A Framework for the Implementation of Artiﬁcial Robotic
Emotional Brain Based on Embryonic and Evolutionary
Hardware
Fernando Cortez Sica
Department of Computer Science
Federal University of Ouro Preto
Ouro Preto, Brazil
Graduate Program in Electrical Engineering
Federal University of Minas Gerais
Av. Antnio Carlos 6627, 31270-901
Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil
sica@iceb.ufop.br
Ricardo de Oliveira Duarte
Department of Electronics
Federal University of Minas Gerais
Av. Antnio Carlos 6627, 31270-901
Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil
ricardoduarte@ufmg.br
Frederico Gadelha Guimar˜aes
Department of Electrical Engineering
Federal University of Minas Gerais
Av. Antnio Carlos 6627, 31270-901
Belo Horizonte, MG, Brazil
fredericoguimaraes@ufmg.br
Abstract—This paper proposes a framework architecture to export
services and facilities for the implementation of artiﬁcial robotic emotional
brain. The framework utilizes concepts from embryonic and evolutionary
hardware. Additionally, we map correlations between computational
systems with natural cognition, knowledge formation and representation.
The main contribution of the paper relies in the utilization of symbolic
and connexionist approaches to cover all the knowledge representation
aspects. This way, this framework facilitates the implementation of generic
intelligent systems.
Keywords—embryonics; evolutionary systems; evolvable hardware; ar-
tiﬁcial brain; artiﬁcial life.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Many current systems that require action-behavior predictions,
e.g., control systems, data mining, biomedical analysis and teleme-
try systems, are focused on the knowledge manipulation, whether
deterministic or not. Real systems can be highly susceptible to
environmental interferences, often not evaluated and not covered
during the intelligent system modeling and simulation.
Considering these challenges and demands, this paper aims to
develop a framework for developing artiﬁcial robotic emotional brains
endowed with embryonic and evolutionary mechanisms. The model
presented is general and can be used in many applications that require
knowledge manipulation for decision making. A possible application
of this framework is the implementation of decision support and
diagnostic systems. In both cases, the artiﬁcial brain has the ability
to learn, in a continuous way, new rules and structures on the
manipulated knowledge.
In the intelligent systems area, we can ﬁnd implementations using
three different approaches: symbolic (which simulates the reasoning
mechanism without considering the biological factor), connexionist
(which simulates the biological brain structure to process knowledge)
or hybrid approaches [4]. As examples of these approaches, we can
cite the projects described in [1], [2] and [3], respectively. In our case,
we adopt the hybrid approach to make the system ﬂexible in relation
to knowledge representation (as mentioned in Subsection III-B).
This framework implements embryonic and evolutionary mecha-
nisms on a software and hardware integration solution. The solution
adopted by this framework is used to map artiﬁcial robotic brain
cognitive models and also to provide a direct mapping between
cognitive science concepts and computer science.
In addition of being able to contribute to achieve the fusion
between embryonic and evolutionary mechanisms, this project is
also intended to make adaptation and modeling using autonomous
intelligent agents in the computational design. The use of intelligent
agents will facilitate the abstraction of the mental structures and their
relations, allowing for a better representation of the artiﬁcial mental
scheme. In this context, by artiﬁcial mental scheme we mean the way
knowledge is represented and abstracted.
The manipulation of emotional factors will act as excitatory or
inhibitory signals to the process of knowledge manipulation, learning
and decision making.
In order to validate the proposed model, this project will be
applied in an example of application that require knowledge manip-
ulation for decision making: aircraft system health monitoring [5].
The artiﬁcial robotic emotional brain, substantiating the knowledge
stored in his hybrid structure (connexionist and symbolic), will be
able to assist the aircraft failure prevention systems. In this case, the
stimuli and input information will be collected from the electronic
components and, from these, the system will be able to generate,
autonomously, the knowledge needed to be converted into preventive
actions.
This paper is structured as follows. In Section II, the basic
concepts in cognitive systems and evolutionary robotics are presented.
In Section III, the proposed framework architecture is described and
our basic mechanism is shown in Section IV. In Section V, the
preliminary results are provided. Finally, we present our conclusions
in Section VI.
II.
BACKGROUND
A. Cognitive Systems
Initially, it is interesting to mention that the cognitive process
presents a dynamic behavior. This dynamic behavior is related to the
environment interaction: collecting information, encoding it, storing it
and processing it such that then there may be some action performed
in the environment.
132
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-273-8
COGNITIVE 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Fig. 1: Cognitive model proposed by Atkinson and Shiffrin in 1971 [6]
The work described by Atkinson and Shiffrin [6] portrays one
of the ﬁrst relevant cognitive computational systems. In that work,
a cognitive system is described as a hierarchical memory system:
sensory memory, short term memory and long term memory (Figure
1).
Other models, such as in [7] – [11], have been proposed with
opposite ideas or complementary ideas to the model of hierarchical
memory. Some of these proposals have incorporated the ﬁlter attention
idea. Filters are capable of acting in the attenuation or ampliﬁcation of
signals to be inferred and manipulated by the cognitive system. Filters
react due to the emotional aspects, stored knowledge and importance
of the stimuli.
To better illustrate the cognitive systems idea, Figure 2 presents
the model proposed in [12].
In the architecture shown in Figure 2, the perception and action
events produce signs that can be evaluated for the formation of
beliefs. Beliefs are states and interactions expected to be assumed by
the agent. During the action event, there is a feedback for possible
restructuring of signs, adapting them to the new situation imposed by
the environment. Every action is the result of the Action Selection
process computed by the deliberative module.
Another important issue in cognitive systems is the knowledge
representation. The information to be stored for later processing
represents information about the environment and about the system
itself, rules, goals, heuristics, relationships, actions, events and other
information used to represent the real world and its interaction
with the computational system. The most well-known techniques for
knowledge representation are based on logics (predicate calculus),
production rules, frames, conceptual graphs and ontologies, and
combinations of these techniques. [13]
B. Evolutionary Robotics
One of the ﬁrst projects in evolutionary robotics is presented in
[14]. In that work, a navigation system to enable a robot to move in
an area with obstacles was designed.
Another application in evolutionary computation and electronics
that deserves to be mentioned for its pioneering in the scope of
artiﬁcial brains can be found in [15] and [16]. In these references, a
brain structure is mapped through a three-dimensional arrangement
using FPGA (Field-Programmable Gate Array) [17].
Fig. 2: IVA (Intelligent Virtual Agent) Architecture proposed by A.
Arnellos et al. [12]
Fig. 3: Proposed architecture for the artiﬁcial robotic emotional brain
Others applications can be cited, as control engineering based on
artiﬁcial brains endowed with emotions [18] – [20].
III.
PROPOSED ARCHITECTURE
In general terms, the proposed architecture (Figure 3) for the
development of robotic artiﬁcial emotional brain based on embryonic
and evolutionary hardware uses the idea of autonomous intelligent
agents for clustering information and, consequently, to better express
the knowledge incorporated by the agents. Another reason for clus-
tering is to resemble the brain anatomy, where the cortex is divided
into functional areas, allowing for a better computational performance
and a higher system granularity.
Figure 3 shows a macroscopic view of the system with multiple
clusters instantiated. Each cluster has three basic and ﬁxed elements
(Embryonic Agent, CommonCluster Memory and IntraClusterBus)
and their respective agent instances.
The Embryonic Agent manages the creation or removal of agents
instances. This mechanism allows for the self-adaptation of the multi-
agent systems, given the environment dynamics. The CommonCluster
Memory is a common area for information storage (long term mem-
ory). The IntraClusterBus and the InterClusterBus are communication
elements based on the Wishbone standard [21].
Referring to Figure 3, notice the presence of instances of agents in
the clusters. Each agent, operating autonomously and cooperatively,
is responsible for: Sensory information acquisition (sensory system);
Encoding, storage and data processing; Actuation on the environment.
To accomplish such functions, each agent has a functional struc-
ture illustrated in Figure 4.
Figure 4 presents the basic elements that comprise the cognitive
agent: sensory system; storage, coding and processing system (SCP
System); Agent Core and Agent Memory, which will be described
below.
A. Sensory System
The sensory system must be able to pick up stimuli from the
environment to provide knowledge modiﬁcations and to make the
Fig. 4: Functional structure of each agent.
133
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-273-8
COGNITIVE 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Fig. 5: Structure of the sensory system.
actuation on the external environment promptly. These two processing
types represent the deliberative and reactive behavior, respectively
[12].
The sensory deliberative system is responsible for interfacing the
system with the environment to capture, for example, image, sound or
other waveforms (stream devices). Regardless of the device type used
to capture data, the goal of the sensory deliberative system consists in
encoding external stimuli in connexionist mappings. The connexionist
maps will be the cognitive system basis - in this case, the information
will form, according to Peirce [22], the informational Firstness, i.e.,
isolated information that does not represent knowledge yet (quali-
signs).
The Peirce categorizations (Firstness, Secondness and Thirdness)
for the organization of symbols in the knowledge generation will
be contextualized, in system level modeling, during the explanation
inherent to the SCP System.
The reactive sensory system should observe environmental values,
which represent exceptions to normal conditions. Therefore, in order
to get a prompt response, this project utilizes a library for hardware
failures veriﬁcation: the Open Veriﬁcation Lib (OVL) [23].
Since OVL is a library for fault veriﬁcation and its utilization is
motivated by:
•
Continuous checking of critical elements (values);
•
Product evaluation during all life cycle;
•
Possibility of incorporating fault tolerance mechanisms. It
is understood as those originating failures due to errors in
design or transient errors;
•
Possibility of activating reconﬁguration mechanisms when
hardware and software ﬂaws are observed.
The use of OVL purely as a ﬂaw veriﬁcation and correction
element can be found in [24], where chained assertions are used to
send signals to a functional element (e.g., a processor) to perform
speciﬁc events. However, in this project, OVL will be used as an
inspection element of values that might result in events of the reactive
system. This idea of using the library to launch various events can
be found in [25], where assertions (monitoring points within the
hardware) are used in order to extend the exception handling in the
computing environment.
In conclusion, in order for the deliberative and reactive systems to
receive information from the environment, the sensory system consists
of two functional modules, as explained in Figure 5.
Also, in relation to Figure 5 and to the sensory system, the
stimulus stream decoder aims to capture and process information
streams (stimuli), e.g., video and sound, dividing them into frames
such that they can be evaluated and handled by the deliberative
system. The coding models used by the decoder are stored in a
repository called Knowledge Abstraction Layer (denoted by KAL).
The assertions processor is a hardware that aims to collect
information from sensors and to signal the reactive and deliberative
systems when previously determined values (or range of values)
occur. This information will shape or will interfere with the emotions
or the artiﬁcial robotic brain learning rates.
B. Storage, coding and processing system (SCP System)
In order to allow greater modularity and reuse of the mental
structures that represent knowledge, the SCP System is based on a
hybrid topology, adopting, in this case, the connexionist and symbolic
models. A hybrid modeling was adopted to best abstract Peirce’s
categorizations for knowledge representation and composition. In this
case, one has:
•
Firstness: connexionist model where each nerve cells cluster
denotes a real-world object - the quali-signs;
•
Secondness: mapping between the connexionist model and
the stored knowledge by means of ontologies to denote the
signs composition and structuring;
•
Thirdness: application of high-level ontological rules to
thought and logical reasoning formation, relating Firstness
and Secondness instances.
The SCP internal elements form the robotic artiﬁcial emotional
brain basis and can be replicated in clusters for better information
representation (knowledge classes) and to provide greater dynamism
to processing. Each cluster can evoke cluster creation or destruction
functions exported by the embryonic agent layer (factory), shown in
Figure 3.
For a better detailing of the model, the components belonging to
the SCP will be presented in the following sections.
1) connexionist Layer: Brieﬂy, under the biological viewpoint, a
neuron can have as basic functionalities: to receive external stimuli
(afferent neurons), to provide the interneurons association (associa-
tive neurons) and to provide the output stimulus (motor neurons).
Regarding its functionality in associative aspect, a neuron can be
pyramidal (derived association between layers) and non-pyramidal
(provides connection between neurons in the same layer).
For modeling purposes, this project will model only two neuro-
transmitters to incorporate the emotions idea: acetylcholine (acting
in attention, learning and memory) and glutamate (associated with
long-term memory and learning) [26]. The neurotransmitters act only
in the symbolic processing layer because they are cognitive processes
and long-term memory regulatory elements. The change in levels of
neurotransmitters is due to the information values provided by the
sensory acquisition.
Finally, completing the basic biological characterization and to
give the clustering abstraction, the cortex is divided into association
regions (where the motor and sensory areas are located) and projection
regions (where the processing itself is performed). Initially, we
mapped only two cell types: pyramidal and non pyramidal. This
criterion was adopted to provide communication optimization and
to better manipulate the attribute types associated with each cell.
Pyramidal cells are modeled only as connection cells between layers.
Non pyramidal cells can be classiﬁed as afferent, associative and
motor.
The mechanisms for the creation of neuronal structures are
contained in the acquisition layer, represented by the KAL.
134
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-273-8
COGNITIVE 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Fig. 6: Structure of the Symbolic Layer.
In this project, only projection cortex areas are mapped, since
the mechanisms associated with the association areas are handled by
the symbolic processing layer. The number of instantiated regions is
related to the external stimuli types to be captured by the system. To
facilitate the processing, the cortical regions may be further divided,
making the system scalable according to the actual needs.
2) Symbolic Layer: The function of the Symbolic Layer is the
formation of signs and reasoning in the artiﬁcial robotic emotional
brain. It should act in accordance with the ontologies stored in its
bases. Moreover, it is responsible for the implementation of the
evolutionary mechanisms that allow a cognitive dynamics.
In order to abstract Peirce’s categorizations as mentioned earlier,
the symbolic layer is divided into two sublayers (Figure 6).
In Figure 6, note the presence of the evolutionary mechanisms
layer (EML - Evolutionary Mechanisms Layer), which, as already
mentioned, will provide system reconﬁguration mechanisms to signs
generation and logical reasoning improvement.
3) Ontology Core: The Ontology Core is based on a general
purpose microprocessor optimized to memory access. The basic
function of the Ontology Core is to execute the XML parser, which
performs search and manipulation operators over the XML structures
(XML denoting ontologies). It was decided, initially, to use a general-
purpose microprocessor because of the ease to implement XML parser
via software. The ontologies, in our project, provide the knowledge
representation under manipulation, e.g., grammatical rules, a circuit
speciﬁcation or an initial Bayesian network [27].
4) Ontology Memory: The Ontology Memory module has the
function of storing ontologies manipulated by each agent cluster.
5) Agent Core: The Agent Core is a general purpose processor
to perform the agent functions. To ensure efﬁciency, ﬂexibility and
software availability, the OpenRisc 1200 [28] has been chosen to
equip the framework.
6) Agent Memory: Unlike Ontology Memory, the Agent Memory
aims to store agents code and attributes (e.g., their states).
C. Actuation System
For initial and prototyping purposes, the Actuation System is
modeled as simply a set of input and output pins in order to provide
basic functionality, for example, digital output, strobe and ACK pins.
D. Communication System
Besides the need to represent the cognition environment, it is also
necessary to have infrastructure for communication between agents
and between agent clusters. Joining the cognitive functionalities,
where each cluster stores part of the knowledge, intra and inter
communication mechanisms are also required. Returning to Figure 1,
these two communication levels are represented by IntraClusterBus
and InterClusterBus respectively. To facilitate the initial prototype, it
was decided to use an open model bus: the Wishbone.
TABLE I: Hardware Values
FPGA model
Xilinx Spartan 3
Number of LUTs
1% (9 of 15360)
Number of IO Ports
12% (27 of 221)
Number of Slice Flip-Flop
1% (15 of 15360)
Minimum period
4.238ns (Max. Freq.: 235.960MHz)
Minimum input arrival time before clock
7.032ns
Maximum output required time after clock
8.962n
Maximum combinational path delay
8.618ns
IV.
PROPOSED BASIC MECHANISM
As mentioned earlier, our project uses a hybrid architecture to
acquire, map and process information. More speciﬁcally, we used:
•
SOFM (Self Organizing Feature Maps) and direct load
values to discover new basic information types (Firstness);
•
Bayesian Networks to map the relationship between the
primary information;
•
Extraction of production rules from the Bayesian Network;
•
Conversion of production rules to electronic digital logic.
In brief, Figure 7 illustrates the information composition scenario.
Faced with this scenario, we adopted the following algorithm:
Algorithm 1 Basic Update Values Algorithm
if new external stimulus then
if mapped knowledge then
update the hardware registers values
hardware inference start
end if
modify the Bayesian Network
run learning evolutionary mechanisms (into Bayesian Network)
run the mechanism to extract production rules from Bayesian
Network
transfer, on-the-ﬂy, the new production rules structure to the
programmable device (FPGA)
end if
V.
PRELIMINARY RESULTS
A hardware prototype was designed to support production rules
with up to 256 nodes (Figure 8 shows the hardware interface).
The modiﬁcation of the production rules will change, only, the
internal routing, without the insertion of new hardware structures.
Table I shows relevant information about the hardware designed.
Fig. 7: Composition of information: the lower layer corresponds to the
isolated values of information obtained from SOFM or general data input
(e.g., sensors); the intermediate layer denotes the Bayesian Network and,
ﬁnally, the upper layer represents the mapping in electronic digital logic.
135
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-273-8
COGNITIVE 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Fig. 8: Hardware interface of the production rules handler (reset out:
reset the strobe out pin; str in: strobe input; address in: input node
identiﬁcation; value in: input node value; address out: identiﬁcation of
activated output node; value out: value of activated output node; str out:
strobe out).
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper presented the framework architecture for the develop-
ment of artiﬁcial robotic emotional brains based on embryonics and
evolutionary hardware.
Our framework has been tested in small production rules. The
result was satisfactory with respect to the response time of the external
stimulus (in about 8ns). The FPGA reconﬁguration time was not taken
into account at this stage in the project.
As future plans, and for testing and validation purposes, this
framework will be used in the implementation of a commercial
aircraft proactive maintenance system. The signals from the air-
craft systems and components will act in reactive and deliberative
knowledge processing. The signs will also be modeled as emotional
elements that interfere in the sensitivity level to be passed to the
cognitive process and to the reactive actuation system.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been supported by the Brazilian agency CAPES
[29].
REFERENCES
[1]
J. R. Anderson,J. M. Fincham, Y. Qin, and A. Stocco, ”A central circuit
of the mind,” Trends in Cognitive Science 12 (4), 2008, pp.136143.
[2]
J. Mugan and B. Kuipers, ”Autonomously learning an action hierarchy
using a learned qualitative state representation,” Proc. 21st International
Joint Conference on Artiﬁcal intelligence (IJCAI’09), 2009, pp. 1175-
1180.
[3]
N. Cassimatis, ”Adaptive algorithmic hybrids for human-level artiﬁcial
intelligence,” Advances in Artiﬁcial General Intelligence, IOSPress,
2007, pp.151163.
[4]
B. Goertzel, R. Lian, I. Arel, H. de Garis, and S. Chen, ”A world
survey of artiﬁcial brain projects, part II: biologically inspired cognitive
architectures,” Neurocomputing 74 (2010), 2010, pp. 3049.
[5]
R. Kothamasu, S. H. Huang, and W. H. VerDuin, ”System health mon-
itoring and prognostics - a review of current paradigms and practices,”
Handbook of Maintenance Management and Engineering, 2009, pp.
337-362.
[6]
R. C. Atkinson and R. M. Shiffrin, ”The control of short term memory,”
Scientiﬁc American, August 1971, 225(2), 1971, pp. 82-90.
[7]
A. D. Baddele and G. J. Hitch, ”Working memory. The psychology of
learning and motivation,” Academic Press, 1974, pp. 47-89.
[8]
S. Franklin, ”Autonomous agents as embodied AI,” Cybernetics and
Systems, 28:6, 1997, pp. 499-520.
[9]
D. Isla, R. Burke, M. Downie, and B. M. Blumberg. ”A layered
brain architecture for synthetic creatures,” Proc. 17th International Joint
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (IJCAI’01), Volume 2, 2001, pp.
1051-1058.
[10]
R. Imbert and A. de Antonio. ”An Emotional Architecture for Virtual
Characters,” Proc. Third international conference on Virtual Story-
telling: using virtual reality technologies for storytelling (ICVS’05 ),
2005, pp. 63-72.
[11]
J. E. Kogler Junior, R. I da Silva Filho, et al., ”First steps toward a
cognitive architecture based on adaptive automata,” Proc. Workshop on
Modelling Adaptive and Cognitive Systems (ADAPCOG), 2008, pp.
1-11.
[12]
A. Arnellos, S. Vosinakis, G. Anastasakis, and J. Darzentas. ”Autonomy
in virtual agents: integrating perception and action on functionally
grounded representations,” Proc. 5th Hellenic conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence: Theories, Models and Applications (SETN ’08), 2008, pp.
51 63.
[13]
E. Motta, ”Reusable components for knowledge modelling: case studies
in parametric design problem solving,” IOS Press Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. 1999.
[14]
A. Thompson, ”Evolving electronic robot controllers that exploit hard-
ware resouces,” Proc. III European Conference on Artiﬁcial Life
(ECAL95), Advances in Artiﬁcial Life, Springer-Verlag, 1995, pp. 640-
656.
[15]
H. de Garis, ”CAM-Brain: A new model for ATR’s cellular automata
based artiﬁcial brain project,” Proc. International Conference on Evolv-
able Systems (ICES’96), 1996, pp. 437-452.
[16]
H. de Garis and M. Korkin, ”The CAM-Brain machine (CBM): real
time evolution and update of a 75 million neuron FPGA-based artiﬁcial
brain,” Journal of VLSI Signal Process. Syst. 24, 2/3, March 2000, pp.
241-262.
[17]
I. Kuon, T. Russell Tessier, and Jonathan Rose, ”FPGA architecture:
survey and challenges,” Foundations and Trends in Electronic Design
Automation,” Vol. 2(2), 2007, pp. 135253.
[18]
B. M. Dehkordi, A. Parsapoor, M. Moallem, and C. Lucas, ”Sensorless
speed control of switched reluctance motor using brain emotional learn-
ing based intelligent controller,” Energy Conversion and Management
52, 2011, pp. 8596.
[19]
M. R. Jamali, A. Arami, M. Dehyadegari, C. Lucas, and Z. Navabi,
”Emotion on FPGA: model driven approach,” Expert Systems with
Applications 36, 2009, pp. 73697378.
[20]
A. Sadeghieh, H. Sazgar, K. Goodarzi, and C. Lucas, ”Identiﬁcation
and real-time position control of a servo-hydraulic rotary actuator by
means of a neurobiologically motivated algorithm,” ISA Transactions
51, 2012, pp. 208219.
[21]
M. Sharma and D. Kumar, ”Wishbone bus architecture - a survey and
comparation,” International Journal of VLSI design & Communication
Systems (VLSICS) Vol.3, No.2, April 2012, pp. 107-124.
[22]
C. S. Peirce, ”Collected Papers,” Harvard University Press, 1958.
[23]
http://www.accellera.org/activities/committees/ovl
(Retrieved:
Jan
2013).
[24]
J. A. Nacif, F. M. De Paula, H. Foster, C. Coelho, F. C. Sica, and A. O.
Fernandes, ”The chip is ready. Am I done? on-chip veriﬁcation using
assertion processor,” Proc. VLSI-SOC2003, 2003. pp. 111-116.
[25]
F. C. Sica, J. A. M. Nacif, C. N. Coelho Jr, F. M. de Paula, H. Foster,
J. M. Mata, D. C. Silva Jr., and A. O. Fernandes, ”Exception Handling
in Microprocessors Using Assertion Libraries,” Proc. 17th Symposium
on Integrated Circuits and Systems Design (SBCCI 2004), 2004, pp.
55-59.
[26]
L. M. Giocomo and M. E. Hasselmo, ”Neuromodulation by glutamate
and acetylcholine can change circuit dynamics byrRegulating the rela-
tive inﬂuence of afferent input and excitatory feedback,” Mol Neurobiol
36, 2007, pp.184200.
[27]
M. J. Druzdzel and L. C. van der Gaag,”Building Probabilistic Net-
works: Where Do the Numbers Come From?,” IEEE Trans. on Knowl-
edge and Data Engineering, 12(4), 2000, pp. 481-486.
[28]
D.
Lampret.
”OpenRisc
1200
IP
Core
Speciﬁcation,”
http://www.da.isy.liu.se/courses/tsea44/OpenRISC/or1200 spec.pdf
(Retrieved: Jan 2013).
[29]
http://www.capes.gov.br/
136
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-273-8
COGNITIVE 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

