A Method to Understand Psychological Factors 
Needed to Improve Learning Behavior 
Yuto Omae, Katsuko T. Nakahira, and Hirotaka Takahashi 
Nagaoka University of Technology 
Niigata, Japan 
e-mail: y_omae@stn.nagaokaut.ac.jp, katsuko@vos.nagaokaut.ac.jp, hirotaka@kjs.nagaokaut.ac.jp 
 
Abstract— Learning behavior is influenced by psychological 
factors. Therefore, if teachers desire to improve the learning 
behavior of their students, they need to know the relevant 
psychological factors and their role in improving learning 
behavior. From this point of view, this paper reports a method 
to quantitatively understand the psychological factors needed 
to improve learning behavior and their shortages by using a 
decision tree. Our proposed method is expected to effectively 
utilize adaptive learning for class design to improve students’ 
learning behavior. 
Keywords-Psychometrics; Data mining; Learning behavior. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
We propose a method to quantitatively understand 
psychological factors related to improving learning behavior. 
In cognitive psychology, knowledge is categorized as 
procedural or declarative [1]. “Procedural knowledge” is 
knowledge about performing various actions (e.g., a 
calculating ability such as addition, subtraction, division or 
multiplication). It is acquired by repetition of its action. 
“Declarative knowledge” has a network structure that 
regards knowledge as a “node” and the relations of 
knowledge as “edges”. One node connects to another along 
an edge [1]. To acquire declarative knowledge, the learner 
needs to learn while thinking about the meaning of each bit 
of knowledge. From the above, if the teacher wishes 
students to acquire procedural knowledge, he/she has to 
assign a task or homework involving exercise with 
repetition (e.g., in the case of calculating ability, the teacher 
assigns many numerical calculations to students). In contrast, 
for students to acquire declarative knowledge, the teacher 
must both assign an appropriate task and appropriate 
learning while thinking about the meaning. 
However, Teranishi pointed out that the number of 
people who learn without thinking about it is increasing [2]. 
If the teacher wishes for them to acquire the appropriate 
declarative knowledge, he/she has to improve their learning 
behavior. However, changing learning behavior is difficult 
[3]. Thus, we consider that teaching students declarative 
knowledge is more difficult than teaching them procedural 
knowledge. For the above reason, our research target is to 
improve learning behavior needed to acquire declarative 
knowledge. 
Horino mentioned the importance of improving the 
psychological factors that provide learning behavior [3]. 
Previous research [3][4][5] also mentioned that the effective 
factors related to learning behavior are psychological factors. 
Therefore, to improve a student’s learning behavior, it is 
necessary for the teacher to improve the student’s 
psychological factors. Figure 1 illustrates a problem that 
occurs when a teacher improves a student’s learning 
behavior. The teacher is going to improve the student’s 
learning behavior by his/her education. According to 
previous research on improving learning behavior, it is 
necessary to improve the psychological factors. However, 
the required psychological factor to improve learning 
behavior and its shortage vary among people. Teachers need 
to understand the missing psychological factors and their 
shortages. However, there is presently no method to 
measure a psychological factor to improve students’ 
learning behavior. Because of this, the following problem 
occurs. The teacher cannot understand what he/she should 
change in the student's psychological factors and by what 
amount it should increase to improve the student’s learning 
behavior. To solve this problem, this paper proposes a 
method to quantitatively understand the psychological 
factors required to improve a student’s learning behavior. 
In Section II, we present the necessary strategies to 
achieve our purpose and an outline for it. In Section III, we 
detail the results of a survey about psychological factors 
affecting learning behavior. In Section IV, we explain a 
 
 
Figure 1. Problem to occur when teacher improves student’s 
learning behavior. 
Learning
behavior
Target Student:
Student who does NOT 
have good learning behavior.
Promotion of 
change by 
education
Teacher's Purpose:  
Improvement of learning behavior.
Necessary:
Appropriate improvement of psychological  
factors
Problem:
To improve student's learning behavior,
 What should teacher increase?
 How much amount?
-> They vary among people.
Previous Researches:
Psychological factors provide learning behavior.
Our Research object:
Proposal of a method to measure psychological factors needed to improve 
learning behavior.
Student
Teacher
Factor 
1
Psychological
Factors
...etc.
Factor 
2
165
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

method to quantitatively measure the psychological factors 
needed to improve learning behavior. In Section V, we 
provide this paper’s summary and the prospects for future 
work. 
II. 
OUTLINE 
We focus on mathematics as the subject of our method 
because Ichikawa says that many learners are weak in this 
area [6]. We adopted strategies of comprehension, which 
are effective learning strategies for knowledge acquisition in 
mathematics (defined in Learning Behavior in Table I) [2]. 
Ichihara tried to explain that the use of strategies of 
comprehension is influenced by the elements in Eccles’s 
expectancy-value theories (Intrinsic value, attainment utility 
value, and expectancy for success) [4][7]. In imitation of 
this, we adopted intrinsic value, attainment utility value, and 
expectancy for success as our psychological factors 
(Psychological Factors are defined in Table I). Based on the 
above discussion, this paper focuses on learners who use 
few strategies of comprehension. Here, we describe our 
method to understand quantitatively the psychological 
factors needed to increase the use of strategies of 
comprehension. In order to do this, we need to address the 
following two points. 
(1) Understanding the kind of psychological factor that 
provides use of strategies of comprehension. 
(2) Understanding the conditions (in the form of the 
Decision Tree discussed in Section III) of the 
psychological factors selected in (1) to encourage 
use of strategies of comprehension. 
Item (1) is covered in previous research [4]. Thus, we 
re-inspect it using Structural Equation Modeling (SEM). We 
apply item (2) to the result of clustering by decision tree 
based on the result of (1). We then consider conditions 
connected to improving the use of 
strategies of 
comprehension. To get the full picture of items (1) and (2), 
we surveyed 91 students of high school to score items on 
their intrinsic value, attainment utility value, expectancy for 
 
Figure 2. SEM of psychological factors and learning behavior. 
Dashed line is NOT statistically significant. 
Intrinsic
value
Attainment 
utility value
Expectancy for 
success
Strategies of 
comprehension
.43**
.20*
.11
                                  
Psychological factors
Learning behavior
Mean
SD
Intrinsic value
0.50
0.29
Attainment utility value
0.64
0.22
Expectancy for success
0.57
0.21
Strategies of comprehension
0.57
0.20
TABLE I. TECHNICAL TERM 
Psychological factors 
Intrinsic value means fun and interest about learning contents. 
Attainment utility value means recognitions of merit about 
acquiring and using knowledge of learning contents. 
Expectancy for success means confidence about learning contents. 
Learning behavior 
Strategies of comprehension are learning behavior such as study 
with understanding meaning. 
 
 
Figure 4. Scatter plot to be classified by decision tree. 
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
α
β
γ
δ
Use of strategies of comprehension,
：High 
：Low
Intrinsic value
Attainment
utility value
Classification condition
of decision tree
 
Figure 3. Decision tree. 
Use of strategies of comprehension High or Low?
High
above-average
5.0%
(n=1)
44.4%
(n=4)
51.2%
(n=21)
90.5%
(n=19)
Low
below-average
95.0%
(n=19)
55.6%
(n=5)
48.8%
(n=20)
9.5%
(n=2)
Abundance Rate of High and Low (n=91)
α
    
    
    
    
    
β
γ
δ
    
Intrinsic value
Attainment
utility value
n=20
n=9
n=41
n=21
Dependent variable (Binary variable, "High" or "Low") :
→
"Strategies of comprehension"
Independent variable (Quantitative variable, [0,1]) :
→
"Intrinsic value", "Attainment utility value"
166
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

success, and strategies of comprehension. We created the 
survey questions based on Ichihara’s items, generated by a 
factor analysis (Table II shows some of them. The answer 
form is on a 6-Likert scale). 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
We standardized intrinsic value, attainment utility value, 
expectancy for success, and strategies of comprehension to 
range from 0 to 1. Figure 2 presents the result of (1), along 
with the mean and standard deviation. The partial regression 
coefficients of intrinsic value and attainment utility value 
were statistically significant. This result is similar to 
previous research [4]. We thus determined that intrinsic 
value and attainment utility value could be used to 
categorize the amount of strategies of comprehension used. 
For the above reason, we performed clustering in the form 
of a decision tree. To do this, strategies of comprehension 
was classified into above average (High) and below average 
(Low). We then regarded strategies of comprehension as the 
dependent variable and intrinsic value and attainment utility 
value as independent variables. Based on these conditions, 
we performed clustering in the form of a decision tree (see 
Figure 3 and the corresponding scatter plot in Figure 4). We 
set the horizontal axis as the intrinsic value, the vertical axis 
as the attainment utility value, and the density of colors as 
the abundance ratio of strategies of comprehension state in 
terms of “High (Black)” and “Low (White)”, and 
constructed a 2D Map of Psychological Factors and 
Learning Behavior (Figure 5). The map has four fields 
according to the abundance ratio (“High” or “Low”) of the 
amount of strategies of comprehension used and the value 
of the psychological factors. 
 
α-field (White) Most of the subjects are in a 
“Low” strategies of comprehension state.  Intrinsic 
value and attainment utility value are low. 
β-field (Grey) The abundance ratio of the 
strategies of comprehension state: (“High” or 
“Low”) is nearly half-and-half. Intrinsic value is 
low. 
γ-field (Grey) The abundance ratio of the 
strategies of comprehension state (“High” or 
“Low”) is nearly half-and-half. Attainment utility 
value is low. 
δ-field (Black) Most of the subjects are in a 
“High” strategies of comprehension state. Intrinsic 
value and attainment utility value are high. 
 
If a student’s strategies of comprehension state is “Low,” 
it is desirable to move the point of their intrinsic value and 
attainment utility value into the δ-field to improve their use 
of strategies of comprehension. 
IV. 
PROPOSED METHOD 
Based on the result in Section III, we determined that the 
shortages of intrinsic value and of attainment utility value to 
improve the use of strategies of comprehension represent 
the difference between “Student Marker” and “Boundary 
Marker for δ-field” (Figure 6). The teacher can understand 
the shortage of these psychological factors, which vary from 
person to person, to improve learning behavior by following 
five steps. 
Step 1. Measure strategies of comprehension of students 
using the questionnaire in Table II. 
TABLE II. AN EXAMPLE OF USED QUESTIONNAIRE. THERE 
ARE ALL ITEMS IN [4]. 
Intrinsic value (Total 7 items) 
(1) I think mathematics is interesting. 
(2) I like mathematics. 
(3) I enjoy studying mathematics. 
(In addition, there are 4 items.) 
Attainment utility value (Total 8 items) 
(1) It is important for me to be good at mathematics.  
(2) I think the knowledge of mathematics will be useful in 
future. 
(3) The knowledge of mathematics is important for learning 
other subjects.  
(In addition, there are 5 items.) 
Expectancy for success (Total 7 items) 
(1) I have confidence about being good at mathematics. 
(2) I have confidence about understanding learning contents in 
mathematics lesson. 
(3) I have confidence about getting good score in the 
mathematics tests. 
(In addition, there are 4 items.) 
Strategies of comprehension (Total 7 items) 
(1) When I study mathematics, I prove a theorem. 
(2) When I read mathematics’ textbook, I use critical thinking 
(e.g., Why is this theorem proved by this proof process?). 
(3) When I solve mathematics’ problem, I think specific image. 
(In addition, there are 4 items.) 
Answer Form (6-Likert-Scale) 
About the above question items, please choose one : 
1:  Very Negative         2:  Negative         3:  Little Negative 
4:  Little Positive          5:  Positive           6:  Very Positive 
 
 
Figure 5. 2D Map of Psychological Factors and Learning Behavior. The 
density of color means High and Low rate. Black=High, White=Low. 
0.33
0
1
1
0.51
0.83
Most people 
in α-field are 
“Low” state.
Most people in δ-field 
are “High” state.
Boundary Marker for δ-field
α
β
γ
δ
Attainment
utility value
Intrinsic value
167
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Step 2. Sample students in the “Low” state for strategies 
of comprehension. 
Step 3. Measure intrinsic value and attainment utility 
value of these students (using the questions in Table II). 
Step 4. Understand the shortages of intrinsic value 
and/or attainment utility value by calculating the 
difference between Student and Boundary Marker for the 
δ-Field on a 2D Map (Figure 6). 
Step 5. If the teacher wants to know the average 
shortages for his/her own class, he/she calculates them 
from the individual shortages. 
We applied our proposed methods to two classes (a and 
b). Table III presents the results of Steps 1 to 5. The 
insufficient psychological factors of a-Class were intrinsic 
value and attainment utility value. However, the only 
insufficient psychological factor of b-Class was attainment 
utility value. With this method, we can quantitatively 
understand the psychological factors needed to improve the 
use of strategies of comprehension. 
V. 
SUMMARY AND FUTURE WORK 
There presently is no method to measure the 
psychological factors needed to improve learning behavior. 
Thus, this paper proposed a measuring method for these 
factors. The adopted psychological factors were intrinsic 
value and attainment utility value. The adopted learning 
behavior was strategies of comprehension. We proposed a 
method to understand the shortage of each psychological 
factor in order to improve learning behavior using these 
factors. This paper described the research process as follows. 
(1) Re-inspect the causal relationship reported in 
previous research (Figure 2) [4].  
(2) Construct a 2D Map of Psychological Factors and 
Learning Behavior using a decision tree (Figure 5).  
(3) Determine the shortages of the psychological factors 
needed 
to 
improve 
the 
use 
of 
strategies 
of 
comprehension (Figure 6). (The procedures to achieve 
this are given as Steps 1 to 5 in Section IV). 
From (2) and (3), a teacher can quantitatively understand 
the shortages of psychological factors that vary among 
people to improve students’ learning behavior. We applied 
this method in two classes (Table III). In the results, the 
shortages of the psychological factors were different in each 
class (Table III). By using this result, teachers will be able 
to design adaptive learning approaches based on improving 
learning behavior using psychological factors. 
As future work, we will perform education to increase 
intrinsic value and attainment utility value in two classes (a 
and b, Table III) while monitoring their psychological 
factors on a 2D Map of Psychological Factor and Learning 
Behavior time-serially. Based on this, our next step will be 
to improve their use of strategies of comprehension. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported in part by JSPS KAKENHI 
Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (No. 24501146). This 
work was also supported in part by Nagaoka University of 
Technology Presidential Research Grant (D). We would like 
to thank Takako Mitsui, Yoko Tsuchiya and Rai Shukuin at 
Yamanashi Eiwa Junior and Senior High School for 
cooperating on our research. 
REFERENCES 
[1] E. D. Gagne, C. W. Yekovich, and F. R. Yekovich, “The 
Cognitive Psychology of School Learning”, Little Brown. 
1993. 
[2] Y. Teranishi, “How High-school Students Think of Formulas 
and Theorem in Mathematics -Correlation with Learning 
Beliefs, Strategies, and Performance-” The bulletin of the 
Graduate School of Education of Waseda University. 16 (1), 
2008, pp. 1-13. 
[3] M. Horino, and S. Ichikawa, “Learning Motives and 
Strategies in High-School Student’s English Learning”  The 
Japanese Journal of Educational Psychology. 45 (2), 1997, pp. 
140-147. 
[4] M. Ichihara, and K. Arai, “Moderator Effects of Meta-
Cognition: A Test in Math of a Motivational Model” The 
Japanese Journal of Educational Psychology. 54 (2), 2006, pp. 
199-210. 
[5] P. R. Pintrich, and E. V. DeGroot, “Motivational and Self-
regulated Learning Components of Classroom Academic 
Performance” Journal of Educational Psychology, 82, 1990, 
pp. 33-40. 
[6] S. Ichikawa, “Ninchi kaunseringu kara mita gakusyu houhou 
no soudan to shidou (Counseling and Guidance of the 
Learning Method from Cognition)” Brain Publisher, 1998. 
[7] J. E. Parsons, T. F. Adler, R. Futterman, S. B. Gof, C. M. 
Kaczala, J. L. Meece, and C. Midgley, “Expectancies Values 
and Academic Behaviors. In J.T.Spemce(Ed)” Achievement 
and Achievement Motivation. San Francisco, CA: Freeman, 
1983, pp. 75-146.  
TABLE III. RESULT OF STEPS 1-5 
 
Average shortage amount 
Intrinsic value 
Attainment utility value 
a–Class (n=22) 
0.16 
0.36 
b–Class (n=25) 
0.01 
0.35 
 
 
Figure 6. Definition of the degree of psychological factor needed to 
improve use of strategies of comprehension. 
0
1
1
A shortage of 
intrinsic value
Boundary Marker for δ-field
On 2D Map, set student who
use of strategies of 
comprehension is "Low" state.
α
β
γ
δ
Attainment
utility value
Intrinsic value
A shortage of 
attainment
utility value
Student Marker
168
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

