KMI-IWS: Towards a Framework for a Knowledge Management Initiative Intelligent
Work-ﬂow System
Ricardo Anderson
The University of the West Indies,
Mona-Western Jamaica Campus
Montego Bay, Jamaica
email: ricardo.anderson02@uwimona.edu.jm
Gunjan Mansingh
The University of the West Indies,
Mona Campus
Kingston, Jamaica
email: gunjan.mansingh@uwimona.edu.jm
Abstract—Knowledge is enriched information which contains
framed experience, values, context and expert insight. It has been
posited that the survival of the modern organization depends
heavily on knowledge, since it has become one of the primary
sources of competitive advantage. Given that knowledge exist
in people, processes and data, it is necessary for deliberate
organizational activities aimed at accessing, explicating and where
applicable converting information into knowledge. In addition,
technology driven systems are required to support storage, update
and the application of knowledge in order to produce the desired
beneﬁts. This can be accomplished by implementing knowledge
management systems (KMS). However, the process for developing
KMS that extends the existing information systems infrastructure
remains inadequately addressed in the existing literature. Whilst
there are some successes, many knowledge management initiatives
(KMIs) are challenged by lack of process visibility, in addition
to the difﬁculties associated with deﬁning system requirements
early in the process as it is not known what new knowledge will
be discovered and how the new knowledge can be applied or
will be integrated at the beginning of these initiatives. Improved
process visibility enables better tracking towards completion or
transitioning between the activities in the process. In this paper,
we advance the argument that a work-ﬂow system can be used to
overcome some of these issues associated with KMIs and therefore
have positive impacts on the success KMS implementation.
Further, we discuss a framework for an intelligent, adaptive work-
ﬂow system for supporting activities related to implementing a
KMS. We suggest that the integration of adaptive and intelligent
techniques will improve outcomes of initiatives geared towards
improving knowledge capability of the organization.
Keywords–Knowledge Management System; Work-ﬂow system;
KMI-IWS.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Knowledge is a ’ﬂuid mix of framed experience, val-
ues, contextual information and expert insight that provide a
framework for evaluation and incorporating new experiences
and information [1]. This differs signiﬁcantly from information
and data which are lower according to the data-information-
knowledge-wisdom (DIKW) hierarchy [2]. Bowman argues
that knowledge can be critical to an organization’s success
as it can improve their capability [3]. Other authors have
underscored the importance of knowledge to success and
competitive advantage of the modern organization [4][5].
Knowledge has become critical to the survival of the orga-
nization since it provides for learning, and supports strategy.
Given the importance of knowledge to the organization, it is
very important to advance initiatives to manage knowledge in
order to support the continued survival of the organization.
Important consideration must be given to how information
and communications technology can be used to support these
KMIs. Given the proliferation of computer-based information
systems, consideration must also be given to how these tech-
nologies can help and facilitate the knowledge initiatives in
the ﬁrm. This study deﬁnes a KMI as a group of tasks aimed
at improving the knowledge capability of an organization.
Primarily, a KMI is aimed at exploiting some aspect of the
organization or some process to enable the acquisition, storage,
application and update of new and existing knowledge. Whilst
the it is not always the case, generally, the desired outcome of
a KMI is a KMS.
A KMS is a class of information systems applied to
managing knowledge in the organizational context. They are
IT-based systems developed to support and enhance organiza-
tional processes related to knowledge management [6]. KMS
extend beyond traditional information systems as they provide
a context within which information is coded and presented for
use [7], in addition to supporting the four main knowledge
management activities of knowledge creation, storage, appli-
cation and update. KMS within this context should therefore
be comprised of a toolset that facilitates proper organization
of resources with emphasis on information technologies that
will drive the knowledge processes in the organization. KMS
should also provide components that will support the acquisi-
tion, modeling, representation and use of knowledge [6][8]. It
is also important that knowledge is suitably modeled so that
it integrates into the organization to enable appropriate use.
Knowledge must also be constantly updated to ensure that the
most current knowledge is being used. The type of knowledge
that exists in the organization also plays a signiﬁcant role in
determining the actions necessary for knowledge management
and building KMS. If the knowledge exists in experts, then
capturing (knowledge elicitation) should be the focus. If the
knowledge is an object then the focus should be collect,
store, and share knowledge. If the knowledge is embedded
in processes the KMS should provide for improvements in the
ﬂow of the knowledge [9].
Most modern organizations today use computer based
information systems that are vital to their processes and
data management needs. These provide features to effectively
manage their data and transform this into information. There
is however less evidence of ﬁrms effectively implementing and
129
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

using KMS and by extension, leveraging their information
resources for knowledge. Several methodologies have been
proposed for knowledge management in the organizational
context. There is however gap in the current literature related
to moving from information management systems to KMS,
i.e., transitioning from information management to knowledge
management supported by existing information systems. Based
on an action research study in a developing country context,
a domain speciﬁc model CoMIS-KMS was developed and
applied to address this problem [10]. The major challenges
with the case based application of this model included many of
the process based challenges such as lack of process visibility
and limited or no room for adaptability and/or ﬂexibility.
These challenges have been well addressed in the work-ﬂow
systems literature. A work-ﬂow can be deﬁned as a collec-
tion of tasks organised to accomplish some business process
(e.g., processing purchase orders over the phone, processing
insurance claims). One or more software systems, one or a
team of humans, or a combination of these can perform a task.
Human tasks include interacting with computers closely (e.g.,
providing input commands) or loosely (e.g., using computers
only to indicate task progress) [11].
This study posits that work-ﬂow technologies can be
successfully applied to a KMI and in particular in the manage-
ment of task associated with transitioning an information sys-
tems environment into a knowledge management environment
driven by computer based KMS, which extends the current
information system.
In this paper, we propose a framework for a Knowledge
Management Initiative Intelligent Work-ﬂow System (KMI-
IWS), which provides tools to support the execution of a KMI
that includes the transitioning of a current information system
to a KMS. We discuss the framework in relation to a current
project in a developing country environment. The rest of this
paper presents our work in progress. Section II discusses work-
ﬂow systems and techniques applied on other domains. We
then present the KMI-IWS framework in Section III followed
by a discussion, conclusion and future work.
II.
WORK-FLOW MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS
A work-ﬂow management system either completely or
partially support the processing of work item(s), in order
to accomplish the objective of a group of tasks within a
process activity. These systems usually include features for
routing tasks from person to person in sequence, allowing
each person to make a contribution before moving on in the
process [12]. Given that work-ﬂow systems allow tracking of
tasks from one step to the other and assigns participants in a
process, they have the advantage of providing positive beneﬁts
to managing processes and enhances visibility of the process
it manages. In general, work-ﬂow systems would depend on
a well deﬁned process that is then automated by the use
of computer software. The rules and process steps are pre-
deﬁned and remains relatively static. Given that the business
environment has become increasingly fast paced and dynamic
there has been the need to allow static work-ﬂow systems
to evolve into adaptive, ﬂexible systems [13][14][15]. The
literature provides several reasons and examples of methods for
developing adaptive work-ﬂow systems and examples of their
use are well established. The key reasons supporting the need
for adaptability include new business needs, supporting change
after the process has begun, handing exceptions during process
execution and providing ﬂexibility while assuring coherence
and process quality [14][16][17]. The literature also provides
signiﬁcant focus on the beneﬁts, application and techniques
used in work-ﬂow systems and how they can be made more
effective in supporting the modern organization. Work-ﬂow
systems have undoubtedly provided signiﬁcant beneﬁts to
process management in many domains and is the core of many
enterprise resource planning systems.
III.
THE KMI-IWS FRAMEWORK
The presented framework illustrated in Figure 1 depicts
a combination techniques that may be implemented as an
intelligent work-ﬂow system to enhance the success of KMIs.
Particularly, the framework develops on the speciﬁc domain
where activities have been applied to transition an existing
MIS to a KMS [10]. The process applied in this domain was
successful but several questions about its continued application
and generalization remain. One major issue was that given
that KMIs are not prevalent, especially in developing country
environments, organizations want to be able to track these
processes more carefully to enhance the likelihood of success;
as such process visibility is desirable. Additionally, given that
many of the tools and techniques have never been applied in
these organizations, expertise is lacking in their use, selection
and application. Therefore if the work-ﬂow system can provide
guided assistance and decision support, this may improve
outcomes. Finally, as we propose the application of the pro-
cess to develop the knowledge management capability of the
organization by transitioning to a knowledge management
environment applying a KMS, the nature of change in the or-
ganizational setting, differences between knowledge resources
and organizational culture among other things enforces the
need for our work-ﬂow system to be ﬂexible, adaptive and
robust. Figure 1 illustrates the proposed framework.
A. Components of Framework
The KMI-IWS framework (see Figure 1) speciﬁes two
major components: activity management work-ﬂow and the
interactive management component. The interactive manage-
ment component includes process improvement tools, analytics
engine and a plugin manager.
In the activity management work-ﬂow component, tasks
for the KMI are identiﬁed and sequenced. The tasks are ﬁrst
listed by the initiative owner who may or may not specify
all the task at the planning/beginning of the project. Impor-
tantly, the tasks dependencies must be deﬁned. Thereafter,
we suggest tasks be plotted on a directed graph to represent
the constraints on the order of execution. This approach is
useful as once graph representation is used, several techniques
such as shortest paths and minimum spanning trees can be
applied over the set of tasks plotted as a graph or any sub-
graph of tasks. This representation will allow for multiple
possible arrangements of tasks depending on the dependencies
that will be enforced by the directed edges between nodes
which represent tasks. Adaptability and ﬂexibility is enabled by
this representation as the initiative can have tasks reorganized
as more tasks are added or removed or can be re-sequenced
to give alternative sequences of execution subject only to the
constraints of which tasks must be done before others. This
activity management work-ﬂow component is the core of the
system which supports the other main components in applying
tools for process improvement, analytics and the support of
130
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Figure 1. The KMI-IWS Framework
speciﬁc tasks within the work-ﬂow. The arrangement of tasks
in this component represents the work-ﬂow to be used.
Within the interactive management component, the pro-
cess improvement tools, analytics engine and plugin manager
will interact with the activity management work-ﬂow to allow
several intelligent and assistive tools and agents to better
execute the tasks within the work-ﬂow system. A core design
requirement is a plugin manager that will allow for the
insertion and removal of tools to be used during the execution
of the tasks within the KMI. It is established that KMIs differ
in what is required to complete them depending on the type
of knowledge that exists [9]. Therefore, the tools required to
support the execution of speciﬁc tasks in one initiative may dif-
fer signiﬁcantly for another. In general, the tools may include
knowledge elicitation (KE)/knowledge acquisition (KA) tools,
such as questionnaire manager, repertory grid or other artiﬁcial
tools that are widely used in elicitation/acquisition and coding
of knowledge. Built into these tools are relevant intelligent
agents that will ensure the proper elicitation of knowledge.
One simple example is the use of an expert system to do
automated questioning of an expert where subsequent question
responses are used to determine next questions in the sequence.
Additionally, with the use of artiﬁcial methods for knowledge
elicitation, the data collected can be interpreted by algorithms
or heuristics to produce the knowledge automatically. The
primary goal of the tools in this sub-component is to improve
on how well tasks are done in relation to the overall work-ﬂow.
Thus, any tool that can allow for improving the sequencing
of tasks, the completion of speciﬁc standard tasks or the
reorganization and visualization of the tasks in the work-ﬂow
are included. Process improvement tools may also include a
set of decision support tools that will provide suggestions
throughout the execution of the initiative such as suggestions
on tasks that may not have been completed and those that
are pending as well as prompting and suggesting alternative
allowable sequencing of tasks. The insertion and removal of
tasks and alternative plotting of execution sequences that the
initiative may take to its completion are also included in this
sub-component. This provides the ﬂexibility of having multiple
sequences for completing the initiative and the adaptability
required based on changes in tasks or the need to add and
remove tasks as the initiative progresses. In addition, tools to
allow the execution of speciﬁc tasks are included in process
improvement tools. One example, based on the tasks in the
work-ﬂow, could be, tools to assist the user in identifying
and specifying possible knowledge sources, then use heuristics
in a decision support system (DSS) to reason and suggest
the best method to elicit/acquire the knowledge based on
the description of each knowledge source identiﬁed. In an
organisation that has their data in largely structured ways such
as in relational databases, this DSS may be able to guide the
user on the best methods and tools to apply based on the
task goals. This intelligent agent will add value to, and allow
for improvement in the user’s ability to successfully complete
tasks. The process improvement sub-component should also
include document management capabilities which will allow
the system to act as the document repository for the initiative.
This is useful to ensure that the entire initiative management
and tracking is integrated into the designed work-ﬂow system.
The analytics engine will provide assessments of task
performance within the work-ﬂow. It will log activities and
provide analysis of performance with visualizations of tasks
progress. This sub-component will also include a set of tools
that can perform basic data analysis to support knowledge
elicitation and acquisition activities within the execution of
the overall KMI. The collated data within the analytics engine
focus on how tasks are done, and their progression. This will
be capable of eliciting trends based on the performance of tasks
within the initiatives and will include tools to allow the user
to specify rules for identifying lagging activities, prompting
where tasks are overdue and managing the metrics that must
be met as performance indicators for the KMI. The analytics
131
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

engine collects, collates and assesses performance within the
context of the initiative itself such that on-the-ﬂy reports and
analysis of the KMI can be done. This should inform the user
of how well the initiative is going, patterns of success or failure
on execution, changes and any trends that could inform how
things should change to meet the objectives of the KMI.
IV.
DISCUSSION
The KMS-IWS framework speciﬁes how an intelligent
work-ﬂow system may be developed to support a sequence
of activities that are associated with a KMI. In this study
the focus is on transitioning a current computer-based infor-
mation processing environment to a knowledge management
environment driven by a computer-based KMS. Regardless of
the determined tasks, the framework suggests that any work-
ﬂow system built according to this design will allow tasks
to be deﬁned and their dependencies and constraints will be
enforced by using well established techniques from graph
theory. The other important components of the system will
allow for managing the process to make sure there is increased
process visibility and will integrate intelligence based tools to
assist in the efﬁcient completion of tasks. The system must
allow for plugins to be added and removed as necessary since
some of the assistive tools that are required for use in the
analytics engine for process improvement may not always be
applicable to each KMI. Therefore, the initiative owner should
be allowed to check-in and check-out tools as necessary so that
the process is managed within the work-ﬂow system without
the need to use several fragmented systems.
The primary aim of the framework is to establish a
suitable design speciﬁcation that may be useful when designing
a work-ﬂow system for managing KMIs. The resulting work-
ﬂow system may be widely used for many different organiza-
tions and types of initiatives with many different constraints
or unique properties. This design speciﬁcation incorporates
ﬂexibility and robustness given that initiatives for knowledge
management depend on the sources, type and the availability
of knowledge which may differ in each domain. We posit that
this framework is a useful guide that can lead to building
adaptive/intelligent work-ﬂow systems generally applicable to
different knowledge management context.
V.
CONCLUSION, CURRENT AND FUTURE WORK
This paper presents a framework for developing an
intelligent, adaptive knowledge initiative work-ﬂow system.
The framework provides a design guideline and components
that are relevant to the development of a work-ﬂow system that
will allow an organization to manage their KMI. The basis of
this framework was a speciﬁc domain in a developing country
context where a successful knowledge initiative process was
executed following a deﬁned process model, which identiﬁed
tasks and the sequence for execution. The researchers having
completed this initiative observed challenges with managing
the tasks in the process. One major challenge was process
visibility. Additionally, upon completion of the initiative, the
evaluation identiﬁed improvements, if integrated could assist
the process through better tracking of progress. In addition
to the need for process improvement, the initiative could
have beneﬁted from other assistive tools that could make
the execution of tasks more efﬁcient. This work therefore
provides the design speciﬁcation a work-ﬂow system that
would address
these problems. We
therefore
developed
the KMI-IWS framework. Our current work includes the
development of a prototype system based on this framework
after which we will use the system for another initiative and
do a comparative analysis of its impact.
REFERENCES
[1]
T. H. Davenport and L. Prusak, Working knowledge: How organizations
manage what they know.
Harvard Business Press, 2000.
[2]
J. Rowley, “The wisdom hierarchy: representations of the dikw hierar-
chy,” Journal of Information Science, vol. 33, no. 2, 2007, pp. 163–180.
[3]
B. J. Bowman, “Building knowledge management systems,” Informa-
tion systems management, vol. 19, no. 3, 2002, pp. 32–40.
[4]
M. E. Jennex, S. Smolnik, and D. T. Croasdell, “Towards a consensus
knowledge management success deﬁnition,” VINE, vol. 39, no. 2, 2009,
pp. 174–188.
[5]
C. Rolland, “A comprehensive view of process engineering,” in Ad-
vanced Information Systems Engineering.
Springer, 1998, pp. 1–24.
[6]
M. Alavi and D. E. Leidner, “Knowledge management and knowledge
management systems: conceptual foundations and research issues,” MIS
quarterly (2001): 107-136, 2001.
[7]
B. Gallupe, “Knowledge management systems: surveying the land-
scape,” International Journal of Management Reviews, vol. 3, no. 1,
2001, pp. 61–77.
[8]
G. Schreiber, Knowledge engineering and management: the Com-
monKADS methodology.
MIT press, 2000.
[9]
K.-M. Osei-Bryson, G. Mansingh, and L. Rao, “Understanding and
applying knowledge management and knowledge management systems
in developing countries: Some conceptual foundations,” in Knowledge
Management for Development.
Springer, 2014, pp. 1–15.
[10]
R. Anderson and G. Mansingh, “Migrating mis to kms: A case of
social welfare systems,” in Knowledge Management for Development.
Springer, 2014, pp. 93–109.
[11]
G. Mentzas, C. Halaris, and S. Kavadias, “Modelling business processes
with workﬂow systems: an evaluation of alternative approaches,” Inter-
national Journal of Information Management, vol. 21, no. 2, 2001, pp.
123–135.
[12]
G. Fakas and B. Karakostas, “A workﬂow management system based on
intelligent collaborative objects,” Information and Software Technology,
vol. 41, no. 13, 1999, pp. 907–915.
[13]
P. A. Buhler and J. M. Vidal, “Towards adaptive workﬂow enactment
using multiagent systems,” Information technology and management,
vol. 6, no. 1, 2005, pp. 61–87.
[14]
P. J. Kammer, G. A. Bolcer, R. N. Taylor, A. S. Hitomi, and
M. Bergman, “Techniques for supporting dynamic and adaptive work-
ﬂow,” Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW), vol. 9, no. 3-4,
2000, pp. 269–292.
[15]
S. Rinderle, M. Reichert, and P. Dadam, “Flexible support of team
processes by adaptive workﬂow systems,” Distributed and Parallel
Databases, vol. 16, no. 1, 2004, pp. 91–116.
[16]
Y. Han, A. Sheth, and C. Bussler, “A taxonomy of adaptive workﬂow
management,” in Workshop of the 1998 ACM Conference on Computer
Supported Cooperative Work, 1998.
[17]
N. C. Narendra, “Flexible support and management of adaptive work-
ﬂow processes,” Information Systems Frontiers, vol. 6, no. 3, 2004, pp.
247–262.
132
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

