A Model of Burden Sense from Psychophysical Factors in Lifting Action
with and without Power Assist Device
Kosuke Takahashi, Takayuki Tanaka,
Hiroyuki Nara and Shun’ichi Kaneko
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology
Hokkaido University, Japan
e-mail: ktakahashi@ssc.ssi.ist.hokudai.ac.jp
ttanaka@ssi.ist.hokudai.ac.jp
nara@ssc.ssi.ist.hokudai.ac.jp
kaneko@ssi.ist.hokudai.ac.jp
Eiichi Yoshida
CNRS-AIST JRL (Joint Robotics Laboratory), UMI3218/CRT
AIST, Japan
e-mail: e.yoshida@aist.go.jp
Abstract—In light of Japan’s low birthrate and aging pop-
ulation, technology is needed for facilitating the activities of
elderly persons as well as their caregivers. Wearable assist
devices, such as the Smart Suit Lite (SSL) developed at our
laboratory, are effective for this purpose. It is important to
evaluate such devices from not only physical, but also from
psychophysical perspectives. Experiments involving lifting a
heavy object with and without SSL were conducted, and SSL
was evaluated psychophysically. The muscle activity was mea-
sured by surface electromyography. The psychophysiological
evaluation was conducted by using the visual analogue scale, in
which reductions in load of 22.01% for muscles and 19.74% for
the sense of lumbar load were conﬁrmed. This report proposes
the human load sense model based on the sense of weight and
the amount of muscular activation. This model is expected to
ﬁnd application in humanoid robots for robust evaluation of
power assist devices.
Keywords-Human Sense Model; Burden Model; Power Assist;
EMG.
I. INTRODUCTION
Support technology that facilitates daily operations is
necessary for Japan’s aging society. In addition to activities
associated with caregiving and agricultural work, lifting of
heavy objects in everyday activities undoubtedly applies a
heavy burden on the low back[1][2].
At present, many researchers are focusing on power assist
devices that can amplify muscle force or support movements.
Among these, wearable power assist devices are attracting
particular attention. Such wearable power assist devices
can be categorized into active power assist devices with
drives, such as Hybrid Assistive Limb (HAL) by Sankai[3]
and a muscle suit by Kobayashi[4], and passive power
assist devices, such as a suit-type back muscle supporter
by Yamazaki[5] and an assist suit by Maeda[6]. Generally,
active power assist devices with large force output necessary
for several-fold ampliﬁcation of forces applied by the wearer
require power sources and many actuators, which makes
them extremely heavy. In contrast, the main purpose of
passive power assist devices without power sources is the
reduction of the physical burden on the wearer rather than
force ampliﬁcation.
Figure 1.
Smart Suit Lite
Figure 2.
Appearance of elastic materials
We are developing a passive power assist supporter named
“Smart Suit Lite (SSL)[7]” shown in Figure 1 for the purpose
of preventing lumbar injuries. SSL is an assistive power suit
made of elastic materials (rubber belts). It uses elastomeric
forces generated when wearers change their posture to
reduce burden in the lumbar region. The appearance of the
elastic materials is shown at Figure 2.
The evaluation of such support devices is as important as
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-273-8
COGNITIVE 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

their actual development. Related works evaluated the assist
technology only physically. However this study evaluated
SSL not only physically but also psychologically. It is
important to evaluate from the both sides of the psycho-
logical and physical because these technologies are used by
human. Inoue develops evaluation method based on physical
and psychological burden in care[8]. In fact, evaluation by
humans it is important to evaluate from the both sides of
the psychological and physical. In this regard, SSL has
been evaluated physically by humans[7]. Although its power
assistance effect has been conﬁrmed, its effect on the senses
of the wearer should also be evaluated. Inspection of the psy-
chophysical effect of such devices by humans is associated
with difﬁculties in considering individual differences and the
condition of the wearer on the day of the experiment. This is
a disadvantage in comparison with related study evaluating
only physically.
In a recent study, wearable assist devices were evaluated
by humanoid robots[9]. In this approach, if the motor torque
of the humanoid robot is assumed to be the same as the
average torque of a human limb joint, the burden on a human
limb joint can be estimated virtually by the value of motor
torque of the humanoid robot. Humanoid robots thus make
it possible to perform evaluations that are not inﬂuenced by
individual differences and conditions. However, it is difﬁcult
for humanoid robots to evaluate the sense of burden. Thus,
we considered that humans evaluate the sense of burden
from some information, for example, the weight of the lifted
object, the amount of muscle force and the motion trajectory.
In this way, it is possible for humanoid robots to evaluate
the sense of burden from equivalent values.
In this study, we inspected the physical and psychophys-
iological effects of wearing SSL and evaluated the human
burden sense model in lifting a heavy object from the sense
of weight and the amount of muscle force.
In this paper, ﬁrst, we proposed the Human burden sense
model. Next, The experiment of lifting with/without SSL
was explained and the results were shown psychophysically.
Finally, we considered the the Human burden sense model.
II. HUMAN BURDEN SENSE MODEL
In this section, we suggest the human burden sense (HBS)
model based on four following hypotheses.
• Hypothesis 1:
First, we suppose that the HBS is expressed to the
sense of weight and the amount of muscular activation.
We consider that the sense of weight might not be con-
stant for a given object weight in the lifting. The cases
of lifting the same weight many times and becoming
used to the weight, and the case of lifting a weight
without prior weight lifting experience or information
about the weight are different from the perspective of
the sense of weight [10]. Therefore, using the sense of
weight as a constitution parameter of the HBS model
is suggested. In addition, we consider that the burden
sense changes by the quantity of muscular strength.
• Hypothesis 2:
We suppose that the HBS is proportional to the
sense of weight and the amount of muscular activation,
and expressed by those linear combination. We deﬁned
sense of weight as Sw, sense of lumbar burden as Slb,
muscular activity as El. The formula of the HBS model
is
Slb = αSw + βEl + L0
(1)
• Hypothesis 3:
The coefﬁcient α denotes the sensitivity with respect
to the sense of weight, and the coefﬁcient β denotes
the sensitivity with respect to the amount of muscular
activation. Even though Sw has 0, muscular activity
is needed for lifting and Slb has a minute value. The
constant term L0 is the adjustment term for it. We
hypothesized that the sense of weight does not change
when wearing SSL, and a person wearing SSL has
the same sense of weight as when not wearing SSL.
In addition, we hypothesized that the sense of lumbar
burden in lifting with SSL is the same in value as lifting
without SSL when the sense of weight and the amount
of muscular activation have the same values as in the
case of lifting without SSL. In other words, α, β and
L0 is formed independent of whether SSL is worn.
• Hypothesis 4:
The sense of lumbar burden is considered to increase
together with the increase in intensity of the sense of
weight and the amount of muscular activation. There-
fore, in the ideal model, α and β are as follows:
α > 0, β > 0
(2)
Therefore we consider that the HBS model is expressed by
formula(1) and satisﬁed formula(2). A value of El becomes
small by wearing SSL, and the value of Slb becomes small
with it.
III. LIFTING WITH/WITHOUT SSL
We measured the amount of muscular activation to quan-
tify the effects of SSL in terms of reduction in burden and the
intensity of the sense of burden in lifting a heavy box. The
subjects were 5 healthy men without past or present clinical
history of musculoskeletal system injury. The number of
subjects is small because it was a purpose to look at the
validity of the experiment technique and the tendency of
the model that hypothesized. Information about each subject
is given in TABLE I. The details of the experiment were
explained in advance to the subjects, and their consent to
participate was obtained.
There are two main lifting movements. The ﬁrst involves
squatting, in which the knees are bent and subsequently
extended as the person lifts the object. The second involves
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-273-8
COGNITIVE 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Figure 3.
Lifting motion
Figure 4.
Sites measured by electromyography
stooping, in which the knees remain extended and the back
is bent instead.
In this experiment, subjects were instructed to lift a heavy
object from the stooping posture (Figure 3). Fujimura has
reported that the maximal voluntary contraction (%MVC) of
erector spinae in the stooping posture is larger than in the
squatting posture in the lifting action[11]. The aim of this
research was to examine the effect of wearing SSL on the
low back; for this reason, we adopted the stooping posture
for evaluating the burden on the erector spinae.
The center of gravity of a box (40 (W) × 25 (D) × 28 (H)
cm) was situated at its geometrical center, and the handle of
a heavy object was placed at a height of 32 cm above the
ground. The subjects stood in front of the object, with their
feet positioned such that the distance between them was the
same as the distance between the shoulders. The weight of
the box was changed in units of 5 kg between 15 and 25
kg,. The box was covered in order to prevent the subjects
from estimating its weight from its contents (Figure 3).
The motion period of 8 s was controlled with a
metronome. Each subject lifted each weight 4 times (for a
TABLE I.
SUBJECT DATA
Subject
Age
Height[cm]
Weight[kg]
A
23
181
78
B
25
165
57
C
23
166
58
D
22
172
60
E
23
164
62
Average
23.2
169.6
63.0
SD
1.10
7.09
8.60
total of 12 lifting motions) in random order. The experiment
was conducted on 2 different days, where subjects lifted the
box with SSL on one day and without SSL on the other.
The second dynamic lifting session was conducted at least
2 days after the ﬁrst session to allow for fatigue recovery.
The muscular electric potential at the erector spinae
muscles was measured with a data logger (DL2000; S&ME
Inc.) with a sampling period of 1 millisecond. The measuring
sites are shown in Figure 4. The skin was prepared at each
site by abrading the area with tissues soaked in alcohol.
We measured the muscular activation from the time to
start bending towards for lifting to the time to be in an
upright stance after putting the object. In this research,
average rectiﬁed values (ARVs) obtained by integrating by
unit time the rectiﬁed waveforms in the electromyograms
were taken as the amounts of muscular activation. ARVs
were normalized by the 100%MVC method, in which the
amount of muscular activation in certain aspects of the
movement are represented by their ratios to the amount of
muscular activation at MVC. Given that MVC represents
in its own terms voluntary and static conditions, muscular
activation during movements may sometimes exceed that at
100%MVC[12][13]. To calculate %MVC, the muscle action
potential at the time of maximum voluntary contraction at
erector spinae was measured for 5 s.
In terms of burden intensity, the sense of weight and
the sense of lumbar burden were measured with the visual
analogue scale (VAS) [14]. VAS is a simple and frequently
used method for assessing variations in pain intensity. In
clinical practice, the percentage of pain relief, assessed by
VAS, is often considered as a measure of the efﬁcacy of
treatment. VAS is used widely as a tool for subjective
evaluation and is not limited to the evaluation of pain. VAS
is a line 10 cm in length with “no pain” at the left end and
“worst pain imaginable” at the right end, and the subjects
were instructed to rate the level of pain that they were
currently experiencing. The intensity was measured for 4
subjects (A to D).
IV. MUSCLE BURDEN ASSISTANCE EFFECT
Figure 5 shows the average amount of muscular activation
[%MVC] in lifting movement at the upper parts of erector
spinae according to the lifted weight. The muscle burden as-
sistance effect was evaluated by the total amount of muscular
activation [%MVC] in the lifting movement. The amount of
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-273-8
COGNITIVE 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

(a) Subject A
(b) Subject B
(c) Subject C
(d) Subject D
(e) Subject E
Figure 5.
IEMG of erector spinae (upper part)
muscular activation in all subjects increased depending on
the weight of the object.
In 4 of 5 subjects, the amount of muscular activation in
the case of wearing SSL was lower than that in the case
of not wearing SSL (no-SSL). Such effect was not seen
in subject C. As described below, the amount of muscular
activation decreased in the lower erector spinae for subject
C. We consider that subject C changed the lifting motion
because of SSL, and therefore the muscles used for lifting
changed.
The muscular burden reduction (MBR) rate η was deﬁned
using the following equation for the evaluation function of
the assistive effect.
η =
(
1 −
∫ T
0 VEMGdt
∫ T
0 VEMG0dt
)
× 100
(3)
VEMG0 denotes the normal amount of muscular activa-
TABLE II.
MBR RATE
Subject
η[%]
A
12.16
B
16.78
D
25.73
E
33.37
Average
22.01
tion and VEMG denotes the amount of muscular activation
with assistive power provided by SSL, both of which are
integrated by the motion period T. This represents the rate
of reduction in the amount of muscular activation due to
assistive power from SSL. In the 4 subjects whose respective
amounts of muscular activation decreased. The analysis was
performed t-test and each p-value was shown in Figure 5(a),
5(b), 5(d), and 5(e). Except only one result, p-values were
lower than 0.01. Therefore signiﬁcant difference was shown.
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-273-8
COGNITIVE 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

(a) Subject A
(b) Subject B
(c) Subject C
(d) Subject D
Figure 6.
Sense of weight and sense of lumbar burden
Figure 7.
Interval of integration for calculating the MBR rate
TABLE III.
SBR RATE
Subject
ς[%]
A
13.92
B
27.10
C
18.21
D
(-34.45)
Average
19.74
The MBR rates were calculated by fomula(3) according
to the weight of object and shown as line graphs in Figure
5(a), 5(b), 5(d), and 5(e).
There was no correlation between the change in MBR
rate and the lifted weight in the case of 4 subjects. Thus,
we calculated the MBR rates for those 4 subjects by disre-
garding the lifted weight. The results are shown in TABLE
II. According to the results, the average assistance rate at the
erector spinae muscles in 4 subjects was 22.01%, and the
amounts of activation of the erector spinae muscles subject
to assistive power by SSL decreased accordingly.
V. SENSE OF LUMBAR BURDEN ASSISTANCE EFFECT
We measured the intensity of burden as the distance from
the left edge in VAS to the line indicated by the subjects. The
subjects were instructed to use VAS to score their evaluation
of the burden on the low back as well as the entire body.
At the same time, the subjects were also instructed to use
VAS to estimate the weight of the object they lifted. An
evaluation of the sense of lumbar burden was performed in
terms of the relationship between lifting with SSL (With
SSL) and without SSL (no-SSL). The relationship between
sense of weight and sense of lumbar burden is shown in
Figure 6. The horizontal axis denotes the sense of weight,
and the vertical axis shows the sense of lumbar burden.
The relationship is derived from a regression formula that
approximates the relationship between the two parameters
by the least squares method depending on whether SSL is
worn. SSSL
w
was bounded by Sw when the subject performed
lifting with SSL, and Sno
w
was bounded by Sw when the
subject performed lifting without SSL. When we considered
the range Swmax to Swmin (Figure 7), Sw ← SSSL
w
∪ Sno
w ,
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-273-8
COGNITIVE 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

(a) Subject A
(b) Subject B
(c) Subject C
(d) Subject D
Figure 8.
Burden sense model
SSSL
lb
show small values compared to Sno
lb in 3 of 4 subjects.
From this result, it can be concluded that subjects felt a
burden reduction effect by wearing SSL. We deﬁned the
sense burden reduction (SBR) rate ς as in formula (4) and
calculated it for these 3 subjects.
ς =
(
1 −
∫ Swmax
Swmin SSSL
lb
(Sw)dSw
∫ Swmax
Swmin Sno
lb (Sw)dSw
)
× 100
(4)
The results are shown in TABLE III. The average of ς for 3
subjects was 19.74%. Therefore, SSL could have the effect
of reducing the sense of lumbar burden, similarly to the case
of muscles.
VI. RESULT OF HUMAN BURDEN SENSE MODEL
We inspected an effect of SSL from both physical and
psychophysical points of view in Sections IV and V. We
combine these perspectives in this section and consider the
human burden sense (HBS) model from a psychophysical
perspective. The results indicated that the amount of muscu-
lar activation decreased, and that the sense of lumbar burden
decreased substantially through the use of SSL. The feeling
of reduced burden due to the decreased amount of muscular
activation is natural. Therefore, we concluded that the sense
of burden in lifting depended on the amount of muscular
activation and the weight of the lifted object.
We modeled HBS of each subject by formula(1) based on
the least squares method using the sense of weight and the
amounts of muscular activation not depending on whether
SSL is worn. The results are shown in Figure 8 as aspect
graphs. The multiple correlation coefﬁcient is larger than 0.7
for all subjects. This value is sufﬁcient for explaining the
HBS from the sense of weight and the amount of muscular
activation.
As a result, 2 of 4 subjects (A and B) satisﬁed the
condition of the ideal model (formula(2)). We discuss the
results for these 2 subjects who did not satisfy the conditions
of the ideal model.
i) Subject C : We failed to obtain an ideal model for this
subject, where β had a negative value. The sense of lumbar
burden for subject C decreased when SSL was worn (Figure
6(c)). However, the amount of muscular activation of subject
C increased in the upper parts and decreased in the lower
parts of erector spinae (Figure 9(a)). The reason for this
result was considered to be the change in the way muscles
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-273-8
COGNITIVE 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

(a) subject C
(b) subject D
Figure 9.
IEMG of erector spinae (upper and lower parts)
are used when wearing SSL.
ii) Subject D: We failed to obtain an ideal model for subject
D as well, where β had a negative value. The amount of
muscular activation for subject D decreased in the upper
parts and increased in the lower parts of erector spinae
(Figure 9(b)). We considered that subject D felt a more
intense sense of lumbar burden with SSL than without SSL
because of the increased amount of muscular activation in
the lower parts of the muscles.
VII. CONCLUSION
The effect of wearing SSL when lifting a heavy object
was examined, whereby it provided assistance amounting to
an average of 22.01% of the force effected at erector spinae
muscles. In addition, a reduction of an average of 19.74%
in terms of the sense of burden was conﬁrmed by using
VAS. The burden reduction effect has been conﬁrmed from
the points of view of both muscular activity and subjective
evaluation. In addition, the human burden sense model was
formulated by using the sense of weight and the amount
of muscular activation [%MVC]. The sense of lumbar bur-
den was consequently expressed by a single formula not
depending on whether SSL was worn. Only two subjects
satisﬁed this ideal model. The amount of muscular activation
in humans is considered to correspond to motor torque of
in robots, and the sense of weight in humans is considered
to correspond to the output of distortion sensors attached
to the end effectors of robots. These correspondences show
the possibility of applying the human burden sense model to
robots and realize the evaluation by robots. Therefore, this
study leads to the realization of the robust evaluation for
assist technology.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was supported in part by the Japan Science
and Technology Agency under the Strategic Promotion of
Innovative Research and Development Program (Title of
Project: Research and Development of KEIROKA Technol-
ogy to Support Independent Life of Elderly People in Aged
Society and Construction of Its Evaluation System).
REFERENCES
[1] A. Minematsu, “Low Back Pain in CareWorkers,” Japanese
J. of occupational medicine and traumatology, Vol.52, No.3,
2004, pp.166-169
[2] Y. Kokubo, Y. Maesawa, N. Furusawa, K. Utida, and H. Baba,
“Management and prevention of low back pain in nursing per-
sonals,” The J. of Japanese Society of Lumbar Spine Disorders,
Vol.6, No.1, 2000, pp.52-55
[3] K. Suzuki, G. Mito, H. Kawamoto, Y. Hasegawa, and Y.
Sankai, “Intention-Based Walking Support for Paraplegia Pa-
tients with Robot Suit HAL,” Advanced Robotics, Vol.21,
No.12, 2007, pp.1441-1469
[4] H. Kobayashi, A. Uchimura, and T. Shiiba, “Development of
muscle suit for upper body,” Proc. of Intelligent Robots and
Systems 2003, Vol.3, 2003, pp.3624-3629
[5] N. Yamazaki, and N. Takahashi, “Suit-type Back Muscle
Supporter Utilizing Body Surface Deformation During Care
Motions,” Society of Biomechanisms Japan, Vol.17, 2004,
pp.235-244
[6] D. Maeda, S. Yoshinari, Y. Nakajima, and K. Kuwano, “De-
velopment of assistive technology to reduce physical burden
of agricultural workers,” 21th Bioengineering Lecture meeting
2008, 2009, pp.409-410
[7] Y. Imamura, T. Tanaka, Y. Suzuki, K. Takizawa, and M. Ya-
manaka, “Motion-Based-Design of Elastic Material for Passive
Assistive,” Journal of Robotics and Mechatronics Vol.23, No.6,
2011, pp.978-990
[8] H.Inoue, et al., “Fundamental Study to New Evaluation Method
Based on Physical and Psychological Load in Care,” GLOBAL
HEALTH 2012, The First International Conference on Global
Health Challenges, 2012, pp.129-134
[9] K. Miura, et al., “Humanoid Robot as an Evaluator of Assistive
Devices,” Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation,
to appear (2013), in press.
[10] K. J. Cole, “Lifting a familiar object: visual size analysis,
not memory for object weight, scales lift force,” Experimental
Brain Research, Volume 188, Issue 4, 2008, pp.551-557
[11] M.
Fujimura,
and
I.
Nara,
“THE
INFLUENCE
ON
LUMBAGO
IN
LIFTING
WEIGHTS
MEASURED
BY
ELECTROMYOGRAPHY,” Japanese journal of occupational
medicine and traumatology 52(6), 2004, pp.341-347
[12] T. Kizuka, T.Masuda, T. Kiryu, and T. Sadoyama, “Practical
Usage of Surface Electromyogram,” Tokyo denki university
press, 2006
[13] S. Kumar, and A. Mital, “Electromyogram in Ergonomics,”
Taylor & Francis, 1996
[14] A. Bond, and M. Lader, “The use of analogue scales in rating
subjective feelings”, British Journal of Medical Psychology 47,
1974, pp.211-218
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-273-8
COGNITIVE 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

