Resonance Thinking in Cartesian Systemic Emergence 
Marta Franova, Yves Kodratoff 
LRI, UMR8623 du CNRS & INRIA Saclay 
 Bât. 660, Orsay, France 
e-mail: mf@lri.fr, yvekod@gmail.com
 
 
Abstract— Cartesian Systemic Emergence (CSE) is concerned 
with strategic aspects relative to the conception of Symbiotic 
Recursive Pulsative Systems intended to solve real-world 
problems handling control and prevention in incomplete 
domains. This work is performed in order to prepare 
fundamentals for designing automated tools that help to 
perform this complex task. This paper presents the most 
important features of one particular way of thinking present in 
CSE. We call it ‘Resonance Thinking’. Resonance Thinking 
takes care of generating and handling experiments during 
CSE. We explain that Resonance Thinking causes the 
complexity of CSE to be analogous to Ackermann’s function 
computation complexity. The work presented is related to 
cognitive and computation models of human creative reasoning 
mechanisms. Our approach brings forward several challenging 
questions to Cognitive Science that will be given in the paper.  
Keywords-Cartesian 
Systemic 
Emergence; 
Symbiotic 
Recursive Pulsative Systems; Resonance Thinking; cognitive 
models; implementation of human reasoning mechanisms; 
design of experiments. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
In [11], we have described Cartesian Systemic 
Emergence (CSE) as a method that handles strategic aspects 
of construction and particular evolutive improvement of 
Symbiotic Recursive Pulsative Systems (SRPS). The 
construction and desired improvements have to guarantee 
control and prevention in the system. The need for this work 
came out during our research on automating program 
synthesis from formal specifications in incomplete domains. 
[7] [10]. For simplicity, we refer to it as Program Synthesis 
(PS).The constraints imposed on this PS research required us 
to develop a particular systems design methodology. CSE 
represents our way to tackle this task. We are thus 
developing theoretical models and criteria representing, 
among others, a background for capturing and understanding 
the complexity of cognitive tasks involved in CSE. 
Resonance Thinking (RT) introduced in this paper takes care 
of generating and handling experiments during CSE. 
In [11], we describe several facets of CSE, namely 
tackling underspecified information, on-purpose invention 
instead of manipulating a specific search space, and 
formulating fruitful experiments during this invention. 
Resonance Thinking, as a symbiotic part of CSE, possesses 
also these facets and describes them in a more precise way, 
even though a formal description has still to be worked out. 
CSE can be used for creating a solution for complex real-
world problems, mainly those that request some kind of 
security handling [19], [20].  
Since the illustrations of Resonance Thinking in PS or 
other complex real-world problems would be very 
cumbersome, we shall re-use here the toy example presented 
in [11]. The purpose of this paper is four-fold: 
• 
describe particularities of Resonance Thinking 
taking place in CSE; 
• 
illustrate this method on a toy example nevertheless 
dealing with a problem that many innovative 
researchers may have to face; 
• 
compare the complexity of Resonance Thinking to 
the computation process of Ackermann’s function; 
• 
mention 
the 
main 
problems 
and 
challenges 
addressed by Resonance Thinking to various fields 
of Cognitive Science. 
The paper is organized as follows. Section II presents 
fundamental notions necessary for understanding CSE and 
Resonance Thinking. Section III recalls the notion of CSE. 
Section IV develops an illustration of Resonance Thinking. 
Finally, Section V presents several challenges that 
Resonance Thinking and CSE offer to Cognitive Science. 
II. 
FUNDAMENTAL NOTIONS  
The goal of CSE is to formalize strategic aspects of 
human creation of informally specified symbiotic systems in 
incomplete domains following our pulsation model. This 
formalization is performed in order to prepare fundamentals 
for designing automated tools that help to perform this 
complex task.  In this section, we recall four terms by which 
this goal is expressed and that will be also used in our 
presentation of Resonance Thinking, namely 
• 
informal specification, 
• 
symbiosis, 
• 
incompleteness, and 
• 
pulsation. 
We shall recall also the main features of our particular 
handling of the well-known Ackermann’s function in the 
construction of our pulsation model, as given in [13]. These 
features will be used in our description of CSE’s and 
Resonance Thinking’s complexity. 
Informal specification of a system that has to be 
constructed is a description of this system in terms that are 
not yet exactly defined and that, when considered out of a 
particular context, may even seem absurd. These terms, in 
which the specification is expressed, will evolve during the 
system construction. In other words, depending on some 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-705-4
COGNITIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

constraints and opportunities that will arise during the 
construction, the meaning of the terms used in the starting 
specification will evolve and will make a part of the solution. 
The initial ambiguity of terms is eliminated by the provided 
solution. We might say that the notions used in an informal 
specification are of evolutive and flexible character. Their 
evolution will also bring an exact specification of the context 
to be considered. In the framework of CSE, the notion of 
informal specification needs to be completed by the notions 
of 
formalized 
and 
formal 
specification. 
Formalized 
specification is an intermediary state in the progress from 
informal to formal specification. It consists in a collection of 
basic working definitions and basic tools that seem plausibly 
pointing out a successful completion process, even though 
some inventive steps may still be needed to complete the 
tools so as giving their final form to the working definitions. 
Formal specification then consists in the complete solution 
represented by the working system, the methodology of both 
functioning and system construction. These all are needed in 
order to be used in further evolutive improvement. 
As far as incompleteness is concerned, from a practical 
point of view, we know that full reality is unknown. What 
we may know at a given time can be formalized by an 
incomplete system. From a decision point of view, it is well-
known that incompleteness constitutes a large drawback 
[14]. Incompleteness, however, is not at all a drawback for 
the practical purpose of solving real-world problems that are 
asking for some kind of innovation. This means that, from a 
construction point of view, incompleteness brings a freedom 
for technological ingeniosity resulting in possible new 
technological inventions. Since an informal specification 
contains terms that are not exactly defined, a particular 
informal specification points to a context that can be 
represented by an incomplete environment. CSE can then be 
seen not only as a construction process for a system in its 
informally specified initial environment but also as a fruitful 
strategy for a progressive completion of this environment. 
By symbiosis we understand a composition of several 
parts which is vitally separation-sensitive. By vital 
separation-sensitivity we mean that eliminating one part 
leads to the destruction or to a non-recoverable mutilation of 
the other parts and of the whole composition. This means 
that the widely used divide and conquer strategy is not at all 
suitable when creating and extending symbiotic systems. We 
can also say that analysis and synthesis are inappropriate 
tools when creating and observing symbiotic systems. 
Symbiosis is therefore different from synergy that is a 
mutually profitable composition of elements that are not 
destroyed nor mutilated by separation. From a pragmatic 
point of view, symbiosis of a system is embodied by the 
interdependence of all notions and parts of this system. We 
have illustrated this, in [9], on the example of Natural 
Numbers (NAT) defined by Peano’s axioms. NAT can be 
seen as the simplest existing system incarnating the main 
features of SRPS. 
Pulsation is a model for construction and evolutive 
improvement of incomplete systems that are concerned with 
the factors of control and prevention. In other words, 
pulsation provides a rigorous framework for the completion 
process of incomplete systems. This model is described in 
[13]. It relies on our particular handling of Ackermann’s 
function. We shall recall now the features of its handling that 
will be referred to, later in the paper. 
Let ‘ack’ be Ackermann’s function defined, as in [18], by 
its standard definition, i.e., 
 
ack(0,n) = n+1 
(1) 
 
ack(m+1,0) = ack(m,1)  
(2)  
 
ack(m+1,n+1) = ack(m,ack(m+1,n)). 
(3) 
Since ack is a non-primitive recursive function, by 
definition of non-primitive recursion, it is a particular 
composition of an infinite sequence of primitive recursive 
functions. In similarity to the infinite sequence which is used 
– in [13] – to construct Ackermann’s function, the evolutive 
improvement (i.e., pulsation), relies on a construction of a 
potentially infinite sequence of systems that might, in an 
ideal world, be used to construct a global ‘Ackermann’s 
system’ that contains all of these systems. In our work, by 
pulsation we thus understand a progressive construction of a 
potentially infinite sequence of incomplete theories T0, T1, 
…, Tn, Tn+1, … such that Ti ⊂ Ti+1,Ti ≠ Ti+1 (for i = 0, 1, 2, 
…) and such that an infinite limit of this sequence represents 
an ideal, complete system. Pulsation does not reduce to one 
particular step in this sequence. This means that pulsative 
systems are formalized progressively and potentially 
indefinitely. Pulsation is a model that does not describe how 
the particular systems in this sequence are constructed. This 
is the role of Cartesian Systemic Emergence [11]. 
III. 
CARTESIAN SYSTEMIC EMERGENCE 
As said above, the goal of CSE is to formalize strategic 
aspects of human creation of informally specified symbiotic 
systems in incomplete domains. In this section, we recall two 
paradigms that play a fundamental role in CSE and that will 
be referred at in Section IV. The first paradigm can be 
formally represented by the formula 
 
∀ Problem ∃ System solves(System,Problem). 
(4)  
The second problem can be represented by the formula 
 
∃ System ∀ Problem solves(System,Problem).   (5)  
There is one main difference between these two 
paradigms. Namely, in (4), each problem or a class of 
problems related to a system can have their own solution 
while in (5), a unique, universal solution is looked for. The 
first paradigm leads to a library of particular heuristics, while 
the second one results in a single universal method.  
CSE is concerned with the pulsative construction of a 
system that verifies (5). As presented in [11], the main 
features of CSE are as follows: 
• 
Works with an informally specified goal. 
• 
Handles incompleteness. 
• 
Takes into account symbiosis and pulsation. 
• 
Generates experiments. 
• 
Oscillates between the paradigms (4) and (5) in 
order to reach a solution described by (5). 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-705-4
COGNITIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

CSE has to be considered in the framework of Cartesian 
Intuitionism and not in the framework of Newtonian Science. 
In [10], we explain in more details that the main keywords of 
Newtonian Science are 
• 
exactness 
• 
formal systems and tools justified in a logical way 
• 
methods of demonstration reduced to some axioms 
and rules of inference 
• 
decision and undecidability. 
In contrast to this, as pointed out in the same paper, the 
main keywords of Cartesian Intuitionism are 
• 
realization and ingeniosity 
• 
systems and tools justified in an epistemological way 
• 
methodology of construction taking into account 
also 
‘Cartesian 
Intuition’ 
(i.e., 
a 
symbiotic 
composition) 
• 
handling incompleteness in a constructive way. 
This means that Cartesian Intuitionism has its own, we 
might say ‘pragmatic’, notion of rigor that allows, during the 
research and development stages, to rely on methods and 
tools that do not verify the modularity criteria of Newtonian 
Science. This non-conformity with logical criteria and a kind 
of ‘rigorous freedom’ is justified by the work with informal 
notions and incompleteness.  
It happens that the process of construction of informally 
specified symbiotic systems is very difficult to describe 
exactly and in its full generality. Our CSE attempts to tackle 
the task of its description. In [11], we present a general, even 
though yet informal, scheme for CSE based on the method 
called Constructive Matching formula construction (CM-
formula construction) which is used in PS (introduced in [6]) 
for problems of type (4). We shall refer here to it as CSE-
scheme. 
IV. 
RESONANCE THINKING 
As said above, Resonance Thinking is a method for 
solving problems represented by paradigm (5). It takes care 
of generating and handling experiments in the process of 
CSE so that these experiences lead to new ideas hinting at 
suitable symbiotic solutions of ‘mismatches’ among 
experiences themselves as well as the desired solution 
expressed initially by an informal specification. It is inspired 
by our application of Descartes’ rule XII ([3], p. 39), as well 
as by the main precepts of his method, in the present state of 
our construction of a particular SRPS for PS. In his rule XII, 
Descartes advises: “In sum, we must make use of all the help 
which intellect, imagination, sense-perception, and memory 
can supply in order to take a distinct intuition of simple 
propositions, combine according to the rules things that are 
searched for with those that we know, as well as to discover 
things that have to be related to others so that we neglect no 
fraction of human resources.” Resonance Thinking describes 
our understanding of Descartes’ “combining, according to 
the rules, things that are searched for with those that we 
know, as well as to discover things that have to be related to 
others” in the framework of Cartesian Intuitionism [10]. 
In order to take hold of the complexity of Resonance 
Thinking, it is necessary to keep in mind that CSE and 
Resonance Thinking are designed for a systems creation 
which has to provide control and prevention in the resulting 
system. Therefore, the criterion of security is strongly 
involved already in the system’s creation. Such a particular 
security follows immediately from a careful simultaneous 
use of the following four precepts of Descartes’ method [4], 
p. 120: 
a) “Carefully to avoid precipitate conclusions and 
preconceptions. 
b) Divide each of the difficulties into as many parts as 
possible and as may be required in order to resolve 
them better.  
c) Suppose some order even among objects that have 
no natural order of precedence. 
d) Make 
enumerations 
so 
complete 
and 
so 
comprehensive, so we can be sure of leaving nothing 
out.” 
Note, that these four rules represent also four 
fundamental (symbiotic) facets of CSE in this order:  
a' ) Pulsative Thinking, i.e., taking care of security, 
control and prevention [13]. 
b' ) Metamorphic Thinking, i.e., taking care of resulting 
epistemological equivalence between paradigm (5) 
and particular CSE-handling paradigm (4). 
c' ) Symbiotic Thinking, i.e., taking care of construction 
of a symbiotic system. 
d' ) Resonance Thinking, i.e., taking care of generating 
and handling experiments. 
A description of a one part in a symbiotic composition 
(such as the successor function ‘Suc’ in NAT) is not a simple 
task, as one can realize while trying to give an exact 
description of the successor function (Suc) in NAT. Indeed, 
an exact description of Suc would imperatively require 
explicit references to 0, NAT, the induction principle and 
Peano’s axioms defining the addition and multiplication. 
Therefore, we do not intend yet to provide here a rigorous 
and complete description of Resonance Thinking, as we still 
need to describe in a future work, more in details, 
Metamorphic Thinking (MT) and Symbiotic Thinking (ST). 
On the other hand, CSE and Resonance Thinking handle 
informally specified notions (and thus incompleteness). This 
means that, it is only natural that procedures and notions of 
CSE come out through progressive evolution from informal 
specifications to formalized specifications and then to formal 
specifications. In this paper, we shall therefore limit 
ourselves to an illustration of the goal of Resonance 
Thinking and the basic procedures it relies upon.  
We shall present Resonance thinking and its basic 
notions with the help of a toy example used, in [11], for 
description of CSE. In comparison to examples provided by 
PS framework, this example is simpler and could illustrate 
many other scientific fields than PS-research does. The 
example problem presented here concerns conveying a new 
original scientific knowledge in such a way that its essential 
content and creative potential are preserved by the next 
generations. This is not a trivial problem as already pointed 
out in the past [1] [4]. Our experience confirms that, for new 
knowledge that concerns creation and extension of symbiotic 
recursive systems, this problem remains relevant until now.  
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-705-4
COGNITIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

A. Specification of a toy example 
In this section we present our example illustrating CSE 
and Resonance Thinking.  
Let us suppose that René is a founder of a novel scientific 
theory with a high pulsative potential. Referring back to the 
bad founders’ experience in the past, he needs to ask himself: 
“How to build some ‘works’ able to convey the full 
complexity of my new theory while simultaneously 
preventing a degradation of its pulsative potential?” In a 
more formal way, René must solve a problem informally 
specified as: 
 
∃works ∀disciple conveys(René, works) &  
 
 conveys(works,disciple)   
(6)  
 
essential_of(René) = essential_of(disciple)  
Note that this problem has the same logical structure as 
the second paradigm presented in the form (5). Specification 
(6) is an informal specification. As said above, this means 
that the notions that appear in (6) are not defined in a 
rigorous way. They are only specified in an informal way in 
terms of some non-formal criteria (i.e., a kind of 
underspecified constraints). This means that a solution 
‘works’ for (6) has to emerge simultaneously with suitable 
formalizations (thus, the final definitions) of notions that 
occur in (6). In the following, we shall denote by Dt the set 
of (initially underspecified) sentences specifying ‘to convey’ 
and by De the set of (initially underspecified) sentences 
specifying ‘essential_of’. These sets evolve in the process of 
CSE and Resonance Thinking towards a more rigorous final 
form. For simplicity of presentation, we do not involve such 
an evolution in our notation. 
In [11], we mention that, in order to solve (6), there is a 
particular switch to a framework of experiments described 
by the formula 
 
∀disciple ∃works conveys(René, works) &  
 
 conveys(works,disciple)   
(7)  
 
essential_of(René) = essential_of(disciple)  
This formula represents paradigm (4). Above, we have 
explained that there is a difference between solving (4) and 
(5), and this obviously applies to their instances (6) and (7). 
In general, in order to be fruitful and justified, a switch from 
(5) to (4) has to rely on what we call Metamorphic Thinking. 
Roughly speaking, Metamorphic Thinking (MT) takes a care 
of a rigorous, epistemologically and pragmatically justified 
transformation of paradigm (5) into the context of paradigm 
(4). Our paper [11] gives its illustration. A more detailed 
description of MT is presently under development. 
In other words, MT provides a switch from (6) to (7) that 
is useful in order to generate experiments leading, within the 
framework of (7), to some hints and inspiration for solving 
(6). These hints and inspirations represent temporary (see 
precept (a)) underspecified constraints that enlarge the 
already existing set of underspecified constraints. In order to 
generate such inspiring experiments, while considering (7), 
from the set of all disciples, we chose a finite number of 
disciples d0, d1, …, dn that seem highly different so that each 
of them seems to need a different ‘works’. Note that this step 
implicitly embodies the above precept (b). We shall call 
representatives these disciples. In other words, our 
experience shows us that challenging experiments are needed 
to obtain some inspirations contributing to a solution of (6) 
in the framework of paradigm (5). Note that we order these 
disciples in a numbered sequence just for the presentation 
purposes. This will be useful when describing recursive 
procedures that handle this finite set of disciples. 
Very roughly speaking, in order to solve a problem 
represented by paradigm (5), it might seem possible to 
replace MT from paradigm (5) to (4) by a symbiotic 
composition of a set of solutions for carefully chosen 
representatives of universally quantified elements of this 
paradigm. A drawback of such a description lies in 
considering a lone symbiotic operation (i.e., one action), 
while Resonance Thinking, through precepts (a), (b), (c) and 
(d) requires performing a great number of interdependent 
symbiotic compositions, as will be described below. 
Recall that the two operators ‘conveys’ and ‘essential_of’ 
are here specified informally only by some set of sentences 
that represent informal descriptions (i.e., underspecified 
constraints) relative to these notions. Thus, we shall replace 
these notions by their informal descriptions. Above, we have 
denoted by Dt the set of sentences specifying ‘to convey’ and 
by De the set of sentences specifying ‘essence_of’. 
Therefore, (7) writes as 
 
∀disciple ∃works { Dt(René, works) &  
 
Dt(works,disciple)  De(René) = De(disciple) }  (8)  
Let us consider (8) for each particular di, i.e., 
 
∃works { Dt(René, works)  
 
   & Dt(works, di)  De(René) = De(di) } 
(9)  
In [11], we show that a solution for (9) can be found for 
each di by following CSE-scheme and oscillating between 
paradigms (4) and (5). This solution consists of a concrete 
value wi for ‘works’ and of less informal descriptors Dt,i and 
De,i. We shall note Soli = { wi, Dt,i, De,i }. Due to a careful 
oscillation between paradigms (4) and (5) the descriptors Dt,i 
and De,i, wi refine ‘works’ and the operators ‘to convey’ and 
‘essential_of’ in (6). These resulting refinements ‘resonate’ 
with the framework of paradigm (5). By their resonating we 
mean that, during the experimentation process, we feel that 
they might, probably after some ‘judicious adaptations’, be 
applied also to other instances of ‘disciple’.   
B. Resonance Thinking 
Resonance Thinking relies heavily on what Merriam-
Webster Dictionary considers as resonance: a quality that 
makes something personally meaningful or important to 
someone. Resonance Thinking thus involves the ability to 
create and explore personally meaningful or important 
relations in the process of generating and handling 
experiments. 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-705-4
COGNITIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

We are going to describe it in the framework of René’s 
example. 
At this stage, we suppose that (9) for d0 is already solved 
following the CSE-scheme. Sol0 represents thus a 
‘temporary’ solution for d0. By ‘temporary’ we mean that 
this solution will still have to be approved or modified by 
Resonance Thinking. Procedurally, the part of generating 
experiences of Resonance Thinking is based on two 
procedures for which we cannot yet provide a detailed 
description 
(thus, 
making 
explicit 
also 
‘handling 
experiments’ part of RT), as they rely also on other 
symbiotic facets of CSE not introduced yet (namely, MT and 
ST mentioned above). We shall therefore concentrate on 
explaining the role of these procedures. The first procedure 
will be called topological symbiosis (noted ts) and it is also a 
primitive operation for the second procedure. The second 
procedure is called complementary topological symbiosis 
(noted cts). Both these procedures require creativity in 
developing symbiotic systems. In this paper, we describe the 
way these procedures work: they are therefore to be handled, 
for the time being, by a creative human person. The 
following description of the role of ts and cts illustrate some 
of the challenges that ts and cts have to tackle. 
1) On symbiosis in Resonance Thinking 
We need to point out here two particular features of ts. 
The first one concerns the character of possible “mutilations” 
performed by ts and the second one concerns its goal. 
In [8], we present an example of a pictorial symbiosis of 
two different women. One woman is young, the other is old. 
The resulting symbiosis is a face that can be seen 
simultaneously as a young and an old woman. The original 
two pictures of women have to be ‘mutilated’ so that the 
resulting symbiotic picture is convincing. For instance, an 
eye of old woman and an ear of young woman overlap in the 
symbiotic picture. As for the opposite ages of the women on 
the initial pictures, they are ‘merged’, since the symbiotic 
picture is at the same ‘old’ and ‘young’. 
In [9], we used the example of Peano’s axioms that are 
(also) symbiotic since, by deleting one of its axioms, the 
reduced set of axioms leads also to other interpretation 
structures (such as, for instance, the set of Perfect Women in 
[8]). This example exhibits an explicit degradation due to the 
presence of a set of notions and constraints that obviously 
became underspecified when one of Peano’s axioms is 
deleted. This shows that, at first glance, systemic symbiosis 
manifests itself not so much as ‘merging’ contradictory 
facets of the considered system (as ‘merging’ two opposites, 
namely young and old in the above mentioned pictorial 
symbiosis), but as constructing an emergent vitally 
separation-sensitive interdependence (i.e., symbiosis) of 
parts of the system. However, a detailed perception shows 
that this vitally separation-sensitive interdependence means 
‘merging’ relationships that are usually contradictory, for 
instance, ‘p depends on q’ and ‘q depends on p’. 
2) On generating experiments in Resonance Thinking  
We are going to describe ts and cts in the framework of 
René’s example. At this stage, we suppose that (9) for d0 is 
already solved following the CSE-scheme providing the 
solution Sol0 for d0. Sol0 represents a ‘temporary’ solution 
for d0. By ‘temporary’ we mean that this solution will still 
have to be approved or modified by RT. Similarly, for other 
disciples d1, …, dn, we will obtain Sol1, Sol2 and so on. We 
assume here that the solutions are obtained in a particular 
‘linear’ way, one after another. This ‘linear’ way looks as 
follows. 
Once Sol0 is constructed, a ‘temporary’ solution Sol1 for 
d1 is constructed (‘temporary’ in the same way as Sol0 is a 
‘temporary’ solution for d0). Note that both these 
constructions may lead to new experiences and thus, they 
modify the initial environment by refining the informal 
notions of our definition (6) of our problem. For the sake of 
simplicity, we do not describe explicitly below this evolution 
of environment, though we take it into account by calling it a 
‘feedback’ when we use it. 
Now, suppose that we solved the problem for the first 
disciple. Before starting solving the problem for the next 
one, we try to take into account the informal notions present 
in (6). This try amounts to an attempt to ‘merge’ the 
solutions Sol0 and Sol1 using topological symbiosis ts, i.e., 
we try to achieve their symbiotic composition that resonates 
(as explained in Section 4.A) with the informal specification 
(6). We shall denote this process by ts(Sol0,Sol1).  
If solving ts(S0,S1) fails, i.e., we cannot find relevant 
refinements, we keep in mind the feedback obtained while 
constructing Sol0 and Sol1, as well as the failure reasons of 
ts(S0,S1). This failed step will have to be redone later while 
relying on some inspirations that may rise while finding the 
solutions for the next disciples. If this process fails, the 
problem will have to be considered as a challenge for one of 
the next pulsation steps. 
If the process ts(Sol0,Sol1) succeeds, both solutions are 
temporarily approved. Then, keeping in mind all the 
feedback obtained, a solution of (9) for d2 is constructed. 
One might suppose that this process may continue linearly as 
suggested by its beginning, as we just have seen. However, 
recall that we work in an environment that requires control 
and prevention. Therefore, in this environment, we rely 
strongly on the above four precepts. This means that 
generating complementary experiments for topological 
symbiosis of solutions constructed is necessary. We call 
complementary topological symbiosis (noted cts) this 
procedure for generating new experiments. 
Roughly speaking, cts is a particular generation process 
(defined with help of ts) for creating experiments. The goal 
of these complementary experiments is to provide 
inspirations for further refinement of underspecified notions 
and constraints. Similarly to the computation of ack (see 
[12]), in the process of generating experiments (via ts) for 
Solm and Soln, i.e., while ‘computing’ cts(Solm,Soln), the 
operation ts(Soli,Solj) for other solutions Soli and Solj  is 
performed several times. 
Let us denote by ts1(Soli,Solj) the solution of the first 
computation, by ts2(Soli,Solj) for the second computation, 
and so on. It is important to point out that tsp(Soli,Solj) and 
tsq(Soli,Solj) in this sequence of computations may carry two 
different feedbacks. Indeed, each inner step of cts (i.e., 
evaluating cts(Solm,Soln)), may bring new refinements, 
constraints as well as it may point out to missing knowledge 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-705-4
COGNITIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

or second-order notions and procedures. The procedures ts 
and cts have to insure that not only reasonable and 
achievable solutions are obtained but that a possibility of 
future evolutions are guaranteed while properly handling 
prevention and control.  
Recall that ts and cts are, in our case, presently performed 
by a human mind. This means that human mind can rely on 
relevant creativity in order to decrease the number of 
repetitions. In consequence, even though ts and cts are not 
simple, CSE and Resonance Thinking are not overwhelming 
tasks for human performers. However, they may be 
overwhelming for a human observer even in this simplified 
form. This is why we believe that further research is 
necessary to give a reasonable formula for performing cts by 
machine. 
V. 
DISCUSSION/RELATED WORK  
Scientific creation, as a particular human invention [15], 
becomes a highly economically interesting topic when it can 
be turned into an implementable science. CSE does try to 
build an implementable theory of SRPS scientific creation.  
Since it is based on our relatively successful experience in 
creating a methodology for PS, the four fundamental facets 
of CSE bring several stimulating challenges to Cognitive 
Science (CS). Some of them have been presented in [11]. In 
this paper we would like to mention two more challenges. 
They concern frame problem [2] and conceptual blending 
[5].  
Bermudez’ work, as cited above, seems to imply that CS 
is somewhat wary of non-modular processing. One of the 
reasons is that non-modular processing very quickly meets 
frame problem-like difficulties. We have seen that, during 
Resonance Thinking, the human brain is rather at ease with 
the identifications needed to handle the frame-problem. Why 
it is so? Is it because there is a particular kind of internal 
representation human mind is able to construct? Alternately, 
is it because our mind includes mechanisms that are 
presently out of the scope of the current modular approach to 
our mind architecture [2]? Moreover, performing CSE 
includes a symbiosis of form, a meaning, a representation 
formalism, mechanisms and, importantly, reaching a human 
agreement via conceptual coherence [16] and real-world 
exploitation. Does it mean that a modular approach to mind 
architecture should be revised? Could it be possible that 
some kind of symbiotic approach might be better suited even 
though it is more complex? 
Besides, we have tried to find some concepts of CS that 
resonate with CSE-thinking. We have found some 
similarities between Resonance Thinking and Conceptual 
Blending (CB) as presented in [5]. On a high-level of 
abstraction, RT and CB seem similar, since they are both 
concerned with construction of meaning and they both 
involve ‘merging’. Of course, they also show some 
differences at this high-level because RT is consciously 
performed, while CB is considered as taking place outside 
consciousness and is not available to introspection (as in [5], 
p. 33). We believe that this unconscious feature of CB 
disappears if people work in domains where rigor, 
justification and reproducibility of results are essential. 
Incidentally, let us point out that Fauconnier and Turner’s 
illustrations, in [5], do not fulfill these stipulations. 
At a lower-level, RT seems to us more complex than CB. 
Let us mention several features of RT that contrast CB.  
• 
CB is highly nondeterministic while, in RT, the 
solution is specified in advance, even-though 
informally. Thus, RT performs what could be called 
a ‘goal-oriented symbiosis’. While handling the 
generated experiments, RT focuses on what 
resonates as contributing to a universal solution, as 
in René’s example, ‘works’ in (6).  
• 
RT involves solving underspecified constraints due 
to the presence of incompleteness and an informal 
specification.  
• 
RT 
not 
only 
handles 
a 
given 
data 
input 
(experiments) but it also generates complementary 
data (experiments).  
• 
CB usually works with two mental spaces. RT, via 
topological symbiosis, works with three inputs (two 
experiments and one goal) and the solutions obtained 
are temporary until other experiments confirm the 
output. 
• 
Fauconnier and Turner [5], in relation with CB, 
claim that researchers are unaware of how they are 
thinking. RT is a description of our way of thinking 
relevant to creation of SRPS.  
• 
CB is performed on mental spaces, i.e., small 
conceptual pockets constructed for purposes of local 
understanding and action ([5], p. 40). In RT, there 
are no small conceptual packets since global 
understanding is required even in considerations that 
may seem local. 
• 
In the case of CB, the effects of some unconscious 
imaginative work are captured by consciousness, but 
the operations that produce it are not ([5], p. 58). As 
said above, RT (and CSE) is a description of our 
way of thinking that is relevant to SRPS creation. 
This means that we are consciously aware of the 
informal specifications of the operations performed 
by our mind. Presently, our goal is not to apprehend 
all the conscious details of the operations performed 
by RT and CSE. Our present goal is to specify what 
enters into the ‘game’ of RT (and CSE) and what the 
‘winning strategies’ are in order to conceive all the 
rules of ‘the full game’ of CSE. In other words, 
presently, we aim to develop a ‘prosthesis’ that can 
be implemented and used during CSE. We are 
convinced that apprehending human operations first 
by relevant informal specifications is half way to a 
reasonable implementable solution.   
We can also compare ‘mismatch-based learning’ 
presented in [21] to our ‘mismatch-based creativity’ in the 
following sense. Any proof performed in an incomplete 
domain always faces a possibility of leading to a failure. This 
means that we are bound to provide means of recovery from 
these temporary failures or, alternatively, strategies making 
use of the failure itself – which is a way to recover from such 
a failure by including the failure cases inside the domain. An 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-705-4
COGNITIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

example of the last kind of recovery has been provided by 
Grossberg who, in [21], introduces a procedure including 
‘mismatch-based learning’ cases in order to enable a rapid 
adaptation to changing bodily parameters relative to the 
posterior parietal cortex. Our approach, however, relies on a 
creative recovery more than a learning one, as explained 
above. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
It is largely accepted that inspiration seems to take place 
anytime, such as while walking (e.g., Poincaré’s case), 
showering or during a pause playing the violin (e.g., 
Einstein’s case). It is usually also accepted that some sort of 
unconscious incubation precedes this inspiration. Since we 
differentiate ‘unconscious’ and ‘non-verbal’, this does not 
take place during RT. Furthermore, contrary to Popper’s 
opinion [17] that “there is no such a thing as a logical 
method of having new ideas, or a logical reconstruction of 
this process,” RT is a systemic method for generating new 
and relevant ideas. Of course, its ‘logical reconstruction’ is 
not trivial, as is illustrated by this paper. CSE, CSE-scheme, 
RT, Symbiotic Thinking and Metamorphic Thinking 
nevertheless seem to be a good start for a ‘Cartesian 
reconstruction’ of this process. Thus, we believe that, even in 
its presently incomplete version, CSE brings forward 
thinking mechanisms that are essential for exploration, 
creation of possibilities, anticipation, resonance, blending, 
on-purpose creating of informally specified tools, invention, 
discovery, and so on. 
We are aware that our description of the cognitive tasks 
involved in CSE does not provide a clear idea whether it is 
possible (or reasonable) to find a way to break down the 
cognitive tasks that are performed into more determinate 
tasks. We describe what humans do or what they have to do 
without specifying how these tasks are performed by our 
brain. We thus believe that research on these topics in the 
field of CSE in particular and its comparison with scientific 
creativity in general (i.e., a comparison with scientists’ 
creative thinking in several scientific domains) might bring 
new conceptual and procedural switches not only in 
Computer and Cognitive Sciences, but also in other human 
activities. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We thank Michèle Sebag and Yannis Manoussakis for 
their moral support. 
REFERENCES 
[1] F. Bacon, Novum Organum, P.U.F, 1986. 
[2] J. L. Bermúdez, Cognitive Science, An Introduction to the 
Science of the Mind, Cambridge University Press, 2014. 
[3] R. Descartes, “Rules for the Direction of the Mind,”  in R. 
Descartes, translated by J. Cottingham, R.Stoothoff, D. and 
Murdoch, Philosophical Writings of Descartes, vol. 1, 
Cambridge University Press, 2006, pp. 9-76. 
[4] R. Descartes, “Discourse on the Method,”  in R. Descartes, 
translated by J. Cottingham, R.Stoothoff and D. Murdoch, 
Philosophical Writings of Descartes, vol. 1, Cambridge 
University Press, 2006, pp. 111-151. 
[5] G. Fauconnier, M. Turner, The Way We Think, Conceptual 
Blending And The Mind's Hidden Complexities, Basic Books, 
2003. 
[6] M. Franova, “CM-strategy: A Methodology for Inductive 
Theorem Proving or Constructive Well-Generalized Proofs,”  
in A. K. Joshi, (ed), Proceedings of the Ninth International 
Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 1985, 1214-1220. 
[7] M. Franova, “An Implementation of Program Synthesis from 
Formal Specifications,”  in Y. Kodratoff, (ed.), Proceedings 
of the 8th European Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 
Pitman, 1988, pp. 559-564. 
[8] M. Franova, “The Role of Recursion in and for Scientific 
Creativity,” in R. Trappl (ed.), Cybernetics and Systems 2010, 
Proc. of the Twentieth European Meeting on Cybernetics and 
System research, Austrian Society for Cybernetic Studies, 
2010, pp. 573-578. 
[9] M. Franova, “A Cartesian Methodology for an Autonomous 
Program Synthesis System,” in M.Jäntti, G. Weckman (eds)., 
proc. of ICONS 2014, The Ninth International Conference on 
Systems, ISBN, 978-1-61208-319-3, 2014, pp. 22-27. 
[10] M. Franova, “Cartesian versus Newtonian Paradigms for 
Recursive Program Synthesis,” International Journal on 
Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol. 7, no 3&4, 
2014, pp. 209-222. 
[11] M. Franova and Y. Kodratoff, “Cartesian Systemic 
Emergence - Tackling Underspecified Notions in Incomplete 
Domains,” in O. Chernavskaya, K. Miwa (eds.), Proc. of 
COGNITIVE 2018, The Tenth International Conference on 
Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications, ISBN, 
978-1-61208-609-5, 2018, pp. 1-6. 
[12] M. 
Franova, 
Trace 
of 
computation 
for 
ack(3,2), 
https://sites.google.com/site/martafranovacnrs/trace-of-
computation-for-ack-3-2, retrieved 03/2019. 
[13] M. Franova and Y. Kodratoff, “Cartesian Systemic Pulsation: 
A Model for Evolutive Improvement of Incomplete Symbiotic 
Recursive Systems,” Internat. Journal On Advances in 
Intelligent Systems, vol 11, no 1&2, 2018, pp. 35-45. 
[14] K. Gödel, “Some metamathematical results on completeness 
and consistency, On formally undecidable propositions of 
Principia Mathematica and related systems I, and On 
completeness and consistency,”  in J. van Heijenoort, From 
Frege to Godel, A source book in mathematical logic, 1879-
1931, Harvard University Press, 1967, pp. 592-618. 
[15] J. Hadamard, An Essay on the Psychology of Invention in the 
Mathematical Field, Read Books, 2007. 
[16] G. L. Murphy and D.L. Medin, “The Role Theories in 
Conceptual Coherence,” Psychological Review 92(3), 1985, 
pp. 289-316. 
[17] K. Popper, The logic of scientific discovery, Harper, 1968. 
[18] A. Yasuhara, Recursive Function Theory and Logic, 
Academic Press, New York, 1971. 
[19] H. Mantel and A. Schairer, “Exploiting Generic Aspects of 
Security Models in Formal Developments”, in Mechanizing 
Mathematical Reasoning, Lecture Notes in Computer Science 
Volume 2605,  2005, pp. 452-475. 
[20] D. Hutter, H. Mantel, I. Schaefer and A. Schairer, “Security 
of multi-agent systems: A case study on comparison 
shopping”, ournal of Applied Logic, Volume 5, Issue 2, 2007, 
pp. 303-332. 
[21] S. Grossberg, Cortical and subcortical predictive dynamics 
and learning during perception, cognition, emotion and action. 
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 364, 2009, pp. 1223–1234. 
 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-705-4
COGNITIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

