Extending the World to Sense and Behave: A Supportive System Focusing on the
Body Coordination for Neurocognitive Rehabilitation
Hiroaki Wagatsuma, Marie
Fukudome
Department of Brain Science and
Engineering, Graduate School of Life
Science and Systems Engineering
Kyushu Institute of Technology
Kitakyushu, JAPAN
{waga, fukudome-
marie}@brain.kyutech.ac.jp
Kaori Tachibana
Department of Physical Therapy,
School of Health Sciences
Ibaraki Prefectural University of
Health Sciences
Inashiki-Gun, JAPAN
tachibana@ipu.ac.jp
Kazuhiro Sakamoto
Research Institute of Electrical
Communication
Tohoku University
Sendai, JAPAN
sakamoto@riec.tohoku.ac.jp
Abstract—We focus on the difficulty in people with cerebral
palsy to perform motor skills in a coordinated and purposeful
way and designed a robotic training support system for
children with cerebral palsy, which enhance their motivation
to do the training. The first target is to regenerate a balance
between right and left motions in a rhythmic task. In the
paddling task with both hands for rolling a long bar
systematically, we found a pace-making dynamics with
recovering an preferable motion to individuals and realize that
it is the key to build extensive rhythm-based tools for
improvements of cerebral palsy symptoms to capture the sense
of the world and increase an active range of motion.
Keywords-physical therapy (PT); robotic therapy; epigenetic
robotics; neurocognitive rehabilitation.
 I. 
 INTRODUCTION
Cerebral palsy (CP) is the most frequent physical
disability, or disorder, that mainly onsets in childhood. Over
the past four decades, the number of patient has reported
constant at 2 to 3 per 1,000 live births in industrialized
countries, with low fetal mortality [1] [2]. Treatment of CP is
a lifelong process that requires the collaboration of medical
professionals including physiotherapists, the children, and
their families. This is a sort of permanent disorder, but not
unchanging in the viewpoint of neuro-developmental aspect.
The patients have problems in muscle tone, movement,
and motor skills, especially in the ability to move body parts
in a coordinated and purposeful way. Some patients also
exhibit disability in other health issues, such as vision,
hearing, and speech and learning problems, implying
concerns about a relation to the impairment of intellectual
development. Physical therapy treatments of medical
professionals largely contribute to reconstruction in motor
skills, and the procedure is well investigated and adequately
equipped to care for patients with brain damage. In adult
cases, patients are convinced by the experience of the
physiotherapists and intend to do unpleasant trainings for
recovery. However, children’s expectations of the physical
therapy even with well-equipped procedure often do not
coincide with reality, and unwillingness often results.
Recently, brain plasticity enhanced by the presence of
awareness, attention and concentration is focused in studies
for recovery of the brain function [3] and clinical treatments
of rehabilitation, so-called cognitive- or neuro-cognitive
rehabilitation [4]. The combination of physical therapy
procedures and retention of cognitive process in thinking and
awareness starts anticipating for development of effective
strategies that will open a new door in treatments of
children’s care, toward CP patients and its developmental
difficulty [5].
In the present study, we are devoted to developing a
robotic training support device (Fig. 1), which holds
automated parts to enhance, support and burden a user’s
motion. The device is capable of recording their motions and
performances as a training history to help visualize their
developmental processes. As the framework, requirements
for such devices are 1) modifiable structure, 2) adjustable
kits and 3) rearrangement of parts in a structure, and 4)
switching tasks and 5) changing challenging levels to the
task difficulty as functions. In the viewpoint of the task
design, we focus on a sense of cognitive space during the
motor training. Ultimate goal is to provide a training method
to encourage subjects to capture an appropriate cognitive
space, and we start to investigate an effective method to
regenerate a balance between right and left motions.
We hypothesized that a clue to the regeneration problem
is to enhance an internal rhythm when subjects perform
periodic movements, such as pedaling with legs and paddling
with hands. Finally the concept of right-and-left coordination
should be extended to an arbitral configuration, or a flexible
sense of position in space, which are necessary for skills of
musical instruments, like multiple percussions.
In the present paper, we describe an important
relationship between cognitive and operational space in the
viewpoint of neurocognitive rehabilitation in chapter II, our
framework of a training support system for CP in chapter III,
results 
of 
the 
pilot 
experiment 
to 
investigate 
an
musculoskeletal pace-making dynamics during the paddling
task in chapter IV, and the conclusion in chapter V.
171
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 II. 
COGNITIVE AND OPERATIONAL SPACE
Cognitive motor control refers to processes that blend
cognitive and motor functions in a seamless, interwoven
fashion [6]. Through such experiences, the functions evolve
in space and time at various levels of difficulty and
complexity. Training programs in physical therapy mainly
focus on improvements of motor abilities, which may
distinct from the target of occupational therapy, but
programs for children with CP are inescapable to include
cognitive trainings, for example a task to require not only
pointing a letter in text but also reading the letter and
understanding what it describes (Fig. 2).
 In a memory task, we observed a child with CP who can
retrieve greater than seven random number presented by the
therapist in a voice, suggesting an above-average IQ over
children with the same age, but decreases its performance if
random positions are presented in a table. Another child with
CP who has taken an adequate physical therapy for
movements in the paralysis side still demonstrates
asymmetric operational areas between right and left hands
(Fig. 4). One possible hypothesis is that cognitive and
operational spaces link together and cognitive tasks to be
aware of things in the paralysis side can be used as a
complementary approach to the physiotherapy treatment for
children with CP. We focus on the coordination between
cognitive sense of space and behavioral structure in motion
and designed a prototype of the robotic training support
system to enhance the link between cognitive and
operational spaces.
   
(a)
(b)
Figure 1.  A prototype of the robotic training support device for
execution of various handling tasks and monitoring the behavior. (a)
Sensors spread over the flat table to detect hands’ motion. Children
with CP sit at the table because they mostly deficit self-standing ability
in an early stage of rehabilitation and the device is devoted to
examining how their cognitive developments proceed through memory
tasks of visual stimulus and tracing hand movements in this case. (b)
Portable PC is implemented in the device for task presentation,
recording of behavioral data and communicating with physiotherapists
in the hospital and other children with CP to play an interactive training
game together.
 
III. 
FRAMEWORK DESIGN
We designed a training device for children with CP,
which enhance their motivation to do the training through
rhythmic game-like tapping devices. Palm-sized buttons can
be used for designing such devices, by putting buttons with
on the table and the buttons respond a touch by sound and
light like musical instruments. Possible arrangements are
given according to the subjects’ deficits and we can consider
various configurations (Fig. 3) to examine changes cognitive
and operational areas between both hands (Fig. 2). However,
our purpose does not design a musical instrument in a
passive manner, but design an active device to be able to
synchronize the internal rhythm that appears when individual
subjects perform a rhythmic task at their own paces.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.  A concept of cognitive motor space. (a) (left) Allocentric
coordinate or objective space to enable two persons to share the same
space. (right) Egocentric coordinate or subjective space for handling by
oneself. Cognitive development is considered to extend from egocentric
to allocentric coordinates. (b) Cognitive and operational space in stages
of rehabilitation. (left) In normal subjects, reachable spaces of right and
left hands are consistent with spaces of easy-to-operate. (center)
Patients with deficits in the right hemisphere of the brain are not good
at handling things in the left side, known as hemispatial neglects [7].
(right) An ideal process of regenerate a balance between right and left
motions after appropriate rehabilitations.
   
Figure 3.  Palm-sized buttons are implemented in the table device. The
button lightens the surface when touched and/or controlled by the PC
according to the automated task program in an active manner (left), and
are aligned in various ways such as grid-like, square, circle, and a
spokewise structure (right). This helps to provide a tapping task in
accordance with music.
172
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
IV. 
A PILOT EXPERIMENT
Firstly, we investigated a pace-making dynamics in
motor trainings according to the concept of neurocognitive
rehabilitation (Fig. 4a) and designed a padding task of hand
motions [8] with two options: 1) with/without circular guides
in both sides for navigating cyclic motions (position
guidance) and 2) with/without balls in both sides for
enhancing forces in cyclic motions (acceleration guidance).
We built the equipment for the task and the real-time
recording 
system 
of 
motion 
information 
through
accelerometers (Fig. 5) by using the Nintendo Wii remote
controller [9] [10] with the real-time Bluetooth wireless
communication to an external PC (Fig. 6).
As the first step, six normal subjects were trained in the
paddling task without guides and without balls, which
consists of continuous five sessions (#1-#5) of a minute with
interval breaks of five minutes. In the observation of
paddling motions of a subject, we found a certain period of
cyclic motions at a constant pace and a cracking between
periods (Fig. 7). Interestingly, our experimental data exhibits
a recovering dynamics to connect constant periods, with
semi-conscious deorbit process (black lines in Fig. 7, 8) and
conscious or quasi-conscious back-on-track process (blue
lines in Fig. 7, 8) in Session #1. Due to the tendency to
enlarge the constant period, the number of cracking
decreases which is also observed in the frequency
component analysis (Fig. 9). This tendency was observed in
other subjects except in performances at the slow pace of
cycling. This fact suggests that this phenomenon requires a
certain workload for individual subjects, and this indicates
the existence of a comfortable pace-making in the paddling
task as the result of a synergy among the subject’s internal
rhythm, constraints of the support device and effect of
training, such as habituation and learning.
 V. 
CONCLUDING REMARKS
We introduced a concept of relationship between
cognitive and operational space in the viewpoint of
neurocognitive rehabilitation concepts, and demonstrate a
pilot experiment to investigate an integral pace-making
dynamics during a paddling task. We hypothesized that a
clue to the regeneration problem is to enhance an internal
rhythm when subjects perform periodic movements, such as
paddling motions with hands. In further analysis and
developments of the device and task design, we attempt to
apply this result to the framework in an arbitral configuration,
which enable the device to supply complex rhythmic and
coordinating motions accompanied with memory skills in a
cognitive space. For extending to the table-shaped device
with palm-sized buttons aligned in a various structure, the
device may require to detect the integral pace that is
generated from such a synergy among the subject’s internal
rhythm, task constraints and learning effects and to
synchronize it as a tempo of the music. It is expected to
enhance the coordination between cognitive and behavioral
sense, which may be observed as changes operational areas
of both hands. This rhythm-based cognitive motor training
coupled with the supportive autonomous system opens new
doors for a self-sustained interactive rehabilitation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is partially supported by JSPS KAKENHI
(22300081).
　 　
  (a)                                    (b)
Figure 4.  A possible rehabilitations process for reorganization through
rhythmic motions. (a) An expected process of rehabilitations through
the device, which is inspired from [11][12].  (b) Our proposed paddling
taks with the 180cm bar, which allows a certain flexion according to the
cyclic motion like a fishing pole. The task has two options:
with/without circular guides in both sides for navigating cyclic motions
(position guidance) and with/without balls in both sides for enhancing
forces in cyclic motions (acceleration guidance).
Figure 5.  A demonstration of the paddling task. The left-bottom panel
denotes a snapshot of the paddling motion in the equipment. The top
plot exhibits a real-time observation of values from three dimensional
acceleration meters (Fig. 6), which attached on both ends of the bar.
The recording system was designed by MATLAB.
  
Figure 6.  A Wii remote controller to connect to the PC via the
wireless Bluetooth communication. This includes acceleration sensors
with three orthogonal axes.  (right) X-Z accelerometer values in
machine rotations with a constant power.) (Figures from [10])
173
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Figure 7.  A temporal evolution of accelerometer values in the
paddling task. (a) Experimental data of a subject in the first sesssin #1,
for 70s. (b) A highlight of a recovering process connecting two constant
periods, which consists of a stable period (red), deorbit period (black),
back-on-track quick process (blue) and recovered stable period (green).
Figure 8.  Replotting the recovering process of Fig. 7 in the X-Z
accelerometer coordinates. This visulaizes an attractor dynamics to
differ the stable orbit and the deorbit processes, and to make sense two
stable periods (red and green) are consistent.  Line colors are the same
in Fig. 7.
Figure 9.  FFT analyses among different sessions #1 and #5, which is
obtained from the same subject in Fig. 7 nad Fig. 8. Peak positions are
similar in two sessions, while the frequency distribution is getting
sharper with a single peak, suggesting the increasing of stableness of
the paddling motions at a constant speed.
REFERENCES
[1] 
G. E. Molnar, “Rehabilitation in cerebral palsy,” In
Rehabilitation Medicine-Adding Life to Years, West J Med,
vol.154, pp. 569-572, 1991.
[2] 
K. Mattern-Baxter, “Locomotor Treadmill Training for
Children With Cerebral 
Palsy,” Orthopaedic Nursing,
vol.29(3), pp. 169-173, 2010.
[3] 
V. S. Ramachandran and S. Blakeslee,  “Phantoms in the
Brain: Probing the Mysteries of the Human Mind,” New
York: William Morrow, 1998.
[4] 
K. D. Cicerone, C. Dahlberg, J. F. Malec, D. M. Langenbahn,
Y. Felicetti, S. Kneipp, W. Ellmo,  K. Kalmar, J. T. Giacino, J.
P. Harley, L. Laatsch, P. A. Morse, and  J. Catanese,
“Evidence-based cognitive rehabilitation: updated review of
the literature from 1998 through 2002,” Arch Phys Med
Rehabil, vol.86(8), pp. 1681-1692, August 2005.
[5] 
“Robotic therapy holds promise for cerebral palsy - Devices
can help children with brain injuries learn to grasp and
manipulate 
objects,” 
MIT 
news,
http://web.mit.edu/newsoffice/2009/robotherapy-0519.html
[6] 
A. P. Georgopoulos, “Cognitive motor control: spatial and
temporal aspects,” Curr Opin Neurobiol, vol.12(6), pp. 678-
683, December 2002.
[7] 
P. Malhotra, E. Coulthard, and M. Husain, “Hemispatial
neglect, balance and eye-movement control,” Curr Opin
Neurol, vol.19(1), pp. 14-20, 2006.
[8] 
M. Fukudome and H. Wagatsuma, “A supportive system
focusing on the body coordination for neurocognitive
rehabilitation,” Proceedings of the 21st Annual Conference of
the Japanese Neural Networks Society (JNNS 2011), pp. 216-
217, 2011.
[9] 
S. Brosnan, “The potential of Wii- rehabilitation for persons
recovering from acute stroke,” Physical Disabilities Special
Interest Section Quarterly, vol.32(1), pp. 1-3, 2009
[10] G. Goldberg, H. Rubinsky, E. Irvin, E. Linneman, J. Knapke,
and M. Ryan, “Doing WiiHab: Experience with the Wiivideo
game system in acquired brain injury rehabilitation,” Journal
of Head Trauma Rehabilitation, vol.23(5),  pp. 350, 2008.
[11] H. Haken, J. A. S. Kelso, and H. Bunz “A Theoretical Model
of Phase Transitions in Human Hand Movements,” Biological
Cybernetics, vol.51, pp. 347-356, 1985.
[12] B. A. Kay, J. A. S. Kelso, E. L. Saltzman, and G. S. SchÄoner,
“The Space-time Behavior 
of Single and Bimaniual
Movements: Data and Model,” Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance vol.13, pp.
178-192, 1987.
174
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

