A Predictive System for Distance Learning Based on Ontologies and Data Mining  
 
 Boufardea Evangelia  
University of Patras 
CTI "Diophantus" Computer Technology Institute & 
Press 
Patras, Greece 
mpoufard@ceid.upatras.gr, mpoufard@westgate.gr 
Garofalakis John  
University of Patras 
CTI "Diophantus" Computer Technology Institute & 
Press  
Patras, Greece 
garofala@ceid.upatras.gr, garofala@cti.gr 
 
 
Abstract— The development of distance learning, e-learning 
and online learning, has increased exponentially in recent 
years. Lately, researchers have begun to investigate various 
data mining techniques in order to improve the quality of this 
type of education. However, although distance learning in 
education is well established, there are a few attempts to 
extract educationally useful information during the course and 
before the final evaluation. In this paper, we propose an 
ontology based on the structure of a distance learning 
environment which enriches a recommendation system with 
rules generated by data mining techniques. Tutors can use this 
recommendation system in order to predict learners’ progress 
and their final performance. This application will enhance the 
efficiency of any distance learning or e-learning platform and 
will be beneficial for learners as well as for tutors in the 
learning process. 
Keywords: ontology; protégé; RDF; data mining; weka; 
classification; J48 algorithm; distance learning; HOU 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The rapid spread of Internet has caused significant 
changes in many sectors of the economy and society 
worldwide. From these changes, education could not be left 
out. With the increasing development of information 
technologies, a new form of education appears, e-learning 
(distance education), which revolutionized the educational 
process. 
Furthermore, while the World Wide Web gradually 
transforms into Semantic Web, new standards and models 
such as Extensible Markup Language (XML) [20], Resource 
Description Framework (RDF) and OWL Web Ontology 
Language are evolving in order to enhance this technology. 
The storage, presentation, transmission and search of 
information according to those standards open up new 
horizons in the utilization of the Web. Ontologies are 
increasingly get used for knowledge representation. 
A large ontology contains useful data for a system of 
distance education and thus it is deserved to investigate the 
"hidden knowledge", i.e., to discover possible associations or 
to find repeated patterns and forms or extreme events. 
This paper proposes a data mining approach to discover 
relationships between the learning resources metadata. A 
new recommendation system is developed for assisting tutors 
in distance learning to predict learners’ progress and their 
final performance. The developed system is based on a new 
framework using data mining techniques in metadata derived 
from an ontology. The basic idea was to design an ontology 
that can store knowledge about the learners’ skills in relation 
to a specific educational purpose. We used for our research 
PLI23 - Telematics, Internet of the Hellenic Open 
University, which has a very specific subject and 4 
mandatory projects per year, and then we exploited the 
imported data in order to discover rules and predict learners’ 
progress. The key in distance learning is the communication 
between learners and tutors. With the help of the proposed 
system, this communication is getting better, more 
immediate and effective. In other words, the quality of 
distance learning is improved. 
This paper is organized as follows: in Section II, related 
work, a quick reference to ontologies, data mining and 
distance education, which are the basis of our application, 
are presented. In Section III, we present our implemented 
application is presented. The application has three parts. The 
first refers to the ontology that was created in order to 
represent a course. The second part refers to the data mining 
techniques that were used in order to exploit the data from 
the ontology, which algorithms were used and why, which 
attributes were taken into account, and finally, the rules 
generated. The third part of the application -the predictive 
system- is a platform which is used by tutors in order to 
predict learners’ progress. The platform is based on the 
results of the previous parts. Finally, conclusions and an 
outline of further work are presented. 
 
II. 
TOPICS OF INTEREST 
Distance learning, ontologies and data mining techniques 
are the topics that were studied in order to implement our 
decision support system. There is related work that is 
presented below. 
A. Distance learning 
Higher education systems all over the world are 
challenged nowadays by the new information and 
communication technologies (ICT). Distance education or 
distance learning is a field of education that focuses on 
teaching methods and technology with the aim of delivering 
teaching, often on an individual basis, to students who are 
not physically present in a traditional educational setting 
such as a classroom. It has been described as "a process to 
151
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

create and provide access to learning when the source of 
information and the learners are separated by time and 
distance, or both." Distance education courses that require a 
physical on-site presence for any reason (including taking 
examinations) have been referred to as hybrid or blended 
courses of study [18]. 
Distance learning programs can fundamentally change 
the way schools compete for students, especially part-time 
students. A school that develops distance learning programs 
usually increases the scale and scope of its offerings. Many 
traditional institutions have added distance learning 
programs. Academic institutions and corporations are 
combining resources to bring distance learning programs to 
workplaces. Academic institutions offer courses through 
distance learning so students have opportunities to create a 
degree program that uses course offerings from multiple 
schools. 
Hellenic Open University (HOU) is the 19th Greek State 
University, but the only one that provides distance education 
in both undergraduate and postgraduate levels via the 
development and utilization of appropriate learning material 
and methods of teaching. The HOU's mission is to provide 
distance education at both undergraduate and postgraduate 
level. For that purpose, it develops and implements 
appropriate learning material and methods of teaching. The 
promotion of scientific research as well as the development 
of the relevant technology and methodology in the area of 
distance learning falls within the scope of the HOU's 
objectives [22]. 
B. Ontology 
Ontologies are widely used in Knowledge Engineering, 
Artificial Intelligence and Computer Science, in applications 
related to knowledge management, natural language 
processing, e-commerce, intelligent integration information, 
information retrieval, database design and integration, bio-
informatics, education, and in new emerging fields like the 
Semantic Web [1]. 
The term is borrowed from philosophy, where ontology 
is a systematic account of existence. 
“Ontology 
is 
an 
explicit 
specification 
of 
a 
conceptualization.” This definition became the most quoted 
in literature and by the ontology community. Based on 
Gruber’s definition, many definitions of what ontology is 
were proposed. Borst (1997, page 12) modified slightly 
Gruber’s definition as follows: Ontologies are defined as a 
formal specification of a shared conceptualization.” [7]. 
Several 
technologies 
have 
been 
developed 
for 
constructing and developing the Semantic Web. RDF and its 
extensions such as OWL have been developed to define 
metadata 
schemas, domain 
ontologies and resource 
descriptions. RDF is a W3C (World Wide Web Consortium) 
standard developed in 1997. It is a standard model for data 
interchange on the Web. RDF has features that facilitate data 
merging even if the underlying schemas differ, and it 
specifically supports the evolution of schemas over time 
without requiring all the data consumers to be changed [23]. 
Web ontology language (OWL) built on RDF is the new 
W3C recommendation for ontology construction with 
facilitates for effective reasoning capabilities by consistency 
checking through inference rules such as transitivity, 
symmetry etc.  OWL is designed for use by applications that 
need to process the content of information instead of just 
presenting information to humans. OWL facilitates greater 
machine interpretability of Web content than that supported 
by XML, RDF, and RDF Schema (RDF-S) by providing 
additional vocabulary along with a formal semantics. OWL 
has three increasingly-expressive sublanguages: OWL Lite, 
OWL DL, and OWL Full [24]. 
Eyharabide et al. [13] described an ontology that was 
implemented for predicting students' emotions when 
interacting with a quiz about Java programming.  Zhuhadar 
et al. [9] and Pin-Yu Pan et al. [12] proposed a hybrid 
recommendation strategy of content-based and knowledge-
based, in which aiming to filter recommended items from the 
available items according to the user's preferences. Sridharan 
et al. [3] presents a multi-level ontology - driven topic 
mapping approach to facilitate an effective visualization, 
classification and global authoring of learning resources in e-
learning.  
In this paper, we implemented an application ontology 
that contains all the definitions needed to model the 
knowledge required for the particular area of application. 
Application ontologies often extend and specialize the 
vocabulary of the domain for a given application such as 
ours. For instance in this work, we created an ontology for a 
system specialized in distance learning for the HOU and we 
adapt the particularities of HOU into the ontology. 
C. Data mining techniques 
Data mining involves the use of sophisticated data 
analysis tools to discover previously unknown, valid patterns 
and relationships in large data sets. These tools can include 
statistical models, mathematical algorithms, and machine 
learning methods (algorithms that improve their performance 
automatically through experience, such as neural networks or 
decision trees). Consequently, data mining consists of more 
than collecting and managing data, it also includes analysis 
and prediction [8]. 
Data mining is ready for application in the business 
community because it is supported by three technologies that 
are now sufficiently mature [6]:  
 
Massive data collection 
 
Powerful multiprocessor computers 
 
Data mining algorithms 
The most commonly used techniques in data mining are: 
Artificial neural networks (non - linear statistical data 
modeling tools, usually used to model complex relationships 
between inputs and outputs or to find patterns in data) [15], 
Decision trees (a decision support tool that uses a tree-like 
graph or model of decisions and their possible consequences, 
including chance event outcomes, resource costs, and utility) 
[17], Genetic algorithms (a search heuristic that mimics the 
process of natural evolution) [19], Association Rules 
(popular and well researched method for discovering 
interesting relations between variables in large databases) 
[16], etc. 
152
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

There are several approaches to data mining techniques 
in e-learning generating recommendations based on a user’s 
profile. Burdescu et al. [4] proposed a novel structure of a 
support system for e-Learning infrastructure that is based on 
data representing learner's activities and processes. Markov 
chain modeling and classification is used as main intelligent 
procedure for data analysis. Hanna [10] described how we 
can profit from the integration of data mining and the e-
learning technology. Taking into consideration the suggested 
methods, data mining can be used to extract knowledge from 
e-learning systems through the analysis of the information 
available in the form of data generated by their users. In this 
case, the main objective is to find the patterns of system 
usage by teachers and students and, perhaps most 
importantly, to discover the students’ learning behavior 
patterns. In this paper, we used classification process and 
more specific Decision Trees in order to find a set of models 
that describes and distinguishes data classes and concepts. 
The derived model is based on the analysis of a set of 
training data.  
A dissertation also with subject “Understanding dropout 
of adult learners in e-learning” [2] has been also conducted, 
which is related, too. 
III. 
APPLICATION 
A. Building the Ontology  
Nowadays, ontologies offer the ability to model the 
knowledge of a domain in a discrete and definite way. We 
used Protégé as a framework application. Figure 1 shows the 
design of “pli” ontology in Protégé.  
As far as concerning HOU, by means of an ontology, it 
will be possible to describe the knowledge domain the 
subjects constituting it, the relations among the various 
subjects, as well as methodologies and means with which 
they are presented. The content of an ontology depends both 
on the amount of information and on the degree of formality 
that is used to express it. Generally, two main types of 
ontologies are distinguished: lightweight and heavyweight. 
In this paper, the lightweight approach is adopted according 
to this definition of ontology: “ontology may take a variety 
of forms, but it will necessarily include a vocabulary of 
terms and some specification of their meaning”. A 
lightweight ontology is a structured representation of 
knowledge, a taxonomy where the concepts are arranged in a 
hierarchy with a simple relationship between them.   
In this ontology, we had to model and represent the 
relevant aspects and domains of knowledge for a distance 
learning environment which contains the knowledge about 
the followings: 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Pli ontology 
Apart from the above classes, there are also relations, 
datatypes and restrictions such as following in Table I: 
TABLE I.  
ELEMENTS OF PLI ONTOLOGY 
Pli ontology 
Relations 
“Students belong to a class”        or 
“A class consists of students” 
“A project has level of difficulty”  
“Teachers teach at a class” or          
“A class is taught by teachers” 
“Students 
take 
activities” 
or 
“Activities are taken by students” 
“Students are of sex” 
“Students have grades” etc… 
 
Datatypes 
Exams_type (string) –  
domain: exams, students 
Grade (float) –  
domain: students, grade 
Pass_exams (Boolean) –  
domain: students 
 
Restrictions 
A class <= consists of max 30 
(students), etc… 
 
 
In our study, there were three different fields, three 
classes, four teachers, seventy nine students, and three level 
of difficulty for the projects. In order to check if there is any 
153
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

inconsistency of our ontology we used a reasoner. Pellet [14] 
reasoner was used, which is a piece of software able to infer 
logical consequences from a set of asserted facts or axioms.  
After the ontology building, metadata are gathered, and 
the title and description fields of the metadata XML/RDF 
files are separated. The next step is to use the produced RDF 
in order to take the data in an ARFF (Attribute-Relation File 
Format) format in order to process them with data mining 
techniques. An ARFF file is an ASCII text file that describes 
a list of instances sharing a set of attributes. 
 
B. Data mining techniques for prediction 
Data-mining techniques have been applied in order to 
find interesting patterns, build descriptive and predictive 
models from large volumes of data accumulated through the 
ontology. The results of data mining can be used for getting a 
better understanding of the underlying educational processes 
especially 
in 
distance 
learning, 
for 
generating 
recommendations and advices to students, for improving 
resource management, etc. 
We used classification as it has many applications in both 
traditional education and modern educational technology. 
The best results are achieved when classifiers can be learned 
from real data, but in educational domain the data sets are 
often too small for accurate learning. Our sample was only 
79 instances. 
Our most important concern was to select a sufficiently 
powerful model, which catches the dependencies between 
the class attribute and other attributes, but which is 
sufficiently simple to avoid overfitting. Both data 
preprocessing and the selected classification method affect 
this goal. We used Weka for the extraction of rules that 
predict students’ progress. Weka is a collection of machine 
learning algorithms for data mining tasks. The algorithms 
can either be applied directly to a dataset and Weka [21] 
contains tools for data pre-processing, classification, 
regression, clustering, association rules, and visualization. It 
is also well-suited for developing new machine learning 
schemes. It can also make comparative surveys or checks in 
datasets. Someone can see the errors of every classification 
with a popup menu, or if there is a decision tree the result 
can be shown as a picture.  
The produced RDF from the ontology gives us the 
instances of the attributes that we are interested in. The 
attributes that are important for our predictive system are the 
grades of the projects, the grades of the exams, the type of 
exam, the gender of the student. Some other important 
attributes could be the age of the students, their marital 
status, their educational background etc. Unfortunately, due 
to the privacy of the personal data we could not have access 
to these data so we restricted in the referred attributes.  
Real data is often incomplete in several ways. It can 
contain missing or erroneous attribute values. Erroneous 
values are generally called noise, but in some contexts noise 
means only measurement errors. Educational data is usually 
quite clean because it is either collected automatically (log 
data) or checked carefully (students’ scores). In our system 
we used real data based on students’ grades so we avoid the 
noise. 
All the useful needed data are in the ontology that was 
implemented previously, so we can extract them in an arff 
format, see Figure 2, via RDF schema, with the help of a 
parser. We need these data in arff format as it is the suitable 
format for processing of data through Weka. For this reason 
firstly we codified students’ data in a tuple in order to 
process them if there are hidden relations among them i.e., 
students whose 2nd and 3rd project had grade up to 7,5 
succeeded in final exams, or students who did not submit the 
1st project they dropped out the course. 
  
The following data were elaborated: 
Sex 
(male/female) 
Grade 
1st project 
(number) 
Grade 
2nd project 
(number) 
Grade 
3rd project 
(number) 
Grade 
4th 
project 
(number) 
Grade 
Final exams 
(number) 
Grade 
Repeat 
exams 
(number) 
Type of 
exams 
(final/repeat) 
Pass 
(true/false) 
 
For example, a student can be represented as tuple at 
Weka as follows: 
male, 5, 6, 7, -1, 4, 9, repeat, true 
 
That is, the student is man and his grades at the first three 
projects are 5, 6, 7, he did not submit the fourth project, he 
failed at final exams with grade 4 and he gave repeat exams 
with grade 9 and he passed the course. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Arff file for pli 
The dataset that was created consists of 79 instances and 
every record has 9 attributes. Essentially it is investigated 
whether a student will pass the exams of the course based on 
rating criteria the grades of the projects and the grades of 
exams. 
Through the process of data, Weka extracts rules 
applicable to a proportion of cases (confidence). We are 
interested in those that apply for 100% of cases. The data 
154
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

classification is a supervised learning process in which an 
apprentice algorithm takes a number of observations 
(records) as a basis for its training. 
As we use the dataset in Weka, we can have immediately 
a visualization of all attributes depending on pass or fail 
status of student.  
The data mining technique that was used in our 
application was classification. Decision trees are maybe the 
best-known classification paradigm. A decision tree 
represents a set of classification rules in a tree form. 
Decisions tree are a collection of nodes, branches, and 
leaves. Each node represents an attribute; this node is then 
split into branches and leaves. Decision trees work on the 
“divide and conquer” approach; each node is divided, using 
purity information criteria, until the data are classified to 
meet a stopping condition. 
The earliest decision trees were constructed by human 
experts, but nowadays they are usually learned from data. 
One of the best known algorithms is C4.5 [11] is an 
algorithm used to generate a decision tree. The basic idea in 
all learning algorithms is to partition the attribute space until 
some termination criterion is reached in each leaf. Usually, 
the criterion is that all points in the leaf belong to one class. 
However, if the data contains inconsistencies, this is not 
possible. As a solution, the most common class among the 
data points in the leaf is selected. An alternative is to report 
the class probabilities according to relative frequencies in the 
node. J48 is an open source Java implementation of the C4.5 
algorithm in the Weka data mining tool. 
For our recommendation system we decided to use J48 
algorithm since decision trees have many advantages: they 
are simple and easy to understand, they can handle mixed 
variables (i.e., both numeric and categorical variables), they 
can classify new examples quickly, and they are flexible. 
Enlargements of decision trees can easily handle small noise 
and missing attribute values. Decision trees have high 
representative power, because they can approximate 
nonlinear class boundaries, even if the boundaries are 
everywhere piecewise parallel to attribute axes [5]. The idea 
of classification is to place an object into one class or 
category, based on its other characteristics 
We run our dataset using J48 algorithm and cross 
validation 10 folds. This means that the dataset is divided 
into 10 parts. The nine of them used in order to train the 
algorithm and the rest one is applied to trained algorithm. 
We made many tests giving as data only the grade of 1st 
project and the grade of final and repeat exams, and then 
giving the grade of 1st and 2nd project etc. We will present 
the decision tree which is resulted from the data of all the 
grades of projects and the sex of students. In Figure 3 you 
can see this decision tree. The building of the tree is shown 
in the Figure 4.  
From the 79 instances the 63 classified correctly and 16 
classified erroneously. The precision of the classification of 
our model is 85.2%.  
 
Correctly Classified Instances  63    79,7% 
 
Incorrectly Classified Instances   16  20,3 % 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Decision tree 
 
 
Figure 4.  Building the tree with J48 (cross-validation 10 folds) 
We observe that for the class “pass=true” (the course) is 
True Positive=0,891, False Positive=0.417, Precision=0.831, 
instead of the class “pass=false” is True Positive =0.583, 
False Positive =0.109 and Precision=0.7.  
 
According to Confusion Matrix the 10 b instances from 
24 b (b: false) classified as a (a: true) although there were b 
so FP=10/24=0.417. On the other hand 6 a classified as b so 
FP for the “pass=false” is 6/55=0,109. 
 
 
155
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
Probabilities of being correct given that your 
decision. 
- Precision of pass=true is   49/59 = 83% 
 
Probability of correctly identifying class. 
- Recall accuracy for pass=true is 49/55 = 89% 
 
Accuracy: # right/total =63/79 =~79,7% 
 
We used the same dataset to train J48 algorithm with 
parameter percentage split 66%. The building of the tree is 
shown in the Figure 5.  
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Building the tree with J48 (percentage split 66%) 
The metrics are the following: from the 27 instances the 
23 instances classified correctly and 4 classified erroneously. 
The accuracy of our model is 85.2% 
 
 
Correctly Classified Instances  23    85.2% 
 
Incorrectly Classified Instances   4  14.8 % 
 
For the class “pass=true” is True Positive=0.952, False 
Positive=0.5, Precision=0.87. For the class “pass=false” is 
True 
Positive 
=0.5, 
False 
Positive 
=0.048 
and 
Precision=0.75. According to the Confusion Matrix 3 b 
instances out of 6b (b: false) classified as a (a: true) although 
there were b so FP=3/6=0.5. On the other hand 1 a classified 
as b and for “false” was FP=1/21=0.048. 
 
Probabilities of being correct given that your 
decision. 
- Precision of pass=true is   20/23 = 87% 
 
Probability of correctly identifying class. 
- Recall accuracy for pass=true is 20/21 = 95.23% 
 
Accuracy: # right/total =23/27 =~85.2% 
 
Summarizing for the case of class “pass=true” the 
metrics for the two different parameters are shown in Table 
II. For the class “pass=false”, the metrics are shown in Table 
III. We take into account only the grades of projects and 
students’ sex. As we see the accuracy is the same 
independently of the parameter and the decision tree is the 
same too.  
TABLE II.  
METRICS FOR PASS=TRUE 
Pass=true 
TP 
FP 
Precision 
Recall 
Accuracy 
J48 (cross-
validation 
10 folds) 
0,891 
0,417 
0,831 
0,891 
79,7% 
J48 
(percentage 
split 66%) 
0,952 
0,5 
0,87 
0,952 
85,2% 
 
TABLE III.  
METRICS FOR PASS=FALSE 
Pass=false 
TP 
FP 
Precision 
Recall 
Accuracy 
J48 (cross-
validation 
10 folds) 
0,583 
0,109 
0,7 
0,583 
79,7% 
J48 
(percentage 
split 66%) 
0,5 
0,048 
0,75 
0,5 
85,2% 
 
Based on the produced decision trees some rules were 
created. We used these rules in order to implement a 
recommendation system.  
C. Recommendation system 
The goal of the recommendation system is to provide a 
modern web based environment that will allow the timely 
assessment of the achievement of learning outcomes, thus 
supporting the realization of efficient personalized learning 
paths. The aims are to support the monitoring of learners’ 
progress and provide indicators of successfully achieving 
learning outcomes, to support the assessment of learning 
paths and to provide a means for interaction between learners 
and tutors. 
This predictive system is a web based platform that 
records learners’ progress and provide tools for analyzing 
their performance and estimating the chances of finally 
achieving the planned learning outcomes based on the rules 
that generated through the data mining techniques. This 
platform will be targeted to learners, tutors of HOU. 
This study examines the background information from 
data that impact upon the study outcome of PLI23-
156
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Telematics students at the HOU. Classifying students based 
on grades information and the rules presented for each node 
would allow the tutors to identify students who would be “at 
risk” of dropping the course very soon in academic year. 
Then the tutor can support student with additional 
educational material, and give them orientation, advising, 
and mentoring programs, that could be used to positively 
impact the academic successes of such students.  
Our application is a web based application implemented 
with open source technologies such as php, MySql, 
javascript, html. Tutors and learners have access to the 
platform, but tutors have access in an additional functionality 
of platform. This functionality is the prediction of students’ 
progress. Tutors can log on in the platform and insert 
student’ data such as name, grades, etc. then they can check 
with the given data the probability of failing or succeeding in 
the exams. If the tutors see that a student is “at risk” can 
communicate with him/her and advise him/her, give 
supportive material or just make a warning. So the learner 
could improve his/her performance, study hardier etc. 
Figure 6 shows the prediction of “pass” of a student. The 
tutors can see the percentage of probability and if they want 
to see they can also see the decision tree that resulted in this 
percentage.  Of course if we had access in more information 
about students such as age, occupation, marital status etc this 
system would give us more interesting rules. But as we 
already referred we could not have access to such 
information.  However, if there are institutes or organizations 
which don’t face problems related to privacy, this system 
could cover their needs too. 
The system also creates arff files automatically after the 
insertion of data, which means that creates a larger dataset 
that can be exploited by Weka and maybe it can also change 
the rules that have been already generated. 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Prediction of a student’s final performance 
The key in distance learning, as we already mentioned, is 
the quality of communication. A system like ours can 
improve the quality of this type of education since it supports 
the immediate communication between tutor and learner. 
Tutor has only to click on the name of student and send 
him/her an email or make a call and inform him/her for 
his/her progress. 
We made piloting testing with real data of students of 
next years and the results were very satisfying. We use 31 
records of students. The application firstly gave the 
proportion based on the grades of 1st project, then based on 
grades of 1st and 2nd project and finally based on grades of 
1st, 2nd and 3rd project. The grade of 4th project doesn’t play 
any role to the generated rules from previous step of data 
mining. This happens because of the curricula of HOU, the 
4th project is optional. If a student doesn’t have good grades 
in previous projects can give the 4th project in order to be 
able to participate in final exams. That means that the 
majority of students do not make the 4th project. The 
application seems to be very accurately as it has small 
deviation error i.e., for the 1st project and for the 1st and 2nd 
project the system predicts that all users will pass the exams. 
The real data show that only two students fail out from 31. 
So the system has accuracy 93.5%. Taking into account and 
the 3rd project the precision of system is getting lower. The 
system predicts erroneously that 2 students will succeed in 
exams and 2 students will fail. So the accuracy of system is 
87%.  However, it predicts that 2 students (women) will 
marginally fail but at the end they pass. So we assume that 
this path of the decision tree is weak and if we had a larger 
dataset to train the algorithm, this path would be different.  
The Precision of this pilot dataset is 90.3% and the Recall 
is 96.6% comparing to the precision and the recall of the 
classifier performance we see that is more accurately. This 
happens as the pilot test dataset is too small and the data are 
too clear. Table IV shows briefly the results of pilot testing. 
TABLE IV.  
PREDICTION OF STUDENTS’ FINAL PERFORMANCE  
Results/ 
Projects 
Prediction 
of pass 
Prediction 
of fail 
Pass 
Fail  
Total  
1st  
31 
0 
29 
2 
 
    31 
1st & 2nd  
31 
0 
29 
2 
1st & 2nd  
& 3rd  
29 
2 
27 
4 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
This application can be the vehicle for improving the 
quality of existing distance -and not only- learning systems 
and it will be very helpful not only for the learners who will 
be able to be informed for their progress but also for the 
tutors who can improve their teaching process. After the 
study of different data mining techniques, we chose the one 
that was most suitable for our application and as we see is 
the most widespread in this field. The results were very 
satisfying and after pilot testing of our application we saw 
that the final results verified the generated rules with small 
157
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

deviation error prediction. The basic idea of this system can 
be also applied in other distance learning or e-learning 
systems. 
A comparison between some classification tree models 
would be conducted in the future in order to determine the 
best model for the dataset. Maybe an alternative to a 
classification tree should be considered in order to compare 
the results. 
This research is based on background information only. 
Leaving out other important factors as previous studies, 
number of courses completed motivation, financial aids, age, 
marital status, etc.) that may affect study outcome, could 
distort results obtained with classification trees. For example, 
including the educational background of students after the 
submission of the first project would probably improve 
predictive accuracy of the model. To improve the model, 
more attributes could be included to obtain prediction with 
fewer errors. 
Furthermore, an idea is to incorporate the C4.5 algorithm 
to our platform in order to run again and again the algorithm 
with the new data too. So the model will be always up to 
dated and new rules could be generated. These rules could be 
also incorporated to our ontology as restrictions. This 
enrichment of ontology may lead to the extraction of 
prediction directly from the ontology. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] A. Gomez-Pιrez, M. Fernαndez-Lopez and O.  Corcho, 
“Ontological Engineering with examples from the areas of 
Knowledge Management, e-Commerce and the Semantic 
Web”, First Edition 
[2] B. A. Jusung Jun, “Understanding dropout of adult learners in 
e-learning”, A Dissertation Submitted to the Graduate Faculty 
of the University of Georgia in Partial  
[3] B. Sridharan, H. Deng, B. Corbitt, “An ontology-driven topic 
mapping approach to multi-level management of e-learning 
resources”, 17th European Conference on Information 
Systems, pp. 1187-1198 
[4] Burdescu, D.Dan  Mihaescu, M. Cristian  Ionascu, C. Marian  
Logofatu, 
Bogdan, 
“Support 
system 
for 
e-Learning 
environment based on learning activities and processes” (19-
21 May 2010), Research Challenges in Information Science 
(RCIS), 2010 Fourth International Conference, pp. 37-42 
[5] C. Romero, S. Ventura, M.  Pechenizkiy, R.S.J.d. Baker, 
“Handbook of Educational Data Mining, Edited”, chapter 5 
[6] F. Castro, A. Vellido, À. Nebot, F. Mugica, “Applying Data 
Mining Techniques to e-Learning Problems”, Evolution of 
Teaching and Learning Paradigms in Intelligent Environment 
In Evolution of Teaching and Learning Paradigms in 
Intelligent Environment, Vol. 62 (2007), pp. 183-221 
[7] Gruber, Thomas R. ,“A translation approach to portable  
ontology 
specifications”, 
(June 
1993), 
Knowledge 
Acquisition 5, pp.199–220. 
[8] J. W. Seifert, “Data Mining: An Overview”, National Security 
Issues, pp. 201-217 
[9] L. Zhuhadar, O. Nasraoui, R.Wyatt and E. Romero, “Multi-
model Ontology-based Hybrid Recommender System in E-
learning Domain”, 2009 IEEE/WIC/ACM International 
Conference on Web Intelligence and Intelligent Agent 
Technology – Workshops, pp.91-95 
[10] M. Hanna, (2004) "Data mining in the e-learning domain", 
Campus-Wide Information Systems, Vol. 21 Iss: 1, pp.29 - 34 
[11] N. V. Chawla, “C4.5 and Imbalanced Data sets: Investigating 
the effect of sampling method, probabilistic estimate, and 
decision tree structure”, ICML’03 Workshop on Class 
Imbalances 
[12] Pin-Yu Pan,  Chi-Hsuan Wang,  Gwo-Jiun Horng, Sheng-
Tzong Cheng, “The development of an Ontology-Based 
Adaptive Personalized Recommender System”, Electronics 
and Information Engineering (ICEIE), 2010 International 
Conference On, 1-3 Aug. 2010, pp. V1-76 - V1-80 
[13] V. Eyharabide, A.  Amandi, M. Courgeon, C.Clavel, C. 
Zakaria, J. Martin, “An ontology for predicting students' 
emotions during a quiz. Comparison with self-reported 
emotions”, Affective Computational Intelligence (WACI), 
2011 IEEE Workshop on, 11-15 April 2011, pp. 1-8 
[14] http://clarkparsia.com/pellet/protege/ [retrieved: March, 2012] 
[15] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Artificial_neural_network 
[retrieved: May, 2012] 
[16] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Association_rule_learning 
[retrieved: May, 2012] 
[17] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Decision_tree [retrieved: May, 
2012] 
[18] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Distance_education 
[retrieved: 
March, 2012] 
[19] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Genetic_algorithm 
[retrieved: 
May, 2012] 
[20] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/XML [retrieved: May, 2012] 
[21] http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka 
[retrieved: 
March, 
2012] 
[22] http://www.eadtu.eu/hellenic-open-university-hou-
greece.html [retrieved: March, 2012] 
[23] http://www.w3.org/RDF/ [retrieved: May, 2012] 
[24] http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-features/ [retrieved: May, 2012] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
158
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

