Motorsport Driver Workload Estimation in Dual Task Scenario 
A Methodology for Assessing Driver Workload in a Racing Simulator 
 
Luca Baldisserri, Riccardo Bonetti, Francesco Pon  
Direzione Gestione Sportiva - Ferrari Driver Academy 
Ferrari spa 
Maranello (MO), Italy 
luca.baldisserri@ferrari.com, riccardo.bonetti@ferrari.com, 
francesco.pon@ferrari.com 
Leandro Guidotti, Maria Giulia Losi, Roberto 
Montanari, Francesco Tesauri 
RE:Lab srl 
Reggio Emilia, Italy 
leandro.guidotti@re-lab.it, giulia.losi@re-lab.it, 
roberto.montanari@re-lab.it, francesco.tesauri@re-lab.it 
Simona Collina 
Università Suor Orsola Benincasa 
Napoli, Italy 
simona.collina@unisob.na.it 
 
 
Abstract — The study aims to define a methodology to 
assess driver workload by means of a racing simulator 
applying the dual task paradigm. The experimental plan 
consists of a series of secondary tasks (i.e., math 
calculation, imaginative, monitoring and communication 
tasks) to be performed in a driving simulated context. 
The preliminary results evidenced that the methodology 
is a fundamental step forward in order to improve 
driving abilities of young professional drivers. The 
described methodology puts the basis for the definition 
of training programmes for managing high workload 
racing situations. 
 
Keywords - Distraction; driver; dual task; motorsport; 
multitasking; 
racing; 
simulator; 
stress; 
track; 
training; 
workload.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND 
This work and the reported experimental plan are 
intended to define a methodology for assessing the level of 
cognitive load of young motorsport drivers involved in 
advanced training programs for single-seater racing cars. The 
aim of the described methodology is to evaluate potential 
variation in performance due to the increase of mental 
workload. Drivers involved in test sessions are engaged in 
driving in a racing simulator (i.e., primary task) while they 
are asked to perform also one or more secondary tasks.  
Studying 
the 
performance 
of 
drivers 
and 
their 
"multitasking" skills implies the measurement of their 
performance first, and the identification of their level of 
adaptability to increasing workload. The ability and 
adaptability of multitasking are prominent features of many 
professions, where the simultaneous management of multiple 
activities is required and it is sometimes in conflict or in 
competition over physical and cognitive resources. When 
multitasking, people can become overloaded as working 
memory and attentional resources are exhausted [2]. They 
might also become anxious and frustrated when task 
challenges outweigh cognitive resources [10]. Furthermore, 
overall performance can be negatively affected when the 
demands of one task interfere with those of another task [5]. 
For instance, a common multitasking everyday situation is 
the concurrent use of mobile phones while driving, which 
have been demonstrated to impair driving by, for instance, 
delaying break reaction times and affecting object detection 
[4]. Although many studies have shown a generalized impact 
on attention related to driving distraction tasks, recent 
research has focused on “supertaskers” [6], by examining 
individual differences in the performance of multitasking. 
In order to highlight abilities of “supertaskers”, this study 
carried out on the short-term working memory [1] that 
constitutes a field of fundamental analysis to make 
predictions about the level of resource adaptability. Different 
skills are required for performing tasks simultaneously, and 
one must activate different cognitive structures according to 
tasks, such as the central executive system, the visual-spatial 
notebook and the phonological loop. 
The presented methodology aims to measure the level of 
racing driver cognitive workload while driving in a simulated 
circuit, establishing a relationship between the observed 
cognitive workload and the variation of the driving 
performance in different scenarios of the dual task paradigm. 
The paper is structured as follows: Section II presents the 
methodology and the design of experiment in details. Section 
III describes the test protocol and the execution of the 
experiment. Section IV presents the results of the test. In 
Section V, the results, the presented methodology, and the 
related impact are discussed. Conclusion and references 
close the paper. 
II. 
METHODOLOGY 
The methodology for the evaluation of cognitive 
workload in racing environment has been designed to reach 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-340-7
COGNITIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

two main goals. On the one side, the objective is to identify 
the cognitive profile of each individual driver, by assessing 
the cognitive load. On the other side, once the driver 
cognitive profile has been outlined, a specific training 
programme can be identified in order to enhance the abilities 
and the adaptability of drivers in complex situations. This 
objective can be achieved by making some target activities 
automated according to the driver cognitive profile, thus 
reducing the cognitive and attentional resources allocated to 
those specific tasks. 
In order to outline the cognitive profile, two different 
kinds of test can be assigned: (1) computer-based tests about 
cognitive resources and (2) tests in driving and not driving 
conditions in simulators. Concerning the former point, 
Individual Differences Measures (IDMs) can be collected 
assigning to users a series of computer-based tasks to be 
performed concerning each cognitive structure (i.e., central 
executive system, visual-spatial notebook, phonologic loop) 
[2]. 
In this research, we focused on the latter point, i.e., on the 
methodology for the assessment of the cognitive workload in 
driving a racing simulator applying a dual task paradigm. 
The Dual-Task Paradigm [3] is characterized by a series of 
secondary tasks assigned in concurrency with the primary 
driving task.  
The reference methodology is the Multi-Attribute Task 
Battery (MATB) [2], which is used widely in the avionic 
domain. MATB consists in 4 different tasks simultaneously 
submitted to users at flight simulators. According to this 
methodology, the types of secondary tasks drivers might be 
asked to carry out while driving are reported below. 
• 
Perform complex math calculation (e.g., to count 
backwards of 7 steps from an assigned number). 
• 
Imaginative task (e.g., mental imagery task). 
• 
Monitoring of system status and tracking (e.g., to 
indicate an event by pushing a button on the steering 
wheel or to check the number of engine revolutions).  
• 
Communication task (e.g., to listen to instructions 
and questions via radio and to answer properly). 
Each task has 4 different levels of complexity: automatic 
(0), low (1), medium (2), high (3). 
The Dual-Task Paradigm is aimed to collect objective 
and subjective measures as well as qualitative and 
quantitative data to be analysed for assessing if the driver 
performance improve or decrease, whenever the cognitive 
workload changes itself due to the variation in the difficulty 
of the secondary tasks as schematised in Fig. 1. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Double task paradigm. 
The evaluation of the cognitive workload of racing 
drivers allows researchers to assess the relationship between 
workload and changes in the driving performance and then to 
plan training programmes that may take the cognitive profile 
of each driver into account for the improvement of his 
adaptability to multitasking. The estimation of the residual 
cognitive abilities while performing a Dual-Task Paradigm 
tests is identified as the result of the comparison between the 
baseline performance (e.g., the lap time in the driver comfort 
range) and the performance in terms of lap times carried out 
experiencing a secondary task. 
The methodology applied for the assessment of the 
cognitive profile of racing driver comes from the assumption 
that all track, racing, and practice conditions shall be taken 
into account, and that the driver physical status can change 
during the driving session. These aspects may be responsible 
for a significant variation in the level of mental workload 
while driving. Hence, the following scenarios and conditions 
have been identified as relevant for test sessions. 
• 
Monitoring of internal and external conditions of the 
cockpit (e.g., weather, engine revolutions, fuel 
level).  
• 
Managing radio communication with garage. 
• 
Visualizing data on the steering wheel display. 
• 
Psychophysical degradation related to a high level of 
mental workload (e.g., sweating or tiredness). 
The experimental design has been tailored also by 
considering some requirements of the driving academy 
involved in research and, of course, the experimental 
requirements. They are briefly described below. 
• 
Users should be racing drivers of single-seater 
vehicles with experience in motorsport domain and 
should be involved in training programmes. 
• 
Users should be young (i.e., 14 to 22 year old) in 
order to evaluate future training programs. 
• 
Test sessions need to be carried out in a controlled 
environment as a lab. 
• 
The main asset required is a single-seater driving 
simulator for racing. A fully dynamic and immersive 
racing simulator would be best. 
• 
Material for interviews and collection of data (e.g., 
datasheet, notebooks, test protocols, chronometer, 
questionnaires) should be prepared in advance and 
available at sessions. 
• 
Additional displays should be necessary if visual 
secondary 
tasks 
(e.g., 
reading 
of 
a 
value; 
acknowledge following a visual warning) are 
experienced. 
• 
Radio 
equipment 
for 
remote 
communication 
between driver and interviewers should be present. 
As far as it concerns the primary task, users are asked to 
drive in a simulated selected track at the maximum of their 
skills and performance. The driving performance, measured 
in terms of lap time within the comfort range of lap times, is 
considered as baseline. Users are then asked to perform 
secondary tasks aimed at stimulating each interested 
cognitive structure (i.e., phonologic loop, visual-spatial 
notebook and central executive system), either individually 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-340-7
COGNITIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

or in association. The goal assigned to the driver is to 
maintain a level of performance within the comfort lap time 
range, both in cases of exclusive primary task and in dual 
task conditions. 
Relevant dependent variables are collected in terms of 
subjective and objective measures. Subjective measures 
consist of both qualitative data (i.e., post-task comments) and 
quantitative data, such as NASA-TLX (i.e., Task Load 
Index) questionnaire, about mental workload [11], and SEQ 
(i.e., Single Ease Question), about perceived difficulty to 
carry out tasks [8]. Quantitative objective data are collected 
by measuring the driving performance in terms of lap time in 
baseline as well as in dual task conditions, by identifying 
explicit driving errors (e.g., off-track, over-steering) or 
modifications in driving behaviours (i.e., by collecting most 
relevant indicators such as the usage of throttle, brakes, 
steering wheel, and gear shift), and the number of 
right/wrong answers reported to secondary task, when asked. 
The number of answers is considered a measure of 
efficiency, whereas the speed and correctness in answering 
are measures of effectiveness. Also direct observation of 
driving style could be considered, if quantitative data are not 
available. 
According 
to 
the 
identified 
relevant 
variables, 
appropriate tools are used for the collection of measures. In 
particular, “think-aloud” comments will be written down by 
observers, numeric values will be reported on scales as 
answers to questionnaires, and vehicle data will be recorded  
by the telemetry software of the driving racing simulator.  
Different types of data analysis can be performed: 
• 
Analysis and clustering of significant comments, 
annotations, and answers to open-ended questions. 
• 
Descriptive statistical analysis describing each 
aspect of interest (e.g., frequency of answering, rate 
of perceived difficulty in driving, the reported 
subjective mental workload). 
• 
Inferential statistical analysis of the impact of the 
dual task on the primary task (i.e., performance in 
lap time) carried out for subjects and for items. 
• 
Analysis of statistical regression to assess which one 
of the variables considered is predictive of the 
performance of the other one, by correlating both the 
linguistic and the visual-spatial tests to see how 
much they influence the driving task.  
Testing the driver performance in a racing simulator 
environment cannot disregard some constraints that might 
affect the testing procedure. In particular, a higher workload 
level can arise compared to the experience of driving on 
track with a real single-seater vehicle. This increased 
workload might be due to the lack of feedbacks from the 
external environment and to the effort of the racing driver 
who artificially recreates mentally inputs in order to generate 
specific driving behaviours. Furthermore, the selection of 
young racing drivers implies different technical skills and 
different levels of automations while driving. Depending on 
the track configuration and on the technical skills of the 
driver, a track can be more or less difficult to be covered in 
terms of mental workload. For instance, the "Fiorano" track 
in Italy can be considered familiar for the Ferrari Driver 
Academy racing drivers and it is assumed to imply a medium 
level of mental workload compared to the "Monza" track, 
which generates a variable level of mental workload 
depending on the track segments and on the number and type 
of corners. Other minor aspects could impact the workload, 
for instance the use of a standardized rather than a 
customized steering wheel for each racing driver can 
influence the level of familiarity and the automatic driving 
procedures. 
Moreover, 
the 
variable 
and 
permanent 
conditions of real tracks are missing, such as the high or low 
grip feeling, the weather conditions, and the presence of 
other vehicles that can only be simulated. It is not possible to 
simulate this variability and to control it as an independent 
variable in order to increase the difficulty level due to 
changing external context conditions. 
III. 
TESTING OF METHODOLOGY 
The test protocol has been designed for sessions on a 
fully dynamic and immersive single-seater driving simulator 
for racing, as shown in Fig. 2. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Racing driving simulator facilities 
The test session has been carried out on the 13th of March 
2013 involving one young professional driver of the Ferrari 
Driver Academy, 19 years old. The simulated single-seater 
vehicle has been his "F3 Euro Series" in the simulated track 
of "Autodromo Nazionale Monza", Italy (5793 km, 8 
corners, clockwise). The track is represented in Fig. 3. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Autodromo Nazionale Monza 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-340-7
COGNITIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

The test session lasted about 120 minutes and it consisted 
of 40 laps with 3/4 minutes of stop between each test run.  
The test protocol has been designed considering 1 run of 
warm-up, aimed at identifying the “comfort lap time range” 
for the driver and 1 run for each task session. Each run 
consists of 1 out-of-garage lap and 3 timed laps.  
The comfort lap time range (i.e., minimum lap time and 
maximum lap time) for the involved user is within 1:46.200 - 
1:47.200 in Monza track, considering a comfort variance of 
2%. The baseline sessions, in which the driver is asked to 
focus only on the primary task, are followed by SEQ and 
NASA-TLX questionnaires. After that, a sequence of 
randomly selected test run including secondary tasks is 
assigned to the driver. The user performs, firstly, only the 
secondary task, in not driving conditions, and he is then 
asked to fill in SEQ. Then, he experienced the secondary task 
in driving conditions, followed by SEQs referring both to 
primary and to secondary tasks, and by the NASA-TLX 
questionnaire about perceived mental workload. The baseline 
is repeated three times, at the beginning, in the middle and at 
the end of the test session. In the performed test session, the 
randomized task sequence has been: B, T1, T3, T2, B, T5, 
T4, B, which are described below. 
• 
T1 = Math identification if an assigned number is 
grater or less than 45 (in not driving and driving 
conditions). 
• 
T2 = Count backwards of 3, step by step, starting 
from an assigned number (in not driving and driving 
conditions). 
• 
T3 = Count backwards of 7, step by step, starting 
from an assigned number  (in not driving and driving 
conditions). 
• 
T4 = Count backwards of 13, step by step, starting 
from an assigned number (in not driving and driving 
conditions). 
• 
T5 = Count the number of letters of a given word (in 
not driving and driving conditions). 
• 
B = Baseline run. 
The user was alone in the driving simulator room. During 
test sessions, the researcher was able to communicate with 
the user through one-way at a time radio. As in real "F3 Euro 
Series" racing context, user had to press a button on the 
steering wheel in order to enable communication and let 
researcher hear him while speaking. Also, the researcher had 
to press button to be heard by user. These actions are 
mutually exclusive. The researcher has been in charge of the 
task assignment, such as to provide to the user the list of 
numbers according to the given task. 
After each test phase, SEQ has been provided to the 
driver. It is a 7-points scale item from "Very difficult" to 
"Very Easy" to be self reported by the user. The objective of 
the measure is to evaluate the perceived easiness of the 
primary task (i.e., driving performing a lap time within the 
comfort range) not experiencing (i.e., in baseline) or 
experiencing the secondary tasks, and also the perceived 
easiness of the secondary task itself, in stationary and driving 
conditions. SEQ has concerned the following topics. 
 
In baseline - “How do you evaluate the driving task on 
track? (i.e., how difficult or easy it has been?)” 
 
After experiencing the secondary task stationary - “How 
do you evaluate the 'secondary task'? (i.e., how difficult/easy 
has it been?)” 
 
After experiencing the dual task while driving - “How do 
you evaluate the driving task on track while you are 
performing the 'secondary task'? (i.e., how difficult/easy has 
it been?)”  
 
After experiencing the dual task while driving - “How do 
you evaluate the 'secondary task' while driving on track? 
(i.e., how difficult/easy has it been?)" 
 
After each driving session, both in baseline and in dual 
task, the user is also asked to fill in the six scales of NASA-
TLX questionnaire. RTLX (i.e., Raw NASA-TLX) version 
of the questionnaire has been considered [11]. 
The driving performances have been recorded by Atlas 
software for telemetry. It collected data from different 
channels (e.g., brake, accelerator, steering wheel angle, 
speed, engine revolution, gear, wheel speed, etc.) and the 
press of the buttons on the steering wheel. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
The data analysis has shown that it is possible to point 
out specific remarks about dual task performance in the 
motorsport driving domain by carrying out test sessions 
applying the described methodology. 
With respect to lap timing, a remarkable impact on 
performance has been registered according to the type of 
secondary task. Timings in dual task conditions are higher 
(Ma= 01:47.5) in comparison with those in baseline 
conditions (Ma= 01:46.7). In three occasions, the lap time is 
higher than the comfort range threshold (i.e., between 
01:46.2 and 01:47.2), as shown in Fig. 4 and in Table I. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Average lap time 
 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-340-7
COGNITIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

TABLE I.  
AVERAGE LAP TIME 
 
 
The perceived mental workload by NASA-TLX and the 
self-reported changes depend on the type of secondary task, 
as shown in Fig. 5 and Table II. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Average Workload (NASA-TLX) 
 
TABLE II.  
NASA-TLX RESULTS 
 
 
The perceived easiness while performing the dual task 
changes among the tasks themselves and it changes for the 
same task in stationary or driving conditions, as shown in 
Fig. 6. 
The secondary tasks that are considered the most 
demanding and that seem to have a greater impact on lap 
times and on perceived mental workload are the backward 
counting of -7 steps (NASA-TLX score 60,83 and easiness 
3/2/2) and the identification of the number of letters in a 
word (NASA-TLX score 56,67 and easiness 3/4/3). 
Nevertheless, an effect of self-learning may have happened 
while performing the secondary tasks. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Perceived easiness of tasks 
 
The times for answering to assigned sub-tasks reflect the 
difficulties perceived while performing the tasks, as shown 
in Fig. 7. 
All the surveys and the results seem to be consistent with 
the perceived easiness, the errors occurred in the answers 
provided to secondary tasks (Fig. 8), workload, and the level 
of performance (i.e., lap time). 
 
 
Figure 7.  Average response time 
 
 
Figure 8.  Correct answer rate 
 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-340-7
COGNITIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

TABLE III.  
ERRORS AND RESPONSE TIME 
 
 
The user involved in the test session has a maximum 
error rate counting back of 7 steps task (i.e., 12,12 % of error 
rate) and he takes more time (i.e., 00:09.8) to carry out sub-
tasks rather than other dual tasks, as reported in Table III. 
V. 
IMPACT AND DISCUSSION 
A methodology to analyse the multitasking ability of a 
young motorsport driver while performing a dual task 
paradigm on a racing simulated track has been designed. A 
preliminary test has been carried out. Researchers collected 
and analysed data to evaluate if any degradation could be 
detected in the driving performance due to the concurrency 
with increasing demanding cognitive tasks. 
Findings cannot be considered statistically relevant due 
to the narrow sample of users, but it has served the scope to 
identify and to test the designed methodology for data 
collection and data analysis. Thus, it can be considered an 
indicator of the expected impact of cognitive workload on 
the driving performance in a racing context. 
Driver has autonomously and constantly performed the 
requested dual tasks. The secondary tasks seemed to induce a 
diversified level of workload pressure, pointed out by the 
self-reported data, perceivable also by the tone of the voice 
and by the speed of the answers provided by the user. 
In some conditions, driver has not immediately answered 
to or performed the secondary task, but he took some time to 
complete the task assigned. From the observation, it seemed 
that, when approaching the corners of the Monza track, the 
driver was focused exclusively on the primary task and he 
started performing the secondary task only after the 
completion of the manoeuvre. 
Learning strategies in the answering to dual task requests 
(e.g., to count -30 or -3 when asked to count back of 13) does 
not seem to influence the performance of the dual task and 
the global impact it has on the primary task. Driver 
encountered an initial physical difficulty, reported as a 
speech comment, when pushing the “radio” button while 
changing the gear or when approaching the corners. 
Furthermore, possible relevant changes in the driving 
performance by analysing the telemetry channels shall be 
assessed and interpreted. The survey in baseline conditions 
and double task will allow an interpretation of the driving 
style in the different conditions of mental workload. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
Research findings shall be considered as interpretations 
referred to collected data and to the descriptive results 
presented. There are no specific considerations and 
interpretations about the performance and driving style in 
different test sessions. There are no interpretations related to 
or statistic interferences among the data collected. For 
practitioners and researchers, it shall be highlighted that 
motorsport, together with the avionic domain, is a well suited 
context for the goal of testing multitasking ability of young 
drivers and the impact of workload on the driving 
performance. Training programmes can be easily defined 
thanks to the results gathered by applying the methodology, 
with the aim of improving the performance of the driver by 
increasing his/her multitasking ability and the ability to face 
concurrent task on cognitive resources. Although only one 
user has been involved in the tests performed so far, the 
expected impact has been verified by the collected data: the 
young professional driver registered large variations in the 
driving performance in terms of lap time, due to the 
secondary tasks. In addition to that, the methodology applied 
has been solid, coherent and correct in terms of results. It is 
also in line with the studies that have been carried out in the 
last years concerning the dual task paradigm. In order to 
enhance the obtained results, the objective will be to 
consolidate the methodology by involving a larger sample of 
drivers in test sessions as a way to identify areas of 
improvement and to evaluate if such improvements have 
been reached thanks to the training activity. 
VII. REFERENCES 
[1] A. Baddley, Human Memory: Theory and Practice, Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates, London, UK, 1990. 
[2] B. Morgan, S. D’Mello, R. Abbott, G. Radvansky, M. Haass, 
and A. Tamplin, "Individual Differences in Multitasking 
Ability and Adaptability", Human Factors: The Journal of the 
Human Factors and Ergonomic Society, vol. 55, 2013, pp. 
776-788. 
[3] C.D. Wickens, "Processing resources and attention", Multiple 
Task Performance, Taler & Francis, Ltd., Bristol, UK, 1991, 
pp. 3-34. 
[4] D. L. Strayer, F. A. Drews, and W. A. Johnston, "Cell phone 
induced failures of visual attention during simulated driving", 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, vol. 9, 2003, 
pp. 23-52. 
[5] E. M. Altmann and W. D. Gray, "An integrated model of 
cognitive control in task switching", Psychological Review, 
vol. 115 (3), 2008, pp. 602–639. 
[6] J. M. Watson and D. L. Strayer, "Supertaskers: Profiles in 
extraordinary multitasking ability", Psychonomic Bulletin & 
Review, vol. 17 (4), 2010, pp. 479-485. 
[7] J. R. Comstock, and R. J. Arnegard, The Multi-Attribute Task 
Battery for human operator workload and strategic behaviour 
research, National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
Technical Memorandum No. 104174, Washington D.C., 
USA, NASA, 1992. 
[8] J. Sauro and J. S. Dumas, "Comparison of three one-question, 
post-task usability questionnaires", Proceedings of CHI, 
ACM, Boston (MA), USA, 2009, pp. 1599-1608. 
[9] L. Angell et al., Driver Workload Metrics Project, Task 2 
Final Report, CAMP Driver Workload Metrics, Report No: 
DOT HS 810 635, U.S. Department of Transportation 
NHTSA, USA, 2006. 
[10] M. Csikszentmihalyi, Beyond boredom and anxiety, Jossey-
Bass, San Francisco (CA), USA, 1975. 
[11] S. G. Hart, “NASA-TLX Load Index; 20 years later”, 
Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 
50th Annual Meeting, Santa Monica (CA), USA, 2006, pp. 
904-908. 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-340-7
COGNITIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

