A Multi-Agent Control and Automation Architecture with Integrated Flexible User 
Communication Agents 
 
Ahmed Kamel 
Offutt School of Business 
Concordia College 
Moorhead, Minnesota, USA 
Email: kamel@cord.edu 
 
 
Abstract—In this paper, we present a flexible integrated multi-
agent automation and control architecture. The architecture 
relies on a knowledge-based module. This module is custom 
designed to 
every 
application and 
is 
thus 
open 
to 
personalization to other domains requiring a similar control 
scheme. It, thus, provides an important level of adaptability. 
The architecture also provides a flexible communication agent 
that can communicate with a user using a variety of 
communication media to meet the user’s needs at any given 
point in time. 
Keywords-multi-agents; decision-support system;knowedge-
based system; human-computer collaboration. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
While every control system is unique in terms of its 
needs, many control systems share a common characteristic; 
They need to gather input from a user, manage a situation 
based on the user’s needs, monitor their environment to 
update the control plans as needed, and communicate with 
the user to inform them of any changes and update the plans 
based on the user’s preferences. 
While several general purpose agent architectures exist, 
in the work developed here, we custom-designed an agent 
architecture that balances our need for efficient execution 
and flexibility to customize  
In Section II, we present the current state of multiagent 
architectures, in Section III, we present the basic 
architecture we developed for control systems, and in 
Section IV, we present two different applications we 
developed using our architecture. These applications include 
an 
agricultural 
management 
system 
with 
weather 
monitoring [1] and a call routing system for a teachnical 
support center [2]. A general conclusionis provided in 
Section V. 
 
II. STATE OF MULTI-AGENT ARCHITECTURES 
Multiagent architectures are architectures that utilize 
multiple cooperative autonomous agents that collaborate on 
decision making and coordinating their actions to 
accomplish tasks beyond their individual capabilities [3], 
[4]Communication styles among these agents can be 
hierarchical, centralized, or distributed[5],[6]. Over the 
years, specialized languages have been developed for agent 
programming [7]. The research reported in this article does 
not utilize any of these languages. 
Most new developments in agent architectures are driven 
by application needs. Application domains are varied 
including areas like traffic management[8], [9], cooperating 
robots[10], supply chain management [11], and smart 
electric grid management[12]. The research reported here 
follows this trend by customizing the agent architecture to 
the needs of the application domains. We elected to do our 
own development rather than rely on a general purpose 
architecture for a more efficient execution and a higher level 
of flexibility. 
III. BASIC ARCHITECTURE 
Our control architecture is divided into four basic 
modules with an additional weather data gathering module 
that we found to be useful in several of our developed 
applications. These modules are the User Input module, the 
Knowledge-based System, the information delivery module, 
and the Timer module. These modules are connected 
centrally to a database. The database we used is Microsoft 
Access and the system has also been tested with SQL Server 
thus making it more flexible. The use of an intelligent-agents 
approach has allowed the development of a user-friendly 
system that can be applied to many monitoring systems. 
A. 
System Features 
 
Allows the users to enter their information for 
performing daily activities 
 
Stores the information in a database 
 
Agent parses the information and stores it 
 
Can connect to the web and collects the weather 
information 
 
Expert System integrates with the agents and accesses 
the user database to make intelligent decisions 
 
Agents collect the information from the Expert System 
 
Agents convert the information to appropriate forms as 
needed for user communication, such as Text or Wave 
for voice communication 
 
Telephony Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) 
can call the users with the data stored in the Agents 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-046-9
COGNITIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

using standard telephony or any of an array of Voice 
Over Internet Protocol (VOIP) applications 
 
Users are contacted using their preferred communication 
method (voice, text, email) and within each method, 
they are given the capability of interacting with the 
system. 
 
The system is maintained by a timer, which runs every 
morning by default and checks the data for the users. 
Users can customize the timer schedule. 
B. 
User Input Module 
The user interface is a critical part of any solution and 
should be very user friendly. We developed a web-based 
user-input module. The User can enter their weekly 
information in the system. The system is smart and updates 
its information every time a user comes into the system. The 
user is allowed to make their personal profile, which is 
password protected. Options provided for the user are 
customized based on the type of application such as farming, 
or home automations as discussed in the next section. The 
system also collects the user’s preferred contact method and 
their needed credentials so they can be contacted as needed 
using the information delivery module. The data stored in the 
database is used by the expert system module to compare the 
data and generate appropriate results. These web pages are 
running on an Internet Information Server and are connected 
to the database. 
C. 
Knowledge-Based System Module 
Knowledge-basedsystems (sometimes referred to as 
Expert Systems) are computer systems, which provide expert 
quality advice, such as diagnoses, and recommendations 
given real-world problems. They are intelligent systems, 
which have knowledge stored in them and can make 
decisions, which normally require human expertise. It 
receives as input a problem and through its knowledge base 
makes decisions to give a solution to the problem. 
Knowledge-based Systems have been used in different areas 
such as medicine, robotics, mathematics, and various other 
fields. We include a generic template for a knowledge-based 
system in our architecture. This template needs to be 
customized for each application as discussed in the next 
section.  
The knowledge-basedsystem is designed to access the 
central database and check the requirements for every user 
that were entered through the user interface and based on the 
given rules, it makes its decisions using the information 
stored in the Data Base Management System(DBMS) agent.  
The Knowledge-based systemis triggered based on the 
schedule stored in the timer module to avoid unnecessarily 
using the system resources and skips processing the users 
who are inactive in order to minimize the resources used by 
the agents, the CPU time, and the memory. The knowledge-
based system invokes the information delivery agent 
discussed below to alert the user as needed. 
D. 
Information Delivery Module 
     The information delivery module is another crucial 
part of the system. This module is responsible for delivering 
the results; the useful information generated from the expert 
system to the user and acquiring any feedback from the user. 
There are diverse ways of communication available today. 
Multiple agents are provided and can be activated according 
to the user’s availability and wishes. Each agent is 
responsible for one communication method, an agent for 
agent-initiated phone communications, an agent for agent-
initiated e-mail communications, an agent for user-initiated 
web-based communications, as well as an agent for VOIP 
communication that can be customized with any of several 
available VOIP applications (Skype, Messenger, WhatsApp 
for now but others can be added). This multi-modal 
communication 
provides 
efficient, 
dependable, 
and 
accessible interaction with the users regardless of their 
physical location.  
This module manages the call processing. This is a multi-
function module. It performs the function of opening the 
line, making a live connection, and then passing the data 
with a two-way interaction between the user and the 
automated program. This module goes through the list of 
users generated by the knowledge-based system and plays a 
file for each user. 
This module also includes another set of agents known as 
sound agents. For every user, a sound agent is generated. 
These agents perform the function of converting any 
necessary information to be communicated to the user into 
wave files. We have used the Speech Application 
programming Interfaces to generate the wave files. These 
files are then played to the user who gets called by the call 
processing system.  
E. 
Timer Module 
     This module 
controls 
the 
invocation 
of the 
knowledge-basedsystem module and if needed the Web data 
gathering, which in-turn triggers the information delivery 
module. We defined a default schedule that runs once a day 
This schedule can be customized to meet any specific user 
needs. 
Figure 1 shows the overall diagram of the general control 
architecture 
with 
its 
components 
and 
shows 
their 
interactions. 
 
 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-046-9
COGNITIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
 
 
 
F. 
 Weather Data Gathering Module 
Since several of our applications rely on weather data. 
We designed a weather agent and included it with the basic 
architecture for use in any control situation that needs it.We 
included a collection of agents with one agent for each day 
of the week. While the choice of having an agent for each of 
the days of the week seems arbitrary, the choice was driven 
by our first application area in farming where we found that 
many of our famer collaborators are used to performing 
different tasks on different days of the week so having a 
different agent for each of the days of the week allows 
customization for each day in terms of the weather 
parameters needed. They use the web to collect information 
from weather web sites. They are also responsible for parsing 
the data and extracting the required data for their respective 
days. We developed these agents in Visual C++ and 
programmed them to use HTTP APIs to get the data. The 
Agent architecture looks for the web site URL, parses it and 
returns the type of service and its components. It then opens 
an HTTP connection and opens the source of the web page 
for data processing. The page contains the weather 
information for the given input parameters (location, time, 
needed weather data points).  
There are seven weather agents, each holds a day’s 
weather information and these intelligent agents in our 
system interact with the knowledge-based system. This 
interaction can occur in either direction. The knowledge-
based system can trigger the weather agents if it needs 
weather information.The weather agents can also trigger the 
knowledge-based system if they detect a significant change 
in weather conditions.  
G. 
The Database 
There is another important agent, the DBMS Agent that 
retrieves the information from the database for the users. 
This agent gets updated during processing of different users. 
This agent works closely with the knowledge-based system 
and interacts with the above agents to facilitate decision-
making. This agent carries the information for a specific user 
in a dedicated manner and holds that information until the 
decisions are created for that user. 
IV. APPLICATIONS 
We applied our control to several application domains. In 
this section, we present two of these applications; weather 
data monitoring for use in a farm control setting[13]and 
monitoring of incoming technical support phones for routing 
to appropriate technicians[14]. 
A. 
Weather Monitoring 
Our weather monitoring system[14] is intended as a 
helper application to a farm management system we 
developed in the past to manage a wheat farm [1].  
The agriculture community has always been dependent 
for their work on weather conditions, and it takes significant 
planning and money investment for them to perform their 
daily farming activities. If they are not well informed of the 
upcoming weather conditions, they are prone to revenue loss. 
Through this agent-based system, we provide this 
community an opportunity to prevent the waste of their 
resources and effectively utilize them by pre-informing them 
about valuable weather data based on their plans which we 
capture online in their personal accounts. There are seven 
weather agents, each holds a day’s weather information and 
these intelligent agents in our system interact with the 
interactive decision criteria Alert Expert System, which 
activates these agents based on the management plans in the 
system. These plans include aspects such as irrigation and 
fertilization schedules which are typically extremely 
sensitive 
to 
changing 
weather 
conditions. 
Example 
conditions that the expert system module is trained to 
monitor include: 
 
Fertilization and Irrigation: Heavy Rains 
 
Spraying:  Strong winds/Windy or rains 
 
Planting and Sowing: Rains 
A top-level view of this system is shown in figure 2. 
 
We tested this system with several collaborating farmers 
and all of them reported a high level of satisfaction with the 
alerts received from the system. 
B. 
Smart Call Routing 
In this application [2], we utilized our architecture to 
develop an agent system to route incoming technical support 
calls to appropriate technicians based on the needs of the 
users and the areas of expertise of the different technicians.  
Traditionally, corporate computing systems consisted of 
hardware and software systems purchased from one or more 
vendors and maintained on site typically by local information 
technology staff. In recent years, a gradual shift occurred to a 
Figure 1. General Agent-Based Control Architecture 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-046-9
COGNITIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

managed system model where corporations contract a vendor 
to install and support integrated IT systems. This shift was 
accompanied by a shift of the help desk support from the 
corporate IT department to the vendor’s own staff. As a 
result, vendors set up large help desk installations where staff 
accept calls from personnel at a large number of corporate 
clients and attempt to troubleshoot a variety of issues. 
The goal of this system is to assist the first line 
technicians in routing the calls to the appropriate service 
technicians. Figure 3 shows a top-level view of this system. 
As reported in [2], this system resulted in the reduction of 
the average number rerouting incidents of incoming calls 
from 5.6 to 2.4 when used to replace an existing manual call 
routing system. This resulted in a higher level of satisfaction 
among surveyed callers. 
 
 
V. CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper, we presented a framework for 
communication agents embedded within an architecture for 
control based on a set of collaborating agents. The control 
architecture involves the users through communication 
between the users and the agent system. Multi agents are 
provided to enable intelligent decision making and 
interaction among users and their agents regardless of their 
physical location. We demonstrated the use of the developed 
architecture in two different control situations.The first 
application is for monitoring the web for the occurrence of 
an event such as a weather alert that would interact with 
predefined crop management plans. The other application is 
for routing incoming technical support calls to appropriate 
technicians based on their areas of expertise. 
We are currently planning to apply this same architecture 
to other domain areas. 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] A. Kamel, "Agent-Based Design of Agricultural knowledge 
Based Systems," International Journal of Computers and Their 
Applications, pp. 228-232, 4 2005. 
[2] A. Kamel, "Smart Call Routing Utilizing a Multi-Agent 
Architecture," in 
The 
Eighteenth 
International Multi-
Conference on Computing in the Global Information 
Technology, Barcelona, Spain, pp. 1-4 2023. 
[3] P. Stone, and M. Veloso, "Multiagent systems: A survey from 
a machine learning perspective," Journal of Artificial 
Intelligence Research, vol. 11, pp. 216-252, 2000.  
[4] M. Tambe, P. S. Rosenbloom, "Towards intelligent agent 
architectures: A survey.," in Firts International Conference on 
Multiagent Systems, San Fransisco, CA, 1997.  
[5] W. Van der Hoek, J. J. Meyer, C. Witteveen, "Agent 
architectures and their evaluation: Who is afraid of a 
benchmark?" Artificial Intelligence, vol. 131, no. 1, pp. 181-
213, 2001.  
[6] J. F. Hubner, J. S, Sichman, O. Boissier, "Developing multi-
agent systems with a FIPA-compliant agent framework.," 
Software: Practice and Experience, vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 159-189, 
2004.  
[7] M. Wooldridge, N.R. Jennings, "Intelligent agents: Theory and 
practice.," in First International Workshop on Agent Theories, 
Architectures, and Languages (ATAL'94), The Netherlands, 
1995. 
[8] J. Ma, L. Chen, Y. liu, "Multi-agent systems for traffic 
management: A review.," IEEE Transactions on Intelligent 
Transportation Systems, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 308-320, 2016.  
Weather Agents 
 
Sound Agents 
Alert Expert System DBMS 
Agent 
 
Figure 2. Top Level View of Weather Alert System 
Figure 3: Top Level View of Call Routing System 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-046-9
COGNITIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

[9] J. Ma, L. Chen, Y. liu, "Multi-agent systems for traffic 
management: A review.," IEEE Transactions on Intelligent 
Transportation Systems, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 308-320, 2016.  
[10] M. Smadi, A. Kamel "A Knowledge Based Traffic Signal 
Control Application," in Fifteenth International Conference on 
Computer Applications in Industry and Engineering, San 
Diego, CA, 2002. 
[11] A. Agah, G. A. Bekey, "Multi-robot assembly system using 
evolutionary multi-objective optimization and self-adaptive 
multi-agent systems.," Robotics and Autonomous Systems, 
vol. 43, no. 3-4, pp. 171-186, 2003.  
[12] X. Li, D. Li, C. Huang, "A multi-agent architecture for 
intelligent supply chain management.," Journal of Systems 
Science and Systems Engineering, vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 445-466, 
2013. 
[13] T. Pinto, H. Morais, Z. Vale, P. Faria "Multi-agent systems for 
integration of distributed energy resources in power systems: 
Models, applications, and future trends.," Renewable and 
Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 49, pp. 345-357, 2015. 
[14] D. Seth and A. Kamel, "An Intelligent-Agent Based 
Automated Weather Alert System," in Third International 
Conference on Computer Science, Software Engineering, 
Information Technology, E-Business, and Applications, Cairo, 
Egypt, 
pp. 
48-63, 
2004.
 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-046-9
COGNITIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

