The Virtual Patient Simulator of Deep Brain Stimulation in the  
Obsessive Compulsive Disorder Based on Connectome and 7 Tesla MRI Data 
The Virtual Patient Simulator of Deep Brain Stimulation in the 
Obsessive Compulsive Disorder 
Giorgio Bonmassar and Nikos Makris 
A. A. Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, MGH, Harvard Medical School Boston, USA 
e-mails: {gbonmassar, nmakris}@partners.org@partners.org 
 
 
Abstract— We present work in progress on the virtual patient 
model for patients with Deep Brain Stimulation (DBS) 
implants based on Connectome and 7 Tesla Magnetic 
Resonance Imaging (MRI) data.  Virtual patients are realistic 
computerized models of patients that allow medical-device 
companies to test new products earlier, helping the devices get 
to market more quickly and cheaply according to the Food and 
Drug Administration.  We envision that the proposed new 
virtual patient simulator will enable radio frequency power 
dosimetry on patients with the DBS implant undergoing MRI.  
Future patients with DBS implants may profit from the 
proposed virtual patient by allowing for a MRI investigation 
instead of more invasive Computed Tomography (CT) scans.  
The virtual patient will be flexible and morphable to relate to 
neurological and psychiatric conditions such as Obsessive 
Compulsive Disorder (OCD), which benefit from DBS. 
Keywords-virtual patient simulator; VPS; deep brain brain 
stimulation; DBS; obsessive compulsive disorder; OCD; MRI; 
CT; MRI safety; specific absorption rate; SAR; connectome; 7 
Tesla MRI 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
A. MRI safety in Deep Brain Stimulation (DBS) 
 Many DBS patients will require regular MRI 
examinations throughout the course of their lives since MRI 
is often the diagnostic tool of choice for monitoring 
structural changes in the brain.  Because of safety concerns 
to the patients approximately 300,000 people per year are 
denied MRI and the associated health implants such as 
Implantable Cardioverter Defibrillator (ICD) and DBS leads 
as well as guide wires and catheters.  One of the main 
concerns of use of MRI for DBS implants is related to 
potential RF – heating [1].  The Radiofrequency (RF) waves 
used in MRI to elicit signal from the brain tissue interact 
with the conductive leads generating potentially high 
induced currents (“antenna effect”) and related increased RF 
power deposition at the tip of the leads [2].  Several cases of 
permanent neurological injury were recently reported [3].  
The conditions in which currently DBS are indicated for 
MRI are extremely restrictive.  In these patients it is only 
possible to image with head coils, so that any other part of 
the body is contraindicated.  Also, only transmit-receive 
heads coil are indicated and the current state-of-the-art MRI 
receive 
coils 
multichannel 
coils 
are 
completely 
contraindicated.  In the near future, the use of MR imaging 
in these patients will become more and more problematic 
following the manufacturer guidelines.  This is of the 
upmost importance for the 300,000 people who are denied 
MRI. 
B. Lack of a gold standard DBS Virtual Patient Simulator 
(VPS) 
 The state-of-the-art numerical DBS modeling is based 
on a wire or set of wires, which represents the virtual DBS 
implant, superimposed to healthy human brains [4].  Several 
numerical models for electromagnetic analysis of DBS have 
been proposed [5-9]; however they are incomplete since 
they do not take in consideration an accurate anatomical 
modeling of the structures involved in the stimulation, 
anisotropic dielectric constants, information about head 
perfusion and the tissue scar from the surgery.  Therefore, 
we need knowledge about the i) anatomy, ii) conductivity 
and permittivity along x, y, z, iii) blood vessels and iv) 
encapsulating tissue around the electrodes. 
C. Importance of structural MRI-based modeling 
The Ventral Capsule/Ventral Striatum (VC/VS) in the 
Anterior Limb of the Internal Capsule (ALIC, which is 
approximately 20 mm long in its dorsoventral extension and 
2-5 mm wide mediolaterally at the coronal sections where 
the nucleus accumbens is present) is currently a target for 
DBS in Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (OCD) (Medtronic, 
Minneapolis, MN) (Fig.1). Importantly, a small structure 
within this large territory, namely the ventromedial 
Prefrontal-Basal Ganglia (vmPFC-BG) tract is thought to be 
a more specific target for this procedure in OCD. The latter 
is a relatively small fiber bundle, of about 2 mm diameter, 
which courses approximately 4-5 mm above the nucleus 
accumbens interconnecting ventral prefrontal cortex with 
basal ganglia [10].   
D. Importance of Connectome-based modeling 
Anisotropy of electrical properties of tissue arises in 
nerve and muscle fibers which consist of bundles of long, 
parallel myelinated elements.  Diffusion Tensor Imaging 
235
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-340-7
COGNITIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

(DTI) data will be used to model tissue anisotropic 
conductivity.  In general, we will convert the acquired 
diffusion tensor D into a complex relative permittivity 
tensor ε* using a simple linear transform 
D
å*


d
*

where ε* is the tissue complex relative permittivity [11] and 
d is the diffusivity.  Our preliminary data (Fig. 1B) show 
that Connectome MRI data (voxel size: 2 × 2 × 2 mm3) 
could be reliable in identifying the fiber tracks connecting 
vmPFC and BG.  The gradient strength determines the 
sensitivity, accuracy, and resolution of diffusion imaging.  
The connectome MRI is a new scanner purpose-built for 
diffusion MRI with ultra-high gradients of 300 mT m-1, 
more than three times stronger than any previously achieved 
in human subjects.  The new Connectome scanner at the A. 
A. Martinos Center has reduced read out time , increased 
time-efficiency, and improved structural resolution with 
reduced diffusion time.  Recent data show that this 
technology allows for enhanced sensitivity and resolution of 
white matter imaging and MRI tractography of 5-10 fold 
over any other human DTI or High-Angular Resolution 
Diffusion Imaging (HARDI) such as the Diffusion Spectrum 
Imaging (DSI) technology.  We will be generating fiber 
tracks by using spatial information derived from high spatial 
resolution ex-vivo diffusion imaging (voxel size: 100 µm 
isotropic).  Finally, VPS with DBS have been proposed for 
real time MRI surgical guidance, we propose to develop a 
post-operative VPS tool for safe MRI.  
E. Importance of Computed Tomography Angiography 
(CTA)-based modeling 
Heat transport in biological tissues, which is usually 
expressed by the Pennes bio-heat equation, is a complicated 
process since it involves thermal conduction in tissues, 
convection and perfusion of blood (delivery of the arterial 
blood to a capillary bed in tissues).  We propose to model 
the heat transfer from the blood to the tissue (qp) in the 
Pennes bio-heat equation as a term proportional to the 
temperature difference between the arterial blood entering 
the tissue and the venous blood leaving the tissue.  A total of 
continuous 15 minutes exposure to heating may result 
reversible thermal lesions occur at 42–44°C, and irreversible 
lesions occur at temperatures greater than 45°C.  At higher 
temperatures, the thermal damage depends on both the 
temperature levels and the time of exposure.  Since ex-vivo 
CTA is a standard tool in micro vasculature modeling, we 
will use CTA with contrast agents containing large barium 
or iodine particles to elucidate vascular tissues in 3D.   
F. Importance of Tissue Scaring around the DBS Electrode 
 Chronically implanted recording electrodes provoke an 
immune reaction against them.  The histopathological 
finding is that of gliosis and spongiosis around the electrode 
track, which forms an encapsulation layer referred to as the 
“glial scar”.  This reactive glial tissue which surrounds the 
implanted electrodes is approximately 200 m thick and 
progressively isolated the electrode from surrounding 
neurons modifying the electric field and acts as a natural 
neuro protector against heating of the electrode tips.  We 
will model the conductivity and permittivity of the scar 
tissue at the frequency of interest (124 MHz).  The scar 
tissue will affect the bio-heat modeling behaving as a 
thermal insulating shield, thus improving the accuracy of the 
model. 
G. Impact of the new RF pulse 
The issue of heating of implants during MRI has been 
studied [12] and analytical solutions (Green’s function) to 
the problem have been proposed for simple geometries.  
Modifications of the implant leads and wires for reducing 
the RF-induced heating have been proposed introducing 
chokes or special geometrical paths of the wire.  However, 
all of these leads design modifications may be not 
appropriate for patients who already have DBS implants, 
since replacing the original leads with these modified safer 
leads requires major brain surgery.  Since the heating due to 
conductive wires depends on the phase distribution of the 
MRI transmit field, the modification of the transmit field to 
minimize the electric field in and around the implant to 
minimize the RF pickup of the DBS wire is critical.   
II. 
METHODS 
A. Overview of study design 
The study is based on ex-vivo analysis of collected 7 Tesla 
(7T) T2* and Connectome diffusion MRI data.  
(a) Structural T2* 7 Tesla MRI The model is generated by 
segmenting 21 different brain structural entities on the ex-
vivo structural MRI, as well as 28 non-brain structural 
entities following the approach described in Makris and 
colleagues [13].  This ex-vivo brain consisted of MRI data of 
a hemisphere fixed in Periodate-Lysine-Paraformaldehyde 
(PLP) using the following parameters: T2*-W, 100 m3 
isotropic 
resolution, 
TR/TE/flip=40ms/20ms/20°, 
1600×1100×896 matrix.  Segmentation of OCD-DBS target-
related cerebral structures, specifically the  putamen, 
caudate nucleus, nucleus accumbens and anterior limb of the 
internal capsule were manually outlined (on a re-sampled 
dataset at 1 mm isotropic spatial resolution of the original 
ex-vivo high-resolution (100 m3 isotropic resolution) 
dataset acquired at 7 Tesa) using the segmentation methods 
by Filipek [14] and Makris [15], which have been developed 
and validated at the MGH Center for Morphometric 
Analysis, and have been implemented in several clinical 
studies (Fig. 1A). The VC/VS in the ALIC is currently a 
target for DBS in OCD (Medtronic). Importantly, a structure 
within this large territory, namely the vmPFC-BG tract is 
thought to be a more specific target for this procedure in 
OCD.  This is a relatively small fiber bundle, however, by 
reaping the benefits of the high-resolution dataset, we will 
segment the ALIC/VS as follows.  The anterior limb of the 
internal capsule is delimited medially by the head of the 
caudate nucleus, laterally by the putamen and ventrally by 
236
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-340-7
COGNITIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

the nucleus accumbens. These structures were delineated by 
direct visualization using intensity-based contours in the 
Cardviews software system).   (b) Connectome DSI data are 
transformed into DTI data to estimate complex relative 
permittivity tensor 
D
å*


d
 *
, introduced above.  The 
vmPFC-BG tract is delineated using diffusion Connectome 
data as shown in Fig. 1B. DTI/DSI data are visually 
validated by comparing the computed fiber tracks with 
anatomical atlases with particular emphasis to the basal 
ganglia region as shown in Fig. 1A.  Finally, DTI/DSI data 
provide detailed information on the fiber tract connectivity 
between the ventromedial prefrontal cortex and basal 
ganglia that is useful for DBS programming [16] and basic 
neuroscience research. 
B. Numerical Model of Deep Brain Stimulation implant 
  One or two bilateral implants, as shown by the post-
operative MRI, are modeled as insulated wire(s) connected 
to the left and/or right targets in the head [3].  The wires are 
modeled as a Perfect Electrical Conductor (PEC) and the 
dielectric is modeled as Teflon.  A four-electrode 
connection [16] and the scar tissue are modeled in full detail 
reaping the benefits of the proposed 100 m3 isotropic 
resolution based on the actual Medtronic electrode set that 
will be used.  The four electrodes are modeled as PEC and 
the scar tissue is modeled with the known dielectric 
properties.  We model only the head without the shoulders, 
since the VPS is meant to be used for 3T scanners with head 
transmit birdcage coil, where the quasi-static approximation 
applies. Finally, the simulations are tested by following the 
same procedure for the published CHEMA model [4] and 
running the FDTD simulations described in this paragraph.  
This data are then resampled at 1mm3 and compared with 
our published results and [4] only if the error of the 10g -
averaged SAR data is within 20% the test is considered 
passed. 
III. 
RESULTS 
Our preliminary results are principally in identification and 
segmentation of the OCD target structures for DBS using 
high-resolution T2*-W and diffusion spectrum MRI data 
and electromagnetic simulations for MRI safety. Given that 
this is work in progress our pilot data provide a basis for 
validation and completion of the VPS database.  
In Fig.  1 (A and B), we show data from a manual 
segmentation procedure to outline the different anatomical 
structures related to the VC/VS target area derived from a 
high-resolution 7 Tesla dataset and DSI-based tractography. 
In Fig. 2, we present a geometrical model of the coil array 
and the VPS model [13] with examples of different parallel 
transmit excitation phases and the resulting  B1 maps 
(nT/ampere) [18]. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
Clinical work in obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) 
indicates that several compulsive behaviors in this disorder 
 
 
 
Fig. 1. (A) Coronal section at the C.A.P. (Caudate-Accumbens-Putamen) level of a 7T high-resolution (100 m3 isotropic) 
ex-vivo human dataset showing detailed anatomy of the VC/VS target area (cross-hair in red) within the anterior limb of the 
internal capsule. (B) : (left) DSI connectome data set, (middle) electrode placement in the VC/VS target area traversed by 
fibers (yellow fibers) of the ventromedial prefrontal-basal ganglia tract at the C.A.P. coronal slice. The latter fibers stem 
from the ventromedial prefrontal area (yellow block). (A=nucleus accumbens, C=caudate nucleus, P=putamen), and (right) 
electrode geometry with the proposed embedded thin solid state temperature sensor film (red).   
 
 
Fig. 2 (Left)  Geometrical model of the coil array and our model [13] with examples of null (A) and uniform (B)   vectors 
[17].  (Right) 8-channel transmit phase array FDTD B1 maps (nT/ampere) of the center transverse slice of our model when 
each channel is driven with a 1-ampere peak-to-peak 300-MHz sinusoid [18]. 
(B) 
(A) 
237
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-340-7
COGNITIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

are related to avoidance of putative dangerous situations.  
The neural system that mediates avoidance is the same one 
that also underlies reward-seeking and comprises (anterior 
cingulate/orbital)-Basal-Ganglia (BG) connections.  DBS is 
a therapeutic procedure aiming to change activity in fronto-
basal ganglia circuits by injecting electrical stimulation in 
the Ventral Anterior Internal Capsule (VA-ALIC) and 
adjacent Ventral Striatum (VS), i.e., nucleus accumbens 
septi. In many OCD patients the benefits of DBS as a 
therapy outweighs the risks of surgery.  However, there 
have been reports of serious accidents associated with 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)-related heating [3].  
OCD patients with DBS would benefit from regular MRI 
examinations, as MRI is often the diagnostic tool of choice 
to diagnose injury due to trauma or evaluate comorbidities 
(e.g., stroke, cancer, etc.).  The Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) has approved the use of DBS leads 
by restricting the use to transmit head only coils and fields 
up to 1.5 Tesla.  However, excluding the use of 3 Tesla 
systems severely limits MRI as a diagnostic tool.  There are 
over 75,000 patients with DBS implants worldwide and only 
approximately one patient in twenty is assessed with (FDA 
restricted) MRI.  In this pilot study investigating the VPS 
application in patients with DBS implants we gathered 
preliminary results on the anatomical characterization of the 
OCD target structures for DBS using high-resolution 7 Tesla 
and Connectome MRI data and performed electromagnetic 
simulations for MRI safety.  VPS are realistic computerized 
human models that allow medical-device companies to test 
new products earlier, helping the devices get to market more 
quickly and cheaply according to the FDA. We envision that 
the proposed new OCD VPS will enable radio frequency 
(RF) power dosimetry on patients with DBS implants 
undergoing MRI.  Based on VPS dosimetry, we will be able 
to modify ad hoc the MRI parameters to allow for MRI 
acquisition on patients with DBS implants in situ.  Future 
OCD patients with DBS implants may profit from the 
proposed VPS by allowing for a MRI investigation instead 
of more invasive computerized tomography (CT) scans.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
National Institute of Health, National Institute of 
Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering 1R21EB016449-
01A1. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
C. K. Chou, J. A. McDougall, and K. W. Chan, "RF heating of 
implanted spinal fusion stimulator during magnetic resonance imaging," 
IEEE Trans Biomed Eng, vol. 44, pp. 367-73, May 1997. 
[2] 
L. M. Angelone, A. Potthast, F. Segonne, S. Iwaki, J. W. 
Belliveau, and G. Bonmassar, "Metallic electrodes and leads in 
simultaneous EEG-MRI: specific absorption rate (SAR) simulation 
studies," Bioelectromagnetics, vol. 25, pp. 285-95, May 2004. 
[3] 
J. M. Henderson, J. Tkach, M. Phillips, K. Baker, F. G. 
Shellock, and A. R. Rezai, "Permanent neurological deficit related to 
magnetic resonance imaging in a patient with implanted deep brain 
stimulation electrodes for Parkinson's disease: case report," Neurosurgery, 
vol. 57, p. E1063; discussion E1063, Nov 2005. 
[4] 
L. Angelone, J. Ahveninen, J. Belliveau, and G. Bonmassar, 
"Analysis of the Role of Lead Resistivity in Specific Absorption Rate for 
Deep Brain Stimulator Leads at 3 T MRI," IEEE Trans Med Imaging, vol. 
29, pp. 1029-38, Mar 22 2010. 
[5] 
M. Oliveri, G. Koch, S. Torriero, and C. Caltagirone, "Increased 
facilitation of the primary motor cortex following 1 Hz repetitive 
transcranial magnetic stimulation of the contralateral cerebellum in normal 
humans," Neurosci Lett, vol. 376, pp. 188-93, Mar 16 2005. 
[6] 
C. R. Merritt, H. T. Nagle, and E. Grant, "Fabric-Based Active 
Electrode Design and Fabrication for Health Monitoring Clothing," 
Information Technology in Biomedicine, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 13, pp. 
274-280, 2009. 
[7] 
C. R. Butson, S. E. Cooper, J. M. Henderson, and C. C. 
McIntyre, "Patient-specific analysis of the volume of tissue activated 
during deep brain stimulation," Neuroimage, vol. 34, pp. 661-70, Jan 15 
2007. 
[8] 
M. Seyal, A. J. Shatzel, and S. P. Richardson, "Crossed 
inhibition of sensory cortex by 0.3 Hz transcranial magnetic stimulation of 
motor cortex," J Clin Neurophysiol, vol. 22, pp. 418-21, Dec 2005. 
[9] 
F. Tyc, A. Boyadjian, and H. Devanne, "Motor cortex plasticity 
induced by extensive training revealed by transcranial magnetic stimulation 
in human," Eur J Neurosci, vol. 21, pp. 259-66, Jan 2005. 
[10] 
J. F. Lehman, B. D. Greenberg, C. C. McIntyre, S. A. 
Rasmussen, and S. N. Haber, "Rules ventral prefrontal cortical axons use to 
reach their targets: implications for diffusion tensor imaging tractography 
and deep brain stimulation for psychiatric illness," J Neurosci, vol. 31, pp. 
10392-402, Jul 13 2011. 
[11] 
C. Gabriel, S. Gabriel, and E. Corthout, "The dielectric 
properties of biological tissues: III. Parametric models for the dielectric 
spectrum of tissues," Phys. Med. Biol., vol. 41, pp. 2271–2293, 1996. 
[12] 
C. K. Chou, H. Bassen, J. Osepchuk, Q. Balzano, R. Petersen, 
M. Meltz, R. Cleveland, J. C. Lin, and L. Heynick, "Radio frequency 
electromagnetic exposure: tutorial review on experimental dosimetry," 
Bioelectromagnetics, vol. 17, pp. 195-208, 1996. 
[13] 
N. Makris, L. Angelone, S. Tulloch, S. Sorg, D. Kennedy, and 
G. Bonmassar, "MRI-based anatomical model of the human head for 
specific absorption rate (SAR) mapping," Med Biol Eng Comput, vol. 46, 
pp. 1239-51, 2008. 
[14] 
P. A. Filipek, C. Richelme, D. N. Kennedy, and V. S. Caviness, 
Jr., "The young adult human brain: an MRI-based morphometric analysis," 
Cereb Cortex, vol. 4, pp. 344-60, Jul-Aug 1994. 
[15] 
N. Makris, J. W. Meyer, J. F. Bates, E. H. Yeterian, D. N. 
Kennedy, and V. S. Caviness, "MRI-Based topographic parcellation of 
human cerebral white matter and nuclei II. Rationale and applications with 
systematics of cerebral connectivity," Neuroimage, vol. 9, pp. 18-45, 1999. 
[16] 
T. Eichele, S. Debener, V. D. Calhoun, K. Specht, A. K. Engel, 
K. Hugdahl, D. Y. von Cramon, and M. Ullsperger, "Prediction of human 
errors by maladaptive changes in event-related brain networks," Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A, vol. 105, pp. 6173-8, Apr 22 2008. 
[17] 
L. M. Angelone, N. Makris, C. E. Vasios, L. Wald, and G. 
Bonmassar, "Effect of transmit array phase relationship on local Specific 
Absorption Rate (SAR)." in ISMRM Fourteenth Scientific Meeting, Seattle, 
USA, 2006. 
[18] 
A. C. Zelinski, L. M. Angelone, V. K. Goyal, G. Bonmassar, E. 
Adalsteinsson, and L. L. Wald, "Specific absorption rate studies of the 
parallel transmission of inner-volume excitations at 7T," J Magn Reson 
Imaging, vol. 28, pp. 1005-18, Oct 2008. 
 
 
238
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-340-7
COGNITIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

