Cyber Forensics: Representing and (Im)Proving the Chain of Custody Using the 
Semantic web 
Tamer Fares Gayed, Hakim Lounis 
Dépt. d’Informatique 
Université du Québec à Montréal 
Case postale 8888, succursale Centre-ville, Montréal 
QC H3C 3P8, Montréal, Canada 
gayed.tamer@courrier.uqam.ca   
lounis.hakim@uqam.ca 
 
Moncef Bari 
Dépt. d’Éducation et Pédagogie 
Université du Québec à Montréal  
Case postale 8888, succursale Centre-ville, Montréal 
QC H3C 3P8, Montréal, Canada 
bari.moncef@uqam.ca 
Abstract - Computer/Digital forensic is still in its infancy, but 
it is a very growing field. It involves extracting evidences from 
digital device in order to analyze and present them in a court 
of law to prosecute it.  Digital evidences can be easily altered if 
proper precautions are not taken. A chain of custody (CoC) 
document is used to demonstrate the road map of how 
evidences 
have 
been 
copied, 
transported, 
and 
stored 
throughout the investigation process. With the advent of the 
digital age, the tangible CoC document needs to undergone a 
radical transformation from paper to electronic data (e-CoC), 
readable and consumed by machines, and applications. 
Semantic web is a flexible solution to represent different 
information, because it provides semantic markup languages 
for 
knowledge 
representation, 
supported 
by 
different 
vocabularies for provenance information. These features can 
be exploited to represent the tangible COC document to ensure 
its trustworthiness and its integrity. Moreover, querying 
mechanisms can be also incorporated over this represented 
knowledge to answer different forensic and provenance 
questions asked by juries concerning the case in hand. Thus, 
this paper proposes the construction of a framework solution 
based on the semantic web to represent and consume the 
forensic and provenance knowledge related to the tangible 
COC document. 
Keywords - Knowledge Representation; Chain of Custody; 
Provenance Vocabularies; Semantic Web; Resource Description 
Framework. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Computer/Digital forensic is a growing field. It combines 
computer science concepts including computer architecture, 
operating systems, file systems, software engineering, and 
computer networking, as well as legal procedures. At the 
most basic level, the digital forensic process has three major 
phases; Extraction, Analysis, and Presentation. Extraction 
(acquisition) phase saves the state of the digital source (ex: 
laptop and desktop, computers, mobile phones) and creates 
an image by saving all digital values so it can be later 
analyzed. Analysis phase takes the acquired data (ex: file and 
directory contents and recovering deleted contents) and 
examines it to identify pieces of evidence, and draws 
conclusions based on the evidences that were found. During 
presentation phase, the audience is typically the judges; in 
this phase, the conclusion and corresponding evidence from 
the investigation analysis are presented to them [1].  
Nevertheless, there exists others forensic process models, 
each of them relies upon reaching a consensus about how to 
describe digital forensics and evidences [2][17].  
Like any physical evidence, digital evidence needs to be 
validated for the legal aspects (admissibility) in the court of 
law. In order for the evidence to be accepted by the court as 
valid; chain of custody for digital evidence must be kept, or 
it must be known who exactly, when, and where came into 
contact with the evidence at each stage of the investigation 
[3]. 
The role of players (first responders, investigators, expert 
witnesses, prosecutors, police officers) concerning CoC is to 
(im)prove that the evidence has not been altered through all 
phases of the forensic process. CoC must include 
documentation containing answers to these questions:   
• 
Who came into contact, handled, and discovered the 
digital evidence? 
• 
What procedures were performed on the evidence? 
• 
When the digital evidence is discovered, accessed, 
examined, or transferred?  
• 
Where was digital evidence discovered, collected, 
handled, stored, and examined?  
• 
Why the evidence was collected?   
• 
How was the digital evidence collected, used, and 
stored? 
Once such questions (“i.e., known as 5Ws and the 1H”) 
are answered for each phase in the forensic process, and 
players will have a reliable CoC which can be then admitted 
by the judges’ court.  
This paper proposes the creation of electronic chain of 
custody (e-CoC) using a semantic web based framework that 
represent and (im)prove the classical/traditional paper-based 
CoC during the cyber forensics investigation.  
The Knowledge representation concept has been 
persistent at the centre of the field of Artificial Intelligence 
(AI) since its founding conference in the mid 50’s. This 
concept described by Davis & al. by five distinct roles [28]. 
The most important is the definition of knowledge 
representation as a surrogate for things. This paper suggests 
the construction of electronic chain of custody (e-CoC) using 
semantic web as a surrogate of the tangible one.  
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Semantic web will be a flexible solution for this task 
because it provides semantic markup languages such as 
Resource Description Framework (RDF), RDF Scheme 
(RDFS), and Web Ontology Language (OWL) that are used 
to represent different knowledge.  
In addition, the semantic web is rich with different 
provenance vocabularies [10], such as Dublin Core (DC), 
Friend of a Friend (FOAF), and Proof Markup Language 
(PML) that can be used to (im)prove the CoC by answering 
the 5Ws and the 1H questions. 
The remainder of this document is organized as follows: 
section 2 presents the problem statement encounters the 
tangible CoC, the related works is presented in section 3, 
section 4 provides a brief background about the semantic 
web, the proposed solution is presented in section 5, and 
finally, conclusion in the last section. 
II. 
PROLBLEM STATEMENT 
The continuous growing of devices and software in the 
field of computing and information technology creates 
challenges for the cyber forensics science in the volume of 
data (“i.e., evidences”) being investigated. It also increases 
the need to manage process and present the CoC in order to 
minimize and facilitate its documentation.  
The second issue is related to the interoperability 
between digital evidence and its CoC documentation. Last 
works concentrated mainly on the representation and 
correlation of the digital evidences [24][25] and as an 
indirect consequence, the improving of the CoC by 
attempting to replicate the key features of physical evidence 
bags into Digital Evidence Bags (DEB) [5]. However, the 
documentation of CoC for digital evidences remains an 
exhausted task. Knowledge communication between the 
digital evidence and the information documentation about 
the evidence, apart from natural language, can create some 
automation and minimize human’s intervention.  
The third issue concerns the CoC documents. They must 
be affixed securely when they are transported from one place 
to another. This is achieved using a very classical way: seal 
them in plastic bags (“i.e., together with physical evidence if 
it exists, such as hard disk, USB, cables, etc.”), label them, 
and sign them into a locked evidence room with the 
evidences themselves to ensure their integrity. 
The fourth issue is about the judges’ awareness and 
understandings are not enough to evaluate, understand, and 
take the proper decision on the digital evidences related to 
the case in hand. One solution is to organize a training 
program to educate the juries the field of Information and 
Communication Technology (ICT) [6]. From the point of 
view of the authors, this will not be an easy task to teach 
juries the ICT concepts. The other solution is to provide a 
descriptive e-CoC using forensic and provenance metadata 
that the juries can query to find the answers to their questions 
through these metadata.  
The last issue is that the problem is not only to represent 
the knowledge of the tangible CoC in order to solve the 
issues mentioned above, but also to express information 
about where the CoC information came from. Juries can find 
the answers to their questions on the CoC, but they need also 
to know the provenance and origins of those answers. 
Provenance of information is crucial to guarantee the 
trustworthiness and confidence of the information provided. 
This paper distinguishes between forensic information and 
provenance information. Forensic information is responsible 
to answer the 5Ws and 1H questions related to the case in 
hand, while provenance information is responsible to answer 
questions about the origin of answers (“i.e., what information 
sources were used, when they were updated, how reliable the 
source was”).  
III. 
RELATED WORK 
Works related to this paper can be summarized over three 
dimensions.  
The first dimension is the works on improving the CoC. 
In [22], a conceptual Digital Evidence Management 
Framework (DEMF) was proposed to implement secure and 
reliable digital evidence CoC. This framework answered the 
who, what, why, when, where, and how questions. The 
‘what’ is answered using a fingerprint of evidences. The 
‘how’ is answered using the hash similarity to changes 
control. The ‘who’ is answered using the biometric 
identification and authentication for digital signing. The 
‘when’ is answered using the automatic and trusted time 
stamping. Finally, the ‘where’ is answered using the GPS 
and RFID for geo location.  
Another work in [23], discusses the integrity of CoC 
through the adaptation of hashing algorithm for signing 
digital evidence put into consideration identity, date, and 
time of access of digital evidence. The authors provided a 
valid time stamping provided by a secure third party to sign 
digital evidence in all stages of the investigation process.  
Other published work to improve the CoC is based on a 
hardware solution. SYPRUS Company provides the Hydra 
PC solution. It is a PC device that provides an entire securely 
protected, self contained, and portable device (“i.e., 
connected to the USB Port”) that provides high-assurance 
cryptographic products to protect the confidentiality, 
integrity, and non-repudiation of digital evidence with 
highest-strength 
cryptographic 
technology 
[15]. 
This 
solution is considered as an indirect improving of the CoC as 
it preserves the digital evidences from modification and 
violation. 
Recently, a work for managing and understanding CoC 
has been provided using an ontological approach. This 
approach can be used to share common understanding of the 
structure of the digital forensic domain among different 
players, among software agents, and between players and 
software. This approach can also be used to enable the reuse 
of knowledge in digital investigation process [29].  
The 
second 
dimension 
concerns 
knowledge 
representation. An attempt was performed to represent the 
knowledge discovered during the identification and analysis 
phase of the investigation process [26]. This attempt uses the 
Universal Modeling Language (UML) for representing 
knowledge. It is extended to a unified modeling 
methodology framework (UMMF) to describe and think 
about planning, performing, and documenting forensics 
tasks. 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

The third dimension is about the forensic formats. Over 
the last few years, different forensic formats were provided.  
In 2006, Digital Forensics Research Workshop (DRWS) 
formed a working group called Common Digital Evidence 
Storage Format (CDEF) working group for storing digital 
evidence and associated metadata [12]. CDEF surveyed the 
following disk image main formats: Advanced Forensics 
Format (AFF), Encase Expert Witness Format (EWF), 
Digital Evidence Bag (DEB), gfzip, ProDiscover, and 
SMART.  
Most of these formats can store limited number of 
metadata, like case name, evidence name, examiner name, 
date, place, and hash code to assure data integrity [12]. The 
most commonly used formats are described here.  
AFF is defined by Garfinkel et al. in [27] as a disk image 
container which supports storing arbitrary metadata in single 
archive, like sector size or device serial number.  The EWF 
format is produced by EnCase’s imaging tools. It contains 
checksums, a hash for verifying the integrity of the contained 
image, and error information describing bad sectors on the 
source media.  
Later, Tuner’s digital evidence bags (DEB) proposed a 
container for digital crime scene artifacts, metadata, 
information integrity, access, and usage audit records [5]. 
However, such format is limited to name/value pairs and 
makes no provision for attaching semantics to the name. It 
attempts to replicate key features of physical evidence bags, 
which are used for traditional evidence capture.  
In 2009, Cohen et al. in [4] have observed problems to be 
corrected in the first version of AFF. They released the AFF4 
user specific metadata functionalities. They described the use 
of distributed evidence management systems AFF4 based on 
an imaginary company that have offices in two different 
countries. AFF4 extends the AFF to support multiple data 
sources, logical evidence, and several others improvements 
such the support of forensic workflow and the storing of 
arbitrary metadata. Such work explained that the Resource 
Description Framework (RDF) [7] resources can be 
exploited with AFF4 in order to (im)prove the forensics 
process model.  
IV. 
SEMANTIC WEB 
Semantic web is an extension of the current web, 
designed to represent information in a machine readable 
format by introducing knowledge representation languages 
based in XML. The semantic markup language such as 
Resource Description Framework (RDF), RDF Schema 
(RDFS) and the web ontology language (OWL) are the 
languages of the semantic web that are used for knowledge 
representation. 
According to the W3C recommendation [7], RDF is a 
foundation for encoding, exchange, and reuse of structured 
metadata. RDF supports the use of standards mechanisms to 
facilitate the interoperability by integrating separate metadata 
elements (vocabularies) defined by different resource 
description communities (“e.g., Dublin Core”).  
RDF consists of three slots: resource, property, and 
object. Resources are entities retrieved from the web (“e.g., 
persons, places, web documents, picture, abstract concepts, 
etc.”). RDF, resources are represented by uniform resource 
identifier (URI) of which URLs are a subset. Resources have 
properties (attributes) that admit a certain range of value or 
attached to be another resource. The object can be literal 
value or resources.  
The main aim of the semantic web is to publish data on 
the web in a standard structure and manageable format [8]. 
Tim Berners Lee outlined the principles of publishing data 
on the web. These principles known as Linked Data 
Principles (“i.e., LD principles”): 
• 
Use URI as names for things. 
• 
Use HTTP URIs so that people can look up those 
names. 
• 
When someone looks up a URI, provide useful 
information using the standards (RDF, SPARQL). 
• 
Include RDF statements that link to other URIs so 
that they can discover related things. 
The Linking Open Data (LOD) project is the most visible 
project using this technology stack (URLs, HTTP, and RDF) 
and converting existing open license data on the web, into 
RDF according to the LOD principles [9]. The LOD project 
created a shift in the semantic web community. Instead of 
being concentrated on the ontologies for their own sake and 
their semantic (languages to represent them, logics for 
reasoning with them, methods and tools to construct them), it 
becomes on the web aspects (“i.e., how data is published and 
consumed on the web”). 
Semantic web provides provenance vocabularies that 
enable providers of web data to publish provenance related 
metadata about their data. Provenance information about a 
data item is information about the history of the item, 
starting from its creation, and including information about its 
origins. Provenance information about the data on the web 
must comprise the aspects of publishing and accessing the 
data on the Web. Providing provenance information as 
linked data requires vocabularies that can be used to describe 
the different aspects of provenance [11][10][13][14]. 
V. 
SOLTUION FRAMEWORK 
The solution framework is about the use of the semantic 
web to represent the CoC using RDF and improve its 
integrity through different built in provenance vocabularies. 
Thus, the CoC forensic information and its provenance 
metadata will be published and consumed on the web.  
There exist various vocabularies to describe provenance 
information with RDF data. The popular standard metadata 
that can be used in different contexts is the Dublin core 
metadata terms defined in the RDFS schema [19]. The main 
goal of consuming this provenance metadata is to assess the 
trustworthiness and quality of the represented knowledge. 
The W3C Provenance Incubator Group detected the 
needs for provenance in different context. Provenance 
Interchange Language (PIL) has been considered by the 
Provenance Interchange Working Group (PIWG) to publish 
and access provenance using that language. Heterogeneous 
systems and agents can export and import their provenance 
information into such a core language and reason over it 
[30]. 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
Figure1.  Framework for representing and improving CoC using semantic 
web 
 
 As mentioned in Section 2, digital evidence can be 
stored in open or proprietary formats (“e.g., CDEF, AFF, 
EWF, DEB, gfzip, ProDiscover, and SMART”). These 
formats store forensic metadata (“e.g., the sector size and 
device serial number”). The most advanced format for 
representing the digital evidence is the AFF4 which is an 
extension of the AFF to accommodate multiple data sources, 
logical evidence, arbitrary information, and forensic 
workflow [16].  
The framework proposed in Figure-1 shows that the 
tangible CoC can be created manually from the output of 
forensic tools (“e.g., AFF4 or any other format”). AFF4 can 
be modeled into RDF. Human creates the CoC according to a 
predefined 
form 
determined 
by 
the 
governmental 
/commercial institution and fill the forms from the forensic 
information synthesized from the forensic tools. Experience 
can be used, if necessary, to prune or add some forensic 
metadata not provided on the current output format. 
This framework is generalized to all phases of the 
forensic investigation. As we have different forensic models 
with different phases, the framework can be adapted for 
different phases of different models. A summary of different 
process models can be found in [2][17]. Each phase for 
specific forensic process model has its own information: 
forensic metadata, forensic algorithm, player who came into 
contact, etc. 
The AFF4 can be directly represented using the RDF. 
Researchers have proposed several solutions on the use of 
AFF4 and RDF resources to improve digital forensics 
process model or software. The tangible CoC associated to 
each phase/digital evidences can be also represented in RDF. 
Players of each phase can enter the necessary information 
through a web form interface which is then transformed to 
RDF triple using web service tool (“e.g., triplify”) [18]. The 
RDF data are supported by different build in provenance 
vocabularies like DC [19], FOAF [20], and Proof Markup 
Language (PML) [21]. For example, the provenance terms 
used by the DC are: dcterms:contributor, dcterms:creator, 
dctemrs:created, 
dcterms:modified, 
dcterms:provenance, 
which can give the juries information about who contributed, 
created, modified, the information provided to the court. 
FOAF provides classes and properties to describe entities 
such as persons, organizations, groups, and software agents. 
The Proof Markup Language describes justifications for 
results of an answering engine or an inference process.  
CoC representation for each phase in RDF data can be 
linked with another, using the same principle of the LOD 
project (“i.e., RDF graph/statement can be linked and be 
navigated using the semantic technology stack: URLs, 
HTTP, and RDF”). Digital evidence may be also integrated 
with its CoC information. After representing all information 
related to the digital evidence and its associated CoC, the 
player who comes into work in this phase can finally sign his 
RDF data. Finally, we will have an interlinked RDF based on 
the LOD principle which represents the whole e-CoC of the 
case in hand. 
Juries can use application based on the same idea of the 
web crawler; they can not only navigate over the interlinked 
RDF graph/statement, but also, run query through a web 
application over the represented knowledge using SPARQL 
query language, and find the necessary semantic answers 
about their forensic and provenance questions.   
The proposed framework can provide solutions to the 
issues mentioned in Section 2. Representation of the tangible 
CoC knowledge to RDF facilitates the management and 
processing because it is a machine readable form (first issue). 
It is also interoperable; digital evidence representation and its 
CoC description can be unified together under the same 
framework (“i.e., RDF”). Also, each player comes into role 
can secure (“i.e., using cryptographic approaches”) and sign 
his RDF data (“i.e., using digital signature”) to ensure the 
integrity and identity, respectively (second issue and third 
issue). On the other hand, juries can consume and navigate 
over the interlinked RDF data which present the whole and 
detailed information about the history of evidence from its 
collection to its presentation in the court (fourth issue). 
Provenance vocabularies can also be used to provide extra 
and descriptive metadata beyond the forensic metadata 
provided by the forensic tools (last issue).  
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper proposes the construction of a semantic web 
based framework to represent and (im)prove tangible chain 
of custody using RDF and provenance vocabularies. After 
the definition and analysis of all related information 
(metadata) for each phase in a selected forensic process 
(“i.e., source will be the human experience and forensic tools 
output”), we will focus on the conversion and representation 
of tangible COCs information into interlinked RDF (e-
COCs). This representation will contain forensic and 
provenance metadata (built-in/custom) related to the case in 
hand. The last phase will be the construction of a web 
interface that let the juries consume and query these 
interlinked RDF data in order to answer all questions related 
to the COCs of evidences and their provenances.  
 
 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

REFERENCES 
[1] Erin Kenneally. Gatekeeping Out Of The Box: Open Source Software 
As A Mechanism To Assess Reliability For Digital Evidence. 
Virginia Journal of Law and Technology. Vol 6, Issue 3, Fall 2001. 
[2] Michael W. Andrew “Defining a Process Model for Forensic 
Analysis of Digital Devices and Storage Media” Proceedings of the 
2nd International Workshop on Systematic Approaches to Digital 
Forensic Engineering SADFE 2007 
[3] Ćosić, J., Bača, M. Do we have a full control over integrity in digital 
evidence life cycle, Proceedings of ITI 2010, 32nd International 
Conference on Information Technology Interfaces, Dubrovnik/Cavtat, 
pp. 429-434, 2010 
[4] Cohen, M.; Garfinkel, S.; Schatz, B. Extending the advanced forensic 
format to accommodate multiple data sources, logical evidence, 
arbitrary information and forensic workflow. Digital Investigation, 
2009. S57-S. 
[5] Turner, P. Unification of Digital Evidence from Disparate Sources 
(Digital Evidence Bags). In 5th DFRW. 2004. New Orleans 
[6] Judges’ Awareness, Understanding and Application of Digital 
Evidence, Phd Thesis in computer technology in Education, Graduate 
school of computer and information sciences, Nova Southeastern 
University, 2010 
[7] RDF: Model and Syntax Specification. W3C recommendation, 22 
Februrary 1999, www.w3.org/TR/REC-rdf-syntax-19990222/1999 
[8] The semantic web, Linked and Open Data, A Briefing paper By 
Lorna M. Campbell and Sheilla MacNeill, June 2010, JISC CETIS 
[9] Christian Bizer, Tom Heath, Tim Berners-Lee: Linked Data - The 
Story So Far. Int. J. Semantic Web Inf. Syst. 5(3): 1-22 (2009) 
[10] Olaf Hartig: Provenance Information in the Web of Data. In 
Proceedings of the Linked Data on the Web (LDOW) Workshop at 
the World Wide Web Conference (WWW), Madrid, Spain, Apr. 2009 
[11] Olaf Hartig and Jun Zhao: Publishing and Consuming Provenance 
Metadata on the Web of Linked Data. In Proceedings of the 3rd 
International Provenance and Annotation Workshop (IPAW), Troy, 
New York, USA, June 2010  
[12] CDESF. Common Digital Evidence Format. 2004 [Viewed 21 
December 
2005]; 
Available 
from: 
http://www.dfrws.org/CDESF/index.html 
[13] [Olaf Hartig and Jun Zhao: Using Web Data Provenance for Quality 
Assessment. In Proceedings of the 1st Int. Workshop on the Role of 
Semantic Web in Provenance Management (SWPM) at ISWC, 
Washington, DC, USA, October 2009 Download PDF  
[14] Olaf Hartig, Jun Zhao, and Hannes Mühleisen: Automatic Integration 
of Metadata into the Web of Linked Data (Demonstration Proposal). 
In Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Trust and Privacy on the 
Social and Semantic Web (SPOT) at ESWC, Heraklion, Greece, May 
2010  
[15] Solvinghe digital Chain of Custody Problem, SPYRUS, Trusted 
Mobility Solutions, © Copyright 2010 
[16] M. I. Cohen, Simson Garfinkel and Bradley Schatz, Extending the 
Advanced Forensic Format to accommodate Multiple Data Sources, 
Logical Evidence, Arbitrary Information and Forensic Workflow, 
DFRWS 2009, Montreal, Canada 
[17] MD Köhn, JHP Eloff and MS Olivier, "UML Modeling of Digital 
Forensic Process Models (DFPMs)," in HS Venter, MM Eloff, JHP 
Eloff and L Labuschagne (eds), Proceedings of the ISSA 2008 
Innovative Minds Conference, Johannesburg, South Africa, July 2008 
(Published electronically)  
[18] http://triplify.org/Overview 
[19] http://dublincore.org/ 
[20] http://www.foaf-project.org/ 
[21] P. P. da Silva, D. L. McGuinness, and R. Fikes. A Proof Markup 
Language for Semantic Web Services. Information Systems, 31(4-
5):381–395, June 2006 
[22] Ćosić, J., Bača, M. (2010) A Framework to (Im)Prove Chain of 
Custody in Digital Investigation Process,  Proceedings of the 21st 
Central European Conference on Information and Intelligent Systems, 
pp. 435-438, Varaždin, Croatia  
[23] Ćosić, J., Bača, M. (2010) (Im)proving chain of custody and digital 
evidence integrity with timestamp, MIPRO, 33. međunarodni skup za 
informacijsku 
i 
komunikacijsku 
tehnologiju, 
elektroniku 
i 
mikroelektroniku, Opatija, 171-175 
[24] Schatz, B., Mohay, G. And Clark, A. (2004) ‘Rich Event 
Representation for computer Forensics’, Proceedings of the 2004 
Asia Pacific Industrial Engineering and Management System  
[25] Schatz,B., Mohay, G. and Clark, A.(2004) ‘Generalising Event 
Forensics Across Multiple domains’ Proceedings of the 2004 
Australian Computer Network and Information Forensics Conference 
(ACNIFC 2004), Perth, Australia. 
[26] Bogen, A. and D.Dampier. Knoweldge discovery and experince 
modeling in computer forensics media analysis.In international 
Symposium on Information and Communication Technologies.2004: 
Trinity College Dublin 
[27] Garfinkel, S.L., D.J. Malan, K.-A. Dubec, C.C. Stevens, and C. 
Pham, Disk Imaging with the Advanced Forensics Format, library 
and Tools. Advances in Digital Forensics (2nd Annual IFIP WG 11.9 
International Conference on Digital Forensics), 2006 
[28] Davis, R.,H. Shrobe, and P. Szolovits. What is a knowledge 
representation? AI Magazine, 1993. 14(1): p.17-3 
[29] Jasmin Ćosić, Zoran Ćosić, Miroslav Bača, An Ontological Approach 
to Study and Manage Digital Chain of Custody of Digital Evidence, 
Journal of Information and Organizational Sciences (JIOS) e-ISSN: 
1846-9418, Vol. 35, No.1 (2011), PP.1-13 
[30] Provenance 
Interchange 
Working 
group 
http://www.w3.org/2011/01/prov-wg-charter 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

