Cognitive Linguistic Representation of Legal Events 
Towards a semantic-based legal information retrieval  
 
Anderson Bertoldi, Rove Chishman, Sandro José Rigo, Thaís Domênica Minghelli 
Universidade do Vale do Rio dos Sinos (UNISINOS) 
São Leopoldo, Brazil 
andersonbertoldi@yahoo.com, rove@unisinos.br, rigo@unisinos.br, thaisdomenica@hotmail.com 
 
 
Abstract—An important role of an attorney in Brazil is to 
search Brazilian courts databases in order to find precedent 
decisions to base their requests on. This paper discusses the 
initial efforts that have been made towards the development of 
a legal knowledge base, composed by semantic frames, to 
improve Brazilian courts information retrieval systems. 
Linguistic methods are applied to recognize possible legal event 
structures to be described in legal documents. Afterwards, 
based on the linguistic theory of Frame Semantics, the 
participants and props of legal events are described. This is a 
work in progress that will involve both legal and linguistic 
description as well as system development. With this legal 
knowledge base, the results expected are the improvement of 
the legal information retrieval system of Brazilian courts 
databases, using semantic representation of Brazilian legal 
events. 
Keywords-knowledge representation; semantic modeling; 
semantic frames; legal information retrieval. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This paper presents a project in progress whose aim is to 
represent legal knowledge to replicate the possible cognitive 
connections that a law specialist makes in the moment he/she 
is analyzing a legal document. This project applies the Frame 
Semantics theory [1][2] for the semantic modeling of legal 
events. Legal events are represented as semantic frames and 
relations among these semantic frames are established in 
order to reproduce the connections of knowledge that 
specialists have to make to understand legal documents. 
In Brazil, usually, before filing a lawsuit, attorneys 
search the online databases of Brazilian courts for similar 
cases. In this search they look for precedent decisions to 
decide whether a lawsuit has chance to be accepted for the 
judge and to base the request that originates the suit. Despite 
the efforts to improve their Information Retrieval (IR) 
systems, Brazilian court databases still do not work with 
semantic annotation of their documents, which could 
improve the search results. As a consequence, lawyers, when 
looking for precedent decisions, have to deal with a huge 
amount of documents. The proposal of this project is to 
develop a knowledge base composed by semantic frames 
describing the legal knowledge related to legal terms/words. 
These resources will be used to annotate a legal corpus 
aimed to be applied together with an automatic corpus 
annotation tool. 
To discuss this topic, this paper is structured as follows. 
Section II presents the problem that motivates this research. 
As IR systems of Brazilian courts return a huge amount of 
documents, lawyers spend too much time reading documents 
to separate meaningful to non-meaningful documents. 
Section III presents the solution proposed in this project. 
Using linguistic methods to describe the meaning of the legal 
terms/words, this project expects to develop a set of semantic 
tags for legal text annotation. Section IV discusses the 
expected results as well as the steps that have to be 
accomplished in order to build a semantic-based legal 
information retrieval system. Section V presents the related 
work in which this research is based on. Section VI discusses 
the possible contributions of this work with respect to legal 
information retrieval system of Brazilian courts and with 
respect to the previous work in the areas of Frame Semantics 
and legal information retrieval.  
II. 
THE PROBLEM 
When specialists search the online databases of Brazilian 
courts, such as the State Court of Appeal [3] or the Federal 
Court of Appeal [4], looking for precedent decisions to base 
the lawsuit request on, they need to provide a combination of 
words to get better results. Let us consider, for example, an 
attorney who is working on a divorce case. He needs to make 
a request of child support and, therefore, he looks for the 
jurisprudence of the State Court of Appeal. He will need to 
provide to the IR system a combination of words, such as 
alimentos (food) and divórcio (divorce) or alimentos (food) 
and pensão (alimony). 
This example demonstrates that the IR systems of the 
Brazilian courts search their databases by string patterns, not 
by the meaning of the legal terms/words. The search result is 
a huge amount of legal documents stored in the court 
database. The specialist has to spend a considerable part of 
his/her time just reading documents that were returned to 
find which documents are really meaningful for his/her 
intents.   
The assumption explored in this project is that describing 
the meaning of the legal terms/words and establishing 
relations among these terms, with the support of FrameNet 
[5] formalism, the result will be a knowledge base that can 
provide valuable resource to the IR system improvements in 
order to return better results. The framework to implement 
and use this knowledge base comprises the development of 
additional components that expand both the documents 
147
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-340-7
COGNITIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Antonio Jair da Costa[AUTHOR] ajuizou ação[TYPE OF ACTION] 
contra o Instituto Nacional Do Seguro Social – 
INSS[DEFENDANT]. 
 
[Antonio Jair da Costa filed a lawsuit against the National 
Institute of Social Security – INSS.] 
indexing and the term searching operations of the existing IR 
systems. 
III. 
THE SOLUTION PROPOSED 
 
The solution proposed by this project is to build a 
knowledge base describing the meaning of the legal 
terms/words through semantic frames. The theory concerned 
about semantic frames is called ‘Frame Semantics’ and was 
proposed by the linguist Charles Fillmore, inspired by the 
previous work of Marvin Minsky [6]. 
A semantic frame is a schematic structure which 
describes the role of the participants and props of an event or 
state [1]. This schematic structure is evoked by lexical units. 
According to Frame Semantics, lexical units work like a 
trigger that makes the speaker retrieve in his/her mind related 
concepts that help to understand the meaning of a certain 
concept. For instance, in order to understand the meaning of 
‘buying’ the speaker needs to understand the meaning of 
‘selling’. The lexical units ‘buy’ and ‘sell’ evoke a frame of 
commercial transaction. To understand the concept of 
commercial transaction, speakers must understand concepts 
that are related to a commercial transaction, such as ‘seller’, 
‘buyer’, ‘goods’, and ‘money’. 
The proposal presented here is to develop legal semantic 
frames based on the study of legal documents and to describe 
the meaning of legal lexical units relating lexical units to 
semantic frames. After storing semantic frames and lexical 
units in a knowledge base, this knowledge base could be 
used as a component of a legal IR system, providing 
knowledge reasoning capability to IR systems.  
The methodology adopted to develop legal semantic 
frames is majorly based in non-automatic linguistics 
methods. First, a collection of legal texts is compiled and, 
based on linguistic methods, the most relevant lexical units 
of the texts are described, relating them to a specific 
semantic frame. For instance, the lexical unit acusação 
(charges) evokes a semantic frame of ‘Charging.’ Fig. 1 
shows an example of relations among semantic frames for 
Charging frame. 
 
Figure 1.  Relations among semantic frames. 
Concepts related to Charging frame include the 
‘Prosecutor,’ the authority in Brazilian legal system 
responsible for taking a suspect to the court, the ‘Judge,’ the 
authority responsible in the Brazilian legal system for 
saying if the suspect can be suited or not, the ‘Suspect,’ the 
person that is suspect to have committed an infraction or a 
crime, and the ‘Charges,’ the infraction or the crime 
committed. Once the legal events are described as semantic 
frames, it is possible to establish relations among semantic 
frames, pointing which legal action comes first. In this 
moment, the project has had a moderate progress having 
described about ten legal frames related to the lawsuit 
process.  
The Lawsuit frame has as participants and props ‘Type of 
Action,’ which indicates the type of lawsuit that was filled 
against a defendant (administrative, criminal, familiar), 
‘Author,’ who is the person that goes to the court with a 
request, ‘Defendant,’ who is the person that is been suited, 
and ‘Concrete case,’ which is the legal base that gives the 
author the right to make a legal request. Fig. 2 shows a 
schematic representation of the Lawsuit frame. 
 
Figure 2.  Participants and props of Lawsuit frame 
After having developed a set of legal semantic tags 
organized by semantic frames, the project intends to 
annotate legal texts to develop a learning corpus. The 
assumption is that if the legal databases of the Brazilian 
legal courts present a more fine-grained semantic 
annotation, the IR system could be able to return documents 
related closely to the topic that the specialist needs when he 
searches court databases for precedent decisions. Fig. 3 
shows an example of semantically annotated sentences of 
legal documents. 
 
Figure 3.  Example of annotated sentences 
Fig. 3 shows an example of annotation based on semantic 
frame. The participants of the lawsuit are pointed with the 
148
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-340-7
COGNITIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

semantic 
tags 
AUTHOR and 
DEFENDANT. 
The 
tag 
TYPE_OF_ACTION indicates if the lawsuit is, for instance, 
criminal or civil.   
What this project intends is to describe the knowledge 
that a specialist has about legal terms/words when he/she is 
reading a legal document. The representation of these legal 
events in a knowledge base, with the FrameNet [5] 
foundation could reproduce the cognitive connections that 
specialists make when they are reading a legal document. 
Once this database was developed, the semantic tags could 
be used for documents annotation, following others frame-
based annotation projects [7][8][9]. 
This project has been developed by a multidisciplinary 
group, counting with linguists, lawyers, and computer 
science specialists. Despite all the steps described until this 
point being manually-based, further steps will include the 
knowledge base implementation, the manual annotation of 
legal corpora, the development of an automatic document 
annotation tool, and the integration of the knowledge base to 
the IR system of the Brazilian court.  
The automatic document annotation tool is aimed to 
allow improvements in the indexing process of the IR 
system. Since the semantic frames and the semantic tags 
being described allow an approach not syntactically based, 
but rather semantically based, it consists in the first step to 
include the results of the developed knowledge base in the 
IR system operation. Therefore, the expected outcome of 
this tool is the possibility of document indexing operations 
based on the semantic frames related to legal knowledge, 
which is a more precise approach than the word-based 
indexing traditionally observed in IR systems. 
The integration of these resources with the IR system will 
be done through the implementation of semantic treatment 
modules to be applied together with the existing document 
indexing module and information retrieval module. In the 
first one, the improvements obtained are related to the use of 
semantic frames in the indexing process. In the second one, 
the outcomes are due to the change in the traditional search 
operations, shifting from word-based search operations to 
semantic-based operations. 
IV. 
EXPECTED RESULTS 
The target of this project is, first, to apply a linguistic 
theory to legal knowledge modeling and, second, to improve 
a practical implementation. This project expects to develop a 
semantic-based legal IR system to help specialist in 
searching legal documents in the online Brazilian court 
databases. An important step in this direction is to find a 
partner court that is willing to provide legal documents for 
this research project and to support the implementation of a 
frame-based IR system. Some negotiation process was 
started with The National Council of Justice (CNJ) [10] to 
provide the legal documents for this research project.  
Considering the amount of manual work that will be 
needed to develop a legal frame-based knowledge database, 
the expectation is that in five years the linguistic and 
conceptual part of the project could be ready. Once the 
search in the legal database can be done by the content of the 
documents, the specialist will receive documents more 
related to the intents of their search, saving a precious time 
spent only to look for precedent decisions. 
V. 
RELATED WORK 
Since Frame Semantics [1][2] was proposed, a number of 
studies and applications were developed. The first project to 
apply the principles of Frame Semantics was FrameNet [5]. 
FrameNet is a computational lexicographic project that has 
been developing a lexical database describing the meaning of 
English lexical units relating them to semantic frames. After 
the development of FrameNet, many projects started to 
develop FrameNets for different languages. Here are just 
some examples: Japanese FrameNet [11], Spanish FrameNet 
[12], German FrameNet [13], Swedish FrameNet [14], and 
Brazilian FrameNet [15][16]. 
Another application of FrameNet is in semantic 
annotation. Gildea and Jurafsky propose an automatic 
method of using FrameNet semantic tags for automatic 
annotation [7]. Padó and Lapata suggest an automatic 
method to annotate multilingual corpora using FrameNet 
semantic tags [17][18]. The Salsa project opts for manual 
corpus annotation with semantic frames [8]. Other FrameNet 
applications include the use of frame-based lexicons for 
foreign language education [19] and sentiment analysis [20]. 
In the legal domain, Venturi [9] applies the FrameNet 
semantic tags to the annotation of legislative texts. 
According to Venturi’s findings [9], despite being created 
from English lexicon, FrameNet semantic labels can be 
applied for semantic annotation of Italian legislative texts 
with no significant mismatches. In previous work [21][22], 
the authors point the necessity to develop a set of frames for 
Brazilian legal system. Differently from legislative texts, 
semantic frames and tags to annotate Brazilian court decision 
change significantly. This is the reason why this project 
suggests the development a set of semantic frames for 
Brazilian legal system. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper was concerned to present a semantic-based 
information retrieval project. Only the linguistic part of the 
knowledge base development was addressed here. This 
project has been developed for a multidisciplinary research 
group integrated by linguists, lawyers and computer 
scientists. The legal knowledge database development 
requires a huge amount of lexicographic work to select the 
legal terms/words that will be described, as well as 
conceptual work to design semantic frames to represent the 
meaning of these terms/words. 
The expected contribution of this work is to improve the 
legal information retrieval of court databases, optimizing the 
time specialists spend looking for meaningful documents on 
legal databases. Moreover, this work tries to find a solution 
for a practical problem using linguistic studies for knowledge 
representation. This project is an initiative towards a 
semantic-based information retrieval system, trying to meet 
the needs of the Brazilian society.   
149
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-340-7
COGNITIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors acknowledge the financial support given by 
the Brazilian research support agencies CNPQ, CAPES and 
FAPERGS. The authors thank the valuable comments of the 
reviewers.  
REFERENCES 
[1] C. J. Fillmore, “Frame Semantics,” in Linguistics in the Morning 
Calm, The Linguistic Society of Korea, Ed. Seoul: Hanshin, 1982, pp. 
111-137. 
[2] C. J. Fillmore, “Frames and the semantics of understandings,” in 
Quaderni di Semantica, vol. 6, no. 2, 1985, pp. 222-254. 
[3] Rio Grande do Sul State Court of Appeal/Tribunal de Justiça do 
Estado do Rio Grande do Sul. [Access: 2014, 03]. Available at:  
www.tjrs.jus.br. 
[4] Regional Federal Court of Appeal/Tribunal Regional Federal da 4ª 
Região. [Access: 2014, 03]. Available at: www.trf4.gov.br.  
[5] C. J. Fillmore, C. R. Jonhson, and M. R. L. Petruck, “Background to 
FrameNet,” International Journal of Lexicography, vol. 16, no. 3, 
Sep. 2003, pp. 235-250. 
[6] M. Minsky, “A framework for representing knowledge,” Artificial 
Intelligence Meno no. 306, Cambridge: Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, 1974. 
[7] D. Gildea and D. Jurafsky, “Automatic labelling of semantic roles,” 
Computational Linguistics, vol. 28, no. 3, Sep. 2002, pp. 245-288. 
[8] A. Burchardt et al., “Using FrameNet for the semantic analysis of 
German: annotation, representation, and automation,” in Multilingual 
FrameNets in computational lexicography: methods and applications, 
H. C. Boas, Ed., Berlin/New York: Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 209-244, 
2009.  
[9] G. Venturi, “Semantic annotation of Italian legal texts: a frame-based 
approach,” Constructions and Frames, vol. 3, no. 1, 2011, pp. 46-79. 
[10] Coselho Nacional de Justiça/National Council of Justice [Access: 
2014, 03]. Available at: www.cnj.jus.br.  
[11] K. H. Ohara, “Frame-based contrastive lexical semantics in Japanese 
FrameNet: the case of risk and kakeru,” in Multilingual FrameNets in 
computational lexicography: methods and applications,  H. C. Boas, 
Ed., Berlin/New York: Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 163-182, 2009. 
[12] C. Subirats, “Spanish FrameNet: a frame-semantic analysis of the 
Spanish lexicon,” in Multilingual FrameNets in computational 
lexicography: methods and applications,  H. C. Boas, Ed., Berlin/New 
York: Mouton de Gruyter, pp. 136-162, 2009. 
[13] H. C. Boas, “Semantic frames as interlingual representations for 
multilingual 
lexical databases,” 
in 
International Journal 
of 
Lexicography, vol. 18, no. 4, Dec. 2005, pp. 445-478. 
[14] L. Borin, M. Forsberg, and B. Lyngfelt, “Close Encounters of the 
fifth kind: some linguistic and computational aspects of the Swedish 
FrameNet ++ project,” in Veredas, vol. 17, no. 1, 2013, pp. 28-43. 
[15] M. M. M. Salomão, “FrameNet Brasil: a work in progress,” in 
Calidoscópio, vol. 7, no. 3. Sep./Dec. 2009, pp. 171-182. 
[16] T. T. Torrent and M. Ellsworth, “Behind the labels: criteria for 
defining analytical categories in FrameNet,” in Veredas, vol. 17, no. 
1, 2013, pp. 44-65. 
[17] S. Padó and M. Lapata, “Cross-lingual projection of role-semantic 
information,” in Proc. Of Human Language Technology Conference 
and Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language, 
Vancouver: Association for Computational Linguistics, 2005, pp. 
859-866. 
[18] S. Padó, Cross-lingual annotation projection models for role-semantic 
information. PhD Thesis. Saarbrücken: Universität des Saarlandes, 
2007. 
[19] H. C. Boas and R. Dux, “Semantic frames for foreign language 
education: towards a German frame-based online dictionary,” in 
Veredas, vol. 17, no. 1, 2013, pp. 82-100. 
[20] J. Ruppenhofer, “Extending FrameNet for sentiment analysis,” in 
Veredas, vol. 17, no. 1, 2013, pp. 66-81. 
[21] A. Bertoldi and R. Chishman, “Developing a frame-based lexicon for 
the Brazilian legal language,” in Proc. Of International Workshop on 
Artifitial Intelligence Approaches to the Complexity of Legal 
Systems (AICOL-III), AI Approaches to the Complexity of Legal 
Systems – Models and Ethical Challenges for Legal Systems, Legal 
Language and Legal Ontologies, Argumentation and Software 
Agents, vol. 7639, Berlin/ Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2012, pp. 
256-270. 
[22] A. Bertoldi and R. Chishman, “Applying Frame Semantics for the 
Description of the Brazilian Law.” in Veredas, vol. 17, no. 1, 2013, 
pp. 117-133. 
150
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-340-7
COGNITIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

