Subjective Evaluation on Three Types of Cognitive Load
and its Learning Effects
Kazuhisa Miwa
Graduate School of Information Science
Nagoya University
Nagoya, Japan 464-8601
e-mail: miwa@is.nagoya-ua.jp
Hitoshi Terai
Faculty of Human-oriented Science
Kindai University
IIzuka, Japan 820-8555
e-mail: terai@fuk.kindai.ac.jp
Kazuaki Kojima
Learning Technology Lab.
Teikyo University
Utsunomiya, Japan 320-8551
e-mail: kojima@lt-lab.teikyo-u.ac.jp
Abstract—Cognitive Load Theory (CLT) distinguishes between
three types of cognitive loads: intrinsic, extraneous, and germane.
The present study primarily seeks to examine whether partic-
ipants evaluate cognitive loads correctly when the extraneous
and intrinsic cognitive loads are experimentally manipulated.
The results showed that the participants evaluated the intrinsic
and extraneous cognitive loads correctly, and also evaluated the
germane load based on the manipulation of the extraneous load.
The study also seeks to identify the type of cognitive load that
contributes to learning effects; the results indicate that greater
germane and lesser extraneous loads contribute to learning
effects. However, the learning effects were not noticeable when
far transfer problems were used.
Keywords - Cognitive Loads; Intrinsic; Extraneous; Germane
I.
INTRODUCTION
Cognitive Load Theory (CLT) plays a central role in the
process of designing learning environments [1][2]. The theory
distinguishes between three types of cognitive loads: intrinsic,
extraneous, and germane. Previous studies about CLT have
focused on the distinction between intrinsic and extraneous
loads [1]. Intrinsic load is the basic cognitive load required
to perform a particular task. Conversely, extraneous load is
the cognitive load that is unrelated to, and hence wasted in,
primary cognitive activities. Therefore, extraneous load may
have a negative impact on learning activities. In the mid-1990s,
it was found that positive cognitive load increases learning ef-
fects. Some studies reported signiﬁcant learning gains upon the
imposition of a large cognitive load on participants assigned
to the experimental group [2][3], and this type of cognitive
load came to be known as the germane load, which is used
for learning [4][5].
Several methods have been proposed for the measurement
of the three cognitive loads [6]-[11]. A representative method
entails the evaluation of the response time for a secondary
task—a longer response time indicates the emergence of
high cognitive load in the performance of a primary task.
Alternatively, it is also common to use a questionnaire to
elicit the participants’ subjective evaluation; the questionnaire
typically consists of question items related to one of the
three types of cognitive loads. However, the reliability of the
subjective evaluation method has been called into question
as results of multiple evaluations using questionnaires have
been inconsistent. Moreover, some studies also imply that it
is difﬁcult for naive participants to evaluate each of the three
types of cognitive loads individually.
The present study primarily seeks to examine whether
participants evaluate cognitive loads correctly when the extra-
neous and intrinsic cognitive loads are experimentally manip-
ulated. Based on the results of this examination, the relations
between extraneous, intrinsic, and germane cognitive loads in
the context of subjective estimation are also investigated.
The study also seeks to identify the type of cognitive load
that contributes to learning effects. The learning effects are
measured based on the increase in the post-test scores, as
compared to the pre-test scores. The present study also eval-
uates the relations between learning gains and the subjective
evaluation scores of each of the three cognitive loads measured
using a questionnaire developed by the authors.
We explain an experimental design in Section 2, report
the experimental results in Section 3, and summarize our
conclusions in Section 4.
II.
EXPERIMENT
In this section, we will explain the summary of our
experiment.
A. Task
The task used in this study involved an 8-by-8, computer-
based Reversi game, for which a Reversi-based learning en-
vironment was developed by the authors [12][13]. Figure 1
represents the overall conﬁguration of the experimental system.
Participants played 8-by-8 Reversi games on a computer
against a computerized opponent (i.e., opponent agent) in
the experimental environment. Participants were assisted by
a partner, also computerized (i.e., partner agent), to selecting
winning moves. The opponent agent and the partner agent were
both controlled by Edax, a Reversi engine, which suggested
the best moves by assessing future states of the game. The
partner agent typically recommends candidate moves among
valid squares before the participant makes a move.
B. Procedure
In order to determine the baseline for the measurement
of learning gains, the participants were involved in a pre-test,
which consisted of 12 problems. Following this, the partici-
pants took part in the learning (training) phase, which involved
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-609-5
COGNITIVE 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Figure 1. Overall Conﬁguration of the Reversi-based learning environment
16 games. This phase was set up such that the participants had
access only to games that were already in progress; as a result,
nearly half of the discs were already placed on the board. The
learning phase consisted of four blocks, and the participants
were required to play four games in each block. A set of
winning strategies is proposed; and the training for each block
enabled the participants to learn one of the strategies. The
discs were arranged in an identical manner for the ﬁrst three
games in each block, whereas the arrangement was altered for
the fourth (ﬁnal) game. The participants were then required
to work with the questionnaire designed to evaluate cognitive
loads; they were also required to take part in the post-test,
which consisted of the same 12 problems as the pre-test.
C. Questionnaire for cognitive load evaluation
We developed a new questionnaire for cognitive load
evaluation by drawing from the questionnaires used in previous
studies. The questionnaire used in the present study consists
of the following ten items (E, I, and G indicate items related
to extraneous, intrinsic, and germane loads respectively). The
following examples were translated from Japanese version of
the questionnaire that was actually used in the experiment.
•
It is difﬁcult to search for possible moves. (I)
•
It is difﬁcult to search for the best move. (I)
•
It is difﬁcult to look ahead. (I)
•
It is difﬁcult to understand the arrangements of the
discs on the board. (E)
•
The representation of the arrangement of discs is
inadequate for learning. (E)
•
Great effort is required to perform a task given the
inadequate representation. (E)
•
I try to ﬁnd heuristics for winning. (G)
•
I try to understand the other party’s intention. (G)
•
I make great effort to ﬁnd heuristics for wining. (G)
•
I concentrate on my performance in the game. (G)
D. Manipulated factors
The following two factors were applied for manipulation:
(i) the disc representation factor and (ii) the hint informa-
tion factor. The ﬁrst factor was expected to manipulate the
extraneous load, whereas the second factor was expected to
manipulate the intrinsic load.
1) Disc representation factor: Figure 2 presents a sample
disc arrangement typical of the Black and White and the L
and rL (reversal L) conditions.
Figure 2. A screenshot of the game board in the Black and White and L and
rL (reversal L) conditions
When the Black and White condition was considered, the
Black and White discs were used in the arrangement, whereas
when the L and rL condition was considered, the Ls or rotated
Ls (black discs) and the mirror reversal Ls or rotated reversal
Ls (white discs) were used in the arrangement. In order to
perceive the status of the disc arrangement and decide the best
move in the L and rL condition, participants had to imagine
the rotation of the L or reversal L images during each trial,
thus causing a signiﬁcant extraneous load. As a result, the L
and rL condition increased the extraneous load more than the
Black and White condition.
2) Hint information factor: For each trial of the game, the
main task was to choose the best winning move. In order
to do so, the participants had to understand the status of the
disc arrangement, search the problem space, and estimate the
best move, thus increasing intrinsic load. The computerized
partner agent suggested the best moves to the participants in
the hint presentation condition (see Figure 3), whereas under
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-609-5
COGNITIVE 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

the no hint condition, no such information was presented. This
suggests that the intrinsic load of the participants was lower in
the hint presentation condition than in the no hint condition.
Figure 3. A screenshot of the game board when hint information is presented
E. Learning gains
Pre and post-tests were conducted to evaluate the learning
gains, and each test consisted of the same 12 problems. In
each problem, the participants were presented with a disc
arrangement, after which they were required to determine the
best possible move. The 12 problems were grouped into the
following three categories, each of which in turn consisted of
four problems:
1) Identical problems: This disc arrangements presented
here were identical to those used in the training phase.
2) Near transfer problems: For this category, the disc
arrangements used for the learning phase were modiﬁed. More
speciﬁcally, they were rotated 90, 180, or 270 degrees from
their original position or mirror-reversed from the rotated
arrangements.
3) Far transfer problems: New disc arrangements were
presented for this category. The participants were able to
determine the best possible move based on the strategies they
were trained in during the learning phase.
As the number of problems in each category was four, the
full score was also determined to be four. In the present study,
the difference between the pre-test and post-test scores, more
particularly, the increase in the post-test scores, were used as
learning gains.
F. Participants
81 undergraduates from Nagoya University participated in
this study. Although all the participants had played Reversi
prior to their involvement in the study, they were not experts.
The participants were divided into three groups: 21 participants
were assigned to the no hint and Black and White condition;
19 were assigned to the hint presentation and Black and
White condition; 20 were assigned to the no hint and L and
rL condition, and 21 participants were assigned to the hint
presentation and L and rL condition.
III.
RESULTS
First, we examined whether participants evaluate cognitive
loads correctly when the extraneous and intrinsic cognitive
loads are manipulated. Figure 4 presents the results of the
questionnaire used to measure each type of cognitive load.
Figure 4. Results of participants’ subjective evaluation for the three
cognitive loads
In the intrinsic load, a two (hint information: Hint and
No hint) × two (disc representation: Black/white and L/rL)
ANOVA revealed a signiﬁcant main effect of the hint infor-
mation factor (F(1, 77) = 9.59, p < 0.01), but neither the main
effect of the disc representation factor nor the interaction of
the two factors reached a signiﬁcant level (F(1, 77) = 1.58,
n.s.; F(1, 77) = 1.07, n.s.).
In the extraneous load, the same ANOVA revealed a great
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-609-5
COGNITIVE 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

TABLE I. CORRELATION OF THE EVALUATION SCORE OF EACH COGNITIVE LOAD AND THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE PRE-TEST AND
POST-TEST SCORES
Problem type
Intrinsic
Extraneous
Germane
Identical
n.s.
r=-0.385, p < 0.01
r=0.279, p < 0.05
Near transfer
n.s.
r=-0.294, p < 0.01
n.s.
Far transfer
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
signiﬁcant main effect of the disc representation factor (F(1,
77) = 520.43, p < 0.01) but the main effect of the hint
information factor did not reach a signiﬁcant level (F(1, 77)
= 3.79, n.s.). The interaction of the two factors, however, was
found to be signiﬁcant (F(1, 77) =12.13, p < 0.01).
In the germane load, the same ANOVA revealed a sig-
niﬁcant main effect of the disc representation factor (F(1,
77) =35.13, p < 0.01), but neither the main effect of the
hint information factor nor the interaction of the two factors
reached a signiﬁcant level (F(1, 77) = 3.21, n.s.; F(1, 77) =
1.43, n.s.).
Second, we sought to identify the type of cognitive load
that contributes to learning effects. We analyzed the relations
between the evaluation score of each cognitive load in the
questionnaire and the increase in the post-test scores as com-
pared to the pre-test scores. Table 1 presents the results of this
analysis. We found a positive correlation between germane
load and learning gains, but only in the identical problems
that were tested. Negative correlations were found between
extraneous load and learning gains in the identical and near
transfer problems. However, the relations were not noticeable
when the far transfer problems were tested.
IV.
CONCLUSION
Our ﬁrst research question involved examining whether
participants evaluate cognitive loads correctly when the extra-
neous and intrinsic cognitive loads are experimentally manipu-
lated. The results indicate that they accurately and consistently
evaluated extraneous and intrinsic loads with the experimental
manipulation. In the current study, the germane load was
estimated based not on intrinsic load manipulation, but on
extraneous load manipulation.
The second research question pertained to identifying the
type of cognitive load that contributes to learning effects.
The results showed that greater germane load contributed to
learning effects when identical problems were used in the test
phase. This effect, however, was not noticeable when transfer
problems were used.
It takes a lot of training and time to acquire skills and
expertise to play the games [14]. For the purposes of this
experiment, only 16 games were used for training. It is possible
that this limitation did not cause learning effects in the transfer
problems.
Interestingly, the results also clearly showed that less
extraneous load contributed to learning, whereas greater in-
trinsic load did not. This would depend on the much greater
extraneous load caused by the L and rL disc representation.
The results highlight the harmful effect of extraneous load
on learning activities, which is consistent with the ﬁndings
of previous studies [2][8][15][16].
The functions of intrinsic load in learning processes still
remain unclear; we have, therefore, identiﬁed the investigation
of its functions as a key objective of our future studies.
REFERENCES
[1]
J. Sweller, “Cognitvei load during problem solving: Effects on learning,”
Cognitive Science, vol. 12, no. 2, 1988, pp. 257–285.
[2]
J. Sweller, J. J. Van Merrienboer, and F. G. Paas, “Cognitive architecture
and instructional design,” Educational psychology review, vol. 10, no. 3,
1998, pp. 251–296.
[3]
F. G. Paas and J. J. Van Merrienboer, “Variability of worked examples
and transfer of geometrical problem-solving skills: A cognitive-load
approach,” Journal of Educational Psychology, vol. 86, no. 1, 1994, pp.
122–133.
[4]
F. Paas and T. van Gog, “Optimising worked example instruction:
Different ways to increase germane cognitive load,” Learning and
Instruction, vol. 16, no. 2, 2006, pp. 87 – 91.
[5]
P. Ayres and T. van Gog, “State of the art research into cognitive load
theory,” Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 25, 2009, pp. 253–257.
[6]
P. Ayres, “Using subjective measures to detect variations of intrinsic
cognitive load within problems,” Learning and instruction, vol. 16, no. 5,
2006, pp. 389–400.
[7]
K. E. DeLeeuw and R. E. Mayer, “A comparison of three measures of
cognitive load: Evidence for separable measures of intrinsic, extraneous,
and germane load.” Journal of educational psychology, vol. 100, no. 1,
2008, pp. 223–234.
[8]
G. Cierniak, K. Scheiter, and P. Gerjets, “Explaining the split-attention
effect: Is the reduction of extraneous cognitive load accompanied by an
increase in germane cognitive load?” Computers in Human Behavior,
vol. 25, no. 2, 2009, pp. 315–324.
[9]
T. H. S. Eysink, T. de Jong, K. Berthold, B. Kolloffel, M. Opfer-
mann, and P. Wouters, “Learner performance in multimedia learning
arrangements: An analysis across instructional approaches,” American
Educational Research Journal, vol. 46, no. 4, 2009, pp. 1107–1149.
[10]
E. Galy, M. Cariou, and C. M´elan, “What is the relationship between
mental workload factors and cognitive load types?” International Journal
of Psychophysiology, vol. 83, no. 3, 2012, pp. 269–275.
[11]
J. Leppink, F. Paas, T. van Gog, C. P. van der Vleuten, and J. J.
van Merrinboer, “Effects of pairs of problems and examples on task
performance and different types of cognitive load,” Learning and
Instruction, vol. 30, 2014, pp. 32 – 42.
[12]
K. Miwa, K. Kojima, and H. Terai, “An experimental investigation on
learning activities inhibition hypothesis in cognitive disuse atrophy,”
in Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Advanced
Cognitive Technologies and Applications (Cognitive 2015), 2015, pp.
66–71.
[13]
——, “Measuring cognitive loads based on the mental chronometry
paradigm,” in Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on
Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications (Cognitive 2016),
2016, pp. 38–41.
[14]
K. A. Ericsson, The road to excellence: The acquisition of expert
performance in the arts and sciences, sports, and games.
Psychology
Press, 2014.
[15]
R. E. Mayer and R. Moreno, “A split-attention effect in multimedia
learning: Evidence for dual processing systems in working memory,”
Journal of Educational Psychology, vol. 90, no. 2, 1998, pp. 312–320.
[16]
——, “Nine ways to reduce cognitive load in multimedia learning,”
Educational Psychologist, vol. 38, no. 1, 2003, pp. 43–52.
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-609-5
COGNITIVE 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

