Introduction of a Model-Based Approach to Psychology Class:
Class Practice for Serial Position Effect Experiments
Kazuhisa Miwa∗, Kazuaki Kojima†, Yuki Ninomiya∗ and Asaya Shimojo∗
∗Graduate School of Informatics, Nagoya University
Nagoya, Japan 464-8601
Email: miwa@is.nagoya-u.ac.jp, {shimojo,ninomiya}@cog.human.nagoya-u.ac.jp
†Learning Technology Lab. Teikyo University
Utsunomiya, Japan 320-8551
Email: kojima@lt-lab.teikyo-u.ac.jp
Abstract—We report an example class practice that introduces
the model-based exercises into a psychology class in which
participants investigate the serial position effect of the human
memory. To the class, a rule-based cognitive model that simulates
human memory processes was introduced. The participants them-
selves manipulated the parameters of the model and performed
simulations that examined psychological experiments with a
variety of experimental settings and experiments by participants
of various working memory capabilities. Analysis conﬁrmed that
about two-thirds of the participants experienced good exploration
processes and successfully compiled the research reports.
Keywords - science education; model-based approach; serial
position effect
I.
INTRODUCTION
In
science
education,
simulations
using
computer-
executable models are widely used. For example, phET
at the University of Colorado has released simulations
developed based on science education research. Rutten et
al. also reviewed studies on simulation-based learning and
reported that is widely adopted in biology, physics, science,
engineering, general science, earth sciences, and information
science [1].
In this study, we report a simulation-based university class
design and the results of its practice in psychology education.
Compared to the vast practice in natural sciences, simulation-
based class practices in psychology have been reported only
in very limited cases. The current study focuses on cognitive
psychology and cognitive science, which seek to understand
the human internal processing mechanisms. In this ﬁeld, as
in other empirical sciences, computer models also play an
important role as research tools.
In natural science, models are used not only in research
but also in education for learning about various scientiﬁc
phenomena. However, in psychology education, models are
rarely used in class contexts; rather experience-based learn-
ing with experiments and observations is more popular. The
model-based approach realizes the human internal processing
mechanisms on a computer; and it is thought that by such
models, unobservable internal processes can be objectively un-
derstood with the use of these models. This nature of computer
modeling may enable students to learn about psychological
phenomena more deeply and precisely.
Jong distinguishes between simulations that are based on
conceptual versus operational models [2]. Conceptual models
include principles and concepts in the system, and operational
models include procedures and perform information process-
ing. Jong points out that science education has focused on
various conceptual models. In contrast, this study focuses
on operational models that deal with how information is
processed based on the internal mechanism. Both types of
models exist in cognitive psychology and cognitive science,
but in the information processing approach, models that reveal
how information is processed in the internal mechanism take
the leading role.
Example learning environments reported in preceding stud-
ies that support the construction of operational models in
science education include DynaLearn [3] and Model-It [4] for
understanding the dynamic behavior of environmental systems.
For example, Model-It is intended for building ecosystem
models, where learners can deﬁne speciﬁc objects such as
animals, plants, and water, as well as deﬁne static and dynamic
relationships between those objects. In the operational models
in these previous studies, static, and dynamic relationships
between multiple components are deﬁned by mathematical
formulas and graphs.
On the other hand, operational models related to the
human cognitive processing describe not the deﬁnition of the
relationship between components but rather the operations
that transit the internal or external states. In the studies of
human cognition, descriptions and understandings related to
such operations are extremely important. For example, research
on traditional human problem-solving analyzes cognitive pro-
cesses by describing internal or external actions and state
transitions that occur through the operations [5].
The subject of the lesson practice in this paper is the serial
position effect in the human memory [6]. In Section 2, we
explain the serial position effect, the computational model used
for practice, and summary of our class practice. Followed by
the section, we report two class practices in Sections 3 and
4, respectively. Section 5 is the discussion and conclusions
section.
II.
SERIAL POSITION EFFECT
The research topic, the serial position effect, observed in
human memory experimentation will be brieﬂy explained.
A. Primacy and recency effects
The serial position effect is a phenomenon in which, when
a list of words is sequentially stored and free reproduction
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-780-1
COGNITIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

is performed, the memory performance of the ﬁrst and last
several items in the list is higher than the performance of the
items presented in the middle of the list. The effect of the
head of the list is called the primacy effect, and the effect
of the ending is called the recency effect. These effects are
recognized as robust experimental evidence that distinguishes
between the short-term and long-term memory.
An established theory of the human memory system is
summarized as follows. Information from the outside world
is temporarily stored in the iconic memory. Information se-
lectively focused on the iconic memory is sent to the short-
term memory; however, it is maintained only for about 15 to
30 seconds. Without rehearsals of the items, they are soon
erased from short-term memory. Through rehearsal processes,
information in the short-term memory is encoded into the long-
term memory. Once information is encoded in the long-term
memory, it is never forgotten.
The primacy effect emerges because only words presented
earlier are encoded into long-term memory through rehearsals.
The recency effect appears because words from the end remain
in the short-term memory and are directly retrieved from it
when asked to be reported. In contrast, words in the middle
of the list have been present too long to be held in short-term
memory, but not long enough to be encoded into long-term
memory.
B. Two storage model
The mechanisms of the short- and long-term memory, and
the interaction of the two have been explained as the dual-
storage model theory. In this study, based on the theory, a
rule-based model that reproduces the serial position effect
experiment was constructed. A computational architecture for
cognitive modeling used in this practice was DoCoPro, an
educational production system architecture developed by the
authors [7].
Table I shows the main rules that construct the model.
Figure 1 shows ﬂows of cognitive information processing
performed by the model. The model has several parameters.
Students, by manipulating these parameters, are able to simu-
late the cognitive information processing of experiment partic-
ipants with various abilities in short- and long-term memory
abilities. In addition, a variety of experimental situations can
be examined. The list of parameters is shown in Table II.
TABLE I. RULES OF THE MODEL
Rule
Function
Presentation rule
presents an item and encodes it into the short-term
memory
Two erasing rules
erase items from the short-term memory after the time
limit for holding items has passed, and erase items
from the short-term memory when the number of items
has exceeded the working memory capacity
Rehearsal rule
performs rehearsals of items in the short-term memory
Encoding rule
encodes items into long-term memory when the
number of rehearsals exceeds a threshold value
Two reporting rules
report items from the short-term and long-term
memories when asked to report memorized items after
all items have been presented
Two rules
for stopping the system and increasing the time counter
C. Class practice
This class practice was implemented as follows. The prac-
tice here was part of a cognitive science lesson directed by the
TABLE II. PARAMETERS OF THE MODEL
Parameter
Function
Presentation interval
controls an interval between two successive item
presentations
Rehearsals for encoding
speciﬁes the number of rehearsals needed for
encoding items into the long-term memory
Working memory capacity
speciﬁes the number of items that can be
simultaneously stored in the short-term memory;
when the number of items exceeds this limit,
the oldest item that was stored earliest is
erased from the short-term memory
Holding time
speciﬁes a time limit for holding items in the
short-term memory; when no rehearsals are
performed beyond the time limit, the item is
erased from the short-term memory
ﬁrst author. A total of 118 participants joined the class.
The participants ﬁrst took part in the serial position effect
experiment in groups. At three-second intervals, 20 words were
presented, and the participants were asked to list as many
words as possible immediately after memorizing them.
Figure 2 shows the results of the experiment. The pattern
does not show a typical U-shape, but in the overall pattern,
the primacy and recency effects can be conﬁrmed.
Next, the participants attended a lecture on the dual-storage
model theory that explains the serial position effect. The lec-
ture also presented typical experimental results demonstrating
the serial position effect in previous research.
After the lecture, the model for simulation was distributed
to each participant. Each participant was able to simulate
experiments with a variety of experimental situations and
experiments by experiment participants of various abilities by
freely setting parameters.
The participants were given the following two assignments.
III.
ASSIGNMENTS
We performed two assignments. The ﬁrst is a simple
assignment, followed by a more advanced and complex second
assignment.
A. First assignment
1) Tasks: In Assignment 1, the participants were divided
into ﬁve groups, Groups A to E, each of which addressed the
following issues:
•
Group A Examination of the effect of the time interval
of the presented words on experimental results
•
Group B Examination of the effect of rehearsal abil-
ity (required activities for transfer to the long-term
memory) on experimental results
•
Group C Examination of the effect of capacity abil-
ity to maintain words in the short-term memory on
experimental results
•
Group D Examination of the effect of retention ability
of the short-term memory on experimental results
•
Group E Examination of the effect of the number of
presented words on experimental results.
The participants were asked to submit a research report
consisting of (1) hypotheses, (2) experimental designs, (3)
experimental results, and (4) interpretations. The hypotheses
were submitted prior to the simulation, and care was taken not
to change the hypotheses after the simulation.
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-780-1
COGNITIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Figure 1. Summary of the production system model. Italics indicate production rules, and parentheses indicate rule parameters.
Figure 2. Experimental results by participants.
2) Results of the simulations: Figure 3 shows the results of
the simulations performed while controlling the four parame-
ters listed in Table II.
Some interesting patterns can be found.
•
Rehearsals As the number of rehearsals required to
transfer the items stored in the short-term memory
to the long-term memory increases, the recall rate of
words that were presented from the ﬁrst to middle half
of the list decreases. On the other hand, the recall ratio
of words presented at the end does not decrease.
•
Presentation interval Patterns similar to those found
in the control of required rehearsals are conﬁrmed.
However, for words that were presented at one-second
intervals, the recall ratio of words presented from
the ﬁrst to middle half of the list decreases, but,
oppositely, the ratio for words presented at the end
increases.
These phenomena can be understood based on explana-
tions about why primacy and recency effects emerge in the
preceding literature.
The participants manipulated the relevant parameters ac-
cording to a topic set for each group, and conﬁrmed results
similar to those indicated in Figure 3. Based on these simula-
tion results, the participants examined their initial hypotheses.
3) Scores of the participants’ reports: Two expert coders
analyzed the participants’ reports. A perfect score was two
points; and if any of the following checkpoints applied, one
point was deducted.
•
The hypothesis is untestable, or cannot be understood.
•
The experimental design is inadequate for examining
the hypothesis, i.e., incorrect factor control that cannot
test the hypothesis.
•
The experiment has an incorrect factorial design.
•
The simulation results are obviously strange.
The data of 115 participants among 118 who submitted a
report were analyzed. Table III shows the distribution of scores.
It is conﬁrmed that about two-thirds of participants planned
adequate experiments based on an appropriate hypothesis, and
assessed the simulation results properly.
TABLE III. DISTRIBUTION OF REPORT SCORES IN ASSIGNNMET 1
Score
0
1
2
Number (rate)
10 (0.09)
35 (0.30)
70 (0.61)
B. Second assignment
1) Tasks: In Assignment 2, based on the results of Assign-
ment 1, the participants were asked to create a more complex
hypothesis on why the primacy and recency effects would
appear. To test the hypothesis more deeply, they would need
to perform 2 x 2 factorial design experiments.
2) Scores of participants reports: The participants were
told to submit the same style of report as in Assignment 1. The
submitted reports were scored based on the same criterion as
in Assignment 1. The data of 112 participants who submitted
the report were analyzed. Table IV shows the distribution of
scores.
TABLE IV. DISTRIBUTION OF REPORT SCORES IN ASSIGNNMET 2
Score
0
1
2
Number (rate)
6 (0.05)
43 (0.38)
63 (0.56)
IV.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
This paper describes an example class practice that used
model-based exercises in a psychology class in which par-
ticipants investigated the serial position effect of the human
memory. The class introduced a rule-based cognitive model
built based on the dual-storage model theory as a typical theory
of the human memory. This model can reproduce the primacy
and recency effects in the serial position effect. The partic-
ipants themselves manipulated the parameters of the model
and performed simulations that examined psychological exper-
iments with a variety of experimental settings and experiments
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-780-1
COGNITIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Figure 3. Results of computer simulations performed while controlling four parameters. Four parameters, (a) word presentation interval time, (b) rehearsals
required for encoding items into the long term memory, (c) the number of items possible to be stored in the short term memory, and (d) holding time possible
to be maintained in the short term memory, were controlled. The legend shows values of each parameter.
by participants of various working memory capabilities. After
the exercise, the participants worked on research reports that
followed typical psychological exploration patterns: hypothe-
ses, experimental designs, experimental results, and discussion.
Analysis of the reports conﬁrmed that about two-thirds of the
participants experienced good exploration processes and were
successful in compiling the research reports.
This case practice illustrates the value of introducing the
model-based approach in cognitive science, and more broadly,
in cognitive psychology classes. In many psychology classes,
experiments for training are widely used, but computational
models are not always practiced. The lessons introduced in
this paper are less costly to introduce, and it is likely that they
can be applied in psychology-related lessons.
Many cognitive science researchers employ the construc-
tive approach. On the other hand, there are not many teachers
who adopt the model-based approach in education. Yet, as
the analytical and constructive methods are two pillars of
empirical science, it is important to give psychology students
a fundamental understanding of the model-based approach as
part of the general knowledge and skills they need as junior
researchers investigating the human mind.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This research was partially supported by JSPS KAKENHI
Grant Number 18H05320.
REFERENCES
[1]
N. Rutten, W. R. Van Joolingen, and J. T. Van der Veen, “The learning
effects of computer simulations in science education,” Computers &
Education, vol. 58, no. 1, 2012, pp. 136–153.
[2]
T. De Jong and W. R. Van Joolingen, “Scientiﬁc discovery learning with
computer simulations of conceptual domains,” Review of educational
research, vol. 68, no. 2, 1998, pp. 179–201.
[3]
A. Zitek, M. Poppe, M. Stelzhammer, S. Muhar, and B. Bredeweg,
“Learning by conceptual modeling–changes in knowledge structure and
content,” IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies, vol. 6, no. 3,
2013, pp. 217–227.
[4]
S. J. Stratford, J. Krajcik, and E. Soloway, “Secondary students’ dynamic
modeling processes: Analyzing, reasoning about, synthesizing, and test-
ing models of stream ecosystems,” Journal of Science Education and
Technology, vol. 7, no. 3, 1998, pp. 215–234.
[5]
A. Newell and H. A. Simon, Human problem solving.
Prentice-hall
Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1972, vol. 104, no. 9.
[6]
R. C. Atkinson and R. M. Shiffrin, “Human memory: A proposed system
and its control processes.” In K. W. Spence and J. T. Spence (Eds.), The
Psychology of learning and motivation: Advances in research and theory
(vol. 2)., 1968, pp. 89 – 105.
[7]
K. Miwa, J. Morita, R. Nakaike, and H. Terai, “Learning through
intermediate problems in creating cognitive models,” Interactive Learning
Environments, vol. 22, no. 3, 2014, pp. 326–350.
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-780-1
COGNITIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

