Qualitative Spatial Knowledge Acquisition Based on the Connection Relation
Tiansi Dong
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science
University in Hagen
Hagen, Germany
Email: tiansi.dong@fernuni-hagen.de
Tim vor der Br¨uck
Department for Computing in the Humanities
Goethe University Frankfurt am Main
Frankfurt am Main, Germany
Email: vorderBrueck@em.uni-frankfurt.de
Abstract—Research in cognitive psychology shows that the
connection relation is the primitive spatial relation. This paper
proposes a novel spatial knowledge representation of indoor en-
vironments based on the connection relation, and demonstrates
how deictic orientation relations can be acquired from a map,
which is constructed purely on connection relations between
extended objects. Without loss of generality, we restrict indoor
environments to be constructed by a set of rectangles, each
representing either a room or a corridor. The term ﬁat cell is
coined to represent a subjective partition along a corridor.
Spatial knowledge includes rectangles, sides information of
rectangles, connection relations among rectangles, and ﬁat cells
of rectangles. Efﬁcient algorithms are given for identifying one
shortest path between two locations, transforming paths into
ﬁat paths, and acquiring deictic orientations.
Keywords-Deictic orientation; Connection relation; Indoor
environments.
I. INTRODUCTION
Human babies acquire connection relations before other
spatial relations [8]; they ﬁrst make a categorical distinction
between contact and non-contact [1]. Qualitative distances
between extended objects can be represented based on the
connection relation [2]; the qualitative orientation relation
can be understood through qualitative distance comparison
[4]. Research in cognitive psychology shows that human
babies acquire the spatial knowledge in a speciﬁc order:
topological relations, orientation relations, and distance re-
lations, [9]. The question raised in this paper can be stated
as follows: given a spatial map which is purely based on the
connection relation, can other spatial relations be acquired
from this representation? We will construct a map for
indoor environments only with the connect relation among
rooms and corridors, and show how the deictic orientation
instructions from one location to the other can be efﬁciently
acquired. Without loss of generality we only consider rooms
and corridors with four sides which can be approximated
by rectangles. The method to acquire deictic orientation
relations can be easily applied to spatial area with more
than four sides, and curve-shaped corridors.
The following part is organized as follows: Section 2
brieﬂy describes the knowledge acquisition problem of ori-
entation instructions within indoor environments; Section
3 presents the spatial knowledge representation of indoor
environments; Section 4 presents efﬁcient algorithms which
acquire orientation knowledge from connect-relation based
spatial maps; Section 5 concludes the paper, and lists con-
nections with other works.
II. ORIENTATION WITHIN INDOOR ENVIRONMENTS
There are two different perspectives in describing ori-
entations: the survey perspective and the route perspective
[6]. In the survey perspective, orientation descriptions are
constructed within the absolute orientation framework, e.g.,
go south, at the next crossing, go west; in the route per-
spective, orientation descriptions are constructed within the
deictic orientation framework, e.g., go ahead, at the next
crossing turn left. These descriptions are also called rel-
ative route descriptions. Acquiring orientation descriptions
in the survey perspective requires information of absolute
orientation. Such information is quite easy to obtain in out-
door environments where GPS is available. For in-indoor
environments, it is reasonable to acquire relative orientation
descriptions, not only due to the fact that GPS may not be
available, but also due to the fact that many navigators do
not know where the North is inside of indoor environments.
For classic mathematicians, orientation descriptions in
natural languages are vague and imprecise. But not for cog-
nitive psychologists: for them these descriptions serve as a
window to explore mental spatial representations [12], which
have systematical distortions from the external physical
space [7]. Relative orientation knowledge is a useful route
instruction which delineates a directed path in a distorted
physical environment in mind. The basic components of
relative route descriptions, addressed in this paper, are go
out of <somewhere>, go ahead till <somewhere>, turn left,
turn right. These components involve qualitative orientation
instructions along with qualitative distance information.
In particular, people would like to hear pure qualitative
spatial descriptions in indoor environments, as people are
normally not so good at interpreting quantitative route
descriptions, such as go ahead for 15 meters, then turn
clockwise 90 degrees [5]. A preferred orientation description
would be something like go ahead and turn right at the
end of the corridor – even if the turning angle is less
than 45 degrees, or the corridor has a strong curve. This
70
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

1
3
2
4
1
2
3
4
8 
7       
6 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1
(a) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  (b)
Figure 1.
(a) A rectangle represents a room; (b) A rectangle represents
a corridor, whose four sides are counterclockwise named from 1 to 4; ﬁat
cells are named by the qualitative distance to the side with the name 1
observation also explains why the fuzzy approach might
fail in generating effective route descriptions in indoor
environments. The problem addressed in this paper can be
stated precisely as follows: with what kind of knowledge
representations for indoor environments can qualitative de-
ictic orientation knowledge be acquired, if the connection
relation is primitive?
III. SPATIAL REPRESENTATION OF INDOOR
ENVIRONMENTS
A. Rooms
The simplest component of an indoor environment is
room. We assume that rooms have at least one door, and
that rooms have four sides and are of rectangular shape. We
name the four sides as 1, 2, 3, 4, and there must be a door
in side 1, as illustrated in Figure 1(a). A room has a unique
identiﬁcation number, and a name for linguistic description,
e.g., Prof. Helbig’s ofﬁce. Formally, we introduce the fol-
lowing deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 1: R is the type of rooms. Let r be a room,
(r ∈ R), r.side 1, r.side 2, r.side 3, r.side 4 repre-
sent its four sides; r.side represents one of its four sides;
r.id represents its identiﬁcation number; r.name represents
its name.
B. Corridors
Rooms may be connected with each other by corridors.
We also assume that corridors have rectangular shape, and
their four sides are named counterclockwise from 1 to
4. Two end-sides of the corridor are named as 1 and 3,
respectively; two long-sides of the corridor are named as 2
and 4, respectively. A corridor has a unique identiﬁcation
number, and may have a name for linguistic description. A
corridor can be partitioned into a list of small rectangles,
each has exactly two sides that coincide with side 2 and
4 of the corridor. These small rectangles are named as ﬁat
cellsSides of ﬁat cells are named counterclockwise from 1
to 4, such that the sides coincided with its corridor have the
same name (2 or 4). Fiat cells refer to different locations
along a corridor, e.g., end of the corridor, in front of the lift,
etc. Each ﬁat cell is assigned a natural number representing
its qualitative distance to side 1 of the corridor; this number
1
1
1
2
2
3
4
5        4          3         2         1
X
Y
1
2
3
4
1
3
4
4           3          2         1
   4        3       2      1 
2
3
4
1
2
1
3
4
 5          4        3      2      1
 3         2         1
2
3
4
1
2
1
3
4
6          5        4          3         2         1
   7        6       5       4        3       2      1 
(a)
(d)
(b)
(c)
M
M
M
M
N
N
N
Figure 2.
The connection relations between rooms and corridors
uniquely identiﬁes a ﬁat cell, as illustrated in Figure 1(b).
Formally, we introduce deﬁnitions as follows.
Deﬁnition 2: C is the type for corridors. Let c be a
corridor (c ∈ C), c.side 1, c.side 2, c.side 3, c.side 4
represent its four sides; c.side represents one of its four
sides; c.id represents its identiﬁcation number; c.name rep-
resents its name.
Deﬁnition 3: F is the type for ﬁat cells. Let f be a ﬁat
cell (f ∈ F), f.side 1, f.side 2, f.side 3, f.side 4
represent its four sides; f.side represents one of its four
sides; f.cor represents the corridor where it is located;
f.dis represents its qualitative distance to side 1 of f.cor.
C. Connections among rooms and corridors
By a room connecting with another room or a corridor, we
assume that they share a common wall and that there is at
least a door on the common wall, through which people can
go. Otherwise, they might not know that they are connected.
This can be easily represented by the shared side of two
rectangles. For example, in Figure 2(a) Room X connects
with Corridor M. The side 1 of Room X coincides with the
side 4 of Corridor M. Formally, we deﬁne as follows.
Deﬁnition 4: Let r, r1, r2 ∈ R, c ∈ C. r.side i connect-
ing with c.side j is written as Con(r, c) = (i, j); c.side j
connecting with r.side i is written as Con(c, r)
=
(j, i); r1.side i connecting with r2.side j is written as
Con(r1, r2) = (i, j), where 1 ≤ i, j ≤ 4.
The location of a room in a corridor can be represented
by the ﬁat cell in the corridor with which the room connects.
We deﬁne the Loc function as follows.
Deﬁnition 5: Let r ∈ R, c ∈ C, r connects with the
ﬁat cell in c whose qualitative distance is i, written as
Loc(r, c) = i.
71
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

In Figure 2(a), Room X connects with the ﬁat cell of
Corridor M whose qualitative distance is 5. We represent
this as Loc(X, M) = 5.
D. Connections between corridors
Connection relations between two corridors can be one of
three types: ‘T’ type, ‘L’ type, and ‘+’ type, as illustrated in
Figure 2 (b), (c), (d), respectively. For all types we assume
there are two intersected corridors. That is, there is an
overlapped ﬁat cell. For example, in Figure 2(b) the ﬁat cell
1 in corridor N is overlapped with the ﬁat cell 2 in corridor
M. The spatial structure between two intersected corridors
can be delineated by their coincided sides and qualitative
distances. For example, in Figure 2(b) Corridor M intersects
with the ﬁat cell 1 of Corridor N; if a navigator is located
in the intersection of Corridor N and Corridor M, and faces
to side 1 of Corridor N, then she/he also faces to side 2 of
Corridor M; in Figure 2(c) Corridor M intersects with the
ﬁat cell 5 of Corridor N; if a navigator is located in the
intersection and faces to side 3 of Corridor N, then she/he
also faces to side 4 of Corridor M. Formally, we deﬁne as
follows.
Deﬁnition 6: Let c1, c2 ∈ C, c1 intersects with the ﬁat
cell in c2 whose qualitative distance is i. The location of c1
with regard to c2 is deﬁned as Loc(c1, c2) = i.
Deﬁnition 7: Let c1, c2 ∈ C, c1 intersects with c2, ﬁat
cell f1 in c1 is overlapped with ﬁat cell f2 of c2 in such
a way that f1.side i coincides with f2.side j. Their side
overlapping relation is deﬁned as Overlap(c1, c2) .= (i, j).
Remark 1: Suppose the side 1 of ﬁat cell f1 (f1.side 1)
coincides with the side 4 of ﬁat cell f2 (f2.side 4), then
f1.side 2 coincide with f2.side 1, f1.side 3 must co-
incide with of f2.side 2, f1.side 4 must coincide with
f2.side 3. Therefore, we use ‘ .=’ to roughly denote ‘one
of the (four) values is’. Generally, we have the following
theorem.
Theorem 1: Let c1, c2 ∈ C, Overlap(c1, c2) .= (i, j). For
any natural number k, i.e., k ∈ N, Overlap(c1, c2) .= ((i +
k − 1) mod 4 + 1, (j + k − 1) mod 4 + 1).
E. Indoor Map based on the connection relation
An indoor map can be represented as the connection
relations among rooms and corridors, in particular with the
partial functions Con, Loc and Overlap whose signatures are
listed as follows.
Signature 1: Let S be the set of 1, 2, 3, 4; N be the set
of natural numbers.
Con : R × C → S × S
Con : R × R → S × S
Con : C × R → S × S
Loc : R × C → N
Loc : C × C → N
Overlap : C × C → S × S
Example 1: In Figure 2(a), there are one Corridor M, two
rooms X and Y. Room X connects with the ﬁat cell 5 of M,
Y connects with the ﬁat cell 2 of M. side 1 of X connects
with side 4 of M; side 1 of Y connects with side 2 of M.
The map is therefore,
Con(X, M) = (1, 5)
Con(Y, M) = (1, 2)
Loc(X, M) = 5
Loc(Y, M) = 2
Example 2: In Figure 2(b), there are two Corridors M and
N, Corridor M intersects with the ﬁat cell 1 of N, fN,1; N
intersects with the ﬁat cell 2 of M, fM,2. The side 1 of fN,1
coincides with the side 2 of fM,2. The map is therefore,
Loc(M, N) = 1
Loc(N, M) = 2
Overlap(N, M) .= (1, 2)
IV. ACQUIRING RELATIVE ORIENTATION KNOWLEDGE
BASED ON THE CONNECTION RELATIONS
Acquisition of relative orientation knowledge in indoor
environments can be separated into two steps: the ﬁrst step
is to ﬁnd a path between the start location and the target
location; the second step is to acquire relative orientations
from the start location to the target along the path. This
spatial knowledge acquisition process within indoor envi-
ronments is normally not supported by GPS, therefore, the
navigator needs to remember all the orientation knowledge
at the beginning. This leads to some differences from orien-
tation knowledge acquisition in outdoor environments. One
important property which shall be emphasized in the indoor
spatial knowledge acquisition is that the route instructions
shall be short.
A. Find one of the shortest paths
In indoor environments, a path is a sequence of rooms
and corridors. Let A1 and An be the start location and the
target location, respectively. A path between A1 and An is a
sequence A1, A2, . . . , An−1, An such that for any i( 1 ≤ i ≤
n−1) navigators can move between Ai and Ai+1. Formally,
we introduce Path function as follows.
Deﬁnition 8: Let A1 and An be two locations. A path
between A1 and An is a sequence A1, A2, . . . , An−1, An
such that for any i, 1 ≤ i ≤ n − 1, either (Ai, Ai+1) or
(Ai+1, Ai) is in the domain of one of the partial functions
Con, Loc and Overlap. Path(A1, An) is the set of all paths
between A1 and An.
Path(A1, An)
def
= {[A1, A2, . . . , An−1, An]|
∀i : 1 ≤ i ≤ n − 1, (Ai, Ai+1) ∈ DOM
∨(Ai+1, Ai) ∈ DOM}
72
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

f.dom refers to the domain of function f.
DOM = Con.dom ∪ Loc.dom ∪ Overlap.dom
Theorem 2: Path(A1, An) = Path(An, A1)
Proof is trivial.
Remark 2: The path between two locations is understood
as with no direction. To guarantee this property, we deﬁne
the path as the set of all sequences (routes) from one location
to the other.
Example 3: In Figure 2(a), [X,M,Y] is a path between
Room X and Room Y, i.e., [X,M,Y]∈ Path(X,Y), because
the following values are deﬁned: Con(X, M) and Con(Y, M).
Given two locations inside of an indoor environment, one
of the shortest paths between them can be identiﬁed by the
breadth-ﬁrst search algorithm as follows.
Algorithm 1: Search one of the shortest paths between
two places, if exists
input : A map M, two different places A1 and An
output: one of the shortest paths between A1 and An,
if there is a path between them; or NoPath if
there is no path between them
All ←get all of the rooms and corridors from M;
Queue ← [A1];
NotUsed ← All − {A1};
i ← 0;
while i in the domain of Queue do
if Queue(i) = An then
Path ←get all the ancestors of An;
return Reverse(Path)
Temp ←get all of the the rooms and corridors
connected with Queue(i);
Temp ← Temp ∩ NotUsed;
if Temp ̸= ∅ then
set Queue(i) as the ancestor of each element
in Temp ;
append all elements in Temp to Queue ;
NotUsed ← NotUsed − Temp;
i ← i + 1;
return NoPath
Let n be the total number of rooms and corridors,
ConnectWith(X) be the number of rooms and corridors
that X directly connects with, and K be the maximum
number of any ConnectWith(X). In indoor environments we
assume K is not related with n. That is, K is a constant.
The computational complexities of space and time of this
algorithm are O(Kn) = O(n).
B. Fiat path
To ease the acquisition of a relative orientation knowledge
along a path, we introduce the term of ﬁat path. Each path
has a ﬁat path which is a sequence of rooms and ﬁat cells
p = 1
p = 2
p = 3
p = 4
n = 1
-
turn left
turn around
turn right
n = 2
turn right
-
turn left
turn around
n = 3
turn around
turn right
-
turn left
n = 4
turn left
turn around
turn right
-
Table I
TURNING INSTRUCTIONS INSIDE OF A ROOM OR A CORRIDOR; ‘-’
MEANS THAT TURNING IS NOT REQUIRED
of corridors. If C is a corridor in the path, and a navigator
enters C at its ﬁat cell i, and leaves C at its ﬁat cell j, C
is replaced with C.i, C.j. Formally, we deﬁne as follows.
Deﬁnition 9: Let path P = [A1, A2, . . . , An−1, An], its
ﬁat path, written as fPath(P), is deﬁned as follows.
fPath(P)
def
= [f(A1), f(A2), . . . , f(An−1), f(An)]







f(Ai) = Ai
Ai ∈ R
f(Ai) = Ai.s, Ai.e
Cond2
f(A1) = A1.s
Cond3
f(An) = An.e
Cond4
Cond2 : Ai ∈ C ∧Loc(Ai−1, Ai) = Ai.s∧Loc(Ai+1, Ai) =
Ai.e, 2 ≤ i ≤ n − 1
Cond3 : A1 ∈ C ∧ Loc(A2, A1) = A1.s
Cond4 : An ∈ C ∧ Loc(An−1, An) = Ai.e
C. Spatial reasoning on acquiring relative orientation
knowledge
Given a map and a ﬁat path, we can acquire relative
orientation knowledge. The task can be described as fol-
lows: let [Ai, Ai+1] be a path segment along a path and
[f(Ai), f(Ai+1)] its corresponding ﬁat path segment, de-
scribe a relative route description from location Ai to Ai+1,
(1 ≤ i ≤ n − 1).
1) Room Ai and Room Ai+1: Suppose now the navigator
is in Room Ai and faces to side m of Ai, which connects
with Room Ai+1 such that Con(Ai, Ai+1) = (p, q), that
is, side p of Room Ai connects with side q of Room
Ai+1. Relative route instruction in this case has the form
<instruction for turning in Ai >, go out of the room”. At
the end, the reasoning process shall acquire the knowledge
of the navigator’s facing direction in Ai+1, if Ai+1 is not
the target place.
In our proposed data model, sides of rooms and corridors
are named counterclockwise with 1,2,3,4. So, given the
starting facing side n and the target facing side p in the
same location, we can acquire the instruction for turning
with the matrix as shown in Table 1. If we calculate the
value of (n − p) mod 4, we obtain a matrix as shown in
Table 2.
The algorithm for generating turning instruction is quite
simple, as illustrated in Algorithm 2.
When
the navigator arrives in
Ai+1, we need to
know to which side she/he is now facing. As we have
73
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

p = 1
p = 2
p = 3
p = 4
n = 1
0
3
2
1
n = 2
1
0
3
2
n = 3
2
1
0
3
n = 4
3
2
1
0
Table II
TURNING INSTRUCTIONS CAN BE ENCODED WITH A CYCLIC GROUP,
0:-;1:turn right; 2: turn around; 3:turn left
Algorithm 2: Acquiring turning instructions inside of a
room or corridor
input : facing side n, facing side p
output: turning instruction
v ← (n − p) mod 4;
switch v do
case 0 return “-”;
case 1 return “turn right”;
case 2 return “turn around”;
case 3 return “turn left”;
Con(Ai, Ai+1) = (p, q), we know that after entering Room
Ai+1, the navigator is back to side q of Ai+1. Therefore,
she/he is facing to the opposite side of q, written as Opp(q),
This can be easily computed by the formula as follows:
Opp(q) =
 q + 2
if q ≤ 2
q − 2
if q > 2 .
The computational complexities for generating turning
instruction, as well as updating facing direction, are O(1).
2) Room Ai and Corridor Ai+1: Suppose now the navi-
gator is in Room Ai and faces to side m of Ai, who needs
to enter Corridor Ai+1, and may go along the corridor to a
certain location to enter Ai+2. We know Con(Ai, Ai+1) =
(p, q) and Loc(Ai, Ai+1) = s, and let the ﬁat path segment
of [Ai, Ai+1] be [Ai, Ai+1.s, Ai+1.e].
The relative orientation knowledge in this case consists of
two parts: the ﬁrst part is on how to move from Ai to Ai+1.s;
the second part is on how to move from Ai+1.s to Ai+1.e.
As the sides of ﬁat cells are named counterclockwise and
such that two of them coincide with sides of corridors, the
ﬁrst part is the same as moving from room to room. Suppose
the navigator is now in Ai+1.s facing to side n, we need to
give relative route instructions which help her/him to arrive
at Ai+1.e. As ﬁat cells are named by numbers in such a way
that the smaller the number is, the closer this cell is to the
side 1 of the corridor, we can use this qualitative distance
comparison method to ﬁgure out the turning instruction at
Ai+1.s as follows: if s < e, Ai+1.s is nearer to side 1 of
the corridor than Ai+1.e is, so the navigator shall turn to
side 3 of the corridor, which is deﬁned as the same side of
this ﬁat cell; if s > e, Ai+1.e is nearer to side 1 of the
corridor than Ai+1.s is, so the navigator shall turn to side
1 of the corridor. So, we can use Algorithm 2 to generate
turning instruction at Ai+1.s. Instruction for moving from
Ai+1.s to Ai+1.e is quite simple, just go ahead plus some
landmark information along this ﬁat path segment.
3) Corridor Ai and Room Ai+1: Suppose now the nav-
igator is at ﬁat cell s of Corridor Ai and faces to side m
of Ai (Ai.side m), and needs to enter Room Ai+1. In this
case she/he may go along the corridor ﬁrst and then perform
a turning to enter Ai+1. We know Con(Ai, Ai+1) = (p, q)
and Loc(Ai+1, Ai) = e, and let the ﬁat path segment of
[Ai, Ai+1] be [Ai.s, Ai.e, Ai+1]. No new algorithms are
needed to acquire relative orientation knowledge from Ai.s
to Ai.e and from Ai.e to Ai+1.
4) Corridor Ai and Corridor Ai+1: Suppose now the
navigator is at ﬁat cell s of Corridor Ai and faces to side
m of Ai (Ai.side m), and needs to enter Corridor Ai+1.
We know that Corridor Ai and Corridor Ai+1 overlaps in
such a way that ﬁat cell u of Ai, fi,u, connects with Ai+1,
ﬁat cell w of Ai+1, fi+1,w, connects with Ai, side p of fi,u
coincide with side q of fi+1,w. That is, Loc(Ai+1, Ai) =
u, Loc(Ai, Ai+1) = w, Overlap(Ai, Ai+1) .= (p, q). In the
most complicated case, the ﬁat path segment of [Ai, Ai+1] is
in the form of Ai.s, Ai.u, Ai+1.w, Ai+1.e, where the value
e can be obtained from [Ai+1, Ai+2], we can reuse above
algorithms to acquire relative orientation knowledge between
ﬁat cells within a corridor and between coincided ﬁat cells
of different corridors.
The whole algorithm is illustrated in Algorithm 3, whose
computational complexity is the same as that of algorithm
1: O(n).
V. CONCLUSIONS, DISCUSSIONS, AND OUTLOOKS
Spatial knowledge representation of orientation relations
usually requires to represent a point-based orientation refer-
ence framework. A survey can be found in [11]. This paper
presents a novel method showing that how deictic orientation
relations between extended objects can be acquired without
using orientation reference framework.
The advantages of this representation are as follow: this
method is theoretically supported by results from cogni-
tive psychology; practically this representation ﬁlls one
gap between quantitative sensor representation, which are
objective, and acquired by laser scanners, cameras, and
spatial linguitistic descriptions, which are subjective, and
delineate a ﬁat world [10]. By introducing granularities of
ﬁat cells, cognitive agents will talk about a space as people
do. Obtaining a map only based on the connection relation
is an open question. However, cognitive psychology again
provides useful guidelines: infants’ developement of object
concepts is closely related with their developement of spatial
relations [8]. On the other hand, if a full environment map
is available, the presented orientation acquisition method
can be understood as a wayﬁnding method without GPS
information, e.g., in the tunnel, under bad weather.
74
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

Algorithm 3: Acquiring relative orientation knowledge
on a ﬂoor
input : starting room, starting facing, target room,
three tables
output: relative route instruction
Path ← apply Algorithm 1 to get one shortest paths;
ﬁatPath ← turn Path into ﬁat path;
Facing ←starting facing;
Route ←“”;
repeat
Loc1 ← first(ﬁatPath );
Loc2 ← second(ﬁatPath );
if (type(Loc1)̸=type(Loc2)
∨type(Loc1)=type(Loc2)=R) then apply
Algorithm 2 in Loc1, append result to Route;
append go ahead to Route;
else
if Loc1 and Loc2 in the same corridor then
determine targeting facing by distance
comparison;
apply Algorithm 2 in Loc1, append result
to Route;
append go ahead and landmark information
to Route;
updating Facing in Loc2;
pop(ﬁatPath);
until length(ﬁatPath)≤ 1;
EndFacing ← get the side of current location
connecting with target room;
v ← (Facing − EndFacing) mod 4;
switch v do
case 0 append the target room is in front of you to
Route;
case 1 append the target room is at the right side
of you to Route;
case 2 append the target room is back to you to
Route;
case 3 append the target room is at the left side of
you to Route;
return Route;
Indoor spatial environments may be complex, some have
layer-structures on a ﬂoor, some have concave shaped rooms.
The method presented in this paper can be extended by
considering granularities and more sides of spatial objects.
For example, Yuan and Schneider [13] proposed a 3D
method, LEGO representation, to construct maps of indoor
environments. By extending rectangles into hexahedrals, we
can develop similar method for 3D indoor environments. The
path-ﬁnding algorithm for higher dimensional environment
shall be more complex.
We can use the connection relation as primitive to recog-
nize changed environment, [3]. However, it is still an open
issue to explore unknown environments with this primitive
relation. It is a piece of interesting future work for us
to extend current work into robotics: How can a robot
explore unknown environments based on the connection
relation and some primitive perceptions and actions? There
is already some similar work in the literature, e.g., spatial
models developed at http://jrobot.gforge.inria.fr are based on
primitive actions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thanks go to Jianqiu Xu, Ingo Gl¨ockner, Ralf Hartmut
G¨uting, and Petre Dini for helpful comments and sugges-
tions. Financial support from DFG is greatly acknowledged.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Carey. The Origin of Concepts. Oxford University Press,
2009.
[2] T. Dong.
A Comment on RCC: from RCC to RCC++.
Journal of Philosophical Logic, 37(4):319–352, 2008.
[3] T. Dong. Recognizing Variable Environments – The Theory
of Cognitive Prism. Springer, 2011.
[4] T. Dong and H. W. Guesgen.
A Uniform Framework for
Orientation Relation based on Distance Comparison.
In
Proceedings of the 7th IEEE International Conference on
Cognitive Informatics, pages 75 – 82. IEEE CS Press, 2008.
[5] C. Freksa. Linguistic Description of Human Judgments In
Expert Systems and In The ‘Soft’ Sciences. In M.M Gupta
and E. Sanchez, editors, Approximate Reasoning in Decision
Analysis. North-Holland Publishing Company, 1982.
[6] P. U. Lee.
Costs of Switching Perspectives in Route and
Survey Descriptions. PhD thesis, Department of Psychology,
Stanford University, 2002.
[7] T. P. McNamara. Memory’s View of Space. The Psychology
of Learning and Motivation, 27:147–186, 1991.
[8] J. Piaget. The Construction of Reality in the Child. Routledge
& Kegan Paul Ltd, 1954.
[9] J. Piaget and B. Inhelder. La repr´esentation de l’espace chez
l’enfant. Biblioth`eque de Philosophie Contemporaine, Paris:
PUF, 1948. English translation by F. J. Langdon and J. L.
Lunzer in 1956.
[10] B. Smith. Fiat objects. Topoi, 20(2):131–148, 2001.
[11] O. Stock, editor. Spatial and Temporal Reasoning. Kluwer
Academic Publishers, 1997.
[12] B. Tversky.
Distortions in Cognitive Maps.
Geoforum,
23(2):131–138, 1992.
[13] W. Yuan and M. Schneider. Supporting 3D Route Planning in
Indoor Space based on the LEGO Representation. In ISA’10
Proceedings of the 2nd ACM SIGSPATIAL International
Workshop on Indoor Spatial Awareness, pages 16–23, 2010.
75
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

