Towards a Cognitive Handoff for the Future Internet:  
A Holistic Vision 
 
Francisco A. González-Horta, Rogerio A. 
Enríquez-Caldera, Juan M. Ramírez-Cortés, Jorge 
Martínez-Carballido 
Department of Electronics, INAOE 
Tonantzintla, Puebla, México 
{fglez, rogerio, jmram, jmc}@inaoep.mx 
Eldamira Buenfil-Alpuche 
Faculty of Engineering 
Polytechnic University of Guerrero State (UPEG)  
Taxco, Guerrero, México 
e-mail: eldamira@gmail.com
 
 
Abstract— Current handoffs are not designed to achieve 
multiple desirable features simultaneously. This weakness has 
resulted in handoff schemes that are seamless but not adaptive, 
or adaptive but not secure, or secure but not autonomous, or 
autonomous but not correct, etc. To face this limitation, we 
initiated a research project to develop a new kind of handoff 
system which attains multiple purposes simultaneously by 
using context information from the external and internal 
handoff environment. We envision a cognitive handoff as a 
multipurpose, multi-criteria, environment-aware, and policy-
based handoff that trades-off multiple objectives to reach its 
intended goals. This paper presents a conceptual (soft) model 
of cognitive handoffs using a holistic approach. We applied the 
proposed model to identify cognitive handoff performance 
parameters and tradeoffs between conflicting objectives. We 
argue that cognitive handoffs are the archetype of handoffs for 
the future Internet.  
Keywords-Cognitive handoff; future Internet; holism 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
A 
handoff 
is 
intended 
to 
preserve 
the 
user 
communications while different kinds of transitions occur in 
the network connection. Thus, a handoff is the process of 
transferring communications among radio channels, base 
stations, IP networks, service providers, mobile terminals, 
or any feasible combination of these elements. 
Significant desirable handoff features mentioned in the 
literature are, e.g., seamless [1], adaptive [2], autonomous 
[3], secure [4], and correct [5]; however, many others can be 
found in the vast literature of handoffs: transparent, reliable, 
flexible, robust, balanced, immune, fast, soft, smooth, 
lossless, efficient, proactive, predictive, reactive, QoS-
based, 
power-based, 
location-aided, 
time-adaptive, 
intelligent, generic, etc. Despite the rich variety of desirable 
handoff features, two important problems remain unsolved: 
(1) how can be combined different desirable features into a 
single handoff process so that it can achieve many purposes 
simultaneously? (2) how to define every desirable feature so 
that ambiguity and subjectivity can be reduced? 
This gap in knowledge about handoffs has produced a 
number of single-purpose schemes that successfully achieve 
one attractive feature but completely ignore others; e.g., 
seamless handoffs with poorly or null adaptation to other 
scenarios or technologies [6]; adaptive handoffs that do not 
consider any security goal [2]; secure handoffs that ignore 
user autonomy [4]; etc. Also, there is a growing confusion 
in literature about similar features; e.g., accurate-correct, 
fast-timely, smooth-seamless, robust-reliable, etc. In order 
to reduce misuse and ambiguity of these attributes is 
convenient to associate a qualitative property (purpose) and 
quantitative measures (objectives and goals) to each 
desirable feature. By doing so, we can qualify and quantify 
their performance individually or in comparison with others. 
Major contributions of this research paper include: 
1) A new holistic vision of handoffs. Many handoff 
solutions follow a reductionist approach; i.e., they achieve 
one desirable feature, use a small amount of handoff criteria, 
and work only in very specific scenarios. Although these 
simplistic solutions provide understanding and control of 
particular situations, we have seen how they quickly become 
special cases of more general models. Thus, we claim that 
the handoff problem for the future Internet requires holistic 
solutions, achieving multiple desirable features, using a 
diversity of context information, and adapting to any 
handoff scenario. 
2) A new conceptual model for cognitive handoffs. We 
propose a new kind of handoff that is multipurpose, multi-
criteria, context-aware, self-aware, policy-based, and trades-
off multiple conflicting objectives to reach its intended 
goals. This paper provides the conceptual model and its first 
level of functional decomposition. 
II. SINGLE-PURPOSE VS MULTI-PURPOSE HANDOFFS 
Dr. Nishith D. Tripathi in his outstanding thesis work 
published in 1997 [7] probably was the first author in 
considering a handoff that can simultaneously achieve many 
desirable features. His inspiring work served for many years 
as a basis for developing high performance handoffs; 
however, the complexities of handoff scenarios from 1997 
to present days have changed significantly. For instance, the 
handoff 
concept 
changed 
from 
simple 
lower-layer 
transitions between base stations and channels to more 
elaborated 
cross-layer 
transitions 
among 
networks, 
providers, and terminals. The limited scope of Tripathi‟s 
handoff concept has brought in consequence that his 
algorithms and models become today special cases of more 
44
COGNITIVE 2010 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-108-3

general models. Holism is relevant in this way to provide a 
long-term solution for the handoff problem. Another author 
who describes several desirable handoff features is Nasser et 
al. [8] in 2006. Both, Tripathy and Nasser, described various 
desirable features, but they did not make any difference 
among features, purposes, objectives, and goals. A handoff 
model needs a clear distinction to such former concepts. 
The holistic vision to the handoff problem has also been 
studied by Dr. Mika Ylianttila in his exceptional thesis work 
[9] published in 2005. He presented a holistic system 
architecture based on issues involved in 
mobility 
management areas (e.g., mobility scenarios, handoff 
strategies, handoff control, handoff algorithms, handoff 
procedures, 
mobility 
protocols, 
mobility 
parameters, 
performance measures, and handoff metrics). The work of 
Ylianttila improved the architecture of handoff issues that 
Pahlavan [10] published in 2000. However, these 
architectures have some drawbacks: i) they did not include 
the context management problem in their models; ii) they 
did not mention the tradeoffs that handoffs should consider 
in a multi-objective scenario; and iii) their architectures are 
based on types of issues and not in the functionality aspects 
of the handoff process. 
Besides the above related work, we use two criteria to 
classify handoff schemes that are approaching to cognitive 
handoffs: the number of desirable features they achieve and 
the amount of context information they use. Handoff 
schemes, like the ones proposed by So [6] and Zhang [11], 
achieve only one desirable feature using limited context 
information; they provide seamless handoffs between 
particular network technologies and specific mobility 
scenarios. The schemes proposed by Siddiqui [12] and 
Hasswa [13] use broad context information, but they are 
focused only in one feature (seamlessness). 
Conversely, the solutions proposed by Sethom [4] and 
Tuladhar [14] provide seamless and secure handoffs on a 
variety of handoff scenarios because they use broad context. 
The schemes proposed by Singhrova [2] and Chen [15] 
achieve seamless and adaptive mobility, but they cannot 
adapt to any handoff scenario because they use limited 
context. Finally, the scheme proposed by Altaf [16] 
achieves seamless, secure, soft, and adaptive handoffs, but 
just between WiMAX and 3G networks because they use 
limited context. 
Considering this tendency, it will be common to observe 
in the near future a new generation of handoffs that can 
achieve many desirable features using broad handoff context 
information. In current literature, none architecture, model, 
or algorithm is reported to have this property. 
Regarding the related work of standardization bodies, 
like the IEEE 802.21 and the IETF MIPSHOP, we observed 
that they are focusing in seamless heterogeneous handoffs; 
they are not taking into account the vast diversity of 
desirable features that handoffs could have. The IEEE 
802.21 workgroup has approved three task groups to face 
very particular handoff scenarios: the IEEE 802.21a for 
security extensions to media independent handovers, the 
IEEE 802.21b for handovers 
with downlink only 
technologies, and the IEEE 802.21c for optimized single 
radio handovers. We believe they are following a 
reductionist approach, but they lack the holistic vision of 
cognitive handoffs. Emmelman, in [17], discusses ongoing 
activities and scopes of these standardization bodies. 
III. THE COGNITIVE HANDOFF HOLISTIC VISION 
A. Origin of Single-Purpose Handoffs 
The thoughtful study of handoffs started in the early 
1990s with the first generation (1G) cellular networks (e.g. 
AMPS 
[18]). 
These 
networks 
provided 
seamless 
conversations while the mobile phone switched between 
channels and base stations. The decision to perform a 
handoff was made only on a signal strength basis, but the 
handoff execution should be imperceptible to users. For this 
reason, the AMPS system required that the handoff gap be 
no more than 100 ms to avoid the possibility of dropping a 
syllable of speech [18]. These traditional handoffs are 
single-purpose/single-criterion or seamless/signal strength. 
B. Major Challenges in the Future Internet 
1) Multidimensional Heterogeneity: A major trend in 
future communication systems is the coexistence of multiple 
dimensions of heterogeneity integrated into a seamless, 
universal, 
uniform, 
ubiquitous, 
and 
general-purpose 
network. This future Internet will be seamless if it hides 
heterogeneity to users, universal if it can be used by anyone 
with any terminal, uniform if it is an all-IP network, 
ubiquitous if it is available anywhere and anytime, and 
general-purpose if it can provide any service. We divide 
heterogeneity into five dimensions as illustrated in Fig. 1 
and explained in the next paragraphs. The arrows going 
down from the service provider dimension to the user 
mobility dimension depict two different handoff scenarios 
created by instantiating objects in each dimension. 
 
Figure 1.  Multidimensional heterogeneity in the future Internet. 
a) Diversity on service providers and operators: Offer 
different classes of services, billing models, security 
policies, and connection prices. They deploy different 
wireless technologies around the world and make roaming 
agreements and alliances with other providers and operators.  
b) Variety of applications and services: Intend to fulfill 
the distinct ways of human communication; e.g., voice, 
video, data, images, text, music, TV, telephony, etc. 
 
45
COGNITIVE 2010 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-108-3

c) Several access network technologies: Include wired 
and wireless access technologies [19]; e.g., Ethernet, 
Bluetooth, WiMAX, WiFi, UMTS, MBWA, IMT-2000, 
GPRS, GSM, EDGE, LTE/SAE, DVB-HS, etc. They differ 
in terms of electrical properties, signaling, coding, 
frequencies, coverage, bandwidth, QoS guarantees, mobility 
management, media access methods, packet formats, etc. 
d) Plethora of mobile user terminals: Users can be 
humans, machines, or sensors. Terminals for machines are 
integrated parts of machines. Sensor terminals collect 
information from networked sensors [19]. Terminals for 
humans are mobile and multimode, equipped with 
telecommunication capabilities and different saving energy 
characteristics; they change its factor form from those 
looked like computers (laptops, netbooks) to those looked 
like cell phones (PDAs, smartphones). 
e) Numerous user mobility states: Network terminals 
can be located anywhere – in space, on the ground, under 
the ground, above water, underwater, and they can be fixed 
in a geographic position or moving at any speed – 
pedestrian, vehicular, ultrasonic [19]. 
Nowadays, 
no 
handoff 
solution 
exists 
which 
comprehensively addresses the entire scale of heterogeneity. 
Moreover, multidimensional heterogeneity has three main 
attributes: is inevitable, is the source of great amounts of 
context information, and produces an infinite number of 
handoff scenarios. 
2) Ubiquitous Connectivity: It enables connectivity for 
anyone or anything, at any time, from anywhere. A myriad 
of wireless access technologies are spread across the entire 
world overlapping one another but avoiding interferences 
among them. Two requirements for ubiquitous connectivity 
are: (i) to develop scalable architectures to integrate any 
number of wireless systems from different service providers 
[20] and (ii) to develop smart multimode mobile terminals 
able to access any wireless technology [21]. 
3)  Cognitive Mobility: It allows roaming mechanisms 
where the user is always connected to the best available 
network, with the smaller number of handoffs, service 
disruptions, user interventions, security threats, and the 
greater number of handoff scenarios. 
C. External and Internal Handoff Environment 
We envision a cognitive handoff as a process that is both 
context-aware and self-aware. This implicates to make the 
handoff process aware of its external and internal 
environment. We borrowed the term „cognitive‟ from Dr. 
Dixit vision of cognitive networking [22]. He defines 
cognitive networking as an intelligent communication 
system that is aware of its environment, both external and 
internal, and acts adaptively and autonomously to attain its 
intended goals. We believe cognitive handoffs not only 
should behave adaptively or autonomously to attain its 
intended goals, but also seamlessly, securely, and correctly. 
On one hand, the external environment is directly related 
with all the external entities that provide a source of context 
information to the handoff process. These entities are users, 
terminals, applications, networks, and providers; a cognitive 
handoff should adapt to any kind of these entities. These 
entities maintain a strong cyclic relationship as follows: 
users interact with terminals, terminals run applications, 
applications exchange data through networks, networks are 
managed by providers, and providers subscribe users. The 
cyclic relationship of external entities suggests that all 
external context information emanates just from these five 
basic entities and no more; hence, if we ignore information 
of any of these entities, the handoff process will not adapt 
properly to all the scenarios. Therefore, a cognitive handoff 
should consider all the five entities. 
On the other hand, the internal environment is another 
source of context and it is directly related with the behavior 
or performance of handoffs. This behavior directly depends 
on the desirable features of handoff. Next, we identified and 
describe five major desirable features which are considered 
highly significant for the current and future scenarios. 
D. Multiple Desirable Features of Handoff 
1) Seamlessness: It means to preserve the user 
communications before, during, and after the handoff thus 
reducing service degradation or interruption. Service 
degradation may be due to a continuous reduction in link 
quality, network quality, handoff quality, QoS guarantees, 
and energy savings. Service interruption may be due to 
excessive degradations or a “break before make” approach. 
2) Autonomy: This desirable feature is closely related to 
seamlessness. A handoff is autonomous, automatic, or 
autonomic when no user interventions are required during a 
handoff in progress. However, this does not mean that user 
interventions are not required in handoffs. It is good that 
users participate in the handoff configuration process by 
defining their preferences, priorities, or necessities; but, it is 
convenient that users can perform this activity offline to 
prevent any distraction during online communications. 
3) Security: We say a handoff is secure if not new 
threats appear along the handoff process and security 
signaling traffic does not overload the network and degrades 
the communication services. This is a very challenging task, 
but if optimization techniques are used together with our 
model it could be shown that by minimizing handoff 
latency, authentication latency, and signaling overload, the 
risk of new threats appearance may be reduced. 
4) Correctness: A handoff is correct if it keeps the user 
always connected to the best available network with the 
smaller number of handoffs; this is similar to the 
Gustaffson‟s vision of ABC defined in [23]. We consider 
that the best network is the one that is sufficiently better and 
consistently better. Furthermore, correctness can bring other 
additional features to the handoff process: 
 Beneficial: 
if 
quality 
of 
communications, 
user 
expectations, or terminal power conditions get improved 
after handoff. 
 Timely: if handoff is executed just in time; i.e., right 
after target is properly selected and before degradations or 
interruptions occur. 
 Selective: if it properly chooses the best network among 
all the available networks. 
 Necessary: if it is initiated because of one imperative or 
opportunist reason.  
46
COGNITIVE 2010 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-108-3

 
Efficient: if it selects the most appropriate method, 
protocol, or handoff strategy, according to the types of: 
handoff in progress, user mobility, and application. 
These handoff attributes derived from correctness, take 
special relevance during the decision-making phase, where 
it must be decided why, where, how, who, and when to 
trigger a handoff. 
5) Adaptability: An adaptable handoff should be 
successful across any handoff scenario. A handoff is 
successful if it achieves a balance of every desirable feature 
at a minimum level of user satisfaction. 
E.  Structure of Handoff Context Information 
 The 
handoff 
context 
information 
is 
extensive, 
heterogeneous, distributed, and dynamic. It supports the 
whole operation of the handoff process and the achievement 
of multiple desirable features. Therefore, such context 
information should be arranged in a clear structure. Table I  
and Table II show the structure of handoff context 
information according to a pair of criteria: the source of 
context and the class of information respectively. The 
sources of context originated in the external handoff 
environment support context-awareness while the one 
originated in the internal environment (the handoff process 
itself) will provide self-awareness. 
TABLE I.  
STRUCTURE FOR SOURCE OF CONTEXT INFORMATION 
User context: This context allows users to customize the handoff 
according to their own needs, habits, and preferences. It includes: user 
preferences, user priorities, user profiles, user history, etc. 
Terminal context: Allows the deployment of QoS-aware handoffs, 
power-based handoffs, and location-aided handoffs: 
(a) Link quality: Received signal strength (RSS), signal to noise ratio 
(SNR), signal to interference ratio (SIR), signal to noise and 
interference ratio (SNIR), bit error rate (BER), block error rate (BLER), 
co-channel interference (CCI), carrier to interference rario (CIR), etc. 
(b) Power management: Battery type (BT), battery load (BL), energy-
consumption rate (ECR), transmit power in current (TPC), transmit 
power in target (TPT), power budget (PB), etc. 
(c) Geographic mobility: Velocity (Vel), distance to a base station 
(Dist), location (Loc), direction (MDir), coverage area (GCA), etc. 
Application context: This context includes the QoS requirements of 
active applications: Lost packets (LP), delayed packets (DP), corrupted 
packets (CP), duplicated packets (DuP), data transfer rate (DTR-
goodput), packet jitter (PJ), out-of-order delivery (OOD), application 
type (AppT), etc. The consideration of these QoS parameters makes 
provisions for application-aware handoffs. 
Network context: This context is needed to avoid selecting congested 
networks (befor handoff), to monitor service continuity (during 
handoff), and to assess the handoff success by measuring network 
conditions (after handoff): Network bandwidth (NBW), network load 
(NL), network delay (ND), network jitter (NJ), network throughput 
(NT), network maximum transmission unit (NMTU), etc. 
Provider context: Connection fees, billing models, roaming agreements, 
coverage area maps, security management (AAA), types of services 
(data, voice, video), provider preferences, and provider priorities. A 
negotiation model may be required to equate the differences between 
service providers, network operators, and mobile users. 
Handoff performance context: Call blocking (CB), call dropping (CD), 
handoff blocking (HOB), handoff rate (HOR), handoff latency (HOL), 
decision latency (DLat), execution latency (ExLat), evaluation latency 
(EvLat), handoff type (HOType), elapsed time since last handoff 
(ETSLH), interruptions rate (IR), interruption latency (IL), degradations 
rate (DR), degradation latency (DL), degradation intensity (DI), utility 
function (UF), signaling overload (SO), security signaling overload 
(SSO), improvement rate (ImpR), application improvement rate 
(AppImpR), user improvement rate (UsrImpR), terminal improvement 
rate (TermImpR), successful handoff rate (SHOR), imperative handoff 
rate (IHOR), opportunist handoff rate (OHOR), dwell time in the best 
(DTIB), authentication latency (AL), detected attacks rate (DAR), 
online user interventions rate (OUIR), tardy handoff rate (THOR), 
premature handoff rate (PHOR), etc.his context allows users to 
customize the handoff according to their own needs, habits, and 
preferences. It includes: user preferences, user priorities, user profiles, 
user history, etc. 
TABLE II.  
STRUCTURE FOR  CLASS OF INFORMATION 
Handoff 
criteria: 
Network 
discovery, 
decision-making, 
and 
performance evaluation. Some examples of handoff criteria include 
variables or parameters from the external/internal environment such as 
RSS, NL, BL, LP, HOL, Vel, connection price, etc. 
Handoff metrics:  Mathematical models used to measure several 
significant tasks of the handoff process; for instance, the quality of 
links, the quality of communications, the quality of different networks, 
the quality and quantity of handoffs, the quality of different providers, 
the achievement of user preferences, the power budget of a mobile 
terminal, the geographic mobility of a user, etc. Handoff metrics may 
combine a variety of handoff criteria and help any specific handoff 
algorithm to make optimal decisions. 
Performance measures: Set of handoff metrics that are used to quantify 
performance 
of 
communications, 
performance 
of 
networks, 
performance of handoffs, and to evaluate the degree of achieving a 
handoff objective. 
Handoff policies: Users and providers define a series of policies to the 
handoff operation. Policies define and specify rules for making handoff 
decisions in any particular situation; for instance, what to do if the link 
quality drops below a level required for an acceptable service. User and 
provider may have different views of the handoff process; provider may 
be interested in QoS while user in connection charges. Both points of 
view must be consistently integrated into a single handoff policy 
management database. 
Handoff constraints: Conditions that must be satisfied in a particular 
handoff scenario and used to control the handoff operation by keeping 
performance parameters within specific limits. For instance, for a 
seamless handoff process, the delay has to be kept within certain 
boundaries; for real-time applications a delay of 50 ms could be 
acceptable, whereas non-real-time applications might accept delays as 
long as 3-10 sec [9]. 
Handoff configuration: Defines preferences, priorities, and other 
configuration parameters required to customize the handoff operation. 
Typically, the configuration information is organized in a handoff 
profile linked to a particular user, provider, and terminal and should be 
initially performed offline either by the user, the provider, both or an 
auto-configuration setup. But, depending on the type of handoff 
algorithm, different configuration parameters may be required to be 
initialized, e.g. thresholds, timers, hysteresis, weights, etc. 
F. Cognitive Handoff Conceptual Model 
Once we have established and justified the necessity for 
developing a new handoff system, we present our 
conceptual model based on the statement that “a cognitive 
handoff should intend to achieve multiple desirable features 
and be aware of its entire environment by using information 
coming from multiple context domains”. Fig. 2 depicts this 
basic idea by interconnecting multiple desirable features 
47
COGNITIVE 2010 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-108-3

with multiple context domains that we already explained 
separately in III.D and III.E.  
The purpose of this model is to help people debate and 
discuss about the complexity of cognitive handoffs. Thus, 
topics of discussion would be related to level of complexity, 
correlation among desired features and context data, and the 
possibility of establishing handoffs as a multi-objective 
optimization problem as well as to give specifications for 
practical implementations. Used in this way this model is 
not intended for predicting, designing, or implementing 
cognitive handoffs, but for understanding and explaining 
such  difficult and complex process  All the above issues  
have not been addressed in the handoff literature; therefore , 
in effect, the purpose of this conceptual model is being 
achieved.  Models like the one we present here are validated 
by credibility, and credibility comes from the way in which 
the cognitive maps are built and the clarity it represents 
most of the opinion‟s experts [24]. In the next section we 
provide some advances towards the development of 
cognitive handoffs. 
 
Figure 2.  Cognitive handoff conceptual model. The desired features to 
achieve determine the context data to use and vice versa. 
IV. 
COGNITIVE HANDOFF MODEL AT WORK   
A. Cognitive Handoff and Complex Systems 
Cognitive handoffs are complex adaptive systems 
because: (1) they exhibit a complicated hierarchical 
structure (e.g., a power saving system is part of a network 
discovery system, which is part of a handoff system, which 
is part of a mobility system, which is part of a wireless 
communication system, and so on, but also a power saving 
system is part of the decision system, which is part of the 
handoff system, and so on); (2) the whole cognitive handoff 
system achieves purposes that are not purposes of the parts 
(e.g., a cognitive handoff purpose is to maintain the 
continuity of services, but this purpose is not defined in any 
of the parts or subsystems of the cognitive handoff system); 
and, (3) the handoff environment is dynamic and therefore 
adaptability is a desired handoff feature. 
B. Correlating Desired Features and Context Data 
With respect on whether all previously described context 
data are necessary to describe limitations on the model; one 
has to realize that the usage of certain context parameters 
depends on the desirable features being implemented and 
the context data available in a moment will allow to 
accomplish or not a particular desired feature. Thus, we 
need to state a correct relationship or dependence between 
each desirable handoff feature and the subset of context data 
necessary to be accomplished. We made a correlation 
between desired features and context data by transforming 
desired features into purposes, purposes into objectives, 
objectives into goals, and goals into context data. For the 
sake of space in this manuscript the mentioned correlation 
will be shown in our next paper subtitled “Model-driven 
methodology and taxonomy of scenarios” already accepted 
for publication [25].  
C. Advances for a Practical Implementation 
The cognitive handoff system, represented in Fig. 2 by 
the oval in the middle, can be expanded into several sub-
systems by using a functional decomposition approach [26]. 
Fig. 3 shows the main functional sub-systems for cognitive 
handoffs represented in ovals: handoff control algorithm, 
network discovery, handoff decisions, handoff execution, 
handoff evaluation, and handoff context information 
management. We briefly describe them:  
 
Figure 3.  
Functional decomposition model. The desired 
features provide purposes, objectives, and goals to achieve, while context 
domains provide the information needed to attain such goals. 
 
Handoff Control Algorithm: This is the main director 
of the handoff procedure. The entity which implements the 
control algorithm is called Handoff Control Entity (HCE). 
There should be one HCE in every user terminal and also 
there may be many others distributed across the network 
infrastructure. HCEs are agents that cooperate and compete 
to take a particular handoff to succeed. 
 
Network Discovery: This is the system for detecting and 
discovering available access networks. An available 
network is a reachable and authorized network considered 
for an eventual handoff. 
 
Handoff Decisions: The handoff decisions system is 
intended to answer the questions of why, when, where, how,  
and who should trigger the handoff. Typically this system 
has focused only in where and when to handoff [27]. The 
holistic vision extends the scope of handoff decisions. 
 
Handoff Execution: This system is intended to change 
the physical and logical connection from one network to 
 
 
48
COGNITIVE 2010 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-108-3

another, from one provider to another, or from one terminal 
to another. This change requires the most effective method, 
protocol, or strategy according to the current handoff 
scenario. The MIPSHOP group at IETF and the IEEE 
802.21 standard are creating tools for implementing media-
independent handoffs since 2003. 
 
Handoff Evaluation: This system measures the 
achievement of every desirable handoff feature and decides 
whether the executed handoff was successful or not. The 
evaluation results should be delivered after the handoff 
execution but within strict time constraints, thus this task is 
proactively distributed along the handoff process. 
 
Handoff Context Information Management: This 
system is intended to collect the distributed handoff context 
data, transform the data in information, and redistribute this 
information to the HCEs which are responsible for making 
handoff decisions and control. 
Discovery, decisions, execution, and evaluation systems 
can be viewed as sequential stages of the handoff process; 
however, the context manager is a background process 
which permanently supplies the handoff control entities with 
fresh information about the handoff environment. 
D. Cognitive Handoff Performance Measures 
The performance evaluation of cognitive handoffs 
requires a performance metric for each handoff purpose and 
a graphical representation to visualize multivariate data 
[28]. These metrics combine mathematically several 
performance measures that are associated to every handoff 
purpose. It is possible that metrics can normalize 
heterogeneous data into a single value representing the 
performance of each handoff purpose. Moreover, metrics 
can also be designed as utility functions so that greater 
values are better and all values are on the same scale. Fig. 4 
exemplifies a radar graph comparing the performance of 
multiple handoff purposes simultaneously. We say that if all 
measures are within a boundary circle of acceptable quality, 
then the cognitive handoff is successful, otherwise the 
handoff is defective and outliers should be corrected. 
 
Figure 4.  Functional decomposition model. The desired features provide 
purposes, objectives, and goals to achieve, while context domains provide 
the information needed to attain such goals. 
E. Formulating the Cognitive Handoff as a MOP 
 
Let F be the set of desirable handoff features and C be 
the set of context data. We say that a context variable Vi  
C is correlated with a desired feature f  F if and only if a 
change on the value of Vi impacts on the purpose of f. For 
instance, some changes on the value of SNR may degrade or 
improve the link quality and impact on the purpose of 
seamlessness that is to maintain the continuity of services; 
thus, we say that SNR is correlated with seamlessness. 
Let Vf be the set of correlated variables with f, where Vi 
Vf  C. We say that Vi is positively correlated with f if 
and only if increments on the value of Vi produce 
improvements on the purpose of f and decrements on Vi 
produce degradations on the purpose of f. For instance, 
increments on SNR improve the link quality, which 
improves the service continuity of seamlessness, and 
conversely, decrements on SNR degrade the link quality, 
which degrades the service continuity of seamlessness. 
Therefore, SNR is positively correlated with seamlessness. 
 
SNR  LINKQUALITY  SEAMLESSNESS 
SNR  LINKQUALITY  SEAMLESSNESS 
 
We say that Vi is negatively correlated with f if and only 
if increments on the value of Vi produce degradations on the 
purpose of f and decrements on Vi produce improvements 
on the purpose of f. For example, increments on BER 
degrade the link quality, which degrades the service 
continuity of seamlessness, and conversely, decrements on 
BER improve the link quality, which improves the service 
continuity of seamlessness. Therefore, BER is negatively 
correlated with seamlessness. 
 
BER  LINKQUALITY  SEAMLESSNESS 
BER  LINKQUALITY  SEAMLESSNESS 
 
The set Vf is partitioned in two subsets Vf+ and Vf 
where Vf+ is the set of variables positively correlated with f 
and Vf is the set of variables negatively correlated with f. 
Every Vi has a weight Wi associated to its priority 
where Wi  [0,1] and Wi = 1. Let v represent the vector 
of variables v = (V1, V2, …, Vm), then the objective 
function for the desired handoff feature f is defined by 
 
f(v) = (K+Wi)log(Vi+)  (K+Wi)log(Vi)         (1) 
 
where K is a scaling factor so that small changes on the 
context variables reflect big changes on f(v). 
 
In this general objective function, Vi+ and Vi are 
positively and negatively correlated variables of f. The 
objective function f(v) : m   is a utility function that 
we want to maximize because in desirable features the 
higher the value the best. 
 
Considering k different objective functions fi that we 
want to maximize simultaneously where some of them may 
 
49
COGNITIVE 2010 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-108-3

be in conflict, then the multi-objective optimization problem 
(MOP) can be stated as the problem of 
 
Maximize {f1(v), f2(v), …, fk(v)}                (2) 
                        Subject to vl ≤ v ≤ vu , 
 
where vl and vu represent the vectors of lower and upper 
values of the tolerance range for each variable. 
F. Tradeoffs between Conflicting Objectives 
A cognitive handoff is designed to achieve multiple 
purposes, objectives, and goals simultaneously. In the space 
of handoff objectives, we can distinguish between those 
with complementary nature and those with competitive 
nature. Complementary objectives can be simultaneously 
optimized without any conflict between them, but 
competing objectives cannot be simultaneously optimized, 
unless we find compromised solutions, largely known as the 
tradeoff surface, Pareto-optimal solutions, or non-dominated 
solutions [29]. We describe several tradeoffs to consider in a 
multi-objective handoff scheme: 
a) (Max. DTIB and Min. HOR): There is a tradeoff 
between maximizing the time to stay always best connected 
(DTIB) and minimizing the number of handoffs (HOR). The 
conflict arises because in a dynamic environment the best 
network is changing frequently and stochastically; thus, to 
maximize DTIB is necessary to make frequent handoffs as 
soon as a new best is available. This increase in the number 
of handoffs creates a conflict with minimizing HOR. 
b) (Min. DLat and Max. SHOR): This tradeoff is between 
minimizing the handoff decisions latency (DLat) and 
maximizing the number of successful handoffs (SHOR). 
The conflict emerges because the less time elapsed to make 
decisions will necessary lead to reduce the number of 
successful handoffs. For example, in case of imperative 
handoffs, DLat is reduced but this may lead to select an 
incorrect target because the selection time is also reduced. 
c) (Max. Sizeof-ContextInfo and Min SO): This is a 
tradeoff between minimizing the handoff signaling overload 
(SO) and maximizing the amount of handoff context 
information to be managed by the handoff control entities. 
The conflict arises because broad handoff information is 
required to attain multiple desirable features, but this will 
increase the amount of signaling traffic in the network. 
d) (User and Provider Preferences): Several conflicts may 
appear due to differences between provider and user 
preferences. For instance, providers may prefer networks 
within its own administrative domain while users may 
prefer networks with lower charges even if they are owned 
by other service providers; users may prefer a Mobile 
Controlled Handoff (MCHO) while providers may prefer 
Network Controlled Handoffs (NCHO). Conflicts like these 
require a balance between different interests. Handoff 
protocols like Mobile Assisted Handoff (MAHO) and 
Network Assisted Handoff (NAHO) try to balance the 
handoff control [7]. 
V. 
 CONCLUSION 
Handoffs are an integral component of any mobile-
wireless network from past, present, and future. Handoffs 
are transitions that change the data flows from one entity to 
another, where these entities may be radio channels, base 
stations, IP networks, service providers, and user terminals. 
The handoff process should exhibit several desirable 
features beyond seamlessness and should consider more 
context information beyond the signal strength. This is a 
common requirement to face the handoff scenarios of the 
future Internet. 
The existing handoff schemes are not able to achieve a 
variety of attractive features and managing arbitrary 
amounts of context information. Therefore, we proposed a 
conceptual model to create handoffs of this kind. We 
characterized a cognitive handoff to be multipurpose, multi-
criteria, context-aware, self-aware, and policy-based. 
We claimed that our cognitive handoff model is holistic 
because it considers all the transition entities that may be 
involved in handoffs, all the external and internal sources of 
context, and considers many significant desirable features. 
Using a functional decomposition approach, we divided 
the functional behavior of a cognitive handoff into six 
general modules: control algorithm, network discovery, 
handoff decisions, handoff execution, handoff evaluation, 
and context management. Each module has assigned a 
purpose to every feature and decomposed each purpose into 
objectives and goals. We applied the cognitive handoff 
model to define its performance parameters and significant 
tradeoffs between conflicting objectives. 
As a future work, we are preparing another manuscript 
for presenting a new taxonomy of handoff scenarios and the 
model-driven methodology that we are using to develop 
cognitive handoffs. There is still much work to do before we 
can see cognitive handoffs practically implemented. The 
cognitive handoff project follows theoretical and practical 
avenues. A theoretical challenge is to further develop the 
cognitive handoff MOP to study the structure of the 
variables in the handoff context (e.g., continuous/discrete, 
deterministic/stochastic, etc.) and the types of constraints 
required to create a convex optimization problem. In the 
practical and Applicability Avenue, we have deployed 
temporal and geometric simulation models to observe and 
predict the behavior of cognitive handoffs with two 
conflictive 
objective 
functions; 
however, 
further 
development is required to demonstrate the feasibility and 
applicability of cognitive handoffs in complex scenarios. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
F.A. González-Horta is a PhD candidate at INAOE and 
thanks the financial support received from CONACYT 
Mexico through the doctoral scholarship 58024. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] M. Satyanarayanan, M. A. Kozuch, C. J. Helfrich, and D. R. 
O‟Hallaron, 
“Towards 
seamless 
mobility 
on 
pervasive 
hardware” Pervasive and Mobile Computing 1, Elsevier, pp. 
157-189, 2005.  
 
[2] A. Singhrova and N. Prakash, “Adaptive Vertical Handoff 
Decision Algorithm for Wireless Heterogeneous Networks” 11th 
IEEE Intl. Conf. on High Performance Computing and 
Communications, pp. 476-481, 2009. 
50
COGNITIVE 2010 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-108-3

 
[3] J. M. Kang, H. T. Ju, and J. W. K. Hong, “Towards Autonomic 
Handover Decisions Management in 4G Networks” A. Helmy et 
al. (Eds.): MMNS 2006, LNCS 4267, IFIP, pp. 145-157, 2006. 
 
[4] K. Sethom, H. Afifi, and G. Pujolle, “Secure and Seamless 
Mobility Support in Heterogeneous Wireless Networks” Proc. 
IEEE Globecom, pp. 3403-3407, 2005. 
 
[5] K.D. Wong and D.C. Cox, “A Pattern Recognition System for 
Handoff Algorithms” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in 
Communications 18 (7), pp. 1301-1312, July 2000. 
 
[6] J. W. So, “Vertical Handoff in Integrated CDMA and WLAN 
Systems” 
International 
Journal 
of 
Electronics 
and 
Communications (AEÜ) 62, Elsevier, pp. 478-482, 2008. 
 
[7] N. D. Tripathi, “Generic Adaptive Handoff Algorithms Using 
Fuzzy Logic and Neural Networks” Ph.D. dissertation, Virginia 
Polytechnic Institute and State University, August 21, 1997. 
 
[8] N. Nasser, A. Hasswa, and H. Hassanein, “Handoffs in Fourth 
Generation Heterogeneous Networks” IEEE Communications 
Magazine, pp. 96-103, October 2006. 
 
[9] M. Ylianttila, “Vertical Handoff and Mobility – System 
Architecture and Transition Analysis” Ph.D. dissertation, 
Faculty of Technology, Dept. of Electrical and Information 
Engineering, University of Oulu, Finland, May 6, 2005. 
 
[10] K. Pahlavan, et al., “Handoff in Hybrid Mobile Data Networks” 
IEEE Personal Communications, pp. 34-47, April 2000. 
 
[11] Z. Zhang and A. Boukerche, “A Novel Mobility Management 
Scheme for IEEE 802.11-based Wireless Mesh Networks” Intl. 
Conf. on Parallel Processing, pp. 73-78, 2008. 
 
[12] F. Siddiqui and S. Zeadally, “Mobility Management across 
Hybrid Wireless Networks: Trends and Challenges” Computer 
Communications 29, Elsevier, pp. 1363-1385, 2006. 
 
[13] A. Hasswa, N. Nasser, and H. Hassanein, “Generic Vertical 
Handoff Decision Function for Heterogeneous Wireless 
Networks” IEEE, 2005. 
 
[14] S. R. Tuladhar, C. E. Caicedo, and J. B. D. Joshi, “Inter-Domain 
Authentication for Seamless Roaming in Heterogeneous 
Wireless Networks” IEEE Computer Society, pp. 249-255, 2008. 
 
[15] W. T. Chen, J. C. Liu, and H. K. Huang, “An Adaptive Scheme 
for Vertical Handoff in Wireless Overlay Networks” Proc. 10th 
Intl. Conf. on Parallel and Distribution Systems, 2004. 
 
[16] A. Altaf, F. Iqbal, and M. Y. Javed, “S3H: A Secure, Seamless 
and Soft Handover between WiMAX and 3G Networks” Intl. 
Conf. on Convergence and Hybrid Information Technology, pp. 
530-534, 2008. 
 
[17] M. Emmelmann, et al., “Moving toward seamless mobility: state 
of the art and emerging aspects in standardization bodies” 
Wireless Pers Commun 43, Springer, pp. 803-816, 2007. 
 
[18] B. A. Black, et al., “Introduction to Wireless Systems” Ch. 4, 
Prentice Hall, 1st Edition, pp. 125-140, May 2008. 
 
[19] J. L. Salina and P. Salina, “Next Generation Networks: 
Perspectives and Potentials” John Wiley & Sons, England, 2007. 
 
[20] S. Mohanty and J. Xie, “Performance Analysis of a Novel 
Architecture to Integrate Heterogeneous Wireless Systems” 
Computer Networks 51, Elsevier, pp. 1095-1105, 2007. 
 
[21] P. Koch and R. Prasad, “The Universal Handset” IEEE 
Spectrum, vol. 6 num. 4 International, pp. 32-37, April 2009. 
 
[22] Q. H. Mahmoud (Edt), “Cognitive Networks: Towards Self-
Aware Networks” Foreword 2: S. Dixit, J. Wiley & Sons, 2007. 
 
[23] E. Gustaffson and A. Jonsson, “Always Best Connected: 3G 
Mobile Network Technologies and Experiences” IEEE Wireless 
Communications, pp. 49-55, February 2003. 
 
[24] M. Pidd (Edt), “Systems Modelling: Theory and Practice,” John 
Wiley & Sons, England, pp. 1-42, 2004. 
 
[25] F. A. González-Horta, R.A. Enríquez-Caldera, J. M. Ramírez-
Cortés, J. Martínez-Carballido, E. Buenfil-Alpuche, “Towards a 
cognitive handoff for the future Internet: Model-driven 
methodology and taxonomy of scenarios” 2nd International 
Conference 
on 
Advanced 
Cognitive 
Technologies 
and 
Applications, COGNITIVE 2010, Lisbon, Portugal, Nov. 2010. 
 
[26] O. Maimon and L. Rokach, “Decomposition Methodology for 
Knowledge 
Discovery 
and 
Data 
Mining: 
Theory 
and 
Applications” 
Series 
in 
Machine 
Perception 
Artificial 
Intelligence, Vol. 61, World Scientific Pub., London, 2005. 
 
[27] Q. Song and A. Jamalipour, “A Time-Adaptive Vertical Handoff 
Decision Scheme in Wireless Overlay Networks” 17th Annual 
Intl. Symposium on Personal, Indoor, and Mobile Radio 
Commun, PIMRC‟06, 2006. 
 
[28] J. Heer, M. Bostock, and V. Ogievetsky, “A Tour Through the 
Visualization Zoo” Communications of the ACM, vol. 53, no. 6, 
pp. 59-67, June 2010. 
 
[29] J. Branke, et al. (Eds.), “Multiobjective Optimization: Interactive 
and Evolutionary Approaches” Springer, Germany, 2008.       
 
51
COGNITIVE 2010 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-108-3

