Refining a User Behaviour Model Based on the Observation of Emotional States 
1Yuska P. C. Aguiar, 1,2Maria F. Q. 
Vieira 
1LIHM, Electrical Engineering 
Department, UFCG 
Campina Grande, Brazil 
²CESIP, Dept of Electronic & Electrical 
Engineering, University of Strathclyde 
Scotland, UK 
yuska.aguiar@lihm.ufcg.edu.br, 
fatima@dee.ufcg.edu.br 
Edith Galy 
Université de Provence (Aix-Marseille 
I), Département de Psychologie 
Cognitive et Expérimentale 
Centre de Recherche PsyCLE 
Aix-en-Provence, France 
edith.marie@univ-provence.fr 
 
Jean-Marc Mercantini, Charles 
Santoni 
Université Paul Cézanne (Aix-Marseille 
III), Département Génie Industriel et 
Informatique, LSIS 
Marseille, France 
jean-marc.mercantini@lsis.org, 
charles.santoni@polytech.univ-mrs.fr
Abstract— User behaviour models are important tools to study 
human error in the industrial context. With a programmable 
user model it is possible to simulate user activity, analyse the 
influence of context on user behaviour and impact of user 
behaviour on task outcomes. This paper proposes a procedure 
to refine user behaviour models. The procedure has been 
developed to support the analysis of accident and incident 
reports in the operation of electrical power systems. The 
procedure involves observing the user interacting with a 
system simulator that replicates situations described in 
accident and incident reports. This paper focuses on the 
emotional components of behaviour observed during the 
interaction.  
Keywords-User behaviour model; data gathering on human 
emotions; interaction observation; human error studies. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The analysis of accidents and incidents is essential for the 
study of human error and central to strategies for preventing 
these: Human Computer Interaction (HCI) adaptation and 
improvement in training and task adaptation. Report analysis 
is the traditional path followed by many authors 
[3][15][23].This approach was adopted by the authors when 
investigating human error in the operation of an electrical 
power systems company in Brazil. The studies performed 
were based on a corpus of 31 reports of accidents and 
incidents that occurred over a ten-year period. Among the 
results, these studies resulted in a prototype of a system’s 
operator behaviour model [1][17].  
The operator model simulates the dynamic behaviour of a 
system operator performing tasks during situations and 
contexts that lead to error. This model has proved to be an 
important tool for studying, and understanding, human error 
in that it allows situation contexts to be simulated through 
the parameterization of behavioural variables cited in the 
error reports. The original intension was to replicate 
scenarios in which human error occurred and alter user 
behaviour to experiment 
with new scenarios. The 
parameterization of behavioural variables allowed the 
simulation of a range of external and internal aspects 
influences on operator behaviour.  
The analysis of the corpus of reports revealed that the 
error reports focus on the technical aspects of the scenario in 
which the error occurred but rarely address the operator’s 
state while performing the task, often omitting relevant 
information relating to emotion and behaviour. In its initial 
stage the model complexity was kept low, with a small 
number of variables representing operator state. Tiredness, 
stress, inattention and confusion, were the causes most 
frequently mentioned in the reports. To refine the original 
user behaviour model, and in order to better understand the 
error context, more information about the status of the 
operator during the performance of a task is required. The 
proposed refinement consists of adding new characteristics 
to the model, i.e., extending the set of variables that represent 
the operator's state. This requires immersing the operator in 
the work context and replicating scenarios described in the 
accident and incident reports in order to observe behaviour. 
The scenarios must account for the wider environment (e.g., 
the occurrence of lighting, noise, etc.) as well as the 
immediate environment. This will be achieved with a 
simulator that replicates the working environment, with all 
the objects needed to perform the task, as comprehensively 
as possible [24]. In order to analyse interactions and 
highlight elements that contribute to the occurrence of error, 
the observation should be informed by methods and tools 
found in psychology, such as task analysis and the 
observation of emotional components.  
This paper proposes the application of Scherer’s 
Components Model of Emotion (CME) [16] to the 
observation, recording and analysis of the emotional 
components of operator behaviour. The CME model 
considers emotion to be an episode of interrelated, 
synchronized, state changes of subsystems, that are a result 
of the evaluation of an external or internal stimulus event. 
The 
model 
components 
are: 
cognitive 
appraisal, 
physiological 
reactions, 
behaviour 
tendencies, 
motor 
expression, and subjective feeling (emotional experience). 
CME was used to structure a range of relevant emotion-
measuring methods that can be used to find relevant 
emotions during the observation of user-system interaction 
(or with its representation such as the simulator used in this 
research). The emotions identified, and their relationships, 
are incorporated into the user behaviour model. To guide the 
observation an experimental protocol is needed that focuses, 
among other things, on the user behaviour components. The 
protocol consists of a set of procedures, activities and 
36
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

documents that support the observers when planning, 
conducting and reporting an experiment.  
This paper describes how emotions can be measured in 
accordance with CME and how this knowledge can be 
integrated into an experimental protocol devised to observe 
user interactions with systems. The text is organized as 
follows: Section 2 presents the CME and tools employed to 
collect emotion data, Section 3 presents the experimental 
protocol in its original formulation, and Section 4 presents an 
adaptation of the protocol with CME components. In the 
final section, the authors consider the future direction and 
developments this work which is still in progress. 
II. 
COMPONENT MODEL OF EMOTION (CME) 
With the advance, and popularization, of interactive 
technologies, the users’ emotional state has become a 
valuable source of information with the potential to improve 
the interaction mechanisms offered by a system [20]. 
Studying human reactions to emotional episodes allows 
improved understanding of human behaviour.  
Mahlke [9][10] identifies how usability and emotional 
reactions can determine a user's overall appraisal of a system 
and thus influence his future decisions and behaviour. This 
work used CME to structure a range of relevant emotion-
measuring methods and was adopted as the starting point for 
the work described here. What follows is an explanation of 
CME, a list of emotions that can be measured and the tools 
necessary to make these measurements. It is proposed that 
these emotions will be integrated into the user model. 
Although quantitative measurement of the behavioural 
tendency component of CME has been referred in previous 
studies is the least explored in the literature and this 
component is not addressed here.  
A. Cognitive appraisals 
Cognitive appraisals are defined as a quick evaluation of 
a situation that can direct emotional responses (positive or 
negative). Based on a review of the literature, Demir et al. 
[4] propose the following set of appraisal components: 
consistency of motives, intrinsic pleasure, expectation 
confirmation, 
standard 
conformance, 
agency, 
coping 
potential, and certainty. The tool Geneva Appraisal 
Questionnaire (GAQ) [16] assesses the result of an 
individual's appraisal process in the case of a specific 
emotional episode. GAQ aims to measure: intrinsic 
pleasantness, novelty, goal/need conduciveness, coping 
potential 
and 
norm/self-compatibility. 
The 
emotions 
measured by GAC are: anxiety, irritation, contentment, joy, 
sadness, disgust, fear, anger and surprise. 
B. Physiological reactions 
These can be expressed in cardiovascular, electrodermal 
and respiratory measures. Kreibig [7] presents a review of 
investigations of different emotions using a range of 
emotional induction paradigms. The review argues that the 
elements most often investigated are distributed in three 
categories: (i) cardiovascular measurements, i.e., heart rate 
(HR), systolic and diastolic blood pressure (SBP) and heart 
rate variability (HRV); (ii) respiration rate (RR); and (iii) 
skin conductance level (SCL). These are also measurements 
of anxiety, contentment, joy and fear. 
C. Motor expressions 
These are postural, vocal and facial expressions. This 
work addresses only facial expressions. To use facial 
expressions it is necessary to classify and correlate them with 
the appropriated emotion (or set of emotions). The most 
widely reported work in this context is that of Ekman & 
Friesen [5], known as the Facial Action Coding System 
(FACS).Its adoption, however, requires a highly skilled 
professional. This work adopts a simplified system, 
FaceReader [22], for automatic real time analysis of facial 
expressions. FaceReader allows the measurement of the 
following emotions: sadness, disgust, fear, anger and 
surprise. 
D. Subjective feelings 
Subjective feelings refer to the unique mental and bodily 
experience during a particular event [19]. Scherer claims that 
no objective method for measuring the subjective experience 
exists. To access it one must ask the individual to report on 
his/ her experience. The Self-Assessment Manikin (SAM) 
[8] - is a non-verbal scale, using schematic manikins to 
represent the different feelings (anxiety, hope, boredom, 
relaxation, irritation and contentment). SAM manipulates the 
valence, the arousal, and the dominance dimensions. An 
alternative, the Activation-Deactivation Adjective Check List 
(AD-ACL) [21], is a multidimensional tool to test various 
transitory arousal states (interest, irritation, contentment, joy 
and fear). The tool considers four sub-scales to measure the 
relation between energetic and tense arousal: energy, 
tiredness, tension, and calmness. The Geneva Emotion 
Wheel (QEW) [19] - is a verbal self-reporting instrument in 
which the participant is asked to indicate the emotional 
intensity for a single emotion (or a blend of several 
emotions) on 20 distinct emotion families (including interest, 
irritation, contentment, joy, sadness, disgust, fear, anger and 
surprise). Five degrees of intensity are represented by circles 
of different sizes.  
E. Other tools 
In addition to the tools listed above, there are two others 
that are relevant to this study. The Objective and Cognitive 
Profile of the User (POCUS) [18] structures a system user 
profile 
using 
the 
categories: 
personal, 
professional, 
contextual, physical, psychological and clinical. The NASA 
Task Load Index (NASA-TLX) [6], employed to measure 
mental workload, employs three dimensions: behaviour 
(effort and performance), task (physical, mental and 
temporal demands), and subjective (frustration). 
III. 
PROTOCOL FOR EXPERIMENTAL OBSERVATION OF 
THE INTERACTION (PEOI)  
The Protocol for Experimental Observation of Interaction 
(PEOI) [2] structures the usability recommendations found in 
the literature [11][13][14]. PEOI was conceived to support 
the observation of a system-user interaction focusing on 
usability. It is adaptable to a range of usability testing 
37
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

contexts (in the laboratory, in the field and in situ) and to 
different product complexities. It was employed in the 
usability evaluation process of the electric system simulator 
[24]. 
The protocol is organized in six steps each of which 
consists of a process defined by a set of activities. The steps 
and respective processes are illustrated in Figure 1. Step 1: 
Planning the Test characterizes the product, its context and 
its users. Step 2: Training (when needed) prepares the 
evaluation team and/or the test participants with the 
product’s context of use, tools and methods. Step 3: 
Preparation and Validation of the Test: structures the test, 
develops the necessary supporting materials (preparation) 
and performs a pilot test (validation) with a recruited 
participant. Step 4: Conducting the Test and Data gathering: 
executes the experiment resulting in a sample of data. Step 5: 
Data Tabulation and Analysis structures and organizes the 
gathered data for analysis and results in a diagnostic for the 
product-user interaction. Finally, Step 6 - Presentation of the 
Results specifies the form, content and media to report the 
experiment and its results. 
 
1  
Figure 1 Steps and Processes in PEOI 
 
2  
Figure 2 Distribution of proposed changes in PEOI 
PEOI associates a set of methods employed for data 
gathering (observation, interview, questionnaire, document 
analysis) to four categories of data. General data is gathered 
through interview, and aims to clarify the test objectives. All 
four methods are employed to gather data on: task, product 
and context of use. Pre-interaction gathers data on the user 
profile (personal, professional and contextual using all 
methods except observation). Interaction gathers data on 
subjective indicators using observation. It also gathers 
objective indicators about user activity using all methods 
except document analysis. Post-interaction gathers data on 
user satisfaction level with the product or system under test 
using all methods except document analysis. 
Given that the original purpose of the experimental 
protocol is to support usability evaluation, the target data and 
the methods used to gather data have proved adequate. Given 
the interest in extending the protocol to support the 
understanding of user behaviour, however, it needs to be 
adapted to gather data about the user emotional state. This 
additional data collection is associated with the interaction 
and post-interaction data categories. The adaptation of PEOI 
is described in the following section and was based on the 
CME approach. 
IV. 
PEOI'S ADOPTION OF CME'S TOOLS 
In spite of extending the protocol to support user 
behaviour observation, no changes are required in its general 
structure, thus its steps and processes remain the same. The 
changes required are: (i) extension of the range of data to be 
gathered; (ii) adding new methods for data collection; and 
(iii) including new activities to be performed by the 
evaluation team during the experiment. 
Given the new aspects of interest in the pre-interaction 
step, it is proposed that POCUS be adopted when gathering 
data on the user profile. The extended profile identifies 
personality and temperament traits. During the interaction 
and post-interaction steps, the focus becomes that of 
gathering data about the operator´s emotional state. In these 
two steps the elements of interest are the following thirteen 
emotions (according to Geneva Affect Label Coder (GALC´s 
dictionary) [19]): anger, anxiety, boredom, contentment, 
38
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

disgust, fear, hope, interest, irritation, joy, relaxation, sadness 
and surprise. 
With respect to data gathering methods four new groups 
are proposed: a) physiological measurement to gather 
physiological reactions, b) face recognition to gather motor 
expressions (FaceReader), and c) self-reporting to gather 
subjective feelings (SAM/AD-ACL/GEW). 
The overall changes to team activities during the 
experiment concern the measurements to be performed 
relating to behaviour observation. Figure 2 illustrates, at an 
abstract level, how these changes map onto the protocol. In 
Figure 2, the processes associated to each step are 
represented as rectangles, and within each process the 
corresponding 
activities 
are 
represented 
as 
small 
parallelograms. The figure highlights where changes are 
being proposed and the overall level of change proposed 
within each step/process. The level of change represents the 
volume of new activities introduced in the process (five 
levels are represented: 0%, 25%, 50%, 75% and 100%). 
The processes Knowledge of the Product, Recruitment of 
Test Users and Scheduling of Test Sessions and Data 
Gathering can be supported by POCUS. The highest impact 
of protocol adaptation is on these processes which relate to 
the test planning activity, test plan execution and data 
gathering.  
In the process Preparing Data Gathering Material four 
activities were modified: (1) defining which data to gather in 
order to include variables related to the operator´s emotional 
state, (2) including tools for data gathering comprising 
cognitive appraisal (GAQ), physiological measures, motor 
expressions (FaceReader), subjective feelings (SAM/AD-
ACL/GEW), user profile (POCUS) and workload (NASA-
TLX), (3) specifying the tools and resources required to 
collect physiological reactions (HR, HRV, SBP, RR, SCL), 
(4) preparing the artefacts required to perform the 
experiment, e.g., questionnaire, forms/cards and self-
reporting. 
In the process Data Gathering three activities were 
modified: (5) pre-test activities in which POCUS is applied 
while measuring physiological variables which will be used 
as a reference for later comparison with the values collected 
during task activity; (6) conduct the observation in which 
physiological variables (HR/HRV/SBP/RR/SCL), motor 
expressions (FaceReader) and subjective feelings (SAM/AD-
ACL) are measured; (7) conduct post-test activities in which 
cognitive appraisal (GAQ), subjective feelings (GEW), and 
workload (NASA-TLX) are measured. 
In Step 5, the process Analysis of Data Gathered reflects 
all the changes introduced in the previous steps. The data 
gathered in Step 4 will impact the analyses process because it 
requires the correlation analysis between subjective and 
objective indicators. 
Not all the tools and data types in the extended protocol 
must be adopted in every experiment of course. The choice 
of data types and corresponding data gathering tools depends 
on the specific aim of the observation. It is likely, therefore, 
that a specific experiment will only encompass a subset of 
the human behaviour related variables (i.e., subset of 
emotions) to be observed.  
V. 
PROOF OF CONCEPT 
An instantiation of the modified protocol is underway. It 
consists of an experiment in which a product developed for 
use in a critical situation is being used in order to validate the 
protocol and support the selection of tools used in the 
analysis of user behaviour during the task. 
The experiment was conducted in the Research Center of 
Psychology of Cognition, Language, and Emotion of at the 
Université de Provence, in France. It consisted of eight test 
sessions (including the pilot), during which users were 
observed with the aid of the protocol. The evaluation team 
was comprised by one psychologist, two usability experts 
and two usability trainee students, with varying levels of 
knowledge about the protocol. 
The product under observation was the Generateur de 
Plans d'Intervention (GENEPI) [12], which consists of a 
decision support system, to assist in preparing contingency 
plans to deal with maritime accidents. The usage scenario 
was the communication of an accident followed by 
preliminary data, which then had to be complemented by the 
user through the communication with various agencies such 
as a weather office. The user's goal is to propose an action 
plan, consistent with the situation of the accident, and the 
additional data obtained, in the shortest time possible. The 
whole process of supplying information about the accident 
(when requested), along with frequent calls demanding for 
an initial plan, was simulated by the research team during the 
test sessions. 
The data collected from the test sessions is currently 
being analyzed, and will be used to evaluate the new version 
of the protocol in terms of ease of use, effectiveness and 
efficiency. More specifically the data will be used to analyze 
the impact of the changes made in the protocol, on its 
artefacts, on the actors and the interaction between them. It is 
also intended to select those tools that are most appropriate 
for the acquisition of knowledge about the emotions and 
behaviour of users. Finally it is intended to assess the 
adaptability of the protocol to a different context from that 
for which it was conceived (i.e., the observation of electrical 
systems operation). 
From this experiment, it should be possible to identify 
any requirement for protocol refinement, before it is applied 
in the context of electrical systems and used to improve the 
user behaviour model.  
VI. 
FINAL CONSIDERATIONS 
The human error study based on document analysis (in 
particular error reports) will benefit from a user behaviour 
model extracted from the observation of the operator when 
confronted with the work context. To be a useful tool, the 
programmable user model must be refined with data 
gathered using tools and methods from the domain of 
psychology. This paper asserts that experiments to gather 
data on user behaviour must be supported by an experimental 
protocol. It describes such a protocol in the context of a 
product usability evaluation adapted to human behaviour 
observation. The observations supported by the protocol 
focus on aspects related to the user behaviour and emotional 
39
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

state. The proposed protocol supports: (i) identification of 
the emotions to be measured; (ii) identification of tools to be 
used when observing the user-system interaction; and (iii) 
structuring of the data gathering process to be employed 
during the interaction observation. 
One innovative aspect of the work reported is the 
simultaneous application of different tools to collect data 
about the operator’s emotion and behaviour, during their 
work activity, in order to evaluate their effectiveness. 
Another is the proposal of the experimental protocol itself. 
Although the existing literature cites both practices on 
usability evaluation of products and the observation of user 
behaviour in psychology, methods and procedures have not 
yet been made available in the form of a systematized 
protocol to support the reporting, interpretation and 
replication of experiments. 
A limitation of the proposed protocol is that it has been 
designed to observe the behaviour of individuals under stress 
interacting with critical systems. Under these conditions 
human reactions are amplified and thus more easily 
measured. Furthermore, the observation is conducted in a 
simulated environment. This imposes two corresponding 
challenges for the future extension of this work: (i) to 
evaluate the applicability, efficiency and effectiveness of the 
protocol outside the domain of critical systems, and (ii) to 
investigate the degree to which the data collected by the 
protocol reflects that which would be collected in a real 
working environment. 
In the current version of the protocol, data collection is 
focused on the following aspects: workload, attention, 
emotion and behaviour; complemented by data on the profile 
and personality of the operators. However, it is intended to 
extend this to include other aspects of user behaviour. This 
depends on identifying additional tools to collect human 
behaviour data. The observation of such supplementary 
factors will only be useful, of course, if the ranges of the 
metrics describing them in which human errors occur can be 
identified.  
Improved understanding of human behaviour during 
situations leading to error will complement traditional 
information (such as accident and incident reports) and lead 
to reduction in the incidence of human error. Information on 
user behaviour projected onto a user programmable model 
will allow the relationship between user behaviour, work 
context and error occurrences in specific working scenarios 
to be investigated experimentally. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Netto, A. V. S., Aguiar, Y. P. C, Scherer, D., and Vieira, M. F. Q. 
Context analysis during task execution: an operator model. In: IADIS 
Multi Conference On Computer Science and Information Systems, 
2009, Algarve, pp. 113-120. 
[2] Aguiar, Y. P. C. and Vieira, M. F. Q. Proposal of a protocol to 
support product usability evaluation. Fourth IASTED International 
Conference Human-Computer Interaction, 2009, St. Thomas, pp. 282-
289.  
[3] Cellier, J. M. L'erreur humane dans le travail. In : Les facteurs 
humains de la fiabilité dans les systèmes complexes, by J. Leplat and 
G. De Terssac. 1990, Marseille.  
[4] Demir, E., Desmet P.M.A., and Hekkert, P. Appraisal Patterns of 
Emotions in Human-Product Interaction. Int. J. of Design, 2009, 
pp.41-51.  
[5] Ekman, P. and Friesen, V. W. Facial action coding system: A 
technique for the measurement of facial movement. Palo Alto, Ca.: 
Consulting Psychologists Press, 1978. 
[6] Hart, S. G. and Staveland, L. E. Development of NASA-TLX (Task 
Load Index): Results of empirical and theoretical research. In: P. A. 
Hancock and N. Meshkati (Eds.) Human Mental Workload. 
Amsterdam: North Holland Press, 1988, pp. 139-183.  
[7] Kreibig, S. D. Autonomic nervous system activity in emotion: a 
review, Biological Psychology 84, 2010, pp. 394–421. 
[8] Lang, P. J., Greenwald, M. K., Bradley, M. M., and Hamm, A. O. 
Looking at pictures: Affective, facial, visceral, and behavioral 
reactions. Psychophysiology, 30 (1993), pp. 261-273.  
[9] Mahlke, S. and Lindgaard, G. Emotional Experiences and Quality 
Perceptions of Interactive Products. In J. Jacko (Ed.) Human-
Computer Interaction, Part I, HCII 2007, LNCS 4550 pp.164-173. 
Berlin: Springer.  
[10] Mahlke, S. and Thüring, M. Studying Antecedents of Emotional 
Experiences in Interactive Contexts.CHI 2007 Proceedings, pp. 915-
918. New York: ACM Press.  
[11] Mayhew, D. J. The usability engineering lifecycle: a practitioner's 
handbook for user interface design, San Francisco, CA: Morgan 
Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 1999 
[12] Mercantini J.-M., Guerreiro C. V. S, and de Freitas D. D., Designing 
a Software Tool to Plan Fight Action against Marine Pollutions. The 
7th International Mediterranean and Latin American Modelling 
Multiconference, October 13-15 2010, pp. 93-99, Fes, Morocco. 
[13] Nielsen, J. Usability Engineering. Morgan Kaufmann, 1994 
[14] Preece, J., Rogers, Y., and Sharp, H. Interaction Design: Beyond 
Human-Computer Interaction. 2nd Edition, 2007 
[15] Rasmussen, J., O. M. Pedersen, A. Carmino, M. Griffon, and P. 
Gagnolet. Classification system for reporting events involving human 
malfunctions. RISO National Laboratory, Dennmark: RISO National 
Laboratory, 1981.  
[16] Scherer K. R. Appraisal Considered as a Process of Multi-Level 
Sequential Checking; in K. R. Scherer, A. Schorr and T. Johnstone 
(eds.) Appraisal Processes in Emotion: Theory, Methods, Research, 
pp. 92-120. New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001. 
[17] Scherer, D., Netto, A. V. S., Vieira, M. F. Q. and Aguiar, Y. P. C. 
Programming a user model with data gathered from a user profile. In: 
ADIS Multi Conference on Computer Science and Information 
Systems, 2010, Freiburg. , 2010. pp. 139-146. 
[18] Scherer, D. and Vieira, M. F. Q. Accounting for the Human Error 
when Building the User Profile. In: Third IASTED International 
Conference Human-Computer Interaction, 2008, Innsbruck, 2008. v. 
1. pp. 132-137.  
[19] Scherer, K. R., What are emotions? And how can they be 
measured? Social Science Information 44, 2005, pp. 695–729.  
[20] Tayari, I. and Le Thanh, N. "Modélisation des états émotionnels par 
un espace vectoriel multidimensionnel" Research Report 2009. 
[21] Thayer, R. E. Toward a psychological theory of multidimensional 
activation (arousal). Motivation and Emotion, 2, 1978, pp. 1-34. 
[22] den Uyl, M., Kuilenburg, H. V., and Lebert, E. FaceReader: an online 
facial expression recognition system. Measuring Behavior 2005, 5th 
International Conference on Methods and Techniques in Behavioral 
Research, 2005, Wageningen, The Netherlands, pp. 589-590. 
[23] van Eekhout, J. M., and W. B. Rouse (1981). Human Errors in 
Detection, Diagnosis, and Compensations for Failures in the Engine 
Control Room of a Supertanker. IEEE Transactions on System, Man, 
and Cybernetics, 1981, 12 ed., pp. 813-816.  
[24] Vieira, M. F. Q., Nascimento, J. A. N., Scaico, A., Santoni, C., and 
Mercantini, J.-M. A Model Based Operator Training Simulator to 
support Human Behavior Studies. Transactions of the Society for 
Computer Simulation, v. 86, pp. 41-51, 2010. 
40
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

