Cognitive Chrono-Ethnography (CCE) to Reveal Personal Walking Motivations and
Nudging Habit Formation in Reaction
Max Hanssen
University of Tsukuba
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan
Email: maxhanssen98@outlook.com
Muneo Kitajima
Nagaoka University of Technology
Nagaoka, Niigata, Japan
Email: mkitajima@kjs.nagaokaut.ac.jp
SeungHee Lee
University of Tsukuba
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan
Email: lee.seunghee.gn@u.tsukuba.ac.jp
Abstract—Cognitive Chrono-Ethnography (CCE) explores the
qualitative nature of people’s decision-making process through
ethnographical ﬁeld observation to identify human behaviors
related to a daily activity. This paper shows how the results
of previous CCE studies on habitual walking behavior possibly
nudged people along the stages of the transtheoretical model.
The interview results of 29 participants from past CCE studies
showed that participants became more consciously aware of their
appreciation for certain walking elements through either the
one-on-one interview or the experience on an unfamiliar route.
Moreover, the revealed walking motivations were matched to the
six different stages of the transtheoretical model, assuming that
people in the precontemplation and contemplation stages are mo-
tivated by exploration and a route plan, people in the preparation
and action stages are motivated by the surrounding and social
aspects, and people in the maintenance and termination stages
are motivated by mental thinking, physical exercise, and a route
plan.
Keywords—Cognitive Chrono-Ethnography; Habit Formation;
Walking Preferences; Nudges.
I. INTRODUCTION
Making a permanent change in behavior is rarely a simple
process. It often involves a considerable commitment of effort,
time, and emotion. In this regard, many researchers have
studied the process of behavior change. Prochaska introduced
the transtheoretical model of behavior change, which assess
an individual’s readiness to act on a new healthier behavior,
and provides strategies, or processes of change to guide the
individual [1]. In the transtheoretical model, change involves
progress through the following six stages [1][2]:
1) Precontemplation: People have no intention to take ac-
tion in the foreseeable future and are unaware of their
behaviour.
2) Contemplation: People are aware of their behaviour, and
intend to take action in the foreseeable future.
3) Preparation: People are intending to take action in the
immediate future, and may begin taking small steps of
behaviour change.
4) Action: People have made overt modiﬁcations in their
behaviour or in acquiring new healthy behaviours.
5) Maintenance: People have been able to sustain their
change for at least six months and are working to prevent
relapse.
6) Termination: People have zero temptation and they are
sure they will not return to their old behavior.
Past research mentioned various motivating factors for pro-
gression along the transtheoretical model stages. Accordingly,
it is recognized that people at different stages are motivated by
different messages. A smoker in precontemplation likely needs
different information to move to contemplation than a smoker
in the action stage who needs to move to the maintenance
stage. Hence, it is important to develop persuasive interven-
tions that match an individual’s stage. Hereof, O’Keefe [3]
noted that decisional balance and self-efﬁcacy are important
to create stage-matched persuasive messages.
This research considers the capability of the nudge theory
to push people along the different stages of the transtheoretical
model. Nudge theory is based on the concept that by shaping
the environment, one can inﬂuence the likelihood that one
option is chosen over another by individuals [4]. In other
words, nudge theory proposes adaptive designs of the decision
environment as ways to inﬂuence the behavior and decision-
making of groups or individuals [4]. Therefore, a nudge makes
it more likely for a person to make a particular choice, by
altering the environment so that automatic cognitive processes
are triggered to favour the desired outcome.
On this matter, Cognitive Chrono-Ethnography (CCE) as
deﬁned by Kitajima [5][6] could possibly be a nudge to
promote habit formation in participants. CCE explores the
qualitative nature of people’s decision-making process through
ethnographical ﬁeld observation to identify human behaviors
related to a daily activity. Afterwards, study parameters are
identiﬁed through model-based simulation, which are used to
ﬁnd participants who suit the criteria. Consequently, a CCE
study is conducted where participant’s activity is recorded
without interfering their usual behavior. For example, Kita-
jima, Nakajima, and Toyota [7] clariﬁed visiting behaviors
of 9 loyal baseball fans via CCE. They selected loyal fans
based on web questionnaires and interviews, and asked them
to watch three baseball games while their view, heart rate,
and utterances were recorded. One week after each game,
interviews were conducted. Each participant did 4 interviews,
which created a fan history from 5 years ago until the
present, showing what triggered them to stage-up and become
a loyal fan. Among the participants, there was one fan who
mentioned that looking back on his past made him a stronger
fan [8]. Therefore, reﬂecting on one’s own experience via CCE
unconsciously nudged them on the transtheoretical model.
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-046-9
COGNITIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Figure 1. Walking experiences were recorded via (A) biometric data captured
with a wearable device, (B) video footage captured with a GoPro camera,
and (C) a map showing the familiar and unfamiliar parts of the route.
Similarly, past studies have used CCE to study individual
walking experiences and identify individuals’ walking motiva-
tions to promote healthy habitual behaviors [9][10][11]. Dur-
ing the studies, participants became aware of their appreciation
for certain elements of a walk because of the experimental
setting of CCE. Therefore, we hypothesized that participants of
this study also unconsciously progressed on the transtheoreti-
cal model, because the personal walking motivations became
apparent through the CCE study. However, research has not
yet conﬁrmed whether the past CCE studies also nudged
participants to forming a walking habit. Therefore, the purpose
of this study is to clarify how CCE revealed individuals’
walking motivations, and consider how participation to the
CCE study could nudge participants to make a permanent
change in behavior.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, the
methodology of this study is described. In Section III, the
results of the 29 participants are shown regarding personal
walking motivations. In Section IV, the relation between CCE,
walking motivations, and nudge theory are discussed. Finally,
Section V concludes the paper and shows how future works
concerns CCE to promote healthy habit formation.
II. METHODOLOGY
In order to understand how CCE helps participants becom-
ing aware of the walking elements that personally motivate
them to take a walk, this study examined the experience
of 29 participants from past CCE studies [9][10][11]. All
participants walked two routes: ﬁrstly, a familiar route (A), and
afterward, an unfamiliar route (B). Routes were discussed and
decided together with participants beforehand to conﬁrm par-
ticipants’ familiarity with the routes. As shown by Degen and
Rose [12], taking repetitive walking routes makes people less
sensitive to their surroundings. As a consequence, individuals,
Figure 2. Activities of participants 1 to 5 were recorded via (A) third-person
view, while participants 6 to 29’s (B) ﬁrst-person view was recorded, and
(C) biometric data of all participant was visualized.
who enjoy the beneﬁts of walking, might not be aware of all
the elements that contribute to their good walk. This is further
supported by the fact that walking is an automatic process
performed unconsciously [13]. Hence, walking an unfamiliar
route after a familiar route possibly helped to reveal underlying
personal factors that are unconsciously valued by participants.
Moreover, their activity was recorded via a wearable device
to capture biometric data (Figure 1 (A)), an attachable GoPro
camera to capture video footage (Figure 1 (B)), and a map
where participants ﬁlled in their familiar and unfamiliar parts
of the route (Figure 1 (C)).
Consequently, after route A and after route B, 10-minute
one-on-one interviews were conducted. Following the CCE
approach, participants’ walking experience was reproduced in
chronological order by showcasing the captured video footage,
biometric data, and route to make participants remember their
experience to the best extent possible. During the interview,
participants were asked about their activity by focusing on
the decision-making process and satisfaction of their walks.
Additional questions were asked about the walk’s interesting
moments, participants’ walking preferences, and the good and
bad parts of the walk.
Past research [9][11] transcribed and analyzed the interview
answers using Thematic Analysis (TA) to relate participants’
walking habit with the walking elements that they valued,
and to clarify the events that triggered the feeling of value or
satisfaction. TA is a method for identifying, and analyzing pat-
terns of a dataset [14]. Hanssen et al. [9][11] ﬁrst familiarized
themselves with the interview answers, and marked interesting
answers. Then, similar interesting answers were grouped into
themes and further reviewed. Finally, each theme was named,
and results were summarized.
III. RESULTS
A. Activity Recording
As a result of the wearable device (Figure 1(A)) and the
attached GoPro video camera (Figure 1(B)), camera footage
and biometric data were recorded for all participants. Partic-
ipants 1 to 5 participated in a separate CCE study [9] from
participants 6 to 29 [11]. The video footage was recorded from
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-046-9
COGNITIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

TABLE I. THE VALUES MENTIONED BY EACH PARTICIPANT DURING THE ONE-ON-ONE INTERVIEWS AFTER EACH WALK
Participant Value 1
Value 2
Value 3
Value 4
Value 5
Value 6
Value 7
1
Safety
Unknown Scenery Rhythm
2
Safety
Daylight
3
Conversation
Flora
Company
Surrounding
Nature
4
Flora
Insects
Talking
Scenery
Nostalgic
Beneﬁts
5
Seeing Firework
Night
Nostalgic
Conversation
Relax
Scenery
6
Sunny
Seeing pigeon
Seeing statue
Seeing playground Seeing School Seeing lake Seeing trees
7
New Things
8
New Things
Weather
Feelin Environment
9
Safety
Air Quality
Scent
Weather
10
Peaceful Atmosphere Safety
11
Less People
Scenery
Tempo and Music
Adventure
12
Mental Thinking
Scenery
13
Scenery
Sunny
Time
Less People
14
Natural View
New Shops
Less People
Explore
Season
Flowers
15
Physical
Oxygen
Thinking while Exercising Road Condition
16
Landmarks
Familiarity
Purpose
Fun Shops
17
Sunny
Greenery
Peceful and Silent
18
Safety
Scenery
No Cars
19
Mentality
Weather
20
Pedestrian Road
Plants
Season
21
Relaxing
22
Others
Nature
Scenery
No Noise
Explore
23
Purpose
Solitude
Nature
Silence
See Others
Continuity
24
Time
Freedom
With Someone
Purpose
Plan
25
With Someone
Walkability
Scenery
26
Scenery Changes
Newness
Nature
Walkability
27
Physical Beneﬁts
Purpose
28
Familiarty
Adventure
Time
29
Weather
New Things
different perspectives for the two CCE studies. Therefore, the
captured video footage was recorded from a third-person view
for participants 1 to 5 (Figure 2(A)), and a ﬁrst-person view
for participants 6 to 29 (Figure 2(B)). Moreover, Figure 2(C)
shows an example of the biometric data that was recorded with
the wearable device shown in Figure 1(B). As part of a CCE
study, these recordings were shown to participants during the
one-on-one interviews to improve the memory of participants
related to their experience.
B. One-on-one Interviews
During the interview participants discussed parts of the walk
that impacted them and identiﬁed enjoyable walking elements
that potentially motivated them to walk again. Table I sum-
marizes all values that were mentioned by the 29 participants
in the past research [9][11].
Many participants became aware of their appreciation for
certain values through the interview itself. The review of
the captured video footage, biometric data, and map of the
route made participants remember their walking experience,
enabling them to answer the questions asked by the researcher.
Hereof, participants mentioned directly that they were unaware
of their appreciation for certain elements that walking has to
offer, but the experiment made them realize their apprecia-
tion for these walking elements. For example, participant 4
mentioned the values “Nostalgic” and “Beneﬁts” during the
interview. In this regard, he mentioned:
I felt nostalgic while walking because I used to take
recreational walks in the past but not any more. My
father used to walk with me everyday because I had
many personal troubles after we moved to a different
house. Now I realize that walking everyday gave
me many beneﬁts that helped me to overcome that
situation.
Other participants realized their appreciation for certain
walking elements after they were introduced to an unfamiliar
route after the usual familiar walk that they took. In this regard,
participants 1 and 2 realized their appreciation for “Safety”
after the unfamiliar route. For example, after walking a route
with a narrower pedestrian road than usual, participant 1 told
the interviewer:
The narrow pedestrian road was too close to the
cars passing-by and made the route not enjoyable.
Therefore, I think safety is the most important factor
for a good walk.
Similarly, participant 15 mentioned her appreciation for
certain speciﬁc walking elements related to safety, such as
“Road Condition” and “Thinking while Exercising.” These
became apparent to her after walking an unfamiliar route,
which had a poorer road condition than she was used to with
her familiar walks. She mentioned:
The poor condition of the pedestrian road made me
focus on where I put my feet while walking. Because
of this, I could not think about the things I want to
think about while walking.
However, many participants’ experience were also positively
inﬂuenced by the unfamiliarity of the second route, making
their appreciation for “Newness” and “Exploration” apparent.
For example, participant 26 mentioned the importance of
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-046-9
COGNITIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Figure 3. Walking motivations related to different stages of the Transtheoretical Model were found based on previous ﬁndings [9].
“Scenery Changes” and “Newness” after walking an unfamil-
iar route. Also, participants 7 and 8 mentioned “New Things”
as important motivations for them to take a walk. Similarly,
participant 14 mentioned the importance to explore during a
walk. After having walked her unfamiliar route, she mentioned
during the interview:
I like to explore during a walk. I saw new shops that
looked interesting. It is nice to ﬁnd new shops that
I can maybe visit later in the future.
The familiarity of the experience was not only determined
by the route that participants walked, but also by the time of
the day. Participant 2 usually takes a walk in the daylight.
However, he walked the second unfamiliar route during the
night. As a result, the familiarity of the overall walking
experience further decreased. Moreover, participant 2 noticed
the importance of daylight in order to have a satisfying walk.
In this regard, he mentioned:
I needed to watch out where I walked because of the
lack of light. Therefore, the walking experience felt
less safe.
C. Emerged Themes for Walking Motivations
The Thematic Analysis of the previous CCE studies showed
that people with different walking habits valued different
walking elements. As a result, Hanssen et al. [11] classiﬁed
the values into the following six emerging themes to relate the
values to walking habit stages:
• Surrounding: Elements related to natural features of our
surroundings, considered in terms of their appearance,
smell, and sound.
• Social: People’s need for interactions with other people
or need for solitude during the walk.
• Exploration: Wanting to explore “newness” during a
walk by encountering unfamiliar events or objects.
• Route Plan: People with a walking habit beneﬁted from
the “safety” and “road condition” of the Route Plan,
while people with no habit valued the “purpose” or
“destination” of the Route Plan.
• Physical Exercise: Walking motivations that stem from
wanting to move the body for healthy exercise.
• Mental Thinking: Walking helped to stimulate the peo-
ple to think about desired things in their mind.
IV. DISCUSSION
A. CCE to Identify Walking Motivations
Past studies took various approaches to study habit forma-
tion that improve physical health [15][16]. Lally et al. [15]
documented experiences of habit development in participants
who enrolled on a weight loss intervention. Tobias [16]
developed a social psychological model of habit development
by studying the effect of memory aid in habit development
and analyzing time-series data from a behavior-change cam-
paigns. Both studies found insights regarding behavior change.
Lally et al. [15] revealed that behavior change is initially
experienced as effortful but automaticity increased, as the
performance becomes easier. Moreover, Tobias [16] provided
a new understanding on the role of memory to support the
performance of repeated behaviors. However, related works
have not yet shown methods to reveal the valued walking
elements of people that have different walking habits [1][2].
Nevertheless, the past CCE studies’ results on people’s
walking experience raised awareness on personally valued
walking elements [9][11]. In particular, some participants’
one-on-one interview responses revealed that they were un-
aware of personal walking motivations beforehand, but the
walks during the experiment and review of the captured
activity recordings raised their awareness on the elements that
motivated or satisﬁed them. These were summarized in Table I,
and it could be argued that these stimulated them to walk
regularly. In this manner, CCE contributed to healthy behavior
change as it was able to identify the walking elements that
motivate people to walk again.
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-046-9
COGNITIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Figure 4. Personal walking motivations of participants were found during the CCE study by either (A) the review of the captured data during the interview
or (B) the presence or lack of certain walking elements during the unfamiliar route.
Moreover, Hanssen et al. [11] further classiﬁed the valued
walking elements into themes via Thematic Analysis. Six
themes emerged, which were further related to people of
different walking habit stages, identifying how people with
a walking habit value different elements than people without
a walking habit. This study built upon the previous ﬁndings
by examining how the themes possibly relate to the different
stages of the transtheoretical model, as shown in Figure 3.
In past research, three different walking habit stages were
identiﬁed based on how often participants mentioned that
they walked in their daily life. The three stages were the
“No Walking Habit”, “Half Walking Habit”, and “Walking
Habit” stages. Since previous research identiﬁed three habit
stages and there are six stages in the transtheoretical model,
this research matched the “No Walking Habit” stage to the
“Precontemplation” and “Contemplation” stages, the “Half
Walking Habit” stage to the “Preparation” and “Action” stages,
and the “Walking Habit” stage to the “Maintenance” and
“Termination” stages of the transtheoretical model. Therefore,
this study assumes that people in each stage are motivated by
the following values, as shown in Figure 3:
• Precontemplation – Contemplation: People at this stage
are motivated to stage-up by values related to “Explo-
ration” and “Route Plan” of walking. Speciﬁcally, the
“Route Plan” needs a purpose and destination.
• Preparation – Action: People at this stage are motivated
to stage-up by values related to “Social” and the “Sur-
rounding” of walking.
• Maintenance – Termination: People at this stage are
motivated to stage-up by values related to “Mental Think-
ing”, “Physical Exercise” and “Route Plan” of walking.
Speciﬁcally, the “Route Plan” needs to be have good road
conditions and safety.
However, future works should concern how participants can
be categorized to one of the six stages of the transtheoretical
model. Currently, this research assumed relations between the
three walking habit stages and the transtheoretical model, but
these are only based upon the frequency that participants
mentioned to walk in their daily life. Hence, more in-depth
questions should be asked in future works to conﬁrm the
stage of the participant, and to reveal what walking elements
motivated people in each of the six stages.
B. CCE as a Nudge for Walking Habit Formation
Not only researchers, but also the participants themselves
became aware of the elements that motivated them. Therefore,
participation to the CCE study enabled the participants to
better understand their reasons and beneﬁts for walking. It can
be argued that better understanding the reasons and beneﬁts
of healthy activities motivates people to perform this activity
regularly [17] . Therefore, past CCE studies were not only able
to identify walking motivations, but also nudged participants to
form a walking habit by letting them understand their personal
walking motivations.
Hereof, CCE nudged people in two different manners. First,
with the review of the video footage, map, and biometric
data, as it helped participants to remember and understand
their own experience better. Accordingly, when they were
questioned about their walking motivations, they discovered
that they had an appreciation for certain walking elements that
they previously did not know (Figure 4(A)). An example can
be seen in the response of participant 4. The interview and
review of the captured data together with a researcher forced
participant 4 to reﬂect on walking in general. Because of this,
the participant realized the importance and beneﬁts that he
got from past walking experiences. In other words, it can be
argued that the participant became more aware of the effect
of daily walking, which possibly motivated him to walk more
frequently.
Second, participants discovered their appreciation for walk-
ing elements during the unfamiliar route (Figure 4(B)). In
this regard, participants either realized their personal walking
motivations because the usual elements that they encounter
in their familiar walk were not present during the unfamiliar
walk, or because the unfamiliar walk introduced them to
new elements that they immediately appreciated. For example,
participants 1 and 15 noticed the lack of safety while walking
the unfamiliar route compared to their familiar walking route.
Participant 1 mentioned the pedestrian road being narrower
than usual, and participant 15 mentioned the bad inﬂuence
of the poor road condition on her experience. Therefore, they
became more aware of the importance of safety to have their
good walk. On the other hand, participant 14 noticed many
new shops during the unfamiliar route that she had not seen
before. Because of this, she became aware of her appreciation
to explore and ﬁnd new things during a walk.
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-046-9
COGNITIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Figure 5. The inﬂuence of CCE to push people along the six stages of the transtheoretical model via the increased awareness on personal values was found
C. The Effect of CCE on the Transtheoretical Model
CCE’s contribution to the transtheoretical model is shown
in Figure 5. Participants become aware of an activity’s beneﬁts
through CCE, which can motivate them to develop a habit. In
this regard, it is assumed that participants in the precontem-
plation and contemplation stages are impacted to the greatest
extent, as the results showed that participants in the higher
stages were already more aware of their walking motivations.
V. CONCLUSIONS
This paper presents a new approach to understanding the
personal motivations that people have to walk. The interview
results from past CCE studies showed that participants became
more aware of their appreciation for walking elements, possi-
bly nudging them towards the next stage in the transtheoretical
model. In this regard, CCE mainly identiﬁed motivations for
habitual walking experiences in two different manners. First,
the interviews helped participants to reﬂect on their experi-
ence. Second, participants realized what important walking
elements were missing in the unfamiliar route.
Even though this paper explains CCE’s ability to identify
motivations for walking, it can be applied to any activity that
requires progression through the transtheoretical model, such
as psychological rehabilitation. By uncovering personal moti-
vations and facilitating progression through the transtheoretical
model, CCE can help individuals in psychological rehabil-
itation become more aware of the elements that contribute
to their well-being and address any missing components in
their therapeutic journey. CCE’s ability to identify motivations
extends its potential beyond walking, making it a valuable tool
for promoting positive change and psychological recovery.
In conclusion, CCE can reveal what factors push people
to advance to the following transtheoretical model stage. The
revealed factors can be introduced to other people who are
in the precontemplation or contemplation stage, but have the
potential to fully develop a habit, so that they are success-
fully guided through the transtheoretical model stages. By
participating in a CCE experiment about a healthy activity,
participants can become aware of the activity’s beneﬁts, which
potentially nudges them to the next stage in the transtheoretical
model.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number 20H04290.
REFERENCES
[1] J. O. Prochaska and W. F. Velicer, “The transtheoretical model of health
behavior change,” American Journal of Health Promotion, vol. 12, no. 1,
pp. 38–48, 1997.
[2] J. O. Prochaska, “Transtheoretical model of behavior change,” Encyclo-
pedia of Behavioral Medicine, pp. 2266–2270, 2020.
[3] D. J. O’Keefe, Persuasion: Theory and research.
SAGE, 2016.
[4] R. H. Thaler and C. R. Sunstein, Nudge: Improving decisions about
health, wealth, and happiness.
Penguin Books, 2009.
[5] M. Kitajima, H. Tahira, S. Takahashi, and T. Midorikawa, “Under-
standing tourists’in situbehavior: A cognitive chrono-ethnography study
of visitors to a hot spring resort,” Journal of Quality Assurance in
Hospitality & Tourism, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 247–270, 2012.
[6] M. Kitajima, “Cognitive Chrono-Ethnography (CCE): A Behavioral
Study
Methodology
Underpinned
by
the
Cognitive
Architecture,
MHP/RT,” in Proceedings of the 41st Annual Conference of the Cogni-
tive Science Society.
Cognitive Science Society, 2019, pp. 55–56.
[7] M. Kitajima, M. Nakajima, and M. Toyota, “Cognitive chrono-
ethnography: A method for studying behavioral selections in daily
activities,” Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society
Annual Meeting, vol. 54, no. 19, pp. 1732–1736, 2010.
[8] M. Kitajima, “Cognitive Chrono-Ethnography (CCE): a methodology
for anticipating future user needs,” in Work: A Journal of Prevention,
Assessment and Rehabilitation (IEA 2012: 18th World congress on
Ergonomics - Designing a sustainable future), vol. 41.
Amsterdam,
The Netherlands: IOS Press, 2012, pp. 5251–5258.
[9] M. Hanssen, E. Onchi, M. Kitajima, and S. Lee, “Subjective differences
of walking behaviors between familiar and unfamiliar routes,” 4th Inter-
national Conference of the Korean Society on Emotion and Sensibility,
pp. 91–99, 2021.
[10] M. Hanssen, E. Onchi, L. Zhi, M. Kitajima, and S. Lee, “A cognitive
chrono-ethnography approach for classifying walking motivations to
understand the development of walking habits.” Spring Meeting of the
Korean Society of Emotion and Sensibility, pp. 53–56, 2022.
[11] M. Hanssen, M. Kitajima, and S. Lee, “The evaluation of beneﬁcial
walking elements to identify motivations for walking habit formation,”
Emotion and Sensibility 27 [under review], 2023.
[12] M. M. Degen and G. Rose, “The sensory experiencing of urban design:
The role of walking and perceptual memory,” Urban Studies, vol. 49,
no. 15, pp. 3271–3287, 2012.
[13] L. A. Malone and A. J. Bastian, “Thinking about walking: Effects
of conscious correction versus distraction on locomotor adaptation,”
Journal of Neurophysiology, vol. 103, no. 4, pp. 1954–1962, 2010.
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-046-9
COGNITIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

[14] V. Braun and V. Clarke, “Thematic analysis.” APA handbook of research
methods in psychology, Vol 2: Research designs: Quantitative, qualita-
tive, neuropsychological, and biological., pp. 57–71, 2012.
[15] P. Lally, J. Wardle, and B. Gardner, “Experiences of habit formation: A
qualitative study,” Psychology, Health & Medicine, vol. 16, no. 4, pp.
484–489, 2011.
[16] R. Tobias, “Changing behavior by memory aids: A social psychological
model of prospective memory and habit development tested with dy-
namic ﬁeld data.” Psychological Review, vol. 116, no. 2, pp. 408–438,
2009.
[17] S. Mandic, H. Wilson, M. Clark-Grill, and D. O ’Neill, “Medical
students ’awareness of the links between physical activity and health,”
Montenegrin Journal of Sports Science and Medicine, vol. 6, no. 2, pp.
5–12, 2017.
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-046-9
COGNITIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

