The Entry Point in the Identiﬁcation of Familiar Objects
Barbara Bazzanella
Department of Cognitive and Education Sciences
DISCOF, University of Trento
Corso Bettini 31, 38068 Rovereto, Italy
barbara.bazzanella@unitn.it
Paolo Bouquet
Department of Engineering and Computer Science
DISI, University of Trento
Via Sommarive 14, 38123 Trento, Italy
bouquet@disi.unitn.it
Abstract—This paper reports an experiment which explores
whether there is a preferential level of abstraction that serves
as the entry point in identiﬁcation of familiar objects. In
a category-veriﬁcation task the participants were presented
with a category label and asked to indicate whether a picture
presented a brief time later was an example of the category.
Familiar entities from three different categories of objects
(artwork, building and product) and unfamiliar entities from
three contrasting categories (home furnishing, utensil and
musical instrument) were categorized at three different levels of
abstraction (superordinate, basic and subordinate). We found
that participants were faster to identify familiar entities at the
unique level of identity (subordinate level) than they were to
verify them at the basic level. On the contrary, veriﬁcation
times for unfamiliar entities were faster at the basic level than
at the subordinate level. These results suggest that the entry
point of familiar entities is shifted to the most subordinate
level of abstraction in object identiﬁcation (i.e., the level of
singular concepts). Implications of these ﬁndings for the basic
level advantage effect are discussed.
Keywords-entry point; singular concepts; basic level advan-
tage; unique level of identity.
I. INTRODUCTION
Humans have an extraordinary ability to identify indi-
vidual objects and this ability is crucial for daily life. We
need to correctly recognize and identify all the individuals
with which we interact (e.g., people, pets, objects) and
successfully perform actions and have reactions that must
be directed to these entities.
Any individual object can be identiﬁed at multiple levels
of abstraction. For example, whereas a painting can be
identiﬁed as a painting (basic level), the same painting can
be identiﬁed more generally as an artwork (superordinate
level) or more speciﬁcally as a portrait or Mona Lisa
(subordinate or unique level, respectively). In this paper we
aim to investigate whether there is a preferential level of
abstraction at which an individual is ﬁrst identiﬁed. Do we
ﬁrst identify the most famous Leonardo’s painting as Mona
Lisa or as a painting? Is there a direct and rapid access to the
unique mental representation of Mona Lisa (i.e., the singular
concept of Mona Lisa) during the identiﬁcation process, or
is this access mediated by accessing higher level conceptual
representations (i.e., general concepts)? These questions deal
with the bottom-up access to mental representations of
individuals in object recognition. To investigate if the sin-
gular concept represents the ﬁrst conceptual representation
activated during the identiﬁcation process - the entry point
in individual object recognition to use a term proposed by
Jolicoeur et at. [1] - we performed an experiment which
investigates whether people identify individual artifacts from
three different categories (i.e., artwork, building and product)
as quickly (or more quickly) at the unique level of identity
(e.g., Mona Lisa) as at the basic level (e.g., painting). The
results of the experiment challenges the hypothesis that
objects are necessarily ﬁrst identiﬁed as members of basic-
level categories before further identiﬁcation, and provide
preliminary evidence, which may stimulate the debate about
individual objects and their conceptual representations. The
rest of the paper is organized as follows. We review related
work in Section II. In Section III we discuss the motivations
and the hypothesis of the study. Section IV presents the
experiment and results. Finally, the contribution of the paper
with respect to the previous work is discussed in Section V.
II. RELATED WORK
The idea that, of all the various categories to which a given
entity belongs, some appear to be more readily accessible to
the human mind than others, has been widely investigated
by Rosch et al. since from their ﬁrst studies on human
categorization [2]. The authors found that, although all
objects can be categorized at different levels of abstraction,
there is one level, called the basic level, that has a special
status in categorization (a phenomenon known as basic
level advantage). To test the relation between basic level
advantage and object identiﬁcation, Rosch and colleagues
[3][2] used several object-identiﬁcation tasks. The authors
found that people prefer to use basic-level terms to name
objects (e.g., dog) over more general or speciﬁc terms (e.g.,
animal or poodle), they are faster to verify objects at an
intermediate level of speciﬁcity than at more general and
more speciﬁc levels and they are primed by basic-level terms
more than by subordinate- or superordinate-level names.
To explain the basic-level effects, Jolicoeur, Gluck and
Kosslyin [1] proposed that certain nodes within the hierar-
chical representation of object categories in memory serve
as “entry points” for probing the semantic network. An
7
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

entry point corresponds to the level where “the perceptual
stimulus ﬁrst makes contact with its underlying memorial
representation”. Visual stimuli are ﬁrst identiﬁed through
one of these entry-level categories so that any information
stored directly with the corresponding entry-level node is
activated earliest in the identiﬁcation process. Additional
information becomes available later, as activation spreads
downward toward more speciﬁc concepts or upward toward
more general concepts. Basic-level effects are observed for
typical category members because the basic-level category
nodes serve as the entry-point for such items.
However, research on human object identiﬁcation have
demonstrated that the entry point can be modulated by
at least two factors: 1) typicality of an exemplar for its
corresponding basic level and 2) domain-speciﬁc expertise.
Jolicoeur et al. [1] suggested that atypical category members
fail to show a basic level advantage because their entry-
points are speciﬁc rather than basic. An atypical member is
structurally dissimilar to the other members of the same ba-
sic level category and, therefore, it is more easily categorized
at subordinate level than at the basic. Murphy and Brownell
[4] explain this effect arguing that atypical subordinates have
many of the characteristics of basic categories (i.e. they are
speciﬁc) but, unlike other subordinates, they are also very
distinctive.
Also expertise in a particular ﬁeld is likely to shift
entry level of many objects towards the subordinate level.
Johnson and Mervis [5] and Tanaka and Taylor [6], for
example, studied the interaction of knowledge and basic-
level categorization in individuals with varying levels of
knowledge about song-birds and dogs, respectively. They
found that experience increased accessibility to categorical
knowledge at subordinate levels, causing these levels to
function as basic. However, the efﬁciency advantage of
the previous basic level was not lost as knowledge about
subbasic categories increased.
In the domain of face perception, Tanaka [7] proposed a
similar expertise-mediated shift in identiﬁcation of familiar
faces. According to this hypothesis, even though few people
are experts in recognition of objects from a particular
category, all adults can be considered experts in human face
recognition [8]. Therefore, if face recognition follows the
pattern of other kinds of expert object recognition, people
should show a downward shift in recognition as a result
of experience. In this case, however, the face expertise
hypothesis predicts that the entry point of face recognition
is at the most subordinate level of abstraction that is the
level of unique identity where the category label is a proper
name referring to a single individual in the world (e.g.,
Barack Obama). The results from four experiments support
the face expertise hypothesis showing that, for example, a
face is more likely to be identiﬁed as Barack Obama rather
than as a person or as politician. Similar results have been
reported by Belke et al. [9] in the context of art recognition.
In this study the authors provides empirical evidence that
art is distinguished from other real world objects in human
cognition, in that the identiﬁcation of visual art is at the
subordinate level of the producing artist rather than at the
basic level of the object.
III. RATIONALE FOR THE STUDY
The studies described above provide evidence that for
many objects the identiﬁcation process operates at levels
other than the basic level. Moreover, for a special class
of stimuli (i.e., familiar faces) the entry point appears to
be shifted to the level of unique identity. Since human
faces have been often considered special stimuli in visual
recognition, the question whether a similar shift can happen
for other types of familiar entities remains open.
The ﬁrst aim of the present study is to investigate whether
the entry point in the identiﬁcation of unique non-face ob-
jects is at the level of unique identity as that of face objects.
Up to now, research in the domain of object recognition
has been concerned with object classes such as furniture,
every-day-objects and even artiﬁcial objects, but very little
is known about the representation and initial identiﬁcation of
unique entities belonging to these classes. For instance, what
might be the ﬁrst access to semantic memory when a person
identiﬁes the “Eiffel Tower”? According to a strong form
of the basic-level advantage hypothesis, called by Murphy
et al. [4] basic-ﬁrst hypothesis, we should expect that the
entry point in this case is at the level of “monument” or
“tower”, or even more general “work of art”, corresponding
to the basic level of the stimulus. People may access to
the unique level of identity only after the basic level is
activated. Therefore, if the access to the subordinate level
of identity is mediated through the basic-level, we should
predict that the basic-level categorization should be faster
than the subordinate-level categorization. On the contrary,
if the stimulus is recognized at the level of unique identity,
as “Eiffel Tower”, recognition times should be as fast as or
faster at this level than at the basic level.
Our hypothesis is that a person ﬁrst recognizes an individ-
ual entity at the level of unique identity when she possesses
a singular concept on that individual entity in semantic
memory. We assume that the initial identiﬁcation of an
individual entity, whose information is structured in memory
as a singular concept, yields cognitive processing that differs
from that involved in the identiﬁcation of objects which are
not individuated in memory by means of singular concepts.
Initializing the individual concept of an entity makes that
entity unique and identiﬁable (i.e., atypical in a sense) from
the other members of the same basic level category. Then,
this entity can be categorized faster at the most subordinate
level of categorization, namely the unique level of identity.
Having the singular concept of an object entails the direct
recognition of the object through that concept which serves
as the access node to the knowledge that the agent has
8
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

about the object. As a result, any information stored at the
level of the singular concept becomes available earliest in
processing.
On these premises, we hypothesize that the direct access
to semantic information about unique individuals during the
recognition process is not a cognitive process specialized for
human faces, but is a general mechanism that humans use in
the recognition process of unique identiﬁable entities. To test
this hypothesis, we investigated the identiﬁcation process
using another category of unique entities, i.e., artifact. We
predict that, if the entry point is set on the basis of the
level of the uniqueness of the items within the category, the
unique-level categorization of unique items should be faster
than their upper-level categorizations.
IV. THE EXPERIMENT
In the experiment we used a category veriﬁcation task
similar to that adopted by Tanaka [7] in the domain of face
recognition and by Belke [9] in art recognition. Participants
were shown with a superordinate, basic or subordinate level
category name and a brief time later were shown with a
picture. Their task was to indicate whether the picture was
an exemplar of the category. The results were compared
between familiar and unfamiliar objects. Familiar entities
were selected from three categories of objects (i.e., artwork,
building and product) and contrasted with unfamiliar entities
from three contrasting categories (home furnishing, utensil
and musical instrument). In the experiment, participants
were asked to verify exemplars from these categories at su-
perordinate (e.g., “artwork”, “building”, “furnishing”), basic
(e.g., “painting”, “tower”, “chair”) and subordinate levels
(e.g., “Mona Lisa”, “Eiffel Tower”, “rocking chair”) of
categorization. In previous research [2], [1], it has been
shown that participants were faster to categorize exemplars
at the basic level (e.g., verifying that an entity is a “dog”)
than categorizing exemplars at the superordinate level (e.g.,
verifying that an entity is an “animal”) and at the subordinate
level (e.g., verifying that an entity is a “poodle”). Therefore,
according to the basic-ﬁrst hypothesis, artifacts should be
categorized ﬁrst at the basic level (regardless of the fact
that they are familiar or unfamiliar). That is, basic level
veriﬁcations should be faster than superordinate veriﬁcations
and than subordinate veriﬁcations (unique identity name or
model name veriﬁcations). For instance, people should be
faster to verify that a picture is a “painting” than to verify
that it is an “artwork”or “Mona Lisa”. On the contrary, we
expect that subordinate-level representations will be more
accessible than the basic-level representations for familiar
objects. That is, participants should be as fast or faster to
verify the unique identity of a familiar object (e.g., “Mona
Lisa”) than to verify that the object is an “artwork” or a
“painting”. We expect the same pattern of results for very
familiar products, like familiar car models. That is, people
should be as fast or faster to verify that a car is a “Fiat 500”
than to verify that is a “vehicle” or a “car”.
A. Method
1) Participants: Twenty participants (12 males and 8
females) took part in the experiment. Mean age was 31.15
(SD=6.35), ranging from 23 to 45 years. Participants were
tested individually and they were not paid for participation.
2) Stimuli: Pictures were chosen from three categories of
familiar entities (artwork, building and product) and from
three contrasting categories of unfamiliar entities (home
furnishing, utensil and musical instrument). As famous art-
works, some of the most well-known paintings and sculp-
tures in art history were selected (e.g., Mona Lisa, David).
Famous building were selected from those used in [10] (e.g.,
Eiffel Tower, Twin Towers). Finally, for the product category
we used some of the most popular models of vehicles and
electronic devices in Italy (e.g., Fiat 500, Iphone). For each
category we selected 4 items. Additionally, four pictures
other than those used for experimental trials were selected
for practice trials.
3) Procedure: At the beginning of the experimental ses-
sion, participants were presented with instructions explaining
the category veriﬁcation task on a monitor screen. They
were also provided with the complete list of the subordinate-
level terms for all of the 24 target exemplars presented in
a random order one after the other. Subsequently, to signal
the beginning of each trial, a ﬁxation cross appeared for
1000 ms on the monitor. Next, a blank screen appeared for
1000 ms, followed by a category word which remained for
2500 ms. Finally, after 500 ms blank interval, the category
name was replaced with a picture. The participants’ task was
to verify whether the picture matched the category name,
by pressing as quickly as possible the corresponding TRUE
or FALSE buttons. The picture remained on the screen
until the answer was given. The two response keys were
counterbalanced for hand across participants. Trial order was
fully randomized. Figure 1 illustrates the design of a sample
trial in the category-veriﬁcation task used in the experiment.
The experiment consisted of 144 experimental trials, result-
ing from 24 items with two response types (TRUE and
FALSE) and three levels of categorizations. That is, each
item was shown six times. In the superordinate level and true
condition, the category-word could be “artwork”, “building”,
“product”, “furnishing”, “utensil”, “musical instruments”. In
the basic level and true condition it could be “painting”,
“tower”, “phone” and so on. Finally, in the subordinate level
and true condition the category word was the proper name
of the artifact, the model name of the product or the speciﬁc
type of furnishing, utensil or musical instrument. In the
false conditions, category words were taken from a differ-
ent exemplar of the same higher-order level category. For
example, the “Eiffel Tower” letter string and the “Leaning
Tower of Pisa” picture stimulus were paired, falling both
9
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

Figure 1.
Trial presentation sequence in the category veriﬁcation task. On
each trial, a word was viewed (at superordinate, basic or subordinate level),
followed by a picture, and the subjects were asked to indicate whether the
picture matched the word.
under the same inclusive category “tower”. In the basic
level condition, a false word label that shared the same
superordinate category was provided (e.g., the letter string
“painting” was presented with a “statue” picture stimulus,
with both referring to the superordinate category “artwork”).
False trials were designed with the restriction that each
word-picture combination at the subordinate level would
appeared only once during the experiment and each word
within a level of categorization would appeared with the
same frequency in order to prevent response bias. The exper-
iment was implemented in Matlab using the Psychtoolbox-
3. An example of the category words used in the three
categorization levels for true and false conditions is shown in
Table I. We note that the results of the experiment critically
Category Word
Stimulus
Level
True Condition
False Condition
Mona Lisa
Sup.
artwork
building
(familiar)
Basic
painting
sculpture
Sub.
Mona Lisa
The Scream
Eiffel Tower
Sup.
building
utensil
(familiar)
Basic
tower
skyscraper
Sub.
Eiffel Tower
Leaning Tower of Pisa
Fiat 500
Sup.
product
building
(familiar)
Basic
car
audio player
Sub.
Fiat 500
Mini Cooper
rocking chair
Sup.
furnishing
artwork
(unfamiliar)
Basic
chair
table
Sub.
rocking chair
folding chair
bread knife
Sup.
utensil
artwork
(unfamiliar)
Basic
knife
spoon
Sub.
bread knife
ﬂick knife
electric guitar
Sup.
musical instrument
building
(unfamiliar)
Basic
guitar
drum
Sub.
electric guitar
acoustic guitar
Table I
STIMULI AND CATEGORY WORDS USED IN THE EXPERIMENT
depend on the ability of participants to identify the target
stimuli at the subordinate level of identity. For example,
a person who has never encountered the statue of David
by Michelangelo and who is not familiar with his name
would not be able to verify the David name in a category
veriﬁcation task. To exclude the possibility that basic-level
categories were advantaged due to a lack of familiarity with
the subordinate level categories, at the end of the experiment,
participants were asked to identify each stimulus on a very
speciﬁc (subordinate) level. For example, participants were
asked to indicate the title of a painting or the model of
a car. Pictures that could not be named at the subordinate
level were omitted from the analysis for the corresponding
participant.
B. Results
An analysis of variance was performed on reaction times
of correct true and, separately, of correct false responses.
Before performing the analysis, trials with outlying RTs (i.e.,
below 300 ms or above 3000 ms) were excluded from the
data set. To test for differences between the three familiar
categories, mean RTs were submitted to two-way ANOVA
with Category (artwork, building and product) and Cate-
gory Level (superordinate, basic and subordinate) as within-
participant factors. This analysis showed that the main effect
of level of categorization was signiﬁcant, F(2, 38) = 8.93,
p < 0.001. Neither the main effect of category F(2, 38) =
1.36, p = 0.27, nor the interaction between category and
category level were signiﬁcant F(4, 76) = 0.20, p = 0.93.
The same analysis was performed to test for differences
among the unfamiliar categories. Mean RTs were subjected
to a 3 (Category: home furnishing, utensil and musical
instrument) × 3 (Category Level: superordinate, basic and
subordinate) within-participants ANOVA. As in the previous
analysis, we found that neither the main effect of category
F(2, 38) = 1.03, p = 0.36, nor the interaction between cat-
egory and category level were signiﬁcant F(4, 76) = 1.73,
p = 0.15. On the contrary, the main effect of level of
categorization was signiﬁcant, F(2, 38) = 11.20, p < 0.001.
Consequently, categories of familiar entities and cate-
gories of unfamiliar entities were collapsed to obtain in-
dividual mean RTs to familiar and unfamiliar entity types,
respectively. Table II shows the separate reaction times for
true responses as a function of category (Familiar vs. Unfa-
miliar) and category level (Superordinate, Basic and Subor-
dinate). An analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed
for reaction times of correct true responses with Familiarity
(familiar or unfamiliar) and Category Level (superordinate,
basic and subordinate) as within participant factors. The
main effect of Familiarity was not signiﬁcant F(1, 19) =
0.93, p = 0.35, indicating that overall participants were
not faster to categorize familiar entities than they were to
categorize unfamiliar entities. On the contrary, the main
effect of category level was signiﬁcant, F(2, 38) = 13.61,
10
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

Category Level
Category
Superordinate
Basic
Subordinate
Familiar
1200
1072
949
Unfamiliar
1236
979
1096
Table II
MEAN REACTION TIMES FOR THE TRUE RESPONSES AS A FUNCTION
OF CATEGORY (FAMILIAR VS. UNFAMILIAR) AND CATEGORY LEVEL
(SUPERORDINATE, BASIC AND SUBORDINATE).
p < 0.001. Critically, the Familiarity × Category Level
interaction was also signiﬁcant, F(2, 38) = 5.69, p < 0.01.
As shown in ﬁgure 2, participants were faster to categorize
unfamiliar entities at the basic level than at subordinate level,
F(1, 19) = 4.10, p < 0.05. For instance, they were faster
to verify that a bread knife is a “knife” than they were to
verify that it is a “bread knife”. On the contrary, for familiar
entities, participants were faster to categorize entities at
the subordinate level (i.e., unique level) than at the basic
level, F(1, 19) = 7.72, p < 0.05. For example, participants
were faster to verify that the David is “The David” than
to verify that it is “a statue”. The results seem to conﬁrm
the assumption of a general basic-level advantage [2] for
unfamiliar entities. However, contrary to this assumption,
we found a different pattern of results for entities that can
be identiﬁed at the unique level of identity (i.e., familiar
entities). At the subordinate level (i.e., the unique level
of identity) familiar entities were categorized faster than
at the basic level, showing that the basic-level advantage
disappears for entities that can be identiﬁed at the most
speciﬁc level of identity.
Direct comparisons between TRUE judgments showed
that subordinate-level judgments in the familiar category
were signiﬁcantly faster than subordinate judgments in the
unfamiliar category, t(19)=3.74, p<0.01. The related com-
parison between reaction times for the familiar-basic and
unfamiliar-basic categorizations showed the opposite pattern.
Unfamiliar-basic judgments were signiﬁcantly faster than
familiar-basic judgments, t(19) = 2.36, p<0.05.
In summary, these results demonstrated that familiar en-
tities were identiﬁed differently from unfamiliar entities.
People are faster to categorize familiar entities at subordinate
level than they are to verify them at the basic level. On the
contrary, veriﬁcation times for unfamiliar entities were faster
at the basic level than at the subordinate level. Moreover,
the results seem suggest that the shift of the entry point
in recognition towards the subordinate level is not peculiar
of some special categories of entities but is a more general
phenomenon concerning all the entities that have a unique
representation in memory. An ANOVA was also performed
for correct false reaction times with familiarity (familiar
or unfamiliar) and category level (superordinate, basic and
subordinate) as within-participant factors. Table III shows
the separate reaction times for false responses as a function
True Reaction Times
Category Level
mean Reaction Time
Supeordinate
Basic
Subordinate
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Category
Familiar
Unfamiliar
Figure 2.
Mean Reaction Times for categorizing familiar and unfamiliar
entities at superordinate, basic and subordinate levels in the TRUE condi-
tion.
of category (Familiar vs. Unfamiliar) and category level
(Superordinate, Basic and Subordinate). The results of this
Category Level
Category
Superordinate
Basic
Subordinate
Familiar
1108
1104
1052
Unfamiliar
1118
1010
1182
Table III
MEAN REACTION TIMES FOR THE FALSE RESPONSES AS A FUNCTION
OF CATEGORY (FAMILIAR VS. UNFAMILIAR) AND CATEGORY LEVEL
(SUPERORDINATE, BASIC AND SUBORDINATE).
analysis were globally in accordance with those obtained for
correct true response times. The main effect of familiarity
was not signiﬁcant, F(1, 19) = 1.40, p = 0.24. This
means that people were not faster to verify familiar entities
than unfamiliar entities. Instead, the main effect of level of
categorization was signiﬁcant, F(2, 38) = 12.97, p < 0.001,
indicating slower responses for a more speciﬁc level of
categorization. Critically, the Familiarity × Category Level
interaction was also signiﬁcant, F(2, 38) = 6.59, p < 0.001.
The interaction indicates that participants were faster to
correctly reject unfamiliar entities at the basic level than at
the subordinate level, F(1, 19) = 4.10, p < 0.05, whereas
they were equally faster to correctly reject familiar entities
at basic level than at subordinate level, F(1, 19) = 0.161,
p = 0.69. The last result represents a difference compared
to the previous analysis on the correct true reaction times.
While participants were faster to verify a familiar entity
at the subordinate level than at the basic level, they were
equally fast to correctly reject a familiar entity at the
subordinate-level as at the basic-level. This result could be
explained arguing that the mismatch between the singular
concept activated by the word category and that activated
by the picture takes more time to be recognized. However,
the result does not contrast our hypothesis since it shows
that it is not the case that correctly rejecting a familiar
11
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

entity at the basic-level is faster than rejecting a familiar
entity an the subordinate level, as predicted by the basic-
level advantage hypothesis. On the contrary, the lack of a
basic level advantage for the true rejecting trials of familiar
entities indicated that representations of familiar entities are
highly accessible at a speciﬁc level of abstraction which is
related to the proper name of the entities.
As in the TRUE condition, we found that direct com-
parisons between FALSE judgments showed that basic-
level judgments in the unfamiliar category were signiﬁ-
cantly faster than basic-level judgments in the familiar cate-
gory, t(19)=4.07, p<0.001. These results open the question
whether a mechanism of inhibition may come into play
to favor the access to singular representations compared to
higher level representations. To answer this question, future
experiments should compare familiar and unfamiliar entities
from the same categories to reduce as much as possible
processing differences due to the category.
V. CONCLUSION
The purpose of the study was to provide empirical
evidence for the direct access to semantic memory of
unique entities through individual concepts. The results from
a category veriﬁcation experiment, which has previously
proved sensitive to address the entry point identiﬁcation
issue, suggest that the initial point of contact between the
perceptual stimulus of a unique distinguishable object and
its memory representation is not mediated by high level
conceptual structures (i.e., general concepts).
The results of our study mirror previous ﬁndings in
recognition of familiar faces [7] and visual art identiﬁcation
[9], in that a preferential accessibility to more speciﬁc repre-
sentations in memory has been previously demonstrated for
famous face and art recognition. However, in these studies
the underlying idea is that there is something “special” in the
target entities that lead people to develop specialized mech-
anisms of identiﬁcation. Belke [9], for instance, explicitly
states that “art has a special status amongst external-world
objects since it allows for a memorial representation based
on stylistic features that are linked in semantic memory
to the creating artist” (p.199). The special status of faces
was instead conceived by Tanaka [7] in terms of expertise.
According to the face expertise hypothesis, the high level
of specialization in face recognition explains the shift of
the entry point for faces at the most subordinate level of
abstraction. We suggest an alternative explanation for the
preferential access to unique representations in memory. The
idea is that having an individual representation of an object
in memory is a sufﬁcient condition to shift the entry point of
recognition to the most subordinate level of categorization,
that is the unique level of identiﬁcation. The recognition
mechanism of unique familiar entities is different from
that of entities that can not be identiﬁed at the unique
level of identity (i.e., unfamiliar entities). In principle, a
familiar individual could be ﬁrst recognized as whatever
other unfamiliar individual, namely as a member of a basic
level category. Our experiment provides evidence against
this hypothesis. We found that unique familiar entities are
veriﬁed more quickly (or rejected as quickly as) at the
subordinate level of unique identity than they are at the basic
level. In conclusion, the results of the experiment provided
evidence in favor of our hypothesis that people are faster (or
at least equally fast) to verify entities at the unique level than
at higher levels of abstractions. These results suggest that
whereas the entry point in recognition for most unfamiliar
objects is a the basic level of categorization (i.e., the ﬁrst
contact with a memorial representation is at the level of a
general concept), the entry point of unique familiar entities
is at the subordinate level of unique identity (i.e., the ﬁrst
contact with a memorial representation is at the level of a
singular concept).
REFERENCES
[1] P. Jolicoeur, M. Gluck, and S. Kosslyn, “Pictures and names:
Making the connection,” Cognitive Psychology, vol. 16, pp.
243–275, 1984.
[2] E. Rosch, C. Mervis, W. Gray, D.Johnson, and B.-P. Braem,
“Basic objects in natural categories,” Cognitive Psychology,
vol. 8, pp. 382–439, 1976.
[3] C. Mervis and E. Rosch, “Categorization of natural objects,”
Annual Review of Psychology, vol. 32, pp. 89–115, 1981.
[4] G. L. Murphy and H. H. Brownell, “Category differentiation
in object recognition: Typicality constraints on the basic
category advantage,” Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, vol. 11, pp. 70–84, 1985.
[5] K. E. Johnson and C. B. Mervis, “Effects of varying levels
of expertise on the basic level of categorization,” Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, vol. 126, pp. 248–277,
1997.
[6] J. Tanaka and M. Taylor, “Object categories and expertise:
Is the basic level in the eye of the beholder?” Cognitive
Psychology, vol. 23, pp. 457–482, 1991.
[7] J. W. Tanaka, “The entry point of face recogntion: Evidence
for face expertise,” Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, vol. 130, pp. 534–543, 2001.
[8] J. Tanaka and I. Gauthier, “Expertise in object and face
recognition,” in Psychology of Learning and Motivation,
Mechanisms of Perceptual Learning, R. Goldstone, P. Schyns,
and D. Medin, Eds.
San Diego: Academic Press, 1997, pp.
83–125.
[9] B. Belke, H. Leder, G. Harsanyi, and C. Carbon, “When a
picasso is a ”picasso”: The entry point in the identiﬁcation of
visual art,” Acta Psychologica, vol. 133, pp. 191–202, 2010.
[10] M. Gorno-Tempini and C. Price, “Identiﬁcation of famous
faces and buildings: a functional neuroimaging study of
semantically unique items,” Brain, vol. 24, pp. 2087–2097,
2001.
12
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

