3D SpaceQuantumIndexation and Computation via VoxelNET to Enhance 3D 
Cognitive Systemisation     
-Reasoning, Raycasting and GeoLoacted Voxels 
 
Charlotte Sennersten 
Mineral Resources 
CSIRO  
Australia  
email: charlotte.sennersten@csiro.au 
Craig Lindley  
Data 61 
CSIRO 
Australia 
email: craig.lindley@csiro.au
 
 
Abstract—A 
global 
recursive 
equal-volume 
spatial 
quantization and indexation system can unify access to, use 
and perform volumetric computations across diverse fields to 
provide a volumetric evolution from the current 2D internet. A 
unifying spatial framework has been developed to demonstrate 
this alternative. The framework supports cognitive spatial 
analytics incorporating different datasets, advanced AI 
systems, human decision support, robotic and autonomous 
systems, and many other applications for which three-
dimensional spatial structure is important. Domains in 
question can include a variety of sensor inputs, including 
environmental, physiological, neural, material, chemical, 
optical, locational (e.g. GPS and lidar), etc.. Sensor data in 
diverse domains is used to create domain-specific models for 
analytics and decision support, and for models of human 
cognitive performance amenable to automated, machine 
implementations. The system includes a unified, hierarchical 
spatial quantization system with time series data and fixed, 
locational, and mobile volumetric structures. The framework 
supports data, information and knowledge management and 
can also be used to manage the distribution of computational 
loads. It can also support new computing paradigms, e.g. 
tracking the spatial locations of geographically dispersed 
computations linked by quantum entanglement. 
 
Keywords-Spatial Cognition; Voxelisation; Computation; 
Sensor Integration. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
The main objective of this paper is to collate many years 
of 
work 
unifying and 
systemizing 
qualitative and 
quantitative data using a 3D spatial framework called the 
VoxelNET platform. The platform provides a ‘digital 
twinned’ world, a digitized replica of the volumetric physical 
world, a unified, hierarchical spatial quantization framework 
for location and movement tracking and volumetric 
computations across diverse fields. The main fields 
demonstrated over the years have been gaming, mining, 
space and robotics -where decisions mainly have been about 
volumetric comprehension, timing, and economy. 
The goal of the computer and cognitive science research 
is to provide the software engineering implementation with 
requirements for a systemized volumetric infrastructure so 
people/users can share and understand otherwise siloed 
volumetric data. 
An analogy might help to explain why all this is 
important. Imagine yourself scuba diving and navigating 
through water. You may not know what is ‘up’, ‘down’, 
‘left’ or ‘right’ and available sensors do not capture the 
environmental, physiological or optical data in its 3D 
context. VoxelNET and its indexation helps to geo-index, 
cross-correlate, compute and contextualize the data in its 
global volumetric architecture. Our research purpose is to 
make sense of sensed and captured data in this 3D context. 
The platform sits exemplifies Internet 4.0, Mining 4.0, 
Space 4.0, Industry 4.0 and other X 4.0 concepts representing 
the full integration of sensors, information and operations 
systems within the 3D and 4D structure of the world. This 
includes elements such as: cyber-physical systems (CPS), the 
internet of things (IoT), industrial internet of things (IIOT), 
cloud computing, cognitive computing, and artificial 
intelligence (AI). X 4.0 systems are characterized by the 
interpenetration of 
the 
physical world 
using data, 
computation, analytics and control systems. The result is an 
evolving large-scale infrastructure that includes the data 
interconnectivity required for integration, together with 
many diverse systems and components for modelling and 
analyzing the world. The total infrastructure hierarchy for 
control happens by a synthesis of human, automated and 
autonomous decision making at different levels. Decision 
making within such an integrated system is both 
heterogeneous and highly distributed. Raising the overall 
intelligence of X 4.0 systems requires higher levels of 
coordination. A critical element of this is the coordination of 
mapping and decision making regarding three-dimensional 
(3D) space. However, current internet concepts and 
technologies are neither inherently spatial nor three 
dimensional. Since X 4.0 is heavily concerned with data and 
computational integration of the physical world and its 
contents, which are inherently 3D and spatial, the 
deployment of a universal 3D spatial infrastructure can be a 
critical element in accelerating the evolution of these 
systems. A universal 3D spatial infrastructure can provide 
the 3D spatial context of X 4.0 data, models and 
computations, facilitating higher level cognitive functions 
that can process not only what is happening when (the 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-780-1
COGNITIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

current dominant paradigm for X 4.0), but also where it is 
happening. This amounts to the incorporation of spatial 
awareness and spatial cognition into X 4.0 systems for 
indexation, computation, analytics and display. 
Previous work [1], [2]) has described the VoxelNET 
research prototype system, a 3D spatial indexation system 
and a computational infrastructure used to support 
volumetric representations and decisions. VoxelNET is a 
demonstrator for a broader concept of a universal 3D spatial 
data framework that can potentially provide the kind of 
spatial framework required for X 4.0.  
VoxelNET quantizes the Earth into default 1 m³ voxels 
that penetrate Air, Space, Water, Rock, and Soil so these 
natural continuous material distributions can be included in 
the Internet of Things (IoT), which otherwise tends to focus 
on separate artefacts or objects that are artificially produced 
[1] [2]. This allows the combination of representations of 
what is artificially made with what occurs naturally together 
with their respective locations, orientations and spatial 
distributions over time.  
This can be extended beyond the Earth to include the 
Moon, Mars and other solar system objects. Of course, these 
objects have their own coordinate systems. This is catered 
for by the underlying mathematical formulations of 
coordinate systems, which can include alternate geometries 
(e.g. ellipsoidal, spherical, Cartesian) modelled as local 
coordinate systems within specified larger scale spatial 
coordinate reference frames within which they are situated 
and mapped by spatial transforms. The required transforms 
must specify a particular location (typically in 3 dimensions) 
and orientation (e.g., in terms of rotations around 3 axes) at a 
specific time (or epoch), together with a specification of 
velocity at a particular epoch. These parameters can be used 
by active functions to compute locations at different times. 
The VoxelNET capacity for representing multiple 
coordinate systems can be used to locate objects and material 
masses within locational coordinate reference systems, as 
well as larger scale global reference frames within which 
local frames can be situated. Spatial reference frames are 
static, persisting over time, and voxels within the 3D 
structure are referred to as location voxels. The VoxelNET 
database allows data to be volumetrically indexed and 
associated with unlimited amounts of data for specific 
volumes. The volumetric indexation of locations is static. 
Objects and materials are represented using the concept of 
material voxels. These are volumetric representations of 
material masses and objects moving through static 
geolocated voxels. Representations of material voxels can be 
rescaled, combining multiple material voxels into larger 
scale voxels, or subdividing them into smaller scale and 
potentially mixed and/or materially/chemically transformed 
voxels, and aggregated or disaggregated into malleable 
shapes. This capacity has been used, for example, to map the 
removal of materials from a mineral resource block in the 
ground, through sequences of mixing and separating 
transforms via processes such as blasting, excavation, 
loading onto haulage, unloading, stockpiling, etc., to create 
provenance records for material entering a mineral 
processing plant. 
This paper elaborates on a number of topics associated 
with this integrating vision of the VoxelNET system, 
including: general issues around spatial cognition, the 
integration and use of environmental and physiological 
sensors, 
management 
of 
distributed 
computation, 
understanding and integrating human cognition in a broader 
spatial context, and potential application in quantum 
computing. Section II. describes spatial cognition and 
associated concepts, while subsequent sections describe III. 
Sensors for Environment and Physiology, IV. Discretized 
Computation, V. VoxelNET, Brain, Gaze and Ray Casting -
how to bind it together, and VI. Parallel Processing and 
Quantum Computing. 
II. 
SPACIAL COGNITION, SYNTAX,  AWARENESS AND 
COGNITION  
Spatial cognition involves not one but many specific 
abilities. These include locating points in space, determining 
the orientation of lines and objects, assessing location in 
depth, apprehending geometric relations between objects, 
and processing motion, including motion in depth. Building 
upon these details, spatial cognition includes awareness of 
locations and orientations in space, spatial relationships 
between and among objects and materials, how to navigate 
through an environment, and how to manipulate objects and 
materials by hand or machine for a large range of purposes. 
Zimring and Dalton [3] describe ‘Linking objective measures 
of space to cognition’ mainly focused on how people 
acquire, store, and represent information about directions, 
distances, and locations in the large-scale physical world. 
The authors also refer to Space Syntax in terms of 
“…rigorous measurement of the layout of physical settings 
and observation of people moving through it; environment 
and behavior studies have examined self-report behavior 
such as think-aloud protocols and sketch maps as well as 
movement in real-world settings; cognitive science has 
explored and modeled cognitive processes.” [3]. 
Most 
researchers 
have 
found 
that 
cognitive 
representations, or their presumed externalizations such as 
sketch maps, are often distorted. Often people learn topology 
first and then develop more coordinated metric relationships 
later. For example, one might know that a shopping center is 
beyond the school but not know how far. People seem to 
have greater difficulty representing complex settings. In the 
realm of IoT and digitization, spatial navigation needs to be 
extended to digital 3D world representations, discretization, 
digital operations and digital 2D and 3D browsing in order to 
understand, design and optimize the operation of systems 
within their spatial context.  
Moreover, as Thrift [4] puts it, “The fabric of space is 
open-ended rather than enclosing.” and “we are increasingly 
a part of a ‘movement-space’ which is relative rather than 
absolute but which … relies on an absolute space for its 
existence”. 
Spatial awareness is defined as “the ability to be aware of 
oneself in space. It is an organized knowledge of objects in 
relation to oneself in that given space and the relationship of 
these objects when there is a change of position.” [5]. Spatial 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-780-1
COGNITIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

awareness is essentially a question of making a trade-off 
between local visual information (which can be seen from a 
single standpoint) and global spatial information, which 
includes visual data of the rest of the environment, but also 
haptics and symbolic representations of space such as maps. 
To be efficient, a person navigating must maximize their 
acquisition of global information while minimizing local 
information, achieved by recognizing when they already 
comprehend enough about their immediate surroundings and 
hence intuitively seek the next key location that permits a 
sudden increase in novel environmental data.  
 As thinking individuals, we are cognitively calculating 
ourselves through the physical and digital world i.e., the 
logic of the system. “The upper bound of human brainpower 
has been calculated to be 2 x 1016 calculations per second. If 
computational power continues to conform to Moore’s Law, 
then by 2030 just an ordinary PC should compute at around 
1016 instructions per second [6]. There is also an increasing 
ubiquity of hardware and software, which means that 
computing can take place in many locations” [4]. Moreover, 
islands of computational power analogous to individual 
human cognitive processing capacity are increasingly being 
integrated in seas of interconnectivity. This raises the need 
for collective cognitive frameworks for the unification of 
individual nodes of cognitive capability into larger scales of 
cognitive capability interconnected by much higher 
bandwidths than native human communication mechanisms 
(i.e., speech, non-verbal communication, technologies such 
as writing and drawing).  
While navigating on and through Earth we can map 
physical reality using sensor data. Extending this to X 4.0 
systems of systems, we need to be able to situate and index 
the information so we can translate context and invite people 
and machines to interact in a ‘ground-truthed’ collective 
digitized environment. A location method such as GPS is an 
estimate of a location, while the "ground truth" is the actual 
location on earth [7]. Ground truth refers to information 
collected on location, as opposed to information inferred 
from remotely sensed data. Ground truth allows image data, 
for example, to be related to real features and materials on 
the ground. The collection of ground truth data enables 
calibration of remote-sensing data, and aids in the 
interpretation and analysis of what is being sensed. Ground 
truth is a best representation of the geolocated information 
and its three dimensions of 360-degree landscape so we can 
share, interact and specify where we and things are, 
wayfinding ourselves by using various individual coordinate 
systems.  
III. 
COGNITION [PHYSIOLOGICAL SENSORS] AND SPACE 
[ENVIRONEMNTAL SENSORS] 
How do we understand cognitive choices and how can 
we assist and design 
for 
our affordances 
versus 
shortcomings? 
A. Attention, Heart Rate, Arousal and Reasoning  
Human and animal intelligence is facilitated by several 
forms of memory, including a long-term semantic memory 
(SM) of abstract concepts and types, a short-term memory 
(STM) and a long-term episodic memory (LTM) of 
experiences. Humans also reason about their environment 
and use a so- called Memory SketchPad or working memory 
(WM) for active thinking processes that combines both new 
and old information to solve problems, such as finding a 
path, creating and negotiating a trajectory in the case of 
spatial reasoning [8]. 
Our eyes are the main physiological instrument that 
provides data for use by the cognitive system to navigate 
through a 3D space or a maze, and visual attention directs the 
eyes to features of interest in the visual field that are 
unconsciously selected for relevance to a problem-solving 
situation [9]. WM is used by cognitive processes to 
synthesize this kind of data into problem solutions. 
Heart rate, heart rate variability, and other indicators of 
physiological arousal such as skin conductance are other 
unconscious responses to stimuli such as environmental and 
social factors.   
All these physiological responses can be measured by 
physiological sensors such as infrared diode corneal 
reflection for eye gaze tracking to study visual attention, 
heart rate and its variability using pulse monitoring, and skin 
conductance measurements to study arousal [10] [11]. fMRI 
can be used to understand the spatial distribution of brain 
activity via increased blood flow. 
Eye gaze tracking can be used to gain insight into the 
control of visual attention to gain data used by cognitive 
processes 
for 
problem 
solving, 
while 
unconscious 
physiological data can be used to infer emotional states 
relevant to cognitive goals and biases, e.g., as input to 
affective computing systems. The spatial context of these 
processes is crucial for understanding their details and a 
general external spatial reference frame can be used to locate 
measurements and external phenomena in relation to which 
cognitive processes are being performed. 
B. Lidar Pointclouds, Images and Objects 
Numerous environmental sensors measure different states 
of our environment and optical sensors such as lidar can map 
spatial details of local physical environments in detail and 
store the information to computer memory. A Lidar scan 
usually has a geolocated origin point such as a GPS point so 
the location of the Lidar scan can be situated in the world. 
Lidar gives the structure of a space, it’s lay-out in 3D. 
RGBD and Photogrammetry combine image and depth. An 
image in a traditional sense is a 2D representation of the 
world providing inputs to image processing that can 
distinguish features via pixel color and contrast features to 
distinguish depth parameters [12]. A universal 3D spatial 
reference frame can be used to store all of these kinds of data 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-780-1
COGNITIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

for use both in real time and for retrospective analytical 
studies across agents and situations.    
IV. 
COMPUTATION 
Our brains and computers perform computation. 
Computation by definition means: I. the action of 
mathematical calculation, "methods of computation" and II. 
the use of computers, especially as a subject of research or 
study. In theoretical computer science and mathematics, the 
theory of computation is the branch that deals with how 
efficiently problems can be solved on a model of 
computation, using an algorithm. Humans, animals and 
robots use algorithms to perform tasks. 
VoxelNET discretizes volumetric data in a systematic 
way and this can be used as a computational framework so 
we use computer/computing science as a baseline in parallel 
with cognition i.e., reasoning when looking into how to 
progress the design of the system for both machine and 
human benefit and comprehension.  
Thrift writes “In a world in which numerical calculations 
are 
being 
done 
and 
redone 
continuously, 
static 
representation becomes subordinated to flow (not least 
because ‘the image, in a traditional sense, no longer exists’ 
[13], the nomadologic of movement becomes the natural 
order of thought. The world is reconfigured as a global 
trading zone in which network forms, which strive for 
coordination, are replaced by flow forms which strive for 
observation 
and 
projection.”. 
He 
continues 
“Most 
importantly, I shall argue that the sheer amount of 
calculation that is now becoming possible at all points of so 
many spaces is producing a new calculative sense, which I 
will call ‘qualculation’ [14].” Thrift [4] includes factors like 
speed, faith in numbers and limited numerical facility 
available in the bodies of the population also involving a 
different sense of number and counting and series. It is 
important that the use of numbers varies with context and is 
not a discrete activity carried out for itself. 
The computation field is divided into three major 
branches: automata theory and languages, computability 
theory, and computational complexity theory, which are 
linked by the question: "What are the fundamental 
capabilities and limitations of computers?". To this we can 
add, what are the fundamental capabilities and limitations of 
the human brain and reasoning capability for computing and 
interpreting a holistic digital eco system? 
A. Computational Complexity Theory 
Computational complexity theory considers not only 
whether a problem can be solved at all on a computer, but 
also how efficiently the problem can be solved [15]. Two 
major aspects are considered: time complexity and space 
complexity, which are, respectively, how many steps it takes 
to perform a computation, and how much memory is 
required to perform that computation [16].  
In order to analyze how much time and space a given 
algorithm requires, computer scientists express the time or 
space required to solve the problem as a function of the size 
of the input problem. For example, finding a particular 
number in a long list of numbers becomes harder as the list 
of numbers grows larger. If we say there are n numbers in 
the list, then if the list is not sorted or indexed in any way 
we may have to look at every number in order to find the 
number we're seeking, which will result in an average 
search time of n/2. We thus say that in order to solve this 
problem, the computer needs to perform a number of steps 
that grows linearly with the size of the problem.  
B. Discretisation  
In applied mathematics, discretization is the process of 
transferring continuous functions, models, variables, and 
equations into discrete counterparts. This process is usually 
carried out as a first step toward making them suitable for 
numerical evaluation and implementation on digital 
computers [17]. 
C. Quantisation  
Quantization is the concept that a physical quantity can 
have only certain discrete values. Electrical charge, energy, 
light, angular momentum, and matter are all quantized on the 
quantum level. Also, the energy levels of electrons in atoms 
are quantized. In a computational system, quantization is 
typically the same as discretization, where the size of quanta 
involves a tradeoff between storage space and processing 
time on one hand, and the accuracy of physical simulation on 
the other; large quanta are easier to store and process, but 
less accurate for the simulation or representation of 
continuous physical phenomena. Quantization does not need 
to be linear, but can be a nonlinear map that partitions a 
numerical space and represents all of the values in each 
subspace by a single value [18].  
Quantization errors are errors arising from the loss of 
information created by the mapping of continuous 
phenomena into discrete artificial quanta. The scalability of 
VoxelNET location and material voxels facilitates the 
optimization of voxel size in relation to the spatial frequency 
distributions of data, as well as the management of tradeoffs 
between quantization errors and computational space/time 
complexity. 
D. Size of Files 
 To progress in a 3D world with sensors mapping real 
world environments we need to subdivide information in a 
discrete and quantized manner; this is a fundamental 
principle of digital computers, for which all continuous 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-780-1
COGNITIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

values must be represented in binary numbers. In many cases 
there are clear criteria for quantization scales. For example, 
to represent a varying phenomenon, basic sampling theory 
shows that samples of the phenomenon should be taken at a 
rate (i.e. the inverse of temporal or spatial quantum size) of 
at least twice the frequency, or half the wavelength, of the 
highest required frequency component of the sampled 
phenomenon. A lower rate than this will lose information, 
while a higher rate will add no new required information. For 
cognitive attention, the quantization scale is related to the 
importance of a sensory feature for the cognitive task at hand 
and its neural or computational transformation into a level of 
abstraction suitable to problem solving. E.g., in digital 
modelling of a Field of View (FoV), see Figure 1, we may 
need to represent digitized content supporting a task at high 
resolution, leading to large data sizes, while the background 
and middle ground of the FoV may be of less importance and 
therefore appropriately represented at a lower resolution.  
 
 
Figure 1. Typical lidar file sizes around 300-400MB. 
 
Digitized content includes optical sensor information and 
computation for analytics and display. 
V. 
VOXELNET, BRAIN, GAZE AND RAY CASTING 
How do we bind together the external world with 
computation and human cognition in a coherent systemized 
way. 
The technical solution to this described here is the 
VoxelNET system. By default, VoxelNET indexes and 
quantizes the Earth in equal volumetric computational units, 
see Figures 2, 3 and 4.  
 
 
 
Figure 2. VoxelNET Earth quantization. 
On one hand the VoxelNET database represents a 
linguistic interpretation and representation of the physical 
world while the client needs to replicate and represent the 
world in a direct 3D FoV manner. The VoxelNET 
infrastructure spatially parses all 3D objects and data in the 
world. The voxel indexation makes it possible to directly 
point towards a direct volume without lengthy descriptive 
relations in order to reduce time and space complexity. The 
volumetric context of a volume provides context information 
that points alone cannot. Equal volume quantization allows 
analyses to be conducted across numerous voxels which 
nevertheless have a comparable quantization of the world 
and therefore consistent and commensurable volumetric 
interpolation and averaging of data points. 
 
 
Figure 3. VoxelNET at local regional level. 
 
A. Gaze into the world -Ray Casting and Ray Tracing  
Ray casting is a rendering technique used in computer 
graphics and computational geometry making use of the 
same geometric algorithm as ray tracing. Ray tracing is a 
rendering technique that aims to simulate the way light 
bounces off objects, in turn creating more realistic shadows, 
reflections, and lighting effects. This ensures that the 
computer isn't wasting processing power on objects the 
camera doesn't see (compare FoV) while producing more 
realistic lighting effects. The ray casting method is used in 
addition to eye tracking, so it is possible to log what a user is 
looking at in the 3D digital/physical world. 
B. Eyetracking and Eyesteering via Ray Casting to 
connect with Human Intentions and Actions    
Corneal reflection and infrared light can be used to track 
the gaze behavior and therefore visual attention of a user 
interacting with computer content, revealing how things are 
operated, read, created, etc. to be tracked as an insight into 
ongoing cognitive processes. Gaze can also be used as an 
input device into the digital environment here via 
VoxelNET. The universal volumetric representation system 
demonstrated by VoxelNET can be used to generalize the 
use of this interaction and attention analysis technology. 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-780-1
COGNITIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

C. Real World Knowledge Systemisation and Indexation 
for Human Brains 
To connect the external world with the neural 
physiological foundations of human behaviors and cognition, 
we need a volumetric representation that can connect or link 
brain actions with contextual representations of the 3D world 
that make these meaningful.  
 
 
Figure 4. VoxelNET and voxelised brain for world and human knowledge 
systemization. 
 
In times of neurological programming, machine learning 
and data mining, it becomes even more important to know 
and shape knowledge about how we look into the world’, 
what brain regions we activate’ and on what basis. Spatio- 
and spectro-temporal brain data (STBD) are the most 
commonly collected data for measuring brain response to 
external stimuli. However, Kasabov says “there is no 
unifying computational framework to deal with all these 
types of data in order to better understand this data and the 
processes that generated it.” (2013) [19]. Kasabov’s 
NeuCube model is based on a 3D evolving Spiking Neural 
Network (SNN) that is an approximate map of structural and 
functional areas of interest in the brain related to the STBD 
modeling that integrates various brain data, information and 
knowledge for a single person into one model.  
In the VoxelNET world systemization the brain can be 
voxelised within a local coordinate system, allowing ray-
casting via gaze to bind the two worlds together. 
 
D. Brodmann Brain Areas  
When our gaze is distributed across various external 
stimuli, our brain is processing incoming information in 
various functional volumes. As Kasabov puts it “The brain is 
a complex integrated spatio-temporal information processing 
machine. An animal or a human brain has a range of 
structural and functional areas that are spatially distributed in 
a constrained 3D space”. The brain processes information, 
either triggered by external stimuli, or by inner processes, 
such as visual, auditory, emotional, environmental, social, or 
all of these stimuli together, complex spatio-temporal 
pathways are activated, and patterns are formed across the 
whole brain.  
If we want to systemize digitized knowledge i.e., the 
human or the robot operating in the world and also execute 
‘compute on demand’ with these methods we need to know 
what happens when, how and where. It is also a matter of 
how we have people and humans coexisting in the same 
digital twin world. We want to create a comprehensive 
digital twin where we create knowledge and not ‘black boxes 
of algorithms/AI’ no one understands.  
Brodmann areas were originally defined and numbered by 
the German anatomist Korbinian Brodmann [20], see Figures 
5 and 6. Brodmann split the cortex into 52 different 
volumetric areas and assigned each a number (many of these 
Brodmann areas have since been subdivided). He published 
his maps of cortical areas in humans, monkeys, and other 
species in 1909, along with many other findings and 
observations regarding the general cell types and laminar 
organization of the mammalian cortex. 
Zilles reports that “A cited reference search in the Web of 
Science carried out in July 2018 resulted in over 170 000 
citations of Brodmann’s work, mainly of his monography 
(Brodmann, 1909). His publications on the cytoarchitectonic 
parcellation of the entire human cerebral cortex made him a 
founder of the field of anatomical brain mapping. The 
number of publications with references to different versions 
of his maps (Brodmann, 1908a, 1909, 1910, 1912, 1914) 
dramatically increased since the advent of neuroimaging 
using PET and MRI, and is still increasing ... The maps have 
become particularly popular in recent times for localization 
of activations using functional MRI and for meta-analyses of 
structural and functional relationships.” [21]. 
The brain locations are of interest when also looking at 
Quantum Neural Networks (QNNs) as per what neurons are 
fired where, when and for what reason. 
Brodmann’s brain areas for humans and other primates 
are:  
• 
Areas 3, 1 and 2 – Primary somatosensory cortex 
in the postcentral gyrus  
• 
Area 4 – Primary motor cortex  
• 
Area 5 – Superior parietal lobule  
 
 
Figure 5. Inner brain 3D mapping [22]. 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-780-1
COGNITIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

• 
Area 6 – Premotor cortex and Supplementary 
Motor Cortex (Secondary Motor Cortex)  
• 
Area 7 – Visuo-Motor Coordination  
• 
Area 8– Includes Frontal eye fields  
 
• 
Area 9 – Dorsolateral prefrontal cortex  
• 
Area 10 – Anterior prefrontal cortex (most rostral 
part of superior and middle frontal gyri) 
• 
Area 11 – Orbitofrontal area (orbital and rectus 
gyri, plus part of the rostral part of the superior 
frontal gyrus) 
• 
Area 12 – Orbitofrontal area (used to be part of 
BA11, refers to the area between the superior 
frontal gyrus and the inferior rostral sulcus) 
• 
Area 13 and Area 14* – Insular cortex  
• 
Area 15* - Anterior Temporal lobe  
• 
Area 16 – Insular cortex  
 
Figure 6. Outer brain volumes [22]. 
• 
Area 17 – Primary visual cortex (V1)  
• 
Area 18 – Secondary visual cortex (V2)  
• 
Area 19 – Associative visual cortex (V3, V4, V5)  
• 
Area 20 -Inferior temporal gyrus  
• 
Area 21 – Middle temporal gyrus  
• 
Area 22 – Part of the superior temporal gyrus, 
included in Wernicke’s area  
• 
Area 23 – Ventral posterior cingulate cortex   
• 
Area 24 – Ventral anterior cingulate cortex. 
• 
Area 25 – Subgenual area (part of the 
Ventromedial prefrontal cortex)  
• 
Area 26 – Ectosplenial portion of the retrosplenial 
region of the cerebral cortex 
• 
Area 27 – Piriform cortex  
• 
Area 28 – Ventral entorhinal cortex  
• 
Area 29 Retrosplenial cortex  
• 
Area 30 – Subdivision of retrosplenial cortex 
• 
Area 31 – Dorsal Posterior cingulate cortex  
• 
Area 32 – Dorsal anterior cingulate cortex   
• 
Area 33 – Part of anterior cingulate cortex  
• 
Area 34 – Dorsal entorhinal cortex (on the 
Parahippocampal gyrus) 
• 
Area 35 – Part of the perirhinal cortex (in the rhinal 
sulcus) 
• 
Area 36 – Part of the perirhinal cortex (in the rhinal 
sulcus) 
• 
Area 37 – Fusiform gyrus  
• 
Area 38 – Temporopolar area (most rostral part of 
the superior and middle temporal gyri) 
• 
Area 39– Angular gyrus, considered by some to be 
part of Wernicke’s area  
• 
Area 40 – Supramarginal gyrus considered by 
some to be part of Wernicke’s area  
• 
Areas 41 and 42 – Auditory cortex  
• 
Area 43 – Primary gustatory cortex  
• 
Areas 44 and 45 – Broca’s area, includes the 
opercular part and triangular part of the inferior 
frontal gyrus  
• 
Area 46– Dorsolateral prefrontal cortex  
• 
Area 47 – Orbital part of inferior frontal gyrus  
• 
Area 48 – Retrosubicular area (a small part of the 
medial surface of the temporal lobe) 
• 
Area 49 – Parasubicular area in a rodent 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-780-1
COGNITIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

• 
Area 52 – Parainsular area (at the junction of the 
temporal lobe and the insula) 
(*) Area only found in non-human primates.  
The VoxelNET system is capable of representing the 
voxelised volumetric structure of the brain corresponding to 
the Brodmann areas in the form of a material voxel structure, 
as well as the voxelised spatial environment providing the 
perceptual, physical context of brain activations and the 
neural/cognitive functions that they represent (see figure 4). 
This can provide a much more ecologically valid method of 
studying neural function that the rarefied experimental 
structures more typically used in cognitive and neural 
sciences. 
VI. 
PARALLEL PROCESSING AND QUANTUM COMPUTING 
To be able to process vast amounts of data, parallel 
processing or parallel computing is a method of 
simultaneously breaking up and running program tasks on 
multiple 
microprocessors 
resulting 
in 
reduction 
of 
processing time. Large problems can often be divided into 
smaller ones, which can then be solved at the same time and 
not sequentially. As an example: we may gaze into the 
world and direct attention towards complex scenes and need 
to calculate both optical sensors input and other operational 
calculations at the same time. A 3D infrastructure such as 
VoxelNET can be used to subdivide and direct computing to 
save/distribute 
computational 
resources 
while 
also 
displaying information/parts of scenes. Parallel processing 
can be accomplished via one computer with multiple cores 
and expanded via a computer network.  
A. Quantum Computers, Quantum Computing and 
Quantum Computational Intellgence  
Quantum computers aren't limited to two states; they 
encode information as quantum bits, or qubits, which can 
exist in superposition. Qubits represent atoms, ions, photons 
or electrons and their respective control devices can work 
together to act as computer memory and a processor. 
Quantum 
computing 
is 
a 
non-classical 
model 
of 
computation. Whereas a classical computer encodes data 
into fundamental units called bits, where each bit represents 
either a one or a zero, a quantum computer encodes data 
into bits that can represent a one, a zero, or some 
combination. 
a. 
Quantum Qubit 
A qubit, Qubit or Qbit, see Figure 7, can have 2-bit states 
at the same time. Therefore, a qubit is equal to a bit, but also 
equal to 2^Q bits. The two most relevant aspects of quantum 
physics 
are 
the 
principles 
of 
superposition 
and 
entanglement. A Qbit can be thought of as an electron in a 
magnetic field. 
 
Figure 7. A classical bit and a Quantum Qbit comparison. 
 
The ‘Bloch sphere’ is a geometrical representation of the 
pure state space of a two-level quantum mechanical system 
(Qubit), named after the physicist Felix Bloch, see Figure 8.  
 
 
Figure 8. The quantum Bloch sphere, a geometrical representation of a 
quantum state space. 
 
The bottom line of Quantum Computing (QC) is the 
existence of correlations between different Qbits as 
superposition states which when destroyed by measurement 
or any other means, the proper correlation is instantaneously 
communicated between the Qbits. Researchers have 
proposed some models where the neuron is modeled like a 
Qbit and organized into networks in the form of Quantum 
Associative Memory (QAM). 
Here in regard to VoxelNET, we suggest that the indexed 
voxels can compute content in a discretized, quantized and 
spatially distributed way and therefore function as a 
quantum computational infrastructure. Every voxel can 
include one or several bloch spheres for computation 
purposes.  
The interest in QC -physically based computation 
founded on quantum-theoretic concepts - has grown since 
the early 90’s in the computer and cognitive sciences as a 
result of claims by Deutsch [23] 1985, [24] 1989 and Shor 
[25] 1994 that problems regarded by computer scientists as 
NP-hard or NP-complete can be solved by a quantum 
computer. [26] “Since it is regarded that if a computational 
solution can be found to one of the problems in the NP-
complete class then a solution can be found to all problems 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-780-1
COGNITIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

in this class. These claims raise deep questions for computer 
scientists as to the nature of computational and algorithmic 
processes as well as the relation between computation and 
physical processes. Penrose [27] claimed in 1994 that 
solving the quantum measurement problem is a prerequisite 
to understand the human mind, and Hameroff’s [28] 
proposal the same year that consciousness emerges as a 
macroscopic quantum state from a critical level of 
coherence of quantum-level events in and around 
cytoskeletal microtubules within neurons, raise important 
questions for the scientific foundations of cognitive science 
and the appropriate level for a computational account of 
mind/brain [29].”.  
An exhaustive survey made in 2012 [30] included various 
applications 
of 
Quantum 
inspired 
Computational 
Intelligence (QCI) techniques and proposed to lay out the 
landscape for researchers on Quantum computing as a 
young discipline. The introduction lays out “Computational 
Intelligence (CI) as an offshoot of artificial intelligence 
which involves the study of adaptive mechanisms to enable 
or facilitate intelligent behaviors in complex and changing 
environments. CI consists of collective efforts in emerging, 
fundamental computational paradigms, unlike intelligent 
systems (IS), which covers all aspects of artificial 
intelligence (AI) and focuses on the development of the 
latest research into practical, fielded applications. CI 
depends upon numerical data supplied by manufacturers and 
does not rely on “knowledge”. AI, on the other hand, uses 
knowledge derived from human experts. The knowledge or 
intelligence exhibited from CI is self-emerging and 
spontaneous as opposed to manmade and artificial from 
AI.”. 
The theory of QC is related to a theory of reversible 
computing, which brings together ideas from classical 
information theory, computer science, and quantum physics. 
Mapping brain regions and running a variety of Neural 
Network (NN) methods such as Back Propagation NN, 
Training Algorithms, Hamiltonian NN, Hopfield NN, Self-
Organizing Map, Radial Basis Function NN, Recurrent NN, 
Stability Analysis, Support Vector Machines, Spiking NN, 
Quantum Inspired Fuzzy System, Quantum Inspired 
Evolutionary Methods must be based upon systemizations 
of environmental, human and robotic action, sensor data and 
computational power so that the background world 
representation is sufficiently systematic to support synthesis 
or comparison of CI results. 
VII. CONCLUSION  
This paper has presented a number of functions for which 
integration has been based upon a coherent unifying system 
of spatial and volumetric indexing and representation. The 
paper has emphasized the particular relevance of 
representing both the spatial structure of the physical world 
and that of neural information processing in order to study 
and leverage the response of human cognitive/neural 
systems to external situated 3D structures and events. The 
use of a unifying 3D location voxel structure has also been 
considered as a framework for managing computation on a 
spatial basis, where computing load can be managed and 
distributed on a spatial volumetric basis, and also potentially 
support quantum computing. 
The overall conclusion is that 3D spatial structure is 
inherent in many kinds of data, information, knowledge and 
processes, and this can be used to integrate and coordinate 
distributed processes having diverse primary functions. The 
current internet, based upon abstract links and document-
style interfaces, does not intrinsically provide this kind of 
coherent 3D spatial structure. 
The main author and her 4D Internet team are currently 
implementing 
and 
progressing 
VoxelNET 
from 
Technology-Readiness-Level (TRL) 4 to 6 and next year 
(2021) progressing it further towards TRL 7-8.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Thanks to CSIRO Mineral Resources and the Hard Rock 
Mining Program for supporting this research.  
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Sennersten, A. Davie and C. Lindley, "Voxelnet - An 
Agent Based System for Spatial Data Analytics", short paper, 
Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive 
Technologies and Applications (COGNITIVE 2016), March 
20 - 24, Rome, Italy. 
[2] C. Sennersten, C. Lindley, and B. Evans, “VoxelNET’s Geo-
Located Spatio Temporal Softbots -including living, quiet and 
invisible data”, The Eleventh International Conference on 
Advanced 
Cognitive 
Technologies 
and 
Applications 
(COGNITIVE 2019), May 05- 09 May, 2019, Venice, Italy. 
[3] C. Zimring and R. Conroy Dalton, “Linking Objective 
Measures of Space to Cognition” in Environment and 
Behaviour, Vol. 35 No. 1, January 2003, pp. 3-16 DOI: 
10.1177/0013916502238862. 
[4] N. Thrift, “Movement-space: The changing domain of 
thinking resulting from the development of new kinds of 
spatial awareness, Economy and Society, 33:4, 582-604, 
(2004), DOI: 10.1080/0308514042000285305.  
[5] https://www.google.com/search?client=firefox-b-
e&q=spatial+awarness+definiton+%5C 
[6] W. Sharpe, Cognitive Systems Project: Applications and 
Impact London DTI/Foresight  (2003) 
[7] https://www.researchgate.net/post/what_do_you_mean_groun
d_truth_dataset_or_images 
[8] D. Norris, “Short-Term Memory and Long-Term Memory are 
Still Different”, Psychological Bulletin, Vol. 143, No. 9, 992–
1009, 2017. 
[9] C. Sennersten and C. A. Lindley, “Real Time Eye Gaze 
Logging in a 3D Game/Simulation World”, Measurement 
Technology and Intelligent Instruments IX, Key Engineering 
Materials, Vol. 437. Initially presented at The 9th 
International Symposium on Measurement Technology and 
Intelligent Instruments (ISMTII-09), June 29 - July 2, 2009, 
Saint-Petersburg, Russia. 
[10] P. Jercic, C. Sennersten, and C. Lindley, “The Effect of 
Cognitive Load on Physiological Arousal in a Decision 
Making Serious Game”, 9th International Conference on 
Virtual Worlds and Games for Serious Applications (VS-
Games), UK, 2017.  
[11] C-A. Wang, T. Baird, J. Huang, J. D. Couitinho, D. C. Brien 
and D. P. Munoz, “Arousal Effects on Pupil Size, Heart Rate, 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-780-1
COGNITIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

and Skin Conductance in an Emotional Face Task”, Frontiers 
in 
Neurology, 
03 
December, 
 
2018 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fneur.2018.01029 
[12] F. Azhari, C. Sennersten, and T. Peynot, "Evaluation of 
Vision-based 
Surface 
Crack 
Detection 
Methods 
for 
Underground Mine Tunnel Images" (pap129s1), to Australian 
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ACRA 2019), 
Australia. 
[13] L. Manovich (2001) The Language of New Media Cambridge 
MA MIT Press   
[14] Callon, M and Law, J. (2004). ‘Guest Editorial’. Environment 
and Planning D: Society and Space, 22: 3–11. 
[15] Computational Complexity Theory, Stanford Encylopedia of 
Philosophy, 
USA 
(2015/16), 
https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/computational-complexity/  
[16] Algoritmic 
Complexity 
https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~adamchik/15-
121/lectures/Algorithmic%20Complexity/complexity.html  
[17] https://www.definitions.net/definition/discretization 
[18] W-K. Ling, “Quantisation”, Non Linear Digital Filters, High 
Dynamic Range Video, 2016. 
[19] N. K. Kasabov, “NeuCube: A spiking neural network 
architecture for mapping, learning and understanding of 
spatio-temporal brain data”, Neural Networks (52) 2014, pp 
62-76, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neunet.2014.01.006.  
[20] R. Olry, “Korbinian Brodmann (1868–1918)”, Journal of 
Neurology, Pioneers in Neurology, 257 , pp. 2112–2113, 
2010. 
[21] K. Zilles, “Dorsal Column, Grey Matter, Brodmann: a pioneer 
of human brain mapping—his impact on concepts of cortical 
organization”, BRAIN – a Journal of Neurology, 2018: 141; 
3262–3278, Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain, 2018, doi:10.1093/brain/awy273. 
[22] https://www.researchgate.net/figure/The-Brodmann-areas-
map-of-the-cortex-taken-from-126_fig2_262216540  
[23] D. Deutsch, Quantum theory, the Church-Turing principle and 
the universal quantum computer, Proceedings of the Royal 
Society of London, A 400, 97-117 (1985). 
[24] D. Deutsch, Quantum computational networks, Proceedings 
of the Royal Society of London A 425, 73-90 (1989). 
[25] P.W. Shor, Algorithms for quantum computation: Discrete 
logarithms and factoring, Proceedings of the 35th Annual 
Symposium on the Foundations of Computer Science, IEEE 
Press (1994). 
[26] T. Menneer and A. Narayanan, “Quantum-inspired Neural 
Networks”, Tech. Rep. R329,  Department of Computer 
Science, University of Exeter, 1995. 
[27] R. Penrose, Shadows of Mind: A Search for the Missing 
Science of Consciousness, New York: Oxford University 
Press, 1994.  
[28] S. Hameroff, Quantum coherence in microtubes: A neural 
basis for emergent consciousness? Journal of Consciousness 
Studies, 1(1), 91-118, 1994.  
[29] A. Narayanan, Biomolecular cognitive science, Proceedings 
of the Foundations of Cognitive Science Workshop, AISB95, 
Sheffield, UK, Available through ftp: atlas.ex.ac.uk, Research 
Report 325, 1995.  
[30] A. Manju and M. J. Nigam, “Applications of quantum 
inspired computational intelligence: a survey”, Artif Intell 
Rev (2014) 42:79–156, DOI 10.1007/s10462-012-9330-6, 
Springer, 
2014.
 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-780-1
COGNITIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

