An Innovative Immersive Environment to Assess
Non-Technical Skills: A Pilot Study
Dinet Jerome
2LPN, UR 7489
University of Lorraine
Nancy, France
jerome.dinet@univ-lorraine.fr
Pignault Anne
2LPN, UR 7489
University of Lorraine
Nancy, France
anne.pignault@univ-lorraine.fr
Linot Beatrice
SDIS 57 and 2LPN
SDIS and U. of Lorraine
Metz, France
beatrice.linot@sdis57.fr
Battarel Carole
Virtual Rangers Company
Virtual Rangers
Luxembourg, Luxembourg
info@virtual-rangers.com
Saint-Dizier De Almeida Val´erie
2LPN, UR 7489
University of Lorraine
Nancy, France
valerie.saint-dizier@univ-lorraine.fr
Grayo Franck
Groupe EDF
Nuclear Power Plant of Cattenom
Cattenom, France
Franck.grayo@enedis.fr
Chevrier Pierre
ENIM
National School of Engineering
Metz, France
pierre.chevrier@univ-lorraine.fr
Abstract—Because non-technical skills are more and more
important to improve safety in industry, this paper is aiming to
present an innovative tool to assess these non-technical skills, by
using an immersive environment. Even if all existing assessment
methods (e.g., simulated clinical scenarios, objective structured
clinical examinations, and questionnaires or written assessments)
provide interesting data, they present several limitations (weak-
ness of their theoretical background, only based on subjective
and individual data). The main goal of this paper is to present
an innovative tool to assess non-technical skills, by using an
immersive environment, allowing collection of quantitative and
objective data for several individuals engaged in a collaborative
and a complex cooperative task. Performances of the team, per-
formances, verbalisation and behaviors of each participant/player
are automatically recorded by the immersive system and a
debriefing session was realized with all participants/players at the
end of each game. Our results obtained with 35 participants tend
to confirm that technology such as an immersive environment
created by Virtual Rangers can offer a new and positive model for
assessing non-technical skills. Finally, advantages of this iterative
and incremental human-centered design are discussed in the
domain of the assessment of non-technical skills.
Index Terms—virtual reality; human factors; behavioral sci-
ence; human-computer interaction
I. INTRODUCTION
Many 21st century operations are characterised by teams of
workers dealing with significant risks and complex technology,
in competitive, commercially-driven environments. Informed
managers in such sectors have realised the necessity of un-
derstanding the human factors to their operations if they
hope to improve production and safety performance. While
organisational safety culture is a key determinant of workplace
safety, it is also essential to focus on the non-technical skills
of the system operators based at the ’sharp end’ of the
organisation [1].
In this context, a consortium has been created through an
industrial chair. The ”Behavior” chair held jointly by National
Engineering School of Metz (ENIM) and the research unit
2LPN (Lorraine Laboratory of Psychology and Neuroscience
of Behavioral Dynamics, UR7489) related to University of
Lorraine (France). This Chair promotes collaboration between
three main stakeholders: expert researchers in human factors,
professionals in industrial field and experts in scripting and
development of virtual environments. All of the stakeholders
have opted for a training program enriched by an approach
human-centered, i.e., centred to their behaviors and psycho-
logical factors underlined. The objective of the ”Behavior”
Chair is to develop innovative pedagogical innovations to
train future engineers, professionals in industry, executives
and managers in the industrial field or civil security in the
behavioral approach to risk management in companies. More
specifically, the challenge is to develop and validate tools
(through virtual reality simulation) aimed at developing non-
technical skills associated with collective tasks in an emer-
gency or risk context. The tools developed by the ”Behavior”
Chair are used in training courses to assess the technical and
non-technical skills mobilized in situation, and to engage the
trainees in reflexive processes promoting the development of
good practices and the associated skills.
This paper is aiming to present (i) one of the digital tools
(i.e., an immersive environment) developed in this ”Behavior”
Chair oriented to the assessment of non-technical skills and
(ii) the results issued from the first pre-validation testing of
this digital tool conducted with 35 volunteers. In Section 1,
the importance of non-technical skills in workplace safety and
the different techniques used to assess them are presented;
Section 2 is dedicated to the methodology used in our ex-
periment by describing the characteristics of participants, the
immersive environment specifically created, and the protocol
and the procedure; In Section 3, the first results obtained in
our pre-validation testing conducted with our 35 participants
are described by distinguishing quantitative and qualitative
data; Finally, in Section 4, perspectives and implications are
discussed.
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-046-9
COGNITIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

A. Non-Technical Skills to Improve Workplace Safety
From a historical point of view, non-technical skills emerged
from research into aviation accidents which occurred in the
late 1970s, such as the Tenerife airport disaster in 1977. As
technology improved, the human contribution to accidents had
become more apparent. Rather than there being any technical
fault with the aircraft, it became clear from subsequent investi-
gations that things, such as poor communication between pilots
and air traffic control could be primarily responsible for these
crashes. Since these disasters, a lot of other domains focused
attention to non-technical skills, particularly in industry [17].
Because the modern complexities of healthcare delivery and
rapid expansion of medical knowledge necessitate a high-
functioning team approach, which requires human factors
engineering and non-technical skills to operate effectively,
multiple tools have been developed for the assessment of
non-technical skills in healthcare [2] [7] [9]. Failure of non-
technical skills has been linked to poor quality and safety
of care [3]. For instance, a series of studies found a strong
correlation between surgical team situational awareness and
fewer technical errors [4] and a 3-year retrospective review
of fatal medical accidents submitted to a third-party safety
organisation found roughly half to be due to failures of non-
technical skills, most often related to situational awareness,
teamwork and decision-making [5].
While authors do not agree about the number of non-
technical skills (e.g., from 11 for [1] to 22 for [12], a consensus
exists about some crucial non-technical skills existing in all
domains (Figure 1): time and stress management, situation
awareness, communication, adaptability, creativity. In other
words and in accordance with [14], we define non-technical
skills as ”intra- and inter-personal (socio-emotional) skills,
essential for personal development, social participation and
workplace success. They include skills, such as communica-
tion, ability to work on multidisciplinary teams, adaptability,
etc.; these skills should be distinguished from technical, or
“hard skills”. We characterized them as “skills” in order to
emphasize the fact that they can be learned/developed by
suitable training efforts, and they can also be combined,
towards the achievement of complex outcomes.
Fig. 1. Non-technical skills according to [5] and [6]
In other words, non-technical skills are defined as the social
(teamwork, leadership, communication), cognitive (situation
awareness, decision-making, cognitive readiness, task man-
agement) and personal management (stress and fatigue man-
agement) skills necessary for safe and effective performance.
In other words, non-technical skills are the cognitive and
social skills required for efficient and safe operations. In some
domains such as civil aviation, nuclear power plant, high risk
industry, it has long been appreciated that the majority of
accidents could have been prevented if better non-technical
skills had been demonstrated by personnel operating and
maintaining the system. Whatever the domain (healthcare, in-
dustry, services, transportation, etc.) and whatever the activity
(maintenance, problem solving, monitoring, etc.) when applied
well, non-technical skills are invaluable in maintaining system
safety and ensuring efficient and effective operations. For
example, people often need to work in teams and communicate
with one another to get a particular job done. Learned through
training and practice, the best operators possess good non-
technical skills which enables them to, for example, work
well with others, work more safely, have a good ”situation
awareness” and communicate more effectively.
B. Assessment of Non-Technical Skills
Assessment methods related to non-technical skills fell into
three categories [8]: simulated clinical scenarios, objective
structured clinical examinations, and questionnaires or written
assessments. Even if all these tools provide interesting data,
they present the following limitations:
• Tools to assess non-technical skills were often devel-
oped locally, without reference to conceptual frameworks.
Consequently, the tools were rarely validated, limiting
dissemination and replication.
• Tools to assess non-technical skills are essentially based
on qualitative and subjective data issued from verbaliza-
tion or written data.
• Activity used to assess non-technical skills are often
individual and ”simple” activity (i.e., one people is asked
to complete one specific task).
• The assessment of soft skill is therefore widely practised,
but there is little in the way of research or evidence on
how well this assessment is done.
. The main goal of this paper is to present an innovative
tool to assess non-technical skills, by using an immersive
environment, allowing collection of quantitative and objective
data for several individuals engaged in a collaborative and a
complex task.
The immersive environment created to assess non-technical
skills has been elaborated by taking account of data issued
from a large literature review suggesting that non-technical
skills standards and assessments should [16]):
• Be aligned with the development of significant, soft skills
goals.
• Incorporate adaptability and unpredictability.
• Be largely performance-based.
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-046-9
COGNITIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

• Add value for teaching and learning.
• Make students’ thinking visible.
• Valid for purpose.
• Generate information that can be acted upon and provides
productive and usable feedback for all intended users.
• Provide productive and usable feedback for all intended
users.
• Be part of a comprehensive and well-aligned system
of assessments designed to support the improvement of
learning at all levels of the educational hierarchy
.
II. METHOD
In this section, details are provided about the immersive
environment created by Virtual Rangers to assess the non-
technical skills, and about the design and procedure of the
pilot study. This environment offers a role-playing simulation.
A. The Immersive Environment
The specific immersive environment created by Virtual
Rangers to assess non-technical skills has been elaborated in
accordance to Boud’s ideas [15], having summarised a body
of research on assessment, who listed desirable attributes of
assessment as including:
• Assessment should be authentic (reliable).
• Assessment should be process rather than results oriented.
• the act of assessment signals the importance of what is
being assessed, so assessment is a driver for learning;
and assessment activities need to be seen by students as
worthwhile and interesting activities.
. The use of immersive environment to assess non-technical
skills is recent (e.g., [9] [18] [22]). Traditionally, immersive
environments have been used in the development or the
assessment of hard skills, particularly in technical areas such
as health, engineering, defence or the environment [19] [21].
However, they can also be applied in the assessment and
development of soft skills [20], which are increasingly key
competencies for an individual in the twenty-first century [11]
[12].
Fig. 2. Screenshot of the submarine viewed by each participant.
On the one hand, immersive environment headsets provide
an immersion that focuses the user’s attention on her/his
Fig. 3. Screenshot of the desk viewed by one of the players.
actions in the virtual environment. On the other hand, the
controllers/joysticks allow natural gestures to be reproduced
to catch, use or throw objects. Tactile interactions are also
simulated to reproduce screen interfaces.
B. Participants
For this pre-validation testing session, thirty-five partici-
pants/players have been recruited to test the immersive envi-
ronment specifically created. All are adults, volunteers, native
French-speakers, and have no experience with immersive
environment or have a very low level of experience with this
kind of digital tool.
C. Task and Procedure
The assessment of the non-technical skills performed with
our specific immersive environment has several successive
steps:
• First, participants/players are asked to take a seat a the
specific room to use the immersive environment (Figure
2). The situation/room can accommodate from 2 to 6
players.
• Then, each participant/player is equipped with a VR
headset and is asked to take the two associated con-
trollers/joysticks.
• After a training session, participants/players are informed
that they will perform a collaborative task in a specific
environment (i.e., a submarine; Figure 3). The topic (i.e.,
the submarine) has been chosen for the following reasons:
a priori, no participant has experience in a submarine;
to prevent falls, all tasks can be performed while the
participant/player is seating down; and no specific techni-
cal skills are required to perform the different missions.
Randomly, one of the participants/players is designated
as a captain.
• To perform the collective task, each participant/player
must realize specific tasks (Figure 4). They received
instructions that they have to accomplish missions that
will require precise synchronization and collaboration to
achieve the objective of the module.. To do that, s/he is
asked to listen and to understand to the instructions given
by the captain, to use displayed information in front of
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-046-9
COGNITIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

her/him, to use her/his hands to perform specific tasks and
finally, to communicate with other participants/players.
• All interaction between participants/players are recorded
to provide qualitative information about their behaviors,
their verbalization and their attitudes.
• In parallel, all performances and all quantitative behaviors
(e.g., time spent to perform the task, numbers and types of
errors) are automatically recorded by the digital system.
• At the end of the game, a debriefing session is conducted
with all participants/players. S/he is invited to comment
freely their own behaviors, their difficulties, their limits
or misunderstandings, etc. This debriefing session is su-
pervised by an expert in ergonomics or work psychology.
.
Fig. 4.
Example of a session performed in the Meta Behavior room by 6
participants.
III. PRE-VALIDATION TESTING: FIRST RESULTS
The immersive environment several full iterations of soft-
ware development, and after every iteration, the environment
was tested in order to gain information about key elements:
in particular, those elements that we believe can play the
most prominent role in the efficacy, usability and acceptability
of the immersive environment as a training and assessment
tool. Iterations of development and testing are fundamental
for assessing the development phase and make sure that the
objectives are met to an acceptable extent. After the several
iterations presented here, the immersive environment was
released for an extensive validation phase
A. Quantitative Data
Performances of the team, performances, verbalisation and
behaviors of each participant/player are automatically recorded
by this system. By this way, it is easy to collect quantitative
data such as the rate of success/failure, time spent to complete
the tasks, the number and the type of each failure, etc. For
instance:
• As Figure 5 shows, the more players there are, the greater
the number of errors (Person’s r = .557, p=.0001).
• As Figure 6 shows, the more players there are, the
longer it takes to complete the mission Person’s r = .622,
p=.0001).
• But, finally, as Figure 7 shows, the number of errors has
no significant impact on the success rate (Student’t =
.543, df=33, p=.591).
• And, in the same way, as Figure 8 shows, there is no
significant relationship between the numbers of errors (x-
axis) and time spent to complete the mission (Person’s r
= .361, p=.033).
• Some failures are particularly frequent. For instance,
during the game, each participant/player was asked to
take the good Personal Protective Equipment (PPE), i.e.,
a glove worn to minimize exposure to hazards that cause
serious workplace injuries and illnesses. Each partici-
pant/player must choose the right gloves for the type
of hazard (chemical, electrical, ...), this glove can be
different among the player. Several participants/players
did not choose the correct glove because they did not
spend attention about the characteristics of the material.
.
Fig. 5.
Correlation between number of participants/players (x-axis, from 2
to 6) and number of errors (y-axis): Persaon’s r = .622, p=.001
B. Qualitative Data
As explained in the Method part, a debriefing session was
realized with all participants/players at the end of each game.
Each participant/player was invited to comment freely their
own behaviours, their difficulties, their limits or misunder-
standings, etc. This debriefing session was always supervised
by an expert in ergonomics or work psychology.
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-046-9
COGNITIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Fig. 6.
Correlation between number of participants/players (x-axis, from 2
to 6) and time spent to complete the mission (y-axis, in minutes): Persaon’s
r = .557, p=.001
Fig. 7. Impact of the number of errors on success
A lot of interesting qualitative and complementary informa-
tion has been obtained during this debriefing session. For in-
stance, from a spontaneous manner, some participants/players
evoked specific difficulties such as: ”s/he didn’t understand
what s/he must to do, because s/he didn’t listen me!” ”S/he
didn’t respect the instructions given by the captain.” ”I was too
stressed because the other individuals didn’t’ give feed backs
about their own behaviours”.
Moreover, some verbalisation allow to determine some
problems or difficulties in the immersive environment or in
the game design. For instance, some participants underlined
the existence of irregularities in the synchronisation between
Fig. 8. Correlation between the numbers of errors (x-axis) and time spent to
complete the mission (y-axis)
the physical location of each other participants in the digital
environment and their voices (e.g., ”I saw him/her in front of
me in the submarine but I heard her/his voice on the right
side”).
As we can see, debriefing provides information about the
immersive environment itself (i.e., its usability, its acceptabil-
ity, some technical problems) but debriefing is particularly cru-
cial to allow participants/players to reflect on their experience,
support each other, share perspectives, identify difficulties and
finally, to develop understanding about some non-technical
skills involved .
IV. DISCUSSION
First, our results obtained with 35 participants tend to
confirm that technology such as an immersive environment
created by Virtual Rangers can offer a new and positive model
for assessing non-technical skills. A crucial feature of non-
technical skills is the fact that they can be developed through
training, education and development programs and, besides the
training, such non-technical skills can also be assessed using
quantitative methodologies.
Second, we assume that the collaboration between scientists,
industrial partners and designers is necessary to conceive a
relevant assessment tool human-centred and oriented to non-
technical skills.
Third, if the use of digital tool as immersive environment is
relevant to assess non-technical skills, debriefing after the use
is also important because it allows professional teams to reflect
on their experience, support each other, share perspectives,
identify learning opportunities and agree on improvement
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-046-9
COGNITIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

needs. In other words, we assume that an iterative and incre-
mental human-centered design is a problem-solving technique
that puts real people at the center of the development process,
enabling us to create products and services such as immersive
environments that resonate and are tailored to our audience’s
needs.
Our experiment has several limitations preventing gener-
alization. For instance, several individual characteristics of
each player/user (e.g., level of expertise, status in his/her
company) were not assessed although we know that these
individual characteristics can have an effect on participation
or communication.
From an applied point of view, our immersive environment
can be a complementary educational tool to assess and to
teach non-technical skills. Non-technical skills are more and
more important in industry for safety while some authors such
as [23] discussed a mismatch between the goals of technical
depth demanded by recruiters and line managers and the
broader intellectual skills sought by corporate leadership. This
can be described as the tension between needing graduates
to be productive and to have safety behaviours today and the
desire to harness and grow creative, innovative, and managerial
talents. Non-technical Skills are more and more strategic to be
successful in personal and professional life then are essential
for a candidate when he tries to obtain any kind of job [24].
The quality of the industry, in terms of quality of the product,
of the organization, of the services and of the workers’ life and
safety, strongly depends on the non-technical Skills possessed
by personnel at any level. In other words, as an implication,
universities and school of engineering need to equip students
not just with intellectual and technical capabilities but also
applied practical non-technical skills which make them more
“work ready” to being focused in safety [25].
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research is supported by a grant issued from the
industrial ”Behavior” Chair ((https://chaire-behaviour.com/).
We are very grateful to all the people who have participated in
our experiment, and we want to thank all the partners related to
the ”Behaviour” Chair, this project being supported by a grant
issued from Department de la Moselle (CD 57), the Center of
Firefighting of Moselle (SDIS 57), Fondation ENIM, Fonds
de dotation Mercy, EDF CNPE Cattenom, Virtual Rangers
company, Demathieu Bard company, Eurometropole de Metz.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Flin, P. O Connor, and M. Crichton, ”Safety at the Sharp End: A
Guide to Non-technical Skills”, 2013, pp. 1-317.
[2] H. Higham, et al., ”Observer-based tools for non-technical skills as-
sessment in simulated and real clinical environments in healthcare: a
systematic review”, BMJ Quality and Safety, vol. 28(8), pp. 672-686,
2019.
[3] R. Flin, G. Youngson, and S. Yule, ”Enhancing surgical performance :
a primer in non-technical skill”, Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 2016.
[4] A. Mishra, K. Catchpole, T. Dale, and P. McCulloch, ”The influence
of non-technical performance on technical outcome in laparoscopic
cholecystectomy”, Surgical endoscopy, 22, pp. 68-73, 2008
[5] M. Uramatsu, et al., ”Do failures in non-technical skills contribute to
fatal medical accidents in Japan?” A review of the 2010–2013 national
accident reports. BMJ open, vol. 7(2), e013678, 2017.
[6] P. Gontar, H. J. Hoermann, J. Deischl, and A. Haslbeck, ”How Pilots
Assess Their Non-Technical Performance–A Flight Simulator Study”,
Advances in human aspects of transportation. part i, pp. 119-128, 2014.
[7] A. L. Hamilton, J. Kerins, M. A., MacCrossan, and V. R. Tallentire,
”Medical Students’ Non-Technical Skills (Medi-StuNTS): preliminary
work developing a behavioural marker system for the non-technical
skills of medical students in acute care. BMJ Simulation and Technology
Enhanced Learning”, vol. 5(3), pp. 130, 2019.
[8] M. Gordon, et al., ”Non-technical skills assessments in undergraduate
medical education: a focused BEME systematic review”, BEME Guide
No. 54. Medical teacher, vol. 41(7), pp. 732-745, 2019.
[9] R. Flin, and N. Maran, ”Identifying and training non-technical skills for
teams in acute medicine”, BMJ Quality and Safety, vol. 13(suppl 1), pp.
i80-i84, 2004.
[10] F. Almeida, and Z. Buzady, ”Development of soft skills competencies
through the use of FLIGBY”, Technology, Pedagogy and Education, vol.
31(4), pp. 417-430, 2022.
[11] H. Tadjer, Y. Lafifi, H. Seridi-Bouchelaghem, and S. G¨ulsec¸en, ”Im-
proving soft skills based on students’ traces in problem-based learning
environments, Interactive Learning Environments”, vol. 30:10, pp. 1879-
1896, 2022.
[12] V. Dolce, F. Emanuel, M. Cisi, and C. Ghislieri, ”The soft skills
of accounting graduates: perceptions versus expectations”, Accounting
Education, vol. 29:1, pp. 57-76, 2020.
[13] C. Succi, ”Are you ready to find a job? Ranking of a list of soft
skills to enhance graduates’ employability”, International Journal of
Human Resources Development and Management, vol. 19(3), pp. 281-
297, 2019.
[14] K. Kechagias, ”Teaching and assessing soft skills”, 2011, European
Union. Retrieved online: http://hdl.voced.edu.au/10707/363495.
[15] D. Boud, ”Enhancing learning through self assessment”, Routledge,
1995.
[16] M. Binkley, et al., ”Defining 21st Century Skills. Draft White Papers.
Melbourne: Assessment and Teaching of 21st Century Skills (ATCS21),
2010.
[17] S. Prihatiningsih, ”A Review of Soft-skill Needs in in Terms of Indus-
try”, In IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering, vol.
306, No. 1, pp. 012117, IOP Publishing, 2018.
[18] L. Hickman, and M. Akdere, ”Exploring Virtual Reality for Developing
Soft-Skills in STEM Education,” 2017 7th World Engineering Education
Forum (WEEF), Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 2017, pp. 461-465, doi:
10.1109/WEEF.2017.8467037.
[19] B, Eberhard, and T. Haase, ”Virtual reality platforms for education
and training in industry”, Advances in Databases and Information
Systems: Associated Workshops and Doctoral Consortium of the 13th
East European Conference, ADBIS 2009, Riga, Latvia, September 7-10,
2009. Revised Selected Papers 13. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2010.
[20] F. G´orski, ”Building virtual reality applications for engineering with
knowledge-based approach”, Management and Production Engineering
Review, vol. 8.4, pp. 64-73, 2017.
[21] D. Gorecky, M. Khamis, and K. Mura, ”Introduction and establishment
of virtual training in the factory of the future”, International Journal of
Computer Integrated Manufacturing, vol. 30(1), pp. 182-190, 2017.
[22] D. Eckert, and A. Mower, ”The effectiveness of virtual reality soft skills
training in the enterprise: a study”, Price Waterhouse Coopers, 2020.
[23] J. J. Duderstadt, ”Engineering for a changing road, a roadmap to the
future of engineering practice, research, and education”, Millennium
Project, 2007.
[24] B. Cimatti, ”Definition, development, assessment of soft skills and
their role for the quality of organizations and enterprises”, International
Journal for quality research, vol.10(1), pp. 97, 2016.
[25] N. Khalid, et al., ”Importance of soft skills for industrial training
program: employers’ perspective”, Asian Journal of Social Sciences and
Humanities, vol. 3(4), pp. 10-18, 2014.
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-046-9
COGNITIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

