Reproducing Fine Textures on Touch Displays Using Band-Limited White Noise
Vibrations
Ugur Alican Alma
Centre for Tactile Internet
with Human in the Loop (CeTI)
Chair of Acoustic and Haptic Engineering
Dresden, Germany 01069
Email: ugur_alican.alma@tu-dresden.de
Ercan Altinsoy
Centre for Tactile Internet
with Human in the Loop (CeTI)
Chair of Acoustic and Haptic Engineering
Dresden, Germany 01069
Email: ercan_altinsoy@tu-dresden.de
Abstract—In this paper, perceived roughness of different band-
limited white noise vibrations was evaluated on a tactile dis-
play. In the previous study, white noise vibrations without a
speciﬁc cut-off frequency were found suitable while rendering
ﬁne textures. In that study, some participants reported that low
frequency content of the noise vibrations were not plausible when
they were touching the ﬁne textures to rate the similarity between
them. Therefore, the motivation of this work is to improve the
perceptual capacity of white noise vibrations by adjusting its
character according to the surface roughness of ﬁne textures.
Two essential factors can be used to adjust the character of noise
vibrations: Frequency content and intensity level. In this study, a
perceptual test is conveyed to scale the congruence between ﬁne
textures and band-limited noise vibrations with different high
pass ﬁlters and intensities. In total, four cut-off frequencies (30
Hz, 60 Hz, 90 Hz and 120 Hz) and three intensity levels were
tested to seek their best combination with respect to three ﬁne
textures with the grit sizes of 0.05 mm, 0.1 mm and 0.2 mm. Based
on the analysis of the collected data, cut-off frequency is found
as a primary factor to create plausible ﬁne texture sensation on a
display. On the other hand, vibration intensity has no signiﬁcant
effect on perceived similarity when the vibration intensity changes
less than 3 dB.
Keywords–Haptic; Texture; Rendering.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The ﬁeld of haptic augmented reality has experienced
rapid growth using touch displays recently. Touch displays are
rapidly emerging apparatus since they are programmable input
devices. Besides their programmability, integration of haptic
feedback to touch displays made them indispensable devices
for users. With the enhancement of haptic feedback, not only
blind [1], but also old or young people can have easier control
on touch surfaces [2]. In the last decade, haptic touch devices
have been already prototyped using different surface actuation
mechanisms [3], [4], and there is even a commercialized touch
product [5]. Thanks to haptic feedback, humans can experience
cues, such as texture, shape and stiffness [6]-[9]. Particularly,
texture cues provide fundamental haptic information about
the objects on 2-D space. Hence, texture rendering has been
considered as the ﬁrst step on enhancing haptic dimension of
touch devices.
So far, immense amount of researches have been conducted
to produce texture sensation on displays by reproducing differ-
ent texture dimensions, such as roughness and friction. These
two cues have been simulated on touch displays using different
approaches, such as electrostatic force, ultrasonic vibrations
and vibrotactile feedback [8]-[10]. On the other hand, in recent
years, some of the researchers introduced signiﬁcant studies
on measurement-based rendering techniques which enabled
creating realistic haptic textures [9]. However, since such
methods simply plays back the captured immense data from
the surfaces, limited capabilities of tactile receptors [11] is
unavoidably ignored [12]. Besides that, perception mechanisms
of ﬁne and coarse textures are different from each other as
explained in the duplex theory of tactile texture perception
[13]. Based on this theory, vibrations occurring from the spatial
pattern of a surface can be only perceived when texture is not
too ﬁne. For ﬁne textures, the effect of induced vibrations on
the perception is not clear, but vibrotactile encoding ability
of sensory receptors take place to perceive them [14], [15].
Based on the study of Tiest [16], it was reported that complex
vibrations induced when a ﬁnger moves over ﬁne textures
are not identical to surface roughness while it is identical for
coarse textures. In the seventies, the studies of Lederman [17]-
[20] and Johnson [21]-[23] brought signiﬁcant contributions to
texture perception. According to their studies, spatial cues can
contribute to roughness perception if the spatial size of bumps
are larger than 0.1/0.2 mm. Afterwards, Bensmaia and Hollins
asserted that waveform variations on complex vibrotaction can
change the perception of texture, and vibrotactile encoding is
sufﬁcient itself to perceive ﬁne textures [24]. Furthermore,
another study claimed that active surface exploration with
ﬁnger with varying speed can activate different tactile receptors
with different selective frequencies [13].
As mentioned, the data-driven approach (playing back
captured surface data) proposes tactile vibration for ﬁne and
coarse textures with similar complexity resolution. Moreover,
played back recorded vibrations can contain non-perceivable
frequency components, which are below the human vibration
detection threshold. According to the former study [12], it was
observed that recorded texture vibrations were too complex for
coarse textures while ﬁne textures were simulated best with
complex vibrations. However, actual physical representation
was not necessary to render ﬁne textures since white noise
vibrations were found as efﬁcient as recorded vibrations. So
far, not enough researches have been done on perception-based
texture modelling [25], [26]. Accordingly, the aim of this study
is to propose a simple and perceptually efﬁcient ﬁne texture
rendering strategy. Therefore, white noise vibrations will be
elaborated based on perceived roughness of ﬁne textures which
have different spatial densities. This elaboration procedure
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-780-1
COGNITIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

will be explained in section 2. With the proposed strategy,
capturing surface data process, which is cumbersome and
time consuming process, can be eliminated. This aim will
be investigated by assessing the congruence between several
sand papers and band noise vibrations with different cut-off
frequencies and intensities. The ﬁne sand papers are selected
so as to have grit sizes of 0.05 mm, 0.1 mm and 0.2 mm.
For the perceptual investigation, four cut-off frequencies and
three intensity levels (reference, -3 dB reduced and +3 dB
increased levels) were tested. Investigation process will be
described in detail in Section 3. Before the main experiment
session, perceived intensities of the band noise vibrations were
equalized via a preliminary test to investigate the effect of
the frequency clearly. Based on the results of the evaluation,
cut-off frequency is found as a signiﬁcant factor to have an
effect on perceived roughness. On the other hand, changing the
intensity level as much 3 dB is not found as a signiﬁcant factor
on the suitability of the band-limited white noise vibrations.
In the following section, creation process of tactile stimuli,
experimental setup and experimental method are explained.
II.
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
A. Creation of Vibrotactile Feedback
The band-limited white noise vibrations were produced at
MATLAB with the sampling frequency of 44100 Hz. In total,
4 different high pass ﬁlters were applied to the white noise
signals with the order of 6. The cut-off frequencies are 30 Hz,
60 Hz, 90 Hz and 120 Hz. In addition, a low pass ﬁlter with
1000 Hz cut-off frequency was applied to the band-limited
noise signals to eliminate non-perceivable high frequencies.
Note that the cut-off frequencies were selected considering
the just noticeable difference of frequency [11]. During the
preliminary research phase, 150 Hz cut-off frequency was also
tested, but it was found similar with the vibration with Fc
120 Hz. The proﬁles of four types of band noise signals are
schematically illustrated in Figure 1.
Figure 1. In the ﬁgure, frequency spectrum of prepared band-limited white
noise signals are illustrated to show the spectral characteristics of each band
noise vibrations.
Furthermore, intensity levels of the vibrations with different
Fc values were equalized based on perceived vibration inten-
sity. This process was done by conducting a preliminary test
in which 5 subjects tuned the power ampliﬁer until 4 types
of vibrations have same perceived intensity. Thus, the peak
magnitude difference between the signals are explicitly illus-
trated in Figure 1. After equalizing the perceived intensities of
the vibrations, four types of vibrations were also produced at
reduced (-3 dB) and increased (+3 dB) intensity levels.
B. Test Setup
To carry out a similarity evaluation on a display, an experi-
mental apparatus was built as seen in Figure 2. A touch display
monitor (Gechic HD 1102H) was assembled on top of an
electrodynamic shaker (RFT Messelektronik), and the control
interface was designed to contain scaling bar and play button
for driving the vibrotactile stimuli. The tactile feedback was
played for 5 seconds after the subjects clicked the play button
on the interface, and a closed-back headphone (beyerdynamics
DT-770) was used to prevent the potential interference of the
sound of the electrodynamic shaker.
Figure 2. The experimental setup and the evaluation interface are seen
above. During the evaluation, the participants touched the sand papers under
the wood cover.
As shown in Figure 3, three sand papers with different
grit sizes were utilized in the perceptual study to examine the
relation between the spatial density of ﬁne textures and the
frequency content of white noise. The image demonstrates the
sand papers from left to right with increasing grit sizes. Note
that the sand papers have regular spatial distributions.
Figure 3. From left to right, the sand papers have 0.05 mm, 0.1 mm and 0.2
mm grit sizes.
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-780-1
COGNITIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Before the experiment started, tactile feedback genera-
tion system was validated as follows: Intensity level of the
band noise vibrations at actual intensity on the display was
perceptually set to be similar with the perceived roughness
magnitude of 0.1 mm sand paper by tuning the power ampliﬁer.
This process was repeated for each participant. Therefore, the
effect of altering the intensity level on the perceived roughness
similarity can be examined. Moreover, the subjects were told
to move their ﬁngers in the central area of the display where
the characteristic of vibrations was calibrated. In addition, the
participants were requested to slide their ﬁngers gently over
the touch screen to avoid changing vibration intensity on the
display considerably.
III.
EXPERIMENTAL METHOD
In the evaluation, similarity tests were conducted based on
Rohrmann scaling method [27] since it is a practical approach
to evaluate similarity of a stimuli on linear one dimensional
scale. In total, four band-limited white noise vibrations with
cut-off frequencies of 30 Hz, 60 Hz, 90 Hz, and 120 Hz were
judged in three different intensity levels. It means that there are
36 stimulation cases (4 vibrations x 3 intensity levels x 3 sand
papers) when the subjects evaluate the vibrotactile stimuli for
each texture. In total, 12 subjects, 9 male and 3 female aged
between 24 and 39 years, participated in the experiment.
The evaluation consists of two consequent steps which are
exploring the vibrations and textures, and the rating process.
When the participants clicked the play button from the eval-
uation interface, the vibrations were driven one by one on
the touch display. Then, the participants were requested to
move their ﬁngers on the display at a constant speed during
the stimuli inspection. Also, the participants were allowed to
repeat each vibrotactile stimulus until they are ready for the
rating process. Afterwards, the subjects scaled the similarity
of the each vibrotactile feedback with respect to each sand
paper using verbal labels. The verbal labels are “not at all”,
“little bit”, “middle”, “very much” and “fully”, placed on the
continuous equal interval scale from 0 to 100 at the experiment
interface. Also, the participants were allowed to rate anywhere
in between two labels using the slider. Furthermore, before
the main rating process, training session took place so that
the subjects were trained to be familiar with the evaluation
procedure and the types of vibrotactile stimuli before the main
experiment. The data of the training session were not used
for analysis of the test. The main test aimed to collect the
subjective evaluation data with respect to all combinations
of the vibrotactile stimuli and the textures. All participants
completed the evaluation including the training session below
30 minutes.
IV.
RESULTS
In the perceptual test, the similarity of the vibrotactile
stimuli were judged by the subjects. The collected data for each
vibrotactile stimulus were normally distributed. To begin with
the investigation of the experimental data, similarity ratings of
the vibrotactile stimuli were plotted for each texture as seen
in Figure 4. In the ﬁgure, it is observed that there is a distinct
differences between the ratings of the vibrations with different
cut-off frequencies. In addition, when intensity level of the
vibrotactile stimuli was reduced and increased, the ratings of
the vibrations increased for 0.05 mm and 0.2 mm textures,
respectively. This shows that the participants well-tuned the
perceived intensity of the vibrations according to 0.1 mm sand
paper. To analyze the effect of each factor (Cut-off frequency,
intensity and texture) on the perceived roughness similarity, a
three-way ANOVA test was performed. This test was carried
on for 432 values (4 types of vibrations x 3 intensity levels
x 3 sand papers x 12 subjects) using all similarity ratings as
the dependent value. In conclusion, the cut-off frequency (F(3,
431) = 19.351, p = .0001) and the grit sizes of the ﬁne textures
(F(3, 431) = 5.268, p = .005) were found to have signiﬁcant
effects on the perceived similarity.
Figure 4. Similarity ratings of three texture vibrations are concluded as
above. On the top, the ratings of fc = 30 Hz and fc = 60 Hz, on the bottom,
fc = 90 Hz and fc = 120 Hz cases are plotted.
Apart from individual analysis of the independent factors,
signiﬁcant interaction effects were found between the factors
of cut-off frequency and texture (F(3, 431) = 5.346, p = .0001),
the intensity and the texture (F(3, 431) = 20.079, p = .0001),
and all three together (F(3, 431) = 1.691, p = .045). The
interaction among the three factors demonstrates that creating
plausible band noise vibrations for ﬁne textures depends on
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-780-1
COGNITIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

all three factors together, but primarily frequency content. On
the other hand, although intensity was not found to have a
signiﬁcant effect on the ratings, it might have been signiﬁcant
if intensity level would have been altered more than 3 dB.
Furthermore, Post-hoc t-tests with a Bonferroni procedure was
performed to make pairwise comparisons for each factor. As
a result, signiﬁcant differences were found for 5 pairwise
comparisons out of 12 comparisons: “ fc = 30 Hz - fc = 60
Hz”, “fc = 30 Hz - fc = 90 Hz”, “fc = 30 Hz - fc = 120 Hz”,
“0.05 mm texture - 0.2 mm texture” and “0.1 mm texture -
0.2 mm texture”.
V.
DISCUSSION
In this study, the suitability of the band-limited white
noise vibrations are evaluated according to three different
ﬁne textures. The goal of this evaluation was to detect the
most plausible frequency band and the vibration intensity
level according to grit sizes of the ﬁne textures. Therefore, a
perception-based ﬁne texture rendering model can be attained
as an alternative to data driven method. With this method,
data capturing process can be discarded, and texture rendering
process can be simpliﬁed. This idea was developed after testing
the suitability of white noise vibrations, recorded vibrations
and simple sinusoids with respect to the fabric textures in the
previous study. Since suitability ratings of white noise were
found similar with the recorded vibrations for ﬁne textures,
it was considered that plausibility of white noise can be
augmented by removing redundant frequency components. In
addition, different vibration intensity levels were tested in the
evaluation so that the roles of both cut-off frequency and
vibration intensity on perceived similarity can be ﬁgured out
in one test. According to the results, the cut-off frequency
was found as a primary factor to create congruent texture
vibrations. However, it is likely that vibration intensity could
have had more impact on the similarity ratings if the intensity
level would be increased or decreased more than 3 dB.
According to the collected similarity ratings, the band noise
vibrations with 30 Hz cut-off frequency was found as the
most unsuitable vibrotactile stimuli for the ﬁne textures, as
expected. Even altering the vibration intensity did not increase
the ratings considerably. However, when the cut-off frequency
was 60 Hz, the similarity ratings for the ﬁnest and the mid-
ﬁne textures increased with the conﬁdence interval of 95%.
This event demonstrates the effect of cut-off frequency on
the suitability of the white noise vibrations. When the cut-off
frequency of the tactile stimuli became 90 Hz, the mean ratings
were maximum for 0.1 mm and 0.2 mm textures (at increased
intensity level) with the conﬁdence interval of 80%. For 0.05
mm texture, The maximum mean rating was attained when the
cut-off frequency became 120 Hz (at reduced intensity level).
For the Fc 90 and 120 Hz cases, altering vibration intensity
changed the means of the ratings with the conﬁdence interval
of 95%. This demonstrates that the effect of vibration intensity
on perceived roughness can be only observed if frequency
content of the vibration is set to be congruent with respect
to a reference texture.
Another point attained from the statistical analysis is
that 0.05 mm and 0.1 mm textures were found signiﬁcantly
different than the 0.2 mm texture, but they were not found
signiﬁcantly different from each other. Possibly, it shows that
different cutaneous perception processing might have occurred
for 0.2 mm texture compared to 0.05 mm and 0.1 mm textures.
This outcome agrees with the previous studies conducted by
Lederman and Johnson arguing that spatial cues can contribute
to roughness perception if the spatial size of a surface is more
than 0.1/0.2 mm.
The perceived intensity of four band-limited noise vibra-
tions were equalized at the preliminary test. It is because the
human vibration detection threshold depends on the frequency
of the vibration. Balancing the perceived intensity allowed
to perform a reliable judgment on the effect of the cut-off
frequency. Furthermore, the reason why the grit sizes of the
sand papers were chosen as 0.05 mm, 0.1 mm and 0.2 mm is
to analyze relation between the roughness of ﬁne textures and
the the factors comprehensively.
The maximum ratings of the vibrotactile feedback, which
are resembling the roughness, were clustered between 70%
and 80%. The reason why the ratings did not reach 100% is
because the tactile texture perception consists of four main
dimensions, and roughness is one of the dimension in texture
perception. Therefore, lacking of other dimensions (hardness,
friction and heat capacity) might have limited the subjective
evaluation.
VI.
CONCLUSION
With the results of this study, the effect of frequency and
vibration intensity on the perceived magnitude of roughness is
investigated. Hence, the primary and second factors affecting
the suitability of created texture vibrations is ﬁgured out.
On the other hand, the state of art for reproducing textures
has been measurement-based approaches, but perception-based
rendering algorithms will likely draw more attention in near
future. It is because perception-based methods can provide
plausible texture sensation on displays with simpler vibrations
and rendering processes, as observed in the previous study
[12]. These advantages can be particularly crucial for tactile in-
ternet technology, which aims rapid data transmission between
smart haptic devices for extremely low latency [28]. Namely,
texture rendering approaches which drive only perceptually
perceivable amount of data with high perceptual capacity can
be the most useful technique. As a future work, an extended
study will be conducted to compare the perceptual capacities
of perception-based and data-driven approaches, and this test
will be carried out with more participants for more reliable
statistical analysis.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Funded by the German Research Foundation (DFG,
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft) as part of Germany’s Ex-
cellence Strategy - EXC 2050/1 - Project ID 390696704 -
Cluster of Excellence ”Centre for Tactile Internet with Human-
in-the-Loop” (CeTI) of Dresden Technical University.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Bateman, O. K. Zhao, A. V. Bajcsy, and M. C. Jennings, “A user-
centered design and analysis of an electrostatic haptic touchscreen system
for students with visual impairments”, International Journal of Human-
Computer Studies, 109, 102-111, 2018.
[2]
D. Cingel and A. M. Piper, “How parents engage children in tablet-based
reading experiences: An exploration of haptic feedback”, In Proceedings
of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work
and Social Computing, pp. 505-510. 2017.
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-780-1
COGNITIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

[3]
O. Bau, I. Poupyrev, A. Israr, and C. Harrison, “TeslaTouch: electrovi-
bration for touch surfaces”, In Proceedings of the 23nd annual ACM
symposium on User interface software and technology, pp. 283-292.
2010.
[4]
J. Mullenbach, C. Shultz, A. M. Piper, M. Peshkin, and J. E. Colgate,
“Surface haptic interactions with a TPad tablet”, In Proceedings of
the adjunct publication of the 26th annual ACM symposium on User
interface software and technology, pp. 7-8. 2013.
[5]
M. Cherif, E. J. Colgate, M. A. Peshkin, M. F. Olley, and G. Topel,
“Materials and structures for haptic displays with simultaneous sensing
and actuation”, U.S. Patent Application 14/931,209, ﬁled May 5, 2016.
[6]
S. C. Kim, A. Israr, and I. Poupyrev, “Tactile rendering of 3D features
on touch surfaces”, In Proceedings of the 26th annual ACM symposium
on User interface software and technology pp. 531-538. ACM, 2013.
[7]
S. Saga and R. Raskar, “Simultaneous geometry and texture display based
on lateral force for touchscreen”, In World Haptics Conference (WHC),
pp. 437-442, IEEE, 2013.
[8]
G. Ilkhani, M. Aziziaghdam, and E. Samur, “Data-driven texture render-
ing with electrostatic attraction”, In International Conference on Human
Haptic Sensing and Touch Enabled Computer Applications, pp. 496-504,
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2014.
[9]
H. Culbertson, J. Unwin, and K. J. Kuchenbecker, “Modeling and
rendering realistic textures from unconstrained tool-surface interactions”,
IEEE transactions on haptics, pp. 1-1, 2014.
[10]
L. Winﬁeld, J. Glassmire, J. E. Colgate, and M. Peshkin, “T-pad: Tactile
pattern display through variable friction reduction”, In EuroHaptics
Conference, 2007 and Symposium on Haptic Interfaces for Virtual
Environment and Teleoperator Systems, World Haptics 2007, Second
Joint pp. 421-426, IEEE, 2007.
[11]
M. Rothenberg, R. T. Verrillo, S. A. Zahorian, M. L. Brachman, and S. J.
Bolanowski Jr, “Vibrotactile frequency for encoding a speech parameter”,
The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, pp. 1003-1012, 1977.
[12]
U. A. Alma and E. Altinsoy, “Perceived Roughness of Band-Limited
Noise, Single, and Multiple Sinusoids Compared to Recorded Vibration”,
In IEEE World Haptics Conference (WHC), pp. 337-342, IEEE, 2019.
[13]
D. Katz, “The world of touch”, Psychology press, 2013.
[14]
M. Hollins, S. J. Bensmaa, and R. Risner, “The duplex theory of tactile
texture perception”, In Proceedings of the 14th annual meeting of the
international society for psychophysics, pp. 115-121, the International
Society for Psychophysics Quebec, Canada, 1998.
[15]
M. Hollins and S. R. Risner, “Evidence for the duplex theory of
tactile texture perception”, perception & psychophysics, 62(4), pp.695-
705, 2000.
[16]
W. M. B. Tiest and A. M. Kappers, “Haptic and visual perception of
roughness”, Acta psychologica, 124(2), pp.177-189, 2007.
[17]
S. J. Lederman, “Tactile roughness of grooved surfaces: The touching
process and effects of macro-and microsurface structure”, Perception &
Psychophysics, 16(2), pp. 385-395, 1974.
[18]
S. J. Lederman, “The callus-thenics of touching”, Canadian Journal of
Psychology, 30(2), p. 82, 1976.
[19]
S. J. Lederman and M. M. Taylor, “Fingertip force, surface geometry,
and the perception of roughness by active touch”, Perception & Psy-
chophysics, 12(5), pp. 401-408, 1972.
[20]
S. J. Lederman, “Tactile roughness of grooved surfaces: The touching
process and effects of macro-and microsurface structure”, Perception &
Psychophysics, 16(2), pp. 385-395, 1974.
[21]
C. E. Connor and K. O. Johnson, “Neural coding of tactile texture: com-
parison of spatial and temporal mechanisms for roughness perception”,
Journal of Neuroscience, 12(9), pp. 3414-3426, 1992.
[22]
K. O. Johnson and G. D. Lamb, “Neural mechanisms of spatial tactile
discrimination: neural patterns evoked by braille like dot patterns in the
monkey”, The Journal of physiology, 310(1), pp. 117-144, 1981.
[23]
J. R. Phillips and K. O. Johnson, “Tactile spatial resolution. II. Neural
representation of bars, edges, and gratings in monkey primary afferents”,
Journal of neurophysiology, 46(6), pp. 1192-1203, 1981.
[24]
S. J. BensmaIa and M. Hollins, “The vibrations of texture”, Somatosen-
sory & motor research, 20(1), pp. 33-43, 2003.
[25]
R. F. Friesen, R. L. Klatzky, M. A. Peshkin, and J. E. Colgate, “Single
pitch perception of multi-frequency textures”, In Haptics Symposium
(HAPTICS), pp. 290-295, IEEE, 2018.
[26]
S. Okamoto and Y. Yamada, “Lossy data compression of vibrotactile
material-like textures”, IEEE transactions on haptics, pp. 69-80, 2013.
[27]
B. Rohrmann, “Verbal qualiﬁers for rating scales: Sociolinguistic con-
siderations and psychometric data”, Project report, p.68, 2007.
[28]
E. Steinbach, M. Strese, M. Eid, X. Liu, A. Bhardwaj, and Q. Liu,
“Haptic codecs for the tactile internet”, Proceedings of the IEEE 107,
no. 2, pp. 447-470, 2018.
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-780-1
COGNITIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

