Altered Resting-State Functional Connectivity in Internet Addicts 
Jin-Hun Sohn 
Department of Psychology 
Chungnam National University  
Daejeon, S. Korea 
jhsohn@cnu.ac.kr 
 
Ji-Woo Seok 
Department of Psychology 
Chungnam National University  
Daejeon, S. Korea 
suk6124@naver.com 
 
 
 
Suk-Hee Kim  
Department of Professional Counseling & Psychotherapy  
Wonkwang University  
Iksan, S. Korea. 
sookheekim22@gmail.com 
 
Sunju Sohn 
Department of Social Welfare  
Cheongju University 
 Cheongju, S. Korea 
sunjusohn124@gmail.com
 
Abstract—The purpose of this study was to examine functional 
disconnectivity 
in 
Internet 
addicts 
using 
resting-state 
functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (rs fMRI). Internet 
addicts and demographically similar non-addicts were scanned 
using rs fMRI. For the connectivity analysis, Regions Of 
Interests (ROIs) were defined based on previous studies of 
addictions. The functional connectivity assessment for each 
subject was obtained by correlating time-series across the 
ROIs, resulting in 8x8 matrix for each subject. Within-group 
functional connectivity patterns were observed by entering the 
z maps of the ROIs of each subject into second-level one 
sample t test. Two sample t test was also performed to examine 
differences between two groups. A significant increase was 
observed in positive functional connectivity between the Orbito 
Frontal Cortex (OFC) and several brain regions in the non-
addicted group. However, no significant correlations in these 
structural connectivities were found in the Internet addiction 
group. The Internet addiction group presented significant 
negative connectivity between the OFC and insula. Our 
findings provide the evidence that Internet addicts have 
aberrant functional connectivity in the corticostriatal circuit at 
resting state. Particularly, we suggest that the OFC, which is 
associated with processing negative affect and behavioral 
inhibition, may play a crucial role in the pathophysiology of 
the Internet addiction. 
Keywords-Resting-state fMRI; Internet addicts; Functional 
connectivity; Orbitofrontal cortex 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Internet addiction disorder is marked by an inability to 
control one's Internet use, which eventually leads to 
psychological, social or work difficulties [1]. Internet 
addiction is defined as an Internet gaming disorder in DSM-
V [2], but the nosology and optimal diagnostic criteria for an 
Internet gaming disorder remain controversial. The reason is 
that Internet addiction shares features in common with 
impulse control, behavioral addiction, and obsessive-
compulsive disorders  [3].  
Regardless of whether Internet addiction is best 
conceptualized as a behavioral addiction or an impulse 
control disorder, Internet addiction has been speculated to be 
related to impaired inhibitory control. While impulsivity has 
always been recognized as central to Internet addiction, it is 
increasingly acknowledged to impact upon risk for and 
maintenance of addictive disorders.  
Clinical evidence suggests that Internet addicts have a 
high level of impulsivity as measured by behavioral task of 
response inhibition (Go-No go task) and a self report 
questionnaire (BIS-2 scale) [4]. An Event-Related Potential 
(ERP) study of executive control ability (Go-No go task) 
found Internet addicts represented less efficient information 
processing and lower impulse control than controls [5]. In a 
functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) study using 
color-word stroop paradigm, Internet addicts also showed 
diminished efficiency of response inhibition processes 
relative to controls [6]. While numerous studies have focused 
on task-based ERP and fMRI related to Internet addiction 
and impulsivity, few studies have explored resting-state brain 
activity in relation to Internet addiction and impulsivity.  
The purpose of this study was to examine functional 
disconnectivity in Internet addicts using resting-state fMRI. 
II. 
METHODS 
A. Participants 
Fifteen individuals from the Internet addicts (15 men; 
mean = 22.20, SD = 3.07) and 15 from the normal group (15 
males; mean = 22.47, SD = 2.53), both university students, 
participated in the current fMRI experiment. To sample the 
final 
participants 
of 
the 
experiment, 
the 
Korean 
translated/modified version of the Internet Addiction Scale 
(IAS) [1] and the K-scale [7] were used. The original IAS is 
a self-reported scale of the pathological use of the Internet 
(i.e., preoccupation, compulsive use, behavioral problems, 
emotional changes, impact on life related to Internet usage), 
consisting of 20 questions. Each question is based on a 5-
point scale (1: Never to 5: Very). Individuals scoring 70 
points or higher compose the Internet addiction group, for 
whom the Internet use can cause a serious problem in daily 
246
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-340-7
COGNITIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

life; people by 40–69 points are categorized as a mild 
Internet addiction group, and those with 39 points and less 
are considered normal users. The Korean version of the IAS 
showed desirable internal consistency (Cronbach’s α=. 9) [8].  
The K-scale is a Korean adults’ Internet addiction self-
diagnosis scale developed based on a survey of 146 
university students. The scale consists of 20 questions and 
includes 4 subscales: disability to distinguish daily life and 
reality; the positive expectation of the Internet; tolerance and 
withdrawal; and self-awareness of the Internet. Each 
question is asked on a Likert-type 4-point scale (1: Never to 
4: Very), with 53 points or below indicating that the 
individual should be classified as part of the general user 
group, whereas individuals with a score of 54 points or 
above are included in the Internet addiction group. 
To obtain more accurate behavioral and neuroimaging 
data on Internet addicts, all subjects included in the Internet 
addiction group and the normal controls did not 
simultaneously experience other addictive diseases such as 
alcoholism or gambling addiction. The average IAS score of 
participants selected as the final Internet addicts was 70.80 
(SD = 10.31), and the average K-scale score was 60.00 (SD 
= 4.47); the average IAS score of the control group was 
28.60 (SD = 7.35), and their average K-scale score was 
32.60 (SD = 7.70) (p < 0.001). All participants of the 
experiment provided their signed consent to voluntarily 
participate in the experiment after being thoroughly informed 
of the details of the experiment. 
To determine whether Internet addicts were more 
impulsive than controls, Barrett’s Impulsiveness Scale II 
(BIS-II), as adapted by Lee [9], was used. BIS-II consists of 
35 questions with dichotomized “yes” (1) or “no” (0) 
answers. The total score ranges between 0 and 35, with 
higher scores indicating greater levels of impulsiveness. The 
scale was reported to be reliable (Cronbach's α=. 85) [10]. 
B. Regions of Interest for Network Analysis 
On the basis of previous studies on the functional 
neuroimaging of addiction [11], the following regions, 
including the reward network, were considered a priori to be 
of particular interest: the Inferior Parietal Cortex (IPC), 
Anterior Cingulate Cortex (ACC), caudate nucleus, 
Putamen, Orbital Frontal Cortex (OFC), Dorso Lateral 
PreFrontal Cortex (DLPFC), amygdala, and insua. Thus, 8 
seed regions were defined.  
 
 
 
Figure 1. Selected ROIs for connectivity 
(ACC, Anterior Cingulate Cortex; IPC, Inferior Parietal Cortex; 
OFC, Orbito Frontal Cortex; DLPFC, DorsoLateral PreFrontal 
Cortex) 
 
Figure 1 shows selected Regions Of Interest (ROIs)  for 
connectivity analysis. These ROIs masks were built by 
using the WFU pick atlas 2.4 toolbox [12]. 
C. Functional MRI Image Acquisition 
Imaging was conducted using a 3.0 T whole-body ISOL 
Technology FORTE scanner (ISOL Technology, Korea) 
equipped with whole-body gradients and a quadrature head 
coil. Single-shot echo-planar fMRI scans were acquired in 35 
continuous slices, parallel to the anterior commissure–
posterior commissure line. The parameters for fMRI 
included the following: the Repetition Time/Echo Time 
(TR/TE) were 3000/40 ms, respectively, flip angle was 80, 
field of view was 240 mm, matrix was 64 × 64, slice 
thickness was 4 mm, and the in-plane resolution was 3.75 
mm. Three dummy scans from the beginning of the run were 
excluded to decrease the effect of non-steady state 
longitudinal magnetization. T1-weighted anatomic images 
were obtained using a 3-D FLAIR sequence (TR/TE = 
280/14 ms, flip angle = 60, FOV = 240 mm, matrix = 256 × 
256, slice thickness = 4 mm). 
D. Analysis- Functional MRI Preprocessing 
The first 4 time points of the resting-state were discarded 
to avoid the instability of the initial MRI signal. After that, 
preprocessing steps, carried out with the SPM 8 toolbox, 
consist of slice-timing correction for interleaved acquisition, 
motion correction, and spatial normalization into a standard 
template provided by the Montreal Neurological Institute 
(MNI). The normalized images were smoothed with 8-mm 
Gaussian kernel. For the resting-state data, linear detrending 
and band-pass filtering (0.01-0.08 Hz) were performed by 
using conn toolbox. In addition, the head motion parameters, 
averaged signals from white matter, cerebrospinal fluid, and 
global brain signal were regressed out to remove the 
possible spurious variances derived from cardiac and 
respiratory fluctuations [13][14].  
247
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-340-7
COGNITIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 2.  The flow chart of resting-state functional connectivity 
analysis 
E. Analysis- Functional Connectivity: ROI-Wise Manners 
After extracting the 8 ROIs for each subjects, we 
computed the functional connectivity between each pair of 
the 8 ROIs.  
Functional connectivity analysis were conducted in ROI-
wise manners. For ROI-wise functional connectivity 
computing the 
correlations 
between 
ROIs, network 
functional connectivity was conducted at one to one basis.  
The ROI-to-ROI functional connectivity analysis was 
performed by averaging the time series in the two seed 
regions, respectively, and then, computing the Pearson’s R 
correlation coefficient between the two averaged time series. 
Therefore, we obtained an 8*8 matrix for each subject in 
resting-state, with each element representing the strength of 
the functional connectivity between the corresponding two 
brain regions within the reward network. Specifically, the 
diagonal element was self-correlated to the corresponding 
region. Finally, the resulting correlation coefficients then 
were 
normalized 
to 
z-scores 
with 
Fisher's 
r-to-z 
transformation.  
F. Analysis - Statistical Analysis 
To determine whether the correlations between regions 
were significantly nonzero across subjects, we performed 
one-sample t test for each group. To examine the differences 
in the strength of connectivity between the two groups in 
resting-state, we performed two sampled t tests on the 
elements with significant nonzero connections of either 
control or Internet addicts. The significance threshold 
between group differences was set at p < 0.05, and the False 
Discovery Rate (FDR) [15] procedure was used to find a 
threshold that would restrict the expected proportion of type 
I errors to q = 0.05.  
To investigate the relationship between resting state 
connectivity strength and degree of Internet addiction and 
degree of impulsivity, the correlation between functional 
connectivity of ROIs and scores of Internet addiction were 
assessed.  
III. 
RESULTS 
Table 1 provides functional networks showing significant 
connectivity of each ROI between controls and Internet 
addicts.  
 
TABLE 1. CORRELATION COEFFICIENT BETWEEN ROIs 
BLACK: NON-ADDICTION,  RED: INTERNET 
ADDICTION 
 
(* p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001, FDR) 
 
In resting state, controls showed increased connectivity 
in several pair regions, including   connectivity between the 
caudate nucleus and the  anterior cingulate cortex, between 
the putamen and the insula, between the putamen and the 
caudate nucleus, between the dorso lateral prefrontal cortex 
and the inferior parietal cortex, between the dorso lateral 
prefrontal cortex and the orbito frontal cotrex, and between 
the amygdala and the putamen, while showed decreased 
connectivity between the dorso lateral prefrontal cortex and 
the insula (p < 0.05, FDR).   
In Internet addicts, a significant increase was observed 
in functional connectivity between the caudate nucleus and 
the anterior cingulate cortex, between the putamen and the 
anterior cingulate cortex, between the putamen and insula, 
between the caudate nucleus and the putamen, between the 
dorso lateral prefrontal cortex and the inferior parietal 
cortex, between the dorso lateral prefrontal cortex and the 
orbito frontal cotrex, between the amygdala and the 
putamen, and a significant decrease was observed in 
functional connectivity between the orbito frontal cortex and 
the insula, between the dorso lateral prefrontal cortex and 
the insula (p < 0.05, FDR).  
Between group analysis revealed that the connectivity in 
between the orbito frontal cortex and inferior parietal cortex, 
between orbito frontal cortex and putamen, between the 
orbito frontal cortex and anterior cingulate cortex, between 
the insula and anterior cingulate cortex, and between 
amydgala and insula were significantly stronger in control 
group than in the Internet addicts (Figure 3a), while the 
248
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-340-7
COGNITIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

connectivity in between the orbito frontal cortex and insula 
showed stronger negative correlation in the Internet addicts 
relative to control group (Figure 3b) (p< 0.001, uncorrected).  
 
 
Figure 3. Significant differences in resting state functional network 
connectivity between groups. Yellow: positive correlation, Blue: 
negative correlation 
 
No 
significant 
relationship 
between 
functional 
connectivity strength and current degree of Internet 
addiction and degree of impulsitivy was seen. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This study found that Internet addicts had declined 
connectivity strength in the Orbito Frontal Cortex (OFC) 
and other regions (e.g., ACC, IPC, and insula) during 
resting-state.  It may reflect deficits in the OFC function to 
process information from different area in the corticostriatal 
reward network. Evidence indicates that the OFC 
participates in the executive control of information 
processing and behavioral expression by inhibiting neural 
activity 
associated 
with 
irrelevant, 
unwanted, 
or 
uncomfortable information, or actions [16]. The role of the 
OFC in inhibition has gained increasing prominence in the 
literature due to the dramatic rise in research investigating 
the neural correlates of social and emotional processing 
[16][17] .  
Our findings provide the evidence that Internet addicts 
have aberrant functional connectivity in the corticostriatal 
circuit at resting state. Particularly, we suggest that the OFC, 
which is associated with processing negative affect and 
behavioral inhibition, may play a crucial role in the 
pathophysiology of the Internet addiction.   
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This research has been supported by the Converging 
Research Center Program funded by the Ministry of 
Education, Science and Technology (2013K000332) and the 
Korea 
Science 
and 
Engineering 
Foundation 
(No.20120006577).  
REFERENCES 
[1] K. S. Young, “Internet addiction: The emergence of a new 
clinical disorder,” Cyberpsychology & Behavior, vol. 1, 
1998, pp. 237-44.  
[2] A. P. Association, Diagnostic and statistical manual of 
mental disorders: DSM-V, text revision, Washington, DC: 
American Psychiatric Association, 2013. 
[3] E. Aboujaoude, L. M. Koran, and N. Gamel, “Prevalence 
underestimated in Problematic Internet Use Study  (response 
to Dr. Jerald J. Block.),” CNS Spectrums, vol. 12, 2006, 
pp.14-15.  
[4] F. Cao and L. Su, “Internet addiction among Chinese 
adolescents: prevalence and psychological features,” Child: 
Care, Health, and Development, vol. 33, 2007, pp. 275-281. 
[5] G. Dong, Q. Lu, H. Zhou, and X. Zhao, “Impulse inhibition 
in 
people 
with 
Internet 
addiction 
disorder:  
Electrophysiological  evidence from a Go/NoGo study,” 
Neuroscience Letter, vol. 485, 2010, pp. 138–142. 
[6] G. Dong, E. DeVito, X. Du, and Z. Cui, “Impaired inhibitory 
control in Internet addiction disorder: A  functional magnetic 
resonance 
imaging 
study,” 
Psychiatry 
Research: 
Neuroimaging, vol. 203, 2012, pp. 503-508. 
[7] K.A.D.O Promotion. The development study of  Internet 
addiction to prevent program and K-scale, Seoul: Korea 
Agency for Digital Opportunity and Promotion press, 2002. 
[8] M. S. Lee, E. Y. Oh, S. M. Cho, M. J. Hong, and J. S. Moon, 
“An assessment of adolescent Internet addiction problems 
related to depression, social anxiety and peer relationship,” 
Journal of the Korean Neuropsychiatry Association. vol. 40 
2001, pp. 616-626. 
[9] H. S. Lee, Impulsivity test. Seoul: Korea Guidance. 2002. 
[10] H. J. Jang, The psychological characteristics of adolescent 
addictive using cellular phone. Unpublished master's thesis, 
Seoul: Sungshin Women's University, 2002  
[11] D. J. Kuss, and M. D. Griffiths, “Internet gaming addiction: 
A systematic review of empirical research,” International 
Journal of Mental Health and Addiction, vol. 10, 2012, pp. 
278-296. 
[12] J. A. Maldjian, P. J. Laurienti,  R. A. Kraft, and J. H. Burdette,
  “An automated method for neuroanatomic and cytoarchitect
onic atlas-based interrogation of fMRI data sets,” Neuroimag
e, vol. 19, 2003, pp. 1233-1239. 
[13] M. D. Fox, A.Z. Snyder, D.M. Barch, D. A. Gusnard, and M. 
E. Raichle, “Transient BOLD responses at block transitions,” 
Neuroimage, vol. 28, 2005, pp. 956–966. 
[14] M. D. Fox, D. Zhang, A. Z. Snyder, and M. E. Raichle, “The 
golbal signal and observed anticorrelated resting state brain n
etworks,” Journal of Neurophysiology, vol. 101, 2009, pp. 32
70-3283. 
[15] C. Genovese, N. Larzar, and T. Nichols, “Thresholding of sta
tistical maps in functional neuroimaging using the false disco
very rate,” Neuroimage, vol. 15, 2002, pp. 870-878. 
[16] A. P. Shimamura, “The role of the prefrontal cortex in dynam
ic filtering,” Psychobiology, vol. 28, 2000, pp. 207-218. 
[17]  R. R. Rule, A. P. Shimamura, and R. T. Knight, “Orbitofron t
al cortex and dynamic filtering of emotional stimul,” Cogniti
ve, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience. vol. 2, 2005, pp. 2
64-270. 
 
249
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-340-7
COGNITIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

