Capturing Knowledge for Multimodality Processing: 
Interpreting Brain Vascular Imaging and its Description 
Julia M. Taylor Rayz 
Computer and Information Technology  
Purdue University 
West Lafayette, Indiana, USA 
email:jtaylor1@purdue.edu 
Vitaliy L. Rayz 
Biomedical Engineering 
Purdue University 
West Lafayette, Indiana, USA 
email:vrayz@purdue.edu 
Victor Raskin 
Linguistics & CERIAS 
Purdue University 
West Lafayette, Indiana, USA 
email: vraskin@purdue.edu
 
 
Abstract—Advancements in medical imaging led to increased 
amount of image data that needs to be post-processed and 
examined in order to determine a pathology and provide 
diagnosis. In particular, post-processing and analysis of 
magnetic resonance images of blood vessels in the brain requires 
advanced tools capable of representing the vessels network in 
3D and eliminating errors caused by image artifacts and noise. 
An approach based on the knowledge of the anatomy and 
functions of the brain vasculature is considered. While state-of-
the-art tools are designed to evaluate image intensity, the 
knowledge-based framework can use the information on the 
underlying vascular structures to map imaging data to 
ontological representation, thus allowing for annotation 
possibility and textual description understanding, as well as 
detect errors and separate them from abnormalities caused by 
vascular disease. 
Keywords-Ontology; Knowledge Representation; Medical 
Imaging; Blood vessels; cerebral circulation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The paper proposes using an ontology as the basis of 
relevant knowledge for the domain. It assembles and neatly 
arranges, in an online resource that could be open to use by 
any health professional, all knowledge and experience that is 
available to an experienced physician “intuitively,” thus 
upgrading any less experienced medical practitioner’s ability 
to diagnose and treat the patient. Needless to say, while the 
ontology is open to any user, an individual patient’s data are 
duly protected as required by the relevant laws. 
For any individual domain, the ontology is an easy and 
affordable extension of the existing general and previously 
extended ontology. The extension is implemented semi-
automatically, with the computer formatting the entry and 
prompting a moderately trained user for questions about the 
linguistic meaning of terms. The previous extensions, to the 
banking industry, information security, and to feelings in 
general and humor research in particular, all resulted to the 
addition of under 400 new concepts, usually developed as new 
branches and leaves under one existing concept (BANK, 
SECURITY, and FEELING, respectively).  
The ontology in our Ontological Semantic Technology 
approach is much more than a typical government or industry 
ontology for various areas: those are often an inventory of 
terms, usually aiming in standardizing them and focusing on 
objects rather than objects and events, linked with an 
abundance of properties. It is common for many published 
ontologies to have hardly any properties beyond subsumption, 
which establishes the hierarchy. 
The standard procedure starts with what was referred to in 
the 1980s as knowledge engineering that led to the creation of 
expert systems. The crucial difference is that we are aware of 
the semantics of the collected material rather than the syntax-
oriented and, therefore, failing expert systems. We do have an 
expert in vascular system among us, so the following sections 
of the paper were written in the process of conversing with 
him or drafted by him. But, the standard extension procedure 
could have started from a well-indexed textbook or reference 
book. Another significant advantage is that, within our 
approach, any acquisition is guided by the ontology that, 
logically and consistently, develops the new branches and 
leaves where they belong. 
The purpose of any ontological extension is to identify all 
the events and objects in the domain and the multiplicity of 
properties that link them to each other. The objects and events 
are the nodes in an ontology, and the links are its named edges. 
The central concept for this extension is, of course, blood 
VESSEL. 
The paper is organized in the following order: section II 
introduces blood vessels from a human perspective and 
describes what a system should know about them; section III 
describes how this knowledge can be represented for 
computational purposes; section IV goes further into the 
details of ontological representations, describing the salient 
features that are useful for processing. Finally, section V 
demonstrates what happens when an image is analyzed.  
II. 
BLOOD VESSELS 101: WHAT KNOWLEDGE SHOLD BE 
CAPTURED  
A blood vessel can be characterized by its anatomy and 
function. In the current clinical practice, clinical decisions are 
often based on medical images visualizing vascular anatomy, 
thus neglecting valuable information that could be inferred 
from functional data. Vessel anatomy can be characterized by 
its location and geometry, with the former describing whether 
it is an artery or vein, and where it is located in the circulation. 
This also defines the “parent” vessel and the branches, i.e., a 
vessel from which the vessel of interest originated and all 
vessels emanating from the vessel of interest. Longer vessels, 
such as an internal carotid artery, are subdivided in segments, 
in order to precisely locate the regions of interest. The 
geometry is defined by the diameter, length, and tortuosity of 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-705-4
COGNITIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

the vessel – these can obviously vary for different segments of 
the same vessel. The purpose of circulation is to quickly 
deliver oxygen from the lungs to all the cells of various organs 
and tissues, thus large vessels delivering blood to a particular 
region of the body divide into subsequent branches with 
smaller diameter but larger cumulative area. This typically 
results in a gradual decrease of the vessel diameter (but not 
necessarily length!) as we proceed through the circulation. 
The vessels or their segments located closer to the heart are 
called “proximal”, while those further away are called 
“distal”. It should be noted that this is defined by the vessel 
relative location and not by the direction of blood flow. The 
vessels that are located above are called “superior” while 
those below are called “inferior”. Finally, the vessels closer to 
the front of the body are named “anterior” and those closer to 
the back are “posterior”.  
A vessel affected by cardiovascular disease typically has a 
local change in its diameter, such as an abnormal constriction, 
named “stenosis” or dilation, named “aneurysm”. Medical 
images showing stenosis may indicate atherosclerotic plaques 
obstructing blood flow and potentially decreasing the amount 
of blood delivered to the distal vascular territory supplied by 
this vessel. An aneurysm of a brain vessel may grow and 
rupture, causing hemorrhage in the brain.  
The functional information can be obtained with advanced 
images that can either visualize the transport of an injected 
contrast agent or directly measure blood flow velocities. 
These characteristics of the vessel include the blood flow rate, 
the pulsatility of the flow (how much it is changing through 
the cardiac cycle), the velocity distribution in the vessel or 
simply the average or maximum velocity, and the pressure 
drop, i.e., the difference between the pressure at two different 
points in the vessel. For example, a stenosis resulting in a 
minimal pressure drop is likely to present less risk than that 
causing a larger pressure drop, even if both are characterized 
by the same degree of the vessel’s obstruction. In addition, 
there are numerous flow-derived metrics that can characterize 
the vessel’s function and, in some cases, help with diagnostics 
and risk stratification of patients. These include wall shear 
stress -- a frictional force exerted on the vessel wall by flowing 
blood, flow residence time -- the relative time blood dwells at 
a given location and other, more complex flow descriptors.  
A healthy vessel is characterized by approximately the 
same or gradually changing diameter and relatively smooth 
distribution of velocities, faster in the core of the flow and 
slower near the wall. This also results in a very minimal 
pressure drop along the vessels and an optimal range of wall 
shear stress for all arteries of similar size. A diseased artery, 
affected by a stenosis or aneurysm is characterized by local 
changes of the diameter and curvature, as well as by complex 
flow patterns affecting other flow-derived descriptors. A 
narrowing of the vessel results in a high velocity jet and region 
of disturbed, slowly recirculated flow. The flow residence 
time in these disturbed regions is typically increased. These 
features may cause various image artifacts, such as a loss of 
signal or insufficient resolution to detect the smaller section 
of the diseased vessel. An aneurysm is also characterized by 
disturbed flow with jets and regions of flow recirculation, 
affecting wall shear stress and flow residence time. This may, 
in turn, affect the quality of medical images, e.g., cause the 
loss of MRI (Magnetic Resonance Imaging) signal in regions 
of stagnant flow which occur in larger aneurysms. 
Depending on the size of blood vessel or whether it is 
affected by disease, the flow through it may be also 
“Newtonian” or “non-Newtonian”. Since blood is not a 
homogeneous fluid but a suspension of cells in plasma, blood 
viscosity (resistance to flow) depends on the interactions of 
these cells. In a vessel that is comparable in size to these cells 
or in regions of disturbed flow, blood viscosity can increase 
due to aggregation of cells. In addition, blood may form clots 
consisting of aggregated cells and cell fragments. Blood 
clotting is important for preventing leaks through injured 
regions of the vessel wall. At the same time, a clot formed in 
a vessel may travel to the smaller vessel downstream and 
block it, causing a stroke. 
It should be mentioned that the vessels are also 
characterized by the wall thickness and properties. While 
vessel walls in the brain are typically too thin to be detected 
with existing imaging modalities, it is crucial to understand 
their anatomy and function in health and in disease. A vessel 
wall is composed of three layers with different characteristics 
and properties. The inner layer, the intima, is a layer of 
endothelial cells providing a barrier between the flowing 
blood and stationary tissue. The other two layers, media and 
adventitia, are composed of elastic tissue reinforced by 
collagen fibers which determines its elastic properties. A 
diseased vessel may contain plaques with necrotic (dead) 
tissues, calcifications and intraplaque hemorrhage. Advanced 
vessel wall imaging techniques, such as those developed by 
David Saloner at UC San Francisco [1], aimed at detecting 
various components of the wall. A healthy wall thickness is 
typically 10% of the vessel’s diameter, while a diseased wall 
can be either abnormally thin or inflated. While a healthy wall 
is compliant, and moves corresponding to heart pulse, a 
diseased wall may become rigid, affecting both the flow and 
pulse wave propagation. 
III. 
ONTOLOGICAL VIEW 
We take a general ontology that we have developed [2] as 
a reference point. Our general ontology contains concepts and 
their properties and has been formally described in its crisp 
[3]-[5] and fuzzy [2], [6], [7] flavors.  Here, we will continue 
with the fuzzy approach, and we will demonstrate that it is 
most suitable for this domain.  As [2] states, given a set of 
objects D, where D is the disjoint union of Dc (concepts) and 
Dd (literals), and given its interpretation function  ℐ, for every 
fuzzy concept C, object x is an element of C with some degree 
ℐ[C](x)®[0, 1]; for every relation R, ℐ[R](x, y)ÍDc x Dc®[0, 
1]; for every attribute A; ℐ[A](x, a)ÍDc x Dd®[0, 1].  
We assume that xÎC if ℐ[C](x)®(0, 1]. With this in mind, 
the following is true for concepts C1 and C2:  
ℐ[C1 C2](x) = max{ℐ[C1](x), ℐ[C2](x)}; 
ℐ[and C1 C2](x) = min{ℐ[C1](x), ℐ[C2](x)}; 
ℐ[((C))](x)= maxyÎC{ℐ[R](y, x)}; 
ℐ[(R(and C1 C2))](x) = min{ℐ[(C1)](x), ℐ[(C2)](x)}; 
ℐ[R(C1 C2)](x) = max{ℐ[R(C1)](x), ℐ[R(C2)](x)};  
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-705-4
COGNITIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

ℐ[C1(R(C2))](x) = min{ℐ[C1](x), ℐ[R(C2)](x)};  
ℐ[C(R1(C1))(R2(C2))](x) =  
=min{ℐ[C(R1(C1))](x), ℐ[C(R2(C2))](x)};  
A. Vessel domain ontologies 
Many terminological descriptions of blood vessels that 
resemble ontologies exist today. We take an approach here 
that an ontology should capture most useful properties of the 
domain of application, and thus, a hierarchy with a handful of 
properties is not an ideal ontological representation. With this 
in mind, lattices of blood vessels’ anatomy are a useful 
starting point. 
The second point worth making is that we are only 
interested in the details of the cerebral vessels, which means 
that while we cannot completely discard the rest, a special 
attention is paid to the description of the brain area. Finally, 
we treat an ontological hierarchy as a good starting point due 
to its mathematical properties, such as inheritance. We will 
assume, then, that it is sufficient to describe properties of a 
parent concept in this paper with a full understanding that they 
will propagate to the children concepts.  We assume that 
inheritance of properties is carried though IS-A relationship. 
We also allow transitive and symmetric properties in our 
representation: 
∀𝑐$, 𝑐& ∈ 𝐶, 𝑟* ∈ 𝑅: 𝑐$(𝑟*(𝑐&)) ⟺ 𝑐&(𝑟*(𝑐$)) , where c1, 
c2 are concepts and rs is a symmetric property; 
∀𝑐$, 𝑐&, 𝑐1 ∈ 𝐶, 𝑟2 ∈ 𝑅: 𝑐$3𝑟2(𝑐&)4, 𝑐&3𝑟2(𝑐1)4 ⇒
𝑐$(𝑟2(𝑐1)), where c1, c2, c3 are concepts and rt is a transitive 
property. 
 We are going to start with anatomical description of the 
vessel and then continue with its functional characteristics.  
B. Anatomical Properties of Blood Vessels 
As mentioned before, anatomical characteristics can be 
described in terms of location and geometry. While the 
location of the vessel may be reflected in its name, it is still 
crucial to represent this information mathematically. We thus 
have the following location properties, all with a domain of 
the vessel: 
• 
RELATIVE-LOCATION-TO-HEART, with a range of 
{proximal, distal}; 
• 
RELATIVE-VERTICAL-POSITION, with a range of 
{superior, inferior}; 
• 
RELATIVE-FRONTAL-POSITION, with a range of 
{anterior, posterior}; 
• 
RELATIVE-SIDE-POSITION, with a range of {left, 
right}; 
• 
INFLOW-VESSEL, with a range of names of vessels that 
(blood) flow into a given one; 
• 
OUTFLOW-VESSEL, with a range of names of vessels 
that (blood) flow out of a given one. 
Both INFLOW-VESSEL and OUTFLOW-VESSEL properties are 
transitive.  
Geometry properties can be summarized as follows: 
• 
DIAMETER, with a range of being dependent on a 
particular vessel, relative to the aorta of that 
individual; 
• 
LENGTH, with a range of being dependent on a 
particular vessel, not relative to the aorta; 
• 
TORTUOSITY, with a range of true of false, dependent 
on a particular patient, rather than on a type of a 
vessel. 
DIAMETER and LENGTH must be greater than zero. 
Based on the properties above, the following concepts can 
be defined:  
• 
STENOSIS: a portion of artery of variable length where 
diameter of the lumen is decreased relative to the 
diameter the proximal or distal segment of the same 
vessel; 
• 
ANEURYSM: a segment of a vessel with a significantly 
dilated diameter, relative to proximal or distal 
diameter of the same vessel.   
An ANEURYSM has additional properties that a healthy 
vessel does not need to have, such as: 
• 
diameter of a neck of an aneurysm (NECK-DIAMETER), 
which is a diameter of the opening between the 
aneurysm and a parent vessel; 
• 
number of lobes (LOBES-NO), which is a number of 
separate convex shapes in an aneurysm; 
• 
volume of an aneurysm (VOLUME); 
• 
area of an aneurysm (AREA), measured by wall surface 
area; 
• 
height of an aneurysm (HEIGHT), which is a maximum 
distance from the neck to the wall. 
• 
diameter of the aneurysm (DIAMETER), which is the 
largest dimension between any two points in the 
aneurysm; 
• 
aneurysm angle (ANGLE), which is an angle between 
its diameter and flow direction;  
The range of all of these additional properties is a rational 
number. Additionally, two types of aneurysms can be 
described: a SACCULAR aneurism is an aneurysm that appears 
on one side of a vessel; and a FUSIFORM, which bulges out on 
circumference of the vessel. It is possible to create new child 
concepts for these two types or create a property, reflecting its 
relative location as a property, TYPE, with the range 
corresponding to the type names.  
C. Functional Properties of Blood Vessels 
Functional properties of vessels correspond to properties 
that are usually captured with advanced imaging methods. 
These properties, while descriptive of a vessel, may be 
selectively obtained. However, it should be noted that the 
values correspond to each voxel of an image, and thus, each 
vessel is explicitly represented in three dimensional 
coordinates. The properties that describe the vessels are then 
spatiotemporal distributions with values in each of the 
(existing) points in the coordinates, not the properties of vessel 
as a hole. The properties of interests are:  
• 
blood flow velocity (VELOCITY);  
• 
blood flow rate (FLOW-RATE): exists in a given cross-
section, not in a voxel ;  
• 
pulsatility of the flow (PULSATILITY): how much it is 
changing through the cardiac cycle; 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-705-4
COGNITIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

• 
pressure (PRESSURE): pressure measurement at any 
point in a vessel;  
• 
wall sheer stress (WSS): a frictional force exerted on 
the vessel wall by flowing blood;  
• 
flow residence time (FRT): the relative time the blood 
dwells at a given location. 
It is tempting to consider mereology (a study of parts and 
holes) when considering mathematical properties of the 
descriptions above. However, for the purposes of this paper, it 
is sufficient to treat each of these points independently, 
although in reality there is a strong dependence between them.   
IV. 
ACCEPTABLE RANGE OF VALUES 
While location features of blood vessels are tedious to 
construct, there is no mystery to their verification of 
correctness: any anatomical atlas can be constructed for 
information as to whether something is correct or not. For 
example, if one is to describe branches of BASILAR-ARTERY, 
and fill its location properties, one would describe them as: 
• 
LEFT-ANTERIOR-INFERIOR-CEREBELLAR ARTERY  
• 
RIGHT-ANTERIOR-INFERIOR-CEREBELLAR ARTERY  
• 
LEFT-SUPERIOR-CEREBELLAR ARTERY 
• 
RIGHT-SUPERIOR-CEREBELLAR ARTERY 
• 
LEFT-POSTERIOR-CEREBRAL ARTERY   
• 
RIGHT-POSTERIOR-CEREBRAL ARTERY   
Since all of these are branches of the BASILAR-ARTERY, the 
flow of all of the above vessels would be provided by the 
BASILAR-ARTERY, and thus, BASILAR-ARTERY is an INFLOW-
VESSEL for each of them, and each of them is an OUTFLOW-
VESSEL for BASILAR-ARTERY. 
A. Geometric Properties of a Concept VESSEL  
Selecting the correct range of values of the geometric 
properties for a given vessel is slightly more complex. We will 
start with a description of DIAMETER values for a vessel. These 
values are best described as fuzzy membership functions [8], 
where a perfect range corresponds to a maximum value of 
membership function, but then there is a gradual decline in the 
values that corresponds to less than maximal, yet still 
acceptable membership value.  We will call these acceptable 
values a HEALTHY fuzzy set. There are some deviations from 
healthy range, some more severe than others, but, these values 
should still be physically possible. We will call this an 
unhealthy range, corresponding to UNHEALTHY fuzzy set. 
Finally, there will be some values that can only be achieved as 
a result of a measuring error or an artifact of a method, we will 
call this set ARTIFACT set. A graphical representation is shown 
Figure 1. 
 
Figure 1. Fuzzy sets as DIAMETER values (sets are not drawn to scale) 
HEALTHY = {x, µHEALTHY(x) | x∈X}, where X is all possible 
values received for a given property. 
UNHEALTHY = {x, µUNHEALTHY(x) | x∈X}, where X is all 
possible values received for a given property. 
ARTIFACT = {x, µARTIFACT(x) | x∈ X}, where X is all 
possible values received for a given property. 
µHEALTHY(x) = 
⎩
⎪⎨
⎪⎧0, (𝑥 < ℎ1) 𝑜𝑟 (𝑥 > ℎ4)
BCD$
D&CD$ , ℎ1 ≤ 𝑥 ≤ ℎ2
1, ℎ2 ≤ 𝑥 ≤ ℎ3
DHCB
DHCD1 , ℎ3 ≤ 𝑥 ≤ ℎ4
 
 
By convention, a trapezoidal fuzzy set HEALTHY can be 
expressed as [h1, h2, h3, h4]. 
µUNHEALTHY(x) = 
⎩
⎪⎪⎪
⎨
⎪⎪⎪
⎧
0, (𝑥 < 𝑢1) 𝑜𝑟 (𝑢4 < 𝑥 < 𝑢5)
BCK$
K&CK$ , 𝑢1 ≤ 𝑥 ≤ 𝑢2
BCKL
KMCKL , 𝑢5 ≤ 𝑥 ≤ 𝑢6
1, (𝑢2 ≤ 𝑥 ≤ 𝑢3) 𝑜𝑟 (𝑢6 ≤ 𝑥 ≤ 𝑢7)
KHCB
KHCK1 , 𝑢3 ≤ 𝑥 ≤ 𝑢4
KPCB
KPCKQ , 𝑢7 ≤ 𝑥 ≤ 𝑢8
 
 
We will notate UNHEALTHY as [u1, u2, u3, u4] È [u5, u6, 
u7, u8]. 
 
µARFIFACT(x) = 
⎩⎪⎨
⎪⎧0, (𝑥 < 𝑎2) 𝑜𝑟 (𝑥 > 𝑎1)
BCT$
UCT$ , 𝑥 ≤ 𝑎1
1, 𝑥 = 𝑎1 𝑜𝑟 𝑥 = 𝑎2
T&CB
T& , 𝑎2 ≤ 𝑥
 
 
The range of acceptable values of inflow vessel have to be 
propagated to the outflow vessel. The values can be assumed 
to be the same, unless the inflow vessel is branching out into 
a number of outflow vessels.  In the described example of 
BASILAR ARTERY, it has 6 branches that serve as its outflow 
vessels: 
LEFT-ANTERIOR-INFERIOR-CEREBELLAR 
ARTERY, 
RIGHT-ANTERIOR-INFERIOR-CEREBELLAR 
ARTERY, 
LEFT-
SUPERIOR-CEREBELLAR 
ARTERY, 
RIGHT-SUPERIOR-
CEREBELLAR ARTERY, LEFT-POSTERIOR-CEREBRAL ARTERY, 
RIGHT-POSTERIOR-CEREBRAL ARTERY.  Common sense 
dictates that the diameter of these arteries should not be the 
same, and thus it is important to provide a model that is close 
to a real world. We will take a previously defined HEALTHY 
fuzzy set [h1, h2, h3, h4] as a starting point. We will assume 
that each of the branches i have their own HEALTHYi [h1i, h2i, 
h3i, h4i] fuzzy set such that for any branch i, h1i<h1, h2i,<h2 
h3i<h3, h4i<h4. Moreover, 
 (ℎ2 − ℎ1)& ≤ ∑ (ℎ2Y − ℎ1Y)& ≈ 1.2(ℎ2 − ℎ1)&
Y
.  
Thus, the DIAMETER values of the branching vessels can be 
verified compared to the parent vessel.  
LENGTH and TORTUOSITY values of vessel are independent 
on factors other than the actual vessel. While the LENGTH still 
varies from person to person, and should be described as a 
fuzzy number, there are no other dependencies other than that 
of a TORTUOSITY.  
!
1
0
Artifact Unhealthy  Healthy  Unhealthy Artifact
u1 a1 u2
a2
h1u3
h2u4
h3
h4
u5
u6u7
u8
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-705-4
COGNITIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

B. Geometric Properties of the Concept ANEURYSM  
Let us now consider the properties of SACCULAR and 
FUSIFORM aneurysms. As stated earlier, the difference 
between these types is that the former appears to the side of 
the vessel, and the latter to bulges out on the circumference. 
Most properties defined for an aneurism are applicable for 
both types, however some differences should be pointed out.  
The first properties, NECK-DIAMETER, describes an 
opening between a parent vessel and an aneurysm. It follows 
from a definition of FUSIFORM aneurysm that its NECK-
DIAMETER could be equal to the diameter of the vessel, 
whoever this parameter is not typically used in medical 
practice. Similarly, HEIGHT is not of much use for FUSIFORM 
aneurysm, although, technically, could be defined. A NECK-
DIAMETER and HEIGHT of the SACCULAR aneurysm can vary 
and thus are useful parameters.   
Number of lobes is typically applicable to SACCULAR 
aneurysms, but there is no reason why it would not be 
applicable for both. VOLUME and AREA are useful parameters 
for both types, and can vary in values. A DIAMETER of an 
aneurism should not be confused with a DIAMETER of a vessel. 
Since DIAMETER of an aneurysm is defined as a largest 
distance between any two points of an aneurysm, it is always 
greater than the vessel DIAMETER for FUSIFORM aneurysms. 
However, it is possible that it could be greater or less than the 
vessel DIAMETER for SACCULAR aneurysms. 
With these restrictions in mind, the next section will 
demonstrate how an ontology could be used to annotate an 
image. 
V. 
INTERPRETING AN IMAGE 
Figure 2 shows an image used by [9] as an example of 
image segmentation errors. While it is possible to assume 
from this picture that an aneurysm is connected to two arteries, 
the ontology would reject such interpretation.  
 
 
Figure 2. Image segmentation errors [9]: separate blood vessels are 
blended together a) cerebral aneurysm pressing on posterior cerebral 
artery; b) two disconnected arteries. 
Before we get to a reasoning step, however, let us consider 
information presented to us. There are 8 vessels that can be 
identified “under” the aneurysm in this image. Let us start at 
the bottom of the figure, with the large vessel at the center, let 
us identify it as v1. There is another vessel on the left of v1, let 
us call it v2, that merges with v1 to form v3 (in Figure 2, v3 
actually looks like a continuation of v1). A fourth vessel, v4, 
branches off v3. Since we know that a diameter of a vessel has 
to be greater than 0, v4 should not have an empty segment next 
to the right b-arrow. A similar error is seen where another 
vessel, v5, branches off v3. Three more vessels branch off of 
v3, we will call them v6, v7, v8. The following can be observed: 
• 
v1 and v2 flow into v3, which means that  
o 
v1 and v2 are INFLOW-VESSELs for v3,  
o 
and v3 is an OUTFLOW-VESSEL for v1 and v3 
• 
v3 flows into v4, which means that  
o 
v3 is an INFLOW-VESSEL for v4,  
o 
and v4 is an OUTFLOW-VESSEL from v3; 
• 
v3 flows into v5, v6, v7, v8, which mean that  
o 
v3 is an INFLOW-VESSEL for v5, v6, v7, v8;  
o 
and v5, v6, v7, v8 are OUTFLOW-VESSELs for 
v3 
• 
since 
INFLOW-VESSEL 
and 
OUTFLOW-VESSEL 
properties are transitive, we can conclude that  
o 
v1 and v2 are INFLOW-VESSELs for v4, v5, v6, 
v7, v8 
o 
v4, v5, v6, v7, v8 are OUTFLOW VESSELs for v1 
and v2 
Looking at the location properties, and comparing them 
with possible ontological interpretations, v1 corresponds to 
LEFT-VERTBRAL-ARTERY, 
v2 
corresponds 
to 
RIGHT-
VERTBRAL-ARTERY, v3 corresponds to BASILAR-ARTERY, v4 
corresponds to POSTERIOR-INFERIOR-CEREBELLAR-ARTERY, 
v5 and v6 to LEFT and RIGHT SUPERIOR CEREBELLAR ARTERIES, 
v7 and v8 to LEFT and RIGHT POSTERIOR CEREBRAL ARTERIES. 
Let us now address the geometric properties.  All of these 
vessels have TORTUOSITY value of false, with the exception of 
v4. The diameter calculation for healthy vessels should be as 
follows:  
1.2* DIAMETER (BASILAR-ARTERY)2 » 
    »DIAMETER(RIGHT-POSTERIOR-CEREBRAL-ARTERY)2 + 
   + DIAMETER (LEFT-POSTERIOR-CEREBRAL-ARTERY)2 
While the total area of the branches should exceed that of 
the parent vessel, an abrupt increase in the area could make 
the vessel  unhealthy, at the flow would separate from the 
wall resulting in a swirl or recirculation. 
Finally, there is an aneurysm that is seemingly located on 
a side of v8, thus it is a SACCULAR aneurysm. Its DIAMETER is 
considerably greater than the DIAMETER of v8. Its NECK-
DIAMETER appears to be quite large, and a person not familiar 
with brain vessel anatomy may not detect that it is also 
connected to another, yet unlabeled, vessel. A person familiar 
with anatomy (or a computer program?) may detect the 
connection.  It follows that this SACCULAR aneurysm is 
connected on its two sides to two arteries, which is not 
possible according to our current definition. Further analysis 
could indicate that even if it was possible for an aneurism to 
be connected to more than one vessel, there is no blood-flow 
either from v8 to the unlabeled artery with aneurysm or from 
it to v8. Such determination can be done through transitive 
properties 
INFLOW-VESSEL and 
OUTFLOW-VESSEL, thus 
flagging the imaging error, which, in this case, is due to an 
artifact. In reality, the aneurysm is supplied by the anterior 
cerebral artery; the large aneurysm size resulted in its wall 
contacting the v8, without any flow exchange. 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-705-4
COGNITIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

VI. 
CONCLUSION 
The knowledge-based approach for visualization and 
analysis of MR angiography data was formulated and verified 
on an example dataset containing cerebral aneurysm. This 
approach can help in reliable representation of the vascular 
anatomy in 3D, thus helping in flow analysis and treatment 
planning. Moreover, the knowledge-based methods can be 
invaluable for automatic screening of large image datasets in 
order to flag pathologies that require human intervention. 
REFERENCES 
[1] G. Zhu, et al., High resolution imaging of the intracranial vessel 
wall at 3 and 7 T using 3D spin echo MRI, Magnetic Resonance 
Materials in Physics, Biology and Medicine, 2016. 
[2] J. M. Taylor and V. Raskin, “Fuzzy ontology for natural 
language,” NAFIPS 2010, 2010.  
[3] C. Hempelmann, J. M. Taylor, and V. Raskin, “Application-
guided ontological engineering,” IC-AI 2010, 2010. 
[4] J. M. Taylor, C. Hempelmann and V. Raskin, “On an automatic 
acquisition toolbox for ontologies and lexicons in Ontological 
Semantics,” IC-AI 2010, 2010. 
[5] J. M. Taylor, V. Raskin, and C. Hempelmann, “From 
disambiguation failures to common sense knowledge 
acquisition: a day of life in an ontological semantic system,” 
2011 IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conferences on Web 
Intelligence, 2011.  
[6] J. M. Taylor and V. Raskin, “Understanding the unknown: 
Unattested input processing in natural langauge,” FUZZ 
IEEE’11 2011. 
[7] J. M. Taylor and V. Raskin, Computing with nouns and verbs, 
FUZZ IEEE’12, 2012. 
[8] L. A. Zadeh, Fuzzy Sets, Information and Control 8(3), 1965 
[9] J.T. Rayz, V. L. Rayz and V. Raskin, Cognitive imaging: Using 
knowledge representation for reliable segmentation of MR 
angiography data, ICCI*CC 2017, 2017. 
 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-705-4
COGNITIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

