Social Interaction in Knowledge Acquisition: Advanced Curriculum 
Critical Review of Studies Relevant to Social Behavior of Infants 
Igor Val. Danilov 
Academic center for coherent intelligence 
ACCI 
Riga, Latvia 
email: igor_val.danilov@acci.center 
Abstract— The question of the acquisition of the first social 
phenomena by newborns is a crucial issue both in 
understanding the mental development and the ontogenesis of 
social interaction. The review attempts to investigate other 
researches that observe social behavior in studies with no 
communication between subjects. This current analysis 
reviews several studies on social phenomena – categorization of 
words, preference of faces and even race – in newborns and 3- 
to 4-months-old infants and complements their findings. The 
review states that newborns and young infants are not able to 
independently classify phenomena from social reality and 
perceptually interact with adults effectively enough to 
understand the meanings of social phenomena on their own. 
The review concludes that the social behavior of infants is 
driven by adult social learning through non-perceptual social 
interaction between them. This thesis is supported by the 
recent review on social behavior of infants and the experiments 
on language acquisition of adults, where it is also shown the 
increase of group performance provided by such unconscious 
mental collaboration. The long-term study of non-perceptual 
social interaction could form the basis of the advanced 
curriculum that can efficiently introduce new knowledge into 
the long-term memory domain of students to facilitate and 
accelerate their learning.
Keywords- Interpersonal perception; Socialization; Coherent 
Intelligence; Non-perceptual social interaction; Mirror system; 
Theory 
of 
mind; 
Social 
synchronization; 
Visual-spatial 
perspective taking; Problem-Based Learning. 
I. INTRODUCTION
Comprehension and interaction with social reality are 
key issues for the cognitive development. They form many 
social skills such as language and knowledge acquisition, 
manifesting themselves practically in social behavior. The 
question of how and when the meanings of first phenomena 
of reality are acquired by an empty mind can reveal the 
ontogenesis of social interaction (i.e., the question of how 
and when human beings begin behaving socially). The 
overarching goal of this study is to explore the essence of 
social interaction by studying social behavior of newborns 
and infants. Numerous researches were aimed on studying  
when human beings start behaving socially [1]; other studies 
explore categorization of social phenomena – words, faces 
and even race – in newborns and 3- to 4-month-olds infants. 
This review in particular is designed to investigate more 
specific questions of what helps newborns and infants 
behaving socially during experiments, where these human 
beings do not yet know enough meanings of social 
phenomena to socially behave and with no communication 
between subjects. Section II explains the modern knowledge 
about acquisition of first social phenomena in infants. The 
Section III reviews articles which studied social behavior 
among infants through facial recognition. Section IV  
presents the finding about word categorization in infants. 
Section V elaborates all findings from Section III and 
Section IV, describing their meaning. Sections VI and VII 
present some ideas on advanced curriculum, based on the 
non-perceptual interaction. 
II. ACQUISITION OF SOCIAL PHENOMENA
Key issues in selecting studies for this review were 
behavioral parameters belonging to the division between 
physiological reactions and social behavior of newborns and 
infants ( i.e., differences between innate or learned from the 
environment 
actions.) 
Developmental 
psychologists 
consider that initial learning occurs within a shared 
referential context through repetitive multimodal routines, 
which allow infants to utilize current knowledge to predict 
and acquire new meanings [2]. Danilov and Mihailova [3] 
argued that acquisition of knowledge is mainly based on 
discovery of new key relationships between cause and effect 
within prior knowledge, and/or on the opening links 
between elements of prior knowledge and new information 
domain. 'This means that the acquisition of initial words 
also requires infants to  be able to also demonstrate some 
basic knowledge on the social reality around – specific basic 
knowledge of their particular group, considering the 
existence of about 6,000 languages in even more groups and 
communities, all with their unique social reality – as well as 
needs efficient communication, which is a reciprocal 
exchange of mutually intended meanings [3, p. 147].' That is 
the issue of 'current knowledge' (i.e., assimilation of the first 
or initial meanings of social phenomena) is still a focus of 
discussions. Initial learning theories are developed within 
the framework of two core approaches: the innate 
knowledge and the 
acquired knowledge 
from the 
environment. Some recent studies attempted to address the 
problem of acquiring the initial social phenomena; they 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-780-1
COGNITIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

suggest that infants exhibit some general sensitivities and 
expectations at the onset of language acquisition (this later 
could be adjusted to the particular language environment 
that the young infants find around) [4] and/or expect to learn 
reference information through ostensive cues [5]. For 
instance, Waxman and Leddon [4] have proposed that 
infants begin the task of word learning equipped with an 
initially general and universal expectation. The expectation 
is then formed by the structure of the particular language. 
They then grow sensitivity to these perceptual cues. This 
allows them to separate two classes of words: open 
class words (nouns, adjectives, verbs) and closed class 
words, 
including 
determiners 
and 
prepositions 
[4]. 
According to Csibra and Gergely [5], infants are sensitive to 
certain ostensive cues. Their theory of natural pedagogy 
suggests that infants expect to learn reference information 
through signals that relatives direct to them. For example in  
case of young infants these ostensive cues manifest 
themselves following the gaze [5]. Danilov and Mihailova 
[3] have questioned these theories above following recent 
researches and concluding that: The perceptual sensitivities 
and expectations that Waxman and Leddon [4] proposed, 
and/or ostensive cues Csibra and Gergely [5] are not able 
alone to fill infants' personal reality with a sufficient number 
of phenomena in order to start categorization [3]. The latest 
study of Silverstein in 2019 [6] supports the above 
conclusions of Danilov and Mihailova [3], also refuting the 
idea of core role of ostensive signals in initial learning of 
infants. The approach to explain the acquisition of initial 
social phenomena by imitation is also unconvincing.  
Newborns and 3- to 4-month-olds infants are not able to 
imitate social behavior, since 'infants do not imitate others 
until their second year, and that imitation of different kinds 
of behaviour emerges at different ages [7].'  
Another approach, the one from innate knowledge to the 
problem of acquiring initial social phenomena, is based on 
the idea of sound–to–meaning correspondences [8][9]. 
Rizzini introduced an idea of ‘visible-expressive code that 
precedes the use of phonetic codes [8]’. In his study of the 
sense of articulate-oral gestures people use phonetic sounds 
to convey meaning. Sounds correspond to oral gestures that 
create them, which in turn substitute behavioral responses to 
internal and external events. This means practically that 
articulate-oral gestures have universal meanings through 
innate visible-expressive code. This theory also suggests a 
mechanism for collecting social phenomena by newborns: 
actual physiological responses of the newborns to internal 
and external events are superimposed in their neural circuits 
on the innate visible-expressive codes. If they coincide, then 
they are filled with meanings and stored. These meaningful 
gestures remain in their operative disposal, as a library of 
the same events. The set of articulate-oral gestures, created 
in such a manner, becomes an adequate response to the 
actual needs of their social reality. This means that 
newborns arrive in social life with neurological tools 
suitable for behavioral responses, and are able to use them 
carefully and efficiently depending on the occurrence. This 
process leads to neurological growth of newborns with the 
help of more and more effective symbolization through the 
visible-expressive codes [8]. This very well-developed 
theory explains part of the social interaction that occurs via 
unconscious communication throughout life. However the 
acquisition of initial social phenomena by newborns can be 
explained limitedly within the framework of above noted 
innate visible-expressive code and/or any other embodied
cognition approach, because this approach contains of 
difficulties:  
(i) lack of empirical evidence and, probably, the 
impossibility of ever proving the standpoint of innate 
knowledge on social phenomena.  
(ii) absence of mechanism that can explain such innate 
transfer of knowledge based on biology and/or laws of 
physics. 
Social 
behavior 
is 
influenced 
by 
many 
environmental factors and also by psychological traits of 
individual, the heritability of which is caused by many 
genes of small effect [10]. Obviously, genes impact 
individuals' traits, which certainly have some influence on 
social behavior. The genetic mechanism contributes to 
social behavior but not with a substantial contribution.   
Psychological traits impact too on behavior of individual but 
they are one of many other factors that guide a person to 
make a decision. Another big component that we should not 
forget is the freewill. People's attitudes toward innate 
differences in human appearance – such as skin and hair 
color, shape and color of eyes, and facial attractiveness –
evolve in history and differ between cultures. The 
semiotician Umberto Eco [11] argued about the concept on 
how these phenomena are construct together: the notions of 
beautiful and ugly are defined in relation to a particular 
historical period or a particular culture [11]. Many social 
phenomena are based on attitudes toward innate physical 
features of individuals, such as facial attractiveness, skin 
color, hair color, congenital physical differences and race. 
The innate nature of these particularities does not change 
their essence as social phenomena, and it also does not mean 
that the innate mechanism of social behavior can exist. For 
example, race is not an inherited social phenomenon. Racial 
discrimination is a modern social construct, for until the 
sixteenth century there was practically nothing in the life 
and thought of the West that could be characterized as 
racism [12]. Race does not even have a physical or 
biological meaning. Geneticists note that ’the proportion of 
human genetic variation due to differences between 
populations is modest, and individuals from different 
populations can be genetically more similar than individuals 
from the same population [13].’ 
(iii) the conflict with the generally accepted neo-
Darwinian evolutionary principles. Even if one assumes that 
genes impact on traits more than above indicated (in point 
ii), and therefore the relationship between genes and social 
behavior is closer than it is, even so, genes can provide 
inheritance for a very limited number of social phenomena. 
The cultural development is too fast for natural selection 
through the genetic mechanism. Social phenomena change 
faster than genes change through natural selection, so this 
means that genes encoding the reflection of certain social 
conventions will be eliminated before being expressed. In a 
rapidly changing environment, phenotypic flexibility in 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-780-1
COGNITIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

dealing with different environments is usually preferable to 
genes that shift the phenotype narrowly toward a particular 
environment [14]. For instance, the 'young' ‘genetic 
tolerance in adults for lactose probably arose and spread to 
high frequencies within the last 6,000 years in some 
populations of this same language family [14]’, compared to 
the 'old' social phenomenon of racial discrimination, which 
is no more than 600 years old [12].   
Taking into account the above arguments, the author 
believes that the acquisition of first social phenomena is still 
a subject of discussion. The author also believes that any 
theory of knowledge and/or mind, in order to become 
acceptable to the academic community, must comply with 
the laws of physics and be supported by mathematical 
models. This means that having a deeper understanding of  
the physical processes of information transfer that underlies 
initial learning is the goal of current and future researches. 
The above reflection noted that the attitude of men to some 
physical features of other individuals is social phenomena 
acquired in the process of social learning. Therefore, the 
current review examined social interaction of newborns and 
infants, studying what can help newborns behave socially in 
different social tasks – (a) recognition of faces: Other Race 
Effect (ORE), Other Species Effect (OSE), facial 
attractiveness, and (b) categorization of words – until 
infants understand enough meanings of phenomena from 
social reality to initiate social behavior their own. 
. 
III. NEWBORNS AND INFANTS BEHAVE SOCIALLY:
FACIAL RECOGNITION
Over the past 50 years, numerous studies have begun to 
examine the social behavior of infants through facial 
recognition. Most of them support results of their 
identification of parents, women, perception of multiracial 
faces ORE, other species faces OSE, as well as preference 
of facial attractiveness. Their findings are crucial for the 
present review: 
(1) Goren et al. [15] showed that newborn tracked a 
moving schematic face with a strong preference for the face 
patterns over the other stimuli [15][16].  
(2) Newborns demonstrated preference for their mother's 
face over a stranger's face [17]-[20]. 
(3) Newborns prefer faces from their own-ethnic group, 
ORE [21][22].  
(4) Preferences of infants depend on their caregivers. 
Tasting 3- to 4-month-olds infants, Quinn et al. [23] 
suggested that 'representation of information about human 
faces by young infants may be influenced by the gender of 
the primary caregiver.'  
(5) 3-month-old infants prefer the natural composition of 
inner features of faces rather than the same features, but in 
an unnatural position. Turati et al. [24] observed reactions of 
infants on women pictures. Black-and-white photographs of 
women's faces have been digitally modified altering the 
position of internal facial features. Infants saw both normal 
and modified faces. This study suggested 'that the face 
arrangement of the inner features in the natural face affects 
infants’ performance, attracting infants’ gaze even when 
face configurations are paired for stimuli equated with up–
down asymmetry in the distribution of inner features [24, p. 
268]'. 
(6) Newborns recognize familiar faces even presented 
partly. Simion et al. [25] eliminated one by one inner and 
internal features from photographs of women's faces found 
that: '1- to 3-day-old infants are capable of recognizing a 
familiar face based on either the inner or outer features, and 
on either featural or configural perceptual properties.' 
(7) Newborns prefer attractive faces. 'Human infants 
prefer to look at physically attractive human faces when 
they are paired with physically less attractive human faces. 
Infant preference for attractive faces has been observed for a 
range of human faces, including Caucasian and African 
American adult female faces, adult male faces, and infant 
faces [26]'. 'The attractiveness effect can be demonstrated 
even in newborn infants, is orientation dependent, occurring 
for upright but not inverted faces, and is driven by the 
internal features of faces [26]'.  
 (8) The 3- to 4-month-olds infants prefer attractive faces 
of cats. The results of Quinn et al. [26] demonstrated that 
'the preference for attractive faces by infants that has 
previously been observed for human faces can also be 
observed for domestic cat faces [26, p. 80]'.  
 (9) The 6- to 9-months-old infants recognize race even 
through observing grayscale faces in black-and-white 
photographs. 'Results for the grayscale stimuli showed that 
even when a salient perceptual cue to race, such as skin 
color information, is minimized, 6- to 9-month-olds, 
nonetheless, show an ORE in their face recognition 
memory. Infants’ use of shape-based and configural cues for 
face recognition is discussed [27, p.641]'.  
 (10) The 
3-month-olds 
infants 
from 
cross-race 
environment did not show ORE. 'African Israeli infants 
(who by virtue of being a very small ethnic minority 
experience considerable cross-race exposure) do not 
develop a preference for own-race faces [28, p. 162].' 
'Biracial infants, however, showed the opposite effect: An 
‘own-race’ novelty preference was associated with reduced 
scanning between eye and mouth regions of ‘own-race’
habituation stimuli, suggesting that biracial infants use a 
distinct approach to processing frequently encountered faces 
[29, p. 1].' 
IV. NEWBORNS AND INFANTS BEHAVE SOCIALLY:
WORDS CATEGORIZATION
Categorization of social phenomena is the skill that 
allows for social interaction. Adequate interaction with 
objects depends fundamentally on a person's ability to 
categorize [30]. How infants bring order into their world by 
categorizing objects is a core issue for the research in 
cognitive and language development. Ferry et al. [31] and 
then Perszyk and Waxman [32] found that 3- to 4-month-
olds infants already can categorize words – fishes and 
dinosaurs from different classes – that do not fit into their 
personal reality. According I. Val. Danilov and Mihailova 
[3]: it is necessary to note several circumstances to assess 
their results: 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-780-1
COGNITIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

(i) infants participated at the experiments always with 
adults: with their caregivers in pair, infants sat on a 
caregivers' lap facing the stage as well as a supervisor of  
the experiment, who was there in the contact with infants; 
(ii) infants did not perceptually interact with anyone 
during experiments; 
(iii) all persons involved in the experiment – both 
participants of the pairs infant-caregiver as well as the 
supervisor – received tasks simultaneously; 
(iv) 
infants 
improved 
performance 
during 
the 
experiments when objects were marked vocally that present 
adult also listened to; 
(v) the chosen visual stimuli are fishes and dinosaurs 
from different classes, that do not fit into the personal reality 
of 3- to 4-months-old infants [3, p. 151]. 
V. DISCUSSION
The review evidently shows a discrepancy between the 
complexity of tasks and ability of infants to solve them. Ten 
facts from studies on facial recognition and the 
contradiction from studies on word categorization show 
infants' social behavior that does not fit with their ability to 
understand social reality. The beginning of independent 
assimilation of social phenomena by infants is possible only 
when a lot of knowledge is already in place: (i) the meaning 
of 'I', distinct from the environment; (ii) separation of the 
environment on immovable and movable objects, the 
retrieval familiar objects from others; (iii) understanding of 
truth and false, (iv) understanding of the meanings of initial 
social phenomena, to rely on in order to begin acquiring the 
meanings of objects from social reality. The analysis of the 
above noted 11 facts (Sections III and IV) enlightened in the 
following statements: 
– Newborns have very limited knowledge of social 
reality to behave socially on their own, since their mind 
does not maintain any communication. Even if one ignores 
the necessary effectiveness of communication skills to 
maintain the acquiring social meaning mechanism and 
assumes that one of the existing hypotheses (or all together) 
promotes the mechanism of initial learning, then newborns 
would not have the time to acquire the meanings of enough 
social phenomenon to understand social reality to such an 
extent to recognize faces without their context: in schematic 
pictures (fact 1), distinguishing mother and stranger (fact 2), 
discriminating race (fact 3), recognizing faces through their 
parts (fact 6), and even selecting attractive faces (fact 7). 
The research of Danilov and Mihailova argued that at this 
stage of mental development infants cannot acquire meaning 
of social reality their own because of lack communication: 
they initiate to develop their non-verbal communication 
since 12-months of age [3]. 
– The 3- to 4-month-olds infants cannot independently 
understand phenomena that are not related to their social 
reality, which is very limited. The lack of communication 
noted above does not allow infants to know nature well 
enough to distinguish attractive cat faces from non-attractive 
ones (fact 8), and to know anatomy well enough to prefer 
the natural composition of inner facial features rather than 
the same features, but in an unnatural position, recognizing 
faces without their context (fact 5). Regarding the fact of 
word categorization (Section IV), 'infants cannot themselves 
recognize and classify inappropriate phenomena that are 
absent or inaccessible to their reality; even if one forgets 
about the problem of assimilating of first notions and the 
acquiring of the first words, and supposes that infants 
somehow themselves have already learned some basic set of 
meanings, there is another problem of comprehension of 
abstract phenomena – the above-noted fishes and dinosaurs 
are not suitable objects for the categorization experiment 
with 3- to 4-months-old infants; it is very hard to believe 
that without the help of adults they can categorize such 
abstract phenomena [3, p. 155].' 
VI. CONCLUSION
These achievements of infants are possible only through 
their collaboration with adults. Adults somehow guide 
infants without any perceptual instruction and/or hints to 
them. This supposition is also supported by the facts that: 
the preference of 3- to 4-month-olds infants depends on 
their 
caregivers 
(fact 
4); 
infants 
from 
cross-race 
environment did not show ORE (fact 10); and infants 
independently can solve tasks even difficult for adults: the 
6- to 9-month-olds infants recognize race even through 
observing grayscale faces in black-and-white photographs 
(fact 9). Hence, taking all arguments together it is possible 
to conclude that the initial social learning occurs through 
non-perceptual social interaction at least partly. One 
possible explanation for this phenomenon was introduced 
by Danilov in the theory of Coherent intelligence: 'Coherent 
Intelligence is an effect of unconscious collaboration 
provided by interconnection of many brains united by 
entanglement state of their neurons – the phenomenon of 
quantum entanglement of particles – which is stimulated by 
common emotional arousal. This connection of entangled 
neurons may unite neural chains of different cerebrums and 
maintain their coherent mental process [33, p. 109].' This 
theory supposes that the phenomenon emerges from 
collaboration of many individuals if they solve an important 
problem for them at the same time within the framework of 
single emotional stimulation [33]. Recent research by 
Danilov and Mihailova [3] on language acquisition in adults 
supported this conclusion showing the increase of group 
performance provided by such 
unconscious 
mental 
collaboration. The theory corresponds to the laws of 
quantum physics and future research may supplement it 
with a mathematical model. The long-term study of this 
rudimental non-perceptual social interaction, which was 
developed before the emergence of the 5 perceptual senses 
could complement the understanding of human development 
within the framework of the modern paradigm of 
evolutionary theory. The growing field of knowledge and 
the multicultural environment of its development require 
improving teaching methods that include higher-order 
thinking with deeper levels of information processing to 
create richer memory structures for students. The author 
believes that long-term studies can help to develop an 
advanced curriculum based on the non-perceptual social 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-780-1
COGNITIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

interaction. This method can facilitate learning in various 
academic disciplines by introducing knowledge even 
unconsciously while studying the program. 
VII. FUTURE WORK
 Recent studies show that group collaboration in 
problem-solving can significantly increase memorization by 
28%, the effect of which increases to 30% in a month. 
'Taking part in a relevant group discussion had a direct 
positive impact on recall, whilst this positive effect persisted 
over a longer period only for those who had given 
explanations during the discussion [34]'. This probably 
means that a learning method based on problem-solving –
such as the Problem Based Learning (PBL) method – may 
suit such a procedure which helps learners to increase 
implicit memory during solving problems. The crucial point 
of the PBL is a discovery or insight, which is still 
inexplicable, unpredictable and uncontrollable process [35]. 
Some recent researches [36] questioned the efficiency of 
knowledge acquisition in the PBL. Colliver [36] argued: 
’this review of the research on the effectiveness of PBL 
curricula provides no convincing evidence that PBL 
improves knowledge base and clinical performance, at least 
not of the magnitude that would be expected given the 
extensive resources required for the operation of a PBL 
curriculum’. He also summarized that the results of the PBL 
method to accelerate learning are not significant enough in 
respect of efforts required. This is considering how many 
resources the PBL needs to be applied in opposition to the 
classical learning and also the fact that the speed of this type 
of learning is less than in the one-to-one tutoring [36]. 
Contemporary studies on the PBL method concentrate 
more its development towards efficiency in criticism 
training of students rather than to accelerate their knowledge 
acquisition. Numerous studies, such as one by Rotgans and 
Schmidt [37], and another one by Masek and Yamin [38], 
have shown that the PBL method can effectively help 
students to develop various abilities such as critical thinking 
and practical skills (as well as enhance their learning 
motivation and volition): 'Based on the review, it is 
concluded that 1) the specific processes in PBL theoretically 
support students’ critical thinking development according to 
the design applied, 2) empirical evidence in general is 
inconclusive in explaining the effect of PBL on students’
critical thinking ability, especially the studies outside of 
medical field, 3) some evidence indicates that PBL requires 
a long term exposure to foster students’ critical thinking 
ability, 4) several predictors might also influence the 
relationships of PBL and critical thinking such as age, 
gender, 
academic 
achievement, 
and 
educational 
background, which calls for further research work. The 
implication is that, PBL curriculum must carefully be 
designed and concerned on the critical elements contributing 
to PBL effectiveness [38]'. 
It seems that the modern PBL method is focused on 
stimulating students to interactive collaboration, by pushing 
their motivation and interest, which of course is necessary, 
but does not distinguish clearly the PBL from other methods 
of training and does not achieve its contemporary goal to 
accelerate knowledge acquisition. It should be noted that  
the problem-based essence of the PBL method requires to 
include in the learning process the actual problem solving 
activity. This by make students overcoming staged 
difficulties through their own insight. So not only reaching 
the solution of simple tasks that doesn't involve cognitive 
processes of higher-order thinking like the more classic 
learning methods. The PBL method was established to 
involve problem solving in the learning process at every 
stage. 'In PBL, the problem comes first [39]'. The teacher 
needs to create quite difficult problems to 'switch on' the 
phenomenon of insight in students. It shouldn't be just a set 
of tasks as a formal pretext to invite students into an 
entertaining lesson. 
Taking into account all the mentioned above challenges 
in the contemporary society, the PBL requires confident 
involvement in its process of high-order thinking with deep 
levels of information processing and critical thinking skills 
to achieve success. The author believes that future 
researches on non-perceptual interaction could be able to 
develop a PBL method in which teachers can predictably 
improve the implicit memory of students, incorporating 
higher-order thinking with deeper levels of information 
processing in learning. More research is needed to expand 
our knowledge on non-perceptual social interaction in order 
to support the development of advanced curriculum based 
on the PBL method. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author thanks Dr. Sandra Mihailova for her 
collaboration in research and also expresses his gratitude to 
Dr. David Vernon and Dr. Tullio Rizzini for their help in 
preparing this review. 
REFERENCES
1.
I. Val. Danilov, "Ontogenesis of Social Interaction: Review of 
Studies Relevant to the Fetal Social Behavior," J Med - Clin 
Res 
& 
Rev. 
2020; 
4(2): 
1-7. 
Available 
from: 
http://scivisionpub.com/pdfs/ontogenesis-of-social-interaction-
review-of-studies-relevant-to-the-fetal-social-behavior-
1081.pdf. 
2.
M. Tomasello, "Constructing a Language: A Usage-Based 
Theory of Language Acquisition," Cambridge: Harvard 
University Press. 2003 
3.
I. Val. Danilov and S. Mihailova, "Social interaction shapes 
infants' earliest links between language and cognition," Social 
Sciences Bulletin, 2019 2 (29), ISSN 1691-1881, eISSN 2592-
8562. 
4.
S. R. Waxman and E. M. Leddon, "Early Word-Learning and 
Conceptual Development," The Wiley-Blackwell Handbook 
of Childhood Cognitive Development. 2010. [retrieved: 02, 
2020]: 
https://www.academia.edu/12821552/Early_Word-
Learning_and_Conceptual_Development. 
5.
G. Csibra and G. Gergely, "Natural pedagogy," Trends Cogn. 
Sci. 13, pp. 148–153, 2009. 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-780-1
COGNITIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

6.
P. Silverstein, T. Gligab, G. Westermanna, and E. Parise, 
"Probing communication-induced memory biases in preverbal 
T infants: Two replication attempts of Yoon, Johnson and 
Csibra (2008)," Infant Behavior and Development, 55, pp. 77–
87, 2019. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infbeh.2019.03.005. 
7.
S. S. Jones, "The development of imitation in infancy," Phil. 
Trans. 
R. 
Soc. 
B, 
364, 
pp. 
2325–2335, 
2009. 
doi:10.1098/rstb.2009.0045. 
8.
T. Rizzini, "The Cultural Linguistic Code," Journal of Life 
Sciences, 12, pp. 59-63, 2018. doi: 10.17265/1934-
7391/2018.01.006. 
9.
L. L. Namy and L. C. Nygaard, "Perceptual-motor constraints 
on 
sound-to-meaning 
correspondence 
in 
language," 
Behavioral 
and 
brain 
sciences, 
31, 
5, 
2008. 
doi:10.1017/S0140525X08005190. 
10. R. Plomin, J. C. DeFries, V. S. Knopik, and J. M. Neiderhiser, 
"Top 10 replicated findings from Behavioral genetics," 
Perspect 
Psychol 
Sci. 
11(1): 
pp. 
3–23. 
2016. 
doi:10.1177/1745691615617439. 
11. U. Eco, "On Ugliness," Maclehose, 2011. ISBN 0857051628, 
9780857051622. 
12. D. A. Puzzo. "Racism and the Western Tradition," Journal of 
the 
History 
of 
Ideas, 
25 
(4), 
pp. 
579–86, 
1964. 
doi:10.2307/2708188. 
13. D. J. Witherspoon, S. Wooding, A. R. Rogers, E. E. Marchani, 
W. S. Watkins, M. A. Batzer, and L. B. Jorde, "Genetic 
Similarities Within and Between Human Populations. 
Genetics," 
176(1), 
pp. 
351–359, 
2007. 
doi: 
10.1534/genetics.106.067355. 
14. J. Burger, M. Kirchner, B. Bramanti, W. Haak, and M. 
G.Thomas, "Absence of the lactase-persistence-associated 
allele in early Neolithic Europeans," Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences USA, 104, pp. 3736 – 41, 
2007. 
15. C. C. Goren, M. Sarty and P. Y. K. Wu, "Visual following and 
pattern discrimination of face-like stimuli by newborn 
infants," Pediatrics, 56. pp. 544-1-549, 1975. 
16. M. H. Johnson, S. Dziurawiec, H. Ellis and J. Morton, 
"Newborns’ preferential tracking of face-like stimuli and its 
subsequent decline," Cognition, 40, pp. l-19, 1991. DOI: 
10.1016/0010-0277(91)90045-6. 
17. I. W. Bushnell, F. Sai, and J. T. Mullin, "Neonatal recognition 
of the mother's face," British Journal of Developmental 
Psychology, 7,  pp. 3–15, 1989. 
18. T. M. Field, D. Cohen, R. Garcia, and R. Greenburg, "Mother–
stranger face discrimination by the newborn," Infant Behavior 
and Development, 7, pp. 19–25, 1984. 
19. O. Pascalis, S. de Schonen, J. Morton, C. Deruelle, and M. 
Fabre-Grenet, "Mother's face recognition in neonates: a 
replication 
and 
an 
extension," 
Infant 
Behavior 
and 
Development, 17, pp. 79–85, 1995. 
20. I. W. R. Bushnell, "Mother’s face recognition in newborn 
infants: learning and memory," Infant Child Dev., 10, pp. 67–
74. 2001. 
21. O. Pascalis and S. de Schonen, "Recognition memory on 3- to 
4-day-old human neonates," Neuro Report, 5, pp. 1721–1724, 
1994. 
22. D. J. Kelly, S. Liu, L. Ge, P. C. Quinn,  A. M. Slater, K. Lee, 
O. Liu and O. Pascalis, "Cross-Race Preferences for Same-
Race Faces Extend Beyond the African Versus Caucasian 
Contrast in 3-Month-Old Infants," Infancy, 11(1), pp. 87–95, 
2007. doi:10.1080/15250000709336871.  
23. P. C. Quinn, J. Yahr, A. Kuhn, "Representation of the gender 
of human faces by infants: A preference for female," 
Perception, 
Vol 
31, 
pages 
1109 
– 
1121, 
2002. 
DOI:10.1068/p3331, p. 1109. 
24. C. Turati, E. Valenza, I. Leo, F. Simion, "Three-month-olds’ 
visual preference for faces and its underlying visual processing 
mechanisms," Journal of Experimental Child Psychology 90 
255–273, p. 268. 2005. doi:10.1016/j.jecp.2004.11.001 . 
25. F. Simion, I. Leo, C. Turati, E. Valenza, and B. D. Barba, 
"How face specialization emerges in the first months of life," 
Progress in Brain Research, Vol. 164. Elsevier B.V., p. 182, 
2007. DOI: 10.1016/S0079-6123(07)64009-6 . 
26. P. C. Quinn, D. J. Kelly, K. Lee, O. Pascalis, and A. M. Slater, 
"Preference for attractive faces in human infants extends 
beyond conspecifics," Developmental Science, 11, 1, pp. 76–
83. p.76, 2008. DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00647.x. 
27. G. Anzures, O. Pascalis, P. C. Quinn, A. M. Slater, K. Lee, 
"Minimizing Skin Color Differences Does Not Eliminate the 
Own-Race Recognition Advantage in Infants," Infancy, 16(6), 
pp. 640–654, International Society on Infant Studies (ISIS), 
2011. DOI: 10.1111/j.1532-7078.2010.00066.x. 
28. Y. Bar-Haim, T. Ziv, D. Lamy and R. M. Hodes, "Nature and 
nurture in own-race face processing," Psychological Science, 
17, pp. 159–163, 2006. 
29. S. E. Gaither, K. Pauker and S. P. Johnson, "Biracial and 
monoracial infant own-race face perception: an eye tracking 
study," Developmental Science, pp. 1–9, 2012. DOI: 
10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01170.x . 
30. A. M. Borghi, "Object concepts and action. In Grounding 
Cognition: The Role of Perception and Action in Memory, 
Language, and Thinking," Edited by Diane Pecher and Rolf A. 
Zwaan. New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 8–34. 
2005. 
31. A. L. Ferry, S. J. Hespos, S. R. Waxman, "Categorization in 3- 
and 4-Month-Old Infants: An Advantage of Words Over 
Tones," Society for Research in Child Development, Inc., 
2010. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8624.2009.01408.x. 
32. D. R. Perszyk and S. R. Waxman, "Infants’ advances in 
speech perception shape their earliest links between language 
and cognition," Scientific reports, 9, p. 3293, 2019. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-39511-9. 
33. I. Val. Danilov. Unconscious Social Interaction: Coherent 
Intelligence. Second edition complemented. [e-book]. 2019. 
[retrieved: 02, 2020] https://www.amazon.com. 
34. F. M. Van Blankenstein, D. H. J. M. Dolmans, C. P. M. Van 
der Vleuten, and H. G. Schmidt, "Which cognitive process 
support learning during small-group discussion? The role of 
providing explanations and listening to others," Instructional 
Science, 39(2), pp. 189-204, 2011. Online [retrieved: 02, 
2020]: 
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11251-009-
9124-7. 
35. D. Boud and G. I. Feletti, "The Challenge of Problem-based 
Learning," London: Kogan Page, pp. 40-41. 1997. 
36. J. A. Colliver, "Effectiveness of Problem-based Learning 
Curricula: Research and Theory," 2000 [retrieved: 02, 2020]: 
https://journals.lww.com/academicmedicine/Fulltext/2000/030
00/Effectiveness_of_Problem_based_Learning_Curricula_.17.
aspxResults#pdf-link. 
37. J. I. Rotgans and H. G. Schmidt, "Effects of Problem‐Based 
Learning on Motivation," Interest, and Learning. 2019. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119173243.ch7. 
38. A. B. Masek and S. Yamin, "The Effect of Problem Based 
Learning on Critical Thinking Ability: A Theoretical and 
Empirical 
Review," 
2011. 
[retrieved: 
02, 
2020] 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/266279314_The_Eff
ect_of_Problem_Based_Learning_on_Critical_Thinking_Abili
ty_A_Theoretical_and_Empirical_Review. 
39. H. G. Schmidt, J. I. Rotgans, and E. H. J. Yew, "Cognitive 
Constructivist Foundations of Problem-Based Learning," The 
Wiley 
Handbook 
of 
Problem-Based 
Learning. 
Miley 
Blackwell. p.257, 2019. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-780-1
COGNITIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

