Voxelnet - An Agent Based System for Spatial Data Analytics 
 
Charlotte Sennersten, Andrew Davie and Craig Lindley 
Connection to the Physical World, Computational Intelligence and Decision Sciences 
CSIRO Data 61 
Sandy Bay, Australia 
email: charlotte.sennersten@csiro.au, boo.davie@csiro.au, craig.lindley@csiro.au 
 
 
 
Abstract—Voxelnet is a proposed voxel-based spatialised 
framework built upon internet communication and associated 
geospatial data standards. Each Voxelnet block has an 
individual IP address and functions as a computational agent. 
The internet of things (IoT) is also based upon objects having 
individual IP addresses on the internet so they can 
communicate using an individual unique identifier. IP 
addresses can roughly reveal where things are via geo 
locations. The internet, though, is a document based repository 
with 3D plug-ins that is not effective for sharing a unified 
world of interconnections from a volumetric point of view. The 
Voxelnet provides volumetric semantics on top of the current 
internet, within which measurements can be located, shared, 
interrelated and spatially analysed, supporting smart informed 
decisions in real and virtual worlds that account for spatial 
structure. It can also be used to interact with IoT systems using 
an integrated spatial representation. 
Keywords; Geospatial Data Systems; Block Models; Internet 
of Things; Data Sharing; Multi-Agent Systems. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Increasing amounts of data are becoming available in all 
sectors. One area that is leading the growth and availability 
of large and heterogeneous data sets is in geosciences, and 
more broadly in the availability of different modes of remote 
sensing data in various spectral regions and resolutions. 
Point sensor networks are also becoming increasingly 
common, measuring factors such as climate (temperature, 
pressure, rainfall, wind direction and speed), river and water 
body temperatures, levels and flow rates, and traffic location 
and movement information. Concepts such as the IoT [1]-[3] 
propose the networked interconnection of an increasing 
variety of physical objects, ranging from sensors to 
consumer and industrial devices. The integration of these and 
other forms of sensors collecting data, using contemporary 
internet protocols and technologies, results in vast amounts 
of heterogeneous data, much of which is spatially specific or 
spatially located. However, current generic web tools are 
based upon a 2-dimensional (2D) text and image based 
presentation model, with few broadly available tools for 
analysing or even traversing or visualising large and complex 
data sets. To address this, this paper proposes the 
development of a Voxelnet, as an inter-networked system of 
volume elements that can provide an intrinsically 3-
dimensional (3D) user interaction paradigm structured to 
readily provide visualisation of and access to spatial data 
sets. An active voxel system is proposed, where volume 
elements are also active computational agents that can 
process the data that they represent. 
 The Voxelnet is based upon points in space-time 
identified by [x, y, z, time], where time can be a specific time 
or a composite specification of times and/or time ranges. The 
Voxelnet space can be traversed (the spatial analog of 
browsing) using 3D interactive interfaces and systemised via 
a default index of 1 m³ cubes penetrating the whole digital 
world. The Voxelnet concept includes the composition or 
decomposition of blocks into smaller units down to an 
arbitrary resolution or up to a universal level providing a 
macro perspective. Every 1 m³ block also represents an agent 
with its own state that is able to react to and process data that 
enters and leaves the block, deciding what data is managed 
by the cube and what to do with it. The cubes will have their 
own IP addresses and can communicate with each other 
when changes occur to their current state. Hence, the 
Voxelnet readily lends itself to parallel computing and 
implement multi-block computations such as 3D cellular 
automata and finite element models.  
This paper elaborates on various features of the Voxelnet 
concept. Section II proposes what a 3D indexation and 
annotation editor supporting the Voxelnet can look like, 
Section III reviews the IoT, Section IV discusses what is 
achievable and identifies some bottlenecks and issues, 
Section V discusses how this system can be implemented in 
a practical sense, Section VI summarises progress to date, 
and Section VII describes future work. 
II. 
A 3D INDEXATION AND ANNOTATION 
EDITOR 
The Voxelnet editor needs an annotation and indexation 
function supporting: 1) a functional communication 
architecture processing an individual spatialised IP address 
for each voxel, 2) agents accessed via their spatialised IP 
addresses, performing functions such as communicating 
what data they store (including 3D content such as 3D 
models with 3D sub-parts, 3D scanned objects, 3D 
environmental scans, data generated in a volume/area [x, y, 
133
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

z], etc.), 3) annotation and indexation functions so that 3D 
objects and related data can be created, changed, located, 
processed or displayed, 4) a 4D distributed data base 
management system so all data can be accessed and 
projected, and 5) scripting tools for active transformations 
and processing of block data. 
In a dynamic world with huge amounts of data, in 
addition to capturing data we need to be able to display it as 
text or visually as 3D architectures, masses, areas and 
objects, and to represent where the location that it represents 
is in the real world. The vast amount of data needs to be 
categorised and indexed for use by researchers, industry and 
the public, allowing reuse of measurements, analyses and 
informed decisions that have been made. This includes data 
generated by agents in space, air, land, water and 
underground that perform distributed sensing and analytical 
functions while being contextualised via their location in the 
world. The Voxelnet with its indexation function will 
support researchers and engineers so they can focus on 
scientific challenges of analysis and discover new knowledge 
in cross disciplinarily correlations, rather than needing to 
handle details of data management.  
III. 
THE IOT 
The term “Internet of Things” was coined around 1999 
by Kevin Ashton at Auto-ID Center mainly in reference to 
radio frequency identification (RFID) tags [3]. RFID tags are 
electronic transmitters that can provide identification and 
other data to a networked system. For the cargo industry this 
means that goods can be tracked anywhere at any time. In 
2008 a group of companies launched the Protocol for Smart 
Objects (IPSO) alliance to promote the use of the internet 
protocol (IP) in networks of so-called smart or intelligent 
objects. Internet Protocol version 6 (IPv6) is the latest 
version of communication protocols providing an 
identification and location system for computers on networks 
[4]. As Leibson put it, “we could assign an IPv6 address to 
every atom on the surface of the earth, and still have enough 
addresses left to do another 100+ earths … if you take the 
surface of the earth as a perfect sphere and covered it with 1-
layer-thick of atoms packed maximally close together.” [5]. 
Even here the spatiality of the IoT starts to manifest. 
The concept of the IoT, also referred to as the Industrial 
Internet, has expanded to encompass machine-to-machine 
internet connections in general. From a business perspective 
it needs to support machine and process-based analytics that 
are physics based, process deep domain expertise, are 
automated and are predictive. The analysis of physical 
machines and systems requires access to data from remote 
and centralised sources and visualisation in 3D and 2D 
graphical systems [1]. 
 
A. Unmanned Aerial Vehicles 
As a caste study, Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) 
flying and capturing data underground [6] will be considered 
as an example of active IoT nodes. A UAV is ‘a thing’ in 
IoT terms. The UAV has several sensors mounted on it and 
these are the things on the thing (the ‘thing’ concept is 
compositional: a bunch of things can constitute another 
thing). The sensors include video for navigation, inertial 
navigation sensors, and sonar distance sensors mounted on 
the UAV pointing towards surfaces in the environment that it 
flies by. Records of the physical location of the generation 
points of data includes complex relations like the thing (the 
UAV) located within 3D space with many other things 
(sensors) mounted to it directed towards many other things 
(walls, vehicles, people, etc.). The IoT universe is not merely 
concerned with individual things, but the compositional and 
spatial relationships among and between those things; 
locality is of fundamental interest. This can be achieved by 
associating every sensor value with a point in space, which 
can be specified in terms of a number of potential reference 
frames. For example, a sensor value might be represented in 
a location specified in a global reference frame (latitude, 
longitude and elevation), or by an orientation and 
displacement from a local coordinate frame centred on the 
UAV, which is in turn represented as a location and 
orientation in relation to the origin of a local mine (in this 
case) coordinate system, which has its own geometrical 
relationship to a wider area reference system such as latitude, 
longitude and elevation. In order to process all of this 
information, optimally in real time, data needs to be accessed 
in comprehensive and standardised formats, ideally 
contextualised based upon its meaning. Note however that 
this is not an argument for the semantic web in the common, 
ontology-based understanding of the term with all of its 
associated techniques. Rather, it is an argument for location 
and content-based indexing mechanisms. This is more of an 
argument for a denotational semantic web [7][8], where 
denotational meaning drives access. Remote control and 
navigation of UAVs flying in unknown spaces would benefit 
from a Voxelnet framework as a reference source of existing 
spatialised data, such as mine models and drill core data. 3D 
models of old mine voids provide an initial estimate of the 
likely structures that will be encountered. Drill core data can 
provide contextual information for the probabilistic data 
fusion of sensor information to make new measurements and 
maps of lithology and mineralogy [9]. 
The Voxelnet system provides a framework for the 
storage, use and reuse of data generated by the UAVs and 
other sensor systems. Drill core data is used routinely 
together with geological expertise, lithology, and contextual 
knowledge to create block models, which are voxel models 
of underground ore bodies, where features are represented 
for each voxel (which has dimensions on the order of 5 m on 
a side) such as specific gravity, hardness, grades of metals of 
interest, etc. [10]. In addition to this conventional mine 
analysis modelling, the Voxelnet also stores all data from the 
UAV. This includes data that can be processed to produce 
3D models of mine void spaces, such as visual (video) data, 
LIDAR (laser scan data), sonar, optical or sonar flow, and 
inertial navigation data. All of these data can be retained in 
the spatial index system of the Voxelnet, together with all 
other forms of spatialised data gathered by other platforms, 
such as other UAVs or surface robots, manual survey 
instruments, and instrumentation built into mining vehicles 
such as load-haul-dump (LHD) machines, drill jumbos and 
134
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

drill platforms. All survey data can potentially add to 
mineralogical evaluations and estimates (e.g., of grades, 
percentages of target metal concentrations, with associated 
probabilities). But the totality of data can be used for 
potentially diverse purposes, such as relating vehicle 
performance and maintenance data back to spatial attributes 
of the working space (e.g., rock hardness, shape, gradients, 
sharpness of turns, stability), actual work records (distances 
and heights traversed, motor accelerations and decelerations, 
total vehicle accelerations and decelerations), and mean time 
between failure for vehicle parts, subsystems and systems. 
These data can feed into site and enterprise level operations 
analysis and optimisation. Not all of these data are or need to 
be spatially specific, but the availability of spatially indexed 
data supports forms of cross model analytics, such as the 
discovery of terrain regularities associated with temporal 
data features that in turn associate with maintenance trends. 
The forms of spatialised data noted above could be (and 
currently are) recorded using methods that are not primarily 
indexed spatially, or if they are spatially indexed, the indices 
exist in highly localised systems. The Voxelnet generalises 
access to spatially indexed data, supporting a much greater 
variety of scales in analytic functions, and analytics across 
more diverse perspectives and interests than the design 
targets of existing tools. 
IV. 
HOW CAN THE VOXELNET AND THE IOT CO-
EXIST? 
The Voxelnet uses IoT concepts in two ways: i) as a 
repository, spatial browsing and analytics system for IoT 
connected objects, and ii) each block behaves as an 
interconnected “thing” within the IoT. Where the IoT deals 
with actual physical objects and sensors, the Voxelnet can 
support virtual objects and sensors that may have been 
converted or derived from physical world data by agents 
within the Voxelnet infrastructure. 
The IoT relies on IPv6 due to the huge number of 
individually accessible things (objects) that are expected to 
be part of it. Likewise, the Voxelnet has the same issue with 
the default 1 m3 block index representing the world. The 
volume of the Earth is approximately 1021 m3, so that is how 
many blocks that would be needed for a complete Voxelnet 
of the Earth. IPv6 supports about 3.4 x 1038 individual 
addresses and so could represent each individual block as an 
IP-addressable entity for the entire Earth and still have most 
of its addresses left over. Just considering the surface area of 
the Earth of 5.1 x 1014 m² and with 2000 m of height interest, 
then there are around 1018 blocks of 1 m3 size. 
However, the represented volume needs to accommodate 
the volumetric data available and context of how it is used. 
For example, geological block modelling used in 
geosciences seeks to achieve a block scale derived from the 
scale of available data samples together with considerations 
of the evidence that the data provides and a suitable degree 
of averaging for resource estimation purposes [11]. Raw data 
should be represented in the highest level of available detail. 
The proposition of a default 1 m3 block is a human scale 
convenience for traversing the complete volumetric system, 
where specific functions may require the aggregation or 
decomposition of this scale to the degree needed. For 
example, underground mine planning typically uses block 
around a size of 5 m3, while an autonomous vehicle that 
needs to analyse points in a point cloud to derive the location 
and classification of features and objects in its immediate 
operational environment might need a spatial index accuracy 
on the order of millimetres. The requirements of scale and 
the functional ability to transition to different scales impacts 
the design of the underlying computational and 
communications 
infrastructure, 
including 
storage 
requirements, network bandwidth, and processing time 
requirements (not considered in detail here). 
This leads to questions for representing the world as a 
block model including how to meet requirements for: i) 
memory, ii) connectivity, iii) speed, iv) network bandwidth 
and v) processing (speed) related to a large number of 
addressable objects. 
V. 
TECHNICAL APPROACH 
Internet IP addresses currently using IPv6 have 128-bit 
addresses facilitating routing via octets representing hosts 
and subnet structures. A domain name or URL is a 
representation that is more understandable and memorable to 
a human, which maps onto a detailed numeric IP address. 
The semantics of an Internet URL or IP address is essentially 
a routing instruction identifying a specific machine within a 
network. This depends only upon the network topology and 
domain structure and has nothing to do with any other form 
of locational information, e.g., about location specific data. 
The Voxelnet proposed here aims to create an alternative 
addressing system having semantics of spatial locations 
instead of routing pathways. This could sit on top of a 
transport layer protocol like IPv6, but it needs to provide 
users with spatial location, content, data modalities and 
feature information, rather than routing information. Hence, 
the semantics of a Voxelnet address is a 3D spatial location 
(within a designated geographic coordinate system), time or 
time range (default to latest), a data type selection 
specification, process instructions, etc. The list of data types 
and processing required includes specific spatial data sets 
(which could include temperature, surface type, pressure, 
gravity, magnetism, biomass, mineralogy, infrastructure, etc. 
The possible format for such a spatialised URL can be based 
upon existing standards for geospatial data systems, such as 
those specified by the Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) 
[12], including netCDF, GeoSPARQL, Geography Markup 
Language Encoding Standard (GML), KML (formerly the 
Keyhole Markup Language), etc. However, currently there is 
no universal access tool that provides a higher level interface 
for access to the data mediated by these standards and hides 
source details from users.  
Such a tool should have analogous seamless integration 
across multiple heterogeneous databases as provided by web 
browsers for data that is unified into a 2D text/image 
presentation paradigm. The Voxelnet is intended to provide 
this kind of access. This is fully in line with current broad 
standardisation efforts (e.g., [13]), but with an emphasis 
upon the creation of a unified user experience paradigm for 
3D spatialised data and analytics. It can also be approached 
135
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

as a user-oriented layer on top of ongoing initiatives to create 
a Spatial Identifier Reference Framework (SIRF) [14].  
The Voxelnet is conceived as a system of agents, each of 
which is responsible for the following kinds of functions, 
including requested processing within the scope of its 
designated volume: 
 
 
Responsibility for management of a specified volume 
of information at a specific scale. 
 
 
Activated by and responds to Voxelnet requests falling 
within its volume of responsibility. 
 
 
Interpretation of the request. 
 
 
Assembly of a data package or service that satisfies the 
request. 
 
 
Conversion from stored coordinate format to coordinate 
format requested. 
 
 
Filtering by attribute value as requested. 
 
 
Aggregation and disaggregation functions associated 
with nested spatial structures. For example, the volume 
represented by an agent may exist within larger scale 
volumes represented by other agents, or may contain 
smaller scale volumes represented by other agents. A 
query might be satisfied by assembling a data package 
from several different scales representing varied 
resolution of sensor instruments and technologies. 
 
 
Streaming to participate in traversal interactions 
through virtual spaces that are constituted by many 
agents, e.g., to create a coherent virtual world 
experience assembled from many smaller scale spatial 
data elements. 
 
 
Implement computationally derived data modalities, 
either pre-computed or computed on demand. 
Examples of these might include finite element or 
cellular automata computations, e.g., to find a path 
through a landscape that minimises gradients or height 
changes, to predict flooding locations, for bushfire 
behaviour prediction, etc.). 
 
On top of this network client functions must be provided to 
provide a coherent experience for users that hides the 
underlying standards and distributed repositories unless 
requested, and focuses upon the creation of a user task-
oriented interaction, visualisation and comprehension 
paradigm. 
VI. 
SUMMARY AND FUTURE WORK 
The Voxelnet concept aims to provide seamless traversal 
through a 3D virtual space with content generated from 
diverse and heterogeneous data sources. Content may be 
multimodal, and can be computed from primary or other 
computational sources. Development of a demonstrator for 
this is work in progress that will support underground void 
mapping by UAVs as a first example use case. The Voxelnet 
concept is general and can be used for many applications. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
P.C. Evans, and M. Annunziata, “ Industrial Internet –Pushing the 
Boundaries of Minds and Machines”, General Electric Co., 
November 2012. 
[2] 
A. Noronha, R. Moriarty, K. O’Connell, and N. Villa, “ Attaining IoT 
Value: How to move from Connecting Things to Capturing Insights –
gain an edge by taking analytics to the edge”, CISCO, 2014. 
[3] 
K. Ashton, “ That ‘Internet of Things’ Thing”, RFID Journal, 2009. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.rfidjournal.com/articles/view?4986 
[retrieved: January, 2016] 
[4] 
A. Keranen, J. Arkko, S. Krishnan, and F. Garneij, “ Toward Ipv6 
world in mobile networks”, The Advance to IPv6, Ericsson Review, 
2/2011. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.ericsson.com/res/thecompany/docs/publications/ericsson_
review/2011/IPv6-June-08-2011.pdf [retrieved: January, 2016] 
[5] 
Quora, 
available 
at: 
https://www.quora.com/Is-Steve-Leibsons-
statement-about-IPv6s-vast-address-range-true 
[retrieved: 
January, 
2016] 
[6] 
C. Sennersten et al., “ Unmanned Aerial Robots for Remotely 
Operated and Autonomous Surveying in Inaccessible Underground 
Mine Voids”, The Third International Future Mining Conference, 
November 2015, 101-08, Sydney, Australia. 
[7] 
C. Sennersten, A. Morshed, M. Lochner, and C. Lindley, 2014, 
“ Towards a Cloud-Based Architecture for 3D Object Comprehension 
in Cognitive Robotics”, COGNITIVE 2014, The Sixth International 
Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Application, 
25-29, May, pp. 220-225, 2014, Venice, Italy. 
[8] 
M. Lochner, C. Sennersten, A. Morshed, and C. Lindley, 2014, 
“ Modelling Spatial Understanding: Using Knowledge Representation 
to Enable Spatial Awareness in a Robotics Platform”, COGNITIVE 
2014, The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive 
Technologies and Application, 25-29 May, 2014, pp. 26-31, Venice, 
Italy. 
[9] 
A. Rahman et al., 2015, “ A Machine Learning Approach to Find 
Associations Between Imaging Features and XRF Signatures of 
Rocks in Underground Mines”, IEEE Sensors 2015, Busan, South 
Korea, November 1-4, 2015. 
[10] C. Lindley et al., 2015, “ A multilayer 3D index tool for recursive 
block models supporting terrestrial and extraterrestrial mine 
planning” accepted for the Third International Future Mining 
Conference, 4-6 November 2015, pp. 289-296, Sydney, Australia. 
[11] J.-P. Chiles, and P. Delfiner (2012). “ Geostatistics: Modeling spatial 
uncertainty. 2nd Edn”. New York: Wiley. 
[12] http://www.opengeospatial.org/ [retrieved: January, 2016] 
[13] http://www.anzlic.gov.au/foundation_spatial_data_framework 
[retrieved: January, 2016] 
[14] http://portal.sirf.net/about-sirf [retrieved: January, 2016])
136
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

