Individual Differences in Deception and Deception Detection 
 
Sarah Ita Levitan, Michelle Levine, 
Julia Hirschberg 
Dept. of Computer Science 
Columbia University 
New York NY, USA 
{sarahita,mlevine,julia}@cs.colum
bia.edu 
 
Nishmar Cestero 
Dept. of Psychology 
Boston University 
Boston MA, USA 
nishmarc@bu.edu 
 
 
 
Guozhen An, Andrew Rosenberg 
Dept. of Computer Science 
Queens College, CUNY 
Queens NY, USA 
{gan@gc,andrew@cs.qc}.cuny.edu 
 
 
 
 
Abstract— We are building a new corpus of deceptive and non-
deceptive speech, using American English and Mandarin 
Chinese adult native speakers, to investigate individual and 
cultural differences in acoustic, prosodic, and lexical cues to 
deception. Here, we report on the role of personality factors 
using the NEO-FFI (Neuroticism-Extraversion-Openness Five 
Factor Inventory), gender, ethnicity and confidence ratings on 
subjects’ ability to deceive and to detect deception in others. 
We report significant correlations for each factor with one or 
more aspects of deception.  These are important for the study 
of trust, cognition, and multi-modal information processing. 
Keywords-Deception; cross-linguistic; personality. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Finding new methods for detecting deception is a major 
goal of researchers in psychology and computational 
linguistics as well as commercial, law enforcement, military, 
and intelligence agencies.  While many new techniques and 
technologies have been proposed and some have even been 
fielded, there have been few significant successes. The goal 
of our research is to develop techniques to identify deceptive 
communication in spoken dialogue. As part of this 
investigation, we are focusing on how within-culture and 
cross-cultural differences between deceivers as well as their 
common characteristics impact deceptive speech behavior.  
Our research focuses solely on cues drawn from the speech 
signal, which have been little studied. 
In this paper, we describe results of experiments 
correlating gender, ethnicity, and personality characteristics 
from the NEO-FFI Five Factor Analysis [1] with subjects’ 
ability to deceive and to judge deception in others’ speech.  
We also examine the importance of subjects’ reported 
confidence in their judgments in deception production and 
detection.  In Section 2, we describe previous work on cues 
to deception and deception detection.  In Section 3 we 
discuss our experimental design, data collection and 
annotation. In Section 4 we describe results of our 
correlations of personality, gender, ethnicity, and confidence 
on deception production and detection. We conclude in 
Section 5 with a discussion of our results.  
II. 
DECEPTION DECTECTION 
Previous research on deceptive behavior has studied 
standard biometric indicators commonly measured in 
polygraphy (cardiovascular, electrodermal, and respiratory), 
facial expression, body gestures, brain imaging, body odor, 
and lexical and acoustic-prosodic information. 
Biometric measures are widely acknowledged, even by 
polygraphers, to be inadequate for deception detection, 
performing at no better than chance. Useful groundwork has 
been laid in identifying potential facial expression cues of 
deception by Ekman et al. [2][3]. However, attempts to 
identify deception from facial expressions are questioned by 
some researchers [4]. Moreover these approaches are 
difficult to automate, requiring delicate image capture 
technology and laborious human annotation. There have 
been promising results using automatic capture of body 
gestures as cues to deception [5][6], but this method requires 
multiple, high-caliber cameras to capture movements 
reliably. Similarly, the use of brain imaging technologies for 
deception detection is still in its infancy [7] and these require 
the use of MRI techniques, which are not practical for 
general use.  Additional biometric indicators of deception 
such as body odor are beginning to be investigated [8] but 
these studies, like brain imaging, are in very early stages. 
Some researchers and practitioners have examined 
language-based cues to deception. These include Statement 
Analysis [8], SCAN [10][11], and some of the text-based 
signals identified by John Reid and Associates [12]. These 
efforts have been popular among law enforcement and 
military personnel, though little tested scientifically 
(although Bachenko et al. [13] have partially automated and 
validated some features used in Statement Analysis). Other 
lexical cues to deception have been developed and tested 
empirically by Pennebaker and colleagues [14][15] and by 
Hancock et al. [16].  There has also been research focused on 
lexical cues to deception in written online communication 
[17][18]. 
Little work has been done on cues to deception drawn 
from the speech signal. Simple features such as intensity and 
hypothesized vocal tremors have performed poorly in 
objective tests [19][10][21][22], although other features 
examined by Harnsberger et al. [23] and Torres et al. [24] 
have had more success.  In previous work on deception in 
American speech, Hirschberg et al. [25] developed automatic 
deception detection procedures trained on spoken cues and 
tested on unseen data. These procedures have achieved 
accuracies 20% better than human judges. In the process of 
identifying common characteristics of deceivers, they also 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

noticed a range of individual differences in deceptive 
behavior, e.g., some subjects raised their pitch when lying, 
while some lowered it significantly; some tended to laugh 
when deceiving, while others laughed more while telling the 
truth. They also discovered that human judges’ accuracy in 
judging deception could be predicted from their scores on the 
NEO-FFI, suggesting that such simple personality tests 
might also provide useful information in predicting 
individual differences in deceptive behavior itself [26]. 
Differences in verbal deceptive behavior in different 
cultures have been identified by several researchers [27][28]. 
Studies of deceptive behavior in non-Western cultures have 
primarily focused on understanding how culture affects when 
people deceive and what they consider deception [29][30].  
Studies investigating the universality of deceptive behavior 
have found that, while stereotypes may exist [31] these may 
not correlate with actual deceptive behavior [32][33] and that 
culture-specific deception cues do exist [27][28][34]. 
In the work presented here, we investigate both the 
ability to deceive and to detect deception considering gender 
and ethnicity and examining new cues to deception:  features 
extracted from the NEO-FFI personality inventory [1] and 
subjects’ reported confidence in their abilities.   
A. 
Experimental Design 
To investigate questions of individual and cross-cultural 
differences in deception perception and production, we are 
collecting a large corpus of cross-cultural deceptive and non-
deceptive speech. We employ a variant of the ‘fake resume’ 
paradigm to elicit both deceptive and non-deceptive speech 
from native speakers of Standard American English (SAE) 
and Mandarin Chinese (MC), both speaking in English. Each 
conversation in the corpus is between a pair of subjects who 
are not previously acquainted with one another. To date, the 
corpus includes 134 conversations between 268 subjects. 
For the first phase of each session, subjects are separated 
from one another. Each is told that they will play a lying 
game with another subject, in which they will alternate 
between interviewing their partner and being interviewed 
themselves. As interviewees, they should attempt to 
successfully deceive the interviewer. As interviewers, they 
should attempt to determine whether the interviewee is lying 
or telling the truth. For motivation, they are told that their 
compensation depends on their ability to deceive while being 
interviewed, and to judge correctly while interviewing. As 
interviewer, they receive $1 each time they correctly identify 
an interviewee’s answer as either lie or truth and lose $1 for 
each incorrect judgment. As interviewee, they earn $1 each 
time their lie is judged to be true, and lose $1 each time their 
lie is correctly judged to be a lie by the interviewer. 
Subjects are then asked to truthfully complete a 24-item 
biographical questionnaire. In addition to their true answers, 
they are told to create a false answer for a random half of the 
questions. They are given guidelines to ensure that their false 
answer differed significantly from the truth, to ensure that 
lying will not be too easy.  For example, for the question 
“Where were you born,” the false answer must be a place 
that the subject has never visited, a false answer to “What is 
your father’s occupation” must be different from their 
mother’s true occupation, and so on.  Before the interviews 
begin, false answers are checked by an experimenter to make 
sure subjects follow these guidelines.  In addition to the 
biographical questionnaire, each subject completes the NEO-
FFI personality inventory [1], which is described below. 
While one subject is completing the NEO-FFI inventory, 
we collect a 3-4 minute baseline sample of speech from the 
other participant for use in speaker normalization. The 
experimenter elicits natural speech by asking the subject 
open-ended questions (e.g., “What do you like best/worst 
about living in NYC?”). Subjects are instructed to be truthful 
during this part of the experiment. Once both subjects have 
completed all the questionnaires and we have collected 
baseline samples of speech, the lying game begins. 
The lying game takes place in a sound booth where the 
subjects are seated across from each other, separated by a 
curtain so that there is no visual contact; this is necessary 
since our focus is on spoken and not visual cues. There are 
two parts to each session. During the first half, one subject 
acts as the interviewer while the other answers the 
biographical questions, lying for half and telling the truth for 
the other half, based on the modified questionnaire.  In the 
second part of the session, the subjects switch roles.  All 
speech data is collected in a double-walled sound booth in 
the Columbia Speech Lab and recorded to digital audio tape 
on two channels using Crown CM311A Differoid head-worn 
close-talking microphones.  
The interviewer is able to ask the questions in any order 
s/he chooses, and is encouraged to ask follow-up questions 
to help determine the truth of the interviewee’s answers.  For 
each question, the interviewer records his/her judgment, 
along with a confidence score from 1-5. As the interviewee 
answers the questions, s/he presses a T or F key on a 
keyboard (which the interviewer cannot see) for each phrase, 
logging each segment of speech as true or false. Thus, while 
the biographical questionnaire provides the ‘global’ truth 
value for the answer to the question asked, the key log 
provides the ‘local truth’ value for each phrase, which is 
automatically aligned with each speech segment. At the end 
of the experiment, subjects complete a brief questionnaire, 
which includes additional confidence questions. 
B. 
Personality Assessment 
The NEO-FFI personality assessment [1] is based on the 
five-factor model of personality, an empirically-derived and 
comprehensive taxonomy of personality traits. It was 
developed by applying factor analysis to thousands of 
descriptive terms found in a standard English dictionary. It is 
used to assess the five personality dimensions of: 
 
Openness to Experience. Designed to capture imagination, 
aesthetic sensitivity, and intellectual curiosity. It is “related 
to aspects of intelligence, such as divergent thinking, that 
contribute to creativity” [1]. Those who score low on this 
dimension prefer the familiar and tend to behave more 
conventionally. People high in Openness are “willing to 
entertain novel ideas and unconventional values” [1].  
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Conscientiousness. Addresses individual differences in self-
control, such as the ability to control impulses, but also to 
plan and carry out tasks.  It measures contrasts between 
determination, organization, and self-discipline and laxness, 
disorganization, and carelessness. 
Extraversion.   Meant to capture proclivity for interpersonal 
interactions, and variation in sociability. It reflects contrasts 
between those who are reserved vs. outgoing, quiet vs. 
talkative, and active vs. retiring. 
Agreeableness.  Measures interpersonal tendencies and is 
intended to assess an individual’s fundamental altruism.  
Individuals high in Agreeableness are sympathetic to others 
and expect that others feel similarly.  
Neuroticism. 
Contrasts 
emotional 
stability 
with 
maladjustment.  It is intended to capture differences 
between those prone to worry vs. calm, emotional vs. 
unemotional behavior, and vulnerable vs. hardy. 
III. 
ANALYSES AND RESULTS  
Although subjects were instructed to lie in response to 12 
of the questions, 55 out of 268 subjects did not follow these 
instructions, and lied in response to more or fewer than 12 
questions. The following analyses include 126 pairs, those in 
which both subjects lied in response to 10-14 of the 
questions; this restriction ensures that roughly equal amounts 
of truthful and deceptive speech are available for each 
subject.  This subsample consists of 142 native SAE 
participants (88 females, 54 males) and 110 native MC 
participants (69 females, 41 males).  Our eventual goal is a 
corpus balanced for gender and ethnicity, but in this paper 
we present results only on this sample. 
First, we examined how accurately subjects could 
identify deception in their partners during the lying game. 
Prior research indicates that human judges perform worse 
than chance at detecting deception [26][35]. However, in our 
study subjects correctly identified question responses as 
truthful or deceptive at a greater than chance level. They 
were accurate 56.75% of the time (compared to the chance 
baseline of 49.55%). 
To further assess subjects’ accuracy, we explored how 
well subjects detected lies as opposed to truths. To account 
for the different number of lies across subjects, for each 
subject we calculated ratio scores for:  number of successful 
global lies to the number of global lies told (successful lies); 
the number of successful lie detections to the number of 
global lies told (successful lie detections); the number of 
successful truth detections to the number of truths told 
(successful truth detections). Results indicate that people 
successfully deceived their partner 51.83% of the time. 
Deceptive answers were correctly identified 48.16% of the 
time and truthful answers were correctly identified 65.20% 
of the time.  
We investigated whether subjects’ ability to detect 
deception was correlated with their ability to deceive by 
comparing successful lies to successful lie detections. Our 
data indicate that subjects who were better at detecting 
deceptive answers were also better at deceiving, r(252) = 
0.13, p = 0.04. When separated by gender and native 
language, it becomes apparent that this correlation is 
strongest for females, and specifically for SAE females 
(r(157) = 0.24, p = 0.003 and r(88) = 0.29, p = 0.005). We 
note that, for all subjects, those who were better at detecting 
deception were also more likely to label their partners’ 
answers as untrue --- whether or not their partner did indeed 
lie, r(252) = 0.69, p < 0.001. However, female subjects who 
were more likely to label their partners’ answers lies were 
also better at deceiving, r(157) = 0.18, p = 0.02.  
Next, we examined how individual differences in gender, 
culture, personality, and confidence ratings interacted with 
successful deception and deception detection. Independent 
sample t-tests indicated no effect of subjects’ gender or 
native language on their ability to deceive. In addition, 
correlational analyses showed no effect of personality factors 
on subjects’ ability to detect deception.  This latter finding is 
in sharp contrast with Enos et al.’s findings for personality 
differences in success rates of post hoc judges of deception 
[24] and suggests that personality factors may play a more 
important role when non-conversational participants rather 
than those engaged in the conversation are judging 
deception. In contrast, the personality factor of Extraversion 
does correlate with subjects’ ability to deceive and here we 
do find cultural and gender differences: MC females’ success 
positively correlates with Extraversion scores (r(69) = 0.26, p 
= .03) while SAE males’ success negatively correlates with 
their Extraversion scores (r(54) = -0.36, p = .01). 
Furthermore, SAE females’ deception ability negatively 
correlates with their Conscientiousness scores (r(86) = -0.22, 
p = .04). 
For confidence ratings, we also find a gender difference: 
overall, female subjects’ ability to detect deception 
negatively correlates with their average confidence in their 
judgments, r(157) = -0.20, p = 0.01. This did not hold true 
for SAE females examined separately although it did for MC 
females, r(69) = -0.26, p = 0.03.  We hypothesize that 
interviewers who are less confident in their judgments may 
ask more follow-up questions and thus obtain more evidence 
to determine deception.  It will be important to look at 
answer length and number of follow-up questions to test 
these possibilities.  We also found that, for females, average 
confidence in detecting deception negatively correlated with 
Neuroticism, r(155) = -0.16, p = 0.05.  Not surprisingly, 
women who are less “neurotic” are more confident in their 
deception judgments.  We will need to check for similar 
findings for male subjects once we have collected more data. 
Finally, we looked at whether the gender and culture of 
subjects’ partners played a role in deception and deception 
detection. Independent t-tests show no effects so far. 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
Preliminary analysis of a sample of our deceptive speech 
corpus shows some promising results:  We found that 
subjects who are better at detecting lies are also better at 
deceiving others, and that this correlation is stronger for 
females and stronger still for SAE females.  While we have 
not found effects of personality characteristics on our 
subjects’ ability to detect deception, in contrast to Enos et al. 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

[26], we have found that Extraversion and Conscientiousness 
scores correlate with ability to deceive, although the 
direction of this effect differs depending upon gender and 
ethnicity.  We note the difference between the judgment 
tasks in our experiment vs. [26]’s.  Finally, we found that 
MC women showed a negative correlation between 
confidence scores and ability to detect deception while SAE 
women and men in general did not.  In addition, for all 
females, ability to detect deception was negatively correlated 
with Neuroticism.   
     We anticipate that the completion of a balanced corpus 
will clarify and expand some of these findings.  We will also 
finish transcribing our corpus and aligning the transcription 
with the speech recordings so that we can add acoustic, 
prosodic, and lexical cues to gender, ethnicity, and 
personality information for the purpose of building automatic 
classifiers for deceptive vs. non-deceptive speech. 
V. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We thank the following students for their contributions to 
this study:  Zoe Baker-Peng, Ling Huang, Melissa Kaufman-
Gomez, Yvonne Missry, Elizabeth Petitti, Sarah Roth, Molly 
Scott, Jennifer Senior, Grace Ulinski, and Christine Wang. 
This work was partially funded by AFOSR FA9550-11-1-
0120. 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. T. Costa and R. R. McCrae, “Revised NEO personality 
inventory (NEO PI-R) and NEO five-factor inventory (NEO-
FFI).” Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources, 
1992. 
[2] P. Ekman, M. Sullivan, W. Friesen, and K. Scherer, “Face, 
voice, and body in detecting deception,”  Journal of 
Nonverbal Behaviour, vol. 15(2), 1991, pp. 125-135.. 
[3] M. Frank, M. O’Sullivan, and M. Menasco, “Human behavior 
and deception detection,” in J. G. Voeller (Ed.), Wiley 
Handbook of Science and Technology for Homeland Security, 
New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2008. 
[4] J. 
Cohn 
quoted 
in 
http://abcnews.go.com/GMA/ 
HealthyLiving/autism-research-benefit-studying-babies-
facial-recognition-experts/story?id=9244817&page=3, 
12/04/2009. 
[5] T. Qin, J. Burgoon, and J. Nunamaker, “An exploratory study 
on promising cues in deception detection and application of 
decision tree.” Hawaii International Conference on System 
Sciences, 2004, pp. 23-32. 
[6] T. Meservy et al., “Deception Detection through Automatic, 
Unobtrusive Analysis of Nonverbal Behavior.” IEEE 
Intelligent Systems, 20:5 (September 2005), pp. 36-43. 
[7] D. Langleben et al., “Telling truth from lie in individual 
subjects with fast event-related fMRI.” Human Brain 
Mapping, 2005, 26(4): 262-72. 
[8] S. Waterman, “DHS wants to use human body odor as 
biometric identifier, clue to deception,” United Press 
International 
(UPI). 
http://www.upi.com/ 
Top_News/Special/2009/03/09/DHS-wants-to-use-human-
body-odor-as-biometric-identifier-clue-to-deception/UPI-
20121236627329/, 3/9/2009. 
[9] S. Adams, “Statement analysis: What do suspects' words 
really reveal?” FBI Law Enforcement Bulletin, October 1996. 
[10] A. Sapir, “Scientific Content Analysis (SCAN).” Laboratory 
of Scientific Interrogation. Phoenix, AZ, 1987. 
[11] N. Smith, “Reading between the lines: An evaluation of the 
scientific content analysis technique (SCAN),” Police 
Research Series. London, UK, 2001.  
[12] J. E. Reid and Associates, “The Reid Technique of 
Interviewing and Interrogation,” Reid, John E. and 
Associates, Inc., 2000. 
[13] J. 
Bachenko, 
E. 
Fitzpatrick, 
and 
M. 
Schonwetter, 
“Verification 
and 
implementation 
of 
language-based 
deception indicators in civil and criminal,” International 
Conference on Computational Linguistics, vol. 1, Manchester, 
2008, pp. 41-48.  
[14] Pennebaker, M. Francis, and R. Booth, “Linguistic Inquiry 
and Word Count.” Erlbaum Publishers, Mahwah, NJ, 2001. 
[15] M. Newman, J. Pennebaker, D. Berry, and J. Richards, 
“Lying words: Predicting deception from linguistic style.” 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 2003, 29:665-
675. 
[16] J. Hancock, L. Curry, S. Goorha, and M. Woodworth, “On 
lying and being lied to: A linguistic analysis of deception.” 
Discourse Processes, vol. 45, pp. 1-23, 2008. 
[17] L. Zhou and D. Zhang, “Following Linguistic Footprints:  
Automatic Deception Detection in Online Communication.”  
Communications of the ACM, 2008, 51(9): 119-122. 
[18] R. Mihalcea and C. Strapparava, “The lie detector:  
explorations in the automatic recognition of deceptive 
language.” In Proceedings of the ACL-IJCNLP 2009.  
Stroudsburg, PA. 
[19] D. Haddad and R. Ratley,   “Investigation and evaluation of 
voice 
stress 
analysis 
technology.” 
http://www.ncjrs.org/pdffiles1/nij/193832.pdf, March 2002. 
[20] H. Hollien and J. Harnsberger, “Voice stress analyzer 
instrumentation 
evaluation.” 
Technical 
report, 
Counterintelligence Field Activity. 2006. 
[21] H. Hollien, J. Harnsberger, C. Martin, and K Hollien, 
“Evaluation of the NITV CVSA.” Journal of Forensic 
Sciences, vol. 53, pp. 183 – 193, 2006. 
[22] A. Eriksson and F. Lacerda, “Charlatanry in forensic speech 
science:  A problem to be taken seriously.” The International 
Journal of Speech, Language and the Law, vol. 14:2, pp. 169-
193,  2007,  http://www.scribd.com/doc/9673590/Eriksson-
Lacerda-2007. 
[23] J. Harnsberger, H. Hollien, C. Martin, and K. Hollien, “Stress 
and deception in speech: evaluating layered voice analysis.” 
Journal of Forensic Sciences, vol. 54(3), pp. 642-50, 2009. 
[24] J. Torres, E. Moore, and E. Bryant, “A Study of Glottal 
Waveform Features for Deceptive Speech Classification.” 
ICASSP 2008, Las Vegas. 
[25] J. Hirschberg et al., “Distinguishing deceptive from non-
deceptive speech.” Interspeech 2005. Lisbon. 
[26] F. Enos, S. Benus, R.  Cautin, M. Graciarena, J. Hirschberg, 
and E. Shriberg, “Personality factors in human deception 
detection: Comparing human to machine performance.” 
Interspeech 2006. Pittsburgh. 
[27] F. Feldman, “Nonverbal disclosure of deception in urban 
Koreans.” Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, vol. 10, 
1979, pp. 215-221. 
[28] M. Cody, W. Lee, and E. Y. Chao, “Telling lies:  Corellates 
of deception among Chinese.” In J.P. Forgas and J. M. Innes, 
eds. Recent Advances in Social Psychology: An International 
Perscpective, 1989, pp.359-568. 
[29] M. Lapinski and T. Levine, “Culture and information 
manipulation theory: The effects of self-construal and locus of 
benefit on information manipulation.” Communication 
studies, vol. 51(1), 2000, pp.  55-73. 
[30] J. Seiter, J. Bruschke, and C. Bai, “The acceptability of 
deception as a function of perceivers’ culture, deceiver’s 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

intention, and deceiver-deceived relationship.” Western 
Journal of Communication 66(2), 2002, pp.158-180. 
[31] C. Bond and The Global Deception Research Team, “A world 
of lies.” Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, vol. 37(1), 
2006, pp. 60-74. 
[32] A. Vrij and G.  Semin, “Lie experts’ beliefs about nonverbal 
indicators of deception.” Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, vol. 
20(1), 1996, pp. 65-80. 
[33] M. Zuckerman, B. DePaulo, and R. Rosenthal, “Verbal and 
non-verbal communication of deception.” In L. Berkowitz 
(ed.), 
Advances 
in 
Experimental 
Social 
Psychology, 
Academic Press, New York, pp.1-59, 1981. 
[34] R. Feldman,  L. Jenkins, and O. Popoola, “Detection of 
deception in adults and children via facial expressions.”  
Child development, 350-355,1979).   
[35] M. Aamondt and H. Custer,  “Who can best catch a liar?” 
Forensic Examiner 15(1):6-11. 2006. 
 
 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

