Using Ontology and RFID Technology to Develop an Agent-based System for 
Campus-safety Management 
 
Sheng-Tzong Cheng and Jian-Pan Li 
Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering, National Cheng Kung University  
Tainan, Taiwan  
E-mail: stcheng@mail.ncku.edu.tw, keyboard802@hotmail.com 
 
 
Abstract—This study proposes a distributed multiagent system 
combining 
radio-frequency 
identification 
press 
(RFID) 
technology with an ontology for real-time monitoring in 
support of dynamic campus-safety management. Safety 
management on campus typically involves relevant supporting 
measures and manuals, but serious safety-related incidents 
continue to take place on campuses.  The goal of campus 
security should be to identify an incident and resolve it 
effectively and in real time before the incident evolves into an 
actual crisis. Our purpose here is to improve the traceability of 
students involved in campus activities—that is, to identify 
students’ whereabouts throughout the entire school day. When 
an incident occurs, our system will notify the relevant parties 
immediately. In the present study, the agents real-time event 
processing increases their situational awareness and reduces 
the likelihood and the severity of unwanted outcomes.   
Keywords- 
multiagent 
system; 
RFID; 
campus-safety 
management; real-time event processing 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Campuses should provide students with educational 
activities, and safety on campus is fundamental to all 
education. Safety incidents occur year after year, resulting 
in injury to students. To enhance the management of 
campus 
safety, 
schools 
should 
consider 
real-time 
monitoring of the campus environment. In recent years, 
campus-safety issues have garnered considerable attention, 
some of which has taken the form of studies on campus-
safety technology. Many studies have integrated information 
technology into campus-safety management. In [5], the 
authors explored the relationship between communication 
technology and campus safety, and presented some ideas 
about early-warning mechanisms. In [3], the authors 
proposed an intelligent campus-safety tracking system using 
radio-frequency 
identification 
(RFID) 
and 
Zigbee 
technology. In [13], the authors proposed an innovative 
application for RFID systems in special-education schools. 
RFID technology is an important tool in many fields of 
study. In [11], when the RFID tag cost is very small, 
employing the RFID technology yields an improved larger 
expected profit and smaller risk. In [9], the authors 
developed an application system using contactless IC card 
and RFID reader related to the improvement of the campus 
safety protection. RFID middleware is one of the main 
research areas in the field of RFID applications in the near 
future [1]. We have been using agent technology to solve 
RFID middleware overloading problem. Our system uses 
artificial intelligence techniques to learn and automate 
certain processes. Many experts found that characteristics of 
intelligent behavior do not rely on individual agents that can 
be generated. According to researchers in the cognitive 
sciences [2], agents use mechanisms that facilitate 
communication and cooperation. Agents interact with one 
another in networks’ open environments, and in this type of 
scenario, two conditions must be met: first, agents must be 
able to find one another [7]; and second, agents must be able 
to interact with one another. To permit interactions among 
multiple agents [8, 10], designers must give the agents a 
common language and rules. In [4], the authors developed a 
conceptual framework based on multi-agent systems and 
ontology technology in order to create a virtual observatory 
with semantically enriched web services. In [6], the author 
proposed an ontology-based and rule-based relevant 
learning objects discovery. 
The purpose of this paper is to improve the traceability 
of campus-safety management systems on the basis of RFID 
technology and ontology technology. We propose an agent-
based system for tracking students during campus activities, 
thus permitting knowledge of students’ whereabouts 
throughout the entire school day. Our system would help 
school staff monitor many types of situations in schools. 
This paper’s focus is on how to utilize ontology-based 
campus-safety management for multi-agent systems. We 
explore campus-safety management problems associated 
with imported multi-agent systems. Our proposed system 
should strengthen campus safety. This paper is organized as 
follows. Section 2 describes related problems and presents a 
scenario analysis. Section 3 describes the agent-based 
system’s design using ontology and RFID technology. 
Section 4 presents the actual implementation and evaluation 
of the proposed system. The final section presents our 
conclusions.  
II. 
PROBLEM STATEMENTS AND SCENARIO ANALYSIS 
A. Case study 
We discuss campus-safety management at the Tainan 
School of Special Education in Taiwan. According to the 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-273-8
COGNITIVE 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

inspection results regarding to our campus visits, most of 
the students studying in Tainan School of Special Education 
have multiple disabilities. Therefore, we take the situation 
of students with special needs into consideration and let 
them know how we can assure a safe-learning environment. 
In this paper, we first surveyed the whole campus 
environment and some areas where students’ activities take 
place. From our survey, we can understand the students’ 
everyday life at school during the whole school days. We 
then analyzed the findings, paying particular attention to 
student-safety incidents associated with specific areas on the 
school campus. 
B. Problem statements 
The Tainan School of Special Education in the past only 
installed surveillance camera at specific fixed points. 
Students were particularly prone to damage in such 
dangerous areas as restrooms, where the school had installed 
emergency call buttons that maybe could not provide 
immediate assistance. After the occurrence of safety 
incidents on campus, school staff began discussing in greater 
depth various issues related to possible improvements in 
accident-prevention mechanisms. Relying on just one 
specific surveillance camera is difficult to monitor students’ 
activities. If we want to track the current state of the students 
on campus, it is a really difficult task. When school staff 
traced the cause and whole story of the incident, they might 
not reach an accurate conclusion. In this case, school staff 
doesn’t seem to figure this accident out in the meeting hence 
it is inevitable that the similar accident may happen again in 
the future. Once we fail to guarantee a safe campus 
environment where the students’ activities take place, it will 
result in the inefficiency of campus safety protection. If we 
do not really realize the reasons causing dangerous accidents, 
it may result in very serious consequences regarding to the 
maintenance and operation of the follow-up campus safety 
issues. We will find out the potential safety problems, which 
make the maintenance of campus safety and operational 
efficiency too low when we survey a safe-learning 
environment issues in school. 
C. Scenario analysis 
We developed several scenarios regarding campus-
safety management service by using RFID ubiquities 
technology and ontology.  
 
Student-tracking management service  
In the classroom, this service can accurately determine 
student’s identity, while recording students attend status 
information. If students have not yet entered a classroom 
after the start of class, the teacher should immediately 
track the location by using RFID technology of the 
students.   
 
 
Dangerous-area warning service 
When students enter danger zones, the proposed system 
can immediately determine the students’ position and 
identify the pertinent characteristics of real-time 
situations. Then the system can inform guards that 
students are to be removed from the danger zones. 
 
 
Body-temperature monitoring service 
An RFID tag can measure the student's body temperature 
that it can also measure the indoor temperature. Each 
student wears an RFID tag which has an important 
function measuring body temperature on the wrist. When 
students into the classroom after 20 minutes, this service 
can accurately determine student’s identity, and began to 
measure the student’s body temperature up to 5 minutes 
average temperature. 
 
 
Mobility-impairment assistance service 
When mobility-impaired students wear RFID tags into 
the restroom after the system accurately determine the 
student’s identity, the system will start record time of 
students into the restroom. If a student stays in the 
restroom for a long time, the system will automatically 
determine the student in the restroom for unusual events. 
Then this service will inform school staff go to the 
restroom and confirm the status of the students. 
 
 
The school-bus roll-call service 
The school bus is identified through GPS positioning. We 
set up an RFID reader in the school bus. When a student 
goes to school by school bus, he only must access the bus. 
If a student by school bus after school, he only must leave 
the bus. A teacher will connect to RFID reader using 
mobile phone's Bluetooth. Therefore, once there are any 
students fail to catch the bus on time, the only thing that 
the teacher on the school bus has to do is report the 
abnormal situation to the school’s back-end management 
system via 3G mobile phone. 
 
 
Extracurricular-education roll-call service 
The teachers should be able to keep abreast of the 
location and the status of the students during 
extracurricular-education events. Therefore, the teacher 
should use a dynamically configured RFID reader and a 
wireless access point to communicate over wireless 
networks so as to judge students’ status. When a student’s 
RFID tag signal disappears from a monitoring range, the 
system will send a message to teachers’ PDA, and then 
the teachers can find the student according to the 
student’s final position. 
III. 
AGENT-BASED CAMPUS-SAFETY MANAGEMENT 
SYSTEM 
We propose an agent-based system for the management 
of campus safety, and use RFID devices to determine 
students’ identity and location on campus. We also use 
ontology to provide for efficient communication among 
agents. 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-273-8
COGNITIVE 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
A. Analysis of the proposed system 
We have tried to design an agent-based campus-safety 
management (ACSM) system, and in this endeavor, we have 
used RFID technology to solve campus-safety issues. Figure 
1 illustrates our proposed campus-safety information system. 
Part one of this paper discussed deployment of RFID 
systems in campus scenarios, with particular regard to data 
collection and transmission systems. We summarized 
students’ behavior patterns in different types of scenarios. 
These RFID readers can cover a wide range of student 
activities, including off-campus education and recreational 
activities. The gateway interface would be responsible for 
real-time data collection and transmission. In part two, we 
will discuss how our proposed information system 
integrates RFID technology into ACSM systems.  We 
developed the RFID monitoring system to aid students at an 
assisted-living facility during the school day. The system 
displays students’ location and other pertinent information 
via a web interface. The system uses active tags to 
communicate with a number of fixed active readers. The 
early-warning system is a component of real-time 
monitoring and recording of data in a campus environment. 
The early-warning system would involve the transmission 
of automatic alerts and real-time information to appropriate 
personnel. In part three, we will discuss software and 
hardware 
features 
of 
database 
system 
with 
RFID 
middleware. In part four, we will discuss automatic early-
warning information systems, which can alert parents, 
teachers, system administrators, and other school staff of 
potential problems. 
 
B. Multi-layered agent system 
The multi-layered agent system can be observed from 
two perspectives. The first one involves individual agents 
playing their own role, while the second one involves the 
interactions of all agents with one another. If one agent 
requires the assistance of another agent in order to achieve a 
goal, then we can say that a relationship of dependence 
exists between the two agents. Agents need to take requests 
from and communicate the results back to school staff. Our 
aim is to help multiple agents collaborate intelligently and 
effectively with one another, so that they can provide 
immediate assistance to students in campus environments. 
We designed the proposed system on the basis of the multi-
layered agent model shown in Figure 2. We define six types 
of agents, as described in the following bulleted points. 
 
RFID Process Agent (RPA): We have deployed an 
RPA in classrooms, restrooms, bus stops, dangerous 
areas, and off-campus education areas. The RPA is 
responsible for gathering all the information in these 
zones. This agent is deployed in each region. 
Combining an RFID reader with middleware on a 
local PC facilitates the real-time monitoring of  
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Campus-safety information system. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Multi-layered agent system 
students’ temperatures. After collecting information 
about students’ status, the RPA sends the information 
to the event-decision agent (EDA). 
 
Trace Agent (TA): This agent is responsible for 
monitoring the operating status of the RPA. The TA 
will continue to detect whether the RPA is engaged in 
normal operations or not. The TA will report the actual 
situation of the regional RPA to the event-
management agent (EMA) at any time. 
 
Event-decision Agent (EDA): Every region of the 
campus has an EDA. When the EDA receives 
information collected from the RPA, the EDA will be 
responsible 
for 
analyzing 
this 
information 
to 
determine whether the students’ independent behavior 
is normal or abnormal. The EDA will make use of the 
appropriate decision-making mechanism, and at the 
same time inform the responsible units in the region. 
The EDA will process independent events, and will 
then process the results and send them to the EMA. 
 
Event-management Agent (EMA): This agent plays a 
role in coordination and communication with several 
different agents. The EMA will receive all campus 
information from TAs. The EMA is also responsible 
for receiving each region’s EDA decision-making 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-273-8
COGNITIVE 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

event results and for managing all events. The EMA 
will 
notify 
the 
agent-based 
campus-safety 
management interface agent (ACSM-IA) while EMA 
stores event-related information in the database-
management agent (DMA). 
 
Database-management Agent (DMA): The DMA is 
responsible for records all the event process results. 
The DMA also conducts database management and 
provides queries for specific events that match a 
specific criterion. 
 
Agent-based Campus-safety Management Interface 
Agent (ACSM-IA): This agent serves as an interface 
to the ACSM system. 
We have used the model of the block-like representation 
of interactive components [12] (BRIC) to build and simulate 
the behaviors of a multi-layered agent system. We have also 
used the BRIC model to characterize agents’ internal status 
and agent–agent interactions. We will describe agent 
modeling because the internal structure of event-
management agent is more complex than the internal 
structure of other agent types. Figure 3 illustrates the BRIC 
model for the EMA, and TABLE I describes in details the 
agent modeling to the EMA. In the BRIC model described 
in Figure 3, one symbol denotes ‘Input/Output’ representing 
the relationships between agents and their environment 
while the other symbol represents the agent’s internal 
mechanisms and actions. 
 
C. Agent-ontology model for an ACSM system 
It is important for agents to interact with one another on 
campus. In our multi-agent environment, agents need to 
exchange results with one another. We use ontology in order 
to knowledge sharing agents’ establishment of effective 
communication in a multi-layered agent system. For our 
current study, we began the ontology-modeling phase by 
conducting an extensive case analysis of campus scenarios. 
This study proposes a campus knowledge base (CKB) 
design for ontology modeling and implementation. The 
CKB defines a new efficient and flexible resource-ontology 
model able to be immediately applied to multi-agent 
environments. Organization of a hierarchical CKB is 
illustrated in Figure 4. The CKB maintains all campus data 
in semantic storage. These resources are available to agents, 
and can help agents maintain the safety of campus activities. 
The ontology of data collection and transmission supports 
efficient data collection, transmission, and management.  
Events ontology deals with real-time incidents. An event 
must have location information, an event time, agent 
information, 
event-trigger 
factors, 
and 
student 
identifications. Our rules ontology plays a key role in the 
hierarchical architecture of agents’ coordination of accident-
prevention mechanisms and communications with other                        
TABLE I.  
DESCRIPTION OF A BRIC MODEL FOR AN EVENT-
MANAGEMENT AGENT 
P01 Receiving data from an event-decision agent 
P02 Processing data 
P03 Creating an event-management agent based on campus information 
P04 Initiating an event-management agent with log information 
P05 Dispatching an event-management agent to an agent environment 
P06 Receiving requests from a trace agent 
P07 Evaluating requests from a trace agent  
P08 Sending requests to an ACSM-IA agent 
P09 Receiving feedback information from an ACSM-IA agent 
P10 Consolidating feedback information from an ACSM-IA agent 
P11 Sending consolidated feedback to a database-management agent 
P12 Receiving requests from an event-decision agent 
P13 Evaluating an event’s priority 
P14 Sending requests to a database-management agent 
P15 Receiving feedback information from a database-management agent
P16 Evaluating information from all sources 
P17 Sending results to an ACSM-IA agent 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  A BRIC model of an event-management agent 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-273-8
COGNITIVE 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

agents. Environmental ontology deals with the definition of 
the roles and behaviors corresponding to agents in charge of 
executing resource-related tasks. 
IV. 
SYSTEM DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION 
In order to validate the proposed system architecture, we 
tested various scenarios which the students may encounter in 
Tainan School of Special Education. In this paper, we 
discussed the implementation of a system, including 
different scenarios for the subsystems and hardware devices 
and clear demonstration for the proposed system design.  
A. Development environment 
The development environment for the prototype system 
is described below: 
 
Operating Systems: server = Microsoft Windows 
Server; client = Web-based operating system. 
 
Backend Database Server: Microsoft SQL Server. 
 
Application program: Microsoft .NET Framework, 
ASPs (Active Server Pages), PHP (Hypertext 
Preprocessor), J2EE technology stack. 
 
Frontend RFID Middleware Server: Windows Server. 
 
Frontend RFID Application Server: Windows Server. 
 
WiNOC (Wired/Wireless Network Operations Center. 
 
RFID tag: 2.45GHz Active RFID tag. RFID reader: 
2.45 GHz Active RFID reader (shown in Figure 5). 
 
 
Figure 4.  Organization of a hierarchical campus knowledge base 
 
Figure 5.  RFID reader and tag 
  
Figure 6.  RFID system for campus safety  
B. System implementation 
This paper presents an integrated information system 
that real-time monitoring in support of dynamic accident-
prevention mechanisms. Our research in an agent-based 
system is built upon a Java Agent Development (JADE) 
framework. JADE involves a set of agents that execute tasks 
and interact with one another by exchanging messages 
according to FIPA specifications governing the agent 
communication 
language 
(ACL). 
The 
agents 
work 
collectively to achieve common goals in a JADE 
environment. JADE simplifies the implementation of the 
multi-layered agent system through a set of graphical tools 
that supports the deployment phases. The agent platform can 
be distributed across machines and the configuration can be 
controlled via a remote graphical user interface.  The system 
is divided into three parts: remote control, web application 
and RFID middleware server, as shown in Figure 6. 
 
C. Performance evaluation 
We will now present a test scenario for the dangerous-
area warning service. Figure 7 presents a diagram of the 
dangerous-area test architecture. The danger zone size is 
2.5M by 2.5M. When a student from point A into the danger 
zone that the average walking time requires is 4.5 seconds, 
the average running time that a student requires is 1.5 
seconds. When a student from point B into the danger zone 
that the average walking time requires is 4.8 seconds, the 
average running time that a student requires is 1.9 seconds. 
In order to prevent students from entering the danger zone, 
both RFID Reader 1 and RFID Reader 2 can simultaneously 
detect an active tag. We used ten active tags to carry out this 
simulation. The percentage of accurate tag readings is 
illustrated in Figure 8. Figure 9 presents the tag-reading 
response times. 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-273-8
COGNITIVE 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

V. 
CONCLUSION 
Through RFID technology and ontology technology, we 
can transform passive security systems into active security 
systems. When students encounter emergencies, their RFID 
tags can send out a distress message from any corner of a 
campus. Basically, in this paper, we aim to demonstrate the 
feasibility and applicability of utilizing agent-based 
technologies to the special-education students. In summary, 
this research makes the following contributions to 
improving the traceability and the efficiency of campus-
safety management systems. 
 
We proposed a distributed multiagent system 
combining RFID technology with a hierarchical 
campus knowledge base ontology model to 
strengthen real-time monitoring and dynamic 
accident-prevention mechanisms in respect of 
ubiquitous campuses. 
 
We classified students’ behavior patterns regarding 
different types of scenario relationships. 
 
The proposed framework can indeed improve the 
traceability of students throughout the entire school 
day. 
 
Our system can provide both school staff and 
parents with real-time information, helping them 
both respond to the status of students in real time 
and make better decisions in handling independent 
events. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Diagram of the dangerous-area test architecture 
 
Figure 8.  The percentage of accurate tag readings 
 
Figure 9.  Tag-reading response times  
REFERENCES 
[1] I. Abad, C. Cerrada, J. Cerrada, R. Heradio, and E. Valero, 
“Managing RFID Sensors Networks with a General Purpose 
RFID Middleware,” Sensors, 2012, pp. 7719–7737. 
[2] W. Chainbi, “An ontology-based multi-agent system 
conceptual model,” International Journal of Computer 
Applications in Technology, 2008, pp. 35–44. 
[3] Y. Chen, Y. Wang, X. Li, and L. Gao, “The design and 
implementation of intelligent campus security tracking system 
based on RFID and ZigBee,” The Second International 
Conference 
on 
Mechanic 
Automation 
and 
Control 
Engineering, 2011, pp. 1749–1752. 
[4] R. Derakhshan, M. E. Orlowska, and X. Li, “RFID Data 
Management: 
Challenges 
and 
Opportunities,” 
IEEE 
International Conference on RFID, 2007, pp. 175–182. 
[5] G. Gow, T. McGee, D. Townsend, P. Anderson, and S. 
Varnhagen, “Communication technology, emergency alerts, 
and campus safety,” IEEE Technology and Society Magazine, 
2009, pp. 34– 41. 
[6] I. C. Hsu, “Intelligent Discovery for Learning Objects Using 
Semantic Web Technologies,” Educational Technology & 
Society, 2012, pp. 298–312. 
[7] G. H. Lee, S. H. Lee, K. H. Choi, and D. R. Shin, “Design of 
Directory Facilitator for Efficient Agent-Based Service 
Discovery,” The Fourth 
International 
Conference on 
Networked Computing and Advanced Information, 2008, pp. 
286–291. 
[8] A. Leite, R. Girardi, and U. Cavalcante, “An Ontology for 
Multi-Agent Domain and Application Engineering,” The 
IEEE International Conference on Information Reuse and 
Integration, 2008, pp. 98–103. 
[9] T. K. Liu and C.H. Yang, “Design and Implementation of 
Campus Gate Control System Based on RFID,” Proceedings 
of the IEEE Asia-Pacific Services Computing Conference, 
2008, pp. 1406–1411. 
[10] S. Saad, H. Zgaya, and S. Hammadi, “Using an ontology to 
solve the negotiation problems in mobile agent information 
system.,” The IEEE International Conference on Systems, 
Man and Cybernetics, 2008, pp. 3685–3690. 
[11] T.M. Choi, “Coordination and Risk Analysis of VMI Supply 
Chains with RFID Technology,” IEEE Transactions on 
Industrial Informatics, 2011, pp. 497–504. 
[12]  J. Ferber, “Multi-agent systems: An introduction to 
distributed artificial intelligence,” New York: Addison-
Wesley, 1999. 
[13] S. H. Yang and P. A. Hsiung, “Innovative Application of 
RFID Systems to Special Education Schools,” Proceedings of 
the Fifth IEEE International Conference on Networking, 
Architecture, and Storage, 2010, pp. 299–304. 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-273-8
COGNITIVE 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

