 
 
The Visual Consciousness Space: 
A mathematical proof of the irreducibility of consciousness to physical data.  
Iegor Reznikoff  
Département de Philosophie 
Université de Paris Ouest Nanterre 
Paris, France 
e-mail: dominiqueleconte@yahoo.fr 
 
 
Abstract—We show here that what we call ‘visual space of 
consciousness’, the space of what we see, is a specific space 
different from the purely physical one and that its properties 
imply that it cannot be reduced to or deduced from physical 
laws. Some biological points are also briefly considered. The 
arguments are of logical, mathematical and physical character; 
although elementary they require a careful reading (A first 
shorter version of this paper appeared in a hardly accessible 
Journal [1], and presented at the International Congress of 
Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Sciences, in Beijing, 
August 2007). There is no need to define consciousness; we 
only observe some of its properties, namely geometric and 
topological properties of visual consciousness, and show that 
these properties cannot be based on physics only. Now, if a 
part of consciousness cannot be grounded on physics only, it is 
the same for consciousness as a whole and we speak of the 
irreducibility of consciousness to physical data. We do not 
consider philosophical questions or issues; in a simple physical 
and mathematical frame we give a logical proof of this 
irreducibility. Elements for a formal mathematical, logical 
proof are mentioned at the end of the paper. The idea of non 
reducibility of consciousness to physical properties creates a 
theoretical foundation of a new approach to study possibilities 
of contact-less brain-computer interface. 
Keywords-consciousness; vision; physics; reality; continuity; 
logic. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The main purpose of this work is to give a proof of the 
non reducibility of consciousness to physical data. In order 
to treat the problem precisely and have clear definitions we 
essentially limit the question to the visual space i.e., to the 
space we see (when looking at something), so that we need 
not define consciousness. If a part – the visual one – of 
consciousness cannot be founded on physics only, it is the 
same for consciousness as a whole and we speak of the 
irreducibility of consciousness to physical data. In Sections 
II and III, notions of visual space and irreducibility are 
respectively defined; then we study two main properties of 
the visual space, namely its continuity (Section IV) and 
unity (Section VI). Since regarding unity the biological level 
is concerned, this point is briefly discussed (Section VII). 
The last Section gives elements for a formal mathematical 
and logical proof (which is out of the scope of this paper). 
Finally, we conclude with a short historical perspective. The 
strictly scientific approach of this work gives possibly new 
ways to study the contact-less brain and computer interface. 
II. THE CONSCIOUSNESS SPACE 
For a given observer, let A be the space of ‘physical 
reality’ as known by physics, the ‘real’ space of matter with 
what is included in it: moving atoms, particles and waves; 
and let B be the observer’s brain regarded as a space, with 
its physiological and neuronal activity (of course B ⊂ A); 
then let C be the space of the observer’s perceptive 
consciousness: what he sees, hears, touches, etc. considered 
as a space. There are of course further levels of 
consciousness, in particular a witness consciousness: the 
one that sees, hears, etc (not to speak of the thinking one). 
But here we consider only perceptive consciousness, what is 
seen (heard, etc), and, more precisely, the visual space in the 
case of vision (resp. the spaces of what one hears, touches, 
etc. for the other senses). For simplicity and because of its 
obvious geometric appearance, we confine our remarks 
mostly to the visual space, but the same points can be made 
about other spaces of perception (For a very interesting 
approach of consciousness of sound, see [2] and [3]). In 
what follows we will speak of A, B, and C also as being 
respectively the ‘real’ or physical space, the brain space and 
the consciousness space with its visual sub-space. 
Between a part of A – B (elements of A that are not in 
B) and B there is a map, say ƒ, which to physical events in 
this part of A – B, through the perceptive channels, 
associates reactions in the brain space B. For instance, a 
photon flux received by the eyes creates an activity in the 
optical nerve and then in the brain. To this activity at the 
level B corresponds in general a representation in C; let g be 
this correspondence between brain activity and its 
representation (image) in the consciousness space. There is, 
therefore, a correspondence from A to C defined by  
h= g [ƒ]. We have the following diagram (Figure 1). 
If we limit C to perceptive consciousness – as we are 
doing here – we could expect to have g [ƒ(A – B)] = C, but 
this is not the case since we are going to show that there are 
properties of C which do not proceed from properties of A. 
Note that ƒ is not injective, since different points in A 
cannot always be distinguished in B, and even less in C. 
One might discuss, of course, the precise domains of 
definition of ƒ and g – since there are not, for all events in A 
or in B, corresponding reactions or representations in B or 
C,  respectively,  but this is of no importance here.  Also we 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-847-1
COGNITIVE 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Spaces A, B, C as presented in the text. 
 
did not give a precise mathematical definition of the maps 
since it is not even clear what the elements in A, B and of 
course in C are; one should probably rather speak of a map 
between some subsets of A and subsets of C, or even better 
in the language of categories; for an approach of some 
properties of consciousness in terms of categories, see [4] (I 
am thankful to the mathematician G. Choquet who 
mentioned this remarkable work). For sake of simplicity, we 
keep the elementary formulation in the language of set 
theory, also because we shall have a logical approach 
referring to some axioms of set theory. The given 
correspondences f and g are however clear enough to say 
that h gives a representation or an image of the reality A in 
the consciousness space C. For instance: to a subset T of  
A – B, a subset of particles reflecting a flux of photons, is 
associated, through the brain space B, a representation h(T) 
of T, in C, say a table; this table is a representation of 
external physical data (the set of all particles, waves, etc. 
concentrated in the given space we call table). We are going 
to study some properties of the space of such 
representations, what we call the consciousness space C. 
 
Proposition 1. The space C is a specific space in itself, 
different from A and B. 
 
Proof. We have C ≠ A, since the representation of A – B 
in C depends on B (and g), whereas A – B does not. For 
example if B is disturbed or injured, clearly so will be C (for 
instance a person sees two tables or none), while A – B has 
not changed (there is still one table). But also C ≠ B. What 
we see is not the brain, nor the activity of the brain. The 
same arguments show, moreover, that C ∩ A =  and  
C ∩ B = . Stated otherwise, the proposition says that 
the consciousness space is different from the real 
physical space and from the brain space. 
Given an object X in A, we do not see X in itself but 
only the result in C of a physiological and neuronal activity 
in B created by photons coming from X. This is well 
known, but the unconscious identification of h(X) with X, 
of what we see with the material physical world, is so strong 
and so widespread – even for those who have read Kant – 
that it is necessary to restate clearly: there is a proper space 
of consciousness and the picture that one sees is not the 
physical world. It is merely a representation of a set of 
particles and waves in the consciousness space; it does not 
mean, however, that this space is itself a ‘set of particles’: 
this is the point, the visual space is a proper non discrete 
space (see below). 
An interesting question is that of the dimensionality of 
the consciousness space. For the visual space, one usually 
counts three spatial dimensions and three dimensions for 
colours. But we do not see a mixture of three colours; we 
see at least seven colours and their varieties and mixtures 
(For a topological approach of visual and colour spaces, see 
[5], [6], [7]). And what about the dimensions of the spaces 
of what we hear [3], smell or touch? Here, however we do 
not consider this question. 
III. 
ON  IRREDUCIBLE PROPERTIES OF THE 
CONSCIOUSNESS SPACE 
It is clear that the consciousness space has properties 
that are not as such in the physical space: this is the case, for 
instance, for colours, which are indefinable without the 
direct experience of seeing them (a person blind from birth 
can have no idea of what green means, though he might 
associate other feelings with this word). However, although 
the qualities (qualias) of a colour cannot be given 
physically, they do correspond to physical data: a green 
object reflects the light waves with a frequency that we see 
as ‘green’. We say that this property of being green can be 
reduced to physical properties. 
The question then arises whether there are properties of 
the consciousness space that cannot be reduced to real 
physical ones. If so, we speak of irreducible properties. 
IV. CONTINUITY OF THE CONSCIOUSNESS SPACE 
A remarkable property of the visual space (but it is true 
also of other perceptions, although the matter is more 
difficult to formulate) is its continuity. We understand 
continuity in the mathematical sense, but the following 
elementary definition is sufficient here: in the visual space, 
there are no gaps or moving separate points; e.g., an 
ordinary white sheet of paper appears uniformly, 
permanently white and still, for at least a while. In contrast, 
physical reality at the atomic level is essentially discrete, 
non uniform, never motionless, and full of collisions; it 
doesn’t mean that there are holes of energy or whatever, but 
we number atoms, electrons and various particles. With 
modern laser and other technologies, an isolated electron 
can be observed [8], [9], and with the NV (Nitrogen 
Vacancy) nanotechnology it is possible to produce sources 
of isolated photons [10]. Moreover, particles and waves are 
in perpetual movement. Of course, at our macroscopic level, 
we can use a magnifying glass and discover other aspects of 
what our eyes and consciousness did not see before, but the 
image remains continuous; there are no holes in the space of 
visual consciousness. Thus we have the question: how can a 
discrete moving atomic reality be represented in a 
continuous way (both in space and time)? The usual 
explanations about such questions concern the macroscopic 
level of perception. A typical example is given by the 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-847-1
COGNITIVE 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
 
continuous appearance of a discrete pile of stones seen from 
a distance: it seems to be a white continuous spot. The usual 
argument is that the discreteness is too subtle to be 
perceived. The question then arises: to be perceived by 
what? And where? Indeed this gives no explanation at the 
atomic level, since the perceptions are transmitted and 
received (if we remain in a purely physical world) by 
discrete processes of particles and moving waves, 
particularly photons, and charges. How does this produce a 
continuous image, and where does this image appear? 
Certainly not in a physical space of particles, nor in the 
neuronal brain; the neurones transmit physical information 
up to consciousness which produces the continuous image 
we see; this is also a proof that C in no way belongs to the 
physical or brain space, and is a specific space of non-
material, non-physical nature. Something to be perceived 
needs a perceiver and here the perceiver’s visual continuous 
space cannot be reduced to physics because of the argument 
above. If everything were created, transmitted and received 
by physical spaces, it would remain permanently moving 
and discrete. As we say in French, ‘the most beautiful girl in 
the world cannot give more than what she has’: physics 
gives no more than physics. 
 
Proposition 2. The property of continuity of the 
consciousness space C is not reducible to or even 
explainable in terms of physical reality. 
 
Against this statement, there is also the argument that if 
there were holes in the visual space we simply would not 
see them, since we obviously can’t see what we do not 
see (!). The discrete structure therefore cannot be perceived. 
However this argument again supposes that something is 
perceived and already presupposes a perceiver: who is the 
we in the sentence above and who or what is seeing? In such 
answers it is assumed that something (somebody) already 
sees or doesn’t see; and the question remains how, in the 
final analysis, a ‘continuous’ space of vision can exist and 
where it can be located. Since it cannot be based on physics 
only, the conclusion is straightforward: continuity is a 
creation of consciousness. And here we come to a purely 
mathematical and logical consideration: continuity is not 
definable from discreteness and finite considerations, and 
cannot exist in a finite numbered domain. But physical 
reality – in a bounded domain at least – is finite. The 
property of continuity is, therefore, indeed irreducible to any 
physical reality, unless the notion of continuous field be 
introduced, which is a very theoretical and problematic 
notion that we discuss below. 
A. Commentary 
One can discuss whether the property of continuity is 
needed to characterize the visual space; for instance, isn’t 
the property of density sufficient (as for the line of rational 
numbers)? Let us recall that density means that between two 
points there is always a third one. The above irreducibility 
argument remains in force even if we assume density; since 
density implies infinity, even in an interval or bounded 
space; indeed the fact that between two points there is a 
third one implies that between these two there is an infinity 
of points. An absolute proof of the continuity of the visual 
space in the strong mathematical meaning is certainly not 
possible because it requires high technical considerations of 
infinite character – let us recall that the continuity of a space 
implies that its infinity is not countable, which means that it 
is bigger than the infinity of the set of integers (it is said to 
have the power of the continuum). Such considerations are 
purely theoretical and certainly beyond any experience. But 
there is another strong epistemological argument for 
attributing continuity to the visual space. This argument 
comes from answering the question: how did the concepts of 
geometrical (Euclidian) space and precisely of continuity 
appear? How the geometrical line was and is understood to 
be continuous? 
The notions of geometrical space and line appear of 
course in and from our visual space and visual experience 
(connected with that of movement and touch for three-
dimensional awareness). Moreover, all our intuition of space 
geometry in the plane comes essentially from our visual 
space which, as we know, until the discoveries of Relativity 
Theory, was considered in its Euclidian formulation to be 
absolute (from the physical point of view at least). The 
notion of continuity proceeds as well from our visual 
experience, the best notion of a continuous line or surface 
being probably given by a surface of water: there are no 
holes or separations. That a segment of a straight line has 
infinitely many points (because it is dense) is readily 
understood and has been understood since Antiquity as well 
as the (intuitive) continuity of the line. And it is most 
remarkable that children, from visual experience, easily 
understand the notion of a (straight) line as well as its 
potential infinity and its continuity as being with ‘points 
everywhere’ so that there are no holes left. Of course the 
notions of closeness, or of going through are also related to 
our experience of movement and touch, but, finally it is by 
reasoning on the geometric line, which belongs to and 
comes from our visual space (so that it can be drawn), that 
the theory of this geometric line has been worked out. Also 
let us note that in our visual space all (necessary 
macroscopic) movements are continuous: it is impossible to 
join two points without passing somewhere in-between, 
while this is not the case at the atomic quanta level. It is 
therefore quite reasonable to consider that our intuition and 
understanding of the visual space demonstrate it to be a 
continuous space. 
What we said about spatial continuity can be repeated 
concerning the continuity of the visual space in time (and, 
more generally, of perception in time). The visual space 
lasts in a continuous way as does a continuous movement; 
while at the atomic level, in duration, there is no continuity 
at all. However our perception of time is continuous and has 
led to a theoretical treatment of time which identifies it with 
the geometric line (for a study on time based on a distinction 
of physical and mind levels, see [11]). This continuity in 
time is closely related to what appears to be an even more 
remarkable property of consciousness and particularly of the 
visual space, namely its unity (see below, Section VI). 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-847-1
COGNITIVE 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
 
B. The consciousness space as a field 
The only physical approach to continuity is given by the 
notion of field. For instance, an electromagnetic or 
gravitational field is assumed to be defined and active 
everywhere in the physical domain where it acts, and this 
everywhere is understood to be continuous since the space 
where the field is active is mathematically considered to be 
the three-dimensional space R3. This is a purely 
mathematical and theoretical formulation: we can only 
verify that the field acts on every particle or object 
appearing in the domain, and experience can show no more. 
But to assume continuity and R3 allows us to use the 
mathematical infinitesimal calculus with all its tremendous 
power. However, we claim, after the discussion above, that 
this geometrical approach is a creation of consciousness and 
particularly of consciousness of the visual space, since there 
is no other evidence for such a geometrical and topological 
continuous conception. It is not and cannot be given by 
direct physical experience which is finite. For us, therefore, 
this geometry is not in A, but in C, and then induced from C 
to the theoretical, mathematical treatment by using the space 
R3 containing a theoretical model of A. 
But since this notion of continuous field actually exists 
in physics – be it created by and conceived from visual 
consciousness – we may say that consciousness is indeed a 
field. And just as a movement of electrons creates an 
electromagnetic field, we may conjecture that intense brain 
activity – of purely physical character at the atomic level of 
particles and waves – creates a field of consciousness: the 
greater the brain activity, the richer the field of 
consciousness. This field is, of course, not physical, since 
A ∩ C =  as we have seen, the space C being a specific 
one. Nor it is simply reducible to a known physical field, 
since in visual consciousness, we can isolate forms, colours, 
objects, etc., while even if there are different wave lengths, 
etc. in physical fields, it is consciousness that extracts the 
mentioned properties or elements from the visual space we 
see. There is nothing analogous or even expressible 
concerning physical fields. The property of seeing separate 
objects in the unity of the whole visual picture corresponds 
to the Comprehension Axiom of set theory: given a set E and 
a property P, the subset of elements of E verifying the 
property P, exists. It cannot be deduced from physics. It 
seems to be a fundamental property of consciousness related 
to the a priori capacity of consciousness to pay attention. 
Moreover, 
if 
we 
consider 
the 
whole 
perceptive 
consciousness, there is no homogeneity between visual 
pictures, acoustic perception or touch. 
If we consider the spaces of what we see, hear, smell, 
taste or touch, as different subspaces of the whole 
consciousness space, the non-homogeneity of these 
subspaces is a quite peculiar fact, bearing in mind that they 
are all produced by the same kind of neuronal activity, since 
there seems to be no difference between the neurones of 
different perception areas in the brain. How can the same 
kind of neuronal activity produce such different worlds of 
perception? This question could yield another proof of the 
irreducibility of the consciousness space to the physical one. 
Of course the scales of various physical data producing the 
perceptions are quite different e.g., the scales of light waves, 
molecules (for the smell) or sound waves, but this does not 
explain the complete non-homogeneity of the corresponding 
subspaces of consciousness, whereas they are held together 
in a remarkable unity: I smell the rose that I see. This is a 
specific property of consciousness. 
But since the emergence of space consciousness comes 
mostly from an intense brain activity of quantum 
electromagnetic nature, the relationship between such a field 
and the field of consciousness has to be investigated not 
only for isolated phenomena (for instance the fact that 
different frequencies of light produce different colours in 
the visual consciousness) but in the whole. Why would not a 
special intense physical activity – in the brain – create a 
field of different – non-physical – nature? Clearly, the 
intermediate biological level appears as an essential one. 
V. THE OBJECTIVITY OF THE CONSCIOUSNESS SPACE C 
A peculiarity of the consciousness space is that it can be 
studied essentially only from inside, by itself: only 
consciousness knows consciousness. And “if you want to 
know my consciousness, look in yours” sounds as a wise 
saying. Thus we come to this important statement: 
 
Proposition 3. The properties of C can be seen by 
everybody: its study is therefore perfectly objective. 
 
Note that here the word objective has the same meaning 
as in natural sciences, e.g., physics, since everything we 
know is known from our perceptive consciousness, and 
everything we look at – for instance the position of a needle 
in a measuring apparatus – is seen in our visual 
consciousness, that is in C. If two persons see the same 
object (the needle at a given position) it is because it is the 
‘same’ object in their respective visual spaces. Although the 
meaning of the word same cannot be explained; this 
meaning is based on a universal understanding without 
which no communication would be possible. Here, appears 
the common but meaningless question whether we all really 
see the same colours or objects: is the red that I see the same 
as the one you see? The question is meaningless because it 
cannot be verified, but the simpler the hypothesis, the better 
it is, and the simplest is to consider that indeed we have 
essentially the same consciousness. But as mentioned 
above, philosophical discussions are not considered here. 
VI.  UNITY OF THE VISUAL CONSCIOUSNESS SPACE 
One of the most remarkable properties of consciousness 
space – and moreover difficult to understand – is its unity, 
that is the capacity that consciousness has to gather 
perceptions as a whole; from a multiplicity of independent 
nervous impulses and neuronal processes consciousness 
produces a unified whole. We do not have consciousness of 
separated elements, but always of a coherent whole, even 
when looking at an isolated object. 
This unity principle is the following: given separate 
elements x1, …, xn, it is the actual capacity to conceive their 
totality i.e. the set {x1, …, xn}. It is remarkable that this 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-847-1
COGNITIVE 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
 
corresponds to an axiom of set theory; logically this 
property is not reducible. It cannot be deduced simply from 
the existence of x1, …, xn as separate elements. Therefore, it 
is not physically explicable, unless of course it is implicitly 
assumed (which is often the case, for instance when one 
assumes that things are somehow and somewhere 
‘observed’ before any consciousness has been introduced). 
In particular, the argument that unity results simply from the 
simultaneity of neuronal processes in some centre of the 
brain is doubly inconsistent. First because the notion of 
simultaneity is meaningless without the notion of now or the 
notion of at the same time as, which presupposes a reference 
and a clock and therefore an observer, i.e. a consciousness 
that grasps this simultaneity, this very notion introduces 
already an observer, it is not an absolute notion. And the 
second inconsistency is that simultaneity presupposes 
certainly the comparison of at least two elements and hence 
the notion of totality, be it only of the set {x1, x2} as a 
whole. Therefore, to have the notion of simultaneity we 
already need that of unity; it is impossible to avoid 
circularity. The simultaneity of physical events is perhaps 
necessary for consciousness of unity but not sufficient to 
explain it. 
But even if the notion of simultaneity is given, the 
probability that all the possible visible ‘dots’ of our visual 
neurology (e.g., retina) are grasped together in a coherent 
unity (their number can be estimated of the order of 107), 
this probability is of order of 2       (2 to the power of 10 to 
the power 7), which is well beyond any physical meaning 
even at the level of light-wave length. Unity cannot emerge 
‘by chance’; moreover, it is permanent, continuous in time. 
The probability for this continuing unity is physically 
without meaning. 
This capacity of totalization, this gift of perceptive 
consciousness, is certainly one of its most important 
properties and unity may be the most characteristic property 
of consciousness. Consciousness unifies elements that 
otherwise are not related; from this comes what is called 
meaning. But we are not discussing this here any further. 
As we have seen, the unity principle has, of course, no 
equivalent in physics; theoretically, it has to be borrowed 
from logic. The property of unity, say of visual 
consciousness and of the space C, is thus irreducible. 
 
Proposition 4. The unity of consciousness is not 
reducible to physical properties. 
 
The question then arises how far logical arguments can 
be used in physics, biology and matters of consciousness. 
But if one looks at a deductive science, rigorously founded, 
the logical and mathematical arguments are hitherto 
unavoidable. Of course a science can be very rich as a 
descriptive one, but the claim is now: is it possible to 
‘explain consciousness’ by neuronal and finally from purely 
physical processes? Since in our attempt, explain means 
deduce or reduce, the argument needs to avoid circularity, 
therefore a careful logical examination is needed, which we 
have attempted above: the unity of the visual space cannot 
be reduced to or explained by physics without circularity 
since a notion of unity is needed beforehand. 
VII. BIOLOGICAL UNITY 
If at some level the property of unity is needed and has 
to be introduced as such, then, it could be given already at a 
different level. It is natural to assume this unity, as we have 
seen, 
as 
one 
of 
the 
characteristic 
properties 
of 
consciousness, but it could be attributed already at the 
biological level. One often speaks of the ‘unity of the cell’. 
Is it not at this elementary biological level that a principle of 
irreducible unity has to appear? 
That such unity is necessary as a global principle in 
biology is simply shown by the same argument as the one 
given for the impossibility of a random unity of the visual 
space. Suppose a biological organism of about 109 (of about 
10 to the power of 9) components (e.g., molecules); the 
probability that all these components should behave 
together in the right way in order to constitute a biologically 
viable unity, this probability is at least of the order of  
2       (2 to the power of 10 to the power of 9), which is, as 
we have seen before, beyond any physical meaning even at 
the atomic level: the age of the universe would not be 
sufficient for even one cell to have a chance to exist, not to 
speak of a more complex organism. 
However, even if a biological property should normally 
appear and be stated before properties of consciousness (and 
moreover could explain some of its aspects), we have a 
knowledge of the visual space, of its continuity and unity, 
certainly clearer, at least in its immediacy, than an as yet 
unformulated principle of unity in biology. 
 
VIII. FORMAL APPROACH 
For a formal, strictly deductive logical approach, we 
need different levels of axioms, laws and data, so that the 
following levels have to be distinguished. 
1. The Logical level needed for mathematics. This 
introduces axioms e.g., the Axiom of Totality: given 
x1, …, xn the set {x1, …, xn} exists. The 
Comprehension Axiom: given a set E and a 
property P, the subset of elements of E verifying 
the property P, exists. And finally an Axiom of 
Infinity. 
2. The Mathematical level: theory of Real Numbers 
and Analysis. Logical axioms are intended for 
mathematical notions and reasoning. 
3. The Physical level with its proper axioms and laws. 
The notions of continuity etc. are borrowed from 
the level 2. 
4. The Biological level (this level is not really needed 
here). 
5. The Consciousness level. 
 
It is important to stress that we need not define 
consciousness (which would be a big challenge since 
consciousness is irreducible to other levels); we only 
observe some properties of visual consciousness, i.e. of 
(109 ) 
(107 ) 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-847-1
COGNITIVE 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
 
what we see. But 
for continuity, unity 
and 
consciousness of seeing various objects, we need 
axioms analogous to the axioms above; these axioms 
are necessary to explain the mentioned properties of the 
visual space, and necessary for a deductive construction 
showing rigorously the irreducibility of consciousness 
to other levels. Since these axioms are not given by 
physics, clearly the level of consciousness is not at the 
physical level and cannot be deduced from physics. The 
careful scientific approach presented here may open 
new possibilities for studies concerning a contact-less 
brain and computer interface [18]. 
IX. CONCLUSION 
That consciousness space is relatively independent from 
external physical reality is a classical statement. For Plato, 
Consciousness precedes Matter (as we learn from the 
Timaeus, 34c), the same for Indian classical religious 
philosophy; Kant’s thoughts on this topic are well known 
(Kritik der reinen Vernunft), but it is worth quoting 
Berkeley: “The proper objects of sight not without the mind; 
nor the images of anything without the mind” and also 
“Images in the eye are not pictures of external objects” [12]. 
Here, we have simply shown that this relative independence 
of the consciousness space and its specific nature can be 
proved convincingly.  
REFERENCES 
[1] I. Reznikoff, “The consciousness space,” Bio-Math, tome 
XXXX (n° 158), Paris, pp. 1-7, 2003. 
[2] R. Casati and J. Dokic, La Philosophie du Son, Nîmes 
(France), 1994. 
[3] I. 
Reznikoff, 
“On 
primitive 
elements 
of 
musical 
meaning,” http://www.musicandmeaning.net/issues/showArtic
le.php?artID=3.2, 2005. 
[4] A. Ehresmann, http://perso.wanadoo.fr/ vbm-ehr/.  
[5] C. Pélissier, Aspects physico-mathématiques de la vision de la 
couleur, Thèse de Doctorat d’Etat, Université Paris VI, 1982.  
[6] C. Pélissier, “Théorie unifiée de Young – Helmoltz – Hering, 
topologie induite, phénomènes d’adaptation, notion de temps 
et d’énergie” in Actes du 5e Congrès de l’Association 
Internationale de la Couleur, Mondial Couleur, Monte-Carlo, 
1985. 
[7] C. Pélissier, Couleurs et Temps, de la Physique à la 
Phénoménologie, Paris, 2006. 
[8] D. Wineland et al., Phys. Rev. Lett., 31, 1279, 1973. 
[9] A. Aspect et al., Phys. Rev. Lett, 49, 91, 1982.  
[10] S. Gleyzes, S. Kuhr, C. Guerlin, J. Bernu, S. Deleglise, U. 
Busk Hoff, M. Brune, J-M. Raimond, S. Haroche, “Quantum 
jumps of light recording birth and death of a photon in a 
cavity,” Nature, vol.446, pp. 297-300, 2007. 
[11] I. Reznikoff, “On a realistic and discrete approach to physical 
time,” HAL open archives, hal-03191083, v1, 2021. 
[12] G. Berkeley, Essay towards a New Theory of Vision, 
contents: 43 and 117, 1709. 
Related works: 
[13] J. Levine, “Materialism and qualia: the explanatory gap,” 
Pacific Philosophical Review, 64, pp. 354-361, 1983. 
[14] B. A. Wallace, The taboo of Subjectivity: Toward a New 
Science of Consciousness, Oxford: Oxford, 2000. 
[15] B. L. Lancaster, “On the relationship between cognitive 
models and spiritual maps,” Journal of Consciousness Studies, 
7 (11-12), pp. 231-250, 2000. 
[16] J. Levine, Purple Haze: The Puzzle of Consciousness, Oxford: 
Oxford, 2001. 
[17] J. McFadden, “Synchronous firing and its influence on the 
brain’s electromagnetic field,” Journal of Consciousness 
Studies, 9, pp. 23-50, 2002. 
[18] I. V. Danilov, "Primary Data Entry", COGNITIVE 2021 (this 
volume). 
 
 
 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-847-1
COGNITIVE 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

