Inducing models of vehicular trafﬁc complex vague concepts
by interaction with domain experts
Paweł Gora
Faculty of Mathematics, Computer Science and Mechanics
University of Warsaw
Warsaw, Poland
Email: pawelg@mimuw.edu.pl
Piotr Wasilewski
Faculty of Mathematics, Computer Science and Mechanics
University of Warsaw
Warsaw, Poland
Email: piotr@mimuw.edu.pl
Abstract—In the paper, we outline our research on obtaining
domain knowledge related to vehicular trafﬁc in cities using
interaction with experts. The goal of acquiring such knowledge
is to construct hierarchical domain oriented classiﬁers for
approximation of complex vague concepts related to the road
trafﬁc. Interaction with experts in construction of hierarchical
classiﬁers is supported by the software for agent-based simula-
tion of vehicular trafﬁc in cities, Trafﬁc Simulation Framework,
developed by the ﬁrst author.
Keywords-vehicular trafﬁc; interaction with expert; complex
vague concepts; perception based computing;
I. INTRODUCTION
Vehicular trafﬁc in cities is a complex phenomenon, which
has a signiﬁcant impact on environment and life of many
people. Understanding the phenomenon and learning how
to control it is a very important task.
One of the main objectives of our research is to de-
tect trafﬁc jam patterns from low level data using domain
knowledge. We propose to support the searching process by
interaction with domain experts ([2]). This can be done by
acquiring from experts the relevant concepts, e.g. trafﬁc jam,
trafﬁc congestion, trafﬁc jam formation, and next by making
it ”understandable” to the system using classiﬁers. The key
issue here is how to dialogize with experts.
In this research, we focus on a single basic trafﬁc concept
- trafﬁc congestion on a single crossroad - and we elaborate
methods for approximating this concept from sensory data.
Sensory data come from simulating trafﬁc using the Trafﬁc
Simulation Framework software [6], [7], [8]. Data from the
software may slightly differ from real-world trafﬁc data
(which are very difﬁcult to obtain), but are conﬁrmed to
be quite realistic [9], enough to conduct our research and
get meaningful results. These data will be used to construct
hierarchical classiﬁers based on rough set methods [2], [16],
[22], which will approximate the concept of a trafﬁc jam on a
single crossroad. The concept is complex, vague and seman-
tically distant from sensory data, so it is difﬁcult to construct
such classiﬁers explicitly. Classiﬁers constructed using uni-
versal methods (independent on domain knowledge) were
not able to approximate such complex trafﬁc concepts with
satisfactory accuracy. It is necessary to construct domain
oriented classiﬁers [2]. However, it is not clear how to obtain
domain knowledge related to such complex phenomenon as
trafﬁc jam and it motivates research presented in the paper.
The paper has the following organization. In Section II
we present the idea of interaction with domain experts and
explain why it is important in the contemporary machine
learning and data mining, particularly in acquiring domain
knowledge about complex processes as vehicular trafﬁc in
cities. In Section III, we argue that vehicular trafﬁc should
be considered as a complex system and its understanding
and modeling is a difﬁcult task. Section IV outlines past
approaches to trafﬁc modeling, recent approaches based on
probabilistic cellular automatons and the model developed
and implemented by the ﬁrst author of the paper. Section
V presents our methodology in details: the procedure of
dialogizing with domain experts, design of our experiments
and expert decisions evaluation. In this section, we also
present values of parameters that are used in our trafﬁc
simulations.
II. INTERACTION WITH DOMAIN EXPERTS
Contemporary machine learning faces a couple of big
challenges. One of them is the problem of data mining
(DM) and knowledge discovery in databases (KDD) with dy-
namically evolving complex data (e.g. stream data sources,
sensory data). Another challenge for machine learning is a
growth of size and complexity of data sources (e.g. Web
sources, neuro-imaging data, data from network interac-
tions). These challenges, in particular, discovery of complex
concepts, hardly can be met by classical methods [19]. They
can be met by KDD systems dialogizing with experts or
users (e.g. interview with V. Vapnik [29]) or by adaptive
learning systems changing themselves during the learning
process as the response to evolving data. Another challenge
comes from a ﬁeld of multi-agent systems. Behavior steering
and coordination of multi-agent coalitions acting and cooper-
ating in open, unpredictable environments call for interactive
algorithms, i.e. algorithms interacting with the environment
during performing particular steps of computation or chang-
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-273-8
COGNITIVE 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

ing themselves during the process of computation. All of
these challenges are present in a domain of trafﬁc control
and modeling and can be approached using Perception Based
Computing paradigm [25], [26], [27].
Coordination and control are essentially perception based.
We understand perception as a process of interpreting sen-
sory data. In the case of road trafﬁc, sensory data can be
acquired from trafﬁc control systems as well as from trafﬁc
simulators. A crucial issue is how to apply such lower-level
data to reason about satisﬁability of complex vague concepts
including complex spatio-temporal concepts as the concept
of a trafﬁc jam or trafﬁc congestion leading to a trafﬁc jam.
Complex vague concepts can be used as guards for actions
or invariants to be preserved by agents. Such reasoning is
often referred as adaptive judgment [10]. Vague concepts
can be approximated on the basis of sensory attributes
rather than deﬁned precisely. Approximations usually need
to be induced by using hierarchical modeling. Unfortunately,
discovery of structures for hierarchical modeling is still a
challenge. On the other hand, it is often possible to acquire
or approximate them from domain knowledge. Given appro-
priate hierarchical structures, it becomes feasible to perform
adaptive judgment [10], starting from sensory measurements
and ending with conclusions about satisﬁability degrees of
vague target guards.
III. VEHICULAR TRAFFIC AS A COMPLEX SYSTEM
Vehicular trafﬁc in cities may be considered as a complex
dynamic system, which consists of hundreds of thousands
independent agents (cars), which drive in the road network
realizing a speciﬁc goal. This goal is usually reaching a
destination point located somewhere in the road network,
fulﬁlling some additional conditions, e.g. minimizing travel
time, fuel consumption etc., and following the rules of drive.
Agents interact with each other since they use the same
road network. This interaction may be purpose of exhibiting
new properties of the trafﬁc, such as formation of trafﬁc
jams. This property is not obvious from the properties of
individual agents (cars) and it is very difﬁcult to predict
this phenomenon in advance (e.g. 5 − 10 minutes before
jamming) and to prevent it. In order to ensure collision-free
drive of cars, trafﬁc engineers introduce mechanisms, e.g.
trafﬁc control systems such as trafﬁc signals at crossroads,
which control drive of cars and optimize the trafﬁc.
Despite many years of extensive research, it is still
difﬁcult and challenging task to model the trafﬁc in cities
properly and with satisfactory accuracy using standard math-
ematical tools or computer simulations. In addition, the
phenomenon may be even more complex and difﬁcult if we
assume, that drivers know the real state of the current trafﬁc
and choose their routes adaptively. Similarly, it is possible
that the trafﬁc control system adapts to the trafﬁc in order to
optimize it, which makes the trafﬁc prediction and modeling
even more complex. In this kind of complex processes, often
the only possible way to model and analyze the process is
by making a computer simulation.
IV. MODELING AND SIMULATING VEHICULAR TRAFFIC
A. Early models
From few decades scientists and trafﬁc engineers have
been working on modeling and better understanding the
vehicular trafﬁc. They created complex mathematical mod-
els, often based on analogies to other real physical phe-
nomenons. For example, some interesting results were ob-
tained by investigating analogy of the vehicular trafﬁc to
ﬂuid dynamics. However, trafﬁc ﬂow is signiﬁcantly dif-
ferent phenomenon, it consists of several substreams, cars
have their own start and destination points [12], [23]. There
were also approaches to model the trafﬁc using analogies
to the kinetic gas theory [20]. These macroscopic models
were not able to model the real trafﬁc with satisfactory
accuracy. The reason was that they did not take into account
local interactions between agents (cars), which are crucial
properties of the road trafﬁc.
One of the considered approaches to solve the problem
was introducing microscopic models, in which agents (cars)
and their interactions were described by mathematical equa-
tions, for example Car-following models were based on
analogy to Newton dynamics equations [23].
B. Models based on cellular automatons
An important progress in modeling vehicular trafﬁc in
cities was made by introducing trafﬁc simulation models
based on probabilistic cellular automatons. An example of
such model is a Nagel-Schreckenberg model (Na-Sch model)
[13], [24], which emulates a freeway trafﬁc. Space, time and
velocities in the model are discrete, the road is divided into
cells, which may be empty or occupied by at least one car,
cars motion is deﬁned by properly selected rules. The model
was broadly investigated and generalized, e.g. to simulate 2-
lane trafﬁc ([21], [14]) or simple crossroads [4].
C. TSF model and software
The Na-Sch model was also used as a base model for a
new trafﬁc simulation model developed by the ﬁrst author of
the paper (P. Gora, [6], [8]). The model extends the standard
Na-Sch model and enables conducting simulations on a
realistic road network, structuralized as a directed graph.
The model takes into account, e.g. driver’s proﬁle, road’s
proﬁle, trafﬁc signals, distributions of start and destination
points.
The TSF model was later implemented in an advanced
software for simulating vehicular trafﬁc in cities, Trafﬁc
Simulation Framework. The main window of the software
is presented in the Figure 1.
The software uses maps taken from the OpenStreetMap
project ([15]) and currently it is able to simulate the trafﬁc
in Warsaw. It was conﬁrmed by Warsaw citizens that the
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-273-8
COGNITIVE 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Figure 1.
Trafﬁc Simulation Framework - the main window of the
application
software can reproduce trafﬁc jams in the same places as
they occur in reality. The software is still being developed,
its functionality was described in papers [6], [8]. TSF has
been already used, e.g. for generating data for the IEEE
ICDM 2010 contest [9], [28] and is used by scientists
from few countries. The TSF software will be also used
for simulating the trafﬁc and interaction with experts. It
possesses a multifunctional Graphical User Interface, which
can be used to present simulations to experts and acquiring
their knowledge about the simulated trafﬁc.
V. METHOD
Trafﬁc is a very complex phenomenon and many high
level concepts related to that phenomenon are complex and
vague and we do not know how to deﬁne it mathematically
(also it may depend on many factors such as a type of
crossroad, city etc.). However, human brain can recognize
such concepts much better. Experts who often drive by cars
and stay in trafﬁc jams are able to recognize the trafﬁc
situation easily by observing the trafﬁc for some period (e.g.
10 minutes).
In this research, we will acquire such domain knowledge
by interaction with experts. We will show short (2-minutes
long) movies, presenting simulated trafﬁc, to domain ex-
perts. After watching the movie, experts will have to decide
what was the state of the trafﬁc. We will also have low
level data related to presented trafﬁc situations. Based on
the expert domain knowledge and these sensory data, it will
be possible to construct hierarchical classiﬁers (e.g. using
rough sets methods [2]) that will approximate the concept
of a trafﬁc jam on a given crossroad and extract trafﬁc jams
formation models.
Hierarchical classiﬁers are examples of classiﬁers which
are decision algorithms that map objects to decisions [1],
[3]. Objects could be described by low-level numerical or
symbolical attributes. Decisions, in many cases, are vague,
complex concepts, which are semantically distant from orig-
inal low-level data. Hierarchical classiﬁers could be viewed
as tools to cover that distance by approximating complex,
vague concepts, using low-level data. In such classiﬁers
the classiﬁcation process goes from input data to decisions
through at least few hierarchy levels, from lower data levels
to higher, more abstract, complex concept levels. Objects
and/or attributes on higher levels are constructed based on
objects and/or attributes from lower levels [26], [27]. This
process may be supported by domain knowledge, given e.g.
in the form of ontologies. To cover the semantic distance,
training sets can be constructed with experts support. De-
cisions could be also complex, temporal or spatio-temporal
objects as automated planning of complex objects behaviour,
e.g. safe diriving through a crossroad or medical diagnosis,
see [2].
In case of our hierarchical classiﬁer, approximating the
trafﬁc congestion concept, low-level data, such as number of
cars, car’s position, current car’s speed, will be taken from
our trafﬁc simulator ([6], [8]), and decisions will be taken
from experts by mean of a dialog. In our trafﬁc congestion
hierarchical classiﬁer, objects and attributes from consec-
utive hierarchy levels will be constructed by information
systems, decision tables and decision rules taken from the
rough set theory [16], [17], [18] as it was done in [2].
This section describes construction of a trafﬁc congestion
training set.
A. Dialog procedure
In this research, we focus on a single crossroad in order
to obtain domain knowledge about the trafﬁc congestion
and presence of a trafﬁc jam near that crossroad during
a given trafﬁc situation, which corresponds to 10 minutes
of simulation. This will be done by a dialog with domain
experts.
We will conduct some number of simulations using the
Trafﬁc Simulation Framework and we will refer to them
as trafﬁc situations or simply situations. For the purpose
of the paper we assume to conduct 51 simulations (the
proper number should be also subject of further research
and experiments). Every situation will last 10 minutes and
be run with different parameters, such as:
1) number of cars,
2) start and destination points distributions,
3) initial conﬁguration of trafﬁc lights on a given cross-
road.
We selected values of all important simulation parameters
in our past research and experiments. These values are
presented in the section V-B.
Every situation will be “recorded” - Trafﬁc Simulation
Framework will log information about positions and veloci-
ties of cars during the simulation in order to read it later and
show the same trafﬁc situation to experts using Graphical
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-273-8
COGNITIVE 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

User Interface of our software. The following information
will be logged to the output ﬁle:
• Timestamp (simulation step),
• Car positions (link in the road network, position within
the link, geographical longitude and latitude),
• Current car’s speed (in km/h).
This logged information enabled reconstruction of the situ-
ation, which will be shown as a movie to experts.
We assume that duration of a single phase of trafﬁc lights
is constant and lasts 2 minutes for every trafﬁc signal, so
every 10-minutes long situation will consist of 5 parts, each
of which will last 2 minutes and will correspond to 1 phase
of a trafﬁc light. To these situation parts we will refer simply
as phases.
We divided logs from our 10-minutes long simulations,
so it will be possible to show to domain experts 2-minutes
long phases separately. Totally, it will give us 255 phases,
which lasts 2 minutes each.
Each of 51 situations will be evaluated by domain experts
and their task will be to provide information about a trafﬁc
state in the area close to the crossroad during every 2-
minutes long part of the simulation. In our case (vehicular
trafﬁc in cities) a domain expert may be any person who has
experience with the city trafﬁc, the most preferable should
be drivers, which use road networks in Warsaw often and
have to cope with trafﬁc jams.
1 of 51 situations will be analyzed by all experts, while
every situation from the rest 50 will be analyzed by 3 experts
giving 50×3 situation evaluations. Every expert will analyze
1 situations: 1 common to all experts and 2 taken from the
rest 50. Therefore, we will construct 150 / 2 = 75 different
tests, one for each expert, so we will need 75 experts. In
every test each 10-minutes long situation will be divided into
2-minutes long phases. Thus, every test will be constructed
from 15 phases (2-minutes long movies). Additionally, from
every situation two phases will be randomly selected to be
presented and labeled by experts twice. Therefore, every test
will consist of 21 phases presented to the expert in a random
order. Experts will not be informed that some of this phases
are repeated in a test. After a presentation of a particular
movie, the question will be displayed: What was the trafﬁc
congestion?, and experts will answer the question with one
of ﬁve possible answers: Small, Medium, Large, Trafﬁc jam,
I don’t know. The answer will be provided using the window
presented in the Figure 2 which will be shown after every
movie.
In the next step, the system will ask experts for the
response justiﬁcation, which they can provide in natural
language using the window presented in the Figure 3.
If the user selects I don’t know response in the ﬁrst
window, the system will ask for checking two closest
options from other options available in the window which
is presented in the Figure 4.
Figure 2.
Window that will be shown to experts after every movie
Figure 3.
Window to justify the response
After checking the answers and submitting justiﬁcations,
the next movie will be presented to the expert.
B. Conducting experiments
In our research we will examine the area close to the in-
tersection of streets Banacha, Gr´ojecka, Bitwy Warszawskiej
1920 in Warsaw, which are very close to our Faculty and
this crossroad is a place were large trafﬁc congestion occurs
very often. The area under investigation is presented in the
Figure 5.
We prepared 51 trafﬁc simulation scenarios, each of which
will be run using the TSF software producing 51 trafﬁc
situations. Every situation lasts 10 minutes and will be run
using simulation parameters presented in the table V-B.
These parameters were selected based on our preliminary
experiments.
Simulations differ in distributions of start and destination
points of cars (and routes calculated based on that distri-
butions) and number of cars that start drive every TimeGap
steps (V-B). We prepared 5 different distributions of starting
points and 5 different distributions of destination points.
Distributions of starting points were named ”From East”,
”From West”, ”From North”, ”From South”, ”Uniform”,
distributions of destination points were named ”To East”,
”To West”, ”To North”, ”To South”, ”Uniform”. It gives us
25 conﬁgurations of pairs: (start points distribution, desti-
nation points distribution). Names of distributions indicates
were is the major concentration of start or destination points,
respectively. The detailed description of these distributions
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-273-8
COGNITIVE 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Figure 4.
Window for submitting two closest options
Figure 5.
Crossroad of streets Banacha, Gr´ojecka, Bitwy Warszawskiej
and procedures for editing start points and destination points
is described in the paper [6].
For every combination of pairs (start points distribution,
destination pionts distribution) we still have few degrees
of freedom that can be manipulated in order to produce
different simulation scenarios. Some of these degrees of
freedom correspond to parameters named in the ﬁrst column
of the table V-B: NrOfCars, NewCars, Acceleration,
CrossroadPenalty, TurningPenalty. Other parameters
may be related to the initial conﬁguration of trafﬁc signals
at the crossroad or maximal velocity permissible on a given
street. For our current research we need only 51 simula-
tion scenarios, so we decided to manipulate the parameter
NewCars. 5 different start points distributions, 5 different
destination points distributions and 3 different values of
the NewCars parameter gives us 125 possible simulation
scenarios, from which we chose 51 that are the most realistic
appropriate to conduct our research.
C. Evaluation of obtained decisions
Evaluation of expert decisions can be either expert-
oriented or case-oriented. In the expert-oriented evaluation
we will check a consistency of decisions made by a given
expert. In this case, the evaluated situation should be labeled
by an expert (before evaluation) at least twice for checking
stability of the expert decision making. In order to do that,
from every situation two phases will be selected to be labeled
Table I
SIMULATION PARAMETERS USED IN OUR EXPERIMENTS
Name of the pa-
rameter
Description
Value
NrOfCars
Initial number of cars for a
single trafﬁc situation
1000
TimeGap
Time after which new cars
start their movement
1 second
Step
Time of a single simulation
step
1000
miliseconds
NewCars
Number
of
cars
which
start
movement
after
every
TimeGap seconds
5, 3, 1
Steps
Duration of the simulation
600 simula-
tion steps
Acceleration
Acceleration of cars per simu-
lation step
10 km/h
CrossroadPenalty
Percentage of velocity reduc-
tion before the crossroad
25%
TurningPenalty
Percentage of velocity reduc-
tion during turning
50%
by an expert twice. In the case-oriented evaluation we will
analyze how a given case (phase or situation) is labeled
by different experts. For this purpose, every phase will be
labeled by three different experts. Their decisions will be
used either to determine the ﬁnal aggregated decision, e.g.
by voting, or to ﬁnd a uniformity of decisions about a given
phase. It should be noted that our approach is only one of
possible and that decision evaluation itself is a novel and
interesting issue and a topic for further research.
VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In the paper, we presented a method for obtaining vehicu-
lar trafﬁc domain knowledge using interaction with experts.
The method also requires realistic simulations of vehicular
trafﬁc, which can be performed using an advanced software
Trafﬁc Simulation Framework [6], [7], [8], developed by
the ﬁrst author of the paper. This is still work in progress
and presented method will be a subject of our future
research. We still need to conduct required experiments
and evaluate obtained knowledge. In the next step, we will
construct hierarchical classiﬁers for approximating spatio-
temporal complex vague concepts related to vehicular trafﬁc.
According to the paradigm of Perception Based Computing,
satisﬁability of such concepts may activate complex actions,
such as reconﬁguring trafﬁc lights at crossroads in order to
prevent trafﬁc jams or to optimize some key parameters of
the trafﬁc. Such classiﬁers may be used, e.g. for discovering
models of complex processes, such as formation of trafﬁc
jams, which may be later used to analyze many properties of
the trafﬁc. All of this may be a subject of extensive research
and obtaining domain knowledge from experts is just the ﬁrst
step. As we argued in the introduction, this step is crucial
to construct efﬁcient hierarchical classiﬁers from low level
sensory data in case of such complex process as vehicular
trafﬁc in cities.
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-273-8
COGNITIVE 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to express our gratitude to Professor
Andrzej Skowron for his valuable comments and advices.
The research has been supported by the research project
realized within Homing Plus programme of Foundation for
Polish Science, co-ﬁnanced from European Union, Regional
Development Fund, grant 2011-3/12, and by the grant
2011/01/D/ST6/06981 from the Polish National Science
Centre.
REFERENCES
[1] E. Alpaydin, Introduction to machine learning, MIT Press,
2004.
[2] J. Bazan, “Hierarchical classiﬁers for complex spatio-temporal
concepts”. Transactions on Rough Sets IX, Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, 5390, 2008, pp. 474-750.
[3] C.
Bishop,
Pattern
Recognition
and
Machine
Learning,
Springer, 2006.
[4] D.Chowdhury and A.Schadschneider, “Self-organization of
trafﬁc jams in cities: effects of stochastic dynamics and signal
periods”, 1999, Physical Review E (Statistical Physics, Plas-
mas, Fluids, and Related Interdisciplinary Topics), 59(2).
[5] W. Dong and A. Pentland, “A network analysis of road trafﬁc
with vehicle tracking data”, AAAI Spring Symposium: Human
Behavior Modeling, 2009, pp. 7-12.
[6] P. Gora, “Trafﬁc Simulation Framework - a cellular automaton-
based tool for simulating and investigating real city trafﬁc”,
Recent Advances in Intelligent Information Systems, 2009, pp.
641-653.
[7] P. Gora, “A genetic algorithm approach to optimization of
vehicular trafﬁc in cities by means of conﬁguring trafﬁc lights”,
Emergent Intelligent Technologies in the Industry, 2011, pp. 1-
10.
[8] P. Gora, “Trafﬁc Simulation Framework”, 14th International
Conference on Modelling and Simulation, 2012, pp. 345–349.
[9] P. Gora, S. H. Nguyen, M. Szczuka, J. ´Swietlicka, M. Woj-
narski, and D. Zeinalipour, “IEEE ICDM 2010 Contest Tom-
Tom Trafﬁc Prediction for Intelligent GPS Navigation”, IEEE
ICDM 2010 Workshops, 2011, pp. 1372–1376.
[10] A. Jankowski and A. Skowron, “Wisdom technology: A
rough-granular approach”, in M. Marciniak, A. Mykowiecka
(eds.) Bolc Festschrift, Lectures Notes in Computer Science,
5070, Springer Verlag, 2009, pp. 3–41.
[11] R. Keefe, Theories of Vagueness, Cambridge University
Press, 2000.
[12] M.J. Lighthill and G.B. Whitham, “On kinematic waves. I.
Flood movement in long rivers”, Proceedings of the Royal
Society of London, Piccadilly, London, A229(1178), 1955, pp.
281-316.
[13] K. Nagel and M. Schreckenberg, “A cellular automaton model
for freeway trafﬁc”, Journal de Physique, 1992, pp. 2221–2229.
[14] K. Nagel, D. E. Wolf, P. Wagner, and P. Simon, “Two-lane
trafﬁc rules for cellular automata: A systematic approach”,
Physical Review E (Statistical Physics, Plasmas, Fluids, and
Related Interdisciplinary Topics), 58(2), August 1998, pp.
1425–1437.
[15] OpenStreetMap, http://www.openstreetmap.org, last accessed:
March, 2013.
[16] Z. Pawlak, Rough sets: Theoretical aspects of reasoning about
data, Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1991.
[17] Z. Pawlak, “Rough sets”, International Journal of Computing
and Information Sciences, 18, 1982, pp.341–356.
[18] Z. Pawlak, A. Skowron, “Rudiments of rough sets”, Informa-
tion Sciences 177, 3–27, 2007.
[19] T. Poggio and S. Smale, “The mathematics of learning:
Dealing with data”, Notices of the AMS, 50(5), 2003, pp. 537–
544.
[20] I. Prigogine and R. Herman, Kinetic Theory of Vehicular
Trafﬁc, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1971.
[21] M. Rickert, K. Nagel, M. Schreckenberg, and A. Latour, “Two
Lane Trafﬁc Simulations using Cellular Automata”, Physica A:
Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 1996, 231(4), pp.
534–550.
[22] J. Stepaniuk, Rough-Granular Computing in Knowledge Dis-
covery and Data Mining, Springer Verlag, 2008.
[23] A. Schadschneider, “Statistical Physics of Trafﬁc Flow”,
Physica A285, 2000, pp. 101–120.
[24] A. Schadschneider, “The Nagel-Schreckenberg model revis-
ited”, The European Physical Journal B, 10(3), 1999, pp. 573–
582.
[25] A. Skowron and P. Wasilewski, “An introduction to percep-
tion based computing”, Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
Volume 6485, Springer Verlag, 2010, pp. 12-25.
[26] A. Skowron and P. Wasilewski, “Information Systems in
Modeling Interactive Computations on Granules”, Theoretical
Computer Science, 412, 2011, pp. 5939-5959.
[27] A. Skowron and P. Wasilewski, “Interactive information
systems: Toward perception based computing”, Theoretical
Computer Science, 454, 2012, pp. 240-260.
[28] TunedIT, http://tunedit.org/challenge/IEEE-ICDM-2010, last
accessed: March, 2013.
[29] V. Vapnik, “Learning Has Just Started”
an interview
with Prof. Vladimir Vapnik by R. Gilad-Bachrach, http://
learningtheory.org, 2008, last accessed: 2012.
125
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-273-8
COGNITIVE 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

