Towards a Cognitive Handoff for the Future Internet:  
Model-driven Methodology and Taxonomy of Scenarios 
 
Francisco A. González-Horta, Rogerio A. 
Enríquez-Caldera, Juan M. Ramírez-Cortés, Jorge 
Martínez-Carballido 
Department of Electronics, INAOE 
Tonantzintla, Puebla, México 
{fglez, rogerio, jmram, jmc}@inaoep.mx 
Eldamira Buenfil-Alpuche 
Faculty of Engineering 
Polytechnic University of the Guerrero State, UPEG 
Taxco, Guerrero, México 
eldamira@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract— A cognitive handoff is a multipurpose handoff that 
achieves 
many 
desirable 
features 
simultaneously; 
e.g., 
seamlessness, autonomy, security, correctness, adaptability, 
etc. But, the development of cognitive handoffs is a challenging 
task that has not been properly addressed in the literature. In 
this paper, we discuss the difficulties of developing cognitive 
handoffs and propose a new model-driven methodology for 
their systematic development. The theoretical framework of 
this methodology is the holistic approach, the functional 
decomposition method, the model-based design paradigm, and 
the theory of design as scientific problem-solving. We applied 
the proposed methodology and obtained the following results: 
(i) 
a 
correspondence 
between 
handoff 
purposes 
and 
quantitative environment information, (ii) a novel taxonomy of 
handoff mobility scenarios, and (iii) an original state-based 
model representing the functional behavior of the handoff 
process.  
Keywords- Cognitive handoff; handoff methodology; handoff 
scenarios 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
A handoff is essential to support the mobility and quality 
of communications on wireless networks. Its main purpose 
is to preserve the user communications (continuity of 
services or seamlessness) while different kinds of transitions 
occur in the network connection. The resulting handoffs 
pursuing such purpose are obviously single-purpose 
handoffs, which we claim they are not enough to face the 
challenges of the future Internet [1], [2], [3], and [4]. 
The rationale for this claim is as follows: a seamless 
handoff provides service continuity, but it is worthless since 
it works only for the specific scenario to which was stated. 
Therefore, a handoff should also be adaptive to any possible 
scenario. Now, a seamless-adaptive handoff is useless if it 
demands online user interventions. Consequently, a handoff 
should also be autonomous. Even so, a seamless-adaptive-
autonomous handoff is fruitless if new security risks appear 
during such handoff. Thus, a handoff should also be secure. 
Furthermore, seamless-adaptive-autonomous-secure handoff 
is still unproductive if it does not perform correctly, i.e., if it 
does not maximize the connection time to the best available 
network and minimize the handoff rate. Such rationale will 
lead to a multipurpose handoff: seamless-adaptive-
autonomous-secure-correct and thus a valuable handoff. 
The development of handoffs achieving multiple 
desirable features has been “delayed” by the research 
community itself, despite it was advised since 1997 by 
Tripathi [1], because many authors preferred to focus on 
understanding and controlling very specific handoff 
scenarios (reductionist approach) instead of managing 
complex and generic handoff scenarios (holistic approach). 
However, recent handoff schemes, like the ones proposed 
by Altaf in 2008 [2] for secure-seamless-soft handovers, 
Cardenas in 2008 [3] for fast-seamless handoffs, and 
Singhrova in 2009 [4] for seamless-adaptive handoffs, show 
a tendency towards cognitive handoffs. 
This paper presents a model-driven methodology for 
developing cognitive handoffs. This methodology represents 
the first attempt to systematically develop cognitive 
handoffs using a comprehensive model-based framework. 
The proposed methodology is founded on a synthesis of 
holism, reductionism, functional decomposition, model-
based design, and scientific problem-solving theory. 
As a result of deploying our methodology, we present a 
clear correspondence among cognitive handoff purposes and 
handoff environment information. 
Besides, in order to test the resulting cognitive handoff 
when applying such methodology with the parameters 
associated to, and for a given scenario, we develop two 
things: i) A taxonomy of handoff mobility scenarios which 
gives a classification of handoff scenarios by considering all 
feasible combinations of several communication dimensions 
involved in, and ii) An original state-based model of the 
handoff process represented by five-state diagram which 
describes a general control handoff process coordinating the 
stages before, during, and after the handoff. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II 
presents the model-driven methodology we are using for 
developing cognitive handoffs. This section discusses the 
difficulties for developing cognitive handoffs and provides 
an overview of theoretical framework setting the basis of 
our methodology. Section III shows the first results we 
obtained from applying the methodology. These results 
include: (a) the correlation between context data and 
desirable handoff features through the definition of handoff 
purposes, objectives, and goals; (b) the taxonomy of handoff 
11
COGNITIVE 2010 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-108-3

scenarios derived from combining all the possible transition 
elements involved in handoffs; and, (c) a cognitive handoff 
state-based model that describes a general behavior of the 
control handoff process. Section IV presents a basic 
discussion on the applicability of preliminary results. 
Finally, Section V concludes the paper with a summary of 
contributions and future work. 
II. 
MODEL-DRIVEN METHODOLOGY FOR DEVELOPING 
COGNITIVE HANDOFFS 
A. Difficulties for Developing Cognitive Handoff 
The simple idea of achieving multiple purposes 
simultaneously is challenging even for humans. Moreover, 
if the intended purposes represent opposing situations which 
all of them are desired, then even humans need a way to 
balance the different purposes in conflict; e.g., the conflict 
between doing the job accurately and doing it quickly. In 
optimization theory, multi-objective optimization states that 
improvements to a single purpose can be made as long as 
the change that made that purpose better off does not make 
any other purpose worse off. This is called a Pareto 
improvement. When no further Pareto improvements can be 
made, then the solution is called Pareto optimal [5]. 
Typically, a decision-maker chooses one optimal 
solution according to his preference. Therefore, the first 
difficulty in developing cognitive handoffs arises because 
there are many purposes, objectives, and goals all of them in 
conflict that need to be tradeoff. 
A second significant difficulty emerges when numerous 
sources of environment information need to be considered 
to achieve the desired multiple purposes. Six sources of 
context we consider include: user, terminal, network, 
provider, application, and handoff process. Such sources 
produce context data that need to be collected, transformed, 
and distributed at the different handoff control entities 
(HCEs). The challenge is how to manage large amounts of 
unsorted high-dimensional data that have very complicated 
structures and at the same time reducing the signaling traffic 
overload produced by this task. 
The last significant difficulty is originated by the 
different transition elements involved in the handoff 
process. These elements include radio channels, base 
stations, IP networks, service providers, user terminals, and 
all the feasible combinations. This variety of elements 
produces a large amount of scenarios that need to be 
considered for an adaptive handoff scheme. 
B. Theoretical Framework 
First, 
we 
state the basis for establishing our 
methodology. 
1) Holism and Reductionism: Holism and reductionism 
are two complementary and opposing approaches for 
analyzing complex systems [6]. They represent different 
views of the relationship between the whole and the parts. 
Holism states that parts cannot explain the whole, the whole 
states the behavior of parts; i.e., it is necessary to understand 
how the entire handoff system determines the behavior of its 
components. Conversely, reductionism states that parts can 
explain the whole, then the behavior of parts determine the 
behavior of the whole. We have seen how reductionist 
handoff schemes achieve its goals in specific scenarios but 
they quickly become special cases of more general models. 
Holistic models are more complex models that pretend to 
consider all the individual parts and to understand the 
purposes of the whole. 
2) Model-based Design: The model-driven paradigm 
has emerged as one of the best ways to confront complex 
systems. As it was clearly expressed by Dr. Hoffman [7], 
models can capture both the structure of the system 
(architecture) and behavior (dynamism). Model-based 
systems engineering [8] helps to address complexity by 
raising the level of abstraction, enabling developers to view 
system models from many perspectives and different levels 
of detail while ensuring that the system is consistent. The 
Systems Modeling Language (SysML) [7, 8] is becoming an 
accepted standard for modeling in the systems engineering 
domain. Using SysML for modeling helps to reduce 
ambiguity in models. In fact, models can now show the 
dynamic behavior of systems, including how they transition 
between states and how the system behaves overall. 
3) Functional Decomposition: refers to the process of 
resolving a functional relationship into its constituent parts 
in such a way that the original function can be reconstructed 
from those parts by function composition. The process of 
decomposition [9] is undertaken for the purpose of gaining 
insight into the constituent components. 
4) Design as Scientific Problem-Solving: In his 
inspiring paper, Braha [10] showed the similitude between 
the systems design process and the solving-problem process. 
Therefore, we developed his foundation and proposed a 
methodology establishing a general procedure that starts 
with a problem statement and ends up with the solution 
deployment. This theory views the problem statement as the 
initial state and then, by searching through a state-space, 
reaches a goal state representing the solution. 
C. Design and Development Procedure 
 Steps involved in a form of top-down procedure are:  
1) Stating the problem: Develop a handoff procedure 
that can optimally achieve multiple desirable features 
simultaneously. 
The 
handoff 
procedure 
should 
be 
implemented for operating in real scenarios with multiple 
dimensions of heterogeneity. Then, as part of the problem: 
a) Identify and analyze the required system functions: Study 
the desirable handoff features that need to be implemented 
and determine the purpose, objectives, and goals associated 
to every feature. Associate a clear and single purpose to 
every desirable feature. Decompose each purpose into one 
or more objectives by identifying the performance 
parameters that help to quantify the achievement of every 
purpose. In the same way, divide every objective into one or 
more specific handoff goals, using optimization values and 
handoff context data and b) Determine the needed handoff 
context information: Establish what handoff criteria, 
handoff metrics, performance measures, handoff policies, 
handoff constraints, and handoff scenarios are needed to 
achieve every desired purpose. Study the availability, 
12
COGNITIVE 2010 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-108-3

locality, dynamicity, structure, and complexity of the 
variables, policies, and constraints to use. 
2) Design a subsystem structure or model-based 
framework: State a cognitive handoff conceptual model, i.e. 
identify all external context information as well as all 
internal context information with the highest abstraction 
level. Whilst internal data constitutes self-awareness, 
external data constitutes context-awareness of the handoff 
process. Then, using functional decomposition divide up the 
conceptual model into a number of sub-models. Every sub-
model corresponds to a particular sub-problem that 
functionally is part of the whole handoff problem. The 
structure of the system may be represented with a hierarchy 
of models or framework enclosing the parts of the whole 
system organized through functional relations. Models in 
this framework describe the system behavior in an accurate 
and unambiguous way if one uses a finite set of states and a 
set of transition functions, thus to ease this part: Identify the 
associated system states and phases. These dynamic models 
can be formally represented using finite automata, Petri 
nets, timed automata, etc. [11]. The states or phases of the 
handoff process should describe a general behaviour rather 
than specific details of particular sub-models. 
3) Execute the models: Execution of models allows 
verification and validation of such models. This is the 
difference between just drawing pictures and making 
pictures “live” as it was pointed out by Hoffmann in [7]. 
However, verification and validation should not be 
confused. Model verification means to test if the model 
satisfies its intended purposes or specifications. Model 
validation tests if the model provides consistent outcomes 
that are accurate representations of the real world. We use 
three strategies for these tasks: simulation, prototyping, and 
analysis. Whatever the strategy we choose, model testing or 
model checking [12] requires the use of a formal notation; 
e.g., modelling languages for simulation, mathematic and 
logic for analysis, and programming languages or 
middleware for model prototype implementation. If a model 
cannot be properly validated or verified, then it must be 
redesigned within the framework. 
4) Implementation stages: Once all the models in the 
framework have been individually tested, the design 
problem now reflects a well-structured solution. A detailed 
design can now be generated considering the entire 
framework of models. This whole system design should be 
implemented in a whole system prototype. The final 
prototype is ready to be tested in-situ; should any failure 
occur during testing, then a review of the conceptual model 
or any sub-model in the framework should be performed. 
5) Solution deployment: The cognitive handoff solution 
is ready to operate on a real handoff environment. The 
solution system (cognitive handoff) provides a simultaneous 
acomplishment of the multiple purposes defined by the 
handoff problem. Each purpose should be associated to 
quantitative objective functions to measure the degree in 
which every handoff purpose was achieved. 
III. 
APPLYING THE MODEL-DRIVEN METHODOLOGY  
A. Purposes, Objectives, Goals, and Context Data 
The 
handoff 
context 
information 
is 
extensive, 
heterogeneous, distributed, and dynamic. It supports the 
whole operation of the handoff process and the achievement 
of multiple desirable features. From the external and internal 
vision of the handoff environment, we have identified five 
external sources of context information (creating context-
awareness) and one internal source which is the handoff 
process itself (creating self-awareness): 
1) User context: This context includes the user 
preferences, user priorities, user profiles, and user history 
and it is used to respond to user needs, habits, and 
preferences. 
2) Terminal context: This context domain includes the 
following evaluating parameters: (i) Link quality: Received 
Signal Strength (RSS), Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR), 
Signal-to-Noise-and-Interference Ratio (SNIR), Bit Error 
Rate (BER), Block Error Rate (BLER), Signal-to-
Interference Ratio (SIR), Co-Channel Interference (CCI), 
Carrier-to-Interference Ratio (CIR), etc.; (ii) Power 
management: Battery Type (BT), Battery Load (BL), 
Energy-Consumption Rate (ECR), Transmit Power in 
Current (TPC), Transmit Power in Target (TPT), and Power 
Budget (PB); (iii) Geographic mobility: Terminal Velocity 
(Vel), Distance from a Base Station (Dist), Geographic 
Location (Loc), Moving Direction (MDir), and Geographic 
Coverage Area (GCA). All these evaluating parameters 
allow the deployment of QoS-aware handoffs, power-based 
handoffs, and location-aided handoffs. 
3) Application context: It includes the QoS requirements 
of running applications; Lost Packets (LP), Delayed Packets 
(DP), Corrupted Packets (CP), Duplicated Packets (DuP), 
Data Transfer Rate (DTR- goodput), Packet Jitter (PJ), Out-
of-Order Delivery (OOD), Application Type (AppT). 
4) Network context: This information is necessary to 
select among networks (before handoff), to monitor service 
continuity (during handoff), and to measure network 
conditions (after handoff) thus they are: Network Bandwidth 
(NBW), Network Load (NL), Network Delay (ND), 
Network Jitter (NJ), Network Throughput (NT), Network 
Maximum Transmission Unit (NMTU).  
5) Provider context: Information about connection fees, 
billing models, roaming agreements, coverage area maps, 
security management (AAA), types of services (data, voice, 
video), provider preferences, and provider priorities.  
6) Handoff performance context: This information 
forms the self-aware part of our cognitive model and 
allowing evaluation of its performance. Call Blocking (CB), 
Call Dropping (CD), Handoff Blocking (HOB), Handoff 
Rate (HOR), Handoff Latency (HOL), Decisions Latency 
(DLat), Execution Latency (ExLat), Evaluation Latency 
(EvLat), Handoff Type (HOType), Elapsed Time Since Last 
Handoff (ETSLH), Interruptions Rate (IR), Interruption 
Latency (IL), Degradations Rate (DR), Degradations 
Latency (DL), Degradations Intensity (DI), Utility Function 
(UF), Signaling Overload (SO), Security Signaling 
Overload (SSO), Improvement Rate (ImpR), Application 
13
COGNITIVE 2010 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-108-3

Improvement Rate (AppImpR), User Improvement Rate 
(UsrImpR), Terminal Improvement Rate (TermImpR), 
Successful Handoff Rate (SHOR), Imperative Handoff Rate 
(IHOR), Opportunist Handoff Rate (OHOR), Dwell Time In 
the Best (DTIB), Authentication Latency (AL), Detected 
Attacks Rate (DAR), Online User Interventions Rate 
(OUIR), Tardy Handoff Rate (THOR), and Premature 
Handoff Rate (PHOR). 
Once we have identified the context data from all the 
context sources and the desired handoff features that we 
wish to implement, then, we assign a qualitative purpose to 
every desired feature and, a set of quantitative objectives 
and goals to every handoff purpose. Tables I and II 
summarize such previous description. 
TABLE I.  
DESIRED FEATURES, PURPOSES, OBJECTIVES, AND GOALS 
Desired 
Handoff 
Features 
      Qualitative               Quantitative 
Purposes 
Objectives 
Goals 
Seamlessness 
Maintain 
continuity of 
services or 
preserve user 
communications 
Reduce 
DR, DL, 
DI, IR, 
IL 
Minimize (BER, 
BLER, CCI, NL,ND, 
NJ, LP, DP, CP, 
DuP, PJ, TPC, TPT, 
ECR, CB, CD, HOB, 
HOL) 
Maximize (RSS, 
SNR, SNIR, SIR, 
CIR, NBW, NT, 
NMTU, DTR, BL, 
ETSLH) 
Autonomy 
Preserve 
handoff 
operation 
independent of 
users 
Reduce 
OUIR 
Maintain (IL < 
app.Timeout) 
Security 
Maintain a 
constant level of 
security along 
the handoff 
Reduce 
SSO, 
DAR 
Minimize (AL, SO, 
HOL) Maintain 
(High Encryption) 
Correctness 
Keep user 
always 
connected to the 
best network 
with minimal 
handoffs 
Reduce 
HOR 
Increase 
DTIB 
Minimize (HOR) 
Maximize (DTIB) 
Adaptability 
Keep success of 
all handoff 
objectives 
across any 
scenario 
Multi-
objective 
optimal 
balance 
Increase 
SHOR 
Keep every desirable 
feature within its 
success range. 
Maximize (SHOR) 
TABLE II.  
OTHER DESIRED PROPERTIES OF COGNITIVE HANDOFFS 
Desired 
Handoff 
Features 
   Qualitative                            Quantitative 
Purposes 
Objectives 
Goals 
Necessary 
Prevent 
unnecessary 
handoffs 
Start HO only if it 
is imperative or 
opportunist 
Maint. HOR = 
IHOR + OHOR 
Imperative if 
(UFcurr<Thinf) 
Opportunist if 
(UFcurr>Thsup) 
UFtarget is 
SuffB & ConB 
Selective 
Avoid 
selecting the 
wrong target 
Verify target is 
consistently better 
(ConB) and 
sufficiently better 
SuffB: UFtarget 
> (UFcurr + ∆) 
ConB: SuffB is 
maintained for 
Desired 
Handoff 
Features 
   Qualitative                            Quantitative 
Purposes 
Objectives 
Goals 
(SuffB) 
SP time 
Efficient 
Operate 
quickly and 
well-
organized to 
decide how to 
perform the 
handoff (HO) 
Select the best 
method, protocol, 
or strategy 
according to the 
HOType, 
AppType, and 
Mobility state. 
Reduce DLat, 
ExLat, EvLat 
Define HO 
policies or 
conditions for 
choosing MIP, 
SIP, MAHO, 
NAHO, or other 
protocols 
Beneficial 
Augment 
benefits to 
applications, 
users, and 
terminals 
after handoff 
Have a better UF 
after HO or a 
maximum 
improvement rate 
(UFnew/UFold) 
ImpR >> 1 
Maximize 
(AppImpR, 
UsrImpR, 
TermImpR) 
Timely 
Initiate a HO 
not tardy and 
not 
prematurely 
Reduce THOR 
and PHOR 
Maintain (DLat 
within its 
tolerance range) 
These tables represent a relevant preliminary result of 
the applicability of cognitive handoff methodology. On one 
hand, they help to reduce the ambiguity and confusion on 
the usability of similar handoff features because every 
desirable handoff feature is defined in qualitative terms 
(purpose) and quantitative terms (objectives and goals). On 
the other hand, they help to correlate context data with 
desirable features. For instance, from Table I, we observe 
that RSS is correlated with seamlessness, IL with autonomy, 
AL with security, etc. This correlation is intended to select 
the context data that is needed to support every handoff 
purpose. 
B. Taxonomy of Handoff Mobility Scenarios  
A second significant result obtained from the proposed 
model-driven methodology is a new taxonomy of handoff 
mobility scenarios derived from combining all the possible 
transition elements involved in handoffs; i.e., channels, 
cells, networks, providers, and terminals. This taxonomy 
depicts all different kinds of handoffs that are possible in 
real networks. 
Nowadays, 
no 
handoff 
solution 
exists 
which 
comprehensively addresses the entire scale of heterogeneity. 
Multidimensional heterogeneity [13] is the reason for the 
large number of handoff scenarios. If we define a handoff 
scenario as an array (d1, d2 …, dn) where di is an instance of 
Di the ith dimension of heterogeneity and there are |Di| 
different ways to instantiate the ith dimension, then by the 
multiplication principle there will be |D1|×|D2|×…×|Dn| 
possible handoff scenarios. However, for the user mobility 
dimension, the array (location, velocity, direction) may have 
distinct values at any instant along the path with infinite 
paths crossing the network; therefore, the number of 
possible mobility scenarios is infinite. Despite of such 
infinite scenarios, it is important to make a classification of 
handoffs according to the elements involved during the 
transition. 
The complexity and treatment for a handoff depend on 
the type of transition that is occurring. A handoff will 
14
COGNITIVE 2010 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-108-3

require of services from distinct OSI model layers 
depending on the elements involved in the transition. For 
example, a handoff between channels of the same cell is a 
layer 1 handoff; a handoff between cells (base stations) is a 
layer 2 handoff, it is homogeneous if cells use the same 
wireless technology, otherwise is heterogeneous; a handoff 
between IP networks is a layer 3 handoff; a handoff from 
one provider to another or between user terminals will 
demand the services of layers 4-7. Fig. 1 depicts the 
hierarchical structure of a mobile Internet in a four-layer 
design (core, distribution, access, and mobile). We will use 
this figure to explain a handoff hierarchy that involves 
channels, cells, networks, providers, and terminals. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Hierarchy of handoff mobility scenarios. Different overlay sizes 
for macro, micro, pico, and femto cells. 
The mobile Internet is divided into independent 
administrative units called Autonomous Systems (AS). An 
AS is a network administrated by a single organization or 
person. The Internet is a network of autonomous systems. 
Fig. 1 depicts two autonomous systems called ISP1 and 
ISP2 for two distinct service providers. Every ISP uses a 
very high-speed core network where main servers are 
located. Providers divide their distribution networks, 
physically and logically, into a number of IP networks, 
subnets, or VLANs (Virtual LANs), where the types of 
services and users are separated. Each IP Net includes a 
group of base stations (BS) or access points with the same 
or different wireless access technology. Base stations get 
distributed across a geographic area to offer mobile 
communication services. Each base station controls a cell 
that may have a group of channels to distribute among the 
associated terminals or a single channel that is shared 
among several associated terminals. 
 In Fig. 1, BS2 illustrates a layer 1 handoff when the 
mobile terminal (MT) changes its connection between 
channels ch1 and ch2 without changing of BS, IP Net, ISP, 
or MT. A layer 2 handoff is illustrated between BS1-BS2, 
BS3-BS4, BS5-BS6, and BS7-BS8. A layer 2 handoff 
changes from one channel to another and from one base 
station to another, but keeps the same IP Net, ISP, and MT; 
however, if the cells involved are heterogeneous, then the 
handoff is vertical, otherwise is horizontal. A layer 3 
handoff is depicted in BS2-BS3 and BS6-BS7. A layer 3 
handoff changes from one channel to another, from one cell 
to another, and from one IP network to another, but 
preserves the same provider and the same terminal; the layer 
3 handoff may be heterogeneous, like in BS2-BS3, or 
homogeneous, like in BS6-BS7. We represent a layer 4-7 
handoff, 
in 
BS4-BS5, 
when 
MT 
changes 
its 
communications from on channel to another, from one cell 
to another, from one IP Net to another, and from one ISP to 
another, but the user keeps the same terminal. The 
encryption schemes and data representation formats change 
from one provider to another, thus higher layer services are 
required. Inside the cell for BS5 we depict a handoff 
between terminals where the user transfers the whole 
session (current state of running applications) from terminal 
MT-A to terminal MT-B. Handoffs between terminals can 
be done for terminals within the same cell or different cells, 
within the same IP network or different IP networks, within 
the same provider or different providers. The terminal 
handoff depicted in BS5 keeps the same cell, same IP Net, 
and same ISP. 
 Fig. 2 presents a process diagram that generates the 
complete taxonomy of handoffs by following the different 
paths from the upper node to the lower nodes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Generation process for handoff taxonomy. There are 15 types of 
feasible handoffs that can be implemented in real wireless overlay 
networks. The 1Fh is not a handoff. 
Every handoff type in this taxonomy should be 
complemented or further classified according to many other 
criteria by using the handoff classification tree of Nasser et 
al. in [14]. 
C. Cognitive Handoff State-Based Model 
By applying the second step of the model-driven 
methodology, design a subsystem structure, we created a 
cognitive 
handoff 
conceptual 
model 
and 
its 
first 
decomposition model both illustrated and discussed in [13]. 
Following the reductionist approach, we now focus on a 
major component of the handoff system, the cognitive 
handoff control system. At this stage, we designed a state-
based model whose purpose is to understand the general 
behavior that should have the handoff control system. Thus, 
this model represents our third main result obtained from 
following the methodology. 
 
 
 
15
COGNITIVE 2010 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-108-3

 
Fig. 3 shows a five-state diagram modeling a general 
control handoff process. The states are: (1) Disconnection, 
(2) Initiation, (3) Preparation, (4) Execution, and (5) 
Evaluation. This model describes a generic control handoff 
system coordinating the stages before, during, and after the 
handoff. We describe each state briefly: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  A handoff control model. This state diagram shows a reactive 
and deterministic behavior of cognitive handoffs. 
1) Disconnection: is the initial state and one of the two 
final states. Here, the terminal is disconnected but 
discovering available networks. The process will stay here 
while there are no available networks. 
2) Initiation: in this state the terminal is connected to 
the best available network and communications flow 
normally. This is another final state. The process stays here 
while there are no reasons (imperative or opportunistic [15]) 
to prepare for a handoff. If current connection breaks and no 
other network is available, then the process goes back to the 
disconnection state. 
3) Preparation: as soon as a better network appears, the 
process changes to the preparation state. Here is where 
properly the handoff begins. This state decides why, where, 
how, who, and when to trigger the handoff. The handoff in 
progress can be rolled back to initiation if current link 
becomes again the best one. 
4) Execution: once a control entity decides to trigger a 
handoff, there is no way to rollback; the handoff will be 
performed. This state knows the current and destination 
networks, the active application to be affected, and the 
strategy or method to use. 
5) Evaluation: once the link switch is made, the control 
entity enters the evaluation state. This state recombines the 
measures for every objective function taken before and 
during the handoff, with new samples taken after the 
handoff to determine its successfulness. The evaluation 
latency is adjusted to a stabilization period [16]. 
IV. 
RESULTS DISCUSSION 
In this research, we have shown a new methodology to 
systematically develop cognitive handoffs, which are 
expected to be in operation in the mobility scenarios of the 
future Internet. Such methodology is based on a sound 
theoretical framework including: methods for analyzing 
complex systems, the model-based systems engineering, the 
functional decomposition approach, and the scientific 
problem-solving theory. There are five stages in the 
proposed methodology: 1) state the problem, 2) design a 
model-based framework, 3) execute the models, 4) 
implement a prototype, and 5) deploy the solution. Thus, we 
have presented three main results obtained from applying the 
first two stages of the methodology: i) a cascade relationship 
of desired features, purposes, objectives, goals, and context 
data; ii) a taxonomy of handoff mobility scenarios; and iii) a 
generic state-based model for a cognitive handoff control 
system. 
 Furthermore, there are some other issues that require 
detailed discussion: (a) the complexity of a cognitive handoff 
system, (b) the evaluation of cognitive handoff models, and 
(c) the implementation of cognitive handoffs. 
A. Cognitive Handoff  Complexity 
In [13] we showed two main properties of complex 
systems that are also present in cognitive handoffs: the 
hierarchic structure of systems and the property of 
emergence. In this section we provide other reasons of why 
cognitive handoffs are complex software systems: (1) 
Cognitive handoffs exhibit a rich set of behaviors: reactive, 
proactive, deterministic, non-deterministic, context-aware, 
self-aware, etc.; behavior is determined by the particular 
desirable features associated to handoffs. (2) Cognitive 
handoffs can be stated as multi-objective optimization 
problems. (3) Cognitive handoffs are driven by events in the 
physical world; e.g., the user mobility, the user preferences, 
the provider services, the coverage areas, etc. (4) Cognitive 
handoffs maintain the integrity of hundreds or thousands of 
records of information while allowing concurrent updates 
and queries. (5) Context information is extensive, 
heterogeneous, dynamic, and distributed. (6) Cognitive 
handoffs control real-world entities, such as the switching of 
data flows through a large set of available networks, 
providers, and terminals. (7) Handoff management has a 
long-life span; handoffs will exist in all future wireless 
networks. (8) Handoff management is a key issue for 
wireless industry and standardization bodies. Grady Booch 
in [17] provides further discussion on the attributes of 
complex software systems. 
B. Evaluation of Cognitive Handoff Methodology and 
Models 
Now, as a result of applying our proposed methodology, 
one gets a set of models that are different in purpose 
(intentions), usability (applicability), notation (language), 
and abstraction (hierarchy). 
 Methodology and each model must be evaluated, either 
by quantitative evaluation, which comprises the definition 
of criteria and metrics intended to measure one specific 
property  or,  conversely by a qualitative evaluation which is 
related to credibility that comes from the way in which the 
16
COGNITIVE 2010 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-108-3

 
cognitive maps are built and the clarity it represents the 
opinion’s of most experts [18]. 
In relation to 
a qualitative evaluation of 
the 
methodology, one requires to think on the stages proposed 
by the development process, the kind of activities to 
accomplish in each stage, the strength of its theoretical 
basis, the kind of lifecycle in the development process, etc. 
Meanwhile, corresponding quantitative evaluation, metrics 
should be applied to all asociated parametres in the stages of 
the process. 
With respect to evaluate models, we made a clear 
distinction in Section II.C between verification and 
validation. The verification tests if the model satisfies its 
purpose, whilst  validation tests if the model outcomes are 
representations of reality. During the development process 
of a new system, special purpose models are built to support 
the understanding that goes on during the development and 
no hard data emerge from such models, thus, they can only 
be verified, but not validated.  
It is worth to notice that in this paper, we deal with a 
specific kind of model belonging to those known as soft 
models [18]. Soft models are intended to understand rather 
than to predict and therefore verification is the way to 
qualitatively evaluate such models. Specifically, the 
theoretical framework in Section IIB has solid and proven 
bases. 
C. Cognitive Handoff Implementation 
We envision the implementation of cognitive handoffs as 
a network of distributed agents cooperating and competing to 
take any type of handoff to success. We distinguish between 
agents for controlling the handoff process (HCEs) and agents 
for managing the handoff context data (CMAs). The CMAs 
are responsible for recollecting the context data and updating 
the handoff information base at the HCEs. CMAs are located 
in user terminals and distributed in different layers of the 
network infrastructure. HCEs are located also in every user 
terminal and at the network access layer; HCEs perform a 
handoff control process like the one depicted in Fig. 3. Thus, 
let us develop the state-based model as follows. 
A dynamic ordered list of available networks (ANL) is 
organized from best to worst, according to the value of 
desirability calculated for every network. The desirability 
metric is a utility function combining a broad set of network 
selection criteria. The best network is the one with highest 
desirability. The value of desirability for the nth network, 
named Dn(v), may have a geometric or stochastic distribution 
depending on the dynamic nature of context variables used 
as selection criteria, and arranged in a criteria vector v = (V1, 
V2, …, Vm). We use Equation (1) to represent a general 
mathematical model for the desirability function: 
 
Dn(v) = (K + Wi)log(Vi+)  (K + Wj)log(Vj)        (1) 
 
The set of decision variables (V1, V2, …, Vm) fetched 
for the nth available network is partitioned in two subsets: 
Vi+ and Vj; where Vi+ is the set of criteria that contribute to 
the desirability (e.g. NBW and NT) and Vj is the set of 
variables that contribute to the undesirability (e.g. NL and 
ND). Wi and Wj are weights corresponding to each variable 
such that Wi and Wj  [0,1],  Wi = 1 = Wj and K is a 
scaling factor so that small changes in the context variables 
reflect big changes in Dn(v). 
For geometric distributions, a proactive handoff strategy 
may anticipate handoff decisions and for stochastic 
distributions a reactive handoff strategy with thresholds, 
hysteresis 
margins, 
and 
dwell-timers 
may 
prevent 
unnecessary 
handoffs. 
The 
control 
handoff 
process 
illustrated in Fig. 3 shows a reactive and deterministic 
procedure; reactive, because the process starts the 
preparation for a handoff until another network with higher 
desirability is present and, deterministic, because it is always 
possible to determine the current state of the process within 
one of five states. 
 Fig. 4 and Fig. 5 depict geometric distributions of 
desirability with different handoff strategies. Fig. 4 shows a 
proactive strategy where the handoff preparation starts 
before the target network improves the current connection. 
Fig. 5 shows a reactive strategy where handoff preparation 
starts after the target network has improved the current 
connection. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  A proactive handoff strategy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  A reactive handoff strategy. 
The darken line over the desirability functions illustrate 
the current connection. The performance parameters PREP, 
 
17
COGNITIVE 2010 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-108-3

EXEC, EVAL, and VHO depict the latencies for the 
different stages: preparation, execution, and evaluation. 
Configuration parameters include ∆ (hysteresis margin), 
desirability threshold (Thsup, Thinf), and dwell-timer (SP). 
Relative Desirability measures are (∆Rs) which are equal to 
|Dcurr  Dbest|. 
The available network list (ANL) is a data structure 
located at the HCEs, but continuously updated by the CMAs. 
When the ANL is empty, the terminal goes to the 
disconnection state (State 1) and stays there while such list is 
empty. CMAs are continuously discovering new networks 
and ordering the list from the highest desirable networks to 
the lowest desired networks. 
The change from disconnection state to initiation state 
(State 2) occurs as soon as new networks are available. The 
HCE selects the best available network from the list and 
connects the terminal to it. The State 2 is the Always Best 
Connected state because the terminal will stay connected to 
the best network as long as no other available network 
improves the current connection. 
The change from initiation to preparation (State 3) occurs 
when a new network is improving or has improved the 
current network. Handoff decisions, in State 3, start by 
identifying a reason to begin the preparation for a handoff 
(why). Next, selecting the target network (where). Then, 
deciding what strategy, method, or protocol to choose (how). 
Then, deciding what HCE will be responsible to trigger the 
handoff (who), and finally, deciding the best moment to 
trigger the handoff (when). The chosen handoff strategy, 
method, or protocol depends on the current handoff scenario 
(as those depicted in Fig. 1) and the type of handoff in 
progress (as those illustrated in Fig 2). 
The decision to trigger a handoff in one terminal changes 
the control process from preparation to execution (State 4). 
The trigger handoff decision activates a procedure to change 
the data flows of an application from one access network to 
another, within specific handoff and time constraints. The 
switching mechanism takes a time EXEC to complete. 
Once the switching process is completed, the HCE enters 
to the evaluation state (State 5). This is an important stage of 
feedback to the handoff control process. At this stage, the 
HCE has a constrained period of time to decide to accept or 
reject the recently executed handoff. One condition for 
handoff success occurs if the new current connection is the 
best available connection, but others include measuring the 
objective functions, associated to every handoff purpose, and 
if all these measures are within a boundary region of 
acceptable quality, then the cognitive handoff is successful, 
otherwise it is defective and outliers should be corrected. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Cognitive handoffs are multipurpose handoffs achieving 
many desirable features simultaneously; e.g., seamlessness, 
autonomy, security, correctness, and adaptability. The 
development of cognitive handoffs is a challenging task that 
has not been properly addressed in the literature. Therefore, 
we proposed a new model-driven methodology for 
developing cognitive handoffs. We applied the proposed 
methodology and obtained a clear relationship between 
handoff purposes and handoff context information, a new 
taxonomy of handoff scenarios, and an original state-based 
model of a generic control handoff process. 
We continue developing and integrating the models 
generated by the cognitive handoff methodology. A future 
work is to organize such models in a comprehensive 
framework of models representing the functional issues for 
the whole cognitive handoff process. Further work is needed 
to study the availability, locality, dynamicity, structure, and 
complexity of variables, metrics, polices, and constraints 
involved in cognitive handoffs. The evaluation of the 
cognitive handoff methodology by quantitative techniques 
demands more work. We are preparing a manuscript to 
analyze the cognitive handoff problem as a multi-objective 
optimization problem using the cellular automata approach 
to simulate complex handoff scenarios. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
F.A. González-Horta is a PhD candidate at INAOE 
Puebla, Mexico, and thanks the financial support received 
from CONACYT Mexico through the doctoral scholarship 
58024. 
REFERENCES 
 
 
[1]  N. D. Tripathi, “Generic adaptive handoff algorithms using fuzzy 
logic and neural networks,” Ph.D. dissertation, Virginia 
Polytechnic Institute and State University, August 21, 1997. 
 
[2] A. Altaf, F. Iqbal, and M. Y. Javed, “S3H: A secure, seamless 
and soft handover between WiMAX and 3G networks,” Intl. 
Conf. on Convergence and Hybrid Information Technology, pp. 
530-534, 2008. 
 
[3] L. R. Cardenas, M. Boutabia, and H. Afifi, “An infrastructure-
based approach for fast and seamless handover,” The Third 
International Conference on Digital Telecommunications, pp. 
105-109, 2008. 
 
[4] A. Singhrova and N. Prakash, “Adaptive vertical handoff 
decision algorithm for wireless heterogeneous networks,” 11th 
IEEE Intl. Conf. on High Performance Computing and 
Communications, pp. 476-481, 2009. 
 
[5] J. Branke, et al. (Eds.), Multi-objective Optimization: Interactive 
and Evolutionary Approaches, Springer, Germany, 2008. 
 
[6] V. V. Raman, “Reductionism and holism: two sides of the 
perception of reality,” The Global Spiral, an e-publication of 
Metanexus Institute, published on July 15, 2005. URL: 
http://www.metanexus.net/magazine/tabid/68/id/9338/Default.as
px, retrieved on September 4, 2010. 
 
[7] H. P. Hoffman, C. Sibbald, and J. Chard, “Systems engineering: 
the foundation for success in complex systems development,” 
IBM Corporation (white paper), Software Group, December 
2009, pp. 1-11. 
 
[8] D. M. Buede, The Engineering Design of Systems: Models and 
Methods, 2nd Edition, John Wiley & Sons, USA, 2009. 
 
[9] O. Maimon, and L. Rokach, Decomposition Methodology for 
Knowledge 
Discovery 
and 
Data 
Mining: 
Theory 
and 
Applications, 
Series 
in 
Machine 
Perception 
Artificial 
Intelligence, Vol. 61, World Scientific Publishing Co., London, 
2005. 
 
[10] D. Braha, and O. Maimon, “The design process: properties, 
paradigms, and structure,” IEEE Trans. On System, Man, and 
Cybernetics – Part A: Systems and Humans, 27(2), March 1997, 
pp. 146-166. 
 
[11] P. A. Fishwick (Ed.), Handbook of Dynamic System Modeling, 
Chapman & Hall /CRC, USA, 2007. 
18
COGNITIVE 2010 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-108-3

 
[12] C. Baier and J.P. Katoen, Principles of Model Checking, The 
MIT Press, USA, 2008. 
 
[13] F. A. González-Horta, R. A. Enríquez-Caldera, J. M. Ramírez-
Cortés, J. Martínez-Carballido, and E. Buenfil-Alpuche, 
“Towards a cognitive handoff for the future Internet: a holistic 
vision,” 2nd International Conference on Advanced Cognitive 
Technologies and Applications, COGNITIVE 2010, Lisbon, 
Portugal, Nov. 2010. 
 
[14] N. Nasser, A. Hasswa, and H. Hassanein, “Handoffs in fourth 
generation heterogeneous networks” IEEE Communications 
Magazine, pp. 96-103, October 2006. 
 
[15] W. Zhang, J. Jaehnert, and K. Dolzer, “Design and evaluation of 
of a handover decision strategy for 4th generation mobile 
networks,” 
The 
57th 
Semiannual 
Vehicular 
Technology 
Conference, VTC 2003, Jeju, Korea, 2003. 
 
[16] H. J. Wang, R. H. Katz, and J. Giese, “Policy-enabled handoffs 
across heterogeneous wireless networks,” WMCSA 99, New 
Orleans, Louisiana, USA, 1999. 
 
[17] G. Booch, et al. Object-Oriented Analysis and Design with 
Applications, Third Edition, Addison-Wesley, Chap. 1, 2007. 
 
[18] M. Pidd (Ed.), Systems Modelling: Theory and Practice, John 
Wiley 
& 
Sons, 
England, 
pp. 
1-42, 
2004. 
 
19
COGNITIVE 2010 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-108-3

