Intentionality vs Chaos  
Brain Connectivity through Emotions and Cooperation Levels beyond Sensory Modalities. 
Igor Val Danilov 
Academic Center for Coherent Intelligence 
ACCI 
Roma, Italy 
e-mail: igor_val.danilov@acci.center 
Sandra Mihailova 
Rīga Stradiņš University 
RSU 
Riga, Latvia 
e-mail: sandra.mihailova@rsu.lv 
Abstract—Empirical evidence shows the efficiency of 
coordinated interaction in mother-infant dyads through 
unintentional movements: social entrainment, early imitation. 
The growing body of the literature evidently shows an impact 
of arousal on group performance and spreading emotion from 
one individual to another organism, called emotional 
contagion. The emotion sharing somehow stimulates shared 
intentionality in individuals of "primary group". Although 
there is increasing evidence of consistency between some 
"motion" and "emotion" concepts, research demonstrating the 
synergy of the integrative process of all these five concepts is 
limited. This study presents a dynamic integrated model of 
motion-emotions synergy that combines and manages all the 
above-mentioned appearances–the Model of Coherent 
Intelligence. This model is supported by arguments that are 
strictly based on experimental evidence in the literature and 
24 online experiments in 2020. Primary groups show empirical 
evidence of a more significant accuracy in problem-solving in 
the coherent intelligence state. In specific, we conducted 13 
online experiments in dyads (116 subjects) with P-value < 
0.001, and 7 experiments in primary group adults (41 subjects) 
with the P-value < 0.002. Experiments with not well-known 
adults from the secondary group show the effect only within 
task UL3 (41 subjects in experiment No.12 with translation of 
unfamiliar language). Non-semantic tasks–SL3 (synthetic 
language) and US3 (two-color symbols)–did not stimulate the 
effect in 3 experiments with 207 secondary group subjects 
(unfamiliar students). The outcome demonstrates inter-brain 
connectivity through ongoing emotions and motion dynamics, 
creating cooperation levels beyond sensory modalities.  
Keywords-social cognition; coherent intelligence; embodied 
cognition; emotion contagion; imitation; interactional 
synchrony; social entrainment. 
I.
INTRODUCTION 
Empirical evidence shows the efficiency of coordinated 
interaction in mother-infant dyads through unintentional 
movements: social entrainment [1][2], early imitation [3][4], 
and interactional synchrony [5][6]. The growing body of the 
literature evidently shows an impact of arousal on group 
performance [7]-[9] and spreading emotion from one 
individual to another organism [10]-[12], called emotional 
contagion. That is, emotion sharing somehow stimulates 
sharing intentionality in individuals of "primary group"[13]. 
Although there is increasing evidence of consistency 
between some "motion" and "emotion" concepts, research 
demonstrating the synergy of the integrative process of all 
these five concepts is limited.  
Recent research presented a more significant accuracy 
level when participants independently completed similar 
tasks parallel with confederates who were primed with the 
correct answer [14]. This research design stimulated their 
emotional arousal and interactional synchrony in face-to-face 
performances. The current paper presents the outcome of 24 
online experiments in 2020, which were designed following 
the Model of Coherent Intelligence (MCI). 
Section II presents the hypothesis of how ongoing social 
dynamics can create a coherent mental process in groups. 
This Model of Coherent Intelligence (MCI) argues that social 
interaction shapes organisms' intentionality. Section III 
contains research data of 24 online experiments, their 
research problem, paradigm, and procedure. Section IV 
discusses limitations and difficulties of this research. Section 
V elaborates all findings, describing their meanings. 
II.
THE MODEL OF COHERENT INTELLIGENCE 
According to Danilov and Mihailova [15], the MCI 
assumes that ongoing social dynamics create a coherent 
mental process in dyads (primary group) where movement 
coordination is cyclically enhanced under ever-growing 
arousal. A supranormal environment, e.g., first hours after 
birth, stimulates supranormal sensation in dyads. This can 
push the inherited mechanism of social entrainment of 
infants to the rhythm of the mother. Both the supranormal 
sensation and social entrainment may stimulate the common 
emotional arousal. The latter is increased by the ongoing 
supranormal sensation and the occurring rhythm of arbitrary 
movements of the infant. The continuing supranormal 
sensation and ever-increasing arousal of the infant and the 
mother, along with the rhythm of the infant’s unintentional 
movements, stimulate early imitation and emotional 
contagion. How the infant captures and reproduces the 
kinematic of movements. The MCI proposes that common 
emotional arousal together with the identical rhythm create 
coherent mental processes in dyads–Coherent Intelligence–as 
it is shown in Figure 1.  
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-847-1
COGNITIVE 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Figure 1. The model of coherent intelligence 
 
At Stage 3 of the Model of Hierarchical Complexity 
MHC [16], organisms (such as human infants) do not 
maintain bilateral communication. According to Danilov and 
Mihailova [17], individuals are able to interact by 
distinguishing perceptual signals of identical modality by 
their significance. This is the foundation of intentionality. 
This ability can contribute to ostensive cues, categorizing 
reality. After all, this meaningless interaction modifies into 
communication when individuals imbue perceptual impulses 
with mutually implied meanings, cascading their signals in 
response to the history of relations between them. In such a 
manner, organisms at Stage 3 of the MHC development 
begin to categorize the chaos of sensory stimuli. The 
hypothesis of the MCI argues that social interaction shapes 
organisms' intentionality, promoting similar categorization of 
stimuli in intimately related individuals with shared social 
routine and interests.  
III.
EXPERIMENTS 
In 2020, we conducted 24 experiments with 407 subjects 
to test the MCI hypothesis of whether this effect also appears 
online. 
A. The Research Problem 
The research problem of these 24 online experiments was 
whether or not unprimed participants show a more 
significant accuracy level when they complete the thought 
task simultaneously with confederates who are primed with 
the correct answer; if they were emotionally stimulated and 
completed the tasks without communication. Would a 
confident knowledge of the confederates on the tasks help 
target participants to solve these unintelligible problems 
without communication, when they simultaneously pass the 
same testing? 
B. Experiment Paradigm and the Procedure  
The within subjects paradigm was applied to verify the 
difference between the correct responses of the participants 
(unprimed subjects) to the "primed block" and "unprimed 
block" of tasks. Specifically, subjects (unprimed participants 
and primed confederates) with their computers joined the 
experiment through an online conference. They were also 
asked to prepare their mobile phones to complete the 
experimental tasks during the online conference by 
connecting to the experiment's website via their mobile 
phones. As soon as they all are online, experimenters divided 
subjects into two groups (participants and confederates) and 
informed them about the task.  
Then, all subjects were asked to use their mobile phones 
to contact the experiment's website for completing the test. 
As soon as all subjects were connected via their mobiles to 
the website, testing began simultaneously. The experiment 
design stimulated arousal by the experiment's unusual 
situation and rhythmically changing red/purple colors of the 
mobiles' screens. Many studies on emotion arousal in 
learning show increased participants' cortisol levels during 
experiments [15]. It is highly likely that unintelligible tasks 
also contributed to emotional excitement in subjects as well 
as the participation of strangers (experimenters) in these 
performances. Interactional synchrony in subjects was 
stimulated by rhythmically changing colors of the mobiles' 
screen (80 bpm), that was identical for all.  
During testing, the website simultaneously presented to 
all subjects 10 tasks. The all tasks design was the same for all 
subjects (participants and confederates)–all subjects saw the 
same picture with the similar mapping of the task and its 
answer options. The design of each task promoted the same 
geometrical navigation on the screen for all. The mapping of 
Unfamiliar Language (UL) task presented 10 answer options 
in one line on the screen of the mobile phones. The mapping 
of unfamiliar Synthetic Language (SL) task presented 8 
answer options located on the square's perimeter on the 
screen. The mapping of Unintelligible Symbols (US) task 
presented on the screens 4 answer options located on the 
square's corners. That is, each task had the same for all 
subjects task-options mapping design, and answer options 
were in the same place on the mobile phone screens for all 
subjects (participants and confederates). In such a manner, 
we designed the same geometrical point of the correct 
answer on the screens for all participants and confederates.  
The confederates were asked to follow hints on the right 
answers, solving tasks. They received hints on all even-
numbered tasks (2-4-6-8-10)–"primed block" of tasks. The 
unprimed tasks for the confederates were all un-even (odd-
numbered) tasks (1-3-5-7-9)–"unprimed block" of tasks. 
They did not receive instructions on odd-numbered tasks. In 
evaluating the outcome, the "unprimed block" of uneven 
tasks (1-3-5-7-9) became the baseline of the experiment. 
Unprimed participants did not receive any instruction on any 
task; both the unprimed block (1-3-5-7-9) and the primed 
block (2-4-6-8-10) were unintelligible tasks for them. That 
is, we tested whether or not unprimed participants (target 
participant) would be more accurate in solving unintelligible 
tasks when they were doing this simultaneously with 
confederates who knew the correct answer. Would unprimed 
subjects' (participants') results be better in the primed block 
than in the unprimed one? Would a confident knowledge of 
confederates on primed block tasks help unprimed subjects 
(target participants) to solve them without communication?  
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-847-1
COGNITIVE 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

The result was estimated by two values: (1) Rb – the ratio 
between the correct responses of the unprimed participants to 
the "primed block" and "unprimed block" of tasks, (2) Rch – 
the ratio between the correct responses of the unprimed 
participants to the "primed block" and possible responses by 
chance. 
B. Experiments with Translation of Unfamiliar Language 
(UL) 
UL1: We conducted 6 online experiments with 22 dyads 
(44 person); we tested subjects who are typical 
representatives of the primary group. The task was to choose 
the correct translation of an unfamiliar language from 10 
variants from the list of 10 options. Before the experiment, 
we asked the subjects if they spoke the investigated language 
to make sure that this language was unfamiliar for them. 
Each dyad was divided into unprimed participants (a child) 
and primed confederates (her mother). They were asked to 
avoid any communication between them during testing. 
Dyads were required to translate unfamiliar foreign words 
themselves (independently) by choosing one correct 
translation from 10 variants in their native language in a 
congruent design and, with the opposite task, in an 
incongruent one. The confederates received correct answers 
on "primed block" of tasks (all even tasks 2-4-6-8-10). These 
online experiments in different languages found evidence of 
an increase of Rb=48% in a group performance between 
"primed block" of tasks and "unprimed block", and an 
increase of Rch=90% above chance in "primed block", the 
results are in Table 1. 
UL2: The same tasks under the similar procedure were 
tested with 24 adults: students and groups of friends. These 
subjects cannot be attributed as typical representatives of the 
primary group; nevertheless, many of them stay in a 
coordinated state of social entrainment with their fellow, as 
we believe. We estimated them as primary group. The 
subjects of five experiments No. from 7 (18/04/2020) to 11 
(12/05/2020) had been studying together since many years. 
These online experiments with different unfamiliar 
languages found evidence of an increase of Rb=143% in a 
group performance between "primed block" of tasks and 
"unprimed block", and an increase of Rch=216% above 
chance in "primed block", the results are in Table 1. 
UL3: We repeated the same procedure in experiment No. 
12 (12/05/2020) with subjects who were 41 second-year 
university students. They knew each other not more then two 
years and it seemed difficult to define their biological state as 
close to the social entrainment. We estimated them as 
secondary group. The results of 4 students were excluded 
from the outcome, since they speak the examined language. 
The online experiment No.12  shows evidence of an increase 
of Rb=133% in a group performance between "primed 
block" of tasks and "unprimed block", and an increase of 
Rch=380% above chance in "primed block", the results are 
in Table 1. 
C. Experiments with a Rebus from Synthetic Language (SL) 
SL1: We conducted 4 online experiments with 23 
children and 19 mothers (specifically 19 families). The task 
was to choose the correct version of the rebus from 8 options 
placed around the square's perimeter. The rebus consisted of 
unknown symbols from synthetic language created 
especially for this experiment. These online experiments 
found evidence of an increase of Rb=394% in a group 
performance between "primed block" of tasks and "unprimed 
block", and an increase of Rch=42% above chance in 
"primed block", the results are in Table 1. 
SL2: We tested the same tasks with 7 adults (M=18): 
students of the last year of high school. We believe they were 
in a coordinated state of social entrainment because of many 
years studying together under the same schedule. We 
estimated them as primary group. These online experiments 
found evidence of an increase of Rb=300% in a group 
performance between "primed block" of tasks and "unprimed 
block", and an increase of Rch=28% above chance in 
"primed block", the results are in Table 1. 
SL3: We tested the same tasks with 56 adults (M=21): 
students of the second year of university. We estimated them 
as secondary group. They knew each other for not more than 
two years, and it does not seem easy to define their 
biological state as close to social entrainment. These online 
experiments did not find evidence of Rb's increase in a group 
performance between "primed block" of tasks and "unprimed 
block". At the same time participants' outcome in both 
conditions was Rch=28% above chance, the results are in 
Table 1. 
D. Experiments with Unintelligible Symbols US 
US1: We conducted 3 online experiments with 17 
children (M=9) and 13 mothers (M=40); specifically, there 
were 13 families. Their task was to choose the two-color 
symbol related to one of the natural numbers from 1 to 5 
among four options. In each task, four answer options 
(different two-color symbols) were located in the corners of 
the square's perimeter.  These five two-color symbols related 
to a natural number from 1 to 5 were created specifically for 
this experiment. These symbols consisted of two colored 
circles (one in the other). The meanings of these unfamiliar 
symbols were unintelligible for subjects.  Experimenters 
asked subjects to solve the tasks applying different strategies. 
Participants (unprimed subjects) were asked to guess the 
correct answer intuitively. In contrast, confederates were 
asked to solve the problems rationally, following hints on the 
correct answer. These online experiments in different 
languages found evidence of an increase of Rb=123% in a 
group performance between "primed block" of tasks and 
"unprimed block", and an increase of Rch=32% above 
chance in "primed block", the results are in Table 1. 
US2: We conducted 1 online experiment with a group of 
10 friend adults: 4 confederates and 6 participants  (M=30). 
Their task was the same as of US1: to choose the two-color 
symbol related to one of the natural numbers from 1 to 5 
among four options. Their meanings were unintelligible for 
subjects.  Experimenters asked subjects to solve the tasks 
applying different strategies. Participants (unprimed 
subjects) were asked to guess the correct answer intuitively. 
In contrast, confederates were asked to solve the problems 
rationally, following hints on the correct answer. These 
online experiments in different languages found evidence of 
an increase of Rb=127% in a group performance between 
"primed block" of tasks and "unprimed block", and an 
increase of Rch=30% above chance in "primed block", the 
results are in Table 1. 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-847-1
COGNITIVE 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

US3: We conducted 2 online experiments with 151 
students from the first year of the university (M=19). We 
estimated them as secondary group. They knew each other 
for not more than a few days (if they knew each other, they 
did not meet because of the online university course), and it 
seems impossible to define their biological state as close to 
the social entrainment. Their task was the same as of US1: to 
choose the two-color symbol related to one of the natural 
numbers from 1 to 5 among four options. Experimenters 
asked subjects again to solve the tasks applying different 
strategies. Participants (unprimed subjects) were asked to 
guess the correct answer intuitively. 
In contrast, confederates were asked to solve the 
problems rationally, following hints on the correct answer. 
These online experiments in different languages found 
evidence of an increase of Rb=3% in a group performance 
between "primed block" of tasks and "unprimed block". 
Their results Rch were below chance, see Table 1. 
E. Results 
The 20 experiments in subjects from the primary group 
includes 13 experiments in dyads (with 58 mothers and 68 
children), and 7 experiments with 41 adults. The 4 
experiments in subjects from the secondary group with 250 
adults showed the effect only in UL3 task (a translation of an 
unfamiliar language). Other experiments in secondary group 
with the tasks SL3 and US3 did not show the effect. 
The results are presented in the Table 1. There are several 
abbreviations to note: UL – the experiments with translation 
of an unfamiliar language; SL – the experiments with a rebus 
from unknown symbols of a synthetic language; US – the 
experiments with two-color round symbols; Rb, equation (1)  
– the ratio between the correct responses of the unprimed 
participants to the "primed block" and "unprimed block" of 
tasks; Rch, equation (2) – the ratio between the correct 
responses of the unprimed participants to the "primed block" 
and possible responses by chance; Mp – mean primed; Mb – 
mean baseline (unprimed); E – estimated by chance; O – 
observed results (both Mp and Mb); P-value – the 
significance of results, rejecting the null hypothesis; and 
values of the Chi-squared distribution is χ2 . 
IV.
DISCUSSION 
The limitations of the unfamiliar language task (UL) and 
synthetic language task (SL) are grounded in the life 
experience of subjects. Translation of an unfamiliar language 
(or solving a rebus) is challenging; however, subjects could 
casually hear some foreign words in the past and/or create 
associative relationships with words/symbols they already 
knew. 
100%x(Mp - Mb)/Mb  = Rb.                   (1)
100%x(Mp - E)/E  = Rch.                      (2)
Σ(O - E)2/E  = χ2.                           (3)
TABLE 1. RESULTS  OF 24 EXPERIMENTS IN 2020 
This implicit knowledge cannot be completely excluded 
from the outcome. Even though we selected unfamiliar 
foreign words (as it seemed to us) verifying this linguistic 
task with a control group, this did not exclude such cultural 
influence on subjects' results. Possible past experience and/or 
associative relationships between words/symbols could make 
an adjustment to the results. Nevertheless, it seems 
uncontroversial to say that young children acquire 
knowledge through a communication environment: language 
and other communicative signs. The current paper explores 
the modalities of social interaction that help organisms to 
assimilate knowledge. Therefore we propose to take into 
account this outcome because language is a typical 
communicative cue for children. It is possible to suppose that 
a communicative environment–symbols' domain–can 
enhance non-perceptual interaction. Principally we suggest 
mentioning this since the control group did not show any 
difference in results between even-numbered tasks and un-
even (odd-numbered) tasks, testing all of them under 
unprimed conditions. This control group outcome may mean 
that the set of foreign words was unfamiliar for the particular 
subjects of the control group and may provide hope that this 
was a spread case also for other subjects. In contrast, the 
tasks with two-color round symbols (US) could create less 
association with previous knowledge in participants. From 
this perspective, the task US could show pure non-perceptual 
social interaction. These limitations can describe the 
difference in results between UL, SL, and US tasks in 
different groups. For instance, the primary group (dyads and 
adults) perform better linguistic task UL than the tasks with 
rebus from unknown symbols SL and two-colored symbols 
US, showing in the UL better results above chance. 
It seems uncontroversial to say that the third task US 
with two-color round symbols excluded participants' 
experience (previous knowledge) from problem-solving to a 
greater extent. Comparing results between different tasks and 
groups shows the lowest increase of  the Rch coefficient – 
the ratio between the correct responses between the "primed 
block" and responses by chance. 
Group
The Ratio of Correct Responses 
Ratio
Task  
UL, %
Task  
SL, %
Task  
US, %
χ2
P-value
1.  
Dyads, 116 
subjects
Rb
48
394
123
16.142
< 0.001
Rch
90
42
32
2. 
Primary 
group, 41 
subjects
Rb
143
300
127
13.493
< 0.002
Rch
216
28
20
3 
Secondary 
group, 250 
subjects
Rb
–
–8
3
O.083
< 0.975
Rch
–
31
–9
Rb
133
–
–
250.624
< 0.001
Rch
380
–
–
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-847-1
COGNITIVE 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

One of the research difficulties was to ensure the 
intentionality of the primed subjects (confederates), since the 
only following the instructions on the correct answers was 
not too exciting for them. We expected their mental 
collaboration instead of indifferent action in choosing of 
correct option. Therefore, for each experiment we created the 
special game for confederates depending on their personal 
interests. Although, in the sense of a person’s unexpected 
choice, none can be sure on what to expect from a person, 
within reasonable limits, of course. Human uncertainty 
creates the problem for any research in psychology. 
Frankness, sincerity and involvement in the experiment are 
most influent factors of the testee's impact on the results of 
research. The experimenter can never exactly know the real 
intention and involvement of the examinee. We believe that 
the difference in the outcomes of the different groups also 
shows the participants involvement in the process. 
The outcome was questioned: whether the correlation of 
results between teams of subjects (participants and 
confederates) is an evident pattern, or it happened by chance. 
The hypothesis evaluation using the P-value shows the 
significance of results in experiments with dyads and adults 
attributed to the primary group. The 20 experiments with 
subjects from primary group show: (i) the P-value < 0,001 in 
13 experiments in dyads; and (ii) the P-value < 0,002 in 7 
experiments in adults. We believe this outcome is statistically 
significant, rejecting the null hypothesis in subjects attributed 
to the primary group. 
V.
CONCLUSIONS 
We conducted 24 online experiments with subjects of the 
primary group (20 experiments, 157 subjects) and subjects of 
the secondary group (4 experiments, 250 subjects). To our 
mind, the results of these online experiments support a 
hypothesis of inter-brain connectivity, which appears in 
individuals of primary groups (including dyads) at the 
beginning of cognition and lasts the entire social life. The 
unprimed subjects (participants) attributed to the primary 
group showed a more significant level of accuracy when they 
completed a thought task in the presence of confederates 
(primed subjects from the same group) who were 
simultaneously primed with the correct answer to the same 
task. We believe that the outcome of the primary group 
(dyads and adults) is statistically significant, rejecting the 
null hypothesis. The current research demonstrated inter-
brain connectivity through ongoing emotions and motion 
dynamics, creating cooperation levels within individuals of 
the primary group beyond sensory modalities. 
We did not expect the coherent intelligence effect in 
experiments with subjects of the secondary group; and we 
did not find it in the experiments with the SL3 (one 
experiment with 56 adults, M=21) and US3 tasks (2 
experiments with 151 first-year students, 
 M=19). 
Surprisingly, the outcome of the experiment No.12, 
12/05/2020 with the task UL3 (an unfamiliar language) was 
very high; and the Chi-squared distribution and P-value of 
this experiment are very significant. This deviation from the 
expected result for this team was 380% higher than the 
probability of a random choice. We tested these subjects 
before the experiment on the knowledge of examined 
language, and the results of 4 students were excluded from 
the outcome, since they speak it. Other subjects did not speak 
this language at all. Following the secondary group 
definition, we rated this team as the secondary group, while 
they showed results as members of the primary group. The 
result of the experiment No.12 led us to additional study the 
history of these students' relationships and the formation of 
their team. Additional information at the stage of the results 
analysis showed that these second-year students had been 
visiting university facilities daily before the pandemic in 
2020. They followed the same social rhythm during two 
academic years before the experiment. While studying at the 
university, they also completed an additional team training 
program to increase the level of inter-group cooperation. To 
our mind, the UL3 outcome means that these subjects had 
more close social cooperation between them than we thought 
at the moment of the experiment. This additional information 
may be useful for understanding why these subjects from the 
secondary group (as we thought earlier) also showed a 
significant accuracy in translating an unfamiliar language, as 
if they were members of the primary group. We believe that 
the results of the experiment No.12 (UL3) provides an 
opportunity for further research on the formation of close 
social bonds in groups that can also promote the more 
precise determination of the primary group's criteria. Further 
research on how the modality of communication can affect 
the message's understanding, even if the language of the 
message is unfamiliar to the recipient, can also develop 
knowledge about the inter-group cooperation.  
The results of other teams with subjects of the secondary 
group in the tasks SL3 and US3 supported our expectations 
that there should be no coherent intelligence effect in the 
secondary group. The unexpected result in UL3 does not 
reject the significant outcomes of experiments in dyads 
(UL1, SL1, and US1) and adults from the primary group 
(UL2, SL2, and US2). We believe that the research outcome 
supports the hypothesis that from the beginning of cognition, 
the effect of coherent intelligence allows the nervous system 
to distinguish particular sensory stimuli from chaos, 
following shared intentionality with intimately related 
individuals. This outcome is consistent with our previous 
research outcome in 2019 from 7 experiments with 104 
subjects, including 51 confederates and 53 participants [14]. 
The presented results complemented the already published 
research about 12 online experiments with 67 adults and 
children, P-value < 0,001 [19]. We believe that, future 
research should aim to understand the possible application of 
this effect to the advanced online curriculum for small 
children.  
AUTHORS CONTRIBUTION ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Igor Val Danilov formulated the hypothesis and wrote the 
first draft of the manuscript. Igor Val Danilov and Sandra 
Mihailova improved the text over several iterations.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors express their gratitude to Prof. Iegor 
Reznikoff, Emeritus Professor Université de Paris Ouest 
Nanterre, France, for commenting this paper. 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-847-1
COGNITIVE 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

REFERENCES 
1.
J. Aschoff, "Comparative physiology: Diurnal rhythms," 
Annual. Rev. Physiol., vol. 25, pp. 581-600, 1963, doi: 
10.1146/annurev.ph.25.030163.003053. 
2.
L. D. Grandin, L. B., Alloy, and L. Y. Abramson, "The social 
zeitgeber theory, Circadian rhythms, and mood disorders: 
Review and evaluation," Clinical Psychology Review, vol. 26, 
pp. 679–694. 2006, doi:10.1016/j.cpr.2006.07.001. 
3.
A. N. Meltzoff and M. K. Moore, "Imitation of facial and 
manual gestures by human neonates," Science, vol. 198, pp. 
75–78. 1977, doi: 10.1126/science.198.4312.75. 
4.
I. Val. Danilov, "Imitation or early imitation: Towards the 
problem of primary data entry," Journal of Higher Education 
Theory and Practice, in press. 
5.
W. S. Condon and W. D. Ogston, "A Segmentation of 
behavior," Journal of Psychiatric Research, vol. 5, pp. 221–
235, 1967. 
6.
G. Markova, T. Nguyen, S. Hoehl, "Neurobehavioral 
interpersonal synchrony in early development: The role of 
interactional rhythms," Front. Psychol. vol. 10, pp. 2078, 
2019, doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02078. 
7.
D. O. Hebb, "Drives and the C.N.S." Psychol. Rev. vol. 62, pp. 
243–254, 1955. doi: 10.1037/h0041823 . 
8.
G. E. Miller, E. Chen, and E. S. Zhou, "If it goes up, must it 
come down? Chronic stress and the hypothalamic-pituitary-
adrenocortical axis in humans," Psychol. Bull. vol. 133, pp. 
25–45, 2007, doi: 10.1037/0033-2909.133.1.25 . 
9.
L. K. Cirelli, Z. B. Jurewicz, and S. E. Trehub, "Effects of 
maternal singing style on mother–infant arousal and behavior," 
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, pp. 1–8, 2019, doi:
10.1162/jocn_a_01402.  
10. E. Prochazkova, and M. E. Kret, "Connecting minds and 
sharing emotions through mimicry: A neurocognitive model of 
emotional contagion," Neuroscience and Biobehavioral 
Reviews, vol. 80, pp. 99–114, 2017, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.neubiorev.2017.05.013. 
11. C. M. Heyes, "Empathy is not in our genes," Neuroscience and 
biobehavioral reviews, vol. 95, pp. 499–507, 2018. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2018.11.001. 
12. M. Katayama et al., "Emotional contagion from humans to 
dogs is facilitated by duration of ownership," Front. Psychol. 
vol.10, pp. 1678, 2019, doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2019.01678 . 
13. C. N. Cooley. Social organization: A study of the larger mind, 
New York, NY: Charles Scribner's Sons, 426 pp. 1909. 
14. I. Val. Danilov, S. Mihailova, and V. Perepjolkina (2019). 
Unconscious social interaction, coherent intelligence in 
learning. Proceedings of the 12th annual conference ICERI 
Seville (Spain), pp. 2217-2222, doi: 10.21125/iceri.2019.0606. 
15. I. Val. Danilov and S. Mihailova, "Emotions in e-learning: The 
review promotes advanced curriculum by studying social 
interaction," The proceedings of the 6th International 
Conference on Lifelong Education and Leadership for ALL, 
held at Sakarya University, July 2020. [retrieved: March, 
2021]https://www.researchgate.net/publication/343053966 
_Emotions_in_e-Learning_The_Review_Promotes_ 
Advanced_Curriculum_by_Studying_Social_Interaction. 
16. M. L. Commons and S. J. Chen, "Advances in the model of 
hierarchical complexity (MHC)," Behavioral Development 
Bulletin, 19(4), 37-50, 2014. 
17. I. Val. Danilov and S. Mihailov, "Knowledge sharing through 
social interaction: towards the problem of primary data entry." 
11th Eurasian Conference on Language & Social Sciences 
which is held in Gjakova University, Kosovo. pp.226. 
[retrieved March, 2021] http://eclss.org/publicationsfordoi/
abst11act8boo8k2021a.pdf. The Best Research Paper Award. 
2021. 
18. I. Val. Danilov and S. Mihailova, "Social interaction shapes 
infants' earliest links between language and cognition," Social 
Sciences Bulletin, 2:29, pp. 145-157, ISSN 1691-1881, eISSN 
2592-8562, 2019. 
19. I. Val. Danilov and S. Mihailova, "Ontogenesis of social 
interaction: Review of studies relevant to the fetal social 
behavior," In S. Denison., M. Mack, Y. Xu, & B.C. Armstrong 
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 42nd Annual Conference of the 
Cognitive Science Society (p. 3506). Cognitive Science 
S o c i e t y. [ r e t r i e v e d M a r c h , 2 0 2 1 ] h t t p s : / /
cognitivesciencesociety.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/
cogsci20_proceedings_final.pdf . 2020. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-847-1
COGNITIVE 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

