Hamlet and Othello Wandering in the Web 
Inferences from Network Science on Cognition 
 
Francesca Bertacchini 
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Energy and 
Management 
University of Calabria 
e-mail: fbertacchini@unical.it 
 
Patrizia Notaro, Mara Vigna, Antonio Procopio, 
Pietro Pantano, Eleonora Bilotta 
Department of Physics 
University of Calabria 
e-mails: patrizia.notaro@unical.it, mara.vigna@unical.it, 
antonio.procopio@unical.it, pietro.pantano@unical.it, 
eleonora.bilotta@unical.it
 
Abstract—Network theory was used to gain a deeper 
understanding of emotional cognition, pretending that 
Shakespearian tragedies of Othello and Hamlet were life-like 
linguistic contexts. A manual segmentation of both plays was 
carried out for defining a lexicon of emotional words 
represented 
by 
networks. 
Using 
ad 
hoc 
developed 
computational methods, further instances of the emotional 
lexicon networks were compared with WordNet’s manually 
extracted data. The results revealed organizations of emotional 
terms’ neighborhoods, evidencing the emergence of emotional 
patterns, with symmetries and breaches of symmetries, thus 
giving a strong support to comprehend the dynamics operating 
on speech production cognitive processes. 
Keywords-language; Shakespeare; network; semantics. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Network science considers the organizational principles 
of complex structures found in different fields of research, 
from physics to biology and social sciences. Its starting point 
is the graph, a mathematical structure made of nodes 
connected by links. Network science has recently contributed 
to the study of language as a real-life problem, by analyzing 
the statistical properties of words associations [1], thesauri 
[2], syntactic dependencies networks [3], modeling the 
properties of these structures [1] and proposing abstract 
models for increasing the general knowledge of language 
functions. Though networks were already associated to 
cognition using different methods [4][5], network science 
greatly expanded cognitive science domains, improving 
knowledge about brain connectivity [6], representing 
semantics in the human brain [7] and studying semantic 
organization of memory [1][8][9]. Despite the huge number 
of studies aiming at analyzing language networks, cognitive 
processes underlying these networks have only been studied 
at the phonological level [10], for spoken word recognition 
[11], or failed lexical retrieval [12], thus leaving away the 
study of lexical semantic organization. In this paper, network 
theory was used as an explanatory principle and a 
methodological tool to gain a deeper understanding of 
emotional cognition into the Shakespearian tragedies of 
Othello and Hamlet as the best exemplar of narrative text, 
pretending they were real life situations. We considered 
mental lexicon as the parameter space of cognitive processes 
related to speech production. We considered the mental 
lexicon as a small-world network, and lexical retrieval as a 
search through that network, similar to the PageRank 
algorithm [13] searches through the World-Wide Web. Our 
aim was to represent the organization of words in memory in 
order to develop a more comprehensive view of emotional 
cognition dynamics and to see how the emotional speech 
could be understood and represented as dynamical system by 
network theory. Data obtained through the manual method 
was subsequently compared and analyzed by computational 
systems searching through WordNet, to examine the growth 
of semantic networks with networks obtained by manually 
segmenting both plays. Networks organized in structures that 
span from simple to complex mathematical configurations 
were detected. They represented patterns of semantically 
similar neighborhoods of emotional words, showing 
symmetries and motifs [14]. The organization of these 
semantic networks has been considered as dynamical 
attractors that work on the connections of semantic 
similarity. If two nodes share many common properties then 
it will be very likely that these two nodes share several links. 
Their concepts are definitely connected. The attractors also 
showed different dynamical patterns, used as a representation 
of emotional dynamics in the plays’ characters and of 
productive processes in the verbal production.  
The paper is organized as follows. After a subsection on 
the theoretical approaches to cognitive processes involved in 
emotional speech and behavior, and basic notions about 
network science, the methods used to analyze text as real life 
situations are described in Section II, specifying the two 
different types of analysis: the manual and the computational 
one. Results on the main theme of this paper are then deeply 
discussed 
in 
Section 
III. 
Conclusions 
and 
further 
developments are presented in Section IV, closing the work. 
A. Basic assumptions on emotions and network science 
Emotions as psychological occurrences have exclusive 
traits, they are embodied, displayed into stereotyped 
behavioral patterns of facial expressions and conduct, stimuli 
driven and related to all aspects of cognition. Besides, 
emotions are significantly connected to the social-cultural 
situations in which they occur [15][16]. According to many 
researches [17][18][19][20], a stimulus in the environment 
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

triggers a chain reaction in humans. According to Frijda [21], 
emotions 
trigger 
cognitive 
structures, 
which 
are 
characteristic of a given emotional experience, by a process 
known as cognitive tuning. Human language represents the 
means to reach a deep knowledge about emotions and body 
language allowing furthermore to understand the other 
participants cognitive mental processing of ideas and 
concepts [22]. Linguistic properties have often been analyzed 
through network science, interpreting language as a graph. A 
classic definition of network is a set of nodes connected by 
edges [23][24][25]. Considering G as an ordered set G = {N , 
E}, where E = {eij = (xi, xj) | xi, xj ∈ N} is a set of paired 
elements of N, among which a relationship is established. 
The components belonging to N are called nodes, or vertices, 
while the components belonging to E are called edges. At the 
words level, the single term is considered a node, while the 
connections among words is the synonymic relation. Crucial 
features of semantic organization can be detected and 
explained with networks models. To analyze the size of a 
semantic network, the total number of nodes (n) and edges 
(m) is calculated. Size in terms of nodes may also be critical 
for the structure of word relationships. Another significant 
feature of semantic networks is the degree of a word (k), 
which identifies its number of links and highlights the weight 
that a single term has as a source of ties (possible 
connections and influences of a word with other words in the 
whole structure). For very large networks, the degree 
distribution 
deviates 
significantly 
from 
the 
Poisson 
distribution, as highlighted for the World Wide Web [24], for 
the Internet [26], and for metabolic networks [27]. The work 
of Barabási et al. [23] defines these networks as scale free. 
This structure includes few words which are highly 
interconnected nodes (hubs) participating to a large number 
of interactions and other terms connecting to the network by 
following a preferential attachment to these hubs. The 
mathematical 
approach 
based 
on 
network 
science’s 
principles used in this experiment represented a useful tool to 
model and analyze cognition. 
II. 
METHODS 
This Section describes the two different methods used. 
A. How to 
In order to obtain a cognitive organization of emotional 
terms, these steps were followed: starting from a text a list of 
emotional terms was manually extracted; from this list 
several networks were built as described in the next 
subsection; finally a comparison between these networks 
with the network extracted from WordNet [28][29][44] was 
made to depict and analyze how the emotions are configured 
in the text. 
B. Manual research method 
Two different methods were used for analyzing 
emotional cognition. The first one employed a lexicon of 
about 2000 emotional words, drawn directly and manually 
from the tragedies of Hamlet and Othello, referring to the 
five 
basic 
emotions 
of 
‘anger’, 
‘love’, 
‘sadness’, 
‘joy’/’enjoyment’ and ‘fear’. A first linguistic modeling was 
applied to this data, organizing them in tables divided by 
emotion and five grammatical categories: verbs, names, 
adjectives, adverbs and sentences (i.e., metaphors or 
idiomatic expressions). The annotation system that was used 
is showed in Figure 1. 
From this first step, a second kind of modeling was built: 
the linguistic data was transformed in numerical data, where 
every element was associated to its synonyms, in order to 
create five separated undirected graphs, containing all the 
words selected for each emotion, with links to every 
synonym in the text. The next step was to complete the 
nodes in the networks, using different kinds of codes: 
 
a color code to indicate grammatical categories; 
 
a numerical code for the same purpose (i.e., Names 
1, Adjectives 2): it allowed the extraction of 
quantitative information about the distribution of the 
nodes in the text; 
 
an alphabetical code of small letters to indicate acts 
and scenes (i.e., a=sc.1); 
 
an alphabetical code of capital letters indicating the 
character speaking. 
C.  Computational Research Methods 
In order to define a computational model inspired to 
biological cognition, the psychological resource WordNet 
was downloaded from Princeton University’s website [44]. 
Developed by George Miller and collaborators [28][29], the 
resource is an attempt to capture psycholinguistic theory 
within a linguistic system, for defining and modeling the 
meaning of words and associations between meanings. The 
system was then transformed into a network, presenting 
139,999 nodes (at the time the system has been downloaded 
for the present study). The following computational models, 
completely adherent with the WordNet system, were 
developed: 
 
R1_Antonyms collected words which stand in 
gradual opposition with a chosen term, have 
complementary meanings, or are the opposite, as 
different and symmetrical terms; 
 
R2_Hypernyms created the hierarchical structure of 
the words, taxonomically classifying them into types 
and subtypes; 
 
the 
function 
R3_Hyponyms 
collected 
terms 
correlated by the ‘IT IS A’ relationship; 
 
R4_Entailment identified all the terms that were in 
some way required, from a conceptual point of view, 
by the starting term; 
 
R5_Similar collected semantic resemblance between 
terms; 
 
R6_Synonyms searches for words with share partial 
sharing of semantic content, denotative and 
connotative meaning, are perfectly interchangeable; 
 
R7_Related identified the terms correlated to the one 
chosen for the study; 
 
R8_Overview identified a mix of all the above 
semantic dynamics for the term under study, for all 
syntactic categories. 
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

The above detailed formal models were implemented in 
the software (SWAP), which performs search in the 
WordNet database, and then calculates a network in which 
nodes are connected by edges according to a chosen R.  
 Figure 1. The annotation system used for creating the dictionary and the 
emotional words' classification system. 
 
We 
thought 
of 
these 
computational models 
as 
‘emotional-terms-hunters bots’, or search engines (software 
robots) of emotional terms, virtually able to ‘hunt’ all the 
semantic 
connections 
related 
to 
emotional 
lexicon. 
Investigating the system with different computational models 
allowed the detection of distinct characteristics due to the 
particular network topology: choosing to move only within 
paths of the network that converged to few nodes or a single 
node, the number of nodes visited decreases, as in the case of 
the computational model R3_Hyphonyms. But, if the paths 
diversified or specialized (as in the case of computational 
models such as R2_Hypernyms and R6_Synonyms), the 
number of visited nodes increased. This could suggest that 
the neighbors of synonyms and hypernyms are more densely 
populated while those of hyponyms are sparser. The total 
network held steady, while the visited part changed. But, if 
the visited nodes were considered as possible states of the 
system, with the computational models seeking synonyms 
and hypernyms, then the number of states eligible by the 
system was wider than in the case of the system using the 
computational model to search for hyponyms. 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Section III highlights and discusses major results. 
A. Manual Research Network Results 
The manual annotation method of emotional terms 
disclosed several features of emotional cognition for every 
character (see an example in Table I). 
Considering parameters λ and γ, where λ is the ratio 
between the average path length (L) and the path length of 
the equivalent random network and γ is the ratio between the 
network clustering coefficient and the random one 
clusterization, the small-world index σ is then calculated as 
the ratio between the clustering coefficient and the path 
length ratios. If γ >> 1, λ ≈ 1, σ > 1 [30], the network 
has a small-world structure. Statistical data reported in Table 
II shows such parameters for emotional terms in both 
tragedies: the emotional language in Hamlet follows a small-
world structure and the same is for ‘fear’ and ‘joy’ in 
Othello. What emerged was that verbs related to the main 
emotions, for example ‘to fear’ in both tragedies, were 
generally pronounced by the main characters in every act. 
Positive emotion words were rare and they generally 
appeared only in negative contexts. The verb ‘to love’ and 
the substantives ‘passion’ and ‘happiness’ in the tragedy of 
Othello, were always related to the idea of ‘hate’, and to the 
character of Iago. The inner emerging dynamics are invisible 
to a classical approach, the association of the character of 
Iago to the idea of ‘hate’ and ‘anger’ could be rather 
predictable, but the semantic slip of the idea of ‘hate’ hiding 
in term such as ‘passion’ and ‘love’ are not completely 
detectable without considering different level of complexity 
and different computational models, such as the one 
proposed to the present study. In Hamlet, the main character, 
according to his dramatic role in the play, had never 
pronounced the most meaningful substantives of the network 
of the term ‘enjoyment’. Later, the computational approach 
allowed to calculate and to visualize the networks dynamics 
in Othello and Hamlet, detecting the main organization 
involved in this process, compared to the growth model and 
the communities of the WordNet networks. 
B. Computer Simulation Results: Network Statistics for 
Emotional Terms 
The statistical values for the analyzed sample of 
networks, for the 5 emotional terms, till 5 levels, together 
with the communities of each network, were calculated. As 
for Othello and Hamlet, such values revealed a small-world 
structure and a broad scale behavior (see as example Tables 
III and IV). It was observed that the relationship between 
nodes varies from one term to the next, with a number of 
similarities among terms. It should be noted that for certain 
terms the overall number of nodes and edges is very high, 
and the number of nodes and number of edges are correlated. 
It also stands out that the term ‘fear’ is the one with the 
absolute highest number of nodes and edges, at all the levels 
that were taken into consideration (Table V and Figures 2, 3 
and 4). 
 
Figure 2. First level of the experimental run with the computational system 
R8_Overview. 
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
 
 
TABLE IV. SMALL WORLD PARAMETERS FOR THE NETWORK OF THE TERM 
‘FEAR’, WHICH IS A VERY MUCH CLUSTERED AND SMALL WORLD NETWORK. 
‘fear’  
n 
γ 
λ 
σ 
 
8228 
60.81 
1.226 
49.61 
 
Results from the other experimental runs are presented in 
Appendix B [43]. The degree was also distributed among 
individual networks in accordance with the terms that 
presented a very high correlation between nodes and edges. 
Networks clustering peaked in correspondence with 
‘anger’ and ‘sadness’, reflecting high search levels in the 
WordNet repository. On the other hand, the networks’ 
efficiency seemed to follow a trend that was only marginally 
significant to increase in search levels. Another important 
element was represented by the network’s diameter, which 
grew in correspondence with the increase in size of the 
linguistic networks. A comparative analysis about simulated 
and inside the tragedies communities was made and it is 
reported in the following paragraph. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE V. NETWORK STATISTICS (n=NUMBER OF NODES,  m=NUMBER OF 
EDGES, 
<k>=AVERAGE 
DEGREE, 
C=CLUSTERING 
COEFFICIENT, 
E=EFFICIENCY, <L>=AVERAGE PATH LENGTH,  d=DIAMETER,  δ=DENSITY) 
FOR THE TERM ‘FEAR’ FOR FIVE EXPERIMENTAL RUNS. 
Net 
n 
m 
<k> 
C 
E 
<L> 
d 
δ 
Fear1 
11 
10 
1.82 
0 
0.09 
0.48 
1 
0.09 
Fear2 
72 
98 
2.72 
0.08 
0.07 
2.3 
3 
0.02 
Fear3 
393 
769 
3.91 
0.16 
0.05 
3.66 
5 
0.005 
Fear4 
2178 
4778 
4.39 
0.17 
0.04 
4.73 
7 
0.001 
Fear5 
8228 
23521 
5.72 
0.23 
// 
5.41 
13 
0.0004 
C. Analysis of both Computational and Manual Networks 
The various search algorithms that were developed 
contributed to the creation of completely different networks, 
identifying the relationships within WordNet’s deep 
structure. In order to collect all of the experimental data, the 
search algorithm R8_Overview was used. For each emotional 
term, the search variable ALL was applied (thus the 
algorithm searched for and inserted in the network all the 
grammatical categories for the studied term, only varying in 
the depth level – in this case, from level 1 to level 5). For 
each search level, the relationships established between 
terminal nodes were not taken into account. 
D. Computer Simulation Results: Emerging Cognitive 
Attractors 
The term ‘love’ was used as an example. Two 
fundamental dynamics showed noticeable phenomena, both 
quantitative and qualitative. 
 
 
Figure 3. Second level using the function R8_Overview, for the term ‘fear’. 
It shows a significant network’s growth and three communities. 
TABLE I. STIMULUS-TRIGGER MODEL [20] APPLIED TO SOME CRUCIAL EVENTS OF THE TRAGEDIES (MANUAL ANNOTATION METHOD). MORE DATA IN 
APPENDIX A [43]. 
Event 
Stimulus Event: ‘threat’ 
Cognition: ‘danger’ 
Feeling State: ‘fear’ 
Overt Behavior: 
‘escape’ 
Effect: ‘safety’ 
Othello: 
ACT II SC III Othello is afraid 
of what Iago says about 
Desdemona and Cassio 
Desdemona could betray him 
and fall in love with Cassio 
Desdemona is unfaithful 
and Cassio is a betrayer 
Fear of betrayal 
He escapes the idea 
of a betrayal 
Iago could be wrong 
and his love is not in 
danger 
Event: 
Stimulus Event: 
‘obstacle’ 
Cognition: ‘enemy’ 
Feeling State: 
‘anger’ 
Overt Behavior: 
‘attack’ 
Effect: ‘destroy 
obstacle’ 
Hamlet: 
ACT II SC II Hamlet discovers 
the truth about the betrayal of 
his mother 
The shame that the Queen 
threw upon Hamlet and his 
father must be revenged 
Hamlet perceives his 
mother as an enemy: she 
is a betrayer 
Disgusted by the 
Queen’s treachery, 
Hamlet is mad for anger 
Hamlet prepares his 
revenge against the 
Queen 
He is going to destroy 
his mother, revenging 
his father 
TABLE II. SMALL-WORLD PARAMETERS [30]. 
Hamlet 
Network 
γ 
λ 
σ 
‘fear’ 
2.32095 
0.96244 
2.41154 
‘anger’ 
1.67713 
0.99621 
1.68352 
‘joy’/’enjoyment’ 
2.00461 
1.00792 
1.98886 
‘love’ 
1.70119 
0.99388 
1.71167 
‘sadness’ 
1.96461 
0.97257 
2.02008 
Othello 
‘fear’ 
1.54020 
1.00695 
1.52956 
‘joy’/‘enjoyment’ 
1.42291 
1.01292 
1.40476 
TABLE III. FIT RESULTS FOR THE DEGREE DISTRIBUTION OF THE 
NETWORK OF THE TERM ‘FEAR’, SUGGESTING A TRUNCATED POWER LAW. 
‘fear’ 
Truncated Power Law 
Power Law 
a 
b 
kc 
R2adj 
a 
b 
R2adj 
in 
1.041 
-1.096 
22.24 
0.999 
1.007 
-1.5 
0.996 
out 
0.295 
0.035 
9.435 
0.9994 
0.355 
-0.675 
0.804 
tot 
0.957 
-0.779 
66.16 
0.976 
0.976 
-0.895 
0.969 
‘fear’ 
Exponential Law 
a 
kc 
R2adj 
in 
1.652 
1.783 
0.962 
out 
0.3 
9.956 
0.9992 
tot 
0.817 
5.64 
0.83 
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 4. Third level using the function R8_Overview, for the term ‘fear’, 
with a greater growth rate of both the network and the communities.  
 
1) The Growth of the Network Structure Through the 
Function R8_Overview 
Networks analysis was carried out using the software 
Mathematica. The program to achieve communities of 
networks with this software is given in the Appendix C of 
supplementary materials [43]. This network is composed by 
a mix of names and verbs, related to the term ‘love’ in all its 
varieties of manifestation and behavior. 
The first levels of the system and the communities of the 
network (Figure 5) showed strongly connected terms, 
sharing mutual meaning relationships: links are bidirectional. 
In fact, there is a clustering of terms based on the 
communities to which they belong. The verbs of the first 
experimental run for the word ‘love’ have reciprocal links, 
which create an emerging structure with terms very close 
from the semantic point of view. The emerging structure is a 
complete graph (see following paragraphs for details). The 
second community presented different relationships, less 
dense and more distant, and moreover, with a different 
spatial organization. From a cognitive perspective, these 
differences in topology may imply a greater clustering of 
terms (denser neighborhoods [10]), resulting in a higher 
availability of the terms of one community compared to 
another.  
In the second level of the network, the number of 
communities arose from 2 to 4 and, as before, the dynamical 
reorganization of meanings was complex. The denser 
community didn’t change throughout the growth processes, 
while the other community acquired new terms. These 
additions let the three new communities emerge, i.e., three 
new network topologies. A growth that was significantly 
different from Barabási and Albert’s preferential attachment 
[23] was observed in this case, given that each node had the 
possibility to develop in multiple dimensions of the semantic 
space.  
 
Figure 5. Communities of the first growth level of the term ‘love’. The 
whole network is showed on the left, and the communities on the right. 
 
At level 4, this phenomenon kept getting more and more 
complex: here, the computational system collected a network 
composed by 290 nodes and 2546 edges, structured over the 
13 communities. 
Many of the communities among the 13 formed in this 
level, though still belonging to the term ‘love’, created in 
turn second level structures, which reproduced the structures 
observed at the first depth level of search algorithm. 
Topologically, similar structures emerged in this network, 
with the same spatial organization, but with different terms. 
These structures started to grow in neighborhoods 
characterized 
by 
highly 
connected 
terms, 
or 
in 
neighborhoods, which were globally poorly dense, but 
locally dense. From this analysis, generative growth models 
were detected: they worked combining their own growth 
mechanism to other existing ones, thus realizing creative 
cognitive processes of terms association. 
 
2) The Associative Dynamics Obtained through the 
Functions 
R2_Hypernyms, 
R3_Hyponyms 
and 
R6_Synonyms 
The simulations with the functions R2_Hypernyms, 
R3_Hyponyms and R6_Synonyms revealed interesting 
behaviors of terms organizations. Again, using ‘love’ as an 
example, simulations were run for the three functions at level 
4, in order to understand the general dynamics of aggregation 
and the related network topologies that sustained such 
functions. 
For the function R2_Hypernyms, the computational 
simulations gave the network (Figure 6) showing behaviors 
of terms aggregation, which were similar to the synonyms. 
As for the function R3_Hyponyms, instead, the topological 
organizations of the emerging communities were different. 
The relationship between nodes and edges had the same 
nature for synonyms and hypernyms, changing for the 
hyponyms network. 
As regards the function R2_Hypernyms, it showed 
behaviors of terms aggregation that are similar to the 
synonyms, as can be seen in Figure 7. 
As for the function R3_Hyponyms, instead, the 
topological organizations of the emerging communities are 
different, as showed in Figure 8. In this last network, 
communities were not linked: hypernyms network showed a 
greater amount of communities as for the other two 
functions, but these communities were composed by terms 
settled in non-densely populated neighborhoods, which 
somehow linked themselves to the key terms of every 
detected sub- community.  
 
Figure 6. Network obtained by R2_Hypernyms starting from the term ‘love’, 
and realizing a structure composed by 125 nodes and 1142 edges. 
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 7. Communities of the hypernyms network of ‘love’. The structure 
had 168 nodes and 1480 edges. 
 
 
Figure 8. Hyponyms network, presenting 370 nodes and 758 edges. The 
aggregational structures are limited to few terms, often not interconnected. 
 
What emerged were structured dynamics hiding in both 
computational and cognitive modeling, similar to a mental 
lexicon 
organization, 
shaped 
by 
the 
processes 
of 
clusterization according to semantic fields and grammatical 
categories or according to a set of stimulus-reaction families, 
which activated different cognitive spreading activation 
dynamics of meaning. 
The clusterization of emotional terms at the first level 
appeared as a structured set of three main collections linked 
to the central term love. The emerging idea is that terms 
clustered according to grammatical categories, where verbs 
topologically and quantitatively represented the main nucleus 
and two outlying clusters composed by adjectives and 
substantives fork, changing the main geometry. At the 
second level of growth, the communities arose with the 
grammatical clusterization of substantives and related 
hypernyms, hyponyms and synonyms. The third level totally 
broke the initial topology of the network, creating new 
ramifications, which semantically blended. The term love 
reached its whole geometry covering with brand-new 
meanings. The emerging grammatical phenomenon is the 
absence of relevant new verbs, in fact, newly appeared 
categories were substantives, adjectives and adverbs. The 
existing set of adjectives near the meaning of ‘dear’ 
increased its cluster, strengthened its connotation and mixed 
grammatical categories. At this level, emerging phenomena 
focused on specific growing principle and structured 
dynamics hiding in computational modeling and similar to a 
mental lexicon organization. 
E. The Resulting Dynamics for Othello and Hamlet 
The emergence of communities was analyzed in the five 
networks related to the five basic emotions in Hamlet and 
Othello as well (Figure 9). 
1) ‘anger’ 
Starting with Othello (Figures 10 and 11), the first level 
of connection of the central term was related to the concept 
of ‘evil’. The growing process of the synonym network 
proceeded in a shading semantic path, sliding from the 
notion of ‘fury’ and ‘rage’, to the conceptualization of ‘bad’ 
and ‘evil’. First high degree nodes arose as central 
architecture of meaning where the emotional lexicon was 
shaped. At an advanced growth level ‘foul’ created a new 
geometry, connecting the meaning of ‘evil’ and ‘bad’ to the 
concept of ‘madness’ with the term ‘foul’. The creative 
process seemed to model the shade of meaning according to 
the cognitive dynamics involved in the play. There were 
different levels of synonymy, which modeled the topology of 
the network. 
The second major clustering of the network reorganized 
the semantic space, moving from the concept of ‘madness’ to 
the cluster with the highest degree node ‘caitiff’. The new 
shade of meaning shuttled to another dimension and affected 
the initial denotation of ‘anger’, according to the well-known 
plot of Othello, where the idea of ‘evil’ and ‘anger’ was 
strictly related to ‘dreadful traitors’. The term ‘anger’ was 
analyzed in detail in Hamlet too, through the visualization of 
three time steps of its network evolution, from a single node 
to a small synonymic network.  
At time step 1 (see Figure 12), ‘anger’ linked itself to 
other key terms such as ‘rage’, ‘choler’ or ‘wrath’, 
reproducing results that were similar to WordNet networks, 
where they were considered pure synonyms of ‘anger’. Due 
to diachronic mutations of semantic areas of the terms, in 
this step other words were included as synonyms, such as 
‘gall’, ‘distemper’ or ‘venom. These elements gave 
remarkable hints about the author perception of the emotion 
‘anger’, always focused on poisonous and contagious 
elements. Unsurprisingly, at the second level of the network 
(Figure 13) terms as ‘poison’ and ‘contagion’ appeared, 
progressively expanding the semantic area covered by the 
initial node ‘anger’. It is interesting to note the immediate 
presence of the term ‘madness’ in the network, already at 
level 1 of its evolution and growing at level 2, linking to 
other existent nodes such as ‘choler’, Furthermore, ‘lunacy’ 
was added as node to the network configuration. ‘madness’ 
and ‘poison’ (which are the two leitmotifs in Hamlet’s plot) 
were well-represented concepts in Shakespearian language 
production networks. 
 
 
Figure 9. Communities of emotional words in Othello (left) and Hamlet 
(right).  
 
 
Figure 10. The network of emotion ‘anger’ in Othello at levels 1, 2, 3 and 
5, clockwise. 
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 11. The network of term ‘anger’ in Othello, at the second level of 
clustering on the left. 
 
1)  ‘fear’ and ‘joy’ 
‘fear’ and ‘joy’ were analyzed as well. Two levels of 
growth 
were 
found 
by 
using 
both 
methods: 
the 
computational and the manual one showed few similar 
results. The term ‘joy’ reflected the same dynamics of 
growth. In the computational model, the starting point was a 
first setting of direct synonyms, which clearly belonged to 
the semantic field of ‘joyfulness’. As seen in Figure 14, the 
manual model, at the first level, reproduced a structure of 
cognitive organization similar to WordNet communities, 
connecting the word ‘joy’ with a specific set of word 
(‘delight’ and ‘pleasure’).  
The second level detached from the probability rules of 
the computational model, clustering the terms according to 
different cognitive processes, used in the creation of the 
tragedy’s plot. Then, the term ‘joy’ acquired a different 
shade, growing in a non-linear sense, towards the semantic 
field of ‘satisfaction’ and ‘bliss’ with a hidden idea of 
‘revenge’. This outcome was due to the differences in the 
structural properties of the two networks: the computational 
one grew by searching into a bigger database (WordNet) and 
looking for various kind of connections, while the manual 
one focused on the search of strong (mainly synonymic) 
links inside the pool of words used by Shakespeare in 
Hamlet. It is noticeable that while the first network allowed a 
general exploration of the semantic space of the ideal term 
‘fear’, the second network was strictly indicative of 
Shakespearean lexical choices. The relationship between the 
same term in the two networks reflected the relationship of a 
‘type’ with its ‘token’, where a ‘type’ represents a 
prototypical concept, and the token represents one of its 
possible real occurrences (in this case, the one chosen by the 
author of the tragedy). 
 
Figure 12. The network of the term ‘anger’ in Hamlet, at level 1. 
 
Figure 13. The node ‘anger’ in Hamlet, at level 2. 
 
2) Body and Emotions Dynamics in Othello and Hamlet 
Physiological changes due to specific emotions represent 
reparatory reactions to specific events [31]. Most of these 
modifications are highly visible, such as increase/decrease 
in heart rate, changes in skin complexion, etc. A deep 
analysis of the metaphors and images consciously or 
unconsciously associated to emotional states helped 
clarifying the way emotions are perceived. In the networks, 
we found a good example for this phenomenon, useful to 
discover how the characters of the plays sensed emotions. In 
Figure 15, the cluster in the network revealed how 
‘mourning’ and ‘sorrow’ were expressed through a group of 
interconnected verbs. Sorrow expression was linked to 
hearing and voice. Thanks to clusters visualization, it was 
easy to study verbs such as: ‘to mourn’, ‘to weep’, ‘to 
grieve’, and ‘to lament’. They shared different auditory 
variations of the same sense, through which ‘sorrow’ 
became concrete and audible. Tables opened the possibility 
to enter in the character’s inner sensing and understand how 
an emotion shaped its body and mind. 
 
 
Figure 14. Growth levels Comparative analysis (first top and second level 
bottom) of the term ‘joy’: manual (right) and computational (left) methods.  
 
 
Figure 15. ‘sadness’ (Hamlet). Focus on the cluster of verbs representing 
pain and its expressions. 
 
3) The Emotional Continuum in Cognitive Phenomena: 
Dynamical Transitions 
Generally, emotions are described as a discrete 
phenomenon [32][33]. In real situations, subjects experiment 
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

a continuous passage from one emotion to another, giving 
the change of the variables (internal and external factors) that 
influence cognitive behavior [34]. 
We use networks and communities of emotional words as 
indicators of these complex changes in Shakespearean 
characters. In fact, networks visualizations made visible the 
intersection points between different emotional words. It 
allowed us to identify those terms recurring in every (or 
almost every) emotional phenomenon, as can be seen in 
Table VI for Hamlet and Othello.  
F.  Emerging Motifs as Cognitive Attractors 
After this initial work, we found that cognitive networks, 
not only created structured connections between terms, but 
such terms, far from being arranged randomly, had an 
organization. We assisted to the emergence of self-
organizing structures [35][36]. In discrete dynamic systems, 
such as Cellular Automata, said motifs are known as gliders 
[37], and are responsible for the stowing and transportation 
of information [38][39]. Similarly, the growth of linguistic 
networks 
produced 
increasingly 
complex 
structures, 
showing that there existed many modalities of network 
growth: at the global level, within the social/cultural 
expression of emotions, and at the community of words 
level, within the large domain of the characters dialogue. 
Well organized patterns were observed, recalling platonic 
solids and other multidimensional geometric figures. Each 
motif was preceded by the starting emotional noun and 
followed by a number. The latter defined the order of 
appearance of the motif within the growth of the emotional 
linguistic 
network. 
An 
iconographic apparatus 
was 
associated to each motif: two images that present the 
constitutive elements of the motif itself in two dimensions, 
one with linguistic tags and one without, and one three-
dimensional image. Some explanatory examples are 
provided below. 
G. Complete Graphs, Symmetries and Breaches of 
Symmetries 
Complete graphs were composed of n nodes, each of 
which was connected to all of the other ones. These motifs 
possessed both reflective and translational symmetries. 
Since the detailed study of said symmetries went beyond 
this article’s objectives, for further details please see [40]. 
For explanatory purposes, it must be pointed out that 
polygons 
have 
two 
dimensions, prisms are 
three-
dimensional objects (whose volume is composed of a finite 
number of planar polygons), and polytopes have various 
dimensions (4, 5 . . . n . . .), known as polychorons. The 
concept of polytopes extends that of prism to various 
dimensions. Some of the emerging motifs that were found 
belonged to the prism category and others to the polytopes 
category. 
A second category of motifs was similar to the previous 
one, although some of the edges were removed: this resulted 
in the loss of some symmetries, also known as breach of 
symmetries. The latter had a very complex organizational 
nature; for example, the breach of two symmetries, if 
appropriately situated, could restore symmetry [41]. This 
category of motifs highlighted the presence of non-
conventional symmetries of great interest to the previously 
presented cases. Many of these motifs presented a pair of 
elements joined by a double bond that pointed to other 
nodes situated in a plane orthogonal to the pair’s axis. For 
example, AngerEP_C1 presented a pentagonal structure 
orthogonal to the pair’s axis. The most outstanding 
symmetry in this structure was the 72° rotation, as in the 
traditional pentagon. Similarly, AngerEP_C3 presented an 
octagon on the plane orthogonal to the pair’s axis, with a 
rotational symmetry of 42°. Examples of said motifs are 
presented in Figure 16 with the labels on the left, the link 
directions in the middle, and 3D structure on the right. 
AngerEP_B1 (containing the term ira, synonym of anger 
and degenerated to other meanings) and DisgustEP_B1 
underwent a break of symmetry. 
H. Motif Composition 
The emergence and breach of symmetries provided 
information regarding the extraordinary compositional 
abilities of the organizational and semantic structure of 
language. The sequence of motifs and patterns highlighted 
the typical nature of a generative grammar, significantly 
recalling the language of chemistry and the formation of 
biological 
macromolecules. 
Figure 
17 
shows 
some 
examples of the motifs AngerEP_D1 and AngerEP_D2, 
which identify attractors of emotional terms. 
A variant of this structure was found in DisgustEP_D3, 
where a 3-simplex and a triangle related to the pair’s axis. 
This case also presented a double breach in symmetry that 
reproduced another symmetry. Motif DisgustEP_D4 was 
more complex and difficult to visualize (and represent). 
Parallel to a plane containing a triangle, a square developed 
on a plane to one side, and a triangle to the other side, 
resulting in a breach of symmetry. The motif DisgustEP_D5 
highlighted the emergence of a complex structure, starting 
from a complex 3-motif graph, from which several bonds 
with other motifs unraveled, situating themselves in a 
variety 
of 
manners 
across 
space. 
The 
motif 
ExpectationEP_D1 
was 
particularly 
interesting: 
two 
TABLE VI. CROSS-EMOTIONAL TERMS IN HAMLET AND OTHELLO 
Hamlet 
‘fear’ 
‘anger’ 
‘sadness’ 
‘love’ 
‘joy’ 
‘blood’ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
- 
‘soul’ 
- 
+ 
+ 
+ 
- 
‘heart’ 
- 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
‘passsion’ 
- 
+ 
+ 
+ 
- 
‘madness’ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
- 
‘fire’ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
- 
‘bosom’ 
- 
+ 
+ 
+ 
- 
‘heat’ 
- 
+ 
+ 
+ 
- 
Othello 
 
‘blood’ 
- 
+ 
+ 
- 
- 
‘soul’ 
- 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
‘heart’ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
‘love’ 
- 
+ 
+ 
+ 
- 
‘happiness’ 
- 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

complete graphs composed of a 9-simplex and a 3-node 
motif, joined around the axis of a node pair. The two nodes 
connected, one opposite the other, to the central pair and to 
one of the motifs, respectively. 
 
 
 
Figure 16. The figure shows examples of symmetries that intercept the 
semantic organization of two emotional terms. 
 
This kind of visualization highlighted a typical feature of 
emotions: they tend to blend and mix in a sort of continuum 
[42], with no clear borders.  
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This analysis was a non-conventional study of texts full 
of emotional cognition: Hamlet and Othello, the two well-
known Shakespeare’s tragedies. The aim was to convert 
these masterpieces in a multi- dimensional field of 
exploration in order to understand how the creative 
processes in the Shakespeare mind modeled an emotion, 
how the emotional words semantic network was involved in 
the process, and how a character, like any other person, felt 
and expressed an emotion inside communicative contexts. 
 
Figure 17. This collection of images represents two different semantic 
organizations for the emotional term ‘anger’. 
The first step was the creation of a list of names, verbs, 
adjectives, adverbs and sentences for five specific emotions, 
manually segmented from both plays. Terms referred to 
‘anger’, ‘love’, ‘sadness’, ‘joy’ and ‘fear’ and their related 
semantic fields were selected. The list included specific 
characteristics for each term, such as who pronounced it, 
when it appeared in the plays, its context and the perceptual 
modality by which it was expressed. Then, complex systems 
theory was applied to the analysis of emotional cognition and 
these 
words 
were transformed into networks. The 
investigation was further explored by interconnecting the 
first skeleton of words with WordNet, thus allowing the 
flourishing of emotional words organization patterns, 
emerged from the interaction of many basic components at 
several levels of complexity. 
The investigation highlighted the following issues: 
- emotional states represented dynamical conditions 
explained through linguistic and behavioral complex 
configurations; 
- transitions existed at different emotional states; 
- linguistic and behavioral attractors were detected as stable 
configurations or related words patterns, which demonstrated 
complex organization, with symmetries and breaches; 
- such attractors were identified by a set of variables 
describing environmental, cognitive and physical features of 
the main characters of both plays; 
- patterns variations demonstrated the same features of 
chaotic systems: small changes in variables’ values involved 
abrupt qualitative behavioral changes (both in corporeal and 
cognitive states changes). The transition from one attractor to 
another could represent phase transitions from an emotional 
state to another; 
- complex organization motifs can be found in both the plays 
and in the WordNet search networks, that not only 
highlighted the complexity of the neighborhoods of each 
emotional term, but that such neighborhoods came with 
special organized structures, with different geometrical 
features, which arose during linguistic production. 
The emotional terms networks’ growth showed a 
different level of complexity for the various terms, which far 
from being strictly ordered, created many cognitive 
organization patterns. Results showed the evolution of the 
story plot connected to the growth of the emotional cognition 
networks, at the single character, and at the global level, 
particularly represented by transitions among different kinds 
of emotions, that demonstrated the complexity of the 
emotional dynamics in the characters of both plays. 
The innovative contribution of this paper was to highlight 
how these elements are brought together in an extraordinary 
variety of patterns and dynamics, which according to us can 
represent an expression of cognitive organization of emotion.  
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Steyvers and J. B. Tenenbaum, “The large-scale structure 
of semantic networks: Statistical analyses and a model of 
semantic growth”, Cognitive Science, vol. 29, no. 1, 2005, pp. 
41-78. 
[2] M. Sigman and G. A. Cecchi, “Global organization of the 
wordnet lexicon”, Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, vol. 99, no. 3, 2002, pp. 1742-1747. 
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

[3] R. F. i Cancho, “The structure of syntactic dependency 
networks: insights from recent advances in network theory”, 
Problems of Quantitative Linguistics, 2005, pp. 60-75. 
[4] M. R. Quillian, “Word concepts: a theory and simulation of 
some basic semantic capabilities”, Behavioral Science, vol. 
12, no. 5, 1967, pp. 410-430. 
[5] A. M. Collins and E. F. Loftus, “A spreading-activation 
theory of semantic processing”, Psychological review, vol. 
82, no.6, 1975, p. 407. 
[6] O. Sporns, “Networks of the Brain”, MIT press, 2011. 
[7] A. G. Huth, S. Nishimoto, A. T. Vu, and J. L. Gallant, “A 
continuous semantic space describes the representation of 
thousands of object and action categories across the human 
brain,” Neuron, vol. 76, no. 6, 2012, pp. 1210-1224. 
[8] T. L. Griffiths, M. Steyvers, A. and Firl, “Google and the 
mind predicting fluency with pagerank,” Psychological 
Science, vol. 18, no. 12, 2007, pp. 1069-1076. 
[9] T. T. Hills, M. Maouene, J. Maouene, A. Sheya, and L. Smith, 
“Categorical structure among shared features in networks of 
early-learned nouns,” Cognition, vol. 112, no. 3, 2009, pp. 
381-396. 
[10] M. S. Vitevitch, “What can graph theory tell us about word 
learning and lexical retrieval?,” Journal of Speech, Language, 
and Hearing Research, vol. 51, no. 2, 2008, pp. 408-422. 
[11] M. S. Vitevitch, G. Ercal, and B. Adagarla, “Simulating 
retrieval from a highly clustered network: Implications for 
spoken word recognition,” Frontiers in psychology, vol. 2, 
2011, p. 369. 
[12] M. S. Vitevitch, K.Y. Chan, and R. Goldstein, “Insights into 
failed lexical retrieval from network science,” Cognitive 
Psychology, vol. 68, no. 1, 2014, pp. 1-32. 
[13] L. Page, S. Brin, R. Motwani, T. and Winograd, “The 
pagerank citation ranking: bringing order to the web.” 
Stanford Digital Libraries Working Paper, 1998. 
[14] R. Milo et al. “Network motifs: Simple building blocks of 
complex networks,” Science, vol. 298, no. 5594, 2002, pp. 
824-827. 
[15] N. H. Frijda, “The Emotions,” Cambridge University Press, 
1986. 
[16] A. H. Fischer, “Emotion Scripts: A Study of the Social and 
Cognitive Facets of Emotions,” DSWO Press, 1991. 
[17] A. Ortony, “The Cognitive Structure of Emotions,” 
Cambridge University Press, 1990. 
[18] R. S. Lazarus, “Thoughts on the relations between emotion 
and cognition,” American Psychologist, vol. 37, no. 9, 1982, 
p. 1019. 
[19] K. R. Scherer, “Emotion as a process: function, origin and 
regulation,” Social Science Information/sur les Sciences 
Sociales, vol. 21, no. 4-5, 1982, pp. 555-570. 
[20] R. Plutchik, “The nature of emotions. human emotions have 
deep evolutionary roots, a fact that may explain their 
complexity and provide tools for clinical practice,” American 
Scientist, vol. 89, no. 4, 2001, pp. 344-350. 
[21] N. H. Frijda, “The different roles of cognitive variables in 
emotion,” Cognition in Individual and Social Contexts, 1989, 
pp. 325-337, Amsterdam: Elsevier Science. 
[22] F. Sharifian, R. Dirven, N. Yu., and S. Niemeier, 
“Introduction: the Mind Inside the Body,” Culture, body, and 
Language: Conceptualizations of Internal Body Organs across 
Cultures and Languages, vol. 3, no. 24, 2008, Berlin: Mouton 
de Gruyter. 
[23] A.L. Barabási and R. Albert, “Emergence of scaling in 
random networks,” Science, vol. 286, no. 5439, 1999, pp. 
509-512. 
[24] R. Albert, H. Jeong, and A.L. Barabási, “Internet: diameter of 
the world-wide web,” Nature, vol. 401, no. 6749, 1999, pp. 
130-131. 
[25] A.L. Barabási, “The origin of bursts and heavy tails in human 
dynamics,” Nature, vol. 435, no. 7039, 2005, pp. 207-211. 
[26] M. Faloutsos, P. Faloutsos, and C. Faloutsos, “On power-law 
relationships of the internet topology,” In ACM SIGCOMM 
Computer Communication Review, vol. 29, no. 4, 1999, pp. 
251-262. 
[27] H. Jeong, B. Tombor, R. Albert, Z. N. Oltvai, and A. L. 
Barabási, “The large-scale organization of metabolic 
networks,” Nature, vol. 407, no. 6804, 2000, pp. 651-654. 
[28] G. A. Miller, R. Beckwith, C. Fellbaum, D. Gross, and K.J. 
Miller, “Introduction to wordnet: An on-line lexical 
database*,” International Journal of Lexicography, vol. 3, no. 
4, 1990, pp. 235-244. 
[29] G. A. Miller, “Wordnet: A lexical database for English,” 
Communications of the ACM, vol. 38, no. 11, 1995, pp. 39-
41. 
[30] D. J. Watts and S. H. Strogatz, “Collective dynamics of small-
world networks,” Nature, vol. 393, no. 6684, 1998, pp. 440-
442. 
[31] R. W. Levenson, “Autonomic specificity and emotion,” 
Handbook of Affective Sciences, vol. 2, 2003, pp. 212-224. 
[32] P. Ekman, “An argument for basic emotions,” Cognition and 
Emotion, 6, no. 3-4, 1992, pp. 169-200. 
[33] L. F. Barrett, “Discrete emotions or dimensions? The role of 
valence focus and arousal focus,” Cognition and Emotion, 
vol. 12, no. 4, 1998, pp. 579-599. 
[34] T. A. Walden and M. C. Smith, “Emotion regulation,” 
Motivation and Emotion, vol. 21, no. 1, 1997, pp. 7-25 
[35] C. G. Langton, “Artificial Life: an Overview,” MIT Press, 
1995. 
[36] E. Bilotta and P. Pantano, “Cellular Automata and Complex 
Systems: Methods for Modeling Biological Phenomena,” IGI 
Global, 2010. 
[37] S. Wolfram, “Universality and complexity in cellular 
automata,” Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena, vol. 10, no. 1, 
1984, pp. 1-35. 
[38] C. G. Langton, “Computation at the edge of chaos: phase 
transitions and emergent computation,” Physica D: Nonlinear 
Phenomena, vol. 42, no. 1, 1990, pp. 12-37. 
[39] C. G. Langton, “Studying artificial life with cellular 
automata,” Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena, vol. 22, no. 1, 
1986, pp. 120-149. 
[40] H. S. M. Coxeter, “Regular Complex Polytopes Volume 1,” 
Cambridge University Press, 1974. 
[41] I. Stewart and M. Golubitsky, “Fearful Symmetry: Is God a 
Geometer?,” Courier Corporation, 2010. 
[42] R. Plutchik, “The Psychology and Biology of Emotion,” 
Harper Collins College Publishers, 1994. 
[43] https://goo.gl/NkNS13, Access date: November 2015. 
[44] http://wordnet.princeton.edu/, Access date: January 2015. 
 
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

