On the Social Aspects of Forming the Concept of "Chef-D'oeuvre"   
 
Olga Chernavskaya  
Lebedev Physical Institute (LPI) 
Moscow, Russia  
E-mail: olgadmitcher@gmail.com   
Yaroslav Rozhylo  
BICA Labs  
Kyiv, Ukraine  
E-mail: yarikas@gmail.com 
 
Abstract— Aesthetic Emotions caused by the perception of an 
Artworks (music, painting, literature, architec-ture, dancing, 
etc.) represent the enigma, since they are quite individual and 
caused by (generally) no rational reasons. However, the 
individual concept of Chef-D’oeuvre, that is the effect of ‘goose 
bumps’, is sincere and objective since could be measured by 
skin sensors. In our previous works, we have proposed so- 
called Natural-Constructive Cognitive Architecture that is 
represented by the complex multilevel combination of various-
type neural processors. Being based on this architecture, we 
have argued that the Aesthetic Emotions are connected with 
activation of the ‘halo-neurons’, those that correspond to 
atypical (rare) attributes of the real objects. It was shown that 
the personal feeling of Chef-D’oeuvre could be caused by the 
‘recognition paradox’ effect, when the artwork seems similar 
to well-known patterns but is still unusual. In this paper, we 
consider certain social aspects of this concept’s formation. It is 
shown that this process is also paradoxical and largely similar 
to the process of individual learning.  
 
Keywords – emotions; association; paradox; halo-neurons; 
core-neurons; ambiguity; expertise.  
I. INTRODUCTION 
Understanding and modeling emotions in artificial 
cognitive systems is really a challenge and attract great 
attention [1]—[6]. Emotions, being a more ancient way of 
reaction to the environment [3], than rational thinking 
(perhaps for this very reason) appear to be rather difficult to 
be conscious and formalized. This is especially so when it 
comes to the Aesthetic Emotions (AE), i.e., the perception 
of artworks and natural phenomena (fire, waterfall, etc.) 
[7]—[9]. In contrast to the so-called "pragmatic emotions" 
associated with the attainment of a specific goal, AE do not 
have visible rational reasons and clear criteria. Moreover, 
the standard division into positive and negative emotions is 
not applicable here, since one can only say whether they 
"like" or "dislike" an artwork. Thus, AE are always purely 
individual and sincere: strong AE are accompanied by an 
objective (and even measurable) effect of "goose bumps". 
This effect occurs when a phenomenon or an artwork is 
perceived as a “Chef-D’oeuvre” (ChD).  
In our previous work [10], we have considered possible 
mechanisms and manifestations of AE in individual 
cognitive systems. It was shown that, in addition to the 
apparent influence of cultural context and public opinion, 
the concept of ChD is formed under the influence of 
 
childish vague impressions;  
 
personal fuzzy associations; 
 
the influence of cultural mini-media (family, 
messmates, etc.). 
All these factors produce subjective fuzzy associations, 
and this is the very mechanism of artwork perception. It was 
shown also that, using the terminology of J. Levin 
(“explanatory gap between the Brain and the Mind”) [11], 
these associations appear at the border between the Brain 
and the Mind.  
In this paper, we consider possible mechanisms of 
forming the public opinion about the value of certain 
artwork. We employ the so-called Natural Constructive 
Approach to the problem of cognitive process modeling, 
that has been proposed and elaborated in our previous works 
[10][12][13]. In other words, we try to realize, how the 
symbol ChD could appear in the “social Mind”. Thus, the 
paper is aimed to reveal possible “natural” mechanisms of 
social appreciation of a certain artwork as a ChD besides the 
obvious propaganda, marketing policy, etc. However, it is 
necessary to stress that this work is in progress yet.  
The paper is organized as follows. Section II is focused 
on the formalization of the problem of forming the public 
evaluation of ChD. In Section III, a possible solution to the 
problem is presented. Summary and discussion of further 
working perspectives are presented in Section IV.  
II. 
1BFORMALIZATION OF THE PROBLEM   
In engaging with the problem of forming a public 
appraisal of a certain Artwork, we did not fully realize the 
whole measure of its complexity. Any Artwork, as well as 
the concepts of ‘information’ and ‘thinking’, has both 
material and virtual component, and the processes of 
formation of their social assessment vary significantly. For 
example, 
paintings 
(originals) 
of 
well-known 
and 
recognized masters are valued as brands; they are so 
expensive because only a single copy of the work exists. 
Here, the laws of the market do work, which practically 
have no relation to the artistic content of the picture. This 
fact explains that musical ChDs have low material price (the 
notes are easily reproducible), but tickets for a concert of a 
famous performer can reach a fairly high price, if the 
performer is fashionable. But what is the mechanism of the 
word "fashionable"? Here again, marketing policy and 
propaganda do work, i.e., forcible implanting into the public 
consciousness the idea of "greatness" of certain pattern. To 
the same range of problems, the political considerations 
could be related. So in the Soviet Union, rather weak 
(untalented) and deservedly forgotten now artworks, 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-609-5
COGNITIVE 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

glorifying the party and the government, were highly 
appreciated.  
The mechanism of artificial formation of public opinion 
is the subject of sociology research, not cognitive science. 
The problem that we are trying to solve is how a natural (or 
“sincere”) feeling that some artwork is a ChD does arise not 
for one individual, but for a large part of society.  
One important factor should be noted. In modern society 
(as well as in any sufficiently developed and structured 
one), the professional corporations (for example, the Union 
of Writers, the Union of artists, the Nobel Committee, the 
Academy of Sciences, etc.) have a great influence. These 
are sufficiently closed communities that are reluctant to 
accept both new members and new ideas. Within these 
communities, 
certain 
(sometimes 
tacit) 
criteria 
for 
evaluating the artworks and the notion of "right" work are 
accepted, but these criteria can not guarantee that this work 
is a ChD .  
It seems that the word "right" could not be applied to an 
artwork, but initially the term ChD, or masterpiece, had the 
meaning of the best example of a product made by an 
artisan, "an approved work sample." Only after the artisan 
made a ChD, he could enter the guild (a trade and craft 
corporation that united masters of one or several similar 
professions), open his own ‘shop’ (studio) and become a 
master. Thus, it was the professionals who evaluated the 
artwork, and often the appraisal was influenced by personal  
interests of the corporation’s members (in other words, by 
intrigues). This is a good example of the emergence of 
conventional information, i.e., subjective information 
accepted within the given society. The mechanism of 
formation of subjective (conventional) information was 
considered within the framework of the Dynamic 
Information Theory [14][15], where it was shown that the 
choice of the society (in the given context, the choice of the 
ChD) should not and often is not the best. It is the result of 
the struggle and agreement of the community’s members, 
which could not stand the test of time and/or be not shared 
by the society in a broader sense (outside professional 
corporations). In the days of Mozart, it was Salieri who was 
treated as a recognized (and highly paid) master, because he 
wrote the "right" music, which was familiar and pleasant 
hearing of the nobles, while Mozart had the reputation of a 
bully whose music was not serious and understandable to 
commoners. However, nowadays it appeared that Mozart's 
music (we will be bold enough to say that not all, but only 
several outstanding patterns like, e.g., “Lacrimosa”) is really 
great, i.e., causes true and sincere "goose bumps" not only 
among professional musicians, but also among a lot of 
people far from music. Speaking about ChD we mean just 
this effect.  
Traditionally, the problem of public acceptance of ChD 
was considered in the humanities, within different branches. 
These approaches account for, first of all, the social and 
historical aspects of the ChD appearance. However, within 
the limits of different directions of art criticism, some 
specific characteristics of those artworks that society 
recognized as a ChD are analyzed. For example, in the 
framework of musicology, certain laws of musical harmony 
[9] are trying to distinguish genius creations from simply 
good professional work. Similarly, within the framework of 
literary studies and linguistics, texts are analyzed for the 
correlation of different grammatical constructions in 
recognized ChDs, and so on. However, the problem that we 
set for ourselves is to highlight certain regularities in the 
process of shaping public opinion in the "sincere" 
evaluation of any ChD, regardless of whether it relates to 
music, painting, literature, architecture, etc.  
III. 
POSSIBLE SOLUTION WITHIN THE NATURAL 
CONSTRUCTIVE APPROACH    
In our work [10], the Natural-Constructive Cognitive 
Architecture (NCCA) has been proposed and considered. 
Let us recall briefly some conclusions on the individual 
perception of  ChD obtained in the framework of this model.  
 
 
Figure 1. Schematic representation of NCCA.  
One of the main principles of the Natural-Constructive 
Approach is that any cognitive system should be divided 
into two subsystems, in analogy with hemispheres of the 
human brain [16]. One of them, the Right Hemisphere (RH) 
is responsible for generating information and learning new 
information (it contains the necessary random factor, the 
“noise”), the other one, tLeft Hemisphere (LH) being 
responsible for processing well-known information. This 
specialization is ensured by the fact that the connections 
between the dynamic formal neurons in the RH are trained 
according to the Hebbian self-organization principle [17] 
(amplified with time), while in the LH, the strongest (black) 
connections are selected according to the Hopfield principle 
[18] “redundant cut-off”. 
The whole system represents a complex multi-level 
hierarchical structure. The main (lower) level contains 
imaginative information (distributed memory) H, where 
signals from each real object activate a chain of neurons. In 
Levin's terminology, this level corresponds to the area of the 
Brain. Already at the next level, symbols [19] of typical 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-609-5
COGNITIVE 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

(i.e., most clearly learned) images are formed, which 
themselves can form "generalized" images (chains of 
connected symbols). At all subsequent levels, this process is 
repeated, leading to the structured ensemble of neurons. We 
emphasize that the process of symbol’s formation relates to 
the generation of a conventional (subjective for a given 
system) information. However, the chosen symbol is not 
necessarily (that is often impossible) the best, i.e., the most 
vivid representative of active neurons. It was obtained 
precisely as a result of "struggle and agreement" in the 
ensemble of neurons. Thus, all the symbolic information 
refers to the field of Mind, because it is not created 
objectively (in response to physiological signals), but as a 
result of the perception of this information in the given 
community of neurons.   
It was noted that the scheme of NCCA in Figure 1 
repeats the location of the various zones of the neocortex 
[13]. Emotions, as a product of the interaction between the 
sub-cortical structures and the neocortex, control the 
interaction and activation of the subsystems RH and LH. 
They can be indicated on the diagram only schematically, 
i.e., between the subsystems. In this process, the so-called 
pragmatic (or rational) emotions associated with the 
achievement of a certain (symbolic) goal, which can easily 
be formalized and formulated, refer to the area of Mind. In 
[10], we have shown that AE, which have no certain goal as 
well as a clear explanation, can arise on the boundary 
between the Brain and the Mind, i.e., when objective 
information obtained by the system results in generation of 
the subjective (conventional) information. Let us consider 
this process in more detail.  
In the process of recording any perceived object at the 
lowest level of RH, there participate so-called core-neurons 
encoding typical (the most characteristic and frequently 
repeated attributes) of this object, and so-called halo-
neurons corresponding to atypical (not characteristic, rare) 
attributes. The first are activated at any presentation of the 
object, and the connections between them intensify faster 
and become “black”. After that, the image is replicated in 
LH, becomes a "typical image" and gets its symbol at the 
next hierarchy level, etc. In this process, only the core-
neurons are involved in the symbol’s formation, so the 
perception of a typical image can be formulated and 
verbalized, i.e., expressed by the symbol-words. 
The halo-neurons are activated only at atypical (rare) 
representations of the object, therefore the connections 
between them and the core-neurons remain rather weak 
("grey"). They have no connection with any symbol, so their 
activation leads to vague impressions that could not be 
formulated and expressed by words. However, the halo-
neurons provide multiple associative links between images 
that are lost at the stage of the typical image/symbol 
formation. Note that the majority of halo-neurons are 
concentrated in the lowest level H0 in RH (that is why it was 
called the “fuzzy set”), which could be associated with 
human’s sub-consciousness.  
According to our hypothesis, it is these implicit 
associative connections that the Brain perceives, while the 
Mind do not realize, that create the "paradox of recognition" 
when perceiving the artworks. It is the impossibility of 
verbalized resolution of this paradox that leads to the effect 
of "goose bumps".  
Let us stress that these multiple nonverbalized 
associations can be considered as a mechanism for the effect 
of "seeing the invisible, connecting the unconnectable".    
How this consideration could be applied to formation of 
the concept of ChD in a “Social Mind”? Actually, the 
society represents a more primitive structure than the 
human’s Mind, but it definitely has highly structured 
organization. We can suppose that the “Social Brain” can be 
treated as the whole (unstructured) community, the analogy 
to the fuzzy set H0. But what is the “Social Mind”? 
Paradoxically, it seems that it is presented by just the next 
(lowest) symbolic level, while all others correspond to the 
artificial “power vertical”.  
Of course, it is impossible to apply these arguments 
literally to the analysis of the process of forming the public 
opinion. However, certain analogies suggest themselves. 
Thus, professional communities can be treated as a "typical 
image" of the profession, and the core-neurons represent the 
analogy with its recognized masters. They determine the 
evaluation of the works in this area, i.e., just they select 
those works that deserve the symbol of ChD. It is 
conventional information of this community (corporation).   
According to our hypothesis, the concept of ChD is 
formed as follows. First, there is a group of professionals in 
the art that defines the standard (pattern) of the "right" work 
(ChD). They play the role of core-neurons and form the 
typical image of the profession. This corporation, officially 
formalized (analogous to the transmission of a typical image 
in the LH), itself selects works that receive an assessment of 
ChD. At the same time, their evaluation can be influenced 
by corporate (however, personal) interests, so this estimate 
may not be related to the true value. Moreover, a really great 
work never corresponds to existing patterns. 
We suppose that true (sincer) perception of ChD in 
society is provided by a group of people who have a certain 
and sufficient experience in this area of art and understand 
the subtleties and measure of paradoxicalness of ChD, 
which represent an analogy with the halo-neurons. Then, 
there is a paradoxical effect of the "unconnectable 
connection", i.e., personal sensation of ChD appears to be 
extended to all (almost) the community. However, it should 
be stressed that speaking about the halo-neurons we imply 
only those, that were involved in some (any) learning 
process and got certain experience (expertise) in some area 
of Art. Note that the process of acquiring the experience 
requires certain time.  
An analogy to the phenomenon of "collective goose 
bumps" can be considered spontaneous (hysterical) 
popularity of certain creations (such as "Yesterday") not 
caused by an official propaganda. Thus, “sincere” AE and 
the appreciation of real ChD in the society arise in full 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-609-5
COGNITIVE 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

correspondence with that in the individual cognitive system. 
Being provided by the excitation of halo-neurons (halo-
people), this effect corresponds to the formula “to connect 
unconnectable”.   
IV. 
CONCLUSION   
We have shown that, apart from obvious propaganda and 
marketing policy (that are not a subject of our research), 
there could be a “natural” mechanism of forming the public 
evaluation of certain artworks. It is in many respects similar 
to the formation of individual perception of ChD and refers 
to the true great artworks providing the “recognition 
paradox” (an object, being in many respects similar to well-
known ones, still seems unusual). In the majority of cases, 
the impression of ChD could be expressed by the formula 
“to see invisible, to connect unconnectable”.  
According to our hypothesis, this effect is provided by 
forming common opinion within not the related professional 
communities, but in a rather large community of no 
professionals who nevertheless have sufficient expertise to 
estimate the value of ChD and the degree of its paradoxical 
features. This group represents an analogy to the halo-
neurons in the fuzzy set H0 of individual cognitive system 
and could be called “the sub-consciousness of society” 
relating to the “Social Brain”.  
It is shown that ChD acceptance in the “Society Mind” 
requires more time, than corporative evaluation (possible, 
incorrect). This effect could explain certain delay in the 
creation and appreciation of almost all ChDs – the society 
should get certain expertise to value the ChD adequately.   
However, there are still many open questions that do not 
allow us to extend the architecture of Figure 1 to human 
society. First of all, there is no (formal) division in a society 
into two subsystems, one of which generates information 
while the other works with well-known information. Of 
course, there are people more and less creative, but this does 
not determine the structure of society. In principle, the 
hierarchy of the architecture in Figure 1 recalls the 
hierarchical organization of power, but these problems 
require additional reflection and analysis. 
Furthermore, the conclusions drawn should be verified 
by, e.g., public opinion poll in certain groups, which are not 
connected professionally. Thus, the work is in progress.  
REFERENCES  
[1] A. Samsonovich, “Emotional biologically inspired cognitive 
architecture,” BICA, vol. 6, pp. 109125, 2013.  
[2] E. Hudlyka, “Affective BICA: Challenges and open 
questions,” BICA, vol. 7, pp. 98125, 2014.  
[3] J. Panksepp and L. Biven, The Archaeology of Mind: 
Neuroevolutionary Origins of Human Emotions. N.Y.: 
Norton, 2012.  
[4] M. I. Rabinovich and M. K. Muezzinoglu, “Nonlinear 
dynamics of the brain: emotions and cognition,” Physics-
Uspehi, vol. 53, pp. 357372, 2010.  
[5] O. Larue, P. Poirier, and R. Nkambou, “The emergence of 
(artificial) emotions from cognitive and 
neurological 
processes,” BICA, vol. 4, pp. 5468, 2013. 
[6] R. Solso, Cognitive psychology (5th ed.). Needham Heights, 
MA: Allyn & Bacon, 1998. 
[7] J. Schmidhuber, “Simple algorithmic theory of subjective 
beauty, novelty, surprise, interestingness, attention, curiosity, 
creativity, science, music, jokes,” Journal of Science, vol. 48 
(1), pp. 2132, 2009. 
[8] D. Huron, Sweet Anticipation: music and physiology of 
expectation. MIT Press, 2006. 
[9] M. Korsakova-Kreyn and W. J. Dowling, “Emotional 
Processing in Music: Study in Affective Responses to Tonal 
Modulationin Controlled Harmonic Progressions and Real 
Music,” Psychomusicology: Music, Mind and Brain, vol. 
24(1), pp. 420, 2014.  
[10] O. D. Chernavskaya and Ya. A. Rozhylo, “On the Possibility 
to Interpret Aesthetic Emotions and the Concept of Chef-
D’oeuvre in an Artificial Cognitive System” The Nineth Int. 
Conf. on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications 
(COGNITIVE), IARIA, Feb. 19--23, pp. 2431, 2017; 
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017. ISBN: 978-1-61208-531-9 .   
[11] J. Levin, “Materialism and Qualia: The Explanatory Gap,” 
Pacific Philosophical Quarterly, vol. 64(4), pp. 354–361, 
1983.  
[12] O. D. Chernavskaya et al., “An architecture of the cognitive 
system with account for emotional component,” BICA, 
vol.12, pp. 144154, 2015. 
[13] O. D. Chernavskaya and Ya. A. Rozhylo, “The Natural-
Constructive Approach to Representation of Emotions and a 
Sense of Humor in an Artificial Cognitive System,” IARIA 
Journal of Life Sciences, vol. 8(3&4), pp. 184202, 2016.  
[14] H. Haken, Information and Self-Organization: A macroscopic 
approach to complex systems. Springer, 2000.  
[15] D. S. Chernavskii, “The origin of life and thinking from the 
viewpoint of modern physics”, Physics-Uspekhi, vol. 43, pp. 
151176, 2000. 
[16] E. Goldberg, The new executive brain. Oxford University 
Press, 2009.  
[17] D. O. Hebb, The organization of behavior. John Wiley & 
Sons, 1949.  
[18] J. J. Hopfield, “Neural networks and physical systems with 
emergent collective computational abilities,” PNAS, vol. 79, 
pp. 25542558, 1982. 
[19] S. Grossberg, Studies of Mind and Brain. Boston: Riedel, 
1982. 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-609-5
COGNITIVE 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

