Art and Brain with Kazuo Takiguchi
– Revealing the Meme Structure from the Process of Creating Traditional Crafts –
Muneo Kitajima
Nagaoka University of Technology
Nagaoka, Niigata, Japan
Email: mkitajima@kjs.nagaokaut.ac.jp
Makoto Toyota
T-Method
Chiba, Japan
Email: pubmtoyota@mac.com
J´erˆome Dinet
Universit´e de Lorraine
Nancy, France
Email: jerome.dinet@univ-lorraine.fr
Abstract— What factors make traditional art what it is? This
paper attempts to answer this question through an analysis
from the cognitive science perspective. The subject of the study
is Japanese traditional crafts. We believe that the process of
artwork production is formed as a result of the interaction
between the individual behavioral ecology of the artist and the
collective behavioral ecology surrounding them, and attempt to
analyze it using a functional brain model. This study aims to elu-
cidate memes that interface the Perceptual, Cognitive, and Motor
(PCM) processes that artists employ while creating artworks with
the individual and collective behavioral ecologies that are used
in these processes. This study focuses on the artwork production
process of Kazuo Takiguchi, a leading Japanese ceramic artist. In
elucidating the processes, Model Human Processor with Realtime
Constraints (MHP/RT), cognitive architecture that can simulate
human behavioral processes by means of PCM processes and
Multi-Dimensional Memory Frames (MDMFs) that represent
memes, and Cognitive Chrono-Ethnography (CCE), a survey
method to understand the characteristics of behaviors expressed
on the basis of these processes are employed. The CCE results
revealed that the collective behavioral ecology, which contains
the individual production experience of each artist folded into
the individual behavioral ecology of the artist, and the skill
acquisition of the production area formed over a long time,
enables the artist to unconsciously imagine and meditate on the
production process results, working on the production itself and
on the ﬁring and glazing process that bring irreversible changes
to the production, to predict with accuracy, and to consciously
evaluate the actual results.
Keywords—Traditional
arts;
Inheritance;
CCE;
MHP/RT;
Meme.
I. INTRODUCTION
A.
Objective: A Meme Perspective on Traditional Arts
In the modern era, information worldwide is interconnected,
and modern educational systems are widespread. Historically,
such a situation was unusual. In fact, in the past, each region
had its own unique collective behavioral ecology, formed over
a long period of time while adapting to the local climate.
The generated collective behavioral ecology formed region-
speciﬁc memes, which have become the basis for individual
behavioral ecologies today. In other words, the natural and
spiritual climates are reﬂected in the collective behavioral
ecology, which in turn is reﬂected in the individual behavioral
ecology through memes.
This paper focuses on traditional arts, which are creative
activities rooted in the local community and developed as
traditions in a collective behavioral ecology, and describe the
process by which they were established and the environmental
conditions that enabled them to continue.
An individual’s
artistic disposition belongs to their individual behavioral ecol-
ogy and is expressed through a structured meme that is formed
on the brain’s parallel distributed memory structure [1] and the
activities that utilize them [2][3]. Therefore, the focus of this
study will be to answer the following research questions:
RQ-1 What does the structured meme look like?
RQ-2 How is it formed?
RQ-3 What are the environmental conditions that allow its
formation to continue?
RQ-4 How are the artistic activities performed on it?
B.
Subject: Japanese Traditional Crafts “Ceramics”
Some of the Japanese traditional crafts have been handed
down to recent times. This study focuses on Japanese ceram-
ics, a traditional art form with a strong regional ﬂavor, as the
subject of study. The basis of the modern Japanese cultural
genealogy is represented by the expression “wabi and sabi,”
which was systematized around the tea ceremony from the
Azuchi-Momoyama period (1568 – 1598 or 1600) to the early
Edo period (after 1603) (see e.g., [4][5]). During the next 300
years of the stable Edo period (1603 – 1868), ceramics became
ﬁrmly established as the foundation of Japanese culture.
From the cognitive science perspective, the behavior of
ceramic artists in creating ceramics can be captured in the four
bands of Newell’s time scale of human action [6, Fig. 3-3].
The four bands are biological (B-band), cognitive (C-band),
rational(R-band), and social bands (S-band), corresponding to
human activities in the time rages of 10−4 ∼ 10−2, 10−1 ∼
101, 102 ∼ 104, and 105 ∼ 107 in seconds, respectively. The
actions in each of these bands are continuously passed down
through generations in the environment in which the artwork is
created. However, unpredictable changes in the environment,
trigger discontinuous leaps, and the continuously inheritable
behavior survives in a different form.
Major ceramic production centers are scattered throughout
Japan. It is one of them. Kyoto is the center of a culture
represented by the tea ceremony, and a strong creative ori-
entation has long existed here. The purpose of this study is
to understand the characteristics of inheritance in Japanese
traditional arts, focusing on the RQs mentioned above.
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-046-9
COGNITIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

C.
Organization of This Paper
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we will
give an overview of traditional art activities and look at the
brain functions that make them possible. Then, the six steps
of CCE, a method for understanding collective and individual
behavioral ecology involved in artistic activities, are presented.
In Section III, we apply the CCE explained in the previous
section to a famous Japanese ceramic artist, Kazuo Takiguchi,
and attempt to understand the activity of ceramic art from a
cognitive science perspective. In Section IV, we conclude the
paper by presenting the core of inherited ceramic activities.
II. TRADITIONAL ART ACTIVITIES AND MEMES
A.
Imagination, Meditation, and Memes in Ceramics
Artifacts for daily use in each region are made from
materials available there. The materials reﬂect the constraints
of the natural climate unique to the region. As production
activities continue in that environment, the techniques for
making artifacts progress, and production methods and works
suited to the natural climate are established.
Technological
progress in the production of daily necessities is supported
by the ability to imagine the “desired state” and the path to
it. Imagination can be paraphrased as the ability to design
and imagine how one would like things to be. The source
of imagination is the parallel and distributed memory in the
brain [1], which makes it possible to imagine a variety of
desired states and explore a vast amount of pathways from
the current state to that state.
The same process of using one’s imagination to create
everyday objects can be used to “explore beauty.” The spiritual
climate has a great inﬂuence on this process. The ceramics
initially existed as an aminist craft of Shinto shrines, but
its artistry was further enhanced by the inﬂuence of the
tea ceremony, a representative of traditional Japanese arts
that formed the basis of the Japanese aesthetic system under
the strong inﬂuence of Zen Buddhism. The inﬂuence of the
spiritual climate on ceramics is evident here. In the activity of
“exploring beauty,” the “desired state” is much more abstract
compared to the case of producing daily necessities. Therefore,
the activity of searching for a quasi-stable activation pattern
by spreading activation inside the memory network through
“meditation,” in which the target state does not exist, and
“imagination,” in which the target state does exist, requires a
long time. Not only that, it also requires a lot of experience to
form a memory network for imagining and meditating, which
is a necessary condition for performing such activities.
The memory network is developed in the form of a Multi-
dimensional Memory Frame (MDMF) [7, Fig. 3] by projecting
Newell’s human behavioral bandwidth [6, Fig. 3-3]. MDMF
has the function of providing the foundation for the execution
of M ⊗ N mapping, a cognitive process that maps M-
dimensional perceptual information input to humans from
the environment via sensory organs to N-dimensional motor
information output to the environment via effectors.
The memes that exist between the individual and the col-
lective behavioral ecologies and interface between the two
play a major role in how the behaviors in the respective time
bands are generated. There exist three types of memes: action-
level, behavior-level, and culture-level memes. All of them are
acquired through imitation, and their complexity increases in
this order. The B- and C-bands are for the activities using
action-level memes, the R-band is for the activities using
behavior-level memes, and the S-band is for the activities using
culture-level memes [2, Fig. 5].
The “exploration of beauty” process that the ceramic artist
performs can be seen as the processes of “imagination and/or
meditation” practiced through M ⊗ N mapping, using memes
that interface the collective and individual behavioral ecology.
B.
Cognitive Chrono-Ethnography (CCE)
This study attempts to understand the individual behavioral
ecology of artists by addressing the aforementioned RQs. In
doing so, we will apply CCE [8], a method for investigating
and analyzing behavioral ecology. In CCE, we ﬁrst identify
behaviors of interest that occur in the target domain. Second,
we perform brain simulations for those behaviors based on
a cognitive architecture that can handle perceptual, cogni-
tive, motor, and memory processes in a uniﬁed manner. We
use the Model Human Processor with Realtime Constraints
(MHP/RT) [8][9][10] for this purpose. Finally we identify
the parameters that characterize the behavior and clarify the
relationship between the values taken by the parameters and
the behavior expressed.
CCE consists of six steps. Below is a brief overview of each
step of the CCE and how each step relates to the RQs.
1)
CCE-Step 1 – Phenomenological Observations for
Dealing with RQ-2 and RQ-3: In traditional art activities, the
individual behavioral ecology is an imaginative and meditative
activity for drawing a path to a desired state expressed
in abstract form, while the collective behavioral ecology
encompasses the individual behavioral ecology over several
generations. The collective behavioral ecology contains an
“education and training system” constrained by the existence
of the natural and spiritual climate of the region. In ancient
times, education conducted within a professional group was
incorporated into the collective behavioral ecology as a form
of family inheritance or apprenticeship. The RQs can be
addressed by clarifying the educational constraint’s parameters
and educational content parameters to understand how the
practice and inheritance of characteristic techniques in speciﬁc
traditional arts are carried out in the ﬁeld through ﬁeld
observations and documents reporting on them. More details
on this are given in Section III-A.
This study focuses on ceramics as a speciﬁc traditional art
form, this study will focus on. In this study, based on the idea
that a unique person recognized as a ceramic artist should
be an instance of a combination of values of characteristic
parameters, we will observe the activities of such an artist and
interview him to understand how the practice and inheritance
of characteristic techniques in ceramic art are carried out. More
details on this are given in Section III-B.
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-046-9
COGNITIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

2)
CCE-Step 2 – Matching with Brain Properties: For
an art form to be called “traditional,” it must have inher-
ited techniques essential to the creative practice of that art
form (e.g., ceramics) through generations. The inheritance of
techniques in traditional Japanese arts is done through the
practice of “watching and stealing work.” The results obtained
by “watching and stealing work” appear as imaginative and
meditative activities that are concretely put into practice.
These activities are simulated by the cognitive architecture
MHP/RT. More details on this are given in Section III-C.
3)
CCE-Step 3 – Structural Modeling: The performance
of imagination and meditation activities can be characterized
as the “variety” and “coverage” of M ⊗ N mappings from
perception to motion. For these practices to take place, “what
is stolen” must be present in the visible range. Since traditions
are unique to a region, it is a prerequisite that the people
who maintain them have been born and raised in the region.
The availability of information, the diversity and coverage of
M ⊗ N mappings, and the relationship between feedforward
and feedback processes become the set of parameters that
characterize an individual’s behavioral ecology. More details
on this are given in Section III-D.
4)
CCE-Step 4 – Formulation of the CCE Survey Method-
ology: In a typical CCE survey, screening is conducted using
a questionnaire that includes the values of a set of parameters
in the questions for selecting an elite sample. In the ceramic
survey conducted in this study, we found “Kazuo Takiguchi”
as a subject that can be called a super elite sample with the
characteristics of traditional art bearers and with whom we
can see the entire sample in one example when we assume
the parameter space set by CCE-Step one through three.
5)
CCE-Step 5 – Conduct CCE Survey: Therefore, focus-
ing on Kazuo Takiguchi, we attempted to clarify the individual
behavioral ecology, collective behavioral ecology, and memes.
6) CCE-Step 6 – Match against Characteristics for Dealing
with RQ-1 and RQ-4: By observing the activities of Kazuo
Takiguchi, speciﬁc examples of imaginative and meditative
activities can be obtained when a person, represented by the
parameter value combinations, performs creative activities us-
ing memes at the site. This will validate the model constructed
in CCE-Step 3.
III.
ELUCIDATING MEMES WITH CCE
A.
CCE-Step 1-1: Field Observation
1)
Collective Behavioral Ecology as a Foundation for
Traditional Arts: Emmanuel Todd [11] lists the following as
inherited collective memes: 1) Group form, 2) The nature of
authority to choose the group’s behavior, and 3) The implicitly
practiced action selection rules as a method for the inheritance
of the group. These are inherited as collective memes, and
groups are managed and developed accordingly. Here, what
and how is taught, RQ-2, in the form of inherited, RQ-3, is
encapsulated. Therefore, different collective memes develop in
different ways.
The culture of a group is part of the collective memes.
Therefore, in culture, each group possesses its own distinctive
way of passing on its manufacturing methods and techniques
that are unique to the group and distinguishable from those of
other groups. Behind this is the existence of evaluation criteria
for cultural products that are unique to that culture.
The collective memes that have been nurtured as a Japanese
tradition has become effective in the acquisition of individual
skills. The reality of this effectiveness can be characterized
as follows. The collective and individual behavioral ecol-
ogy develop by inﬂuencing each other in an interdependent
relationship in which the individual, as a member of the
group, inﬂuences the formation of the collective behavioral
ecology and thus, inﬂuences the formation of the individual
memes. This interdependence determines the forms that make
it possible to maintain, develop, and inherit traditions – RQ-3.
Individual behavioral ecology can be viewed as action-level,
behavior-level, and cultural-level memes. The development of
perception and movement leads to the development of the
action and behavior level memes. The development process
is unique to each individual’s developmental environment and
is often acquired through trial and error based on “imitation.”
The acquired memes are incorporated into the collective
behavioral ecology of the group to which they belong. This
is effective for the next creative activity within the group.
The incorporation of diverse experiences through trial and
error into the collective behavioral ecology gives individuals
in the group the opportunity to “imitate” them and become the
source of new innovations. In the traditional arts, memes are
acquired and utilized in the creative activities of the entire
ﬁeld, functioning as a cyclical system of inheritance and
continuity. This deﬁnes the characteristics of the collective
behavioral ecology of the group – RQ-2 and RQ-3.
2) Japanese Traditional Art, “Ceramic Art”: In this study,
“ceramics” is taken up as a traditional Japanese art form. It
is the art of making ceramics by molding clay and ﬁring
it at high temperatures. In ceramics, the process consists of
imaging the desired form of the object, molding the clay
base into the desired form, applying a glassy coating, heating
it in a kiln to increase strength, hardening, and ﬁxing the
form. It is the activity to be imitated (individual behavioral
ecology) that is handed down, and the environment in which
imitation is practiced (collective behavioral ecology) enables
the inheritance of the imitated activity. The ceramic art process
is described below.
a)
Master Planning: The ﬁrst step in ceramic art is to
solidify the image of the form.
b)
Modeling: It is necessary to remove air from the
clay. This process is called “degassing,” and is done either by
using a vacuum kneader or by hand. After the clay has been
degassed and kneaded, it is dried in preparation for ﬁring.
There are several stages of drying. At the stage where the
clay has a moisture content of approximately 15%, the clay
is very ﬁrm and not very plastic. Cutting, attaching handles,
etc. are often done at this stage. When the moisture content is
nearly 0%, the clay is very brittle and easily broken. Before
the clay is formed, something can be kneaded into it to create
the desired effect in the ware.
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-046-9
COGNITIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

TABLE I. STEPS IN THE PRODUCTION OF ARTWORKS OF YUDAI AND MUDAI. THE STEPS INDICATED IN ∗ ARE THE STEPS COMMON TO BOTH WORKS
YUDAI
MUDAI
Artwork
(a)
(b)
Work Step
For YUDAI
For MUDAI
Master-Planning
∗ Decide on the rough image of the work
∗ Decide on the rough image of the work
• Decide on the speciﬁc title of the work
• Decide on the image of the work that adequately represents
the title
• Decide on the number of parts that comprise the work
∗ Decide on the material / Decide on the size
∗ Decide on the material / Decide on the size
Natural-Modeling
• Form the overall shape of a plate-like material by effectively
utilizing the gravity ﬁeld
Modeling
• Create the model you have in mind (if the modeling consists
of multiple parts, make that number of parts) with the con-
sideration that it will not break during unglazed-ﬁring
• Modify the overall shape of the foundation according to one’s
own inspiration to create the ﬁnal form
∗ Consider a plan for unglazed-ﬁring
∗ Consider a plan for unglazed-ﬁring
Unglazed-Firing
∗ Fire in a kiln according to the unglazed ﬁring plan
∗ Fire in a kiln according to the unglazed ﬁring plan
⇒ End
Coloring
• Select a glaze that matches the ﬁnished image of the work
• Glaze it
repeat
• Considering glazed ﬁring plan
Glazed-Firing
• Fire in kiln according to glaze ﬁring plan
⇒ End
Glazing
∗ Choose a glaze that is matched to the surface texture of the
piece
∗ Choose a glaze that is matched to the surface texture of the
piece
∗ Glaze
∗ Glaze
repeat
∗ Consider a ﬁring plan that suits the glaze
∗ Consider a ﬁring plan that suits the glaze
Main-Firing
∗ Fire based on the ﬁring plan
∗ Fire based on the ﬁring plan
⇒ End
c)
Unglazed-Firing: Firing brings about irreversible
changes in the clay. Only after ﬁring does the work become
ceramic ware. In low-temperature ﬁring, a change called sin-
tering occurs, in which the coarse powders in the clay fuse with
each other contact. For porcelain, where different materials
are used and ﬁred at higher temperatures, signiﬁcant changes
occur in the physical, chemical, and mineral properties of
the constituents. In both cases, the purpose of ﬁring is to
permanently harden the ceramics. The ﬁring method must be
consistent with the materials used.
d)
Glazing: Glaze is the glassy coating of a ceramic
ware. Its main purpose is to decorate and protect. Glaze is
applied by sprinkling solids or by spraying, dipping, pouring,
or brushing on dilute mixtures of glaze and water. The color
of the glaze can be very different before and after ﬁring.
e) Main-Firing: The environmental air of the kiln during
ﬁring can affect the appearance of the ﬁnished product. An
oxidizing environment causes oxidation reactions between the
clay and glaze. A reducing environment deprives the clay and
glaze surfaces of oxygen. This affects the appearance of the
ﬁnished piece. By adjusting the kiln environment, complex
effects can be produced in glazes.
B.
CCE-Step 1-2: Observation of the Super Elite Sample
The second part of CCE-Step 1 takes the ceramics artist as
a super elite sample, a singularity in the individual behavioral
ecology of ceramics activity, and summarizes his ceramics
activity as a structure of individual behavioral ecology. The
super elite sample is the ceramic artist “Kazuo Takiguchi,”
who has been creating ceramics mainly in Kyoto, the center
of traditional Japanese art, for a long time, sublimating imag-
ination and meditation activities in ceramic production, and
practicing perceptual and motor M ⊗ N mapping at a level
that cannot be reached by ordinary people. We observed and
interviewed him during the process of ceramic production. The
results are shown in Table I.
1)
Craft Artist “Kazuo Takiguchi”: He is one of the
leading contemporary ceramic artists in Japan, born in 1953 as
the son of a tableware wholesaler in Gojozaka, a traditional
ceramic production area in Kyoto. He studied brieﬂy under
Rokubei Kiyomizu VI (1901–1980) followed by a brief time
under Kazuo Yagi (1918–1979). It was Yagi’s aesthetic and
focus on non-traditional, sculptural forms that made a lasting
impact on him. Years later, he studied at the Royal College
of Arts, London and graduated in 1992. Living overseas made
him realize the important role the Japanese language played
in his life and how it impacted his artwork. Since then, he has
focused on words as a source of inspiration. He emphasizes
that just as he is free to use language according to his own
desires and needs, he endeavors to give each work a presence
unique to itself. It is important to him that his works touch
the viewers’ hearts outside the context of functionality.
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-046-9
COGNITIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

2)
Description of Kazuo Takiguchi’s Production Process:
Kazuo Takiguchi has produced two very different groups
of works, YUDAI and MUDAI, both extremely different in
appearance. Examples of each of these works are shown in
Table I. Table I also shows the working process of YUDAI
and MUDAI according to the work processes described in
Section III-A2.
The most important perception in making clay and creating
works of art, especially MUDAI, is the tactile sense of the
palm. The palm of the hand can be used to judge a wide variety
of conditions, such as dampness/dryness, hardness, the state
of the clay joints, and the resistance of the clay to breakage
during drying and ﬁring. Kazuo’s sculpturing process is both
complicated and highly creative. Using pulleys, he ﬁrst ﬂattens
a slab of thinly pounded clay between 1/8-1/4 inches of thick
and lays it in a canvas sheet. As shown in Figure 1, with the
use of pulleys, he then hoists it and suspends it in the air,
molding it into the amoebic form he wishes. After the clay
body is dry enough to maintain its shape, he tears open a hole
at the top. His ambitiously abstract forms have made him one
of the standard-bearers of contemporary Japanese ceramics.
Figure 1. Natural modeling using a canvas sheet.
C.
CCE-Step 2: Matching with Brain Properties
In this step, the results of the CCE-Step 1 survey are
reviewed from the perspective of individual behavioral ecol-
ogy. We will perform brain simulations assuming the action-
level, behavior-level, and culture-level memes on the cognitive
architecture to identify the way the brain works, in a way that
best explains the results of the survey. That is, we identify
critical parameters that characterize the behavioral ecology
of individuals. Brain simulations are based on the cognitive
architecture MHP/RT [8][9][10]. In the following, we will give
an overview of MHP/RT, focusing on the part related to the
identiﬁcation of critical parameters.
1)
Outline of MHP/RT: MHP/RT consists of two compo-
nents. Figure 2 provides an overview of each component.
a)
Perceptual-Cognitive-Motor (PCM) Processes: The
ﬁrst component comprises cyclic PCM processes (Figure 2,
left). They execute a series of events in synchronous with
changes in the external environment. The parallel distributed
processing [1] for realizing these PCM processes is im-
plemented as hierarchically organized bands introduced by
Newell [6, Figure 3-3]. These bands are characterized by
characteristic operation times, as mentioned in Section I,
which are deﬁned by associating relative times with individual
TABLE II. FOUR OPERATION MODES OF MHP/RT AND THEIR
RELATIONSHIP WITH THE FOUR BANDS IN THE TIME SCALE OF NEWELL’S
HUMAN ACTION [6, FIGURE 3-3]
Synchronous Modes
Mode 1: System 1 driven mode
A single set of perceptual stimuli initiate feedfor-
ward processes at the B- and C-bands to act with
occasional feedback from an upper band, i.e., C-,
R-, or S-bands.
Mode 2: System 2 driven mode
A single set of perceptual stimuli initiate a feed-
back process at the C-band, and upon completion
of the conscious action selection, the unconscious
automatic feedforward process is activated at the
B- and C-bands for action.
Asynchronous Modes
Mode 3: In-phase autonomous activity mode
A set of perceptual stimuli initiate feedforward
processes at the B- and C-bands with one and an-
other intertwined occasional feedback processes
from an upper band, i.e., C-, R-, or S-bands.
Mode 4: Heterophasic autonomous activity mode
Multiple threads of perceptual stimuli initiate
respective feedforward processes at the B- and
C-bands, some with no feedback and others with
feedback from the upper bands, i.e., C-, R-, or
S-bands.
PCM processes. Events occur by connecting what happens in
a band to what happens in its adjacent band non-linearly.
A mechanism is required to connect the events; MHP/RT
suggests that this connection is provided by the resonance
mechanism via the MDMFs.
b)
Multi-dimensional Memory Frame (MDMF):
The
second component is the autonomous memory system con-
sisting of ﬁve MDMFs, which are perception, motion, be-
havior, relation, and word MDMFs (Figure 2, right). The
MDMFs store information associated with the corresponding
autonomous processes deﬁned in the PCM processes. The
MDMFs are subservient to the PCM processes because they
do not exist unless the PCM processes do.
A copy of MDMFs is shown in Figure 2. This indicates
that the memory that has been constructed up to that point is
used in the PCM processes. Since both the memory system
and the PCM processes are autonomous systems, there is no
relationship in which one system subordinates the other. Any
active states in the autonomous memory can be used by other
autonomous systems through “resonance.” This is indicated by
the symbol “•—•” in Figure 2.
c)
Four Operation Modes: Humans interact with the
external environment and select appropriate actions to achieve
behavioral goals through a cycle of PCM processes. In
MHP/RT, the action selection process is controlled by Sys-
tem 1 and System 2 of Two Minds [12]. These systems
cooperate to link perception and movement, and the degree of
cooperation depends on the state of the external environment
with which the MHP/RT interacts.
Table II shows the Four
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-046-9
COGNITIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Figure 2. MHP/RT and Multi-dimensional Memory Frame [7, Figure 2].
Figure 3. Four processing modes of MHP/RT.
Operation Modes characterized by the relationship between
System 1 and System 2. There are synchronous and asyn-
chronous modes. The ceramic work is performed primarily in
the synchronous mode.
d)
Four Processing Modes: The experience associated
with an individual’s activity is characterized by a series of
events that are consciously recognized serially. Let E(TN)
denote the event that occurred at time TN. The experience is
then deﬁned as a series of events along the timeline as follows:
· · · → E(TN−1) → E(TN) → E(TN+1) → · · ·
Considering the way System 1 and System 2 are involved in
individual events, four processing modes can be deﬁned as
shown in Figure 3.
Before the Event (T < TN)
The event E(TN) that occurs at time TN reﬂects the result
of the resonance between MDMFs and the perceptual and
cognitive systems during the time before TN. The part of the
system that resonates is indicated by •—• in the left diagram
of Figure 2. E(TN) is generated by the activities of System 1
and System 2 in the time period before TN. The different time
bands of processing activities result in two processing modes
before the event:
• System-2-Before-Event-Mode: In the time range of T −
β ≤ t < T − β′, MHP/RT plans for future events to
occur. There is enough time to think carefully.
• System-1-Before-Event-Mode: In the time range of T −
β′ ≤ t < T，the action selections smoothly generate the
immediate event.
The minimum value of β′ is ∼ 150msec, and β ranges
from seconds to hours and months.
In these two modes,
the part of MDMFs activated through resonance in response
to perceptual processing could resonate with System 1 and
System 2 processing (Figure 2, left).
After the Event (T > TN)
When event E(TN) occurs at time TN, the result is stored.
Actions occur by integrating the resonances that emerge
through interacting with the environment prior to the event,
and after the actions are taken, they are bundled and collected.
The existing MDMFs are updated to reﬂect the results of
E(TN) by the activities of System 1 and System 2 during the
time period after TN. This process is indicated by the arrows
from each element of the PCM cycle shown in the upper left
of Figure 2 to the MDMFs in the upper right. The different
time bands of processing activities result in two processing
modes after the event:
• System-1-After-Event-Mode: In the time range of T <
t ≤ T +α′, to perform better for the same event that may
be encountered in the future, the connection between the
incoming perceptual information and the output motor
content is adjusted unconsciously.
• System-2-After-Event-Mode: In the time range of T +
α′ < t ≤ T + α, the event is reviewed and reﬂected
upon. The results are stored and used in the next System-
2-Before-Event-Mode before a similar event occurs.
The minimum value of α′ is ∼ 150msec, and α ranges from
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-046-9
COGNITIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

seconds to months.
In these two modes, action selection
results for the event at TN would be reﬂected in the network
connections of the respective MDMFs (Figure 2, right).
2)
MHP/RT Simulation of Each Ceramic Process: In this
section, we present an MHP/RT simulation of the ceramic
process shown in Table I, which is a summary derived from
intensive interviews with Kazuo Takiguchi and observations of
his work processes. We explain which of the four operation
modes MHP/RT operates in, and what kind of processing
is carried out regarding the four processing modes with a
focus on the memory use represented by the MDMFs. Brief
discussions for some work processes concerning the implica-
tion of the contents of simulated processes for the individual
behavioral ecology of ceramic process follow.
a)
Master-Planning: This work process consists of the
following steps as shown in Table I.
1) Decide on the rough image of the work.
– In the case of YUDAI, this step is accompanied by
the following steps.
a) Decide on the speciﬁc title of the work.
b) Decide on the image of the work that adequately
represents the title.
c) Decide on the number of parts that comprise the
work.
2) Decide on the material.
3) Decide on the size.
Steps 1, 2, and 3 for MUDAI and YUDAI, and a, b, c
for YUDAI, is carried out in Mode 2 of MHP/RT shown
in Table II. Each step is essentially a conscious decision-
making process for accomplishing the purpose of that step,
i.e., forming the rough image of the work, selecting the
material, selecting the size, and so on. It starts with an initial
idea followed by an evaluation-update cycle of the idea. It
terminates when an idea is evaluated satisfactory for the
purpose established.
The chart below will be used to schematically illustrate
what is happening in each step in terms of the characteristic
moments of the four processing modes, i.e., β, β′, ∗, α′, and
α. At β, a conscious activity starts for the future event to be
carried out at ∗ as a consciously recognizable event. At α, the
event is consciously reﬂected. During the period of (β′, α′),
unconscious activities related with the event are carried out.
Each Step of Master-Planning in Mode 2


( β —— β′ –∗– α′ —— α )
Repeat
β: Consciously clarify the policy for updating the cur-
rent idea.
β′: Spread activation in the MDMFs.
∗: Decide on an update for the current idea.
α′: Organize activation in the MDMFs.
α: Consciously evaluate the updated idea.


Each step starts at β for performing conscious reasoning to
elaborate the current idea, which could be the initial idea for
the step or the updated idea of the previous evaluate-update
cycle. The spreading activation within the MDMFs proceeds
through a series of divergences starting at β′, followed by the
moment of decision on the updated idea at ∗, and the period
for convergences terminating at α′. Afterward, the decision is
evaluated at α. The events correspond to the moments when
decisions on the rough image of the work, material, size,
speciﬁc title, and so on, are obtained. This process is repeated
until a satisfactory evaluation for the current idea is obtained.
The result is “master plan of the work,” which consists of a
series of images that should appear in the P-MDMF as the
results to be achieved in subsequent steps.
The content of the master plan of the work is affected
by the extent to which activity is propagated within the
MDMFs during the period leading up to it. The individual
behavioral ecology of this work process is characterized by
the richness of the MDMFs. These steps are carried out by
initially placing seeds that represent the initial idea consciously
in the P-MDMF that ultimately lead to a ﬁnal decision by
means of spreading activation in the MDMFs, which has been
constructed through extensive M ⊗N mapping experience; the
updated ideas are obtained as activated patterns of the network
in the MDMFs centered on P-MDMF. When accompanied by
title setting as in the case of YUDAI, the center of conscious
activity appears in the W-MDMF as well.
b)
Natural-Modeling for MUDAI: In this process, the
shape is created by modifying the material. The overall shape
is formed by effectively utilizing the gravitational ﬁeld oper-
ating on the plate-like material. The reasons for conforming
to the gravitational ﬁeld is to make it resistant during ﬁring
and to make maintaining the balance of the overall shape easy.
Figure 1 are the photos from the process of natural modeling.
The ceramic clay is placed on the suspended cloth to form
the shape by utilizing the gravitational ﬁeld (Figure 1, left).
A cone-like piece is attached to the base while maintaining
the overall balance (Figure 1, right). It takes a certain amount
of time for the materials formed to reach equilibrium in the
gravitational ﬁeld. During that time, the laws of nature govern
the change in shape. The Natural-Modeling for MUDAI is
carried out solely by hand.
In this process, the state of the material is perceived pri-
marily by sight and touch, and the material is formed into the
ﬁnal model deﬁned by the master plan, by moving one’s hands
and ﬁngers. Therefore, this process is simulated by MHP/RT’s
Mode 1, where action selections are carried out mainly by
System 1 with timely interventions of System 2.
Natural-Modeling for MUDAI in Mode 1′


β – β′ –∗– α′ ————-//————- α
β: Clarify the ﬁnal modeling of the plate-like material
and a candidate is placed in the P-MDMF.
β′: Spread activation in the MDMFs.
∗: Make a decision with the modeling and carry it out.
α′: Organize activation in the MDMFs.
α: Evaluate the decision consciously.


7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-046-9
COGNITIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

At β, the ﬁnal modeling is consciously clariﬁed in the
MDMFs. Then, a modeling candidate is placed in the P-
MDMF for each piece of the work, followed by M ⊗ N
mapping from there into the MDMFs to have the M-MDMF
get activated, which speciﬁes hands’ movements for modeling.
Unconscious M ⊗ N mapping is carried out during the
period of (β′, ∗) for making decisions on the modeling and
accomplishing it at ∗. After completion of modeling at ∗, the
form changes according to the laws of nature.
After a certain amount of period shown by —//— , the
result of the work will be evaluated at α by System 2. During
the period (∗, α), two things happen before the shape of the
material is established at α as its equilibrium. The shape of
material changes in the gravitational ﬁeld due to the weight
of the self, and simultaneously, the moisture content of the
material gradually decreases and the material becomes harder
and less deformable. There might exist discrepancies between
the ﬁnal modeling imagined at β and the resultant modeling
obtained at α. By integrating the traces of spreading activation
from β to ∗ for modeling and the evaluation result at α, the
MDMFs, which can be used in the M ⊗ N mapping for the
future Natural Modeling step, is updated. The four processing
mode characterized by this pattern will be called Mode 1′.
c)
Modeling: The purpose of this step is to create the
modeling manually that will not break in the next process,
Unglazed-Firing. For MUDAI, the result of Natural Modeling
is ﬁnalized. For YUDAI, the pieces are assembled together
to accomplish the plan. At β, a candidate of modeling is
placed consciously in the P-MDMF. Then, M ⊗N mapping is
carried out during the period of (β′, ∗) to obtain a candidate
movement of hands in the M-MDMF at ∗ for creating the
model deﬁned in the master plan. During the period of (∗, α′),
the result of candidate movement, which is virtual, plays the
role of a seed in the P-MDMF to spread activation in the
MDMFs, to make a judgement at α whether the ﬁnal modeling
deﬁned in the master plan of the work would be obtained
after the next step, Unglazed-Firing. This updating process is
repeated until a satisfactory one is obtained. The satisfactory
one is carried out at ∗, followed by conscious reﬂection of the
work at α including what will be obtained after the next step,
Unglazed-Firing. The satisfactory modeling is carried out at ∗
according to the active M-MDMF. The four processing mode
characterized by this pattern will be called Mode 1′′.
Modeling in Mode 1′′


( β – β′ ——//——∗——//—— α′– α ) Repeat
β: Consciously think of the ﬁnished form of modeling.
β′: Spread activation in the MDMFs.
∗: Create a form as a candidate for the ﬁnished form
of modeling.
α′: Organize activation in the MDMFs.
α: Imagine the results of unglazed ﬁring for the ﬁnished
form of modeling.


d) Unglazed-Firing: Upon completion of Modeling, the
result of the expected Unglazed-Firing process is activated
in the P-MDMF. From there, the MDMFs involved in the
Unglazed-Firing are also activated. The Unglazed-Firing plan
appears as an activity pattern in the W-MDMF, R-MDMF, and
B-MDMF. In these MDMFs, the activation patterns come from
the P-MDMF that resonates with the results of Modeling, pro-
viding the basis for conscious reasoning by System 2. Firing is
a process in which heating the clay causes irreversible changes
in the physical, chemical, and mineralogical properties of
the constituents, just as gravity works in Natural-Modeling.
The ﬁring plan, carried over from Modeling, activates the
M-MDMF within the MDMFs to perform Unglazed-Firing.
It takes time to obtain the results of Unglazed-Firing. The
process is similar to Natural-Modeling carried out in Mode 1′.
e)
Coloring for YUDAI: This step is executed only in
the case of YUDAI production. The process is carried out
in Mode 1′′ similar to Modeling. The subject of Modeling is
to form the shape while considering the next step, Unglazed-
Firing; the subject of Coloring for YUDAI is to put color with
the consideration of the next step, Glazed-Firing.
f) Glazed-Firing for YUDAI: This step is executed only
in the case of YUDAI production. Its process is similar to that
of Unglazed-Firing. The process is carried out in Mode 1′.
g)
Glazing: This step consists of the following sub-
steps: choosing a glaze that is matched to the surface texture
of the piece, glazing, and considering a plan for Main-Firing
that suits the glaze. The process is carried out in Mode 1′′.
h)
Main-Firing: The ﬁring plan that has been activated
in Glazing is executed. Whether the kiln air environment dur-
ing ﬁring is oxidizing or reducing causes irreversible changes
in the appearance of the ﬁred piece. It takes time to obtain the
results of the ﬁring according to the ﬁring plan. The process
is carried out in Mode 1′.
D.
CCE-Step 3: Structural Modeling
Based on the considerations in CCE-Step 1 and 2, we
can construct a simpliﬁed individual behavioral ecological
model of the surveyed space that explains the differences
among people acting in the collective behavioral ecology of
that space.
The results of the simulation by MHP/RT for
each of the ceramic steps shown in CCE-Step 2, we can see
that the unconscious spreading activation in the MDMFs by
System 1 affects the performance of each process. Except for
Master-Planning, MHP/RT operates in Mode 1. The following
patterns characterize the way of operation.
Operation patterns


Mode 1′′
A: ( β – β′ ——//——∗——//—— α′– α ) Repeat
Mode 1′
B:
β – β′ –∗– α′ ————-//————- α


Similarity between the patterns is the upcoming event ∗
is consciously processed by System 2 and the event that has
occurred is consciously evaluated by System 2. In doing so, the
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-046-9
COGNITIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

part of the M⊗N mapping that was active during the period of
(β, α) is made consciously available for future processing by
System 2 at α. The contents of the MDMFs to be integrated
at α will differ depending on where the event ∗ is located
in relation to β, β′, α′ and α. Nevertheless, the contents that
diverged during (β, ∗) converge during (∗, α), and the whole
is organically related and integrated.
The characteristics of the way of operation can be sum-
marized as follows. In Pattern A, processing by System 1 is
performed for a long time before and after the event. In Pattern
B, processing by System 2 is performed after a long time
after the event. In Pattern A, System 1 executes imaginative
and meditative activities by activating a variety of possible
pathways of M ⊗N mappings within the MDMFs, constructed
through years of experience. How divergence and convergence
are executed over time inﬂuences the ceramic activity.
E.
CCE-Steps 4 and 5: Super Elite Sample
Unlike the usual CCE survey, in this study, Kazuo
Takiguchi, a ceramic artist, practicing an inherited traditional
art form, was identiﬁed as a super elite sample, and a ﬁeld
survey through observation and interviews were already con-
ducted as the CCE-Step 1-2. The results are presented in
Table I.
F.
CCE-Step 6: Match against Characteristics
Two operating patterns, Patterns A and B, were identiﬁed
in CCE-Step 3. They characterize how the MDMFs should
be used in the respective steps. By checking that these pat-
terns match the actually observed ceramic activity of Kazuo
Takiguchi, RQ-1 and RQ-4 will be addressed.
1)
Hierarchical Mapping Structure: Based on the results
of the observations and interviews of Kazuo Takiguchi, the
production process is summarized in the lower part of Table I.
In each step, it was evident that the appropriate timings
for starting, change in condition, and ending were applied;
these were acquired empirically through repeated production
activities. It was possible to identify the actually applied work
conditions that should produce the desired results by memo-
rizing the points indicating the changes within the perceivable
range and their superﬁcial changes through observation of the
process of work, and comparing what has been memorized
with the results after the work.
This is shown schematically in Figure 4(a). The left side of
the ﬁgure shows the manipulated object, O, and the right side
shows the artist, A, which is Kazuo Takiguchi. A executes the
following processes:
1) Observe O under consciousness (OBJECT-Cognition-2),
and 1) become aware of the timing to start the execution
of work, 2) become aware of the conditions for changing
and updating the work content that has been started, and
3) become aware of the conditions for ending the work.
This is executed by System 2.
2) Execute the contents that have been made conscious by
activating the work sequences that have been acquired
through training. Execution is done by perceiving the
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 4. (a) hierarchical mapping structure characterized by M ⊗ N
mapping; (b) changes in material state due to object manipulation in
Modeling, Coloring, and Glazing; (c) changes in material state due to
environmental manipulation in Natural-Modeling and Unglazed-, Glazed-,
and Main-Firing.
state of O with the ﬁve senses (OBJECT-Cognition-1)
and applying the appropriate exercise to O. This is done
by System 1.
The work is stored as an experience of System 1 and System 2,
and inﬂuences future work.
The way in which each work step is carried out is well
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-046-9
COGNITIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

aligned with the four processing modes of the MHP/RT, each
of which is carried out during the periods of [β, β′)，[β′, ∗)，
(∗, α′]，and (α′, α]. Considering the activities performed
in the respective four periods, they are represented by the
following two hierarchical mapping structures.
2)
Hierarchical Mapping Structure of Transformation
caused by OBJECT Manipulation: When an operation is
applied to O, it changes according to its contents. This is
related to the steps of Modeling, Coloring, and Glazing shown
in Table I. What is happening in these steps is shown schemati-
cally in Figure 4(b). The current state of O is mainly perceived
visually (with the help of tactile sense), and the immediate aim
is to reach the ﬁnal goal and the contents of operations to reach
it are selected and decided by System 2 through the experience
accumulated thus far (OBJECT-Cognition-2). Based on this
decision, A perceives the state of O mainly through the tactile
sense and perceives the progress of the operation by System 1
(OBJECT-Cognition-1) while moving his limbs to interact
with O to change it. Once the immediate goal is achieved,
the next goal is set and this process is repeated until the ﬁnal
goal is achieved.
The way these work processes proceed is
well matched to Pattern A.
3)
Hierarchical Mapping Structure of Transformation
caused by Environmental Change: In the steps to perform the
ﬁring in Table I, Natural-Modeling and Unglazed-, Glazed,
and Main-Firing, the objects created due to the direct trans-
formation of the objects in the preceding steps are irreversibly
transformed and ﬁxed by the application of gravitational ﬁeld
or ﬁring environment in the kiln. What is happening in this
process is shown schematically in Figure 4(c). The following
provides an explanation for the ﬁring process, which can be
applied to Natural-Modeling as well.
The current state of
O is perceived visually, and the ﬁring parameters that realize
the ﬁring environment in the kiln to reach the ﬁnal goal are
selected and determined by System 2 using the experience
accumulated (OBJECT-Cognition-2). Based on this decision,
the kiln is adjusted for ﬁring and ﬁring is started. Firing
is an unpredictable and uncertain process. During ﬁring, the
state of the kiln is recognized by System 1 via all ﬁve
senses (OBJECT-Cognition-1) and integrated with previous
experiences as a new experience.
This way of proceeding
with the work process is well matched with Pattern B.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
This study focused on ceramics, a traditional Japanese craft,
and investigated the memes that make it a traditional craft
by conducting a CCE survey with a ceramist as a super-
elite monitor. In ceramics, the manipulation of objects that
are malleable and whose properties change with time and the
setting of ﬁring conditions that produce irreversible physical
and chemical changes in the clay and glaze, are performed. In
both cases, the initial image is placed in the P-MDMF and the
activity is propagated in the MDMFs, which are constructed
with extensive experience as memes, to simulate whether or
not a work that matches the ﬁnal image is obtained. When time
constraints are strong, the richness of the MDMFs related to
System 1 can be an effective help. The quality of the memory
is important for the experiential content during the training
period. Tradition can be understood as a generic term referring
to the results of improving the content quality of one’s training
over a long period of time.
In the West, there is a strong emphasis on logical thinking
by System 2, seeking eternity and ﬁnding laws in nature. Based
on this way of thinking, they have discovered objectivity, the
golden ratio, perspective, and so on, and have applied them
to their creations. In modern times, this attitude can be seen
in the cubism of Picasso, for example. On the other hand, in
Japan, as revealed in this study, there is a tendency to devise
pseudo-expressive methods to express what one truly wants
to express, based on the experiential perception obtained from
interacting with the natural world. This can be seen in ink
paintings and ukiyoe.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
In this study, Kazuo Takiguchi kindly agreed to be inter-
viewed about the inner aspects of the ceramic process, which
could be observed superﬁcially, and provided us with valuable
information. He conﬁrmed the results of the application of
CCE. Without his cooperation, this study would not have been
possible. We would like to express our deepest gratitude to
him. This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant
Number 20H04290. The authors would like to thank Editage
(www.editage.com) for the English language editing.
REFERENCES
[1] J. L. McClelland and D. E. Rumelhart, Parallel Distributed Processing:
Explorations in the Microstructure of Cognition : Psychological and
Biological Models.
The MIT Press, 6 1986.
[2] M. Kitajima, M. Toyota, and J. Dinet, “How Resonance Works for
Development and Propagation of Memes,” International Journal on
Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol. 14, 2021, pp. 148–161.
[3] M. Kitajima, M. Toyota, and J. Dinet, “The Role of Resonance in the
Development and Propagation of Memes,” in COGNITIVE 2021 : The
Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technolo-
gies and Applications, 2021, pp. 28–36.
[4] A. Juniper, Wabi Sabi: The Japanese Art of Impermanence.
Tuttle
Publishing, 11 2003.
[5] A. L. Sadler, The Japanese Tea Ceremony: Cha-no-Yu and the Zen Art
of Mindfulness, paperback ed.
Tuttle Publishing, 4 2019.
[6] A. Newell, Uniﬁed Theories of Cognition (The William James Lectures,
1987).
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1990.
[7] M. Kitajima et al., “Language and Image in Behavioral Ecology,”
in COGNITIVE 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on
Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications, 2022, pp. 1–10.
[8] M. Kitajima, “Cognitive Chrono-Ethnography (CCE): A Behavioral
Study
Methodology
Underpinned
by
the
Cognitive
Architecture,
MHP/RT,” in Proceedings of the 41st Annual Conference of the Cog-
nitive Science Society.
Cognitive Science Society, 2019, pp. 55–56.
[9] M. Kitajima and M. Toyota, “Simulating navigation behaviour based
on the architecture model Model Human Processor with Real-Time
Constraints (MHP/RT),” Behaviour & Information Technology, vol. 31,
no. 1, 2012, pp. 41–58.
[10] M. Kitajima and M. Toyota, “Decision-making and action selection
in Two Minds: An analysis based on Model Human Processor with
Realtime Constraints (MHP/RT),” Biologically Inspired Cognitive Ar-
chitectures, vol. 5, 2013, pp. 82–93.
[11] E. Todd, The Diversity of the World: Family and Modernity (La
Diversit´e du monde. Famille et modernit´e), paperback ed.
SEUIL,
3 1999.
[12] D. Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow.
New York, NY: Farrar, Straus
and Giroux, 2011.
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-046-9
COGNITIVE 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

