A Multiagent Meta-model for the Description of
Socio-cognitive Processes:
An Enactive Perspective of Language in Artiﬁcial Agents
Luciana de Freitas ∗, Davidson Bruno da Silva ∗, Elayne de Moura Braga ∗,
Leonardo Lana de Carvalho ∗ and Joao E Kogler Jr †
∗ Federal University of the Valleys of Jequitinhonha and Mucuri, Diamantina, Brazil,
Email: leonardolana.carvalho@ufvjm.edu.br
† Polytechnic School of Engineering, University of Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil, Email: kogler@lsi.usp.br
Abstract—We propose here a meta-model based on the enactive
and autopoietic theory for the description of social and language
processes by Multiagent Systems (MAS). Our meta-model is a
four-quadrant map, which describes, according to the concepts of
structural couplings and organizational and functional closure,
the architecture of the agents, as well as their social practices and
the formation of social organizations. We propose a social cycle
in which the architecture of agents evolves according to their
practices, uses and social groups, the basis on which language
evolves. Our meta-model was developed from two sources: a) the
enactive and autopoietic theory of cognition, with an emphasis on
social phenomena and the linguistic domain; b) a four-quadrant
map, which describes MAS from an integral view. The motivation
for the proposal of a new meta-model for the description of
MAS and the emerging language in agent-based systems was the
incompatibility between Wilber’s integral view and that of the
enactive theory about psychosocial processes. The central point of
the enactive criticism that we carried out here was the concepts
of interiority and individuality present in Wilber’s theory.
Index Terms—Cognition; Socio-cognitive processes; Enaction;
Meta-model; Language; Multi-agent model
I. INTRODUCTION
Meta-models are of great help in building models that in-
volve very complex frameworks, typical in the study of socio-
cognitive relations among agents and the environment, serving
as scaffolding for the development of simulation architectures.
The purpose of this article is to introduce a meta-model for the
description of Multiagent Systems (MAS) and the emergence
of language in artiﬁcial agents.
The proposed meta-model is derived from two other meta-
models: a) that of the enactive and autopoietic theory of
cognition, which describes language as a social phenomenon
and the linguistic domain as coordination of behavior and
consensual coordination of behavior [12]; [13]; [14]; b) the
four-quadrant map based on the theory of Wilber [18], where
each quadrant of the meta-model indicates a perspective in
which artiﬁcial agents, their practices, collective actions and
social organizations can be described and discussed [1]; [6];
[7]; [15]. The meta-model described by Maturana [12] and the
meta-model describing an integral view on MAS, proposed
by Ferber [6] both emphasize the description of language
and other social processes as an emerging social practice in
complex social organizations. However, the differences be-
tween the enactive and autopoietic view compared to Wilber’s
integral view [18] cannot be made compatible, as we will
argue. The central point of our conceptual analysis rests here
on the concepts of interiority and individuality present in
Ferber’s meta-model [6] that demanded an intense conceptual
review from the enactive perspective, which resulted in the
proposal of our meta-model for describing socio-cognitive
processes, from a strictly enactive perspective. The concepts
of interiority and exteriority have been reduced and replaced
by the concepts of organizational and functional closure and;
the concepts of individual and collective were analyzed, as is
traditionally done in the enactive and autopoietic perspective,
from the concept of structural coupling orders – levels – (ﬁrst,
second and third order structural couplings).
The paper is organized as follows: Section II presents
the enactive and autopoietic theory of social and language
phenomena. Following, section III presents the quadrangle
map that describes the four aspects of a MAS, derived from a
decomposition: Individual / Collective and Interior / Exterior.
Section IV then presents our proposal for a meta-model to
describe cognitive processes, such as language as a social
phenomenon, using a four-quadrant map.
II. ENACTIVE AND AUTOPOIETIC THEORY OF SOCIAL AND
LANGUAGE PHENOMENA
Enaction is bring forth a world, an experiential world. In
Enactive Cognitive Science, we argue that the realization of
the experience occurs within the organizational and functional
closure of structurally coupled living machines [12]; [13].
The ﬁgure 1 illustrates the history of recurring interactions of
living beings, A and B, in the medium C. Maturana considers
these recurring interactions as recursions, and not as simple
repetitions in a sequence [12]. He gives an example of such
recursive function: √a = a′;
√
a′ = a′′;
√
a′′ = a′′′.
Then we say that A and B are organizationally and func-
tionally closed. In biological systems, the organization of A is
represented in the Maturana meta-model above and refers to
the process of self-organization of the physiological domain.
It is also said that A is functionally closed to medium C,
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-847-1
COGNITIVE 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Fig. 1.
History of interactions in a medium. A, B and C named as
different systems by an observer change depending on their interactions while
remaining congruent with themselves in the forms A’, B’ e C’. (Adapted from
[12], p. 82)
altering the medium by its conducts and suffering medium
disturbances. This is the domain of the behavior of system A.
In the position of A, systems B and C are part of the medium.
For B, the medium consists of A and C. Systems that self-
produce structurally coupled to the medium, such as A and B,
are said ontogenic phenotypes [12]. Notice that A, B and C
change along the course of interactions, undergoing a set of
transitions, collectively denoted T. The functional closures of
A with B, A with C and B with C, result under T, respectively
in the functional closures A’ with B’, A’ with C’ and B’
with C’. According to Maturana [12], the observer notes this
organizational change of A in A’, B in B’ and C in C’. Recur-
ring interactions that occur in the contingencies of structural
changes in the environment, undergo also structural changes
due to their coupling to their respective local media. While
dealing with living beings, the observer reckons a history of
transformations (T) in the conducts, which constitute recurrent
interactions. In a history of transformations, it is possible that
there will be an expansion of dominance in the contingencies
of changes. Consensual coordinations of conducts inaugurate
the linguistic domain [12]; [13]. An example of language
coordination is the situation that occurs when a couple starts
their living with a ﬁrst baby, and some friend visiting the
house notices, as an external observer: ”Wow, the dynamics
of this house have completely changed!” The parents and
the baby initiate a history of recurring interactions where the
coordination of conduct between family members and the baby
undergoes changes in their environment as a result of that
history. A domain of consensual behavior is then established,
as it was easily noticed by an observer.
Maturana emphasizes that language appears in this type of
”co-drift story”, ”as an inevitable condition of the history of re-
curring interactions”. The language emerges as “coordination
of behavior and consensual coordination of behavior” ( [12], p.
85), as a set of normative social practices [2]; [9]. An example
of behavior in the linguistic domain is the friend’s speech when
visiting the newborn. It is classically highlighted in enactive
and autopoietic theory that the emergence of language does
not demand anything special, such as internal mental content
or intentional representation, these concepts are reduced and
eliminated by the concepts of functional closure [2]; [9].
Chalmers, also, highlights this point in his functional theory
of language [4].
In the following section, we will go on to describe an
integral view of MAS using a quadrants-based meta-model.
In the section IV we will present the meta-model from an
enactive perspective for describing MAS and the realization of
social processes, like the emergence of language in MultiAgent
Based Simulation (MABS).
III. MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS IN AN INTEGRAL VIEW:
LANGUAGE AS NORMATIVE SOCIAL PRACTICES
In order to describe different aspects of Multiagent systems,
Ferber [6] leaned on Wilber’s theory [18], who describes
in four quadrants an integral view for psychology based on
the concepts of subjectivity, objectivity, interobjectivity and
intersubjectivity. The subjectivity quadrant is obtained by the
Individual / Interior composition (I-I). The objectivity quadrant
is obtained by the Individual / Exterior composition (I-E).
The interobjectivity quadrant is obtained by the Collective /
Exterior composition (C-E) and the intersubjectivity quadrant
is obtained by the Collective / Interior composition (C-I).
Fig. 2. Analysis of MAS according to an integral view ( [6], p. 15).
A series of psychological and social aspects are described
in the meta-model, serving as a basis for understanding the
investigated phenomena for the design of agent and MAS ar-
chitectures. In Wilber’s integral view, mental states, emotions,
beliefs, desires, intentions and even cognition are described
as subjective phenomena or as inherent to the interiority of
individuals [18]. In this quadrant everything that concerns
to the “I” (the “self”) would be comprised. Behaviors of
agents, of objects, observable processes and the bodies of
agents are described as objectives or external things. In an
emblematic way, this quadrant is described as being in the
order of “It” or “This”. In the integral view, facts and social
structures are subject to reiﬁcation. Organizations, forms of
interaction and the environment as a space for interaction are
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-847-1
COGNITIVE 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

described as interobjective phenomena or as of the order of
the “Sociosphere”. In this quadrant everything that is of the
order of ”Them” or ”All This” would be comprised. Shared
knowledge and collective knowledge, ontologies, social norms
and conventions, language and semantics are described as
intersubjective or of the order of the “Noosphere”, which is
all about ”We” or ”us”.
In our view, quadrants are an interesting tool for the
schematic understanding of popular descriptions of psycho-
logical and social phenomena. Mapping these descriptions is
useful to transpose notions expressed about a psychosocial
theme in models and simulations based on agents. Never-
theless, Wilber’s view is not compatible with the enactive
and autopoietic theory of psychosocial phenomena [18]. In
both meta-models, from Maturana [12] and Ferber [6], we
ﬁnd a description of language as social norms and practices.
However, fundamental differences do occur, which we will be
explored in the next section.
IV. A MULTIAGENT META-MODEL FOR THE DESCRIPTION
OF SOCIO-COGNITIVE PROCESSES
The central point of our conceptual analysis rests on the
concepts of interiority and individuality present in Ferber’s
meta-model [6] that demanded a conceptual review from an
enactive perspective, which resulted in the proposal of our
meta-model below for describing MAS. From an enactive
perspective, the concepts of interiority and exteriority are
reduced and eliminated by the concepts of organizational
and functional closure and; the concepts of individual and
collective were analyzed as is traditionally done in the enactive
perspective from the concepts of structural coupling of second
and third orders.
Traditionally, agents are described as autonomous units of
information processing, notion that derive from a cognitivist
perspective [3]. According to Ferber, however, the agent is a
computational entity, a process, located in a virtual or real
environment [6]. Starting from the theoretical framework of
the enactive and autopoietic theory, we defend that an artiﬁcial
agent is deﬁned ﬁrst of all by its organization and then by
its functioning in the environment. Thus, the agent is an
organizationally and functionally closed unit, and artiﬁcial
agents have, as designed by the human being, their initial
organization and thus, an initial mode of functioning in the
environment.
In the proposed meta-model it is intended to situate very
common concepts in the domain of MAS. The agent and its
architecture, which may or may not have a semiotic structure
[10]; [11]; [16]; [17], is described as an organizationally closed
unit, which when concretely implemented (as it is commonly
said), will be structurally coupled by a human designer in a
physical (material) level of the natural organization. In this
sense, robots like Sophia from Hanson Robotics, are designed
with such a body structure that enables it to be inserted in a
certain way in the social dynamics of human relationships.
Starting with the upper-left quadrant of ﬁgure 3, from
the composition “Structural coupling level n / Organizational
closure” (SCn-OC), we describe the concepts of agent, agent
architecture and semiotic structure of agent architecture. Fol-
lowing to the upper-right quadrant, from the composition
“Structural coupling level n / Functional closure” (SCn-FC),
we describe the behaviors of agents in the environment, the
concepts of situated agent and embedded agent. These ﬁrst
two quadrants are central to the so-called Agent Centered
Multiagent Systems (ACMAS) approach.
Fig. 3.
Analysis of MAS according to an enactive vision. The ﬁgure
illustrates language in artiﬁcial agents occurring from a semiotic structure,
situated behaviors, social practices and a social structure of language, that
is; as “coordination of behaviors and consensual coordinations of behaviors”.
Social practices occur as behavior coordinations, but consensual coordinations
depend on the formation of social organizations; social norms and conventions
and, then, the emergence of a social structure of language.
The following two quadrants at the bottom of ﬁgure 3,
describe fundamental characteristics in the so-called Orga-
nization Centered Multiagent Systems (OCMAS) approach.
In this case, the concept of emergent organization takes the
focus of the design and implementation of the MAS [6].
From the composition “Structural coupling n+1 / Functional
closure” (SCn+1-FC), there is a series of emerging phenom-
ena. Classically, it is understood that micro-behaviors (at
level n) can lead to macro-behaviors (at level n+1). We then
describe in the bottom left quadrant social practices, uses,
the semantics as uses, the language as coordination of the
practices of agents in their environments and the environment
as a space modiﬁable by interactions. In the last quadrant,
at bottom right, we zoom in again on the internal dynamics
of the system, highlighting the formation of social groups,
with a social organization being a group of at least one social
group [6]. At this level of the organization of the system we
describe social organizations, social norms and conventions
and also the structure of language. It is emphasized that these
phenomena cannot be reduced to the processes described in
the architectures of the agents. The social processes in their
organizations provide normative patterns of disturbances on
the structure of the agent, which may lead to the evolution of
their architecture. The following meta-model in the ﬁgure 4
presents the evolution of these ontologies described above.
With the modiﬁcation of the agent’s architecture due to the
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-847-1
COGNITIVE 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Fig. 4. Evolution of MAS according to an enactive vision.
emergence of normative social practices embodied in social
organizations, a new cycle begins in the MAS. Thus, the
new architecture will provide for the emergence of behaviors
in the system, social practices will evolve together with the
environment, leading to the evolution of language and seman-
tics (emergent uses in MAS). Finally, the social organization
itself also evolves as a result of these collective practices,
with the possibility of forming new social groups, norms and
conventions, and thus also of the social structure of language.
We understand that language variation occurs fundamentally
with the formation of different social groups, it occurs as
variations in the norms of social practices.
We understand to capture here the essentials of Maturana
and Varela views about language as “history of co-drift”, “as
an inevitable condition of the history of recurring interactions”.
The language emerges as “coordination of behavior and con-
sensual coordination of behavior” [12]; [13]; [14], as a set
of normative social practices. The realization of language in
artiﬁcial agents is the result of several recurring functions in
MAS deﬁning the agent architecture, as well as the MAS ar-
chitecture. The organizational and functional closure embodied
in certain structural coupling level leads to coordinations of
behaviors (collective practices), and consensual coordinations
of behaviors (normative social practices), occurring from an
agent architecture (that can have a semiotic structure), situated
behaviors, social practices and a social structure of lan-
guage. Social practices appear from coordinations of behavior,
however, consensual coordinations require the formation of
social organizations, with social norms and conventions and,
then, with the realization of the social structure of language.
However, a challenge is imposed in the design of semiotic
architectures of agents from an enactive perspective. As a
requirement, it is necessary that the semiotic structure of
the agents can be self-developed by the system, not directly
implemented by the programmer.
V. FINAL CONSIDERATIONS
The objective of this article was to describe social processes
and among them language in particular, based on: a) the
enactive and autopoietic theory of cognition, which describes
language as a social phenomenon and the linguistic domain as
processes of communication over communications [12]; [13];
[14]; b) the Ferber’s meta-model [6], which describes MAS
from a view based on Wilber’s [18], where each quadrant
of the meta-model describes psychosocial processes from the
subjectivity and objectivity dichotomy. Fundamental aspects
of MAS, such as the architecture of agents, the formation of
artiﬁcial organizations and the emergence of language were
presented from this meta-model [1]; [6]; [7]; [15].
However, even though the enactive theory and the integral
view describe language as a social process, occurring in social
organizations, based on social structures and processes, there
are incompatible differences between the enactive view and the
Wilber’s integral view. Fundamental ontological differences
were pointed out, which led us to propose a meta-model to
describe MAS and the realization of language in artiﬁcial
agents in a strictly enactive perspective, using a four-quadrant
map. The central point of our conceptual analysis highlighted
that the concepts of interiority and individuality present in
Ferber’s meta-model [6] are liable to be reduced and replaced
by the concepts of organizational and functional closure and
that, the concepts of individual and collective were analyzed
as it is traditionally done in the enactive perspective from the
concepts of structural coupling of second and third orders.
We conclude with the understanding that our meta-model
of description of MAS under an enactive vision captures the
essentials of Maturana and Varela about language as a history
of co-drift [12]; [13]; [14], “as an inevitable condition in the
history of recurring interactions” (p. 85). We emphasize that
language emerges as “coordination of behavior and consensual
coordinations of behavior” ( [12], p. 85), as a set of social
practices in different forms of social organizations. However,
a challenge is imposed in the design of semiotic architectures
of agents from an enactive perspective because it is necessary
that the semiotic structure of the agents architecture can be
self-developed by the Multiagent system and not directly
implemented by the designer, which is a target for a future
work.
REFERENCES
[1] L. L. Carvalho, ”Emergencia de Linguagem a partir do ciclo social da
regra em modelos computacionais,” Anais da 43a Reuniao Anual da
Sociedade Brasileira de Psicologia Brazil, ISSN 2176-5243, October
2013 [43a Reuniao Anual da Sociedade Brasileira de Psicologia Brazil,
October 2013].
[2] L. L. Carvalho and J. E. Kogler, ”The enactive computational basis of
cognition and the explanatory cognitive basis for computing,” Cognitive
Systems Research, vol. 67, pp. 96–103, June 2021.
[3] L. L. Carvalho, D. J. Pereira and S. A. Coelho, ”Origins and evolution
of enactive cognitive science: Toward a enactive cognitive architecture,”
Biologically Inspired Cognitive Architectures, v. 16, pp. 169–178, April
2016.
[4] D. A. Chalmers, ”Computational Foundation for the Study of Cognition”
Journal of Cognitive Science, vol. 12(4), pp. 323–357, 2011.
[5] D. A. Chalmers, ”The Varieties of Computations: A Reply” Journal of
Cognitive Science, vol. 13(3), pp. 211—224, 2012.
[6] J. Ferber, ”Multi-agent concepts and methodologies,” in Agent-based
modelling and simulation in the social and human sciences, D. Phan
and F. Amblard, Eds. Oxford: Bardwell Press, 2007, pp. 7–33.
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-847-1
COGNITIVE 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

[7] J. Ferber, L. L. Carvalho, D. Phan and F. Varenne, ”O que e seguir uma
regra? Reﬂexao sobre as normas e os usos,” in Temas em Ciencias
Cognitivas e Representac¸ao Mental, E. J. Lopes, Ed. Porto Alegre:
Sinopsys, 2012, pp. 259–277.
[8] J. Ferber, F. Michel, J. BAEZ, ”AGRE: Integrating Environments
with Organizations,” E4MAS’04: Environments for Multiagent Systems
Australia, pp. 127–134, 2005.
[9] D. D. Hutto, E. Myin, A. Peeters and F. Zahnoun, ”The Cognitive Basis
of Computation: Putting Computation in Its Place,” in The Routledge
Handbook of the Computational, M. Sprevak and M. Colombo, Eds.
London: Routledge, 2018, pp. 272—282.
[10] A. C. Loula, R. Gudwin and J. Queiroz, ”Synthetic approach of
symbolic creatures,” S.E.E.D. Journal – Semiotics, Evolution, Energy,
and Development, vol. 3(3), pp. 125–133, 2003.
[11] A. C. Loula, R. Gudwin and J. Queiroz, ”Symbolic communication in
artiﬁcial creatures: an experiment in Artiﬁcial Life,” Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, vol. 3171, pp. 336-345, 2004.
[12] H. Maturana, ”Cognic¸ao, ciencia e vida cotidiana,” 2nd ed., Belo
Horizonte: Editora UFMG, 2014.
[13] H. Maturana and F. J. Varela, ”Autopoiesis and Cognition: the Realiza-
tion of the Living,” Dodrecht: Reidel, 1980.
[14] H. Maturana and F. J. Varela, ”A Arvore do Conhecimento: As bases
biologicas do entendimento humano,” Campinas: Psy, 1995.
[15] D. Phan, J. Ferber, L. L. Carvalho, F. Varenne, ”Qu’est-ce que suivre
une regle ? Reﬂexion sur les normes et les usages,” in Ontologies pour
la modelisation par Systemes Multi-Agents en Sciences Humaines et
Sociales, D. Phan, Ed. Paris: Hermes-Sciences et Lavoisier, 2014.
[16] L. Steels, ”Language as a Complex Adaptive System,” Parallel Problem
Solving from Nature PPSN VI, pp. 17–26, 2000 [International Confer-
ence on Parallel Problem Solving from Nature PPSN, 2000].
[17] L. Steels, ”Intelligence with representation,” Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc.
London, vol. A361(1811), pp. 2381–2395, 2003.
[18] K. Wilber, ”Theory of Everything,” Boston: Shambala, 2000.
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-847-1
COGNITIVE 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

