A Conceptual Architecture of Cognitive Electronic Warfare System 
Qinghan Xiao 
Radar Electronic Warfare Section  
Defence R&D Canada – Ottawa Research Centre 
Ottawa, Canada 
e-mail: Qinghan.Xiao@drdc-rddc.gc.ca 
 
 
Abstract—The major motivation behind research on cognitive 
Electronic Warfare (EW) is the requirement to defeat modern 
radar systems using emerging technologies, especially cognitive 
algorithms. Using cognition-based techniques, a radar system 
would be able to perceive its operational environment, fine-
tune and accordingly adjust its emission parameters, such as 
the pulse width, pulse repetition interval, and transmitter 
power, to perform its assigned task optimally. It is certain that 
traditional EW methods, which rely on pre-programmed 
attack strategies, will not be able to efficiently engage with 
modern radar threats.  Therefore, the next generation of EW 
systems needs to be enhanced with cognitive abilities so that 
they can make autonomous decisions in response to changing 
situations, and cope with new, unknown radar signals. In this 
paper, a conceptual architecture of a cognitive EW system is 
presented. The system consists of five major functional 
components, namely: environmental perception to observe the 
operational environment; intelligent signal analysis to assess 
and characterize electromagnetic spectrum signals emitted by 
enemy radars; a cognitive thinking module to produce close-to-
optimal jamming solutions; a dynamic knowledge base that 
continues to grow during the operation; and a feedback loop as 
a facilitator of intelligence to improve the jamming 
performance. The system architecture and functional modules 
are described in detail. 
Keywords-adaprive electronic warfare; cognitive electronic 
warfare; machine leaning; cognitive thinking. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In recent years, there are growing research interests in the 
development of cognitive capabilities in various electronic 
systems. Mitola and Maguire first introduced the concept of 
cognitive radio in 1999 [1]. In 2006, Haykin proposed the 
idea of cognitive radar, which is a dynamic system that 
adapts and optimizes transmitted waveforms based on the 
operational environment [2]. The proposed cognitive radar 
system is characterized by the following three key features: 
(1) the receiver learns, iteratively, from experience gained 
through interaction with the environment; (2) the transmitter 
adapts its illumination of the environment in an optimal 
manner 
in 
accordance 
with 
information 
about 
the 
environment passed on to it by the receiver; and (3) the 
feedback link coordinates and optimizes the operations of the 
transmitter and receiver in a synchronous manner [3]. 
Different from traditional radar systems, cognitive abilities 
could allow a radar to fine-tune and adjust its emission 
parameters, such as the pulse width, pulse repetition interval, 
power, and pulse compression technique, to perform its 
assigned task optimally.  Therefore, to defend against 
cognitive radar systems, cognition is the key to the next 
generation Electronic Warfare (EW) system. The US Air 
Force Science Advisory Board carried out a study entitled, 
“Responding to Uncertain or Adaptive Threats in Electronic 
Warfare” in 2016. It pointed out that, “increasing signal 
density and highly variable or real-time adaptive waveforms 
and modalities will challenge the ability of Air Force 
systems to identify source and intent of signals in the Radio 
Frequency (RF) spectrum” [4]. Legacy EW systems that rely 
on 
databases 
of 
known 
threats 
and 
predefined 
countermeasures lack the ability to identify and respond to 
parameter agile radars in real time. Therefore, the front-end 
of EW system, Electronic Support (ES), and the back-end of 
the system, Electronic Attack (EA), need to be enhanced 
with intelligence to provide accurate situational awareness 
information through ES, and decide where and how to apply 
jamming through EA.   
As shown in Figure 1, a basic cognitive EW system 
should 
include 
five 
modules: 
signal 
analysis 
and 
characterization, countermeasure preparedness and response, 
countermeasure effectiveness assessment, a database to hold 
a priori and dynamic knowledge of the operational 
environment and threats, and a feedback loop encompassing 
the environment, receiver and transmitter [5][6]. In the 
system, Environmental Perception focuses on sensing of the 
operational environment to optimize further processing 
procedures 
based 
on 
the 
surrounding 
environment. 
Intelligent Signal Characterization block performs pattern 
recognition and uses machine learning algorithms to assess 
and characterize electromagnetic spectrum signals emitting 
from enemy radars as either known or unknown threats. The 
objective of the Cognitive Thinking module is to synthesize 
close-to-optimal countermeasures subject to transceiver 
limitations, user-input restrictions and performance goals. 
The 
Dynamic 
Knowledge 
Base 
contains 
not only 
environmental, target, and other a priori information, but also 
information on recently learned threats. The Feedback loop 
plays a key role in causing the transmission parameters to be 
adjusted in order to improve the jamming performance in 
real time.  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II 
discusses the major differences between adaptive EW and 
cognitive EW. Section III presents a cognitive EW system 
architecture, and finally, Section IV concludes the paper.  
38
Used by permission to IARIA    ISBN:  978-1-61208-609-5
COGNITIVE 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
(c) Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada (Department of National Defence), 2018
(c) Sa Majesté la Reine en droit du Canada (Ministère de la Défense nationale), 2018

 
Figure 1.  Basic cognitive EW system. 
 
II. 
ADAPTIVE EW AND COGNITIVE EW 
Over the past few years, the terms adaptive EW and 
cognitive EW have been used interchangeably by many 
people. In [7], the author raised the following questions: 
What is the difference between adaptive and cognitive 
electronic warfare? Does it even matter? This section is 
intended to address these questions. 
A. Adaptive EW 
The advances of digital radar technology have led to a 
shift in the way legacy EW is executed and raised the need 
for more advanced EW solutions. Adaptive EW is proposed 
in the literature as being capable of recognizing a change in 
the operating environment, and then selecting from a series 
of predetermined EA actions that have been deemed to be 
optimized in an off-line environment [7][8]. For example, 
when the receiver detects a target radar changing its transmit 
frequency, the EW system adapts the transmitter to the 
corresponding frequency band. The main properties are 
summarized as follows: 
 
 
Adaptive EW is reactive; 
 
ES identification relies on a pre-programmed library; 
 
EA responses are pre-programmed solutions; and 
 
The system operates with a feedback mechanism 
between 
transmitter 
and 
receiver, 
which 
is 
independent of the environment. 
B. Cognitive EW 
The concept of cognitive EW is based on a perception-
learning-action framework, which is one step beyond that of 
adaptive EW (Figure 2). Not only would a cognitive EW 
system adapt based on what it observes, but also it should 
use machine learning and pattern recognition algorithms to 
mimic human mental processes of perception, memory, 
judgment, and reasoning. Cognitive EW needs to be a 
dynamic closed-loop feedback system that would enable an 
intelligent response to defeat threat radars. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Perception-learning-action loop. 
RF ENVIRONMENT 
PERCEPTION 
Launching ES tasks 
ACTION 
Launching EA tasks 
LEARNING 
Learning and 
predicting threat 
characteristics 
Environment and Target 
Environmental 
Perception 
Jamming signal 
Threat signal 
Intelligent Signal 
Characterization 
Dynamic 
Knowledge Base 
Countermeasure 
Synthesis 
Countermeasure 
Assessment 
Cognitive Thinking 
Feedback 
Operator 
Situational awareness 
39
Used by permission to IARIA    ISBN:  978-1-61208-609-5
COGNITIVE 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
(c) Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada (Department of National Defence), 2018
(c) Sa Majesté la Reine en droit du Canada (Ministère de la Défense nationale), 2018

Artificial Intelligence (AI) and machine learning could 
make it possible for a cognitive EW system to exploit 
unknown radar waveforms that the system has never seen 
before. A feedback mechanism could possibly coordinate the 
operations of the transmitter and receiver to achieve optimal 
jamming performance. The following are the key features of 
cognitive EW with which cognitive EW needs to be 
proactive, i.e., it would: 
 
 
Adaptive EW is reactive; 
 
ES identification relies on a pre-programmed library; 
 
Attempt to learn the target's dynamic states and 
account for time-varying environmental conditions; 
 
Operate as a dynamic closed-loop feedback system 
encompassing the transmitter, environment and 
receiver; and 
 
Produce effective countermeasures against a threat 
radar even for a new or unknown threat. 
C. Major Differences 
As discussed in the previous sections, there are several 
fundamental differences between cognitive EW and adaptive 
EW. Mark Pomerleau stated in his article [7], “differentiating 
between different levels of adaptability and true cognitive 
EW is important”, although a few experts viewed it 
differently [8]. An adaptive EW system adapts and responds 
to a threat in a pre-programmed manner, either based on 
rules or pre-processed knowledge obtained off-line. A 
cognitive EW system would overcome the limitations of the 
rule-based or knowledge-based adaptive EW system through 
machine learning to make the system better aware of the 
environment in which it is being used, and then characterize 
the threat and determine appropriate countermeasures. Let us 
conclude this section with three remarks: 
 
 
A cognitive EW system should continuously learn 
about the environment through experience gained 
from its interactions with the environment, and 
should continuously update itself with relevant 
information. 
 
The transmitter could deploy jamming signals in an 
intelligent manner which would: 
— take into account factors such as threat function, the 
relative positions and motions of targets, and 
construct optimal countermeasures techniques; 
— assess countermeasure effectiveness; and 
— adjust the countermeasure appropriately in order to 
maintain optimal effectiveness. 
 
The whole EW system would constitute a closed-
loop dynamic system, which should encompass the 
transmitter, environmental, receiver, and feedback 
channel. 
III. 
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
Based on above analysis, a conceptual architecture of a 
cognitive EW system is developed. Figure 3 shows a 
functional block diagram of the proposed system. The 
following important aspects distinguish a cognitive EW 
system from a legacy EW system. 
A. Closed-Loop 
A legacy EW system has an open-loop structure that does 
not assess the jamming effectiveness in real-time. A 
cognitive EW system needs to be a closed-loop system that 
performs environmental analysis, signal characterization, 
countermeasure synthesis, and countermeasure effectiveness 
assessment in real-time. It would continually adjust its 
jamming strategy based on feedback concerning threat 
behavior. 
B. Completely Automated 
In order to devise countermeasures in real-time, a 
cognitive EW system needs to continuously learn about the 
dynamically changing environment, automatically generate 
an 
optimized 
jamming 
technique 
and 
evaluate 
its 
effectiveness. Therefore, it is necessary to perform 
autonomous decision-making in real time. 
C. Machine Learning 
In contrast to static and adaptive EW systems that rely on 
pre-programmed threat libraries, a cognitive EW system 
needs to be able to analyze signals that have not previously 
been encountered, devise effective countermeasures, assess 
their effectiveness, and predict future threat emissions, all in 
real time. Therefore, machine learning is a basic ingredient 
of a cognitive EW system with which to learn and predict 
threat characteristics, and to automatically generate effective 
countermeasures by reasoning about past experiences. 
D. Fuzzy Reasoning 
Fuzzy Logic is an AI technique that can handle ill-
defined, imprecise systems, and therefore enables a system 
using imprecise concepts and dependencies to reason about 
target systems [9]. Due to dynamic changes in the 
electromagnetic spectrum environment, fuzzy reasoning is a 
good tool to address uncertainty and deal with unexpected 
inputs by modeling human behavior to provide approximate 
reasoning when precise information is not available. 
IV. 
CASE STUDIES 
In order to gain a better understanding of the differences 
between cognitive EW and adaptive EW, two case studies 
are described and discussed in this section. The first one is 
about dealing with a previously unknown radar signal. As 
mentioned above, an adaptive EW system relies on libraries 
of known emitter (radar, communications, electro-optical, 
etc.) waveforms to identify the threat and determine the 
appropriate countermeasures response. To detect, deceive, 
and defeat enemy radar threats using new waveforms and 
unknown techniques, the adaptive solution involves 
collecting evidence and analyzing it in a laboratory for 
countermeasure development. There are two challenges: (1) 
it may take months to develop and deploy new profiles and 
countermeasures; and (2) when the received signal is 
slightly out of tolerance compared to what was recorded in 
40
Used by permission to IARIA    ISBN:  978-1-61208-609-5
COGNITIVE 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
(c) Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada (Department of National Defence), 2018
(c) Sa Majesté la Reine en droit du Canada (Ministère de la Défense nationale), 2018

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.    Functional block diagram of a cognitive EW system. 
the library, the threat emitter cannot be identified and 
defeated. On the contrary, a cognitive EW system would use 
AI and machine learning to detect, characterize, and counter 
both known and unknown threat transmissions in real time. 
It would start by analyzing the electromagnetic spectrum 
environment. If changes are detected, then it is reasonable to 
conclude that new or unknown radar emitters are present. 
The environmental change would then be extracted for 
spectrum analysis. Machine learning algorithms would be 
used to characterize and predict the threat’s properties and 
capabilities. The second example concerns the appropriate 
countermeasures response. As mentioned above, an adaptive 
EW system is only reactive’ to the received data stream, 
which relies on a pre-programmed library to provide a 
specific, pre-determined countermeasure. With a dynamic 
knowledge base, a cognitive EW system would generate a 
dynamic 
action 
library 
consisting 
of 
several 
countermeasures options, and perform perception-learning-
action feedback cycles to determine the optimal one. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS 
With the evolution of radar systems from fixed analogue 
systems to programmable digital variants, it is possible to 
endow radars with the ability to produce an almost infinite 
variety of signals. These developments have made legacy 
EW systems less and less effective against modern radar 
systems, especially those that are highly adaptive or 
cognitive [10]. The introduction of 
cognition 
into 
engineering systems is therefore key to the development of 
next generation EW systems. In this paper, a conceptual 
architecture of a cognitive EW system is presented, based on 
a 
perception-learning-action 
framework. 
Its 
major 
components include:  an environmental perception module, 
an intelligent signal analysis module, a cognitive thinking 
module, a dynamic knowledge base, and a performance 
feedback module. The important aspects that distinguish a 
cognitive EW system from a legacy EW system are 
discussed in detail. This is the first step in the development 
of novel cognitive EW techniques. Further research will 
address the following issues: (1) development of analytic 
abilities to perceive the surrounding environment; (2) 
 
Performance Assessment Module 
RF Environment  
Jamming Result Feedback 
…… 
Intelligent Signal Analysis 
Module  
Sensor I 
Environment Perception Module 
Sensor N 
…… 
Jamming Waveform Generation 
Cognitive Thinking 
Learning 
Reasoning 
Optimization 
Countermeasure synthesis 
Dynamic Knowledge Base 
Knowledge-based 
Skill-based 
Rule-based 
41
Used by permission to IARIA    ISBN:  978-1-61208-609-5
COGNITIVE 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
(c) Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada (Department of National Defence), 2018
(c) Sa Majesté la Reine en droit du Canada (Ministère de la Défense nationale), 2018

application of machine learning techniques to characterize 
previously unknown radar signals; and (3) implementation of 
fuzzy logic techniques to deal with environmental 
uncertainty.  
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Mitola III and G. Q. Maguire, Jr., “Cognitive radio: Making 
software radios more personal,” IEEE Personal Commun., 
vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 13–18, August 1999. 
[2] S. Haykin, “Cognitive radar: A way of the future,” IEEE 
Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 30-40, Jauary 
2006.  
[3] S. Haykin, “Cognition is the key to the next generation of 
radar systems,” Proc. of the 13th IEEE Digital Signal 
Processing Workshop and 5th IEEE Signal Processing 
Education Workshop (DSP/SPE ’09), January 2009, pp. 463–
467. 
[4] USAF Scientific Advisory Board. Responding to Uncertain or 
Adaptive Threats in Electronic Warfare. [Online]. Available 
from: 
http://www.scientificadvisoryboard.af.mil/About-
Us/Fact-Sheets/Display/Article/878167/fy16-study-tors/, 
(Access date: 13 September 2017).  
[5] S. Cole, “Cognitive electronic warfare: Countering threats 
posed by adaptive radars,” Military Embedded Systems, pp. 
16-19, January/February 2017.  
[6] B. H. Kirk, R. M. Narayanan, A. F. Martone, and K. D. 
Sherbondy, “Waveform design for cognitive radar: Target 
detection in heavy clutter,” Proc. of SPIE Radar Sensor 
Technology XX, vol. 9829, 13 pages, 30 June 2016.  
[7] M. Pomerleau, “What is the difference between adaptive and 
cognitive 
electronic 
warfare?” 
C4ISRNET. 
[Online]. 
http://www.c4isrnet.com/c2-comms/2016/12/16/what-is-the-
difference-between-adaptive-and-cognitive-electronic-
warfare/, (Access date: 14 September 2017). 
[8] J. Knowles, “Regaining the advantage – Cognitive electronic 
warfare,” The Journal of Electronic Defense, vol. 39, no. 12, 
pp. 56-62, December 2016.  
[9] S. Lee-Urban, et al. “CORA: A flexible hybrid approach to 
building cognitive systems,” Proc. of the Third Annual 
Conference on Advances in Cognitive Systems, Poster 
Collection, 2015, pp. 1-16. 
[10] M. Arik and O. B. Akan, “Enabling cognition on electronic 
countermeasure systems against next-generation radars,” 
Proc. IEEE Military Communications Conference 2015 
(MILCOM 2015), October 2015, pp. 1103-1108. 
 
 
 
 
 
42
Used by permission to IARIA    ISBN:  978-1-61208-609-5
COGNITIVE 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
(c) Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada (Department of National Defence), 2018
(c) Sa Majesté la Reine en droit du Canada (Ministère de la Défense nationale), 2018

