PREVIRNEC 
A new platform for cognitive tele-rehabilitation 
 
J. Solana, C. Caceres, EJ. Gomez 
Bioengineering and Telemedicine Research Center  
ETSIT-Technical University of Madrid / Ciber-bbn 
Madrid, Spain 
{jsolana,ccaceres,egomez}@gbt.tfo.upm.es 
S. Ferrer-Celma, M. Ferre-Bergada, P. Garcia-Lopez 
Informatics Engineering & Mathematics Research Center 
Rovira i Virgili University 
Tarragona, Spain 
{sandra.ferrer,maria.ferre,pedro.garcia}@urv.cat 
A. Garcia-Molina, A. Garcia-Rudolph, T. Roig, JM. Tormos 
Neuropsychology and Research Departments 
Institut Guttmann 
Badalona, Spain 
{agarciam,agarciar,troig,jmtormos}@guttmann.com
 
Abstract — Acquired Brain Injury (ABI), either caused by 
vascular or traumatic nature, is one of the most important 
causes for neurological disabilities. People who suffer ABI see 
how their quality of life decreases, due to the affection of one 
or some of the cognitive functions (memory, attention, 
language or executive functions). The traditional cognitive 
rehabilitation protocols are too expensive, so every help 
carried out in this area is justified. PREVIRNEC is a new 
platform for cognitive tele-rehabilitation that allows the 
neuropsychologist to schedule rehabilitation sessions consisted 
of specifically designed tasks, plus offering an additional way 
of communication between neuropsychologists and patients. 
Besides, the platform offers a knowledge management module 
that allows the optimization of the cognitive rehabilitation to 
this kind of patients. 
Keywords 
— 
PREVIRNEC; 
tele-rehabilitation; 
cognitive 
rehabilitation; Acquired Brain Injury (ABI). 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The World Health Organization (WHO) predicts that by 
the year 2020, stroke and traumatic brain injury (TBI) are 
within top five etiologies considering medical cost and cost 
of disability adjusted to life expectancy (DALY). These 
injuries produce a complex constellation of medical 
consequences including physical and cognitive deficits. 
Cognitive impairments in attention, memory, language, and 
executive 
function 
hamper 
the 
path 
to 
functional 
independence and a productive lifestyle for the person with 
acquired brain injury [1]. 
 
Every year, nine million people around the world suffer 
from stroke [2]. Globally, cerebrovascular disease (stroke) is 
the second leading cause of death and the eighth cause of 
severe disability in the elderly. The WHO estimated that in 
2005, stroke accounted for 5.7 million deaths worldwide, 
equivalent to 9.9% of all deaths, and was the predominant 
cause of disability, afflicting 30.7 million people [2]. 
Statistical data show that after a stroke, one third of patients 
die during the first month, and 40% of people who recover 
from the acute phase exhibit a high degree of impairment 
that decreases their independence and quality of life. Only 
one third of patients recovers their basic functions and can 
resume a normal life [3]. There are not accurate data on the 
prevalence of TBI in Europe, meanwhile data from the 
United States show a high prevalence of this pathology, with 
5.3 million people living with a disability caused by TBI [4]. 
New techniques of early intervention and the development 
of intensive ABI care have noticeably improved the survival 
rate. However, despite of these advances, brain injuries still 
have no surgical or pharmacological treatment to re-
establish lost function. Cognitive rehabilitation, as part of 
neuropsychological rehabilitation, has been defined as the 
application of techniques and procedures, and the 
implementation of supports to allow individuals with 
cognitive impairment to function as safely, productively, 
and independently as possible within their environment. The 
provision of cognitive rehabilitation thus becomes an 
essential part of the services to manage the complex 
disablement that ABI provokes. 
The 
use 
of 
Information 
and 
Communication 
Technologies (ICTs) to develop a tele-rehabilitation and tele-
assistance allows: 
 
To improve the quality of clinical services, by 
facilitating the access to them, helping to break 
geographical barriers. 
 
To keep the objective in the assistance centered in the 
patient, 
facilitating 
the 
communication 
between 
different clinical levels. 
 
To extend the therapeutic processes beyond the 
hospital, like patient’s home. 
 
A saving for unnecessary costs and a better 
costs/benefits ratio. 
59
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

In the last years, several projects have been trying to 
demonstrate this utility of the ICTs as a better way to 
perform the neuro-rehabilitation. 
 
The objectives of this paper are: 
 
Analyzing and modeling a tele-rehabilitation system, 
defining the objectives and user’s requirements. 
 
Defining the platform architecture, highlighting the 
different modules involved. 
 
Designing and developing the platform, including the 
user interface, describing the different functionalities of 
the system for each defined profile.  
 
PREVIRNEC [5] is a tele-rehabilitation platform that has 
been developed during the past six years by the Universitat 
Rovira i Virgili and Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, 
together with the Institut Guttmann (Spain) neuropsychology 
and research departments. The use and experience reached 
during this time with more than 500 patients been treated 
with PREVIRNEC, together with a deep study of the clinical 
problem and a modeling process of the system, have allowed 
the authors to improve considerably the system, creating a 
more complete cognitive tele-rehabilitation platform that is 
presented in this paper. 
This paper starts with the system modeling, describing 
the different user profiles defined. Then, comes a description 
of the tele-rehabilitation itself, explaining their modules and 
the significant work done to achieve the objectives. Finally, 
some conclusions are shown. 
II. 
SYSTEM MODELING 
A. Requirements analysis 
For the system modeling Unified Modeling Language 
(UML) has been used, describing the system’s behavior 
using use cases and sequence diagrams. 
For the elicitation and definition of the objectives and 
user requirements a detailed process has been followed, 
including interviews and meetings with neuropsychologists 
from the Institut Guttmann, which is a specialized center in 
cognitive and functional neuro-rehabilitation. 
 
B. User Profiles 
For each person or entity using the system in a 
determined context and for a specific goal, four different user 
profiles have been defined: 
 
Patients: man or woman of any age with one or some 
cognitive functions affected, as a consequence of 
suffering ABI. Here appears the caregiver role, 
considered a secondary actor that will help the patient 
to use the system when necessary. 
 
Therapist: a neuropsychologist specialized in cognitive 
rehabilitation in patients with ABI, who will have a 
number of assigned patients to be responsible for their 
treatment, scheduling and monitoring personalized and 
individualized therapies. 
 
Supervisor: person in charge of the user management 
for each center, both patients and therapists and their 
assignments, apart from other management and control 
functions applied to center/s that supervises. 
 
Administrator: 
apart 
from 
all 
the 
typical 
administration tasks for every informatics system, the 
administrator will be the responsible for managing the 
categories, functions and tasks defined in the system, 
which is the content the therapist will use to schedule 
therapy sessions to their patients. 
 
III. 
COGNITIVE TELE-REHABILITATION PLATFORM 
PREVIRNEC is a cognitive tele-rehabilitation platform, 
developed over an architecture based on web technologies. 
PREVIRNEC is conceived as a tool to enhance cognitive 
rehabilitation, strengthening the relationship between the 
neuropsychologist and the patient, personalization of 
treatment, monitoring of results and the performance of 
tasks. 
A. Architecture 
The architecture presented here consists of five main 
modules, which group related functionalities vertically, 
sharing the user interface that is personalized depending on 
the user’s role. This interface is also multi-language, with 
Catalan, Spanish and English already implemented, but 
being open to support any other language. The system also 
has a help module, which guides the user in order to 
complete each action. Security aspects are transversal and 
have to be taken into account in every module to keep 
information and all connections safe, due to the important of 
confidentiality in this kind of medical applications. The 
security module is the responsible of controlling every 
access, included the ones related to the patients’ Electronic 
Health Record (EHR). 
In Figure 1. this architecture is represented, where we can 
see the different modules, described below: 
 
 
Figure 1.  Tele-rehabilitation architecture modules 
 
Communication: the main element of this module is 
the 
videoconference that allows 
the users to 
communicate using video, audio and chat. Using the 
videoconference therapists can do tele-appointments 
with patients or other therapists, breaking the distance 
barriers between users, and helping the patients to feel 
60
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

closer 
to the 
clinical 
team. Apart 
from 
the 
videoconference, this module has a mailing service to 
exchange internal asynchronous messages and an alert 
service that let users know what tasks they have to 
accomplish. 
 
 
Information 
management: this module groups 
functionalities related with the generation and edition 
of information that depends on the patient’s EHR. 
Interoperability with the clinical information system 
has been achieved in order to use the patient’s data 
stored in the centers. Besides, this module controls the 
assignation of therapies to the patients, determining 
which computerized tasks a patient has to do in a 
certain day. The results of the execution of these tasks 
are registered in the system, and then can be used by 
the clinicians to see the evolution of the therapy, as 
well as showing graphics and reports related to the 
completion of the sessions, tasks that have been used, 
both global and individual results, and many more. 
 
 
Monitoring: in order to comply with the Data 
Protection Law every action carried out by any user is 
stored in both the database and also in a log file, so the 
administrator can track every action related to any 
patient and its data. Apart from this, the system offers a 
module to monitor the execution of the tasks, so the 
therapist can then reproduce a task as it was done by 
the patient. This allows the therapist to see exactly what 
a patient did in the monitored task, which is very useful 
because sometimes it is not enough to merely see the 
numeric results. 
 
 
Data Analysis: the main objective of this module is to 
extract the maximum knowledge from the information 
stored in the system. To achieve this there is a tool for 
knowledge management that is applied for each data 
collected, being able to filter, analyze and extract the 
necessary knowledge to help the neuropsychologists in 
their decision making. This module, by analyzing a set 
of data defined together with the clinicians, is able to 
assign a patient to an affectation profile. An affectation 
profile groups patients with similar characteristics using 
clustering 
techniques, 
in 
order 
to 
give 
the 
neuropsychologist information about how patients of 
the same profile have done a concrete task in the past, 
helping them to know how good a task is for that kind 
of patient. Moreover, this knowledge can be used to 
learn about the neuro-rehabilitation processes or to 
improve the designed tasks, modifying the ones that 
appear not to be appropriate for certain patients. 
 
 
Administration: this module, although it is the one 
with less functionalities and users, includes very 
important functionalities, like the users’ management 
and their profiles, as well as the system monitoring 
(using logs). 
 
B. User Interface 
One of the main efforts of improvement for this new 
version of PREVIRNEC is the redesign of the user interface. 
This new design, apart from including all the new 
functionalities, has been based on the User-centered design 
model, which principles are a new definition of those from 
classic ergonomics and, in general, from the accessibility 
guides. At this point, it is important to enhance how difficult 
is to have an interface accessible for everybody, even more 
when the target users are patients who suffer ABI and as a 
consequence of this they have problems in their cognitive 
functions. 
In the design of the user interface phase we have used an 
iterative mock-up to show the experts not only how it would 
look like, but also the different functionalities the users will 
find and how they will perform every action. 
 
C. Contents and centers organization 
The tele-rehabilitation sessions consist of computerized 
tasks, 
grouped 
by 
functions 
and 
categories. 
The 
neuropsychologist creates a tele-rehabilitation session by 
assigning a set of tasks to a certain day, being able to 
configure the difficulty of each task, by setting some input 
parameters.  
The new concept of category has been created to treat 
different collectives apart from the initial ABI patients, such 
us the elderly, schizophrenia, childhood, and more.  
Every category will cover different cognitive functions 
and subfunctions. Therefore every task will be particularly 
designed by neuropsychologists for a cognitive subfunction 
(e.g., sustained attention or visual memory) that can be used 
for a specific collective (category). 
 
PREVIRNEC can be used not only in the Institut 
Guttmann, but also in other clinical centers and even 
neuropsychologists who work by their own. Besides, each 
center defines three assistance areas by default (generic, 
home and test), but they can also create new areas as needed. 
This gives the possibility to study separately, for example, 
patients that have been treated at the clinical center from 
those who execute tasks at home 
Moreover, 
the 
system 
administrator 
defines 
the 
categories for each center, selecting for every category the 
specific tests used for the neuropsychology exploration. 
These tests allow neuropsychologists to determine the 
affectation grade of each cognitive function. 
 
D. Technologies 
As we have already said, the platform is based on open 
source web technologies. The main architecture of the 
platform is based on a client-server communication using 
HTTP and XML-RPC, as it is shown in Figure 2.  
 
61
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

 
 
Figure 2.  Client-server communication schema 
In the developing phase, a Model-View-Controller 
pattern has been followed, so the view and the logic to access 
and process data are separated.  
The new web application requires Java (jdk 1.6, jre 6.x) 
and it runs over Apache Tomcat 6.X, as it is based on 
Servlet/JSP. The database used is MySQL Server 5.X and 
MySQL Java Connector 5.X (JDBC). However, thanks to 
this division between data process and the view, the platform 
could be easily adapted to new other database models or new 
languages for the graphic user interface. 
Relating to the programming languages used all the 
environment is Java 2 Platform (J2EE, Enterprise Edition), 
using JavaScript and AJAX (SACK library) to dynamically 
change the data showed on the HTML pages, so avoiding to 
reload the page every time the user wants to show or edit 
contents.  
For the videoconference module OpenMeetings has been 
used, which implements the Real Time Multimedia Protocol 
(RTMP), using a red5 server for the audio and video 
streaming. One of the main challenges addresses in this work 
has 
been 
the 
implementation 
of 
a 
web-based 
videoconference application, so the user does not need any 
local application installed in their computers. 
For the knowledge analysis, Weka has been used. Weka 
is a collection of machine learning algorithms for data 
mining tasks. This is the second main challenge of the work 
done, that is the process that groups patients into different 
clusters, helping the therapists to assign the more suitable 
task to each profile. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The improvements on the platform presented in this 
paper have been tested with patients and neuropsychologists 
from the Institut Guttmann with very promising results. In 
the near future PREVIRNEC is expected to extend to the 
patient homes and other 17 centers. 
The first results reveal that the platform is now more 
efficient and powerful thanks to the new functionalities 
added. The neuropsychologists particularly highlight the new 
design of the user interface that allows, for example, the 
possibility to see the results of a previous rehabilitation 
sessions while they are scheduling new ones. The 
development of the interoperability module that shows the 
patient’s EHR is also well considered. Regarding the new 
content and center classification, users emphasize how this 
platform is open to future neuro-rehabilitation applications, 
allowing new centers to configure the system and manage 
their own users. Finally, neuropsychologists also find very 
useful the knowledge extracted by the data mining module, 
which helps them when assigning tasks to a specific patient. 
As a conclusion, PREVIRNEC is revealed to be a 
powerful tele-rehabilitation platform, letting the patients to 
extend their treatment beyond the clinical centers, reducing 
travel costs and the distortion of the rest of the family, while 
neuropsychologists 
can 
monitor 
and 
evaluate 
their 
evolution. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was partially supported by the following 
grants: Spanish government, Ministry of Industry, Tourism 
and Trade AVANZA PLAN: Digital Citizen Subprogram 
(Neurolearning / Grant: TSI-020501-2008-0154);  Institute 
of Health Carlos III (National Public Health Research 
Institute and the National Funding Agency for Health 
Research in Spain),  Strategic Action Health's Call (Clinical 
implantation of PREVIRNEC platform in TBI and stroke 
patients / Grant: PI08/900525); EU ICT PSP call Identifier: 
CIP-ICT-PSP-2007-1 (Clinical Leading Environment for the 
Assessment and validation of Rehabilitation Protocols in 
home care - Grant agreement: 224985); Ministry of Science 
and Innovation INNPACTO Program (NeuroContent - Grant 
IPT: 300000-2010-30); Ministry of Education Social Policy 
and Social Services IMSERSO Program (Project title 
COGNIDAC - Grant 41/2008); MARATÓ TV3 Foundation 
(Improving 
Social 
Cognition 
and 
metacognition 
in 
schizophrenia: A tele-rehabilitation project - Grant 091330) 
REFERENCES 
[1] C.J. Murray and A.D. Lopez. Alternative projections of 
mortality and disability by cause 1990-2020: Global Burden 
of Disease Study. Lancet 1997a; 349: 1498-504. 
[2] World Health Organization. Burden of Disease Statistics; 
Available online: http://www.who.org/ (accessed on 10 May 
2011). 
[3] L.C. 
Álvaro, 
P. 
López-Arbeloa, 
and 
R. 
Cozar. 
“Hospitalizations for acute cerebrovascular accidents and 
transient ischemic attacks in Spain: Temporal stability and 
spatial heterogeneity, 1998-2003”. Rev. Calid. Asist 2009,vol. 
24, pp. 16-23. 
[4] Brain Injury Association of America; Available online: 
http://www.biausa.org/ (accessed on 10 May 2011). 
[5] A. García-Molina, et al. “Clinical program of cognitive tele-
rehabilitation for traumatic brain injury”. eChallenges 2010, 
Warsaw (Poland). ISBN 978-1-4244-8390-7, pp. 1- 10. 
 
62
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

