Guidelines for Designing Interactions
Between Autonomous Artificial Systems and Human Beings
Muneo Kitajima
Nagaoka University of Technology
Nagaoka, Niigata, Japan
Email: mkitajima@kjs.nagaokaut.ac.jp
Makoto Toyota
T-Method
Chiba, Japan
Email: pubmtoyota@mac.com
J´erˆome Dinet
Universit´e de Lorraine, CNRS, INRIA, Loria
Nancy, France
Email: jerome.dinet@univ-lorraine.fr
Abstract—Human beings live in an environment that consists of
various artifacts, such as physical or virtual tools, information
systems, and social systems. With IT advancement, the wider the
network of artifacts, the more autonomous they become. However,
the ultimate goal of developing these artifacts is to achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) through the exploration
of the design space for realizing a sustainable society. The
artifacts that human beings interact with apply this mechanism
for utilizing the artifacts, by selecting the subsequent actions for
a given situation. This mechanism includes Perceptual, Cognitive,
and Motor (PCM) processes and the memory process. The
cognitive process is characterized by the bounded rationality and
by the satisficing principle proposed by Simon, and Two Minds of
unconscious and conscious processes proposed by Kahneman. The
state-of-the art cognitive architecture, Model Human Processor
with Realtime Constraints (MHP/RT), developed by Kitajima
and Toyota, defines these processes as autonomous systems and
proposes a resonance mechanism between the PCM and memory
processes. The purpose of this study is to propose guidelines to
conduct strategical explorations in design space. Based on the
simulation of human–artifact interaction processes through the
MHP/RT cognitive architecture, the guidelines are grouped into
three levels: goal, mode, and process levels. A method for applying
the proposed guidelines while exploring the design space is also
presented.
Keywords–Design guidelines, Human–artifact interaction; Au-
tonomous systems; Cognitive architecture; MHP/RT.
I.
INTRODUCTION
When viewed as an individual, each human being is
composed of autonomous systems that control perception,
cognition, and movement in synchronization with changes
in the environment, in addition to a memory autonomous
system that works to link perceived movements [1][2]. The
environment in which humans interact and live is composed of
various artifacts. With the progress of networking technology,
a large number of artifacts have become related to each other,
overcoming the physical constraints of time and space. In this
case, the central management method of the set of artifacts and
the environment design to achieve their goals is not effective.
It would rather be effective to design the environment as a
set of autonomously operating artifacts equipped with Parallel
Distributed Processing (PDP), which can be referred to as the
Artificial PDP (A-PDP) system, and to design them so that
they function as a whole and achieve their goals.
There exist interfaces between the above-mentioned au-
tonomous systems, which have to be properly designed for
well-being. The interfaces and internal algorithms defining
their behaviors must support activities conducted by human
beings; they attempt to achieve their happiness goals by
utilizing artifacts. A research question that arises is – how can
such interfaces and internal algorithms be designed for the two
autonomous systems? Our daily life is based on interactions
with a wide variety of artifacts. The purpose of interactions,
for human-beings, is to achieve well-being through activities
in domains such as health (e.g., bio-monitoring), mobility
(e.g., driving an electric vehicle), education (e.g., learning on
Massive Open Online Course (MOOC)), and entertainment
(e.g., playing e-sports). The artifacts support human activities
through the interface at each moment of interaction. There are
multiple autonomous systems on both sides of the interface
with complex relationships. The purpose of this study is to
propose a set of guidelines that should be applied when
designing the interfaces of autonomous artifacts, for supporting
activities carried out by autonomous human beings.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
Section II outlines the human-artifact interaction to define
the specific perspective for considering the complex situa-
tion of interaction, i.e., both sides are autonomous systems.
Section III briefly reviews the Model Human Processor with
Realtime Constraints (MHP/RT), developed by Kitajima and
Toyota [1][2] and defines a framework for developing the
guidelines. A set of guidelines are described. Section IV
presents a hint for applying the guidelines to determine the
direction of strategic development for the maximum utilization
of the artifact. Section V concludes the paper by summarizing
the specific role of the guidelines for realizing a sustainable
society.
II.
HUMAN–ARTIFACT INTERACTION
There are human beings on this side of the interface and
artifacts on the other side. From the viewpoint of a user that
perceives the information provided on an interface to select
the next action for accomplishing his/her goal, a complete
understanding of the detailed processing of an artifact to
generate information on the interface, e.g., the knowledge of
implementing the internal algorithms, is unnecessary; simi-
larly, a detailed understanding of the internal processing of
an input to an artifact is unnecessary for them to continue
the interaction cycle of execution and evaluation. Although
the internal processes are not known to the user, s/he has
to comprehend the mechanism at the interface level in order
to proceed, i.e., “bridging the gulf between execution and
evaluation [3, Figure 3.2].” This also applies to the artifacts.
For designers to specify the interfaces of the I/O for the
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-950-8
COGNITIVE 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Figure 1. Top-level view of human–artifact interaction.
systems by developing internal algorithms to support human
activities, there is no need for them to have a complete
understanding of human reactions to the output of the artifacts
and of human expectations attached to the input to the artifacts.
As Simon pointed out [4], an interface is characterized
by an artificial system between two environments–inner and
outer, i.e., human beings and artifacts, respectively. These
environments lie in the province of “natural science” where
the systems of artifacts and human beings are the focus
of research, but the interface linking them is the realm of
“artificial science.” Therefore, the research question that this
study addresses is in the realm of artificial science. The two
sides, i.e., the behaviors of human beings and artifacts, are
governed by their own principles, and they have to interact
with each other by simultaneously considering the behaviors
of the either side at the appropriate approximation levels in
hope of a successful development. Their articulation could be
formalized as guidelines, which is the form of an answer to
the research question that this study addresses.
The interface between the two systems can be conceived
from a variety of perspectives or dimensions. One of them is
the dimension that focuses on the Perceptual, Cognitive, and
Motor (PCM) processes and the manner in which memory is
acquired, used, and developed in the use of artifacts. This study
specifically focuses on the ongoing PCM processes and the
manner in which they use the memory in the human–artifact
interaction process. Our previous study
[5] focused on the
acquisition and development process and proposed guidelines
for designing artifacts, which could cause the evolution of
artifacts. In the process of evolution, the techniques used in
the development of artifacts are received and absorbed by
users as skills by applying the PCM and memory processes,
which is simulated by MHP/RT. The techniques could turn into
skills if the conditions derived by the simulations MHP/RT
are satisfied. When this spiral evolution occurs, the socio-
cultural ecology, wherein the artifacts are embedded, evolves
to exhibit a splicing evolution. The focus of this paper is not on
the evolution that occurs at the interfaces but on the ongoing
events.
Another dimension, which this study effectively focuses
on, is the structure of human goals, which can be used by
human beings to organize their behaviors. Our previous pa-
per [6] proposed an effective method for achieving Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs) through the behavior of individual
human beings, by applying the knowledge of cognitive science;
the idea is to connect the daily activities of human beings
when trying to accomplish task goals through real world
problem-solving [7], i.e., activities in the COGNITIVE Band
of Newell’s time scale of human action [8, page 122, Fig.
3-3], through any of the SDGs, that concerns social ecology
and resides in the SOCIAL Band by finding the non-linear
mappings between the goals in different bands. The interfacing
situation this study deals with is analogous to the one above.
Each individual human being conducts activities to accomplish
his or her behavioral goal. This activity is non-linearly mapped
onto the autonomous artifacts which have the goal of any of
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-950-8
COGNITIVE 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

the SDGs, where the gulfs of execution and evaluation have
to be bridged.
III.
INTERACTION LEVELS AND GUIDELINES
Figure 1 shows the top-level view of the human–artifact
interaction. The artifacts placed at the center should exist as
entities for achieving any of the SDGs by providing appropriate
support for the individual human beings who try to achieve
any of the seventeen happiness goals. This section begins by
introducing MHP/RT [1][2] in Section III-A focusing on the
levels of interactions with artifacts. It follows Section III-B
and Section III-C with suggestions for enabling conditions
that artifacts have to satisfy to help human beings achieve
a smooth coordination between System 1 and System 2.
Section III-D presents the relationships between the happiness
goals of human beings and the SDGs that the artifacts are
expected to achieve. The top-level constraint for developing
guidelines is that any artifact that complies with the guidelines
has to provide a stable human-artifact interaction; unstable
interactions should result in unpredictable results, which do
not come with the SDGs.
A. MHP/RT and Interaction Levels
Kitajima and Toyota [1][2] constructed a comprehensive
theory of action selection and memory, MHP/RT, that provides
a basis for constructing any model to understand the daily
behavior of human beings. MHP/RT is an extension of the
Model Human Processor (MHP) proposed by Card, Moran,
and Newell [9], which can simulate routine goal-directed
behaviors. MHP/RT extends the MHP by the following as-
sumptions to consider the fact that the processes involved in
action selection are a dynamic interaction that evolves in the
irreversible time dimension:
1)
The fundamental processing mechanism of the brain
is PDP
[10], which leads to a collection of the
autonomous systems having specific functions for
generating an organized human behavior. It consists
of autonomous systems for perception, cognition,
motor-control, and memory, which is referred to as
the Organic PDP (O-PDP) system in the development
of MHP/RT.
2)
Human behavior emerges as a result of the co-
operation of the dual processes of System 1, i.e.,
fast unconscious processes for intuitive reaction with
feedforward control, which connect perception with
motor movements, and System 2, i.e., slow conscious
processes for deliberate reasoning with feedback con-
trol. System 1 and System 2 are referred to as Two
Minds [11].
3)
Human behavior is organized under 17 happiness
goals [12].
Human beings use artifacts to accomplish certain behav-
ioral goals for realizing the desired state of affairs. The
human–artifacts interaction is a cycle of PCM processes. The
MHP/RT simulates the PCM processes as follows. The cog-
nitive process is to select the next actions that are appropriate
for accomplishing the behavioral goals, given the comprehen-
sion results of the perceived information. System 1 directly
connects to the motor process, whereas System 2 can only
TABLE I. Four operation modes of MHP/RT.
Synchronous Modes
- Mode 1: Unconscious mechanism driven mode
A single set of perceptual stimuli initiates feedfor-
ward processes at the BIOLOGICAL and COG-
NITIVE bands to act with occasional feedback
from an upper band, i.e., COGNITIVE, RATIO-
NAL, or SOCIAL.
- Mode 2: Conscious mechanism driven mode
A single set of perceptual stimuli initiates a feed-
back process at the COGNITIVE band, and upon
completion of the conscious action selection, the
unconscious automatic feedforward process is
activated at the BIOLOGICAL and COGNITIVE
bands for action.
Asynchronous Modes
- Mode 3: In-phase autonomous activity mode
A set of perceptual stimuli initiates feedforward
processes at the BIOLOGICAL and COGNITIVE
bands with one and another intertwined occa-
sional feedback process from an upper band, i.e.,
COGNITIVE, RATIONAL, or SOCIAL.
- Mode 4: Heterophasic autonomous activity mode
Multiple threads of perceptual stimuli initiate
respective feedforward processes at the BIO-
LOGICAL and COGNITIVE bands, some with
no feedback and others with feedback from the
upper bands, i.e., COGNITIVE, RATIONAL, or
SOCIAL.
indirectly affect the motor process via System 1. The MHP/RT
assumes a resonance mechanism for connecting the PCM
processes and memory, where the records of the results of
the PCM processes are accumulated in a layered and partially
overlapped structure of multidimensional memory frames. The
cognitive process is carried out by coordinating System 1 and
System 2 appropriately to accomplish the behavioral goals.
System 1 and System 2 interact simultaneously with the multi-
dimensional memory frames to select an appropriate action and
carry it out in a timely manner in the ever-changing environ-
ment. The former is the issue of coordination, while the latter
is that of synchronization. Section III-B and Section III-C, will
address these issues.
B. Mode LevelMode Level: Coordination of Two Minds Ac-
cording to the Goals
Individual beings interact with artifacts to accomplish their
behavioral goals by selecting appropriate actions, by running a
cycle of PCM processes. The MHP/RT assumes that the action
selection processes are controlled by System 1 and System 2.
System 1 and System 2 cooperate to connect perception with
motion, and the degree of cooperation varies depending on the
external environmental conditions, i.e., the state of the artifact
that the MHP/RT is interacting with.
1) Four Operation Modes: The conduction of the coopera-
tion can be understood by observing the interaction processes
for a certain amount of time, to identify the feature of the
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-950-8
COGNITIVE 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

interaction in terms of the mode. The processes carried out
by System 1 and System 2 are independent for some time
durations but are totally dependent on each other in other
domains. This provides a macroscopic view of the manner in
which the human-artifact interaction is organized.
Four qualitatively different modes are identified [13]. Sys-
tem 1 is a fast feedforward control process with the char-
acteristic time range of ¡150 ms to connect the perceptual
process with the motor process, which makes it possible to
behave synchronously with the ever-changing environment.
There could be multiple System 1 processes that correspond
to active perceptual–motor controls. However, System 2 is
a slow feedback control process, which takes a significantly
longer time. The time range can be months or years as long
as feedback from the past event could affect the ongoing
processing. System 2 is a serial process. It can process only
one thing at a time; the process could be monitoring one of
the active threads of System 1 to check for possible deviations
of the results of System 1 from the expected course of actions.
Table I lists four modes, each of which is characterized by
the relationships between System 1 and System 2. Modes 1
and 2 are characterized by a single major System 1 process
monitored by System 2. The differences between them is
the degree of intervention of System 2 for checking the
output of System 1. In Mode 1, the occasional feedback from
System 2 is sufficient to conduct the behavior. In Mode 2,
a frequent monitoring is necessary to organize the behavior
appropriately in the environment. Mode 3 corresponds to the
situation wherein a single set of perceptual stimuli initiates
System 1 processes with one and another intertwined occa-
sional feedback processes by System 2. Mode 4 corresponds
to the situation where multiple threads of perceptual stimuli
initiate the corresponding System 1 processes, some with no
feedback and others with feedback from System 2.
2) Guidelines for Supporting Mode Level Interactions:
The human–artifact interaction is carried out in one of the
four operation modes of MHP/RT. For the viewpoint of a
sound human–artifact interaction, the artifacts should support
the interactions that are carried out in Mode 1 and Mode
2. Mode 3 and Mode 4 include unmonitored feedforward
System 1 processes, which might cause an instability in the
human–artifact interaction. The safety of the human–artifact
interaction is realized by allowing the artifact to intervene
through System 2, causing the human being to restore to
the normal interaction. In other words, the resilience of the
human–artifact interaction is realized by maintaining the in-
teraction in Mode 1 and Mode 2. Achieving resilience is a
necessary condition for the sustainability of the artifacts to
achieve the SDGs.
a) Supporting Mode 2 Interaction: In Mode 2, Sys-
tem 2 frequently intervenes the PCM processes conducted by
System 1. More precisely, the pace of interaction with the
artifact is controlled by System 2. The role of System 1 is to
carry out the necessary PCM processes, to advance the main
System 2–artifact interactions. Because System 2 operates on
language, the appropriate input from the artifact by means of
language is of critical importance. Because the processes of
System 1 are carried out in the context defined by those of
System 2, the appropriate interactions from the artifact for
supporting the processes of System 1 have to be provided
considering the context.
Guideline [A]


1.
Converse with System 2.
2.
Intervene System 1 for facilitating the main
conversation with System 2.


b) Supporting Mode 1 Interaction: In Mode 1, where
the intervention of System 2 is weak, language is not an
appropriate medium for communication. The interaction from
the artifact has to support the unconsciously carried out
automatic processes by System 1. However, in Mode 1, the
timely examination of the progress is critical for a smooth
interaction. The triggers for initiating the examinations carried
out by System 2 could be provided internally or externally,
i.e., from the artifact. There could be a situation where the
examination by System 2 has not been carried out when
necessary. In this situation, the intervention from the artifact
is necessary for maintaining Mode 1 interaction.
Guideline [B]


1.
For a normal Mode 1 interaction, provide infor-
mation to both System 1 and System 2, so that
System 1-led processes can run smoothly.
2.
For an intensive Mode 1 interaction, e.g., video
games and e-sports, focus on System 1 support.


c) Supporting Transition Between Mode 1 and Mode 2:
When the interaction running in Mode 1 breaks down, it be-
comes impossible to continue. In this case, the accomplishment
of the goal via the interaction being advanced is either given
up or a remedial action is taken to return from the failed state
to the original normal state and resume to the execution in
Mode 1. Mode 2 addresses the recovery process.
Guideline [C]


1.
On the detection of the intensive behavior of
System 2 during Mode 1 support, switch from
Mode 1 support to Mode 2 support.


C. Process Level: Synchronization of Two Minds with the
Environment
The mode-level support described in Section III-B is de-
fined for the interactions that span the extended time along the
time dimension. Therefore, its basis is a macroscopic bird’s-
eye view of the interactions. However, process-level support is
defined for each event that occurs along the time dimension.
Its basis is a microscopic view for the interaction at the level
of each PCM process. The MHP/RT defines four processing
modes by considering the manner in which System 1 and
System 2 concern the event occurring at time T.
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-950-8
COGNITIVE 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

1) Four Processing Modes: Conscious/Unconscious Pro-
cesses Before/After an Event: Experiences associated with the
activities of an individual are characterized by a series of
events, each of which is recognized by a person consciously.
As shown in Figure 1, the behavior is defined as a time series
of events, “· · · → [Event at TN−1]
→ [Event at TN]
→
[Event at TN+1] · · · .” We focus on a particular event that
occurs at the absolute time TN. For the event to occur at
TN, the MHP/RT assumes that there should have existed the
conscious processes of System 2 and unconscious processes
of System 1 before TN. For the executed event at TN, the
MHP/RT assumes that there might exist unconscious System 1
processes and conscious System 2 processes, concerning the
event after TN. The behavior of the MHP/RT appears as though
it works in one of four processing modes [1] [14] at a time
before and after the event at TN. They are shown at the bottom
of Figure 1.
Two of the four processing modes concern the processes
carried out before the event:
-
System 2 Before Mode: In the time range of TN −
β ≤ t < TN − β′, where β′ ∼ 500ms and β rranges a
few seconds to hours or even to months, the MHP/RT
uses a part of the memory for System 2 to consciously
prepare for future events.
-
System 1 Before Mode: In the time range of TN −
β′ ≤ t < TN, the MHP/RT unconsciously coordinates
motor activities to the interacting environment. This
mode uses the part of the memory for System 1.
The other two modes concern the processes carried out after
the event:
-
System 1 After Mode: In the time range of TN < t ≤
TN + α′, where α′ ∼ 500ms, the MHP/RT uncon-
sciously tunes the connections between the sensory
inputs and motor outputs for a better performance
for the same event in the future. This mode updates
the connections within the part of the memory for
System 1.
-
System 2 After Mode: In the time range of TN +α′ <
t ≤ TN + α, the MHP/RT consciously recognizes
an event in the past and then modifies the memory
concerning the event, where α ranges a few seconds
to minutes or even to hours. This mode modifies the
connections of the part of the memory for System 2.
2) Guidelines for Supporting Process Level Interactions:
The human–artifact interaction needs to be synchronized for
the cyclic PCM processes to run smoothly in any mode, i.e.,
Mode 1–4 defined in Section III-B, the interaction is in. The
synchronization between the artifact and user is discussed
in [15] in the case of a multi-modal interaction using the
concepts of four processing modes. “Synchronization” and
its derived concept of “weak synchronization” are defined as
follows [16]:
· · · a system and a user is synchronized if every
system event at Tsys occurs as a user event at
Tuser with some amount of time allowance of ∆,
|Tuser − Tsys| < ∆, where the actual values of ∆
depend on the nature of interactions.
· · ·
However, a person’s activity related with an event has
to be considered from the four processing modes,
which ranges relatively long time before and after
the actual time the event happens. Therefore, “syn-
chronization” has to be considered alternatively as
the phenomena a person’s activities during the time
range of [T−β, T+α], which are linked with the spe-
cific recognizable system event at time T through a
sequence of processes carried out in either of the four
processing modes: all the processes have some link
with the system event at T. When this is satisfied,
the event is considered synchronized with a person’s
activities, which is called weak synchronization [15].
The human–artifact interaction has to provide a smooth
flow of the four processing modes. It can break when a person
has to adjust his/her activity while s/he is in the System 1
Before Mode in such a way that his/her movement should
be in synchrony with the current environment. This is the
situation that the interaction has to avoid. This is because
when this happens, the condition for weak synchronization is
not satisfied. To remedy this, s/he has to make extra efforts
to re-establish a weak synchronization by adjusting his/her
movement. This leads to the following guidelines.
Guideline [D]


1.
Provide appropriate language-level support for
System 2 while the user is in System 2 Before
Mode, TN − β ≤ t < TN − β′.
2.
Provide appropriate perceptual- and motor-level
support for System 1 while the user is in Sys-
tem 1 Before Mode, TN − β′ ≤ t < TN.


D. Goal Level
The mode-level support described in Section III-B and the
process-level support described in Section III-C concern direct
interactions with the environment, to accomplish behavioral
goals in problem-solving activities, e.g., real-world problem
solving [7], or routine goal-oriented skilled activities by apply-
ing well-organized knowledge of Goals, Operators, Methods,
and Selection rules (GOMS) [9]. As shown in Figure 1, the
MHP/RT assumes that the behavioral goals are subordinate to
happiness goals; the accomplishment of the behavioral goals
are likely to be accompanied by the unconscious feeling of
happiness, i.e., achieving a certain happiness goal.
1) Happiness Goals and their Relationship with the Behav-
ioral Goals: Morris [12] listed 17 happiness goals. The left
portion of Table II presents them, including goals such as “the
inherent happiness that comes with the love of a child,” “the
competitive happiness of triumphing over your opponents,”
“the sensual happiness of the hedonist,” and so on. Each
happiness goal is associated with a type, e.g., the people “the
achiever” should have “target happiness,” “the winner” should
have “competitive happiness,” and “the drug-user” should have
“chemical happiness.”
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-950-8
COGNITIVE 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

TABLE II. Happiness goals [12] and their relation to social layers. +’s denote the degree of relevance of each goal to each layer, i.e., Individual, Community,
and Social system, respectively. +++: most relevant, ++: moderately relevant, and +: weakly relevant.
Social Layers
Category No.
Name of Happiness
Types
Individual layer
Community layer
Social-system layer
I
8
Painful Happiness
The Masochist
+++
11
Tranquil Happiness
The Mediator
+++
14
Chemical Happiness
The Drug-taker
+++
15
Fantasy Happiness
The Day-dreamer
+++
II
7
Rhythmic Happiness
The Dancer
+++
+++
16
Comic Happiness
The Laugher
+++
+++
4
Genetic Happiness
The Relative
+++
+++
5
Sensual Happiness
The Hedonist
+++
+++
III
10
Selective Happiness
The Hysteric
+++
++
13
Negative Happiness
The Suffer
+++
++
IV
9
Dangerous Happiness
The Risk-taker
+++
++
+
6
Cerebral Happiness
The Intellectual
+++
+++
++
V
1
Target Happiness
The Achiever
+++
+++
+++
17
Accidental Happiness
The Fortunate
+++
+++
+++
VI
12
Devout Happiness
The Believer
+++
++
2
Competitive Happiness
The Winner
+++
+++
3
Cooperative Happiness
The Helper
+++
+++
Kitajima et al. [17] proposed the maximum satisfaction
architecture (MSA). MSA assumes that the human brain pur-
sues one of the 17 happiness goals defined by Morris [12] at
every moment and switches to another happiness goal when
appropriate by evaluating the current circumstances. Each of
the happiness goals is associated with one or multiple layers
of society. The right portion of Table II presents tentative
assignments of the degree of relevance of each happiness goal
to each social layer. The middle portion of Figure 1 suggests
that any activities for achieving specific behavioral goals would
be conducted by individual persons in the pursuit of any of the
17 happiness goals in the social layers presented in the right
portion of Table II. Happiness goals define the value structure
of the person when he or she makes decisions by running
the PCM and memory processes under specific circumstances,
while selecting his or her next actions. As such, it is vital
to assume the correct happiness goal when supporting the
next action selection process of a person, to accomplish the
behavioral goals.
There could be associations between the processes of
accomplishing behavioral goals and the recognized happiness
goals, which could be useful to connect a behavioral goal
with a happiness goal. The associations, however, could be
vary among individuals. A single observed behavior under a
behavioral goal, described in terms of the four operation modes
and four processing modes, may have multiple associations
with the happiness goals. This is because the condition for
feeling happiness is strongly related with individual experi-
ences and the manner in which the reward system functions
for that experience [18]. Therefore, the mappings between the
behavioral and happiness goals have significant individual and
situational differences; a single person could feel different
types of happiness when accomplishing a single behavioral
goal for different contexts.
2) Guidelines for Supporting Goal Level Interactions: The
purpose of designing artifacts has to be linked with any of
the SDGs. The design space for artifacts could be explored
strategically by associating the targeted SDGs with possible
happiness states the user may want to achieve, which is
indirectly connected with the behavioral goal of the user [6].
The mode and process level support are truly at the level
at which the user could directly interact with. However, the
goal-level support is at the level of motivation. The types
of happiness goals have discernible aspects of behavioral
ecology characterized by individual and contextual differences.
Therefore, goal- and contextual-dependent support are needed.
The happiness goals listed in Table II are sorted into six cat-
egories according to the degree of relatedness with the social
layers, i.e., individual, community, and social-system layers.
The categories roughly define the context that the associated
behavioral goals are trying to accomplish. The happiness goals
in category I could be accomplished individually without any
connections with the community or social-system. Those in
the category II could be accomplished individually or with the
members the individual belongs to. The rest of the categories
could be characterized in a similar way. The interface for
supporting happiness goals could be designed by category.
Guideline [E]


1.
Provide individually appropriate support for the
identified happiness goal that the user might
hold when trying to accomplish the behavioral
goal.
2.
Provide contextually appropriate support for the
social layer in which the interaction might be
conducted.


28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-950-8
COGNITIVE 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Ethnographical Field Observation
1
Mapping the Observed Phenomena on Cognitive Architecture
2
Identifying Study Parameters through Model-Based Simulation
3
Design CCE Study
4
Conduct CCE Study
5
Refinement of the Original Study Parameters
7
6 Refinement of the Original Mapping
REPEAT
CCE Study
Cognitive Architecture
Construction of Socio-Ecological Structure Model
Model-Based Simulation
Situation Dependent Simulation of Interaction Processes
Figure 2. The CCE procedure [2, Figure 5.1].
IV.
APPLICATION OF THE GUIDELINES: A HINT
This section introduces a methodology for conducting field
experiments to understand human behaviors as a hint for
carrying out a strategically principled search in the design
space to obtain design specifications that conform to the guide-
lines this study proposes. The methodology, cognitive chrono-
ethnography (CCE) [19], should complement the MHP/RT
by providing the real data of human behavior for specific
situations that should define constraints on the functioning of
PCM and memory processes.
A. CCE for Narrowing Down the Design Space
CCE combines three concepts. “Cognitive” declares that
CCE deals with interactions between consciousness and uncon-
sciousness in the PCM cycles. “Chrono (-logy)” is about time
ranging from ∼100 ms to days, months, and years, and CCE
focuses on these time ranges. “Ethnography” indicates that
CCE takes ethnographical observations as the concrete study
method because in daily life, the Two Minds of people tend to
re-use experientially effective behavioral patterns, which are
biases and might have individual and contextual differences.
To conduct a CCE study, study participants (elite monitors)
are selected. Each defining study field has values. The study
question is “what would certain people do in certain ways
in certain circumstances (not average behavior)?” Therefore,
elite monitors, certain persons, are selected by consulting
the parameter space. In this process, it is necessary that
the points in the parameter space, which correspond to the
elite monitors, are appropriate for analyzing the structure and
dynamics of the study field. The methodology is not for
human–artifact interaction but for every aspect of the daily life
of human beings. Regarding the relationship between CCE and
the design space, CCE focuses on understanding the process
of interaction between successful artifacts and users and is
intended for existing artifacts. Therefore, it is out of scope to
predict the kind of interaction that occurs between the user and
a non-existent artifact that no one has discussed. The role of
CCE is to enable the design space to be narrowed down by a
solid understanding of the success stories of existing artifacts,
thereby defining the successful areas of new designs. With
that in mind, it will be possible to come up with alternatives
to successful artifacts. Whether or not new and innovative
artifacts are accepted by users is discussed in another guideline
paper published by us [5].
B. CCE Procedure for the Human–Artifact Interaction
Figure 2 shows the seven steps to conduct a CCE study [2,
Figure 5.1]. The following describes the CCE steps adapted to
human–artifact interaction. Necessary additions appear after
the general descriptions for the CCE procedures.
(1) Ethnographical Field Observation: Use the basic ethno-
graphical investigation method to clarify the outline of the
structure of social ecology that underlies the subject to study.
The subject of study is to understand the manner
in which the existing artifacts in question are used
successfully by the current users. The ultimate goal of
the artifacts is to achieve any of the SDGs through their
use by potential users; the current users may be a part
of them. The range of users could be widened by ap-
pealing appropriately to the right segments of the users.
The users could be characterized as an individual, a
member of a community or a social-system. Depending
on the social layers the users belong to, the happiness
goals that could be achieved could vary. The kinds of
SGDs that the artifacts with the current or appropriately
enhanced specifications could achieve may be widened
or corrected. In this step, it is necessary to clarify the
outline of the structure of social ecology in terms of
the segment of potential users, the social layer they
belong to, and the happiness goals they may achieve
by referring to Table II.
(2) Mapping the Observed Phenomena on Cognitive Archi-
tecture: With reference to the behavioral characteristics of
people which have been made clear so far and cognitive
architectures, consider what kind of characteristic elements of
human behavior are involved in the investigation result in (1).
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-950-8
COGNITIVE 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

This study proposes the use of MHP/RT as the cognitive
architecture for this step. As this study proposes, the hu-
man–artifact interaction is characterized at three levels,
i.e., the mode, the process, and the goal levels. This is
based on the MHP/RT cognitive architecture. Because
the artifacts in question realize successful interactions
with the users, it is assumed that their design should
conform to the guidelines in specific ways. In this step,
it is necessary to describe the manner in which they
conform to the guidelines, i.e., the mode-level support
provided, the process-level support, and the goal-level
support.
(3) Identifying Study Parameters through Model-Based Simu-
lation: Based on the consideration of (1) and (2), construct an
initial simple model with the constituent elements of activated
memories, i.e., meme, and the characteristic PCM processing
to represent the nature of the ecology of the study space.
In this step, the “what” question answered in (2) is
operationalized by turning it into the “how” question.
This is answered by constructing an MHP/RT model
that could simulate successful users of the artifact in
question. The model could run by specifying (a) the
likely happiness goals, (b) the possible modes of the
assumed interaction, (c) the possible ways of weak
synchronization establishment, and (d) the kinds of
memes of the simulated user [20][21]. The successful
users could be characterized by combining the values
assigned to (a) ∼ (d), which constitute the study pa-
rameters.
(4) Design a CCE Study: Based on the simple ecological
model, identify a set of typical behavioral characteristics from
a variety of people making up the group to be studied. Then
formulate screening criteria of elite monitors who represent
a certain combination of the behavioral characteristics, and
define ecological survey methods for them.
This step follows the standard CCE procedure.
(5) Conduct CCE Study: Select elite monitors and conduct
an ethnographical field observation. Record the monitors’
behavior. The elite monitors are expected to behave as they
normally do at the study field. Their behavior is recorded in
such a way that the collected data is rich enough to consider
the results in terms of the parameter space and as un-intrusively
as circumstances allow.
This step follows the standard CCE procedure.
(6) Refinement of the Original Mapping: Check the results
of (5) against the results of (2) for appropriateness of the
mapping. If inappropriate, back to (2) and redo from there.
This step follows the standard CCE procedure.
(7) Refinement of the Original Study Parameters: If the result
of (5) is unsatisfactory, go back to (4) and re-design and
conduct a revised CCE study, otherwise go back to (3) to redo
the model-based simulation with a set of refined parameters.
This step follows the standard CCE procedure.
On completion of the CCE cycle, the existing social
ecology that characterizes the successful use of the artifact is
understood. This understanding is used to widen the range of
successful use of the artifact and contribute to determining the
direction of strategic development for the maximum utilization
of the artifact.
V.
CONCLUSION
The purpose of this study was to contribute to realizing a
sustainable society of human beings and artifacts. The focus
was on the human–artifact interaction, which occurs at the
interface between human beings (the interface is composed
of multiple autonomous systems, i.e., PCM and memory
systems), and artifacts, which are a collection of autonomous
systems. This study used a theory-based approach to derive
guidelines for application when designing artifacts that should
realize a sustainable society.
The constraints imposed on the derivation were: 1) the
ultimate purpose of artifacts for realizing a sustainable society
should be the achievement of any of the SDGs, and 2) human
interactions with the artifacts should be theorized by the
MHP/RT cognitive architecture. These constraints were related
with each other via the concept of resilience of the interaction
processes. On the one hand, the stability of the human–artifact
interaction at the mode level, i.e., either System 2 dominant or
System 1 dominant processes should be carried out stably, was
the necessary condition for the accomplishment of behavioral
goals using the artifact. On the other hand, the accomplishment
of behavioral goals is linked with the feeling of achieving any
of the 17 happiness goals, defined at the three social layers. The
behavioral goals do not necessarily have a direct connection
with the SDGs; rather, the accomplishment of behavioral goals
indirectly contributes to the achievement of any of SDGs as
by-products [6]. Because both the happiness goals and SDGs
focus on social ecology, the mapping between them could be
established [6]. This would complete the links from the stable
accomplishment of behavioral goals to the achievement of
happiness goals and SDGs for realizing a sustainable society.
Generally, guidelines are useless, unless they are practiced.
This study presented a method for applying the derived guide-
lines based on CCE, which defines the experimentation proce-
dure for complementing the theory of cognitive architecture,
MHP/RT. CCE and MHP/RT are the two-wheels of a vehicle to
understand the daily behavior of human beings [19]; evidently,
the human–artifact interaction is part of it. CCE is used to
understand observed behavior. Therefore, it is most useful for
extending the existing interaction processes by deliberately
extrapolating them by the provision of new interface designs,
which should conform to the relevant guidelines. For example,
at the process level, weak synchronization has to be realized in
the interaction process between the new design and the user.
If this interaction is carried out as routine goal-oriented skills
in Mode 1, the behavior of the users could be represented
as several versions of the GOMS models [9] that are suitable
for accomplishing respective behavioral goals. The appropri-
ateness of the new design has to be considered, as to whether
it could establish weakly synchronized interaction, given the
existing GOMS models.
An artifact is defined as a set of specifications, which are
sufficient for engineering to realize a working product. The
raison d’ˆetre of the artifact would be to contribute to the
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-950-8
COGNITIVE 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

achievement of any of the SDGs and to make its users feel any
of the happiness goals, to realize a sustainable society through
the human–artifact interaction. This study proposed a method
for bridging these goals as a set of guidelines on the basis of
the scientific understanding of human behavior, provided by
the cognitive architecture, MHP/RT, and the methodology for
experimentation to narrow down the design space, CCE.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant
Number 20H04290. The author would like to thank Editage
(www.editage.com) for English language editing.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Kitajima and M. Toyota, “Decision-making and action selection
in Two Minds: An analysis based on Model Human Processor with
Realtime Constraints (MHP/RT),” Biologically Inspired Cognitive Ar-
chitectures, vol. 5, 2013, pp. 82–93.
[2]
M. Kitajima, Memory and Action Selection in Human-Machine Inter-
action.
Wiley-ISTE, 2016.
[3]
D. A. Norman, “Cognitive engineering,” in User Centered System
Design: New Perspectives on Human-computer Interaction. CRC Press,
1986, ch. 3, pp. 31–61.
[4]
H. A. Simon, The Sciences of the Artificial, 3rd ed.
Cambridge, MA:
The MIT Press, 1996.
[5]
M. Kitajima and M. Toyota, “Guidelines for designing artifacts for
the dual-process,” in Procedia Computer Science, BICA 2015. 6th
Annual International Conference on Biologically Inspired Cognitive
Architectures, vol. 71, 2015, pp. 62–67.
[6]
M. Kitajima, “Cognitive Science Approach to Achieve SDGs,” in
COGNITIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced
Cognitive Technologies and Applications, 2020, pp. 55–61.
[7]
V. Sarathy, “Real World Problem-Solving,” Frontiers in human neuro-
science, vol. 12, 2018, p. 261.
[8]
A. Newell, Unified Theories of Cognition (The William James Lectures,
1987).
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1990.
[9]
S. K. Card, T. P. Moran, and A. Newell, The Psychology of Human-
Computer Interaction.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
1983.
[10]
J. L. McClelland and D. E. Rumelhart, Parallel Distributed Processing:
Explorations in the Microstructure of Cognition : Psychological and
Biological Models.
The MIT Press, 6 1986.
[11]
D. Kahneman, “A perspective on judgment and choice,” American
Psychologist, vol. 58, no. 9, 2003, pp. 697–720.
[12]
D. Morris, The nature of happiness.
London: Little Books Ltd., 2006.
[13]
M. Kitajima and M. Toyota, “Simulating navigation behaviour based
on the architecture model Model Human Processor with Real-Time
Constraints (MHP/RT),” Behaviour & Information Technology, vol. 31,
no. 1, 2012, pp. 41–58.
[14]
M. Kitajima and M. Toyota, “Four Processing Modes of in situ Human
Behavior,” in Biologically Inspired Cognitive Architectures 2011 -
Proceedings of the Second Annual Meeting of the BICA Society,
A. V. Samsonovich and K. R. J´ohannsd´ottir, Eds.
Amsterdam, The
Netherlands: IOS Press, 2011, pp. 194–199.
[15]
J. Dinet and M. Kitajima, “Immersive interfaces for engagement
and learning: Cognitive implications,” in Proceedings of the 2018
Virtual Reality International Conference, ser. VRIC ’18.
New York,
NY, USA: ACM, 2018, pp. 18/04:1–18/04:8. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3234253.3234301
[16]
M. Kitajima, J. Dinet, and M. Toyota, “Multimodal Interactions Viewed
as Dual Process on Multi-Dimensional Memory Frames under Weak
Synchronization,” in COGNITIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International
Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications,
2019, pp. 44–51.
[17]
M. Kitajima, H. Shimada, and M. Toyota, “MSA:Maximum Satisfaction
Architecture – a basis for designing intelligent autonomous agents
on web 2.0,” in Proceedings of the 29th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, D. S. McNamara and J. G. Trafton, Eds.
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society, 2007, p. 1790.
[18]
M. Kitajima and M. Toyota, “Two Minds and Emotion,” in COG-
NITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced
Cognitive Technologies and Applications, 2015, pp. 8–16.
[19]
M. Kitajima, “Cognitive Chrono-Ethnography (CCE): A Behavioral
Study Methodology Underpinned by the Cognitive Architecture,
MHP/RT,” in Proceedings of the 41st Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Cognitive Science Society, 2019, pp. 55–56.
[20]
M. Toyota, M. Kitajima, and H. Shimada, “Structured Meme Theory:
How is informational inheritance maintained?” in Proceedings of the
30th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, B. C. Love,
K. McRae, and V. M. Sloutsky, Eds.
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society, 2008, p. 2288.
[21]
M. Kitajima, M. Toyota, and J. Dinet, “The Role of Resonance in
the Development and Propagation of Memes,” in COGNITIVE 2021
: The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive
Technologies and Applications, 2021, pp. 28–36.
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-950-8
COGNITIVE 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

