Consideration for Evaluation Method of Human Behavior based on Brain Activity 
 
Hiroaki Inoue 
Research course of Engineering/Management 
Tokyo University of Science, Suwa 
Chino-city, Japan 
jgh12701@ed.suwa.tus.ac.jp 
Hiroyuki Nara 
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology 
Hokkaido University 
Sapporo-city, Japan 
nara@ssc.ssi.ist.hokudai.ac.jp 
Takeshi Tsuruga 
Department of Clinical and Rehabilitation Engineering 
Hokkaido Institute of Technology 
Sapporo-city, Japan 
tsuruga@hit.ac.jp 
Shunji Shimizu 
Department of Electric Systems Engineering 
Tokyo University of Science, Suwa 
Chino-city, Japan 
shun@rs.suwa.tus.ac.jp 
Fumikazu Miwakeichi 
Spatial and Time Series Modeling Group 
The Institute of Statical Mathematics 
Tachikawa-city, Japan 
miwake1@ism.ac.jp 
Nobuhide Hirai, Senichiro Kikuchi, and Satoshi Kato 
Department of Psychiatry 
Jichi Medical University 
Shimotsukeshi-city, Japan 
nobu@nobu.com, skikuchi@jichi.ac.jp, psykato@jichi.ac.jp 
Eiju Watanabe 
Department of Neurosurgery 
Jichi Medical University 
Shimotsukeshi-city, Japan 
eiju-ind@umin.ac.jp 
 
Abstract—Recently, Japan (also world-wide countries) has become 
aged society, and a wide variety welfare device and system have 
been developed. But evaluation of welfare system and device are 
limited only stability, intensity and partial operability. So, 
evaluation of usefulness is insufficient. Therefore, we will attempt 
to establish the standard to evaluate usefulness for objectively and 
quantitatively on the basis of including non-verbal cognition. In this 
paper, we measure load of sitting and standing movement to use 
Electoromyogram (EMG) and 3D Motion Capture and set a goal to 
establish objective evaluation method. We think that establishing 
objective evaluation method is necessity to develop useful welfare 
device. We examined possibility of assessing load and fatigue from 
measuring brain activity to use Near Infra-Red Spectroscopy 
(NIRS). The idea of universal design is widespread in welfare 
device and system. Measuring requires verification of all 
generations. But, we performed to measure younger subjects as a 
first step. We think that younger subjects were observed the 
significant difference, because they had enough physical function. 
Considering younger subjects as a benchmark is appropriate for 
creating evaluation method. 
Keywords-Evaluation; Movement; Exercise; 3D Motion Capture; 
NIRS; EMG; Care; Welfare Technology; Usefulwelfare device 
evaluation; Evaluation method. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
With the increasing aging population in Japan and world-
wide countries, welfare systems and device are rapidly 
developing, and various devices are manufactured based on the 
increased popularity of welfare device and system. Also, the 
market of welfare device and system is expanding. However, the 
evaluation method is limited respectively to stability, strength 
and a part of operability for individual system or device. It 
means that evaluation methodology for usefulness of them was 
not established. Therefore, we will attempt to establish a  
standard to evaluate the usefulness for objectively and 
quantitatively on the basis of cognition such as physical load, 
reduction of fatigue and postural stability. Especially, in 
considering universality, it is necessary to measure human 
movement in daily life. Movement was not measured by using 
particular device, but routinely-performed movement in daily 
life.  
So, we examined the possibility of evaluation by measuring 
physical load due to activities of daily living with using 3D 
Motion Analysis System [1] and EMG [2]. Also, we looked into 
the possibility of quantitative evaluation of tiredness and load on 
the basis of brain activity using NIRS [4]. Also, we consider that 
physical and psychological load are linked to cognition 
including non-verbal cognition. In this paper, the purpose of 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-273-8
COGNITIVE 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

experiments is to evaluate motion focusing on sitting and 
standing movement, which is usually done in our life by using 
3D Motion Analysis System, EMG, NIRS. We consider that 
human feel physical and psychological load during life motion. 
We tried to measure physical load by using 3D Motion Analysis 
System, EMG. Additionally, we tried to measure non-verbal 
cognition about psychological load by using NIRS. 
Subjects were healthy males in twenty, because the elderly 
people who have various types of disease is inept in quantitative 
evaluation. 
II. 
EXPERIMENTAL METHOD 
A. 
Evaluation by using 3D Motion Analysisand EMG 
We simultaneously measured 3D position and muscle 
potential of subject during task by using 3D Motion Analysis 
System 
(nac 
IMAGE 
TECHNOLOGY 
Inc. 
products- 
MAC3DSYSTEM [1]) and EMG (KISSEI COMTEC Inc. 
products-MQ16 [2]). 
Regarding to measuring 3D position, 8 Infrared cameras were 
placed around subject, and 27 makers of the body surface were 
set on the basis of Helen-Hayes Hospital Marker set (Figure 1). 
In measuring muscle potential, measurement regions were tibialis 
anterior muscle, gastrocnemius muscle, quadriceps femoris 
muscle, hamstring, flexor carpi ulnaris muscle, extensoe 
carpiulnaris muscle, triceps branchii, latissimus dorsi muscle of 
the right side of the body  because these muscle were deeply 
associated with standing and sitting movement. Also, wireless 
measurement was used so that subject was constrained as little as 
possible. As sampling frequency, 3D Motion Analysis System 
was 100Hz, and EMG was 1kHz. 
Subjects were three males aged twenty. They were asked to 
read and sign an informed consent regarding the experiment. 
In this experiment, subject repeated one series of movements, 
which was to transfer from chair to seat face of welfare device 
(IDEA LIFE CARE Co. Ltd products-NORISUKEsan [3]) and 
opposite one with alternating between standing and sitting, at five 
times per one measurement. Seating face of welfare device, 
which was designed to assist transfer movement, was 
manipulated by simple method and appeared on the top of chair. 
Subjects were heard buzzer every one second and kept a 
constant motion of speed to satisfy certain measuring conditions. 
Also, they transferred from seat face to chair or conversely every 
8 seconds with consideration for movement of elderly persons. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Experimental View of 3D motion Analysis and EMG 
Operation of welfare device was performed by the operator 
other than subject. 
B. 
Evaluation by using NIRS 
We measured brain activity during motion with the purpose 
of establishing evaluation method based on generality (Figure 2).  
Subjects were six males aged twenty. They were asked to 
read and sign an informed consent regarding the experiment. 
Measurement apparatus was NIRS (SHIMADZU CO. Ltd 
products-FOIRE3000 [4] ).  Measurement region was at right 
and left prefrontal cortex.  
1) Measuring brain activity during transfer with standing 
position  (task1) 
At this measurement, the subjects used welfare device to 
perform transferring in a standing position. In this measurement, 
subject sat on seating face of welfare device appeared on the top 
of chair after raising hip until kneeling position. Also, subject 
performed inverse transferring from seating face to chair. Time 
design was rest (5 seconds), task (10 seconds), and rest (5 
seconds). This time design was repeated 30 times. Rest time is to 
stabilize the brain activity. In the measurement NIRS, 
2) Measuring brain activity during transfer with half-
crouching position (task2) 
At this measurement,the subjects used welfare device to 
perform transferring in a half-crouch position. In this 
measurement, the subjects sat on seating face of welfare device 
appeared on the top of chair after raising hip until kneeling 
position. Also, the subject performed inverse transfer from 
seating face to chair.Time design was rest (5 seconds), task (10 
seconds) and rest (5 seconds). This time design was repeated 30 
times. 
In experiments of task1 and task2, the operation of welfare 
device was performed by an operator other than subject. Before 
this measuring, subjects adjusted to transferring by use of welfare 
device. 
3) Measuring brain activity during keeping a half-crouch 
position  (task3). 
The subjects performed two tasks at this measurement. 
During task3-1, subject sat on seating face of welfare device with 
eyes open. During task3-2, they kept a half-crouch position. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Experimental View of NIRS 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-273-8
COGNITIVE 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Subjects alternated task3-1 and task3-2. Also, subjects took 
resting time between two types of motion with eyes close. 
Therefore time design was rest (5 seconds), task3-1 (10 seconds), 
rest (5 seconds), task3-2 (10 seconds) and rest (5 seconds). This 
time design was repeated 15 times. 
III. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULT 
A. 
Evaluation by using 3D Motion Analysis and EMG 
Figure 3 shows the result of transferring which was measured 
by 3D motion analysis and EMG. In Figure 3, middle trochanter 
is the height of midpoint between right and left trochanter from 
the floor. Trunk angle is the forward slope of trunk. Also, 
following terms are arectifying voltage wave for each eight 
muscles, which are Tibialis anterior muscle, Astrocnemius 
muscle, Quadriceps femoris muscle, Hamstring, Triceps brachii 
muscle, Etensor carpi ulnaris muscle, Flexor carpi ulnaris muscle 
and Latissimus dorsi muscle. 
 Next, analysis was performed by extracting muscle potential 
during standing and sitting movement from the measuring result 
with reference to middle trochanter and trunk angle and 
calculating value of interal during movement. Table 1 shows the 
ratio of value integral with welfare device to one without device. 
Also, we compared moving distance of median point between 
using welfare device and not. Table 2 shows the comparison 
results in a manner similar to Table 1. 
B. 
Evaluation by using NIRS 
As the common result of all subjects, oxy-Hb tended to 
increase during task and to decrease in resting state. Therefore, it 
was thought that change of hemoglobin density due to task was 
measured. Figure. 7, Figure. 8 and Figure. 9 show trend of the 
channel in which significant different was shown. Analysis was 
performed via one-sample t-test [5,6,7,8,9] by a method similar 
to previous researches [5,6,7,8,9]. In this analysis, it was 
necessary to remove other than change of blood flow due to 
fatigue. So, our method was mainly focused on resting state to 
compare with the 1st trial and another trials of brain activity. 
In task1, 1 and 2, each of sample data for analysis was 4 
seconds after the task (Figure. 4). In task 3, sample data was 4 
seconds during task (Figure. 5). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Result of 3D Motion Analysis and EMG 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. T-test of sample-data of task1 and 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. T-test of sample-data of task3 
 
Figure 6. T-test with different sample-datas  
In the t-test of the same task, we performed t-test with first 
time trial and other trial which was from second times to thirty 
times, and examined relationship the number of trials and 
significant differences. 
 In task 1, significant different could be found from the about 
10th trials. Figure. 10 shows the region confirmed significant 
difference.  
In task 2, significant different could be found from the about 
10th trials too. Figure. 11 shows region confirmed significant 
difference.  
Next, we performed t-test with case of standing position (task 
1) and half-crouch position (task 2). In this analysis (Figure.6), 
significant different could be found at prefrontal area (14ch, 17ch, 
28ch and 32ch). Figure. 12 shows the region confirmed 
significant different. 
Also, two types of motion which was sitting and keeping a 
half-crouching position were repeated alternatively in task 3. At 
first, we performed t-test using 4 seconds during first trial and 4 
seconds during other trials, which were from second to fifteenth 
in same position. Regarding to the analysis result using sample 
data during sitting position and half-crouching position, there 
were significant different at Prefrontal area. Figure. 13 confirms  
a significant difference. 
 
 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-273-8
COGNITIVE 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

TABLE I.  
COMPARISON OF INTEGRAL EMG 
muscle 
 region 
Subject1 
Subject2 
Subject3 
Standing 
Tibialis anterior 
muscle 
0.37 
0.49 
0.64 
Astrocnemius 
muscle 
0.83 
0.78 
0.97 
Quadriceps 
femoris muscle 
0.66 
0.36 
0.81 
Hamstring 
1.90 
0.50 
1.07 
Triceps brachii 
muscle 
1.07 
3.34 
1.01 
Etensor carpi 
ulnaris muscle 
1.08 
1.31 
0.96 
Flexor carpi 
ulnaris muscle 
1.07 
0.89 
0.85 
Lattissimus 
dorsi muscle 
0.98 
0.87 
1.20 
Sitting 
Tibialis anterior 
muscle 
0.50 
0.59 
0.80 
Astrocnemius 
muscle 
1.01 
0.92 
0.94 
Quadriceps 
femoris muscle 
0.49 
0.57 
0.85 
Hamstring 
2.16 
1.60 
0.96 
Triceps brachii 
muscle 
0.89 
0.96 
1.07 
Etensor carpi 
ulnaris muscle 
0.79 
0.89 
0.86 
Flexor carpi 
ulnaris muscle 
0.79 
0.86 
0.95 
Lattissimus 
dorsi muscle 
1.16 
1.18 
0.93 
TABLE II.  
COMPARISON OF CHANGE  IN MEDIAL POINT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Measuring Result of Task1 
 
 
Figure 8. Measuring Result of Task2 
 
 
Figure 9. Measuring Result of Task3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10. Signififant Difference of task1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11. Significant difference of task2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 12. Significant Difference of task 1 and 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 13. Significant Difference in sitting position  
 
Subject1 
Subject2 
Subject3 
Sitting 
0.89 
1.03 
0.90 
Standing 
1.00 
0.84 
1.08 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-273-8
COGNITIVE 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

IV. 
DISCUSSION 
1) Evaluation by using 3D Motion Analysis and EMG 
From the analysis result, it was shown that value of integral 
was decreased by using assistive apparatus for transfer. 
Especially, there was remarkable decrease in value of integral at 
tibialis anterior muscle, quadriceps femoris muscle. On the other 
hand, it was shown to be minor decrease in one at upper limb and 
muscles of the back. Also, moving distance of barycentric 
position was decreased by the use of welfare device. 
On the ground of this result, it was thought to be due to 
difference in height between chair and seating face of welfare 
device. Therefore, it was thought that the use of assistive 
apparatus is useful to lighten burden on lower limb. Thus, it is 
contemplated that muscle load during standing and sitting 
movement was decreased and reduced centroid fluctuation to 
lower the possibility of turnover. 
Even if subjects performed daily movements of standing and 
sitting with the use of assistive equipment, it was shown that the 
integral of muscle potential and distance of centroid change was 
decreased. Therefore, it was proved that there is the possibility of 
evaluation of daily performance except for movement with 
welfare device. 
2) Evaluation by using NIRS 
In this experiment, we tried to measure quantitatively the 
physical and psychological strain on the basis of brain activity.  
Also, we think that brain activity disclose human cognitive 
including non-verbal. As a result, it was shown that there were 
differences at brain activity due to number of trials and postural. 
In this time, analysis was performed via one-sample t-test using 
sample of brain activity in resting state during task or after task. 
Hence, analysis method was to remove disturbance such as body 
motion and angular variation of neck to the extent possible 
although there was the possibility to measure skin blood flow. 
Therefore, it was thought that strain due to tasks was 
quantitatively measured by being recognized significant 
differences 
Also, in previous research, it was reported to decrease in 
activity in the brain around #10, 11 [10], as the result of 
measuring brain activity during Advanced Trial Making Test 
using PET [11]. Therefore, this result came out in support of 
previous research in no small part. 
Of course, it is necessary to increase number of subject at the 
present stage. In addition, there are problems associated with 
experiment, number of subject, method and measured region. 
However, in terms of being recognized significant differences at 
brain activity due to movement, it was thought to show useful 
result in evaluating quantitatively daily movements. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this experiment, our purpose was to evaluate quantitatively 
physical load with focusing on standing and sitting movement 
which was part of daily movements using 3D motion analysis 
system and EMG.  
As the result, it was shown that the integral of lower-limb 
muscle, such as tibialis anterior muscle and gastrocremius muscle, 
significantly decreased by the use of welfare device. 
Also, it was reported that there is a positive correlation 
between anteversion angle of body trunk and movement duration 
in previous research [12]. But, our experiment method was to 
estimate the possibility of falling in rising from a sitting position 
by calculating moving distance of median point. And, it was 
confirmed that the possibility of falling was decreased by using 
device.  
Next, we tried to measure physical and psychological load 
quantitatively on the basis of brain activity. And there were 
significant differences due to number of trials, holding position. 
In this experiment, analysis method was to remove disturbance 
such as body motion and angular variation of neck to the extent 
possible by using the measurement result in resting state as 
sample. Therefore, it was thought to show the useful result in 
evaluating quantitatively load due to movement task by being 
recognized difference in brain activity caused by number of trials, 
substance of task and holding position. 
Main purpose in this study is to evaluate physical load and 
fatigue quantitatively. So, we tried to evaluate change of muscle 
load due to difference of motion by simultaneous measuring with 
3D motion analysis System and EMG quantitatively.  
However, evaluation of psychological load is necessary, too. 
In terms of using welfare device, prolonged use must be taken 
into account.  In this case, it is important to consider not only 
physical load but also psychological load due to prolonged use 
from standpoint of developing welfare device and keeping up 
surviving bodily function.  
Also, in previous research, separation between physical and 
psychological load has been performed. But, our view is that 
there is correlation with physical and psychological load. So, we 
tried to measure psychological load including physical one based 
on brain activity and quantitatively evaluate both load. 
For the future, our aim is to establish method of discussing 
useful of welfare device by evaluating load involved in other 
daily movements with increasing number of subjects. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT  
This research was supported as follow. There dimensional 
motion analysis and commodious room were provided from nac 
Image Techonogy Inc. EMG and analysis software were 
provided from KISSEI COMTEC. NIRS was provided from 
SHIMADZU COPPORATION. Developing welfare device was 
provided from IDEA SYSTEM CO., LTD. We are deeply 
grateful to them. 
This study contributes to become the basis for one of theme 
of s-innovation program in Japan Science and Technology 
Agency which was named “Development Fatigue-reduction 
Technology for Social Contribution of Aged Person and 
Establishment System for Evaluation. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Y. Shinoda, Y. Watanabe, Y. Mito, R. Watanuma, and M. Marumo, 
“Considertion of feature extraction based on center of gravity for 
Nihon Buyo dancer using motion capture system,” SICE Annual 
Confference 2011, Tokyo Japan, pp. 1874-1878. 
[2] Y. Yamaguchi, A. Ishikawa, and Y. Ito, “Development of 
Biosignal Integration Analysis System for Human Brain Function 
and Behavior,” Organization for Human Brain Mapping 2012, 
China, pp. 329-336 
 
 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-273-8
COGNITIVE 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

[3] H. Inoue, S. Shimizu, N. Takahashi, H. Nara, and T. Tsuruga 
“Fundamental Study for Evaluation of the Effect due to Exercise 
Load” , Assistive Technology, Bio Medical Engineering and Life 
Support 2011, Japan, CD-ROM 
[4] E. Watanabe, Y. Yamashita, Y. Ito, and H. Koizumi, ”Non-
invasive functional mapping with multi-channel near infra-red 
spectroscopic topography in humans,” Heurosci Lett 1996, Feb 16, 
205 (1), 41-4.  
[5] N. Takahashi, S. Shimizu, Y. Hirata, H. Nara, F. Miwakeichi, N.  
Hirai, S. Kikuchi, E. Watanabe, and S. Kato, “Fundamental Study 
for a New Assistive System during Car Driving,” Proc. of 
International Conferrence on Robotics and Biomimetics, DVD-
ROM, 2010, Tenjin, China. 
[6] N. Takahashi, S. Shimizu, Y. Hirata, H. Nara, H. Inoue, N. Hirai, S.  
Kikuchi, E. Watanabe, and S. Kato, “Basic study of Analysis of 
Human Brain Activities during Car Driving,” the 14th 
International Conferrence on Human-Computer Interaction,CR-
ROM 2011, USA. 
[7] S. Shimizu, N. Takahashi, H. Nara, H. Inoue, and Y. Hirata, 
“Fundamental Study for Human Brain Activity Based on the 
Spatial Cognitive Task,” the 2011 Internatinal Conference on 
Brain Informatics-BI 2011, vol.6889 pp218-225, China. 
[8] S. Shimizu, N. Takahashi, H. Nara, H. Inoue, and Y. Hirata, 
“Basic Study for Human Brain Activity Based on the Spatial 
Cognitive Task,” The Third International Conference on Advanced 
Cognitive Techonologies and Applications, 2011, pp. 148-151, 
Italy. 
[9] S. Shimizu, N. Takahashi, H. Inoue, H. Nara, F. Miwakeichi, N. 
Hirai, S. Kikuchi, E. Watanabe, and S. Kato, “Basic Study for a 
New Assitive System Based on Brain Activity associated with 
Spatial Perception Task during Car driving,” Proc. International 
Conferrence on Robotics and Biomimetics, 2011, pp. 2884-2889, 
Thailand. 
[10] Y. Watanabe,“Molecular/neural mechanisms of fatigue, and the 
way to overcome fatigue,” Folia Pharmacological Japonica, vol. 
129, pp. 94-98,  2007.  
[11] H. Kuratsune, K. Yamaguti, G. Lindh, B. Evengard, G. Hagberg,  
K.Matsumura, M. Iwase, H. Onoe, M. Takahashi, T. Machii,  Y. 
Kanakura, T. Kitani, B. Langstrom, and Y. Watanage,“Brain 
Regions Involved in Fatigue Sensation: Reduced Acetylcarnitine 
Uptake in to the Brain,” Neuroimage, vol. 17, pp. 1256-1265, 
November 2001. 
[12] K. Maruta,“The influence of Seat Angle on Forward Trunk 
Inclination During Sit-to-Stand,” Jounal of Japanese Physical 
Therapy Association, vol. 31, no.1, pp. 21-28, 2004. 
 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-273-8
COGNITIVE 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

