An Experimental Investigation on Learning Activities Inhibition Hypothesis
in Cognitive Disuse Atrophy
Kazuhisa Miwa
Graduate School of
Information Science
Nagoya University
Nagoya, JAPAN
miwa@is.nagoya-u.ac.jp
Kazuaki Kojima
Learning Technology
Laboratory
Teikyo University
Utsunomiya, JAPAN
kojima@lt-lab.teikyo-u.ac.jp
Hitoshi Terai
Graduate School of
Information Science
Nagoya University
Nagoya, JAPAN
terai@is.nagoya-u.ac.jp
Abstract—The term “disuse atrophy” is generally used for physi-
cal atrophy such as muscle wasting. When muscles are no longer
used, they slowly weaken. This weakening, or atrophy, can also
occur from continuous physical support that leads to a minimal
use of the body. We advance the idea that disuse atrophy occurs
not only in the physical realm but also in cognitive ability.
We investigate why cognitive disuse atrophy occurs. Speciﬁcally,
we examine the learning activities inhibition hypothesis, which
posits that cognitive disuse atrophy occurs because continuous use
of support systems provides cognitive shortcuts for performing
activities and inhibits learning-oriented activities. To investigate
this hypothesis, two experiments were performed in which the
participants played Reversi games. Both Experiments 1 and 2
indicated that the participants’ winning rates were highest when
they were given a higher level of support, and their decision times
for determining each move were shortest in the training phase.
Experiment 2 also indicated that participants’ post-test scores
(measured as learning gains) were lower when they were given
higher levels of support. These results conﬁrmed that a higher
level of support promotes performance-oriented activities, but
inhibits learning-oriented activities when engaging in training,
supporting the learning activities inhibition hypothesis.
Keywords–cognitive disuse atrophy; performance-orienged ac-
tivities; learning-orienged activities
I.
INTRODUCTION
A variety of human support systems based on advanced
technologies, such as automation systems, operate in our
daily lives. These systems have contributed to the increase of
human abilities to perform tasks. However, we often recognize
negative secondary effects of the overuse of such systems
(e.g., difﬁculty in memorizing maps due to daily usage of
car navigation systems, or difﬁculty remembering the accurate
spelling of words because of using a word processor with spell
checker software). Human factor studies have reported that the
continuous use of automated systems decreases users’ manipu-
lation abilities [1][2], and more seriously, complacency on this
front causes aircraft accidents [3]. This happens because long-
term continuous supports decrease human cognitive activity,
weakening the ability to performing tasks.
Miwa and Terai proposed the concept of cognitive ability
disuse atrophy, the loss of cognitive ability due to the disuse of
cognitive activities [4]. We see this as a key issue underlying
some human factor problems that emerge when people engage
in cognitive tasks aided by computers. The term “disuse
atrophy” is generally used for physical atrophy, such as muscle
wasting [5]. We advance the idea that disuse atrophy occurs
not only in the physical realm but also in cognitive ability.
In this paper, we investigate why cognitive disuse atrophy
occurs. Speciﬁcally, we propose the learning activities inhibi-
tion hypothesis to explain this psychological phenomenon. In
explaining this hypothesis, we ﬁrst note the duality of cognitive
processing when engaging in a task [6]. Generally, there are
two objectives for performing a task. One ordinary objective
is to perform and complete the task. However, there is another
important objective: for performers to develop proﬁciency and
knowledge by performing the task. Performance and mastery
are the prime reasons to engage in a task. We contend that
cognitive disuse atrophy emerges when the mastery factor is
lost.
For example, consider car navigation systems. When peo-
ple search for a route from a current location to a new
destination, they usually try to remember a mental map, a
conﬁguration of the possible pathways, select candidate path-
ways related to the target route, and decide on the best route
from multiple candidates while considering current trafﬁc and
construction. These cognitive information processing efforts
develop a mastery of memorizing maps and the acquisition
of the skills to search for a route. However, when we use
navigation systems, we do not need to perform any such mental
activities. All one has to do is to enter the destination and press
the conﬁrmation button. From the perspective of performance,
this is all it takes to achieve the goal. But for mastery, the
mental activities of memorizing a map and ﬁnding a route
with a printed map are also important. Since car navigation
systems deprive users of opportunities for such efforts toward
mastery, they cause mental disuse atrophy.
We deﬁne performance-oriented activities as those for
performing tasks and learning-oriented activities as those for
mastery. The learning activities inhibition hypothesis proposes
that cognitive disuse atrophy occurs because the continuous use
of support systems provides cognitive shortcuts for performing
activities and thus inhibits the learning-oriented activities.
In this paper, we empirically investigate the learning activ-
ities inhibition hypothesis in the following research paradigm.
We had participants engage in a task. In the training phase, par-
ticipants performed the task with help from a task-supporting
system. Task performance was measured and used as an index
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Figure 1. Overall conﬁguration of the Reversi-based learning environment.
for their performance-oriented activities. After the training
phase, a post-test was performed without any supports avail-
able. Post-test scores were measured and used as an index of
their learning-oriented activities in the training phase. We then
evaluated the two indexes as a function of the level of support
(LOS) in the training phase.
The learning activities inhibition hypothesis predicts the
following:
•
As LOS increases, task performance in the train-
ing phase would increase because the performance-
oriented activities would increase due to high-level
supports.
•
However, post-test scores would decrease because
high-level assistance inhibits the learning-oriented ac-
tivities in the training phase.
In Section 2, we explain an experimental system developed
for this study, and Experiment 1 in Sections 3 and 4 and
Experiment 2 in Sections 5 and 6 are reported, followed by
discussion and conclusions in Section 7.
II.
EXPERIMENTAL SYSTEM
A. Reversi-based learning environment
We developed a Reversi-based learning environment as
a workbench to investigate the learning activities inhibition
hypothesis. Figure 1 shows the overall conﬁguration of the
experimental system. In our experimental environment, a par-
ticipant plays 8 by 8 Reversi games against a virtual opponent
(i.e., opponent agent) on a computer. A virtual partner (i.e.,
partner agent) assists the participant in selecting winning
moves. Both agents, opponent and partner, are controlled by
a Reversi engine, Edax, which suggests the best moves by
assessing future states in the game. The opponent’s competence
can be controlled by setting the maximum depth to which Edax
searches for future game states. The partner agent recommends
candidate moves among valid squares before the participant
makes a move.
The Edax-generated opponents are exceptionally competent
Reversi players that cannot be defeated by human participants.
Figure 2. An example screenshot of the experimental system.
Figure 3. Winning rate of the simulated participants against an opponent
agent.
To reduce the strength of the opponent agent to a level
compatible with human participants, the agents were set to
randomly miss the best move twice in the initial and middle
stages. Support levels (LOSs) from the partner agent were
controlled by presenting the candidate with the best or multiple
moves, or no candidates (i.e., no supports). Figure 2 shows an
example screenshot of the experimental system where three
candidate moves are presented.
B. Preliminary simulations
To predict the degree of winning by human participants in
the environment, we conducted preliminary simulations. The
simulated participant randomly selected one of the candidate
moves. In the no-support condition, it randomly selected one
of the possible moves.
Figure 3 shows the ratio of wins by the simulated par-
ticipant against the opponent agent in 20 simulated games.
This ﬁgure implies that the winning ratio of human novices
increases as the support level increases. However, the learning
activities inhibition hypothesis predicts that consistently pre-
senting the best move to participants would inhibit their skill
mastery. Therefore, post-test scores in the best-move presen-
tation condition would be lower than those in the multiple-
candidate-moves presentation condition and the no-supports
condition.
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

III.
EXPERIMENT 1
A. Participants
A total of 71 undergraduate students in the school of
informatics and sciences at Nagoya University participated in
Experiment 1. They were paid 4000 Japanese Yen as baseline,
and were additionally paid to a maximum of 3000 Yen based
on their performance measured as post-test scores.
B. Experimental conditions
We manipulated the LOS in participants’ training by setting
up three experimental conditions: (1) the Best Move condition,
where the partner agent suggested the best move to the
participants, (2) the Three Candidates condition, where three
candidate moves were suggested, including the best move,
and (3) the No Support condition, where no suggestions were
given.
Twenty-three, twenty-four, and twenty-four participants
were assigned to the Best Move, Three Candidates, and No
Support conditions, respectively.
C. Experimental procedure
In the initial stage, participants were instructed on how
to operate the experimental system. In the Best Move and
Three Candidates conditions, participants were taught that a
virtual partner would present candidate moves in each trial,
but they are not required to follow the suggestions. After the
instruction phase, a pre-test was performed. The participants
played a game against the virtual opponent without the partner
agent’s supports.
In the training phase, participants were divided into three
groups and played twelve games in which the LOS was con-
trolled. After the training phase, a post-test was performed in
which the experimental setting was identical to that of the pre-
test phase. After the post-test was performed, the participants
played four additional games in each of the experimental
settings, and then performed the second round of post-test.
We evaluated their learning gains based on the ﬁrst and second
rounds of post-tests.
IV.
RESULTS
A. Winning Rate
First, we evaluated the participants’ performance in the
training phase. Figure 4 shows the winning rate (the ratio of
the obtained pieces (black pieces) to the total number of pieces
(i.e., black and white pieces)) in the pre-test, the training phase,
and the ﬁrst and second rounds of post-tests.
A three (Condition: No Support, Three Candidates, and
Best Move) × four (Trials: Pre, Training, Post 1, and Post 2)
ANOVA revealed a signiﬁcant interaction (F(6, 204) = 13.11,
p < 0.01). The simple main effect of the Condition factor did
not reach a signiﬁcant level at Pre, Post 1, and Post 2 (F(2,
68) = 3.12, n.s.; F(2, 68) < 1, n.s.; F(2, 68) = 1.94, n.s.),
but revealed signiﬁcance at Training (F(2, 68) = 184.74, p <
0.01). The LSD analysis indicated that the winning rate was
signiﬁcantly higher in the Best Move condition than those in
the Three Candidates and No Support conditions (p < 0.05; p
< 0.05).
Figure 4. Winning rate as a function of experimental conditions.
Figure 5. Decision time as a function of experimental conditions.
B. Decision Time
Second, we evaluated the participants’ behavior based on
the average time for determining one move in their turn. First,
we calculated the average time to decide one move in a game;
then we averaged the decision times over the twelve games.
Figure 5 shows the result.
Again, a three (Condition: No Support, Three Candidates,
and Best Move) × four (Trials: Pre, Training, Post 1, and Post
2) ANOVA revealed a signiﬁcant interaction (F(6, 204) = 4.36,
p < 0.01). The simple main effect of the Condition factor did
not reach a signiﬁcant level at Pre and Post 1 (F(2, 68) =
1.63, n.s.; F(2, 68) = 2.27, n.s.), but revealed signiﬁcance at
Training and Post 2 (F(2, 68) = 5.13, p < 0.01; F(2, 68) =
3.44, p < 0.05). At Training, the LSD analysis indicated that
the decision times in the No Support and Three Candidates
conditions were longer than that in the Best Move condition (p
< 0.05; p < 0.05). In contrast, at Post 2, the decision times in
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

the No Support and Three Candidates conditions were shorter
than that in the Best Move condition (p < 0.05; p < 0.05).
C. Discussion
The learning activities inhibition hypothesis predicted that
the winning rate in the training phase would increase with
higher support conditions. This prediction was partially con-
ﬁrmed because the rate was highest in the Best Move condi-
tion, but no difference was found between the No Support and
Three Candidates conditions.
The hypothesis also predicted that post-test scores would
be higher in lower support conditions; but this prediction was
not conﬁrmed. There were no signiﬁcant differences in the
winning rates in the post-test among the three conditions.
However, note that for Post 2, decision times were longer in
the Best Move condition than in the other two lower support
conditions. This implies that training with such a high level of
support, where participants were continuously given the best
move, may have inhibited learning gains, resulting in longer
decision times in the post-test phase where no such computer
supports were available. This speculation is consistent with the
shorter decision times for Training in the Best Move condition,
implying that shorter decision times reﬂect superﬁcial thinking
without deliberate consideration during training.
V.
EXPERIMENT 2
The overall results in Experiment 1 conﬁrmed that the
performance-oriented activities are raised in higher-supported
situations, but not that the learning-oriented activities increase
in less-supported situations. In terms of learning gains, shorter
decision times in lower supported conditions were found only
in Post 2 after additional four training trials, but not in Post 1.
This may imply that learning effects may emerge after longer
training times. Based on this insight, we conducted Experiment
2.
A. Participants
Initially, 27 undergraduate students in the school of in-
formatics and sciences at Nagoya University participated in
Experiment 2. They were not paid because the experiment was
performed as a part of the class curricula for cognitive science.
Twenty-one participants were analyzed since six of the initial
participants withdrew from the experiment after the pre-test.
B. Experimental conditions
In Experiment 1, we could not conﬁrm any differences
between the Three Candidates and No Support Conditions.
Therefore, in Experiment 2, we set up only two experimental
conditions: the Best Move and No Support conditions. The
initial 27 participants were ordered according to their pre-test
scores and were divided into two groups. Speciﬁcally, odd-
numbered (i. e., top, third, ﬁfth, etc.) participants were assigned
to one of the two conditions, and even-numbered participants
were assigned to the other condition. Six participants withdrew
from the experiment, resulting in nine and twelve participants
working in the No Support and Three Candidate conditions,
respectively.
Figure 6. Winning rate as a function of experimental conditions.
C. Experimental procedure
In the initial stage, participants were instructed on how to
operate the experimental system. In the Best Move condition,
they were taught that a virtual agent would present the best
move in each trial, but they were not required to follow
its suggestions. After the instruction phase, a pre-test was
given. Participants then played three games against the virtual
opponent without the partner agents’ supports.
After the pre-test, the participants were instructed to play
three games a day over two weeks to train themselves. They
were required to report their trials daily via e-mail to the
experimenter. To ensure that the participants continuously
engaged in games throughout two weeks, the experimenter sent
e-mail reminders to participants if their daily e-mail reports
were not received.
After two weeks, a post-test was performed. The experi-
mental setting was identical to that of the pre-test phase. The
participants played three games as a post-test.
VI.
RESULTS
A. Winning Rate
As in Experiment 1, we ﬁrst evaluated participants’ perfor-
mance in the training phase. Figure 6 shows the winning rates
in the pre-test, two-week training period, and the post-test.
In the following analysis, the average scores over the three
games were used as the pre- and post-test scores. To calculate
the training scores, we ﬁrst calculated the average values of
each day’s three games, then averaged the values over two
weeks.
A two (Condition: No Support and Best Move) × three
(Trials: Pre, Training, Post) ANOVA revealed a signiﬁcant
interaction (F(2, 38) = 8.59, p < 0.01). The simple main effect
of the Condition factor did not reach a signiﬁcant level at Pre
(F(1, 19) < 1, n.s.), but revealed signiﬁcance at Training and
Post (F(1, 19) = 9.52, p < 0.01; F(1, 19) = 4.81, p < 0.05),
indicating that the winning rates during training were higher,
but the rates in the post-test were lower in the Best Move
condition than those in the No Support condition.
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Figure 7. Decision time as a function of experimental conditions.
B. Decision Time
Second, we also evaluated the participants’ behavior based
on their average times for determining one move during their
turn. Figure 7 shows the result.
A two (Condition: No Support and Best Move) × three
(Trials: Pre, Training, and Post) ANOVA did not reveal a
signiﬁcant interaction (F(2, 38) = 3.13, n.s.). The main effect
of the Condition factor did not reach a signiﬁcant level (F(1,
19) = 2.48, n.s.). However, the ﬁgure obviously predicts a
difference between the two experimental conditions in the
training phase. Therefore, we performed individual statistical
analyses at Pre, Training, and Post, respectively. The results
show that the decision times at Training in the No Support
condition were longer than that in the Best Move condition
(F(1, 19) = 15.82, p < 0.01), even though there were no
signiﬁcant differences in decision times in the Pre and Post
phases (F(1, 19) < 1, n.s.; F(1, 19) < 1, n.s.).
C. Discussion
In the training phase, the winning rates were higher and
the decision times were shorter in the Best Move condition,
conﬁrming that the performance-oriented activities increase in
a higher-support situation. More importantly, for the post-test,
the winning rates in the Best Move condition were lower than
that in the No Support condition, implying that the learning-
oriented activities are inhibited in the Best Move condition.
These results support the learning activities inhibition hypoth-
esis.
VII.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
A. Summary
In the training phase, Experiments 1 and 2 indicated that
the participants’ winning rates were the highest in the Best
Move condition, and their decision times for determining
each move were the shortest. Experiment 2 indicated that,
the participants’ post-test scores measured as learning gains
were lower in the Best Move condition than that in the
No Support condition. These results conﬁrmed that a higher
level of support promotes the performance-oriented activities,
but inhibits the learning-oriented activities of training, thus
supporting the learning activities inhibition hypothesis.
B. Assistance Dilemma
Similar ﬁndings have been reported in studies on intelligent
tutoring systems. Koedinger and Aleven (2007) posed a crucial
question: How should learning environments balance assis-
tance and the withholding of assistance to optimize the learning
process? [7] This assistance dilemma is considered a central
topic for establishing instructional principles in tutoring. While
high assistance provides useful scaffolding that sometimes
facilitates problem solving in the learning phase, it also elicits
superﬁcial responses given without serious consideration. On
the other hand, low assistance encourages self-learning in stu-
dents, but may introduce major errors and sometimes impede
problem solving in learning.
The assistance dilemma implies that, in some cases, re-
ducing support levels increases learning effects, even while
incurring a partial loss of problem-solving performance. This
speculation is consistent with the ﬁndings conﬁrmed in this
paper.
C. Cognitive Load Theory
Cognitive load theory gives us another informative perspec-
tive about the cognitive mechanisms underlying the tradeoff
between the performance-oriented and learning-oriented activ-
ities conﬁrmed in this study.
Cognitive load theory has provided design principles for
learning environments constrained by cognitive architecture.
The theory distinguishes three types of cognitive loads: intrin-
sic, extraneous, and germane [8][9]. The intrinsic load is the
basic cognitive load required to perform a task. The intrinsic
load increases with the increasing difﬁculty of a task and the
decreasing expertise of the performer. The extraneous load
is the wasted cognitive load unrelated to learning activities,
and is reluctantly processed. One source of extraneous load
is inappropriately designed learning material. The extraneous
load can also be increased by a lack of related knowledge
and problem solving skills. Finally, the germane load is the
cognitive load for learning, such as constructing schemata.
From the perspective of cognitive load theory, the intrinsic
load presumably contributes to the performance-oriented activ-
ities, and the germane load contributes to the learning-oriented
activities.
Adequate assistance decreases the extraneous load by pre-
senting related information for problem solving. Many design
principles for reducing the extraneous load have been proposed
[8]. However, note that decreasing the extraneous load by
providing high-level assistance does not necessarily increase
the germane load when superﬁcial problem solving without
deliberate thinking is performed.
Producing the germane load sufﬁcient for maximizing
learning gains is a challenging problem [10][11]. Only a lim-
ited number of design principles exist for raising the germane
load while maintaining sufﬁcient intrinsic load for performing
a task. In this study, we have presented a case in which
low levels of assistance may guide students toward deeper
consideration, activating their learning-oriented activities for
expertise.
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

D. Future Work
To maximize learning gains, the balance between the
performance-oriented and learning-oriented activities is cru-
cial. It is important to ﬁnd ways to manipulate the balance
between these two types of cognitive activities. One important
factor for such manipulation comes from goals established by
performers.
Goal achievement theory has provided theoretical perspec-
tives on the relationships between students’ goals and their
learning activities, and also accumulated a vast amount of
empirical ﬁndings [12]. In goal achievement theory, students’
goals are divided into mastery and performance goals. The
former motivates students to develop their own abilities, while
the latter motivates them to seek higher social evaluation rather
than their own development. This implies that mastery goals
activate the learning-oriented activities and performance goals
activate the performance-oriented activities. In the early stages
of goal achievement theory, mastery goals were found to be
more important than performance goals [13][14].
A recent study found the relationship between students’
goals and their seeking of computer support [15]. According to
this study, mastery-goal-oriented students tend to seek abstract
(i.e., low-level) supports ﬁrst, and then move to more spe-
ciﬁc (high-level) supports, whereas performance-goal-oriented
students preferred quick and direct supports during the initial
stage. This implies that mastery oriented-students tend to focus
their cognitive load on learning-oriented activities.
In our future work, it will be important to conduct further
experiments controlling for participants’ goal factors in order
to seek a way to promote the learning-oriented activities while
cultivating sufﬁcient performance-oriented activities.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This
research
was
partially
supported
by
HAYAO
NAKAYAMA Foundation for Science & Technology and Cul-
ture, and JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number 25560110.
REFERENCES
[1]
R. Parasuraman and V. Riley, “Humans and automation: Use, misuse,
disuse, abuse,” Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and
Ergonomics Society, vol. 39, no. 2, 1997, pp. 230–253.
[2]
N. B. Sarter and D. D. Woods, “Team play with a powerful and
independent agent: a full-mission simulation study,” Human Factors:
The Journal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, vol. 42,
no. 3, 2000, pp. 390–402.
[3]
E. L. Wiener and R. E. Curry, “Flight-deck automation: Promises and
problems,” Ergonomics, vol. 23, no. 10, 1980, pp. 995–1011.
[4]
K. Miwa and H. Terai, “Theoretical investigation on disuse atrophy
resulting from computer support for cognitive tasks,” in Engineering
Psychology and Cognitive Ergonomics, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, D. Harris, Ed.
Springer International Publishing, 2014, vol.
8532, pp. 244–254.
[5]
S. W. Jones, R. J. Hill, P. A. Krasney, B. O’Conner, N. Peirce, and
P. L. Greenhaff, “Disuse atrophy and exercise rehabilitation in humans
profoundly affects the expression of genes associated with the regulation
of skeletal muscle mass,” The FASEB journal, vol. 18, no. 9, 2004, pp.
1025–1027.
[6]
J. Sweller, “Cognitive load during problem solving: Effects on learning,”
Cognitive Science, vol. 12, no. 2, 1988, pp. 257–285.
[7]
K. R. Koedinger and V. Aleven, “Exploring the assistance dilemma
in experiments with cognitive tutors,” Educational Psychology Review,
vol. 19, 2007, pp. 239–264.
[8]
J. Sweller, J. J. Van Merrienboer, and F. G. Paas, “Cognitive architecture
and instructional design,” Educational psychology review, vol. 10, no. 3,
1998, pp. 251–296.
[9]
J. J. Van Merri¨enboer and J. Sweller, “Cognitive load theory in
health professional education: design principles and strategies,” Medical
education, vol. 44, no. 1, 2010, pp. 85–93.
[10]
P. Ayres and T. van Gog, “State of the art research into cognitive load
theory,” Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 25, no. 2, 2009, pp. 253
– 257.
[11]
F. Paas and T. van Gog, “Optimising worked example instruction:
Different ways to increase germane cognitive load,” Learning and
Instruction, vol. 16, no. 2, 2006, pp. 87 – 91.
[12]
C. S. Dweck, “Motivational processes affecting learning.” American
psychologist, vol. 41, no. 10, 1986, pp. 1040–1408.
[13]
C. H. Utman, “Performance effects of motivational state: A meta-
analysis,” Personality and Social Psychology Review, vol. 1, no. 2, 1997,
pp. 170–182.
[14]
C. Ames, “Classrooms: Goals, structures, and student motivation.”
Journal of educational psychology, vol. 84, no. 3, 1992, pp. 261–271.
[15]
B. E. Vaessen, F. J. Prins, and J. Jeuring, “University students’ achieve-
ment goals and help-seeking strategies in an intelligent tutoring system,”
Computers & Education, vol. 72, no. 0, 2014, pp. 196 – 208.
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

