Two Minds and Emotion
Muneo Kitajima
Nagaoka University of Technology
Kamitomioka, Nagaoka, Niigata JAPAN
Email: mkitajima@kjs.nagaokaut.ac.jp
Makoto Toyota
T-Method
Sapporo, Hokkaido JAPAN
Email: pubmtoyota@me.com
Abstract—Human behavior can be viewed as the integration of the
outputs of Systems 1, i.e., unconscious automatic processes, and
System 2, i.e., conscious deliberate processes. System 1 activates
a sequence of automatic actions. System 2 monitors System 1’s
performance according to the plan it has created, and it activates
future possible courses of actions as well. At the same time when
these forward processes are working, System 1 and System 2
deal with the outcome of the forward processes by estimating
the results of System 1’s and System 2’s performance, i.e., good
or bad, and generating emotions depending on the degree of
goodness or badness of the estimation. Emotions are generated
through the dynamics of the parallel processing of System 1 and
System 2, which is called O-PDP, Organic Parallel Distributed
Processing. This paper discusses how emotion generation process
is integrated with the Kahneman’s System 1 and System 2 model
of human decision-making.
Keywords–Two Minds; Organic-PDP; Two Minds; Conscious-
ness; Unconsciousness; Emotion.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Two Minds is the basis of behavioral economics founded
by Kahneman [1][2]. It considers that Two Minds govern
human decision-making: a human being’s behavior is the
outcome of two different systems including an experiential
processing system, System 1, and a rational processing system,
System 2. Figure 1 illustrates the workings of the two systems.
In short, System 1 is a fast feed-forward control process driven
by the cerebellum and oriented toward immediate action.
Experiential processing is experienced passively, outside of
conscious awareness, e.g., one is seized by one’s emotion.
In contrast, System 2 is a slow feedback control process
driven by the cerebrum and oriented toward future action. It
is experienced actively and consciously, e.g., one intention-
ally follows the rules of inductive and deductive reasoning.
However, traditional cognitive modeling has not treated human
behavior as the result of intense interaction between System 1
and System 2. Indeed, traditional cognitive modeling has
been primarily aiming at implementing and testing theories
explaining behavior driven by rational, multi-step cognition.
ACT-R [3][4] and Soar [5] are the most successful cognitive
architectures in this direction. However, there are many human
behaviors that seem to be driven by aspects of behavior that
are not the same as rational cognition: emotional, intuitive,
and other non-rational behavior. These aspects have not been
addressed in these cognitive architectures adequately.
Recently, studies aiming at incorporating Two Minds into
traditional cognitive modeling have emerged. For example,
Kennedy and Bugajuska [6] presented computational cogni-
tive models that take into account the interactions between
conscious processes and unconscious processes. Their mod-
els implemented different strategies in the ACT-R cognitive
architecture [7][4] to allow a human to consciously inhibit
an undesirable fast response. ACT-R is a symbolic and sub-
symbolic, production-based cognitive architecture [3]. The in-
ternal modules of ACT-R represent relatively speciﬁc cognitive
functions (and regions of the brain) including declarative and
procedural memory (long-term memory), auditory and visual
perception, and vocalization and motor functions.
This paper suggests another approach to incorporating Two
Minds in cognitive modeling by stemming on the cognitive ar-
chitecture, Model Human Processor with Realtime Constraints
(MHP/RT), the authors have developed [8][9]. MHP/RT con-
siders that human behavior in the real world occurs in such
a way that the agent’s next behavior is determined by a
combination of the situation of the environment and that of
the agent itself. Therefore, in order to simulate the processes
of human behavior, it is necessary to explicitly include the
real-time constraints that affect the synchronization of behavior
selection. Neither Soar nor ACT-R was designed as an archi-
tecture model for simulating an agent’s behavioral processes
that evolve in synchrony with the environment where real-
time constraints are the critical factors to organize the agent’s
behavior. The predictions made by these architecture models
are derived essentially by linear algorithms that calculate the
best paths for a sequence of behavioral selections [8].
As described in [9], this feature of MHP/RT should be
contrasted with the goal-oriented cognitive architectures such
as ACT-R [3][4] in which the conscious processes are con-
sidered as the processes to control people’s behavior and
the unconscious processes are considered subordinate to the
conscious or intentional processes. What ACT-R tries to do is
to show how System 2 can be implemented on top of System 1.
The procedural memory system is very similar to System 1
(fast, learning based on rewards/experience, intuitive), and then
ACT-R models tend to consist of a set of production rules that
(when run on this System 1 module and in combination with
symbolic working memory buffers and a long-term memory
system) give rise to the slower, deliberative planning behaviors
seen in System 2. This is a very different approach to MHP/RT.
However, ACT-R models are totally adequate for simulating
stable human activities with weak time constraint in which
deliberate decision making would work effectively, but might
be hard for the situations with strong time constraint where
the environmental condition changes chaotically and deliberate
decision making implemented on System 2 might not work as
effective.
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

PERCEPTION
INTUITION
SYSTEM 1
REASONING
SYSTEM 2
PROCESS
CONTENT
Fast
Parallel
Automatic
Effortless
Associative
Slow-learning
Emotional
Slow
Serial
Controlled
Effortful
Rule-governed
Flexible
Neutral
Percepts
Current stimulation
Stimulus-bound
Conceptual representations
Past, Present and Future
Can be evoked by language
Figure 1. Process and Content in Two Cognitive Systems (adapted from [1]).
In summary, traditional cognitive modeling, including
ACT-R or Soar based models, has not considered how Sys-
tem 1 and System 2 develop along the time dimension in
synchronous with the ever-changing environment. Especially,
the intense interaction between emotion in System 1 and con-
sciousness in System 2 has not been considered appropriately
due to the lack of proper treatment of the time dimension.
This paper discusses how emotion generation processes are
integrated with Two Minds on the basis of MHP/RT [8][9]
and its superordinate model, the Nonlinear Dynamic Hu-
man Behavior Model with Real-Time Constraints (NDHB-
Model/RT), that the authors proposed at the past Cognitive
Science conferences [10][11][12].
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, this
paper starts by describing NDHB-Model/RT, followed by an
explanation of dynamics of consciousness–emotion interaction
based on NDHB-Model/RT in Section III. Section IV describes
relationship between Two Minds and emotions, and Section V
concludes the paper.
II.
NDHB-MODEL/RT
The relationship between Two Minds and emotion is
best understood by considering how behavior is generated in
the time dimension. This section introduces some ideas to
make it possible. First, it introduces two basic ideas, Organic
Self-Consistent Field Theory (O-SCFT), and Organic Parallel
Distributed Processing (O-PDP). Then it derives Nonlinear
Dynamic Human Behavior Model with Realtime Constraints
(NDHB-Model/RT), which is a framework for considering
the behavior of human beings in the universe as deﬁned by
O-SCFT and O-PDP. Then, it introduces a cognitive archi-
tecture, Model Human Processor with Realtime Constraints
(MHP/RT), that is capable of simulating human being’s daily
decision making and action selection under NDHB-Model/RT.
A. O-SCFT: Organic Self Consistent Field Theory
1) Self-Consistent Field Theory in Physics: In physics, self-
consistent ﬁeld theory (SCFT) studies the behavior of large and
complex stochastic models by studying a simpler model. Such
models consider a large number of small interacting individual
components which interact with each other. The effect of all the
other individuals on any given individual is approximated by a
single averaged effect, thus reducing a many-body problem to
a one-body problem. In ﬁeld theory, the Hamiltonian may be
expanded in terms of the magnitude of ﬂuctuations around the
mean of the ﬁeld. In this context, SCFT can be viewed as the
“zeroth-order” expansion of the Hamiltonian in ﬂuctuations.
Physically, this means an SCFT system has no ﬂuctuations, but
this coincides with the idea that one is replacing all interactions
with a “self-consistent ﬁeld.” Quite often, in the formalism
of ﬂuctuations, SCFT provides a convenient starting-point to
studying ﬁrst or second order ﬂuctuations.
2) “Organic” Self-Consistent Field Theory: We applied
SCFT in physics to organic systems. Organic systems are those
comprised of human beings as their components. Any organic
system can be represented as a model that considers a large
number of interacting individual human beings which interact
with each other. In addition, individual organic human beings
interact with inorganic physical environment as well, which is
modeled by SCFT. We preﬁxed the word “Organic” to SCFT in
order to explicitly indicate that the application domain of SCFT
is extended to organic systems. We consider that the behavior
of human beings in the universe is quasi-stable, which means
that it is not stable but develop or evolve triggered by some
ﬂuctuations, a feature of dissipative system – a ﬂuctuation of
the system caused by an environmental change would trigger
creation of a new order or catastrophe [13].
3) Human beings considered in O-SCFT: At the zeroth-
order approximation implied by O-SCFT, each human being
interacts with the integrated environment consisting of inor-
ganic components and organic components. Each human being
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

is considered as autonomous system, and interaction is best
represented by information ﬂow from the view point of human
being. O-SCFT is decomposed into three nonlinear constructs,
Maximum Satisfaction Architecture (MSA), Brain Information
Hydrodynamics (BIH), and Structured Meme Theory (SMT)
that correspond to human being, inorganic SCFT components,
and O-SCFT components, respectively.
a) Maximum Satisfaction Architecture (MSA): MSA is
about realization of the purpose of living, i.e., libido – it
maximizes efforts on the autonomous system. It deals with how
autonomous systems achieve goals under constraints deﬁned
by BIH and SMT [10].
b) Brain Information Hydrodynamics (BIH):
Con-
strains from the environment shape how the information ﬂow
develops along the time dimension. This is reﬂected in the
brain as BIH. It deals with information ﬂow in the brain and
its characteristics in the time dimension [11].
c) Structured Meme Theory (SMT): SMT concerns the
relational structure that links human beings and the environ-
ment, and thereby deals with effective information and the
range of propagation [12].
B. O-PDP: Organic Parallel Distributed Processing
We are interested in not only how individual human
being’s brain processes information, originated either from
external or internal environment, but also how it develops
chronologically from his/her birth. We challenge this problem
under the concepts of MSA, BIH, and SMT. As we focus
on information ﬂow in the brain, we considered that Parallel
Distributed Processing (PDP) is the fundamental mechanism
for developing brain architecture [14]. Since PDP is considered
under O-SCFT, we preﬁxed “O (organic)” to PDP, and call this
approach O-PDP.
O-PDP develops cross-networks of neurons in the brain as
it accumulates experience of interactions in the environment.
The neural network development process is circular, which
means that any experience at a particular moment should
reﬂect somehow the experience of the past interactions that
have been recorded in the shape of current neural networks.
In this way, a PDP system is organized evolutionally, and
realized as a neural network system, including the brain, the
spinal nerves, and the peripheral nerves to construct an O-PDP
system. This mechanistic statement might be expressed simply
and casually with a less rigorous but easier to understand
way as follows: the brain processes information thanks to a
dynamically reconﬁgurable network of neurons to which one
must add the spinal chord and peripheral nerves.
C. NDHB-Model/RT
On the basis of O-SCFT and O-PDP, we have developed
NDHB-Model/RT as an architecture model that consists of a
behavioral processing system and a memory processing system
that interact with each other as autonomous systems. The inter-
actions are cyclic, and memory develops and evolves as time
goes by. NDHB-Model/RT represents consciousness as one-
dimensional linear operations, i.e., language, corresponding
to System 2 of Two Minds, and unconsciousness including
emotion as a hydrodynamic ﬂow of information in multi-
dimensional parallel operations in the neural networks, cor-
responding to System 1 of Two Minds. NDHB-Model/RT has
autonomous memory systems that mediate between conscious-
ness and unconsciousness to display the dynamic interactions
between them.
NDHB-Model/RT suggests that the brain consists of the
following three non-linearly connected layers. Behavioral de-
cisions and action selections are made by integrating the results
of operations of these three layers:
•
C-layer: Conscious state layer, i.e., System 2 of Two
Minds
•
A2BC-layer:
Autonomous-Automatic
Behavior
Control layer, i.e., System 1 of Two Minds
•
B-layer: Bodily state layer
B-layer prioritizes the 17 behavioral goals, i.e., happi-
ness types deﬁned by [15], such as “target happiness for an
achiever”, “cooperative happiness for a helper”, “rhythmic
happiness for a dancer”, and so on. The other two layers
interact with each other in order to derive the next behavior that
should satisfy the highest prioritized goal. In normal situations
in our daily life, temporal changes in the environment impose
the strongest constraint on the decision of the next behavior,
and thus A2BC-layer plays a more dominant role than C-layer
in organizing behavior. To put it simply, in our daily life we
act more by reﬂex than by reasoning.
The next behavior is determined by extracting objects
from the ever-changing environment and attaching values to
them according to the degree of the strength of the resonance
with what is stored in the autonomic memory system. This
is followed by deliberate judgement by using the knowledge
associated with the highly valued objects. The former is
controlled by the processes in A2BC-layer, System 1; the
latter, by the processes in C-layer, System 2.
D. MHP/RT
NDHB-Model/RT can be simulated by the architecture
model, Model Human Processor with Real time Constraints
(MHP/RT) [8][9][16]. MHP/RT simulates in situ human be-
havior by switching among four processing modes, con-
scious/unconscious activities for the future events, and con-
scious/unconscious activities for the past events. MHP/RT
focuses on synchronization between System 1 and System 2 in
the information ﬂow under O-PDP. More speciﬁcally, MHP/RT
deals with one aspect of working of NDHB-Model/RT, which
is synchronization between conscious system and unconscious
system in the ever-changing environment where human beings
make decisions and action selections to behave properly.
Figure 2 depicts the outline of MHP/RT. It is a real brain
model comprising of System 1’s unconscious processes and
System 2’s conscious processes at the same level. There are
two distinctive information ﬂows: System 1 and System 2
receive input from the Perceptual Information Processing Sys-
tem in one way, and from the Memory Processing System
in another way. System 1 and System 2 work autonomously
and synchronously without any superordinate-subordinate hi-
erarchical relationships but interact with each other when
necessary. In Figure 2, solid lines and dotted lines indicate
the path associated with System 1 and the one associated
with System 2, respectively. These two ﬂows are synchronized
before carrying out some behavior.
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Behavioral Action
Behavioral Action
Processing
Autonomous System
Perceptual
Information Processing
Autonomous System
Asynchronous
Band
Asynchronous Band
Bodily Coordination
Monitoring
Autonomous System
・ Circadian Rhythm
・ Bodily Activity Monitor
Information from
Environment
Synchronous Band
With Real Time Constraints
Memorization of
Behavioral Actions
and their Results
Two Minds
Autonomous System
Conscious
Information Processing
Autonomous System
Autonomous Automatic
Behavior Control Processing
Available memory for decision making includes:
1) Memory activated by resonance reaction
2) Residually active memory 
Memory Processing Time
TIME
Memory Processing (Resonance Reaction)
Autonomous System
Short-Term Memory
Working Memory
Long-Term Memory
Motor Memory
Figure 2. Outline of MHP/RT.
Time Units
hours
months
weeks
days
10 min
minutes
10 sec
1 sec
100 ms
10 ms
1 ms
100 µs
System
Task
Task
Task
Unit Task
Operations
Deliberate Act
Neural Circuit
Neuron
Organelle
World (Theory)
Social
Band
Rational
Band
Cognitive
Band
Biological
Band
Scale (sec)
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
10
Habitual Organic Activity
Habitual 
Bodily Activity
Internal Activity
Interactive 
Organic Activity
Figure 3. Newell’s time scale of human action (adapted from [17]).
E. Four Processing Modes of MHP/RT
MHP/RT suggests that at a particular time before the event,
say Tbefore, one engages in System 2’s conscious processes
and System 1’s unconscious processes concerning the event.
At a particular time after the event, one engages in conscious
processes and unconscious processes. What one can do before
and after the event is strongly constrained by the Newell’s time
scale of human action as shown by Figure 3. It indicates that
System 2 carries out the processes surrounded by a round-
cornered rectangle with dotted lines, whereas System 1 does
those surrounded by a round-cornered rectangle with solid
lines.
MHP/RT works under the following four processing
modes, ordered from the past to the future:
•
System 2 Before Mode: Conscious use of long-term
memory before the event, i.e., System 2’s operation
for anticipating the future event, or decision-making.
•
System 1 Before Mode: Unconscious use of long-
term memory before the event, i.e., System 1’s opera-
tion for automatic preparation for the future event, or
action selection.
•
System 1 After Mode: Unconscious use of long-term
memory after the event, i.e., System 1’s operation for
automatic tuning of long-term memory related with
the past event.
•
System 2 After Mode: Conscious use of long-term
memory after the event, i.e., System 2’s operation for
reﬂecting on the past event.
Figure 4 illustrates the four processing modes along the
time dimension expanding before and after the event, which
is shown as boundary event. At each moment, one behaves in
one of the four processing modes and he/she switches among
them depending on the internal and external states.
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

III.
DYNAMICS OF CONSCIOUSNESS–EMOTION
INTERACTION: AN EXPLANATION BY NDHB-MODEL/RT
A. Interaction between Consciousness and Emotion
The processes in A2BC-layer and those in C-layer are
not independent. Rather, they interact with each other very
intensely in some cases but very weakly in other cases. We
investigate this issue in more detail below.
1) Onset of consciousness: With the onset of arousal, the
sensory organs begin to collect environmental information, or
paying attention to the information. This information ﬂows into
the brain, and the volume of information ﬂow grows rapidly.
As the information ﬂow circulates in the neural networks, the
center of the ﬂow gradually emerges. It corresponds to the
location where the successive ﬁrings of the neural networks
concentrate. At this time, the center of information ﬂow
induces activities in C-layer via the cross-links in the neural
networks.
2) Conscious activities: Figure 5 depicts the state of the
brain when consciousness starts working. The location of
consciousness is indicated as a dot in C-layer. In many cases,
the working of consciousness includes such cognitive activi-
ties as comprehension of self-orientation and an individual’s
circumstances. The judgement on what decision-making is
needed for the current situation is equivalent to initiating some
action to move the location of consciousness to an appropriate
direction. The direction of movement is determined by the
information needs at that time. It could move either in the
direction in which the initial information will be deepened (left
in the ﬁgure, moving upstream in the information ﬂow) or to
the direction in which the initial information will be widened
(right in the ﬁgure, moving downstream in the information
ﬂow). The density of information would change depending
on how far the center of consciousness would have moved.
However, the location of the consciousness would not move
when carrying out a routine task.
Koch and Tsuchiya [18] suggested that attention and
consciousness are two distinct brain processes. They showed
functional roles of attention and consciousness and the four
ways of processing visual events and behaviors. The upstream
BEFORE
AFTER
System 2 - After 
Realtime Support 
Boundary Event (BE) 
n-th event, En, happens at t=T
Intuition
Heuristics
Preparation for Possible Events
Reflection of the Event 
T << t < ∞
Behavior at T,  Bn(t=T) 
T ≤ t ≤ T + Δ
Space of Certainty
Space of Uncertainty
Estimation of 
Effectiveness of Actions
Estimation of 
Reliability of Actions
Collection of 
Useful Actions
Collection of 
Possible Actions 
Time Constraints: Strong
Time Constraints: None or Weak
Reflection of Bn(T)
System 2 - Before 
Anticipation
System 1 - Before 
Anticipation
System 1 - After 
Realtime Support
Newell’s Time Scale
~ COGNITIVE BAND
≥ RATIONAL BAND
≥ RATIONAL BAND
Figure 4. How the Four Processing Modes work (adapted from [9]).
move of consciousness to the information ﬂow corresponds
to “attention with consciousness” in [18] and the downstream
move corresponds to “consciousness in the near absence of
attention.”
3) Emergence of emotion: After the onset of consciousness,
a new thread of information coming into the brain via the
sensory organs triggers successive ﬁring within the neural
networks. This causes a new information ﬂow in the brain
that reﬂects the past experience that resonates with the input
information. If there is a discrepancy between the new in-
formation ﬂow (the dotted line in the ﬁgure) and the existing
information ﬂow (the solid line in the ﬁgure), emotion emerges.
Emotion works to reduce the amount of discrepancy. This
view is consistent with the one suggested by Tsuchiya and
Adolphs [19], discussing the interaction between emotion and
consciousness by reviewing experimental studies.
4) Determination of next behavior: When A2BC-layer
works continuously within its capacity, consciousness does not
interfere with the working of A2BC-layer but monitors the
individual’s behavior, prepares for the next behavior, and/or
C Layer
A2BC Layer
+
(B Layer)
Information Flow 
in the Brain
Sensory Organs
Sensory Information Filter
The initial information is widened
The initial information is deepened
Direction of the consciousness vector
Center of 
information flow
Emergency of 
emotion
Location of consciousness
Onset of consciousness
Tuning the path
 Information flow vector
Experience vector
Figure 5. Onset of consciousness and emergence of emotion
C Layer
A2BC Layer
+
(B Layer)
Information Flow 
in the Brain
Sensory Organs
Sensory Information Filter
 Information flow vector
Experience vector
Consciousness vector
Emotion vector
1
2
3
4
5
6
Figure 6. Determination of next behavior
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

ponders issues that come to mind. However, if A2BC-layer
has difﬁculty in determining the next behavior, C-layer takes
over and determines it. However, note that decision-making
deals with planning for future behavior in the “System 2 Before
Mode.” Actions that will be taken actually in the ever-changing
real world are determined by the system ﬂexibly in an ad-lib
fashion in the “System 1 Before Mode” [9][16].
5) Summary: The following depicts the ﬂow of the pro-
cesses that would happen (see Figure 6).
1)
Consciousness determines the next behavior by con-
sidering the current emotion state, which is the
functional aspects of an emotion [20], and the self-
recognition.
2)
Consciousness tunes the orientation of the sensory
organs in preparation for initiating the next behavior
just determined.
3)
Consciousness commands initiating the next behav-
ior.
4)
The behavior results in changes in the information
ﬂow.
5)
The direction of emotion changes.
6)
The new state of emotion affects the process of
determining the next behavior.
B. Synchronization between the C layer and the A2BC layer:
MHP/RT’s perspective
We assume that the C layer and the A2BC layer operate
together in order to determine the next behavior. However, as
described above, the interaction between them could be weak
or strong, depending on the situation. There thus needs to
be a synchronization mechanism for them to work together
appropriately. The degree of discrepancy could be measured
by the amount of efforts to re-establish good synchronization
between the two systems.
We suggest that the visual-frame reconstruction process in
the C layer should be used for establishing synchronization
between the C layer and the A2BC layer. In Figure 2,
this synchronization process is indicated schematically as an
arrow with the label “Two Minds.” The C layer predicts the
representation of the visual frame of reference that should
appear in the future and uses it for synchronization. The
information ﬂow for this process is indicated in the dotted lines
in Figure 2, which occurs in the characteristic times surrounded
by a round-corner rectangle with dotted lines in Figure 3. On
the other hand, when the A2BC layer mainly controls the
behavior, the visual-frame updating rate would be around 10
frames per second. The information ﬂows as indicated by the
solid lines in Figure 2, with the characteristic times in the
round-corner rectangle with solid lines in Figure 3.
When the C layer mainly controls the behavior as in the
former case, the rate would become lower and vary depending
on the interest of consciousness. In the latter case, the C layer
would monitor the self-behavior by occasionally matching the
expected visual frame of reference and the real visual frame
of reference in the A2BC layer. For the former situation, the
visual-frame density is high but the information density is low;
for the latter situation, the visual-frame density is low but the
information density is high. Discrepancy would be detected
easier in the former case than the latter.
IV.
RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN TWO MINDS AND
EMOTIONS
A. Taxonomy of emotions: behavioral perspective
Table I summarizes the relationships between Two Minds
and emotions as a combination of the states of C-layer and
A2BC-layer. The top half of the table lists the kinds of
decision-makings that C-layer would do before some event
happens. Depending on the intensity of the signals emitted
from A2BC-layer and the self-estimate of the state of the
system, C-layer decides to do something with large effort,
small effort, or just do nothing, or do nothing intentionally.
Note that no emotion will take place at the time when C-layer
makes decisions concerning the system’s future.
On the other hand, as shown in the bottom half of the table,
emotions will emerge when actions are carried out by A2BC-
layer. A speciﬁc emotion type would emerge depending on
the combinations of the possible states of the following four
conditions:
1)
the signal intensity of A2BC-layer,
2)
C-layer’s estimate of the system state,
3)
the nature of C-layer’s decision-making, and
4)
the result of A2BC-layer’s action.
For example, in Case 9, though A2BC-layer emits good
signals, C-layer estimates the situation to be fearful. It decides
not to do anything. However, A2BC-layer reacts to the situ-
ation autonomously and the situation eventually turns good.
C-layer feels relieved. Feeling is the conscious experience of
the emotion [21]. In sum, this table provides a taxonomy of
emotions in terms of the activities of A2BC-layer and C-
layer. The architecture-based approach towards taxonomy of
emotion this paper has taken is different from traditional one,
which studies in detail the relationships between the observed
phenomena and the triggering conditions. The strength of this
approach is that it would be free from increasing complexity
of society and diversity of cultures.
B. Emotion initiation via memory processes
The processes depicted in Figure 5 include activation of
memory via information ﬂow in the brain. In order to disen-
tangle these processes, we ﬁrst show Figure 7 that illustrates
how each MD-frame, to be explained below, is created as the
result of working of autonomous processes in MHP/RT and
how MD-frames are mutually interrelated [22]. This essentially
details the process “Memorization of Behavioral Actions and
their Results” shown by the dotted oval in the diagram of
MHP/RT, Figure 2, by considering neuronal activities that
actually happen. The basic idea is that each autonomous
system has its own memory.
1) MD-frame: MHP/RT assumes that memory is organized
by Multi-Dimensional Frame for storing information. It is a
primitive cognitive unit that conveys information that can be
manipulated by brain under various constraints.
Object cognition occurs as follows [23]:
1)
Collecting information from the environment via per-
ceptual sensors;
2)
Integrating and segmenting the collected information,
centering on visually collected objects;
3)
Continuing these processes until the necessary objects
to live in the environment are obtained.
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

TABLE I. RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN TWO MINDS AND EMOTIONS.
System 2’s before-event expectation
C-layer’s
Signasl emitted
C-layer’s estimate
Case
before-event
from A2BC-layer
when expectation
decision-making
was formed
1
do something
stable
relaxed
with small effort
(no signal)
2
do nothing
bad
prepared for bad
intentionally
3
do something
bad
positive
with large effort
4
do something
good
strongly positive
with large effort
5
do nothing
good
calm
System 2’s after-event decision-making
C-layer
Signals emitted
C-layer’s estimate
Result of
Emotion after
Case
after-event
from A2BC-layer
when decision-making
A2BC-layer’s
A2BC-layer’s
decision-making
was done
action
action was taken
6
do something
good
good
+
satisfaction
with small effort
−
shock, lostness
7
do nothing
bad
bad
+
amazement, pleasure
intentionally
−
regret, despair
8
do something
bad
uneasy
+
self-praise
with large effort
−
apology
9
do nothing
good
fearful
+
relief
−
regret
Behavioral Action
Behavioral Action
Processing
Autonomous System
Perceptual
Information Processing
Autonomous System
Asynchronous
Band
Asynchronous Band
Bodily Coordination
Monitoring
Autonomous System
・ Circadian Rhythm
・ Bodily Activity Monitor
Information from
Environment
Synchronous Band
With Real Time Constraints
Memorization of
Behavioral Actions
and their Results
Two Minds
Autonomous System
Conscious
Information Processing
Autonomous System
Autonomous Automatic
Behavior Control Processing
Available memory for decision making includes:
1) Memory activated by resonance reaction
2) Residually active memory 
Memory Processing Time
TIME
Memory Processing (Resonance Reaction)
Autonomous System
Short-Term Memory
Working Memory
Long-Term Memory
Motor Memory
Model Human Processor 
with Real-Time Constraints
WMD-Frame
RMD-Frame
BMD-Frame
MMD-Frame
PMD-Frame
Perception
Distributed Memory System
Conscious
Activities
Somatic Marker
Situation Awareness
Bodily
Activities
Cerebellum
bulb, spinal
Perception
Workspace 
for Integration
Language-LINK
Language-LINK
Perception for System 1
Autonomous Automatic
Behavior Control Processing
Perception for System 2
Conscious Information Processing
Perception for
System 1 & 2
Perception
TIME
WMD-Frame
WMD-Frame
WMD-Frame
Workspace 
Bodily Activity Monitor
With Real Time Constraints
TIME
TIME
Perception
Figure 7. MHP/RT and the distributed memory system [22].
These objects are then used independently in Systems 1
and System 2, and memorized after integrating related en-
tities associated with each system. Due to the limitation of
the brain’s processing capability, the range of integration is
limited. Therefore, System 1 memory and System 2 memory
should differ. However, they could share objects originating
from perceptual sensors. Thus, when objects, that are the result
of the just-ﬁnished integration and segmentation process, are
processed in the next cycle, representation of the objects may
serve as the common elements to combine System 1 memory
and System 2 memory to form an inter-system memory. We
call this memory the Multi-Dimensional (MD) -frame.
There are ﬁve kinds of MD-frame in MHP/RT.
PMD (Perceptual Multi-Dimensional)-frame constitutes
perceptual memory as a relational matrix structure. It collects
information from external objects followed by separating it
into a variety of perceptual information, and re-collects the
same information in the other situations, accumulating the in-
formation from the objects via a variety of different processes.
PMD-frame incrementally grows as it creates memory from
the input information and matches it against the past memory
in parallel.
MMD (Motion Multi-Dimensional)-frame constitutes be-
havioral memory as a matrix structure. The behavioral ac-
tion processing starts when unconscious autonomous behavior
shows after one’s birth. It gathers a variety of perceptual
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Somatic Marker 
Situation Awareness 
Hypothalamus 
Amygdala 
Ventromedial 
prefrontal cortex 
cerebellum
WMD-Frame 
Language LINK
Neurotransmitter 
Bodily activity level
Conscious 
Activities
Bodily 
Activities
MMD-Frame
PMD-Frame
Perception
Perception
BMD-Frame
RMD-Frame
Workspace 
for Integration 
BMD-RMD LINK
bulb, spinal
WMD augments itself based on RMD’s partial mapping 
Perception for 
System 2 
Conscious 
Information 
Processing
Perception for 
System 1 & 2
Perception for 
System 1 
Autonomous 
Automatic 
Behavior Control 
Processing
me
Strengthen 
activity 
level
Figure 8. MD-frames and emotion.
Fighting
Chasing
Biting
Threatening
Digging
Testing for materials
Boring
Gluing
Zigzag dance
Leading female to nest
Showing entrance
Quivering
Fertilizing for eggs
Fanning
Rescuing eggs
Building
Mating
Care for offspring
etc.
etc.
etc.
etc.
Reproductive 
instinct
Level of 
*consummatory act*
Figure 9. Fixed hierarchy in the behaviors accompanied with instinct of
procreation (redrawn Figure 8.10 in [24])
information as well to connect muscles with nerves using
spinals as a reﬂection point. In accordance with one’s physical
growth, it widens the range of activities the behavioral action
processing can cover autonomously.
BMD (Behavior Multi-Dimensional)-frame is the memory
structure associated with the autonomous automatic behavior
control processing. It combines a set of MMD-frames into a
manipulable unit.
RMD (Relation Multi-Dimensional)-frame is the memory
structure associated with the conscious information processing.
It combines a set of BMD-frames into a manipulable unit. The
role BMD-frames play for RMD-frame is equivalent to the role
MMD-frames play for BMD-frame.
WMD (Word Multi-Dimensional)-frame is the memory
structure for language. It is constructed on a very simple one-
dimensional array.
2) Consciousness/unconsciousness in MD-frames: In the
MHP/RT’s four processing modes, conscious processes can
happen before the event and after the event. On the other hand,
a series of events happen as time goes by, and each of them
is processed by MHP/RT consciously or unconsciously. For
the conscious processes, WMD-Frame and RMD-Frame are
relevant and consciousness occurs at those levels. These frames
are associated with perceptual MD-Frame. Consciousness is
the phenomenon that connects WMD-Frame and RMD-Frame,
and the connections are established via their relationships with
BMD-Frame and MMD-Frame that are associated with the
shared PMD-Frame. Considering this way, we can reach the
conclusion that the phenomenon of consciousness is one aspect
of the nature of memory system, or MD-frames.
Metaphorically speaking, consciousness is one of tips of
icebergs that appear above the sea level, and the tips are inter-
related with each other via the unseen relationships established
below the sea level. A system of icebergs develops in the
natural condition of seawater and atmosphere, which may or
may not be trivial for any people.
3) Emotion initiation in MD-frames: Figure 8 illustrates
processes in MD-frames with the focus of emotion. Memory
activation originates from perception and spreads in MD-
frames. In normal operation, active memory regions are used
for organizing behavior. For the conscious system, most active
memory regions would connect to consciousness and have
effects on conscious activities. For the unconscious bodily
movement system, most active memory regions corresponding
to respective body parts would directly guide action selections
in parallel.
Somatic markers directly guide the action selections that
are carried out in a feed-forward way. On the other hand,
they have indirect effects on conscious activities by providing
integrated information about the current status of the body
via receptors of the conscious system where neurotransmitters’
local density represents the integrated response to the current
status of the body. In other words, emotion corresponds
to the internal activities that coordinate conscious processes
and unconscious processes to work coherently in the ever-
changing environment. As [21] put it, emotion emerges when
consciousness is recognized for the ﬁrst time. Feeling appears
when the emotion is analyzed ecologically and recognized at
the later time.
V.
CONCLUSION
This paper suggested that emotion is a means for establish-
ing synchronization between consciousness and unconscious-
ness internally via memory processes, with its taxonomy on
the basis of the Four Processing Modes of MHP/RT, which
is a cognitive architecture under NDHB-Model/RT with the
guiding concepts of O-SCFT and O-PDP.
Figure 9 shows the ﬁxed hierarchy in the behaviors ac-
companied with instinct of procreation through observation of
behavior of Nemipterus virgatus [24]. Since the evolution of
vertebrata is no more than history of increasing complexity,
the results of any ecological analyses of emotions would tend
to lead to thesaurus-like similar implicit structures, which is
free from complication of society and diversity in culture, as
suggested in this paper.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Num-
ber 24531274.
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

REFERENCES
[1]
D. Kahneman, “A perspective on judgment and choice,” American
Psychologist, vol. 58, no. 9, 2003, pp. 697–720.
[2]
J. S. B. T. Evans and K. Frankish, Eds., In Two Minds: Dual Processes
and Beyond.
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009.
[3]
J. R. Anderson and C. Lebiere, The Atomic Components of Thought.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1998.
[4]
J. R. Anderson, How can the Human Mind Occur in the Physical
Universe?
New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 2007.
[5]
J. E. Laird, A. Newell, and P. S. Rosenbloom, “Soar: An architecture
for general intelligence,” Artiﬁcial Intelligence, vol. 33, 1987, pp. 1–64.
[6]
W. G. Kennedy and M. Bugajuska, “Integrating Fast and Slow Cognitive
Processes,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on Cognitive
Modeling (ICCM 2010), D. D. Sulvucci and G. Gunzelmann, Eds.
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society, 2010, pp. 121–126.
[7]
J. R. Anderson, D. Bothell, M. D. Byrne, S. Douglass, C. Lebiere, and
Y. Qin, “An integrated theory of the mind,” Psychological Review, vol.
111, no. 4, 2004, pp. 1036–1060.
[8]
M. Kitajima and M. Toyota, “Simulating navigation behaviour based
on the architecture model Model Human Processor with Real-Time
Constraints (MHP/RT),” Behaviour & Information Technology, vol. 31,
no. 1, 2012, pp. 41–58.
[9]
——, “Decision-making and action selection in Two Minds: An anal-
ysis based on Model Human Processor with Realtime Constraints
(MHP/RT),” Biologically Inspired Cognitive Architectures, vol. 5, 2013,
pp. 82–93.
[10]
M. Kitajima, H. Shimada, and M. Toyota, “MSA:Maximum Satisfaction
Architecture – a basis for designing intelligent autonomous agents
on web 2.0,” in Proceedings of the 29th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, D. S. McNamara and J. G. Trafton, Eds.
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society, 2007, p. 1790.
[11]
M. Kitajima, M. Toyota, and H. Shimada, “The Model Brain: Brain
Information Hydrodynamics (BIH),” in Proceedings of the 30th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, B. C. Love, K. McRae,
and V. M. Sloutsky, Eds. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society, 2008,
p. 1453.
[12]
M. Toyota, M. Kitajima, and H. Shimada, “Structured Meme Theory:
How is informational inheritance maintained?” in Proceedings of the
30th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, B. C. Love,
K. McRae, and V. M. Sloutsky, Eds.
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society, 2008, p. 2288.
[13]
I. Prigogine and I. Stengers, Order Out of Chaos. William Heinemann,
8 1984.
[14]
J. L. McClelland, D. E. Rumelhart, and P. R. Group, Parallel Distributed
Processing: Explorations in the Microstructure of Cognition: Psycho-
logical and Biological Models (A Bradford Book).
The MIT Press, 7
1987.
[15]
D. Morris, The nature of happiness.
London: Little Books Ltd., 2006.
[16]
M. Kitajima and M. Toyota, “Four Processing Modes of in situ Human
Behavior,” in Biologically Inspired Cognitive Architectures 2011 -
Proceedings of the Second Annual Meeting of the BICA Society,
A. V. Samsonovich and K. R. J´ohannsd´ottir, Eds.
Amsterdam, The
Netherlands: IOS Press, 2011, pp. 194–199.
[17]
A. Newell, Uniﬁed Theories of Cognition (The William James Lectures,
1987).
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1990, page 122,
Fig. 3-3.
[18]
C. Koch and N. Tsuchiya, “Attention and consciousness: two distinct
brain processes,” Trends in Cognitive Sciences, vol. 11, no. 1, 2007,
pp. 16 – 22.
[19]
N. Tsuchiya and R. Adolphs, “Emotion and consciousness,” Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, vol. 11, no. 4, 2007, pp. 158 – 167.
[20]
J. A. Lambie and A. J. Marcel, “Consciousness and the varieties of
emotion experience: A theoretical framework,” Psychological Review,
vol. 109, 2002, pp. 219–259.
[21]
A. Damasio, Feeling of What Happens: Body and Emotion in the
Making of Consciousness.
Orlando, FL: Houghton Mifﬂin Harcourt,
1999.
[22]
M. Kitajima and M. Toyota, “Topological Considerations of Memory
Structure,” in Procedia Computer Science, BICA 2014. 5th Annual
International Conference on Biologically Inspired Cognitive Architec-
tures, vol. 99, 2014, pp. 326–331.
[23]
——, “The Role of Memory in MHP/RT: Organization, Function
and Operation,” in Proceedings of ICCM 2012: 11th International
Conference on Cognitive Modeling, 2012, pp. 291–296.
[24]
L. W. Swanson, Brain Architecture.
Oxford University Press, 2011.
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

