Learning Cognitive Human Navigation Behaviors
for Indoor Mobile Robot Navigation
Luz Abril Torres-M´endez and Roberto Cervantes-Jacobo
Robotics and Advanced Manufacturing Group, Cinvestav Saltillo
Carr. Saltillo-Monterrey Km. 13, Ramos Arizpe, Coah, 25900, Mexico
E-mails: abril.torres@cinvestav.edu.mx; bortreo@gmail.com
Abstract—We present a framework to transfer cognitive
human navigation behaviors to an artiﬁcial agent so it can
generate route directions similar to those created by humans.
Our method is based on a spatial conceptual map that
attempts to emulate the cognitive process carried on by living
beings during the navigation process. This conceptual map is
modeled as a three-level of interconnected graphs to simulate
human spatial reasoning. We based some of our ideas of
spatial reasoning on qualitative deﬁnitions of neighborhood,
distance and orientation. The ﬁrst level of the conceptual model
contains the approximated metric of the environment and the
physical obstacles that inﬂuence the navigation trajectory. In
the second level, we deﬁne the abstract characteristics that give
information about the ambient, such as the areas of inﬂuence
and key features. Finally, in the third level, the navigation route
obtained from the ﬁrst two levels is stored. The visual and
cognitive skills of each person in the experiments are captured
in terms of the space-time perception while navigating. Our
experimental results demonstrate that the inference of the route
directions can be easily obtained and transferred to an agent
from this spatial conceptual map.
Keywords-human navigation; cognitive conceptual maps.
I. INTRODUCTION
Navigation is generally deﬁned as the process of monitor-
ing and controlling the movement of an agent (i.e., a vehicle,
person or animal) from one place to another towards a goal.
To be able to navigate, the agent has to have the capability
of moving in the space and determine if the goal has been
reached or not. The study of navigation of living beings
has a long history in neuroscience [1], [2], [3], [4], [5].
The discoveries found in the last ﬁfty years have provided a
physiological grounding related to the type of representation
of spatial locations in our brain. In order to efﬁciently
achieve the navigation task, some information about the
environment is required. In robotics, particularly in indoor
robotic navigation, this knowledge is commonly represented
by a metric map containing distances between walls, doors,
objects, corners, etc. However, to obtain precise metric
information may result in a cumbersome task. Moreover, for
the particular case of human navigation, a metric map seems
not to be a natural way to navigate as humans are not good
on measuring exact distances from one point to another nor
in memorizing them to build an internal map of that kind.
In other words, the notion of navigation does not imply that
the current position of the agent must be exactly known.
Thus, for human navigation, the cognitive process carried
on does not require a precise metric. This cognitive process
is mainly based on the relationships we build between
the information captured from the environment through
our senses (i.e., visual and geometric information) and the
conceptual information based on previous knowledge about
the functional characteristics of the environment. The last
is obtained according to the experience of having navigated
before that environment or similar ones.
When walking through an environment, we all have
experienced the need to perceive our spatial sense, also
known as spatial awareness or proximity sense, that is, to
know the dimensions our body occupies with respect to the
empty space of the environment in which we can walk in.
Because of this spatial sense, we are able to get a clearer
perception of how much we have moved forward, related
to where we were, and associate it to what we see next.
This type of perception could be represented in a topological
map, which is another representation that is commonly used
in robotics. A topological map is a graph of connected
landmarks that exist in the environment. However, as we will
see in this research work, the whole process of navigation is
so complex, that having just a topological or a metric map
is not enough to achieve the task efﬁciently.
In our daily life, humans efﬁciently achieve a variety
of skill-motor tasks. Yet today, it is not well understood
the learning processes carried on in our brains that allow
us to navigate a familiar environment. More intriguing is
to understand how we manage to navigate unfamiliar or
even not-seen-before environments – of course, those not-
seen-before environments need to fulﬁll some requirements
regarding its geometric structure and physical laws in order
to be able to navigate them. However, from research done
in behavior and neural sciences [7], [9], [10], [11], we know
that the learning process in navigation involves storage of
the learned skills for future reference. For the case of human
navigation, we store in our memory navigation skills to
which our brain automatically assigns weights according
to how well or bad the task were carried on. Then, our
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

brain and memory connections are updated accordingly,
so that both types of skills (“good” and “bad” ones) are
kept as experiences in order to generate ﬂexible behavioral
responses when similar situations are encountered.
In nature, one of the most ubiquitous form of learning
skills is by imitation. In general, imitation involves the
interaction of perception, memory, and motor control. There
is an inherent transference of knowledge as the brain is
capable of building networks to recreate actions that have
even never executed before. It has been demonstrated that
humans build mental images to facilitate the execution of
tasks. For the case of navigation, humans build navigation
blocks from the mental representation of the environment,
generating what it is known as cognitive maps.
We have managed to transfer those skills, behaviors or
even experiences, to other humans to facilitate their learning
process. However, we still have some difﬁculties on teaching
or transferring those skills to artiﬁcial agents. The reasons
for this are not simple but they could be posited as being
primarily twofold. One is because we do not completely
understand how our brain builds its own reasoning and type
of representations. And two, because we are trying to teach
a task that can be developed by complex systems to a simple
one. In other words, the computer on a robotic system would
need to entirely have the functionality that a human’s brain
has in order to truly understand a concept that is being
taught. This is still an open problem in artiﬁcial intelligence,
although big advances has been made.
The research question we are interested to answer in this
work is: how do we transfer navigation skills to a mobile
robot such that it can generate route directions similar to
those created by humans? To answer that question, we
need to construct a model capable of emulating the human
perception over a navigable environment. This model must
have a good understanding of the functional properties of
the space that can be used while the robot is navigating.
We based our method on a spatial conceptual map to
simulate human spatial reasoning. A spatial conceptual map
is a computerized analogy of the mental maps generated
by humans. There is not a standardized way to build a
conceptual map of a given environment. However, some
information such as the objects and its area of inﬂuence,
the notion of neighborhood, orientation and distance, can
be used as they are part of the process of spatial reasoning.
Then, this spatial conceptual map can be used by the mobile
robot to navigate the environment.
The outline of this paper is as follows. Section II describes
the human behaviours in the navigation process. In Section
III, we mention the relevant aspects in robotic navigation.
Section IV presents in detail the components for creating the
spatial conceptual map we propose. Some simulation results
are shown in Section V. Finally, we give some conclusions
and future work in Section VI.
II. HUMAN BASIC NAVIGATION BEHAVIORS
It has been proved that mental imagery is critical for
human navigation. However, it remains unclear how this
mental representation of the environment, namely a cognitive
map, is built related to speciﬁc orientation strategies [12],
[13]. We gather information by using our sensorial organs
and then we build a mental image of the external world. The
unconscious conception of our bodies in the space that helps
us to interact with our surroundings is called proprioception.
We need to coordinate our movements in order to know
where our body is and what it is doing. This skill has been
reﬁned through our lives thanks to a system of constant
feedback which has been developed since we were inside
our mother’s womb. The sensors give us constant feedback
so the movements can be reﬁned until reaching perfection.
Each person may adopt alternative strategies while moving
along the same well-known route, but it is widely accepted
that cognitive maps are a key element for orientation since
any target can be reached from any place in the environment.
Thus the ability to create a cognitive map is related to the
particular ability of performing mental rotations of simple
geometric shapes, and the ability to visualizing how we
move on a map. In order to navigate successfully in both
known and unknown environments, individuals need the
ability to become familiar and orient in the environment, this
is known as topographical orientation [14]. This complex
task requires many cognitive skills such as visual perception,
memory, attention, and decision-making techniques [15],
[16], being mental imagery skills one of the most important
for orienting within the environment [15], [3].
When navigating through an indoor environment, humans,
contrary to animals, have the understanding of functional
and spatial properties of the environment, while interacting
safely with it. We make use of labels to share common
concepts like the existence of corridors, corners, speciﬁc
furniture, areas, etc. These concepts are not only labels but
semantic expressions that are related to a complete object
or to an objective situation. For example, the label ”living
room” generally is related to a place that has a particular
structure and contains objects (furniture) such as coach,
center table, tv, etc. Thus, representing the space as ”seeing”
by humans requires to take into account the way in which
we make reference to entities in the space through language.
In general, an artiﬁcial agent can use different type of
strategies to go from one place to another. However, if these
strategies are to be used every time without storing them
in a map, it has to learn everything again and again, even
if some distances have been previously covered. To this
end, the topological information and the navigation based on
searching use spatial memory that does not depend of the
goal and can be used for route planning independently of the
ﬁnal goal. The memory that does not depend of the ﬁnal goal
is called cognitive map [10] in which the knowledge about
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

the routes is a form of preprocessed memory. From the ﬁeld
of cognitive psychology and the experimental results in [17],
the notion of object’s inﬂuence area was born. This notion
consists on the idea that people mentally build an “subjective
inﬂuence area” that surrounds the objects in the environment
to be navigated in order to talk about their relative position,
distance and orientation. According to this, the inﬂuence
area is an abstraction of the way objects inﬂuence in the
vision and perception of people. It allows to reason in a
context, evaluate quantitative measures and qualify positions
and distances between objects. It also allows to reason in a
qualitative manner about space.
III. ROBOTIC NAVIGATION
In order to build internal representations of the environ-
ment, robots use its sensors. The sensors can capture infor-
mation of the objects in the environment that can be used to
position the robot in it or to integrate the path the robot has
navigated. For a robot, to use an internal representation of
the space distribution for navigation, can result in a complex
task. As today, there exist several localization systems in
robotics that use metric and/or topological maps as internal
representations. A metric map considers the space in two
dimensions in which the objects are localized with precise
coordinates. Metric maps can be created independently to the
robot, with a high level of precision according to the type
of sensors used. A metric map facilitates the operation of
robots. However, to create a metric map to be used by a robot
can be a cumbersome task. The time for the acquisition and
processing of information could be very high as the robot
needs to take measurements constantly of the environment
while navigating. A topological map considers the relation-
ships between places and objects. The map is represented as
a graph in which the nodes correspond to places/objects and
the edges could represent directions or path convenience.
Contrary to the metric maps, a topological map does not
require models based on precise range measurements, and
this is an important advantage upon localizing the robot.
However, the precision of using a topological map is not
high. A common solution is to use both, a metric and a
topological map, in order to get better robot’s pose estimates
[18], [19].
There exist a vast amount of research work related to nav-
igation systems for indoor and outdoor robots (for a survey
that highlights the more interesting works see DeSouza and
Avinash [20]). It is clear that in order to navigate we need
perceptual and metrical information from the environment.
In robotics, the most common sensors are cameras and laser
range ﬁnders to obtain visual and geometric information, re-
spectively. However, to incorporate conceptual and cognitive
knowledge about the environment into an internal map for
navigation purposes is not a trivial task. This knowledge, in
terms of geometry of space, perceptual and other metrical
information transmitted by the human-like perception of the
world needs a better understanding of the inherent spatial
and functional properties, while still being able to safely
navigate in it. As such, there has been proposed in the
literature a variety of ways to represent this knowledge
into maps (metric, topological and conceptual maps) to be
used by a mobile robot for self-localization and navigation
tasks. Alternatives to map-based navigation strategies are
biologically inspired navigation methods (behavior-based)
that imitate navigational cues observed in animals. In this
research work we adopt a hybrid approach that combines
the two approaches, that is, we construct a map based
on cognitive-behavioral knowledge as well as conceptual
knowledge obtained directly from human while navigating
an indoor environment.
IV. CREATING THE SPATIAL CONCEPTUAL MAP
Humans generate mental images that represent the spatial
knowledge of the area they are navigating. These mental
images are then processed and analyzed in order to generate
a cognitive map. Figure 1 shows the navigation process as
a comparison between humans and artiﬁcial systems and
the components involved in the construction of a spatial
conceptual map as an analogy of the human cognitive map.
Figure 1.
A comparison of the navigation process carried on by humans
and artiﬁcial agents. The arrows indicate the ﬂow of information.
A cognitive map can function as a navigation problem
solver to ﬁnd routes, relative positions, as well as to describe
the location of the subject in a given moment. Thus, the
cognitive map is a non-observable physical structure of in-
formation that represents the spatial knowledge. The learning
process is based on the assimilation of what was captured
by our senses into a cognitive map, and the problem solution
is a process that extracts the answers to particular questions
from the cognitive map. The need of analyzing, processing
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

and using the information in a cognitive map build by a
human is related to the need of generate an analogous
representation that allows to manipulate the information
using computer algorithms in robotics applications. This
representation is known as spatial conceptual map. There
exist some work in the literature that use a computerized
representation of the cognitive maps for navigation. For
example, Moulin and Kettani [17] create a spatial conceptual
map to integrate information such as key features in the
environment, the free navigable space, route deﬁnition and
the categorization of the free space elements according to
their relationship with the surrounding objects, etc.
There is not an standardized way to build a conceptual
map of a given environment. A spatial conceptual map
basically must contain representations of salient objects and
key features in the environment, virtual connections between
the objects in space as well as knowledge of free space to
navigate. The key features and salient objects are used by
people as landmarks to identify elements or regions in the
environment through a deﬁned route in the free space. A
spatial conceptual map can also contain information about
the area of inﬂuence of the objects in the environment.
The area of inﬂuence is an abstraction of how objects are
perceived by people, and it greatly depends on the objects
features. It helps in the estimation of the relative positions,
distances and orientations of the objects. Also, according
to these researchers, the area of inﬂuence allows people to
perform qualitative reasoning about space.
Our spatial conceptual map uses the elements mentioned
above together with the concepts of neighborhood, area of
inﬂuence and distance.
It is easy to see that, for navigation, the main goal is to
have a good representation of the elements of free space in
the conceptual map and an easy way to detect them. As
in [17], we deﬁne two different sets to identify the free
space. The ﬁrst set embraces the salient objects and key
characteristics in the environment, whose area of inﬂuence
is intersected by an element of free space. This means that
the element of free space is a neighbor of diverse objects
that can be used as reference in the navigation process. The
second set includes all elements of free space that intersect
with other elements of free space.
The conceptual map we propose in this work seeks to
integrate the information that people use to navigate a route
in a given environment. We collect this information through
an experiment in which a group of persons were asked
to cover a given route in a large-scale man-made indoor
environment. The main difference with the work presented in
[17] is that all elements and routes are deﬁned directly by the
persons navigating the environment. Therefore, the elements
of free space are deﬁned through the connectivity between
nodes, their vicinity with relevant objects or features in
the environment. And, it is through the sequence of the
connected nodes that the route navigated by each person is
represented. The following section describes the experiments
we carried on to build the conceptual map.
A. Description of the experiments
We have designed an experiment that allow us ﬁrst, to un-
derstand the way humans perceive their surroundings when
successfully navigate in an indoor man-made environment
and second, to register in a natural way, relevant information
used by people in navigation tasks. The experiment consisted
in a set of 15 navigation tests, where ﬁve people participate.
The environment was a local shopping centre which was
unknown to the people in this experiment. In order to select
the route to use in the navigation tests, another person were
asked to walk through the environment for ﬁve minutes with-
out a deﬁned route and then select one. The route selected
and the environment is depicted in Figure 2. Then, we asked
to each person to cover a given route in the environment,
following the same route three times. At the end of each
route, they were asked to close their eyes to focus on the
mental image they have from the portion of the environment
navigated and then generate a pictorial representation of it.
Before, they were instructed to include as much information
as possible related to key features, physical objects, free
space, abstract areas conformed by physical objects. In
addition, they were asked to include in their drawings a
rough idea of metric and topological data, as an option. Also,
we interviewed each participant asking what were the more
relevant characteristics in which they think they focused on
in order to navigate the shopping centre and what was the
dominant thought during the route. It is important to note
that in a spatial conceptual map, the information is not just
limited to the information above listed, and in case we can
have access to more information, this can be integrated to
reinforce the environment description and thus facilitate the
navigation task.
Figure 2.
A sketch of the environment navigated in the experiments.
Figure 3 shows a diagram of the experiment indicating the
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

route navigated by the ﬁve participants. All gathered infor-
mation was used in the spatial conceptual map construction.
Figure 3.
Diagram of the experiment. Five people participate in the
navigation tests. The information gathered was used for building the Spatial
Conceptual Map.
B. Representating the spatial conceptual map
From the information obtained by the ﬁve people through
the navigation tests we can conform two types of maps: a
metric map containing information about distances that de-
ﬁne the location of objects; and a topological map containing
the existing relationships (mainly vicinity and connectivity)
between the present entities in the space to navigate, such
as objects, areas or free space units. As mentioned before,
the metric information is obtained in an approximately as
people indicate roughly the distances between visualized
objects and the traveled length in each segment of the
route navigated. This information makes possible to colocate
objects in a map and locate from a common referential
frame. However, this information only allows knowing the
approximated position of the object within the environment,
thus, to make the navigation possible for a robotic system, is
necessary to consider an average intrinsic referential of the
routes navigated by the ﬁve subjects that, together with the
average extrinsic referential (which is ﬁxed and common
among objects) in the environment, allows a continuous
update of the robot pose, thus making possible the process
of route integration, which, as it was mentioned is one of
the main elements in the navigation process.
The metric and topological maps that conform the spatial
conceptual map (SCM) are shown in Figure 4. These maps
are integrated in order to deﬁne the navigation routes, in
which the identiﬁcation of the relevant objects is crucial. An
important characteristic of the SCM is that all information
in it comes from the participants in the navigation tests.
Therefore, it will totally depend on the way the participants
perceive the environment, regarding the key features in the
navigation process, the salient objects used as reference, or
the abstract areas conformed by physical objects (also used
as reference) together with the concepts of area of inﬂuence,
orientation, and neighborhood.
In the SCM, each relevant object has a set of proper-
ties, one is its neighborhood (see Figure 5). We deﬁne
the neighborhood of an object in terms of orientation and
approximated distance between its neighbors. In the SCM,
each physical object must have at least one neighboring
Figure 4.
Graphic representation of the integration of metric and
topological information. The shaded nodes represent key characteristics in
the environment identiﬁed by the participants in the navigation tests. It is
show how a locality can be deﬁned as a function of nearby objects.
Figure 5. The neighborhood property. The right side shows the topological
relationship that a physical object has with its neighbors. The left side
shows a metric map generated from the neighborhood information deﬁned
in distances and relative orientations between an object and its neighbors.
object (either physical or abstract). This generates in the
SCM a strong interrelated structure that complement the
approximated metric with the local blocks of qualitative rela-
tive information between each of the objects. Thus allowing,
by identifying one or more objects in a locality, the inference
of an approximate relative robot position to the local objects,
and an absolute robot position to the common extrinsic
referential for each of the entities in the environment.
The knowledge of the relative and absolute robot position
together with the real-time identiﬁcation of key features in
the environment, makes possible the navigation process and
to correct any errors present in the estimation due to the
approximated metric and/or the robot’s odometry.
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Another important property of the SCM, which allows the
existence of one of the three levels in the map, is the area
to which an object belongs. We call this the membership
property, and consists in wrapping all objects with common
characteristics (see Figure 6).
Figure 6.
The membership property. The ﬁgure shows a portion of the
graphical representation of the SCM. It can be identiﬁed two set of objects
(labeled nodes from A to H and from I to N, in alphabetically order) which
have similar characteristics and therefore form part of the same area.
Figure 7.
The connectivity property. The left side of the ﬁgure shows a
portion of the SCM. It can be identiﬁed three nodes of free space. The
right side shows the topological relationship of the connectivity among the
nodes. It can be seen that it is possible to go from node “A” to node “C”
going through “B”.
By encapsulating common objects in areas, we strength
the existing neighborhood interrelations among them by
facilitating the manipulation of information in the SCM.
Additionally, the recognition process is simpler because we
only need to recognize only one or two objects and then
know in which area is the robot. Thus, the robot, similar to
humans, is navigating using complete areas as reference.
The last property is the connectivity property and is used
to manipulate the free space in the SCM. The free space
is considered as a set of points in the space, and it is
free of obstacles, thus is navigable. This property allows
that the free space can be represented as a graph, where
each of the nodes represents a point in the free space. The
connectivity property dictates if it is possible to go from
node “A” to node “C” (see Figure 7). Thus, by knowing
the individual connections of each of the nodes conforming
the free space, it is possible to generate a network that
englobes all nodes and to know if a given route is possible
or not. Each of the properties mentioned above facilitate the
access and manipulation of the information in the SCM.
Moreover, as these properties allow that the elements in
different SCMs of the same environment can related among
them, we can identify another property, which integrates
all information in one SCM. We call this the interrelation
property. This property allows the existence of the multilevel
structure in the SCM, in which there can be a direct or
indirect interrelation between each of the elements in the
same level or in different levels. We explain in detail the
interrelation between three levels conforming our SCM in
the next section.
C. The multi-level structure of our SCM
The three levels of the SCM are structured to follow a
hierarchy. The physical objects conform the basic (bottom)
level. Once the objects are classiﬁed according to their
characteristics the next (middle) level is generated, that is,
each area is deﬁned exclusively by their objects in it, giving
origin to the ﬁrst interrelation: physical objects with areas.
Then, the main (top) level contains all the nodes of free
space. These nodes are referenced to nearby physical objects
such that the deﬁnition of the location of each free space
unit is dictated directly by the referenced physical object,
and indirectly by the area that object belongs to; thus giving
origin to a direct interrelation of physical objects with free
space and an indirect one of free space with areas. These
interrelations allow to integrate the whole information in
only one SCM (see Figure 8).
It is important to note that each level in the SCM is con-
formed by a set of individual and unrepeatable elements of
similar hierarchy. Moreover, each node’s structure has all the
necessary information to establish the existing interrelations
with the nodes of the same or different levels of the SCM.
The level of physical objects is integrated by the existing
objects in the navigation space indicated as key elements.
These objects can be obstacles or those considered as
reference to facilitate the navigation process. Each node
representing a physical object contains information such
as an identiﬁcation label, nominal label, area, dimensions,
neighbors and its orientation w.r.t. to the object.
The area level has the objective of complementing the
level of physical objects. The elements that conform this
level are of abstract nature and are based on the membership
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Figure 8.
The multi-level structure of the Spatial Conceptual Map.
property that has the level of physical objects. Each of
these elements represent a portion of the space, within the
environment, that is distinguished by containing physical
objects of afﬁne characteristics. The area nodes are generated
by the SCM from the level of physical objects. These
nodes, similar to the objects nodes, contain information of
identiﬁcation, physical objects in the area, a color associated
to the area, etc.
Finally, the free space level has the objective of repre-
senting the space in the environment where a subject can
navigate. Within the SCM, the free space is considered as
a set of points in the free space of obstacles and navigable.
Those points in the space are the elemental units of free
space. Similarly, the free space elements are represented by
nodes containing relevant information to the point in the
space represented. This information allows registering the
position in space, the connectivity with other free space
elements and its neighborhood with other nearby physical
objects. For our SCM we consider two cases: a) the element
of free space is a point in the route, and b) the element of
free space is a cross between ways (see Figure 9).
Figure 9.
Types of free space in our SCM and its respective objects using
as reference.
Thanks to the multilevel structure integrated in an unique
SCM, it is possible to have access to all the information
contained in the map from any of its elements. This is due
to the existing direct or indirect relationships between the
registered elements.
D. Mobile robot navigation: determining the navigation
routes
In order to determine a navigation route in a spatial
conceptual map, we need to identify the elements of free
space and construct a sequence of them. The main topo-
logical property of the elements of free space is their
adjacency. Each of these elements is deﬁned according to
their neighbors (i.e., objects, features or elements of free
space) and assigned an unique identiﬁcation label (αi). The
fragmentation of paths in elements of free space allows
deﬁning all possible displacements from any element by
using the connectivity relationship between elements. In our
case, all the routes in the conceptual map are deﬁned by
the persons that navigate previously the environment. It is
through the sequence of connected nodes that the route
navigated by a person is represented. In a real application,
where a mobile robot is navigating the environment using
a SCM, the robot pose is estimated from the information
gathered through its sensors. Then, the navigation route will
be determined by matching what the robot “sees” to what
is already registered in the SCM. Previous to the matching
process there exist an inherent recognition process which
in this work is assumed to be ideal. Figure 10 shows the
recognition stage. Given that the nodes of free space in
the SCM are referenced by nearby physical objects (salient
objects) in the environment, which are already registered
in the SCM, it is possible to detect on which free space
unit the robot is is in a given moment as a function of
the recognized objects. However, as this pose estimation
could have some errors due to the dimensions of the free
space units, we need to compensate these errors by using
the robot’s odometry as well. In robotics, it is known
that using just the odometers information could result in a
high accumulation of errors if long distances are navigated
without any other feedback. However, in our case, we only
rely on the odometers in very short distances, i.e., along one
unit of free space. There will be cases where the detected
key features do not correspond to the estimated ones, and
therefore a reorientation or relocation of the robot must be
done by estimating the free space unit in the SCM that have
similar key features. This free space unit is then assigned as
the new topologic position for the robot. Figure 11 shows
an example of this reorientation stage.
Figure 12 is the ﬁnal graphical representation of the
physical objects registered after the total set of navigation
trials. We can conclude that physical objects of greater
dimensions tend to be the most relevant for navigation. In
relation to the approximated metric of the environment, this
was obtained by computing the average of the total number
of steps of each subject. We observed that this metric is
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Figure 10.
The recognition stage of the environment.
Figure 11.
Reorientation.
consistent between the six people since the proportion at
each section with respect to the complete route, for the three
navigation trials, is similar and with low standard deviation.
Therefore, it can be considered that the approximated metric
is good enough since it is also congruent with the data
obtained during the navigation trials. Table I shows the
average steps for each section for the three navigation trials.
Table I
THE AVERAGE STEPS AS THE APPROXIMATED METRIC FOR EACH
SECTION IN THE ROUTE NAVIGATION.
Average of steps
Section 1
64.00
Section 2
85.00
Section 3
49.67
Section 4
112.00
Section 5
56.00
Total in route
366.00
V. SIMULATION RESULTS
At this point, from any physical man-made indoor en-
vironment, our model is validated through simulation. We
use the ﬁnal graphical representation, which englobes the
gathered information of the 15 navigation tests carried on in
Figure 12. Final graphical representation of the navigation trials. The color
of objects (boxes) indicate if they were seen only by 1 person (yellow), 2
(blue), 3 (red), 4 (green), or all subjects (brown).
the shopping centre. We simulate the cinematics of a point
robot in a bidimensional space, without considering changes
in orientation. This in order to simplify the robot’s cinematic
model. Thus, the robot pose in the space is deﬁned by:
q(t) = (x(t), y(t)),
(1)
where q(t) is the robot pose at time t, x(t) and y(t) are the
coordinates of the robot in the axis X and Y , respectively.
The robot’s pose at time i is given by:
qi = (xi, yi).
(2)
The change of the robot’s pose in a time interval ∆ti, can
be calculated as:
∆ti = ti − ti−1, ∆qi = qi − qi−1.
(3)
From the above equations, we can compute the velocity
of the point robot for the time interval ∆ti by:
vi = ∆qi
∆ti
,
(4)
For the simulation, the physical objects considered in the
map (Figure 13) are colored according to their corresponding
area. The free space is deﬁned by the route established
in the navigation tests. As it is assumed that the visual
recognition of the relevant characteristics in the environment
is always correct, the integration of the route navigated in
our simulation is free of errors. However, what it is relevant
to note here is the fact that the model works by using as a
reference only an approximated metric of the environment
and the topological information of the spatial conceptual
map. Moreover, in a real application, following the route
indicated would strongly depend on the correct recognition
of the key characteristics in the environment described in
the spatial conceptual map.
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Figure 13.
Graphical representation of the route navigation for the
simulation. The blue line on the free space is the route.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Mobile robot navigation is generally based only on the
information acquired by the robot’s sensors. However, we
have observed that sensors have great limitations in terms
of coverage capabilities, quality in the measurements and
also factors such as elevated acquisition times and costs.
Current research trends are being focused on the study
of the cognitive behaviors of humans navigation and how
conceptual maps are created.
In general, humans do not have exact knowledge of the
metric of the environment they navigate. They navigate by
constructing a topological hierarchy of the free space accord-
ing to speciﬁc characteristics observed in the environment
that are more relevant than others.
In this work, we have created a model based in a concep-
tual map that considers human navigation behaviors in close
indoor environments. Our preliminary results have shown
that this map can be used by a mobile robot to facilitate
its navigation and eliminate the need of using sensors for
capturing exact metric information of the environment. The
information contained in the conceptual map is enough to
estimate the robot pose and orientation if visual landmarks
are correctly matched.
Future work involves the implementation of our spatial
conceptual model in a real robotic platform. For this, it is
necessary to integrate a robust recognition model of the key
visual features.
VII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors gratefully acknowledge to CONACYT for
funding this project.
REFERENCES
[1] R.G. Golledge and G. Zannaras, “Cognitive Approaches to
the Analysis of Human Spatial Behaviour”, Environmental
Cognition, pp. 59–94, 1973.
[2] M. J. Farah, “The Handbook of Neuropsychology”, Disorders
of visual behavior. F. Boller, J. Grafman, eds., Elsevier,
Amsterdam, pp. 395–413, 1989.
[3] M. Riddoch, G. Humphreys, “Neuropsychology of visual
perception”. Hillsdale: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, pp. 79–
103, 1989.
[4] R.G. Golledge, “Do People Understand Spatial Concepts: The
Case of First-Order Primitives”, Theories of Spatio-Temporal
Reasoning in Geographic Space, pp. 1–21, 1992.
[5] A. D. Redish and D. S. Touretzky, “Cognitive Maps Beyond
the Hippocampus”, Hippocampus 7, pp. 15–35, 1997.
[6] M. Denis, “Image et Cognition”, 1989.
[7] S. Gopal, R. L. Klatzky, T. R. Smith, “Navigator: A Psycho-
logically Based Model of Environmental Learning Through
Navigation”, Journal of Environmental Psychology 9, pp.
309-331, 1989.
[8] P. Gould and R. White, “Mental Maps”, 1974.
[9] D. Hern´andez, “Qualitative Representation of Spatial Know-
ledge”, 1994.
[10] J. O’Keefe, L. Nadel, “The hippocampus as a cognitive map”,
Oxford: Clarendon, 1978.
[11] B. J. Kuipers, “Modeling Spatial Knowledge”, Cognitive
Science 2, pp. 129-153, 1978.
[12] L. Palermo, G. Iaria and C. Guariglia, “Mental Imagery Skills
and Topographical Orientation in Humans: A Correlation
Study”, Behavioral Brain Research 192, pp. 248-253, 2008.
[13] A. D. Ekstrom, et al., “Cellular Networks underlying Human
Spatial Navigation”, Nature 425, pp. 184-188, 2003.
[14] E. A. Maguire, T. Burke, J. Phillips, H. Staunton. “Topo-
graphical Disorientation following Unilateral Temporal Lobe
Lesions in Humans”. Neuropsychology 34, pp. 993-1001,
1996.
[15] R. Brunsdon, L. Nickels, M. Coltheart, “Topographical Dis-
orientation: Towards an Integrated Framework for Assess-
ment”, Neuropsycholy Rehabilitation 17, pp. 3452, 2007.
[16] A. D. Reddish, “Beyond the Cognitive Map from Place Cells
to Episodic Memory”, London: MIT Press, 1999.
[17] B. Moulin and D. Keitani, “Route Generation and Description
using the Notions of Object’s Inﬂuence Area and Spatial
Conceptual Map”, Spatial Cognition and Computation 1, pp.
227-259, 1999.
[18] V. Vanessa Hafner, Learning Places in Newly Explored En-
vironments, 2000.
[19] H. Zender, O. Mart´ınez Mozos, P. Jenselt, G.-J.M. Kruijff,
W. Burgard, “Conceptual Spatial Representations for Indoor
Mobile Robots”, Robotics and Autonomous Systems 56, pp.
493-502, 2008.
[20] G. N. DeSouza and A. C. Kak, “Vision for Mobile Robot
Navigation: A Survey”, IEEE Trans. on PAMI 24(2), pp. 237-
267, 2002.
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

