Enrichment of Cartographic Maps with the Elements of Spatial Cognition 
Farid Karimipour, Ali Khazravi 
Department of Surveying and Geomatics Engineering, College of Engineering, University of Tehran 
Tehran, Iran 
e-mail: {fkarimipr, khazravi}@ut.ac.ir 
 
 
Abstract—Human activities are embedded in the space. People 
need to know where they are and how they can arrive to their 
destination. They may use their spatial cognition in familiar 
space, or navigation aids (e.g., cartographic maps and satellite 
navigation systems) in unfamiliar areas for positioning and 
wayfinding purposes. Today, satellite navigation systems are 
widely used by even non-expert users. Dealing with 
cartographic maps, however, need prior knowledge and 
experience on map reading as well as enough spatial cognition. 
Enriching cartographic maps with the elements of spatial 
cognition could help to navigate more easily in unfamiliar 
environments. This paper represents the result of a research to 
enrich cartographic maps with features used by pedestrians for 
navigation in urban areas.  
Keywords-Spatial cognition; Cartographic maps; Cognitive 
map; Urban navigation; Pedestrian navigation 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Human activities are embedded in the space. People need 
to know where they are and how they can arrive to their 
destination. This so-called wayfinding is a directed process to 
move from a source to a given destination through 
intermediate path(s) [1]. People may use their spatial 
cognition in familiar space, or navigation aids (e.g., 
cartographic maps and satellite navigation systems) in 
unfamiliar areas for positioning and wayfinding purposes. 
Today, satellite navigation systems are widely used by even 
non-expert users. Dealing with cartographic maps, however, 
need prior knowledge and experience on map reading as well 
as enough spatial cognition.  
Suppose you are navigating in a familiar environment 
(for example, you are walking from your home to the 
university). In this case, you will navigate through the path 
without paying attentions to the name of the streets, 
roundabouts, etc.; instead your spatial cognition is used to 
get oriented in the environment based on existing familiar 
features in the way (e.g., landmarks). On the other hand, 
suppose you are in an unfamiliar city for a conference and 
you are walking from hotel to the conference venue. In this 
case, you use a cartographic map and the only connection 
between the environment and the map is the name of the 
streets, roundabouts, etc. as well as their relations. However, 
there are different distinguished features in the way that 
could have helped you for an easier navigation. More clearly, 
your map shows that you have to walk straight until you 
reach the street “A”. Then, you walk and look at the name of 
the streets until finding the street “A”. However, a big blue 
building located at the corner of the street “A” could have 
been a better indicator for you to find the street even before 
you reach the street and see the street name plate. 
A shortcoming of cartographic maps is that they are 
limited to a top view representation of the space [2]. 
Therefore, they only provide metric information and 
topological relations, but do not contain any spatial 
categorical knowledge (e.g., landmarks), which is the basis 
of human spatial cognition.  
Spatial cognition has been extensively studied in 
psychological and geographical research. Kevin lynch 
investigate the spatial cognition and its relation with urban 
design [3]. He studied behavior of people in wayfinding and 
environment recognition in three cities with different 
textures. The elements of cognitive maps introduced in his 
book are the main elements for cartographic map enrichment 
proposed in this paper. 
A recent research in the field of pedestrian navigation 
was done by Giasbauer and Frank [2], who modeled a 
pedestrian navigation system for urban areas. There are 
many studies on spatial cognition in psychology including 
[1, 4, 5, 6, 7]. 
This paper suggests enrichment of cartographic maps 
with the elements of spatial cognition to improve their value 
for navigation in unfamiliar environments. Especially, we 
concentrate on enrichment of cartographic maps with 
features used by pedestrians for navigation in urban areas. 
Section 2 reviews spatial cognition and spatial knowledge in 
more details. In Section 3, the elements of spatial cognition 
are introduced from geographic point of view. Section 4 
contains the results of enriching a cartographic map with the 
elements of spatial cognition introduced in Sections 2 and 3. 
Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper and represents ideas 
for future work. 
II. 
SPATIAL COGNITION AND SPATIAL KNOWLEDGE 
Cognition encompasses acquiring, storing, retrieving and 
manipulation of information used by human, animals or 
intelligence machines. Especially, spatial cognition is 
acquiring, organizing, updating and usage of spatial 
knowledge about the environment [8]. A cognitive system 
may consist of sensing and imagery, learning, reasoning, 
decision making, and problem solving sub-systems [9]. 
A. Cognitive map 
A cognitive map is a mental model of the environment. It 
may contain spatial elements (e.g., path, landmarks, direction 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

and distance) and sensual attributes (e.g., odor, sounds, 
images, and sensations). Cognitive maps do not have an 
integrated structure, but they consist of five distinct spatial 
elements: paths, edges, districts, nodes and landmarks [3]. 
B. Types of spatial knowledge 
Spatial knowledge is divided into metric and categorical 
knowledge. 
Metric 
parameters 
are 
quantitative 
and 
comparable. While, categorical parameters are qualitative 
terms (e.g., left, right, near, far, etc.). Categorical parameters 
are better understood by people. In some cases, however, 
they could be ambiguous.  
In terms of types of the elements and comprehensiveness, 
spatial knowledge is divided into landmark knowledge, route 
knowledge, and survey knowledge. 
1) Landmark knowledge 
In the first step of understanding the environment, people 
pay attention to specific objects or features, called landmarks 
(Fig. 1). Landmark knowledge is an egocentric knowledge 
and is the first element of spatial knowledge [1]. 
 
 
 
 
 
Ferdowsi square 
Tehran University 
Azadi square 
Figure 1.  Landmark knowldege: distinct landmarks 
2) Route knowledge 
Route knowledge is a sequence of familiar or known 
paths, junctions, and landmarks. This kind of spatial 
knowledge is gained gradually, and makes a sequential 
structure by its elements (Fig. 2). This knowledge is used to 
move in routes and paths based on a sequence of landmarks, 
features, junctions, and nodes. Route knowledge is based on 
egocentric view, too [1]. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Route knowledge: sequence of features 
3) Survey knowledge 
Survey (also called configurational) knowledge is more 
comprehensive comparing to the landmark and route 
knowledge. It is built up by integrating all the landmarks, 
routes, and paths as well as the relations among these 
elements into a unified complex network. Survey knowledge 
could be thought of as the view of a bird that flies over a city 
and see everything and their relations at once (Fig. 3). 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Survey knowledge 
III. 
ELEMENTS OF COGNITIVE MAP 
As mentioned, Lynch defines five spatial elements for a 
cognitive map: paths, edges, districts, nodes and landmarks 
[3].  
A. Path 
A path is a linear channel through which the navigators 
move. Streets, sidewalks, railways, and channels are 
examples of paths (Fig. 4). For many people, paths are the 
main elements of their cognitive map, along which other 
spatial elements are organized [3]. Slope is an attribute of a 
path that can be easily reminded and recognized by people, 
but is neglected in current cartographic maps. 
B. Edge 
Edges are linear features that are not considered as a 
path, but are located between two areas. A wall is an 
example of an edge [3]. Hard edges are continuous visible 
features that are passable or impassable. Note that the 
difference between paths and edges depends on the 
navigator, i.e., an object considered a path for a navigator 
could be an edge for others. For instance, a road is a path for 
a car, railway is a path for a train, and both are hard edges for 
a pedestrian. The same applies to passable or impassable 
 
 
Figure 4.  Different paths for different navigators: Buses (left); 
cars,(middle) and pedestarians (right) 
 
Cars 
Pedestrians 
Buses 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

edges. For example, in Fig. 5, the left edge is an impassable 
hard edge for a car, while it is passable for a pedestrian. 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 5.  Examples of edges: (a) An impassable hard edge for a car, but 
passable for a pedestrian; (b) An impassable hard edge for both cars and 
pedesrians 
C. District 
Districts are medium to large scale 2D areas of a city. A 
navigator enters mentally into a district. Each district is 
recognized and identified by some features [3], including the 
building 
structure, 
air 
quality, 
traffic, 
inhabitants’ 
appearance, topography, vegetation cover, etc. Some districts 
have a hard core (visible object), and features around which 
are homogeneous. 
D. Node 
Nodes are strategic and reference points in the city into 
which a navigator mentally enters. A node can be a junction, 
the start or end of a path, the intersection of two paths, or the 
centric points or the core of a district. 
Lynch considers nodes as decision points [3]. The 
number of relations to a node is a key factor to assign an 
importance value to a node: The more relations to a node, the 
more importance value is assigned to it. Furthermore, 
prominence of a node depends on selected paths and 
destination of the navigator. 
E. Landmark 
Landmarks are special type of reference points that 
navigators do not enter into it, but see it in their path  (e.g., 
buildings, mountains, etc.). Different disciplines represent 
different definitions for landmarks, but they all agree on 
visibility, contrast and usability for navigation. Landmarks 
may be used for: 
• 
Selecting a path based on familiar landmarks 
• 
Selecting a path by excluding unfamiliar landmarks 
• 
Approving or denying a selected path 
• 
Orientation 
 
1) Global vs. local landmarks 
Regarding the scale and distance to the viewer, 
landmarks are divided into local and global [10]: 
• 
Local landmarks are only visible from near distances 
and are used for selecting a proper path. These 
landmarks are relatively small and conspicuous. 
Examples are signs and buildings. 
• 
Global Landmark are visible from far distances and 
are used to create an allocentric reference system. A 
global landmark can determine a cardinal direction 
for the reference system. The sun, mountains, and 
sky scraper are instances of global landmarks. 
Global landmarks can be useful on nodes where the 
navigator has to choose a path considering the 
direction to a global landmark. 
 
2) Objective vs. subjective features 
Landmarks may have two types of features; objective and 
subjective features. 
a) Objective features 
Objective features are unequivocal features which do not 
need any interpretation. They are physical attributes of a 
landmark and people with different individual perception 
have the same understanding of them. Objective features are 
so critical for a landmark that an object with no objective 
features cannot be considered as a landmark [1]. 
One of the most important objective feature is contrast 
(Fig. 6). It is the key to recognize and to identify a landmark. 
Objects with high contrast in the environment are naturally 
considered as a landmark [1]. Such contrast could be visual 
(e.g., a red house in a block where other buildings are white), 
or defined based on other senses (e.g., odor, sounds, etc.). 
  
 
 
Figure 6.  Examples of contrast in the environment 
b) Subjective features 
Subjective features rely on individual knowledge or 
memory [1]. Subjective feature are less equivocal, namely 
they mostly depend on the individual perception, which is 
different from a person to another.  
Table 1 illustrates the characteristics of objective and 
subjective features of landmarks. 
TABLE 1. CHARACTERISTICS OF OBJECTIVE AND SUBJECTIVE FEATURES OF 
LANDMARKS [1] 
Objective features 
Subjective features 
Contrast 
Point of reference 
Creation 
Usage 
Visibility 
Remembrance 
Location 
Legend 
Stationary 
Distinguishability 
 
IV. 
IMPLEMENTATION 
This section represents the result of enriching a 
cartographic map with the elements of spatial cognition to 
improve its value for pedestrian navigation purpose. For 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

landmarks, we only concentrate on objective features 
discussed in Section 4. 
The study area is a cartographic map of the Sohrevardi 
area located in the North of Tehran. The transportation 
network of the area was extracted from a digital map (Fig. 
7). Then, the following elements of spatial cognition were 
selected to be added to the map: 
• 
The study area will be highlighted on the map as a 
district. 
• 
The nodes of the area will be added to the map. 
• 
The local and global landmarks that could be used 
for navigation in the area will be added to the map. 
• 
All the streets and highways will be considered as 
edges for pedestrians. 
• 
The sidewalks will be added to the map as paths for 
pedestrians. 
• 
The crosswalks, where pedestrians can cross the 
streets, will be added to the map. 
 
The data needed for the above enrichment were collected on 
the field. As mentioned, we concentrated on objective 
features and unequivocal features of the landmarks, which 
need a little description. The collected data are as follow: 
• 
The objective features of local landmarks, along 
some unequivocal description about their appearance 
• 
Slope of the paths 
• 
The crosswalks and other paths where a pedestrian 
can cross an edge 
• 
Identifying junctions, which have heavy usage, as 
nodes 
• 
Identifying features that are repeated along the 
district 
 
In the enrichment process, landmarks were identified and 
highlighted on the map by a symbol. This information is 
used for a categorical addressing or address matching 
systems. In order to assign descriptive (textual) information 
about the objective features of the landmarks, a distinct 
number were added to the symbols used for each landmark, 
and the related descriptions were provided on the side of the 
map. 
To help the user to find the cardinal direction, a global 
landmark was used. In case of Tehran, the mountain chain 
located in the top north of the city (called Damavand) was 
used. 
Finally, the street slopes were classified into low, 
medium, and high, which were illustrated by different 
symbols and colors (Fig. 8). Furthermore, a symbol was used 
to represent abrupt changes in slope of a path. Then, each 
path on the map was equipped with such slope symbols.  
The final cartographic map enriched with these 
unequivocal elements of spatial cognition is illustrated in 
Fig. 9. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Cartographic maps are one of the most important 
navigation aids. They are mostly a top view representation of 
the space, which provide metric information and topological 
relations. However, maps do not contain any spatial 
categorical knowledge (e.g., landmarks), which is the basis 
of human spatial cognition. In this paper we suggested that 
cartographic maps are enriched with the elements of spatial 
cognition to improve their value for navigation in unfamiliar 
environments.  
 
 
Figure 7.  GIS-Ready Road-Network of studied area 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
Figure 8.  slopes (a): high, (b): medium, (c): low, (d): change in slope 
The result of this study is a cartographic map that is 
enriched with the unequivocal elements of spatial cognition. 
Deploying this map will increase the performance of 
navigation in unfamiliar places. However, the output was 
presented on a paper map, which results in limitations and 
complexities for adding attribute information. The same 
process could be applied on digital maps, which are 
dynamic. It will enable us to provide the user with more 
attributes through filtering the presented information, 
changing the map scale and usage of other media (e.g., 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

voice). Such map will support a spatial information system 
for navigation purposes. 
In order to evaluate the validity and usability of the 
produced map, we are developing an agent-based model that 
deploys the enriched map for navigation. The results will be 
compared with another agent that performs the task using a 
plain cartographic map. 
Adding visibility constraints to landmarks is considered 
as a future work. It helps the user to know where to expect a 
landmark to be seen. Furthermore, by investigating other 
districts, it is possible to compare the results and find more 
specific features to be added to the map. Finally, we are 
working on an automatic cognitive map enrichment system, 
which uses cadastral and land-use data. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] E. Platzer, “Spatial cognition research: The human navigation process 
and its comparability in complex real and virtual environments”, 
PhD. Dissertation, Univerity of Munich, 2005. 
[2] C. Gaisbauer and A.U. Frank. “Wayfinding Model For Pedestrian 
Navigation”. The 11th AGILE International Conference on 
Geographic Information Science, University of Girona, Spain, pp. 21-
29, May 2008. 
[3] K. Lynch, “The Image of the City”, p194,  MIT Press, 1960. 
[4] C. Presson and D. Montello, “Points of reference in spatial cognition: 
Stalking the elusive landmark”, British Journal of Developmental 
psychology, Vol. 6, pp. 378-381.  
[5] K. Schweizer and T. Herrmann, “Sprachliches Lokalisieren und seine 
kognitiven Grundlagen”, Hans Huber, 1998.  
[6] H. Stumpf and J. Eliot, “Gender-related differences in spatial ability 
and the k factor of general spatial ability in a population of 
academically 
talented 
students”, 
Personality 
and 
Individual 
Differences, Vol. 19, Issue 1, pp. 33-45, 1995. 
[7] J. Xia, D. Packer and C. Dong, “Individual differences and tourist 
wayfinding behaviours”. Proceedings of 18th World IMACS Congress 
and MODSIM09 International Congress on Modelling and 
Simulation, Cairns, Australia, pp. 1272-1278, 2009. 
[8] S. Werner, B.K. Brückner, H.A. Mallot, K. Schweizer and C. Freksa, 
”Spatial cognition: The role of landmark, route, and survey 
knowledge in human and robot navigation”, Ph.D. in Computer 
Science, Springer, Vol. 27, pp. 41-50, 1997. 
[9] N.J. Smelser, J. Wright and P.B. Baltes [ed.], “International 
encyclopedia of social & behavioral sciences”, Elsevier, pp. 14771-
14775, 2001. 
[10] S.D. Steck and H.A. Mallot, “The role of global and local Landmarks 
in virtual environment navigation”, Journal of Teleoperators and 
Virtual Environments archive, Vol. 9, Issue 1, pp. 69-83, 2000. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9.  The final enriched cartographic map with the elements of spatial cognition 
 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

