Learning Odors for Social Robots: The URBANO Experience 
 
Daniel Galán, Ramón Galán, Ángel Luis Martínez  
Intelligent Control Group 
Universidad Politécnica de Madrid 
Madrid, Spain 
email: danielgalanv@gmail.com, ramon.galan@upm.es, 
almartinez@etsii.upm.es 
Iveth Moreno  
Facultad de Ciencias y Tecnología 
Universidad Tecnológica de Panamá 
Panamá, Panamá 
email: iveth.moeno@utp.ac.pa 
 
 
Abstract— This paper presents the experience of the 
Intelligence Control Group of UPM in the design of URBANO, 
a tour guide robot. It is a cognitive system based on distributed 
agents. One of these agents is an ontology that contains the 
knowledge used by the robot. This knowledge is mainly 
developed for linguistic applications. Here it is described how 
to add odor experiences to some available concepts in the 
ontology. Odor experiences evolve in time so the learning 
process must be adaptive and supervised. Neural networks, 
fuzzy logic, recursive least squares, Mahalanobis distance and 
genetic algorithms are tested over a low-cost multi-purpose 
electronic nose in the URBANO environment. The obtained 
results show how to add odors to the emotional model of the 
robot help it to increase its performance as a social robot. 
Keywords: Cognitive systems; Social robotics; Neural 
networks; Fuzzy logic; Genetic algorithms. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Electronic noses are artificial olfactory systems whose 
operation is based on an array of chemical gas sensors with 
partially overlapping sensitivities. A series of electronic 
adjustments are made to the electrical values provided by the 
gas sensors in order to enable computer processing. At this 
stage, a pattern recognition technique is applied to the data 
so that the electronic nose will, eventually, be able to 
identify, classify and/or quantify odors. 
Over the last two decades, electronic noses have 
increased significantly in importance due to the different 
applications in which they can be used: agribusiness, 
security, medicine and environmental pollution. During this 
period a great deal of research has been carried out, some of 
which is mentioned by Moreno [1]. 
Emotion importance in human intelligence has been 
underlined in latest decades. Neuroscientist studies show that 
people with their traditional logical reasoning intact but with 
their emotions disconnected make poor judgments, finding 
strong impairments in taking appropriate decisions [2]. An 
emotional balance benefits the problem resolution in a 
flexible and creative way. Evidences show that emotional 
skills are basic for adaptation and taking decisions. In other 
words, emotional control is an intelligence factor. Emotional 
Intelligence [3], is defined as an ability to perceive, assess 
and manage the emotions of one’s self and of others. 
In human communication, emotions take an important 
roll, emotion recognition and emotion expression are 
essential for a complete communication. That is in fact, 
what Affective Computing studies: giving to machines an 
ability to recognize, model and interpret human emotions 
[4]. 
The tour-guide robot URBANO emotional model [5] 
does not intend to be a biological model, not trying to 
reproduce human brain. The aim of this project is to develop 
the necessary tools to let the robot URBANO show an 
emotional behavior that can be understood and accepted by 
humans. In other words, to give autonomy to the robot so 
that it is able to take decisions and to show a social behavior 
that leads to a satisfactory human-robot interaction. 
Emotional abilities, in particular the ability to recognize and 
show emotions, are essential for the natural communication 
with humans, because of that an emotional model is 
developed.  
This paper explains the experience of the Intelligent 
Control Research Group of UPM, in order to include an 
olfactory system in URBANO, a tour-guide robot that is 
described in Section II, and how to integrate olfactory 
stimuli in the behavior of the robot, explained in Section III. 
The e-nose prototype is a low-cost multi-purpose designed 
for this project, which is described in Section IV. Section V 
presents the experiments developed and the obtained results. 
It has been paid special attention to the learning process as 
is depicted in Section VI.  
II. 
URBANO, AN INTERACTIVE TOUR-GUIDE ROBOT 
This section describes the URBANO robot system, its 
hardware, software and the experience we have obtained 
through its development and use until its actual mature stage.  
URBANO robot is a B21r platform from iRobot [6], 
equipped with a four wheeled synchrodrive locomotion 
system, a SICK LMS200 laser scanner mounted horizontally 
in the top used for navigation and SLAM, and a mechatronic 
face and two robotic arms used to express emotions as 
happiness, sadness, surprise or anger. 
The robot is also equipped with two sonar rings and one 
infrared ring, which allows detecting obstacle at different 
heights that can be used for obstacle avoidance and safety. 
53
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

The platform has also two onboard PCs and one touch 
screen. 
The software is structured in a SOAP architecture with 
specialize agents in different functions: speaking, listening, 
navigating through the environment, moving his arm, 
responding to stimuli that affect its feelings. Some agents 
perform cognitive tasks. 
The schedule for URBANO is defined by a diary with 
tasks. The way of making those tasks, the time when they are 
done and, in general, the behavior of URBANO while 
completing them will be based in its emotional state by 
optimizing its happiness function. 
Is intended that, the identification of certain odors act as 
another stimulus and affect to its decision making. For 
example, if the person that is interacting with URBANO 
smells to cigarette, then it can exhort to quit smoking.  Also 
URBANO can identify a person by his perfume. 
A new agent has been developed in order to manage the 
odor information that controls the electronic nose and the 
classification algorithms. 
This new agent collaborates directly with other agents: 
Knowledge Server and Emotional Model. 
The knowledge server consists of a Java application 
developed using the libraries of Protégé-OWL API [7]. The 
tool is capable of reading and editing files in “.owl” format 
where the knowledge is stored in the form of ontologies and 
the management of the information from the kernel is made 
by means of messages that codify the request of specific 
information, and the reply is obtained from the server or the 
introduction of new data.  
The functions of the knowledge server are: loading and 
saving ontologies; creating, renaming, and deleting classes or 
instances; displaying properties of a class; showing 
subclasses or superclasses; showing or entering the value of 
a property; integrating one ontology into another; handling 
queries.  
III. 
EMOTIONAL MODEL IN URBANO 
In order to reach a nearer approximation to human 
emotional system, the proposed model makes use of 
dynamic variables to represent internal emotional state. The 
model follows the classic diagram showed in Fig. 1, being 
the system stimuli u(k) considered as inputs variables, 
emotions x(k) as state variables and task modifiers y(k) as 
output variables.  
 
Figure 1.  Emotional state model. 
 
Following the classic state variable model, four matrices 
have to be defined. 
A-matrix represents the model dynamic, the influence of 
each emotion over itself and over the other emotions. In 
other words, how the emotional state at the time k influences 
the emotional state of the next time k+1. Let us call the A-
matrix emotional dynamic matrix. 
Stimuli influence the system in a different way depending 
on its actual emotional state, i.e., the sensitivity information 
contained in the B-matrix. Let us call it sensitivity matrix. 
C-matrix has the information of how emotional state 
influences modifiers. Let us call this matrix the emotional 
behavior matrix. 
D-matrix contains the information of how the stimuli 
influence directly the task modifiers. Let us call the D-
matrix direct action matrix. We usually consider it to be 
null, nevertheless its use would be analog to the rest of the 
state matrices. 
Due to the difficulty of finding an analytic calculation for 
the matrices coefficients, a fuzzy rules set is used to obtain 
each coefficient. The matrices coefficients are function of 
time k, giving dynamics to the system. Because of that 
coefficients are calculated for each time k. To define fuzzy 
rules is a simple task; the information contained in the rules 
can be obtained from experts in emotions. The use of fuzzy 
knowledge bases opens the opportunity to a future 
automatic adjustment, e.g., genetic algorithms. 
Model equations are analog to the equations used in 
multivariable systems and shown in (1) and (2). 






The operation sequence follows the next steps: 
1. Read stimuli u(k). Stimulus is considered as an 
impulse: it appears and at the next time it 
disappears. 
2. Stimuli and emotions fuzzification. Stimuli and 
emotions intensities are normalized in the range 
[0,100]. In order to transform these determinist 
values of stimuli and emotions into fuzzy values, 
following considerations has been done. Three 
linguistic terms have been considered: HIGH, 
NORMAL, and LOW. A triangle membership 
0
20
40
60
80
100
time
Emotion Intensity
(%)
x1
x2
 
Figure 2. Time dynamics for different emotions. 
54
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

function with a uniform distribution, as shown in 
Fig. 4, has been used.   
3. Fuzzy inference. Let us consider two stimuli {u1, 
u2}, two emotions {x1, x2} and the three linguistic 
labels named previously. In that case, A-matrix 
would be a 2x2 matrix, with the coefficients a11, 
a12, a21 and a22. For each coefficient there is a 
fuzzy knowledge base that contains the fuzzy rules 
to apply depending on the emotion fuzzy values.  
4. Defuzzification to obtain the state matrices 
coefficients. The method of gravity centre is used 
as 
defuzzification 
function 
simplifying 
the 
calculation by equidistant membership functions 
which do not overlap. After this step, the matrices 
A(k), B(k) and C(k) are known. 
5. Calculation of next time emotional state and task 
modifiers, x(k+1) and y(k+1). Knowing the state 
matrices at time k, u(k) and x(k), value of emotions 
and task modifiers at next time are obtained 
applying equations (1) and (2).  
Nor the higher emotions number neither the higher 
number of linguistics terms would increase the complexity 
of the model. It would work with the same efficiency but 
with a higher computational work. 
Task modifiers are used in the development of the tasks. 
This "way of being” is valued by the public through a poll. 
If the results are not satisfactory it is necessary to correct the 
robot "way of being", i.e., fuzzy rule bases that determine 
the matrices A, B and C. The proposed model adjusts in the 
way described by means of a genetic algorithm. The 
algorithm makes use of the information collected of other 
tried behaviors. It changes the fuzzy rules looking for an 
optimization of a desired function. 
Human do or try to do things that make them happy, for 
that reason happiness would be an appropriate function to be 
optimized. Happiness understood no as an emotion but as an 
abstraction that indicates the personal fulfillment of the 
subject. Happiness used to be considered associated to the 
fulfilling of some norms in the development of our vital 
activities. The norms or scale of values are not the same for 
all humans, it exists differences. Helping to others produce 
happiness but we used to help more to friend than to 
enemies. 
In order to implement this capacity in URBANO, it is 
necessary to define a scale of values or robotics laws. Done 
a task, a mathematical function calculates the fulfillment 
degree of these norms and a happiness value. 
IV. 
ELECTRONIC NOSE HARDWARE 
Most of electronic noses comprise three modules: 
chemical, electronic and software The chemical module 
prepares the sample and takes the measurement made by the 
sensors; the electronic module prepares the electrical signal 
obtained at the sensor output and extracts the traits and 
electrical characteristics given by each of the sensors of the 
array; the software performs the signal recognition and 
produces the corresponding visualization in the system. 
Electronic nose design depends on the applications in 
which the nose is to be used. The electronic nose under 
discussion is intended for use, mainly, in agribusiness. This 
intended purpose meant that it would be appropriate to use a 
wide range of chemical odor sensors. Therefore, MOS 
technology chemical odor sensors from Figaro Inc. [8] were 
chosen, from the TGS series, with target gases as organic 
solvents, ammonia, air pollutants, etc. These sensors are used 
in common applications such as monitoring air quality, 
detection of toxic gases, etc.; they are inexpensive and 
readily commercially available. In addition to these sensors, 
four temperature sensors, a relative humidity sensor and an 
atmospheric pressure sensor were fitted to the electronic nose 
with the aim of observing the effects of changes in the 
aforementioned parameters on the measurements produced 
by the electronic nose. 
The different components that have been chosen for the 
design and construction of the electronic nose, have been 
selected based on the type of chemical odor sensors chosen 
for the sensor array. 
The electronic nose constructed contains three modules, 
and it is small, facilitating the integration on a mobile robot. 
The chemical module of the electronic nose consists of 
one chamber were the sensors are located. It contains a 
simple acquisition system for sampling the volatile 
components of the sample, in comparison to other more 
complex systems [9], [10], which include air pumps, reaction 
tubes, purge and trap systems etc., or other systems that keep 
the sample chamber completely separate from the sensor 
chamber [11]. The sensor chamber and the sample are 
separated by a cover, that can be open, and a small 
ventilation unit that draws the odor sample gas molecules 
from the sample chamber into the sensor chamber. After the 
sensors are exposed to the odor samples, this chemical signal 
is transferred, as an analog signal, to the next module, in this 
case, the electronic module, where the signal is amplified, 
filtered and converted into digital values; these will be used 
in the final module, where an algorithm has been developed 
based on neural networks, which will classify the odor that 
has been detected by the electronic nose. When the sample 
has been taken the nose open a backdoor and active another 
ventilation for cleaning the chamber. 
Each sensor has been mounted on a separate card so that 
it can be easily removed or changed by the user.   
V. 
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS 
A series of experiments was performed in order to 
validate the design and the use of the electronic nose; all 
testing was done indoors.  
A. Tests to improve signal stabilization 
Since the signal from the sensors received by the 
computer shows a significant degree of oscillation, an 
adjustment to that signal by means of the computer program 
was proposed. 
55
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

The aim of the adjustments to the program is to filter the 
signal as far as possible, without losing relevant information, 
in order to later apply the pattern recognition algorithms. 
Therefore, the filtering of the signal obtained at the point of 
output of the electronic module was performed using 
different averages (10, 20, 30, 40 and 50) in the data. Ten 
data readings were taken, their average was calculated, a 
further reading was taken, and the average was re-calculated 
using the 10 most recent values, and so on. Using this 
technique means that the average value of the most recent 
10, 20, 30, 40 or 50 values is always used, both for the 
display in graph form and for the application of the pattern 
recognition algorithms. 
The average value that produced the best signal filtering 
was 50, and this is the average that was used to perform all 
the tests.  
B. Tests on odor detection in semi-circles 
Tests were carried out to determine the maximum 
distance at which the electronic nose is still capable of 
significantly detecting an odor. These distances were 
measured from the central point of the sample chamber and 
were arranged to form a semi-circle with different radii. The 
measurements used for the radii were 15, 20, 30, 40 and 50 
cm. 
In the first stage of this test, the sample chamber 
remained in its original location; in addition, two ammonia 
sensors were used, adjusted to different gains. 
In the second phase of this test, the sample chamber was 
removed, thereby allowing the odor to disperse in the open 
air. The values measured by the sensors declined sharply as 
the distance of the odor source from the electronic nose was 
increased. Comparing the results of this phase with the 
previous phase, the measured values were lower than the 
corresponding values. It is interesting to note that, for radii 
very close to the electronic nose, whatever the position of the 
sample, the values measured by the sensors were equal or 
better than those obtained using the sample chamber.   
The final results of this test demonstrated experimentally 
the need to use the sample chamber to carry out the odor 
measurements and that the best position for odor detection is 
locating the odor source in front of, or diagonal to, the 
electronic nose. 
C. Test carried out to investigate the effect of temperature 
on electronic nose performance 
In one of the tests performed for classification between 
red wine and white wine, data was obtained at a temperature 
of approximately 25ºC, and network training was initiated. 
However, when the tests were performed to verify the 
network learning, the values measured by the sensors were 
observed to be different from those obtained during the 
training 
phase. 
The 
possibility 
of 
achieving 
good 
classification was therefore minimal. The only condition that 
had altered with respect to the training phase was the 
ambient temperature, which had risen by three degrees 
Celsius. 
This test demonstrated that changes in temperature affect 
the repeatability of the sensors.  A change was therefore 
suggested in the computer program for odor classification.  
D. Odor classification test 
The aim of this test was to verify the effectiveness of the 
electronic nose at distinguishing between the odor given off 
by a glass of white wine and air molecules under normal 
conditions.   
Before training the neural network, sensors were chosen 
that best reacted to the odor samples: three volatile organic 
compound sensors and one organic solvent vapor sensor. The 
selection of the sensors was based on the fact that the 
olfactory fingerprint obtained by a few sensors facilitates 
learning 
by 
the 
neural 
network. 
Subsequently, 
50 
measurements were taken in clean air, and 50 from white 
wine, and neural network training was performed. 
The network was then verified with a further 200 
samples, (100 air and 100 wine): with 100% of success. This 
same experiment was repeated using a glass of white wine 
and a glass of red wine. It was observed that using all the 
sensors complicated the network learning, and again, only 
the most representative sensors were chosen.  
However, the problem that arose for this experiment is 
that the temperature affected the values measured by the 
sensors, resulting in different values being registered by the 
sensors during the training phase and at the verification 
phase. These drifts in response arise in the medium and long 
term.  
Different algorithms have been used with different 
objectives. The Mahalanobis distance has given excellent 
results in the identification of the ripeness cherry states, 
green-mature-out.  The use of back propagation neural 
networks and the recursive minimum squares allows an 
appropriate generalization in the classification. Because of 
the great influence of the temperature different categories it 
has been added for different temperatures which have 
significantly improved the identification.   
E. Odor search test 
The objective of this test was the validation of 
URBANOs capacity to locate the odor source. It starts by 
presenting the robot a sample of a particular odor, to then ask 
the robot to find a position in the workroom where the odor 
seems very similar to the sample. 
Keep in main that the olfactory fingerprint will have an 
influenced distribution by the air movement in the workroom 
so keep a history of measurements may not provide any 
advantage. 
Simply algorithms were proved were the robot measures 
in semicircles (-90, 0, 90 degrees) and advance in the 
direction where the samples mean square error is minimum. 
For the cases were local minimums are found it has been 
used the relaxation technique. To reduce the time to find the 
source location the algorithm has been modified so that 
progress, without checking the smell of 90 ° and -90 ° when 
the error decreases. This algorithm has been simulated in 
Matlab to verify its performance against abrupt changes of 
the fingerprint while the search. The results show that certain 
56
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

forms can significantly delay the location. The following 
figures show some examples of these simulations. 
 
In the use of the algorithm on a real robot has shown that 
the time required to clean and stabilize the new measured 
value is high in the developed prototype, about a minute 
from one sample to another. If cleaning is not carried out the 
measurement quality decreases and the robot can pass 
through the vicinity of the source without finding a better 
error. 
 
 
Figure 3. Matlab simulations of the odor search. 
The algorithm described works and sources are located 
but must be combined improvements in design for easy 
cleaning and in the algorithm to try to estimate the best 
direction. 
The photos below show the platform used for testing.  
 
. 
  
Figure 4. Urbano and the electronic nose with mobile plataform. 
F. Odor identification test 
Important tasks for URBANO are the location of an odor 
and the position of the odor source. To achieve this goal it is 
necessary to define the concept of "odor experience". 
An odor experience is the set of available sensor values 
that characterize an odor for a period of time as well as an 
identifier for that odor. 
The robot URBANO, in a normal performance, gets 
periodically samples of odor. 
This process starts with cleaning of the chamber by 
circulating a stream of air by opening the two lids and 
turning on both fans, then, it is closed the back cover and 
rear fan is turned off, so a new sample enters in the camera, 
after settling time the sensor values are read. If the sample is 
identified as "similar" to one of the registered it is associated 
with the corresponding identifier and URBANO informs that 
it has detected the smell, except that corresponds to the 
sample labeled "clean air" or what is the same "odor default". 
If it has a refutation by the "user that interacts" informing 
it that the odor is different, it verifies it knows the identifier 
and it adjusts the algorithm including that sample in the 
appropriate category, if it is unknown creates a new category 
with the single sample. 
To validate the identification process, it has been used 
two basic techniques: back propagation neural networks and 
minimum squares. The results have been good with a success 
rate above 94%. 
VI. 
LEARNING ODORS 
As already stated the ultimate goal is to equip the robot 
URBANO with the capacity to learn odors and relate them to 
certain activities. This learning involves: 
 
Odor experiences 
 
Odor identifiers given by the supervisor 
 
Tasks to be associated to an odor identification 
The supervisor is the system administrator. 
It has been designed a new agent in the URBANOs 
architecture that performs the functions for measure odor, the 
identification and the proposal of appropriate tasks to that 
odor. In the following sections it is described with more 
detail this process.  
A. Step 1: Identifying the odor 
The process starts with de odor identification. After 
cleaning the camera and waiting to stabilize the sensor 
measures it is performed the average of 50 measurements. 
These values are used as inputs of the neural network that 
will result the similarity of the sample with other identified 
odors. The neural network provides outputs that can 
determine that a sample seems partially to various odors. 
Then it is "reacted" to that odor. 
B. Step 2: Reaction to known odors  
If the odor identified clearly (the response of the network 
is close to 1) belongs to the category of alarm it is activated 
the corresponding task, likewise the odor is introduced, as 
stimuli in the emotional model of the robot causing emotions 
of WORRY, FEAR. 
If this is not an alarm is then introduced as a stimulus in 
the emotional model generates variations in the emotions and 
the behavior modifiers. For example, an unpleasant odor will 
produce and increment in the emotion value of DISGUST, 
which means that will mean that the task "TOUR GUIDE" 
will be performed in less time because the robot movement 
speed will increase and the modifier amount of information 
provided during the visit will be decremented.  
For same odors will be activated tasks that, normally, 
involve an interruption to the task that is being performed 
for: greet the person to which it relates, to comment that is 
near a certain object or make a comment about the odor. 
57
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

C. Step 3: Unkown odors  
In this case, a task is activated that, by a dialogue with 
the supervisor, tries to get the information needed to 
incorporate the knowledge of the robot. If at that time there 
is no supervisor, the smell is stored as historical data. 
In the performed demonstrator, as well as maintaining a 
question-answer dialogue is possible to complete a form by 
the supervisor, the voice recognition does not always work 
correctly. 
The supplied information by the supervisor is: 
 
Odor ID. 
 
Category to which belongs. This will generate a 
default behavior for that type of odor. It can, also, 
assign a specific behavior relating a specific task for 
the smell or an additional task in addition to the 
standard category. 
 
The stimuli values when the odor is identified. 
 
If the category is new, it is necessary to propose the 
standard task, and if it were necessary to define a 
new one for the specific odor.  
Considering that, during learning, the dependence of the 
robot's supervisor is very high, it has been proposed a class-
based design that allows a very effective default behavior. 
The LEMON odor will belong to the class FRUITS, that 
inherit from PLEASANT_ODORS, so the identification of 
the ORANGE odor will only require by the supervisor to say 
that it belongs to the category FRUITS. Experimentally has 
been tested the feasibility of assigning an unknown odor 
without ID to an ODOR generic category, and has been 
given it a default behavior. The public appreciates the fact of 
recognizing the smell, but in general, requires identification. 
The tasks performed by URBANO are defined in an own 
interpreted language, UPL. This language is C-Like and has 
features appropriate to the characteristics of URBANO, i.e.: 
Say(“Hello”); Produce the synthesizing with the current 
voice of  “Hello”. 
SayDB(“Welcome”); Produce the synthesizing of a 
welcome message selected from the available database. 
URBANO has, in its ontology, a hierarchical structure of 
tasks that can be performed; to facilitate the association of 
odors detected tasks has been created some basic tasks more, 
as: 
ESCAPE, 
ALARM_WARNING, 
GREETINGS, 
PLEASANT_ODOR_MSG, UNPLEASANT_ODOR_MSG, 
etc.  
The genetic algorithm designed to optimize the 
performance of the emotional model, now lead the best use 
of possible tasks associated with a smell and how they are 
used, for it, only needs the public opinion. Since learning is 
based on the experience some performances of the robot may 
be inappropriate.  
VII. CONCLUSIONS 
This paper presents a successful experience in the use of 
an electronic nose on a service robot. On the path towards 
the final demonstrator it has been tried different 
classification algorithms on different elements (fruit, wine, 
etc.), likewise, it has been verified that it is possible to detect 
and locate the odor source for products or dangerous 
situations. 
It is proposed a mechanism for identifying odors that 
fires robot activities. These tasks are related to security or 
they can help with the interaction with the public by 
identifying people, or simply noticing good or bad smells. 
The incorporation of the ontology that relates linguistic 
concepts, which are used by the robot in their explanations, 
with certain smells greatly enriches the knowledge and 
facilitates public acceptance. The performed tests have 
shown a malfunction occurred as expected, with several 
categories of odors that are not detected by the 16 sensors 
selected. For example, infusions, tea, coffee, were not 
detected by our system. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is funded by the Spanish Ministry of Science 
and Innovation (ARABOT: DPI 2010-21247-C02-01) and 
supervised by CACSA whose kindness we gratefully 
acknowledge. We would also like to thank to the members of 
Research Group on electronic noses from UTP: Universidad 
Tecnológica de Panamá.  
REFERENCES 
[1] I. Moreno, R. Caballero, R. Galán, F. Matía, and A. Jiménez, 
"La 
Nariz 
Electrónica: 
Estado 
del 
Arte", 
Revista 
Iberoamericana de Automática e Informática Industrial 
(RIAI), vol. 6, no 3, 2009, pp. 76-91. 
[2] A. R. Damasio, "Descartes’ Error: Emotion, Reason and the 
Human Brain", Gosset/Putnam Press, New York, 1994. 
[3] D. Goleman, "Emotional Intelligence", Bantam Books, New 
York, 1995. 
[4] M. Álvarez, R. Galán, F. Matía and, D. Rodríguez-Losada,  
"Emotional Model for Guide Robot", IEEE Transactions on 
Systems Man, and Cybernetics-Part A Systems and Humans, 
4053, Sept. 2010, pp. 982-992. 
[5] D. Rodríguez-Losada, F. Matía, A. Jiménez, and R. Galán, 
“Local map fusion for real-time indoor simultaneous 
localization and mapping”, Journal of Field Robotics, vol. 23, 
no. 5, May 2006, pp. 291-309.  
[6] iRobot, “B21r Mobile Robot User’s Guide”, part number 
2838, rev. 5. 
[7] H. 
Knublauch, 
“Protégé 
OWL 
plugin 
tutorial”, 
7th 
International Protégé Conference, Bethesda, MD, 2004, URL: 
http://protege.stanford.edu/plugins/owl/documentation.html, 
retrieved on June 20, 2011. 
[8] Z. Hai and J. Wang, "Detection of adulteration in camellia 
seed oil and sesame oil using an electronic nose", European 
Journal of Lipid Science and Technology, vol. 108, no. 2, 
2006, pp. 116-124. 
[9] J. Hu, "Application of PCA Method on Pest Information 
Detection of Electronic Nose", IEEE International Conference 
on Information Acquisition, 2006, pp. 1465-1468. 
[10] A. Campagnoli,  F. Cheli, G. Savoini, A. Crotti, A.G.M. 
Pastori, and V. Dell'Orto, "Application of an electronic nose 
to detection of aflatoxins in corn", Veterinary Research 
Communications, vol. 33, no. 1,  2009  pp. 273-275. 
[11] T.C. Pearce, S.S. Schiffman, H.T. Tagle, and J.W. Gardner, 
"Handbook of Machine Electronic Nose Technology", John-
Wiley and Sons, 2003. 
 
58
COGNITIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-155-7

