Cognitive Science Approach to Achieve SDGs
Muneo Kitajima
Nagaoka University of Technology
1603-1 Kamitomioka Nagaoka
Niigata, Japan
Email: mkitajima@kjs.nagaokaut.ac.jp
Abstract—The UN report, “The Future is Now: Science for
Achieving Sustainable Development,” expressed expectations for
contributions from cognitive science for the achievement of
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). This is because
achievement of the SDGs can be regarded as an extension of
problem-solving activities in individuals’ daily behavior choices.
However, as categorized in Newell’s “time scale of human action,”
the SDGs belong to the SOCIAL BAND, while individuals’ daily
problem-solving belongs to the COGNITIVE BAND, which makes
it difﬁcult to construct predictive models. In other words, it is
impossible to deﬁne a well-deﬁned problem space that spans
between the non-linearly connected BANDs. As an alternative
approach, this paper proposes an adapted version of the Cognitive
Chrono-Ethnography (CCE), a study methodology integrating
cognitive science and ethnography, for understanding individuals’
daily behavior and specifying their action selection activities that
would eventually lead to the achievement of some of the SDGs.
Keywords–Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs); Cognitive
Chrono-Ethnography (CCE); real world problem-solving; adaptive
problem-solving; happiness goals.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) are a blueprint
for achieving a better, more sustainable future for all. They are
aimed at addressing the global challenges we face, including
those related to poverty, inequality, climate change, environ-
mental degradation, peace, and justice. Under the SDGs, 17
interconnected goals, and 169 targets under these goals, have
been deﬁned. For instance, “Goal 3: Ensure healthy lives, and
promote well-being for all at all ages” is associated with 13
targets, such as “3.9 By 2030, substantially reduce the number
of deaths and illnesses from hazardous chemicals and air, water
and soil pollution and contamination.” In the report entitled
“The Future is Now: Science for Achieving Sustainable De-
velopment,” which is the ﬁrst quadrennial Global Sustainable
Development Report prepared by an independent group of
scientists [1], the cognitive capacity required for sustainable
development choices has been explained as follows:
During the long period of human evolution, humans
have overcome multiple complex challenges, and
remained highly adaptive. There is therefore reason
to hope that we will also overcome the current chal-
lenges to sustainability that are faced on a societal
– indeed global – scale. Evolutionary adaptation is
most often based on tangible experiences, short-
term outcomes and relatively straightforward theo-
ries of change. Several aspects of the transformation
towards sustainability can be different.
(· · ·)
Changing behaviours towards evolutionary adapta-
tion in such a context can therefore be different
from other contexts in which humanity has had
to deal with society-wide challenges. Individuals
will play a pivotal role in driving the necessary
transformations. Understanding how people – as
consumers and engaged citizens – make choices
and decisions in that regard can help to further
motivate such action [2]. Cognitive science, psy-
chology, behavioural economics, neurobiology and
brain research can provide important insights in that
regard [3]. They might indicate, for example, what
is going on in our brains when we hear science-
based information about sustainability challenges,
and consequently make decisions and choices.
Thus, the United Nations (UN) report
[1] has clearly
outlined the need for contributions from cognitive science. At
ﬁrst sight, the kinds of activities involved in achieving any of
the SDGs may be considered as problem-solving activities;
hence, the knowledge concerning problem-solving that has
been accumulated in cognitive science should prove to be
of due relevance in achieving SDGs. However, as shown in
the next section, the band structure of human action,
[4,
page 122, Fig. 3-3] when incorporated into the problem space,
which includes both SDGs and real world problem-solving,
makes the application of predictive models, such as production
systems (e.g., Adaptive Control of Thought - Rational (ACT-
R) cognitive architecture [5][6], and Soar [7]), and the Goals,
Operators, Methods and Selection rules (GOMS) approach to
user modeling [8] less useful than it would be under situations
tailored to bolster the effectiveness of these prediction systems.
Accordingly, the rest of this paper explores the issue of
appropriate treatment and utilization of cognitive science for
contributing to the achievement of SDGs. Section II describes
how problem-solving activities are related to achieving SDGs.
Section III describes how the Cognitive Chrono-Ethnography
(CCE) can be applied for specifying individuals’ problem
solving activities that would eventually lead to the achievement
of some of the SDGs. The acknowledgement and conclusions
are provided at the end.
II.
PROBLEM SOLVING FOR ACHIEVING THE SDGS
Efforts to achieve the SDGs ultimately translate into indi-
vidual human efforts. In some cases, an individual may seek to
achieve any of the SDGs directly, while in other cases, he or
she may seek to achieve any of the SDGs indirectly, through
activities within the organization or the community to which
the individual belongs. In either case, such an activity on the
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-780-1
COGNITIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

part of an individual can be considered as an activity oriented
toward achieving one or more SDGs.
A. Societal SDGs vs. Individual Level Goals
Activities to achieve any of the SDGs have to be im-
plemented as problem-solving activities conducted in the
real world context, which is called “real world problem-
solving” [9]. However, as pointed out in the UN report [1],
it would be difﬁcult for a majority of people to concretely en-
visage the situations wherein any of the SDGs can be achieved,
and ascertain the relevance of using real-world problem solving
on an individual level to achieve these goals. An example from
the UN report is as follows:
Carbon dioxide emissions, for example, are not
seen, smelled or directly experienced as harmful,
and their negative impacts will occur relatively far
into the future, while they are often associated in the
present with behaviours that are immediately useful
or pleasurable. Their likely impacts and delayed
risks are inferred from science-based models rather
than immediate individual experience, although that
may currently be changing.
This difﬁculty can be easily understood by considering
Newell’s time scale of human action [4, page 122, Fig. 3-
3]. As shown in Table I, it identiﬁes non-linearly connected
four bands: SOCIAL, RATIONAL, COGNITIVE, and BIO-
LOGICAL. The claim that human action should be structured
in terms of these four discrete bands, suggests that it should
be possible to build predictive and explanatory models for ac-
tivities that happen within a single band, and at the same time,
it should be impossible, or inappropriate, to build predictive
models that include activities that happen in multiple bands
with inter-band interactions. The impossibility of constructing
predictive models for inter-band activities comes from the
existence of non-linear inter-band connections, which would
also make the predictive and/or explanatory models non-
linear. Even if a model is deterministic, it will suffer from
Sensitive Dependence on Initial Condition (SEDIC), a primary
feature of such a non-linear system, and consequently, become
unpredictable.
As also shown in Table I, the SDGs exist in the SOCIAL
BAND, whereas the goals for real world problem-solving exist
in the COGNITIVE BAND or RATIONAL BAND. Problem
solving activities that are conducted in one band should not be
linearly connected to those activities conducted in a different
band because there are gaps between different bands. Activities
within a band, however, can be linearly connected to each
other, and it is possible to perform problem-solving activities
in a well-deﬁned problem space, if the problem-solver has
sufﬁcient knowledge to represent the problem space. However,
it is impossible for a problem-solver to represent a problem
space as a well-deﬁned one if goals exist in different bands,
i.e., some goals are in the SOCIAL BAND and others in the
COGNITIVE BAND, because of the unpredictable nature of
such a non-linear system.
Problem-solvers can identify a top-level goal that belongs
to any of the SDGs and lower level goals that belong to
the BAND where their real-world problem-solving activities
are carried out. These lower level goals would effectively
contribute as sub- or sub-sub- goals, and so on, in the en-
tire hierarchical goal structure. However, the problem thus
constructed, should have the features of ill-deﬁned problems
TABLE I. NEWELL’S TIME SCALE OF HUMAN ACTION. (ADAPTED FROM
NEWELL [4, PAGE 122, FIG. 3-3]).
Scale
Time Units
System
World
(sec)
(Theory)
107
months
106
weeks
SOCIAL
105
days
BAND
104
hours
Task
103
10min
Task
RATIONAL
102
minutes
Task
BAND
101
10sec
Unit Task
100
1sec
Operations
COGNITIVE
10−1
100ms
Deliberate Act
BAND
10−2
10ms
Neural Circuit
10−3
1ms
Neuron
BIOLOGICAL
10−4
100µsec
Organelle
BAND
because even if the state the problem-solver is currently in is
well-speciﬁed, and the moves associated with the current state
toward the states belonging to a different band are deﬁned, i.e.,
the what and how to do is clearly speciﬁed, it is not possible
to anticipate the result of the execution of the selected move
due to the non-linear relationships between the goals in the
different bands.
B. Real World Problem-Solving
Any activities that eventually lead to the achievement of
any of the SDGs have to be implemented as problem solving
activities that are conducted in the real-world context [9]. Skills
necessary for performing these problem solving activities can
be acquired through adaptive problem-solving activities [10]
that have been studied thoroughly in an effort to implement
the second cycle of the Programme for the International
Assessment of Adult Competencies (PIAAC) survey. Note
that the PIAAC is a program focusing on the assessment
and analysis of adult skills. The major survey conducted as
a part of PIAAC is the Survey of Adult Skills. This survey
measures adults’ proﬁciency in key information-processing
skills – literacy, numeracy, and problem solving – and gathers
information and data on how adults use their skills at home, at
work, and in the wider community. This international survey
is conducted in over 40 countries/economies, and measures the
key cognitive and workplace skills needed for individuals to
participate in society, and for economies to prosper.
A problem-solving task requires a problem solver to exe-
cute appropriate Perceptual-Cognitive-Motor (PCM) processes
that are expected to be effective for accomplishing that task.
Figure 1 illustrates how problem-solving activities happen at
the interface between tasks and PCM processes. They could
become diverse depending on the nature of the tasks, and how
people carry out the PCM processes. External tasks impose
time constraints on people’s problem-solving activities, and
people’s PCM processes are carried out under the limitations
(or possible ranges) of their speciﬁc PCM capabilities.
In general, individuals show a mixture of conscious and
unconscious processes depending on the situation. Individuals’
behavior is not always in alignment with their intentions
residing in the RATIONAL BAND and the higher COGNI-
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-780-1
COGNITIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

INTERFACE 
Continuous cyclic loop of 
perception and movement
Internal (Mental) World
External (Physical, Social) World
Perceptual-Cognitive-Motor processes
Individual PS Activities
<< Use Memory for PS Activities 
|| 
Store in Memory Outcome of Performance <<
Carried out in Two Minds: Consciously or Unconsciously
Real World Problem Solving Activities 
A sequence of selected actions carried out  
with the intension of accomplishing a desired state, 
i.e., task goal, starting from the current state 
represented in a problem space
SDGs (Sustainable Development Goals)
Accomplishment of Individual Task Goals 
under any of 17 Happiness Goals
Accomplishment of Societal SDGs
A variety of Real World PS Tasks
Mapping of accomplished individual Task Goals to societal SDGs
Figure 1. Accomplishing SDGs through individual real world problem solving activities for accomplishing individual task goals under happiness goals.
TIVE BAND, but is often carried out as activities in the
lower COGNITIVE BAND at the order of hundreds of milli
seconds. The former corresponds to System 2, and the latter
to System 1. Kahneman [11][12] calls “System 1 and System
2” Two Minds, and describes System 1 as fast, automatic, and
highly susceptible to environmental inﬂuences; and System 2
as slow-processing, reﬂective, and taking into account explicit
goals and intentions. In this way, problem-solving activities
are necessarily adaptive to the tasks people have to deal with.
Adaptation is carried out within the range of PCM capabilities.
As pointed out by Greiff et al. [10], “Adaptive Problem
Solving” skill is one of the critical competencies people must
have in order to achieve well-being in the contemporary multi-
valued, networked, diverse, and heterogeneous society.
The interactions between the tasks that people encounter,
and the PCM processes that people carry out to accomplish
those tasks have a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on people’s devel-
opment of problem-solving abilities. Therefore, people’s past
experiences signiﬁcantly affect the actual action sequences
for solving problems that are observed when some tasks to
be performed are given to them. The bottom part of Fig-
ure 1 illustrates the relationships between real world problem-
solving tasks and an individual’s activities for accomplishing
the goals. There are cognitive architectures available in the
cognitive science society that are capable of simulating in-
dividuals’ real world problem-solving activities (e.g., ACT-
R [5][6], Soar [4], Model Human Processor with Realtime
Constraints (MHP/RT) [13][14][15] , and so on).
C. Individual Level Achievement of SDGs
In some cases, individual activities performed in the COG-
NITIVE BAND or the RATIONAL BAND ultimately lead
to the achievement of the SDGs belonging to the SOCIAL
BAND. Banerjee et al. [17] reported such a case. They ran
two Randomized Controlled Trials. Note that a Randomized
Controlled Trial (RCT) is an experimental form of impact
evaluation in which the population receiving the program or
policy intervention is chosen at random from the eligible
populations, and a control group is chosen at random from
the same eligible populations. This method tests the extent
to which speciﬁc, planned impacts are being achieved. The
distinguishing feature of an RCT is the random assignment of
units (e.g., people, schools, or villages) to the intervention or
control groups. One of its strengths is that it provides a very
powerful response to questions of causality, helping evaluators
and program implementers ensure that the achieved outcome
is a result of only the intervention, and not anything else.
Banerjee et al. [17] utilized this method and showed that
vital information regarding vaccination was spread by using
people who were considered gossips as information sources,
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-780-1
COGNITIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

TABLE II. HAPPINESS GOALS [16] AND THEIR RELATION TO SOCIAL LAYERS. +’S DENOTE THE DEGREE OF RELEVANCE OF EACH GOAL TO EACH LAYER,
I.E., INDIVIDUAL, COMMUNITY, AND SOCIAL SYSTEM, RESPECTIVELY. +++: MOST RELEVANT, ++: MODERATELY RELEVANT, AND +: WEAKLY RELEVANT.
Social Layers
Name of Happiness
Types
Individual layer
Community layer
Social system layer
1
Target Happiness
The Achiever
+++
+++
+++
2
Competitive Happiness
The Winner
+++
+++
3
Cooperative Happiness
The Helper
+++
+++
4
Genetic Happiness
The Relative
+++
+++
5
Sensual Happiness
The Hedonist
+++
+++
6
Cerebral Happiness
The Intellectual
+++
+++
++
7
Rhythmic Happiness
The Dancer
+++
+++
8
Painful Happiness
The Masochist
+++
9
Dangerous Happiness
The Risk-taker
+++
++
+
10
Selective Happiness
The Hysteric
+++
++
11
Tranquil Happiness
The Mediator
+++
12
Devout Happiness
The Believer
+++
++
13
Negative Happiness
The Suffer
+++
++
14
Chemical Happiness
The Drug-taker
+++
15
Fantasy Happiness
The Day-dreamer
+++
16
Comic Happiness
The Laugher
+++
+++
17
Accidental Happiness
The Fortunate
+++
+++
+++
and it eventually led to an increase in the vaccination rate. They
proposed a research framework that can handle information
propagation in situations where individuals cannot grasp the
network structure through which information propagates. For
their work, they received the Nobel Prize in Economics in
2019. In their study, the RCT method was used for verifying
whether gossips, who had no knowledge about the structure
of the information network, and had been nominated by
people in the area, really worked toward spreading information.
However, what the gossips did could be re-interpreted from the
viewpoint of problem-solving activities as follows:
The gossips did not necessarily work toward achiev-
ing any of the SDGs but their efforts for the
fulﬁllment of their personal goals – that were likely
to belong to the COGNITIVE BAND – led to the
achievement of Goal 3 of the SDGs, “Good health
and well-being for people” as a by-product.
Similar mechanisms could be implemented by using the
concept of “nudge” in behavioral economics, which is any as-
pect of the choice architecture that alters people’s behavior in a
predictable way without forbidding any options or signiﬁcantly
changing their economic incentives [18][19]. In situations
where the local decisions made in the COGNITIVE BAND do
not take into consideration the consequences of the SOCIAL
BAND (bounded rationality), actions are selected based on
the principle of satisﬁcing [20]. Currently, the coronavirus
disease 2019 crisis requires large-scale behavior change. Bavel
et al. [21, page 463] point out in their paper entitled “Using
social and behavioural science to support COVID-19 pandemic
response” that “nudges and normative information can be an
alternative to more coercive means of behaviour change or used
to complement regulatory, legal and other imposed policies
when widespread changes must occur rapidly.”
D. Problem Solving for Achieving Happiness Goals
Real world problem-solving is carried out within the
COGNITIVE BAND. The actions taken by the gossips to
spread information in the study by Banerjee et al. [17] can be
understood using the PCM and memory processes, as depicted
in Figure 1, by simulating their activities based on appropriate
cognitive architectures. But what were the actual behavioral
goals the gossips pursued?
It would be reasonable to assume that the goal of the gos-
sips in their real world problem-solving is likely to have been
providing useful information to their listeners. Morris [16] has
characterized such goals as happiness goals and has listed 17 of
them. The left portion of Table II shows these goals, including
such goals as “the inherent happiness that comes with the love
of a child,” “the competitive happiness of triumphing over your
opponents,” “the sensual happiness of the hedonist,” and so on.
Kitajima et al. [22] proposed the “Maximum Satisfaction
Architecture (MSA).” MSA consists of three parts: 1) human
brain characterized by System 1 and System 2; 2) society
consisting of the three layers of Individual, Community, and
Social system; and 3) happiness goals. MSA assumes that the
human brain pursues one of the 17 happiness goals deﬁned by
Morris [16] at every moment, and switches to another goal
when appropriate, by evaluating the current circumstances.
Each of the happiness goals is associated with one or multiple
layers of society. These layers have evolved from the history
of human beings. Each layer is associated with its own
value reﬂecting historical development, and thus, it relates to
different sets of happiness goals.
The right portion of Table II shows tentative assignments of
the degree of relevance of each goal to each layer. The middle
portion of Figure 1 suggests that any real world problem-
solving activities for achieving speciﬁc task goals would be
conducted by individual persons in the pursuit of any of the
17 happiness goals in the social layers suggested in the right
portion of Table II. The happiness goals would deﬁne a value
structure of the problem-solver when he or she makes decisions
by running the PCM and memory processes under speciﬁc
circumstances while selecting his or her next actions. As such,
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-780-1
COGNITIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Ethnographical Field Observation
1
Mapping the Observed Phenomena on Cognitive Architecture
2
Identifying Study Parameters through Model-Based Simulation
3
Design CCE Study
4
Conduct CCE Study
5
Refinement of the Original Study Parameters
7
6 Refinement of the Original Mapping
REPEAT
CCE Study
Cognitive Architecture
Construction of Socio-Ecological Structure Model
Model-Based Simulation
Situation Dependent Simulation of Interaction Processes
Figure 2. The CCE procedure [15, Figure 5.1].
it is vital to assume the correct happiness goal when simulating
a problem-solver’s next action selection processes.
III.
ACHIEVING SDGS BY APPLYING CCE
The gossips in Banerjee et al.’s study [17], who pursued
a certain happiness goal while selecting the appropriate next
actions to be performed as real-world problem-solving activi-
ties, happened to contribute to achieving one of the SDGs. The
upper portion of Figure 1 depicts this as “Mapping of accom-
plished individual Task Goals to societal SDGs.” Banerjee et
al. [17] hypothesized that those persons who were nominated
by villagers as people who would be good at transmitting
information in a network would be highly central individuals;
and that sending information via such nominated individuals
would lead to signiﬁcantly wider diffusion of information than
sending it via randomly chosen people, or even respected ones.
They tested this hypothesis by conducting RCT studies, and
succeeded in bridging the gap between achievement of any
of the SDGs and accomplishment of individual task goals by
selecting the appropriate individuals for making this possible.
This section describes a cognitive scientiﬁc approach to what
Banerjee et al. [17] did by integrating all the portions shown
in Figure 1.
A. Cognitive Chrono-Ethnography (CCE)
This paper focuses on the particular study methodology of
the CCE [23]. CCE is helpful in building an understanding
of people’s daily action selection processes by combining
three concepts. “Cognitive” declares that CCE deals with
interactions between consciousness and unconsciousness in
the PCM cycles. “Chrono(-logy)” suggests that CCE concerns
itself with the time dimension for characterizing human behav-
ior, including not only short-term action sequences, but also
relatively long-term behavioral changes, ranging from ∼ 100
msec to days, months, and years, i.e., spanning through the
COGNITIVE, RATIONAL, and SOCIAL bands. “Ethnogra-
phy” indicates that CCE takes ethnographical observations
as a concrete study method because in daily life, people’s
Two Minds tend to re-use experientially effective behavioral
patterns, which is called “cognitive biases.” Ethnographical
ﬁeld observations are essential for understanding each person’s
biases in his or her daily life. In order to conduct a CCE
study, study participants (elite monitors) are selected. Each
point in the parameter space deﬁning the study ﬁeld has values.
The study question is “what such-and-such people would do
in such-and-such way in such-and-such circumstance (not an
average behavior).” Therefore, elite monitors, i.e., such-and-
such persons, are selected by consulting the parameter space.
In this process, it is necessary that the points in the parameter
space, which correspond to the elite monitors, are appropriate
for analyzing the structure and dynamics of the study ﬁeld.
Monitor selection is conducted by purposive sampling rather
than by random sampling, similar to the RCT methodology.
B. CCE Procedure Adapted to SDGs Achievement
This subsection shows the steps for conducting a CCE
study adapted for understanding people who are practicing
daily real world problem-solving activities, leading to accom-
plishment of the SDGs, as shown in Figure 1. This under-
standing can be used for exporting such people’s activities to
potential followers who can then contribute to the achievement
of the SDGs in the future [24]. Figure 2 shows the seven steps
to conduct a CCE study [15, Figure 5.1]. Described below are
the CCE steps adapted to the problem of SDGs achievement.
Necessary additions appear after the general descriptions of
the CCE procedure.
(1) Ethnographical Field Observation: Use the basic ethno-
graphical investigation method to clarify the outline of the
structure of social ecology that underlies the subject to be
studied.
Here, the study’s focus would be any social ecology
that has achieved or is approaching accomplishment
of any of the UN deﬁned targets associated with
one of the 17 SDGs. The purpose of the CCE is to
understand how this goal accomplishment is possi-
ble in the social ecology in question. Therefore, the
enabling condition for a CCE study is the existence
of such a social ecology, i.e., there is an ecologically
valid solution for achieving the target under the
SDGs.
(2) Mapping the Observed Phenomena on Cognitive Archi-
tecture: With reference to the behavioral characteristics of
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-780-1
COGNITIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

people, which have been made clear so far, and the cognitive
architectures, consider what kind of characteristic elements of
human behavior are involved in the investigation result in (1).
The emphasis is on identifying a plausible happiness
goal that might be held by the people in question.
This step is particularly important, because the
happiness goal is normally different from the target
of the SDGs, each of which resides in different
bands.
(3) Identifying Study Parameters through Model-Based Simu-
lation: Based on the consideration of (1) and (2), construct an
initial simple model with the constituent elements of activated
memories, i.e., meme, and the characteristic PCM processing
to represent the nature of the ecology of the study space.
The focus would be to identify classes of behaviors
that are distinguishable from each other due to
different functioning of their PCM and memory
processes. The bottom part of Figure 1 is achieved
by using appropriate cognitive architecture, such as
MHP/RT [13][14][15] by assigning plausible ranges
of values for the model parameters, which would
result in a number of distinguishable behavioral
patterns. For example, in the case of spreading
information concerning vaccination, the cognitive
processes might differ depending on the nature of
information to be spread. This means that a more
sophisticated treatment of spreading information
could be carried out than that attempted by Banerjee
et al. [17], by taking into account the underlying
PCM and memory processes.
(4) Design a CCE Study: Based on the simple ecological
model, identify a set of typical behavioral characteristics from
a variety of people making up the group to be studied. Then
formulate screening criteria of elite monitors who represent
a certain combination of the behavioral characteristics, and
deﬁne ecological survey methods for them.
(5) Conduct CCE Study: Select elite monitors and conduct
an ethnographical ﬁeld observation. Record the monitors’
behavior. The elite monitors are expected to behave as they
normally do at the study ﬁeld. Their behavior is recorded in
such a way that the collected data is rich enough to consider the
results in terms of the parameter space, and as un-intrusively
as circumstances allow.
(6) Reﬁnement of the Original Mapping: Check the results
of (5) against the results of (2) for appropriateness of the
mapping. If inappropriate, go back to (2) and restart the process
from there.
(7) Reﬁnement of the Original Study Parameters: If the result
of (5) is unsatisfactory, go back to (4) and redesign and conduct
a revised CCE study, otherwise go back to (3) to redo the
model-based simulation with a set of reﬁned parameters.
On completion of a CCE cycle, the existing social ecology
that has contributed to the achievement of any of the SDGs is
understood as a feasible scenario that could be transferred to
another social ecology that is similar to the existing one, but
has still not achieved the goal.
IV.
CONCLUSION
This paper discussed the contribution of cognitive science
to the achievement of the SDGs, taking as an example, the
communication of vaccination information that lead to the
achievement of health goals. There is room for consideration as
to whether the targets set to achieve all SDGs can be advanced
in the same way. However, as stated in the UN report [1], it is
impossible to achieve the targets without human involvement.
In that regard, cognitive science, dealing with human behavior
is destined to make a signiﬁcant contribution. This paper
ﬁrst linked social-level goals of the SDGs to their associated
individual-level happiness goals, and then associated the latter
with human behavior. This association shows that inducing
actions that lead to individuals working toward their happiness
goals can lead indirectly to the achievement of the SDGs. In
this way, scenarios for achieving the SDGs have been and can
be created.
For instance, concerning the goal of attracting tourists
to tourist destinations, CCE has proven to be effective in
understanding tourists’ activities in a previous study [25].
The tourists had different happiness goals organizing their
behavior; these happiness goals were sorted into combinations
of Target Happiness goal with one or two goals out of Sensual,
Cerebral, and Chemical Happiness goals. The total number
of combinations was six. Each of the combined happiness
goals were found to be associated with characteristic tourists’
behavior, i.e., eating, strolling, bathing, shopping, playing, and
relaxing. The social level goal that was indirectly achieved by
the tourists’ behavior was the revitalization of the economy
of tourist destinations. Although this is not one of the social
goals under the SDGs, it nonetheless shows the feasibility of
the CCE study methodology in the context of the achievement
of SDGs.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant
Number 20H04290. The author would like to thank Editage
(www.editage.com) for English language editing.
REFERENCES
[1]
P. Messerli and E. Murniningtyas, Global Sustainable Development
Report 2019: The Future is Now – Science for Achieving Sustainable
Development, New York, 2019, written by Independent Group of
Scientists appointed by the Secretary-General of UN.
[2]
German Advisory Council on Global Change (WBGU), “World in
Transition – A Social Contract for Sustainability,” Tech. Rep., 2011.
[3]
R. Hertwig and T. Gr¨une-Yanoff, “Nudging and boosting: Steering or
empowering good decisions,” Perspectives on Psychological Science,
vol. 12, no. 6, 2017, pp. 973–986, pMID: 28792862.
[4]
A. Newell, Uniﬁed Theories of Cognition (The William James Lectures,
1987).
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1990.
[5]
J. R. Anderson and C. Lebiere, The Atomic Components of Thought.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1998.
[6]
J. R. Anderson, How can the Human Mind Occur in the Physical
Universe?
New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 2007.
[7]
J. E. Laird, A. Newell, and P. S. Rosenbloom, “Soar: An architecture
for general intelligence,” Artiﬁcial Intelligence, vol. 33, 1987, pp. 1–64.
[8]
S. K. Card, T. P. Moran, and A. Newell, The Psychology of Human-
Computer Interaction.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
1983.
[9]
V. Sarathy, “Real World Problem-Solving,” Frontiers in human neuro-
science, vol. 12, 2018, p. 261.
[10]
S. Greiff et al., “Adaptive Problem Solving, Moving Towards a New
Assessment Domain in the Second Cycle of PIAAC,” OECD Education
Working Papers, no. 156, 2017.
[11]
D. Kahneman, “A perspective on judgment and choice,” American
Psychologist, vol. 58, no. 9, 2003, pp. 697–720.
[12]
D. Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow. New York, NY: Farrar, Straus
and Giroux, 2011.
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-780-1
COGNITIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

[13]
M. Kitajima and M. Toyota, “Decision-making and action selection
in Two Minds: An analysis based on Model Human Processor with
Realtime Constraints (MHP/RT),” Biologically Inspired Cognitive Ar-
chitectures, vol. 5, 2013, pp. 82–93.
[14]
M. Kitajima and M. Toyota, “Simulating navigation behaviour based
on the architecture model Model Human Processor with Real-Time
Constraints (MHP/RT),” Behaviour & Information Technology, vol. 31,
no. 1, 2012, pp. 41–58.
[15]
M. Kitajima, Memory and Action Selection in Human-Machine Inter-
action.
Wiley-ISTE, 2016.
[16]
D. Morris, The nature of happiness.
London: Little Books Ltd., 2006.
[17]
A. Banerjee, A. G. Chandrasekhar, E. Duﬂo, and M. O. Jackson,
“Using Gossips to Spread Information: Theory and Evidence from
Two Randomized Controlled Trials,” The Review of Economic Studies,
vol. 86, no. 6, 02 2019, pp. 2453–2490.
[18]
R. Thaler and S. Benartzi, “Save More TomorrowTM: Using Behavioral
Economics to Increase Employee Saving,” Journal of Political Economy,
vol. 112, no. S1, 2004, pp. S164–S187.
[19]
R. H. Thaler and C. R. Sunstein, Nudge: Improving Decisions About
Health, Wealth and Happiness.
Penguin, 3 2009.
[20]
H. A. Simon, “Rational choice and the structure of the environment,”
Psychological Review, vol. 63, 1956, pp. 129–138.
[21]
J. J. V. Bavel et al., “Using social and behavioural science to support
COVID-19 pandemic response,” Nature Human Behaviour, vol. 4, no. 5,
2020, pp. 460–471.
[22]
M. Kitajima, H. Shimada, and M. Toyota, “MSA:Maximum Satisfaction
Architecture – a basis for designing intelligent autonomous agents
on web 2.0,” in Proceedings of the 29th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, D. S. McNamara and J. G. Trafton, Eds.
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society, 2007, p. 1790.
[23]
M. Kitajima, “Cognitive Chrono-Ethnography (CCE): A Behavioral
Study Methodology Underpinned by the Cognitive Architecture,
MHP/RT,” in Proceedings of the 41st Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Cognitive Science Society, 2019, pp. 55–56.
[24]
M. Kitajima, “Cognitive Chrono-Ethnography (CCE): a methodology
for anticipating future user needs,” in Work: A Journal of Prevention,
Assessment and Rehabilitation (IEA 2012: 18th World congress on
Ergonomics - Designing a sustainable future), vol. 41.
Amsterdam,
The Netherlands: IOS Press, 2012, pp. 5251–5258.
[25]
M. Kitajima, H. Tahira, S. Takahashi, and T. Midorikawa, “Understand-
ing tourist’s in situ behavior: a Cognitive Chrono-Ethnography study
of visitors to a hot spring resort,” Journal of Quality Assurance in
Hospitality and Tourism, vol. 12, 2012, pp. 247–270.
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-780-1
COGNITIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

