Evaluating AOU e-Learning Platform Based on Khan's Framework 
 
Bayan Abu-Shawar 
IT Department, Arab Open University, Jordan 
b_shawar@aou.edu.jo 
 
 
Abstract—The rapid growth of online world and the great 
evolution in digital technology open new horizons in different 
domains including education one. Blended learning and e-
Learning approaches are new trends that are based on using 
computers as a medium to deliver and share educational 
materials which makes education available anytime, and 
anywhere. Khan suggested eight dimensional e-learning 
framework which serves as a base to help institutions to plan, 
design, implement and evaluate their e-learning programs. This 
paper discusses whether learning management systems at Arab 
Open University (AOU) meet the eight dimensional e-learning 
frameworks suggested by Badrul Khans. A detailed description 
of Khan’s framework and the LMS used at Arab Open 
University are included in this paper. We claim that the AOU 
LMS is a good framework for e-learning based on these eight 
dimensions.  
Keywords-e-Learning platform; Khan’s framework; LMS; e-
Learning; blended learning.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
The growth of Internet-based technology has brought new 
opportunities and methodologies to education and teaching 
represent in e-learning, online learning, distance learning, 
blended learning and open learning. These approaches are 
typically used in place of traditional methods and mean that 
students deliver their knowledge though the web rather than 
face-to-face tutoring.  
E-learning is a new trend of education systems, which 
implies the "use of Internet technology for the creation, 
management, making available, security, selection and use of 
educational content to store information about those who 
learn and to monitor those who learn, and to make 
communication and cooperation possible." [1]. 
Kruse [2] addressed the benefits of e-learning for both 
parties: organization and learners. Advantages of organizers 
are reducing the cost in terms of money and time. The 
money cost is reduced by saving the instructor salaries, and 
meeting room rentals. The reduction of time spent away 
from the job by employees may be most positive shot. 
Learning time reduced as well, the retention is increased, and 
the contents are delivered consistently. On another hand, 
learners are able to find the materials online regardless of the 
time and the place; it reduces the stress for slow or quick 
learners and increases users' satisfaction; increases learners' 
confidence; and more encourages students' participations. 
In order to make such e-learning or blended learning 
works effectively a well-designed framework is needed. 
Khan's [3] framework offers eight factors that help in 
planning, designing, and evaluating e-learning materials, e-
learning authoring tools, and e-learning platforms, such as 
Learning Management systems (LMS). The framework 
dimensions are: institutional, pedagogical, technological, 
interface design, evaluation, management, resource support, 
and ethical. Khan's framework aims to serve as a self-
assessment instrument for institutions to evaluate their e- 
learning readiness or their opportunities for growth [4]. 
In this paper, the e-learning platform of the AOU is 
described in Section II. Khan's framework is presented in 
Section III. Section IV investigates AOU e-learning platform 
in terms of Khan's framework. A comparison between 
University of Jordan and AOU is discussed in Section V. 
Section VI presents conclusion. 
II. 
THE E-LEARNING PLATFORM OF THE AOU  
Arab Open University was established in 2002 in the 
Arabic region, and adopted the open learning approach. An 
open learning system is defined as "a program offering 
access to individuals without the traditional constraints 
related to location, timetabling, entry qualifications."[5].  
The aim of AOU is to attract large number of students 
who cannot attend traditional universities because of work, 
age, financial reasons and other circumstances. The "open" 
terminology in this context means the freedom from many 
restrictions or constraints imposed by regular higher 
education institutions which include the time, space and 
content delivery methods.  
Freed et al. [6] claimed that the "interaction between 
instructors and students and students to students remained as 
the biggest barrier to the success of educational media". The 
amount of interaction plays a great role in course 
effectiveness [7]. For this purpose and to reduce the gap 
between distance learning and regular learning, the AOU 
requires student to attend weekly tutorials. Some may argue 
that it is not open in this sense; however, the amount of 
attendance is relatively low in comparison with regular 
institutions. For example, 3 hours modules which require 48 
hours attendance in regular universities, is reduced to 12 
hours attendance in the AOU.  
In order to give a better service to students and tutor, to 
facilitate accessing the required material from anywhere, and 
to facilitate the communication between them, an e-learning 
platform is needed. A learning platform “is software or a 
combination of software that sits on or is accessible from a 
network, which supports teaching and learning for 
practitioners and learners.” [18]. A learning platform is 
considered as a common interface to store and access the 
prepared materials; to build and deliver learning activities 
such quizzes and home-works; support distance learning and 
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-340-7
COGNITIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

provide a set of communication possibilities such as 
timetables, videos, etc.  
AOU has partnerships with the United Kingdom Open 
University (UKOU) [19] and according to that at the 
beginning the AOU used the FirstClass system as a 
Computer Mediated Communication (CMC) tool to achieve 
a good quality of interaction. The FirstClass tool provides 
emails, chat, newsgroups and conferences as possible 
mediums of communication between tutors, tutors and their 
students, and finally between students themselves. The most 
important reason behind using FirstClass was the tutor 
Marked Assignment (TMA) handling services it provided. 
However, the main servers are located in the UKOU which 
influences the control process, causes delays, and totally 
depends on the support in UKOU for batch feeds to the 
FirstClass system [8]. 
To overcome these problems, AOU uses Moodle [17] as 
an electronic platform. Moodle is an open-source Course 
Management System (CMS) used by educational institutes, 
business, and even individual instructors to add web 
technology to their courses. A course management system is 
"often internet-based, software allowing instructors to 
manage materials distribution, assignments, communications 
and other aspects of instructions for their courses." [9] 
CMS's, which are also known as Learning Management 
Systems (LMS) or Virtual Learning Environments (VLE), 
are web applications, meaning they run on a server and are 
accessed by using a web browser. Both students and tutors 
can access the system from anywhere with an Internet 
connection.  
The Moodle community has been critical in the success 
of the system. With so many global users, there is always 
someone who can answer a question or give advice. At the 
same time, the Moodle developers and users work together 
to ensure quality, add new ,modules and features, and 
suggest new ideas for development [10][11]. Moodle also 
stacks up well against the feature sets of the major 
commercial systems, e.g., Blackboard and WebCT [12]. 
Moodle provides many learning tools and activities such as 
forums, chats, quizzes, surveys, gather and review 
assignments, and recording grades. 
Moodle was used in AOU mainly to design a well 
formed learning management system which facilitates the 
interaction among all parties in the teaching process, students 
and tutors, and more over to integrate the LMS with the 
Student Information System (SIS). 
In addition that Moodle is easy to learn and use, and that 
it is popular with large user community and development 
bodies. Moodle is flexible in terms of: 
 
Multi-language interface, 
 
Customization (site, profiles), 
 
Separate group features, and pedagogy. 
 
 
 
III. 
KHAN’S E-LEARNING FRAMEWORK 
Khan [3] suggested eight factors of e-learning framework 
that provides a structure to help institutions reviewing e-
learning initiatives and programs to achieve the desired 
learning outcomes. Each dimension represents “a category of 
issues that need to be considered in order to create successful 
e-learning experiences” [4]. The question: "What does it take 
to provide the best and most meaningful open, flexible, and 
distributed learning environments for learners worldwide?" 
[4] originates the idea of Khan’s framework. The framework 
aims to guide planning, designing, and implementing online 
programs and materials. Figure 1 shows the eight 
dimensional e-learning framework which are listed below: 
 
Pedagogical dimension, which mainly concerns of 
issues related to teaching and learning such as course 
contents, how to design it, how to offer it to target 
audience and how the learning outcomes will be 
achieved. 
 
Technological dimension examines issues related to 
hardware, software and infrastructure. E-learning 
environment, LMS, server capacity, bandwidth, 
security and backup are also covered in this 
dimension. 
 
Interface design dimension concerns the overall look 
and feel of an e-learning program. Interface design 
encompasses web and content design, navigation, 
web accessibility, and usability testing. 
 
Evaluation dimension addresses the evaluation of e-
learning at institutional level, evaluation learning 
assessments. 
 
Management dimension refers to the maintenance 
and modification of the learning environment, it also 
addresses issues related to quality control, staffing 
and scheduling. 
 
Resource support dimension related to all technical 
and human resources support to create meaningful 
online environment which includes web-based, 
digital libraries, journals, and online tutorials. 
 
Ethical dimension considers issues related to social 
and political influence, diversity, and legal issues 
such as plagiarism, and copy rights. 
 
Institutional 
dimension 
includes 
three 
sub 
dimensions: issues of administrative affairs related to 
financial aid, registration, payment, graduation and 
grades; issues of academic affairs related to 
accreditation policy, faculty and support staff, and 
class size; issues of student services related to e-
learning which covers everything from counseling 
and library support to book store, internships, and 
alumni affairs. 
 
 
 
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-340-7
COGNITIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
 
Figure 1.  Khan’s framework [4] 
 
IV. 
IMPLEMENTING KHAN’S FRAME WORK AT AOU E-
LEARNING PLATFORM 
AOU adopted the blended learning approach, which is a 
hybrid of both face to face tutoring and online learning. So, 
students attend face to face tutorials once a week for each 
course; at the same time all learning materials are provided 
online for students.  
Moodle was used in AOU to design a well formed e-
learning platform and learning management system (LMS). 
To guarantee security issue, upon launching the LMS site, a 
unified webpage, as shown in Figure 2, is used, where users 
are asked for their authentication. LMS users are classified 
into 
six 
categories 
according 
to 
their 
authorities: 
administrator, creator, an editing-tutor, non-editing tutor, 
student, and guest where each one has different roles as 
listed below: 
 
Administrator can create courses, course sections, 
and create course module blocks and can create new 
user names for new tutors and students. Admin can 
add discussion forums, add chat rooms, messaging 
system, add announcement, add any offline or online 
activities for any course,  
 
Creator has responsibilities according to course level 
such as: creating course sections, adding students to 
their sections, assigning tutors to their sections, and 
adding module blocks and references. 
 
Editing-tutor can do all creation activities related to 
the course level that he is assigned to such as adding: 
lecture 
notes, references, 
assignments, online 
quizzes, etc.  
 
Non-Editing tutor can use web site as it without any 
privilege to create new activities. However, he is 
able to insert grades for assignment quizzes, giving 
feedback to students, share in the discussion forums, 
etc. 
 
A student can use the course website to download 
files and assignment, re submit assignment after 
solving, do online quizzes, fill online questionnaire 
related to course and another one to evaluate tutor. 
Moreover, the student plays the major role in 
discussion forums with other students and with 
his/her tutor. 
 
A guest can observe the activities going on the site 
depending on his level as course level or category 
level but he could not do any interaction 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  AOU e-learning platform starting page 
The infrastructure of LMS is composed mainly of 
authoring tool, and activities tool. Publishing learning 
materials by adding text, creating files, or any content 
management is achieved by authoring tool. Communication 
medium is achieved via activities tool that provides ability to 
create chat rooms, discussion forums, messaging system, 
online quizzes, and grading. Each website of a module 
provides online chatting between student and tutor, different 
forums that enables students to communicate with each other 
and with their tutor sharing their ideas, problems and 
solutions. According to LMS infrastructure, and security 
issues the technological dimension is guaranteed.  
After authentications, another webpage is appeared that it 
shows a list of modules students register on, or the tutor is 
teaching, the user can select the module he/she wants where 
another module website is presented. The module website is 
designed to enable learners to study it online, where learning 
outcomes of each module, and each unit is identified. The 
website of module is divided into weeks according to module 
calendar, where each week has its lecture notes, or slides, in 
addition to video lectures that is offered for students. Based 
on that the pedagogical dimension is considered where in 
addition to face-to face tutoring, online tutoring is also 
available any time.  
Ethical dimension is achieved based on the fact that all 
students have the same rights and etiquette regardless of 
gender, age or disabilities. In terms of assignments, and 
exams there are strict rules applied in case of plagiarism. 
AOU staff has also the same rights, and duties. 
In addition to online material, AOU has an agreement 
with EPESCO, IEEE, Enrolled and other digital libraries so 
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-340-7
COGNITIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

AOU staff and students can access this digital library with its 
journals, and publications. According to this, the support 
report dimension is also guaranteed. 
In general, the interface of LMS has attraction look and 
feels appearance in terms of colors, standardization, 
standardization, and organizations per module. This interface 
is easy to use and user friendly, it needs only an hour 
lecturing to teach new students how to use it. Based on this, 
the Khan’s interface design dimension is applied at AOU e-
learning platform.       
In terms of evaluation dimension, AOU evaluates each 
module and each tutor through online questionnaires. Face-
to-face monitoring is also applied to evaluate monitoring is 
also applied to evaluate tutor teaching strategy; based on 
results of this evaluation, modifications and developments 
are taken in both dimension tutors and modules. Moreover, 
the management dimension is taking into account 
modifications and updating in all program levels including 
LMS platform. For example, a lot of inner house 
enhancements were applied on LMS, such as integrate the 
LMS with the SIS and the Human Resource System (HRS).  
In addition, to release students from being restricted to 
textual learning contents only, learning materials are 
provided as: textual lecture notes, video lectures by 
registering lectures using MS-Producer, and animation 
presentation through PowerPoint application. 
Finally, in respect to institutional dimension, we need to 
elaborate the three sub-dimensions applied at AOU as 
follows: 
   
 
Issues of administrative affairs: AOU have specific 
fees related to faculties and registration; it provides 
financial aid for students and also has regulation to 
fund excellent students. At the same time, AOU has 
different sources of financial aid from Higher 
Ministry of Education and head quarter in Kuwait to 
fund research and projects issues. AOU follows a 
standard scale for full time employee salary and the 
part timer. 
 
Issues of academic affair: AOU follows the 
regulations and standards of Higher Ministry of 
Education in terms of graduation and grading 
system. Since AOU has a partnership with Open 
University 
(OU) 
in 
United 
Kingdome, 
the 
accreditation policy of OU is applied at AOU where 
accreditation is conducted with OU team every four 
years, to discuss any required changes in curriculum 
based on market needs. For teaching purposes, most 
class rooms are equipped with data show that is 
connected to computer; also the class size ranged 
from 25 to 30 students. 
 
Issues of student services: A lot of services are 
provided to students in AOU such as: connecting to 
the SIS to do online registration, obtaining their 
grades, perform learning activities through the LMS, 
such as submitting assignments, do online quizzes, 
and retrieve resources through AOU digital library 
subscriptions. There is a book store to provide 
students with their required books, and establishing 
the student affair department to solve student 
problems, to encourage them practicing their 
hobbies, and establishing graduation alumni. AOU 
offers internship for the tutors to get PhD degree 
from UK universities under certain regulations. 
 
From the above description, we can figure out that AOU 
e-learning platform applied Khan’s eight dimensional e-
learning framework in a digitization way. All services 
provided by AOU for students or staff are part of LMS, 
which facilitate online accessing via e-Learning platform. 
 
V. 
COMPARING E-LEARNING PLATFORMS BETWEEN AOU 
AND UNIVERSITY OF JORDAN 
 
University of Jordan (JU) is both a modern as well as old 
institution of Higher Education in Jordan. Established in 
1962, the University has, since then, applied itself to the 
advancement of knowledge no less than to its dissemination 
[13]. 
E-learning came to assist accomplishing the educational 
system in JU. In order to give a better service to students and 
tutors, to facilitate accessing the required material from 
anywhere, and to facilitate the communication between 
them, an e-learning platform is needed. 
JU is using Blackboard as an electronic platform. 
Blackboard is a web-based system that supports and 
manages various aspects of learning and teaching. 
Blackboard provides many learning tools and activities such 
as course announcements, course documents, self-assessment 
quizzes and online testing, discussion forums, surveys, 
electronic assignment submissions, and links to external 
Web pages. 
Blackboard has been used in JU mainly to design a well 
formed virtual learning environment which facilitates the 
interaction among all parties in the teaching process, students 
and tutors. Moreover, in addition to being easy to use and 
learn, Blackboard is a multi-language platform - since JU is 
using both Arabic and English in its computerized systems, 
and can be customized (site, profiles). 
JU Blackboard system was designed as a modification to 
the existing system; it was developed by students as a 
graduation project [14]. The following summarizes the 
benefits of using the blackboard system in JU: 
 
Providing a web-based system for students and staff 
in order to have a direct effective communication 
channel. 
 
Giving students valuable information to complete 
their learning process through course outlines, notes, 
assignments, quizzes, etc. 
 
Facilitating learning activities by providing students 
with valuable channels of communication such as 
discussion boards with staff, even with students 
themselves. 
 
Enhancing the utilization of existing learning tools 
and making them more attractive for students and 
staff. 
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-340-7
COGNITIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
Giving staff more depth and control over their 
accounts. 
 
In addition to blackboard features, the enhanced 
system will add new features such as discussion 
boards, emails service, playing media files, etc. 
 
Enhancing 
knowledge 
sharing, 
and 
building 
relationships with the students themselves. 
 
Ensuring that students are timely updated with 
information regarding courses and other valuable 
announcements. 
 
JU and AOU developed various systems, including 
the e-learning system, the Student Information 
System (SIS), and the Human Resource System 
(HRS). However, JU had the advantage of providing 
more useful tools for university staff and students, 
including the registration using SMS system, the e-
library system, and the automated exams system. 
 
On the other hand, although the JU systems have one 
integrated data base, these systems are separated in 
the interface, where users of AOU can access most 
of its systems using a unified interface. JU used 
Blackboard in its e-learning system, while AOU 
used Moodle. Moodle is an open source CMS used 
by educational institutes, business, and even 
individual instructors to add web technology to their 
courses. More details about this system and the 
differences between Blackboard and Moodle can be 
found in [15][16][17]. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
The e-learning becomes widely used as a way of teaching 
in the education community. The need for learning 
management systems to deliver the courses online becomes a 
significant issue. Khan’s e-learning framework served as an 
instrument to guide institutions to plan, design, implement 
and evaluate their e-learning programs. In this paper we 
present Khan’s framework, AOU blended learning approach, 
and 
we 
conducted 
that 
AOU 
e-learning 
platform 
implemented 
Khan’s 
eight 
dimensional 
e-learning 
framework: 
pedagogical, 
technological 
information, 
interface, ethics, management, report support, evaluation and 
institution dimension.   A comparison between the e-learning 
platform in JU and AOU was discussed. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Mikic, F. and Anido, L. Towards a standard for mobile 
technology. Proceedings of the International Conference on 
Networking, International Conference on Systems and 
International Conference on Mobile Communications and 
Learning Technologies (ICNICONSMCL'06). 2006, pp. 217-
222. 
 
 
 
 
 
[2] Kruse, K. The Benefits and Drawbacks of e-Learning. 
[Online]: 
http://www.corebiztechnology.com/software_article_elearnin
g_d.htm. [Retrieved: May, 2014]. 
[3] Khan, B. H. (Ed.). (1997). Web-based instruction. Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Educational Technology Publications. 
[4] Khan, B. H. (2001). A framework for Web-based learning. In 
B. H. Khan (Ed.), Web-based training. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Educational Technology Publications. 
[5] P. Karampiperis and D. Sampson. Designing Learning 
Services for Open Learning Systems Utilizing IMS Learning 
Design. In Proceeding of 4th IASTED Int. Conf. on web-based 
Education (WBE 2005), Swaziland, 2005, pp. 165-170.  
[6] Freed, K. A History of Distance Learning, Retrieved June 25, 
2004 from http://www.media-visions.com/ed-distlrn.html 
[7] Rovai, A.P. and Barnum, K.T. On-line course effectiveness: an 
analysis of student interactions and perceptions of learning. 
Journal of Distance Education, 18(1), 57-73, 2003. 
[8] Hammad, S., Al-Ayyoub, A.E., and Sarie, T. Combining 
existing e-learning components towards an IVLE. EBEL 2005 
conference. 
[Online] 
http://medforist.grenobleem.com/Contenus/Conference%20A
mman%20EBEL%2005/pdf/15.pdf 
[9] M.C. Lohman. Effects of Information Distributions Strategies 
on Student Performance, and Satisfaction in a Web-Based 
Course Management System. International Journal for the 
Scholarship of Teaching and Learning, vol. 1, no. 1, 2007, pp. 
1-17.  
[10] Giannini-Gachago D., Lee M., and Thurab-Nkhosi D. Towards 
Development of Best Practice Guidelines for E-Learning 
Courses at the University of Botswana. In Proceeding Of 
Computers 
and 
Advanced 
Technology 
In 
Education, 
Oranjestad, Aruba, 2005. 
[11] Louca, S., Constantinides, C., and Ioannou, A. Quality 
Assurance and Control Model for E-Learning. In proceeding 
(428) Computers and Advanced Technology in Education - 
2004. 
[12] Cole, J.  Using Moodle, O'Reilly, First edition, July 2005 
[13] University of Jordan. URL: http://www.ju.edu.jo. [retrieved: 
May, 2014]. 
[14] N. Al-Assaf. JU Blackboard System. Graduation project, 
King Abdullah II School for Information Technology, The 
University of Jordan, summer term 2009. 
[15] D. Giannini-Gachago, M. Lee, and D. Thurab-Nkhosi. 
Towards Development of Best Practice Guidelines for E-
Learning Courses at the University of Botswana. In 
proceeding of Computers and Advanced Technology In 
Education, Oranjestad, Aruba, 2005. 
[16] S. Louca, C. Constantinides, and A. Ioannou. Quality 
Assurance and Control Model for E-Learning. In Proceeding 
(428) Computers and Advanced Technology in Education. 
2004. 
[17] J. Cole. Using Moodle. 1st edition, O'Reilly. 2005. 
[18] B. AbuShawar. Learning Management System and its 
Rlationship with Knowledge Management. Proceedings of the 
International Conference on Intellignet Computing and 
Information Systems. (2009), pp.738–742. 
[19] Open University. URL: http://www.open.edu/openlearn/. 
[retrieved: May, 2014]. 
 
 
 
 
 
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-340-7
COGNITIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

