Evaluating Data Storytelling Strategies: A Case Study on Urban Changes
Flavia De Simone
Scienza Nuova Research Centre
Suor Orsola Benincasa University
Naples, Italy
Email: flavia.desimone
@centroscienzanuova.it
Roberta Presta
Scienza Nuova Research Centre
Suor Orsola Benincasa University
Naples, Italy
Email: roberta.presta
@centroscienzanuova.it
Federica Protti
Scienza Nuova Research Centre
Suor Orsola Benincasa University
Naples, Italy
Email: federica.protti
@centroscienzanuova.it
Abstract—Understanding urban changes is important for both
citizens and administrations from several perspectives, ranging
from the monitoring of the territorial development in the long
run, to the support to business decision making, and to the
people involvement in the administration policy. Data storytelling
plays a big role in explaining both the factors involved in
this complex phenomena and the effects that administration
choices have on the territory. This work aims to compare the
communication power of different data storytelling strategies
using “semantic” language (newspaper articles) and “perceptive”
language (maps) in the context of urban changes. The study
focuses on the cognitive strategies that human beings apply to
process perceptive and semantic information. In particular, we
compare the ability of two groups of users to understand and to
recall information about the metamorphosis of the Italian city of
Turin after the XX Olympic Winter Games competition in 2006.
The same information about the city has been provided through
infographics to the ﬁrst group and through newspaper articles
to the second one. Both users’ groups have been observing the
information support for the same interval of time. The fruition
strategies of the users have been observed by means of an eye
tracker device, while the comprehension of the information has
been veriﬁed using a questionnaire. The experiments show that,
within ﬁxed time constraints, the users provided with infographics
gain a deeper understanding and a better ability of recall the
represented phenomenon then the others. Further results about
the comparison of the view patterns on the different types of
information support are documented.
Keywords–Human Reasoning; Data Storytelling; Eye Tracking.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In a global scenario, cities have become nodes in a world-
wide network and this connection context has increased the
attention they need to receive. Preserving and increasing the
competitiveness and the attractiveness of cities is a challenge
not only for local administrations but also for central govern-
ments [1]. Indeed, at the time of writing, we ﬁnd in the ﬁrst
point of the USA President’s agenda the creation of a White
House Ofﬁce on Urban Policy focused on the development of
a strategy for the American metropolis for ensuring that all
the resources allocated to urban areas are effectively spent on
the highest-impact programs [2]. This is a measure to contrast
poverty, to facilitate the economic integration of families and
communities. However, to strike the goal, people need to know
they are part of the project: they need to be updated about
the progress of the strategy in action and how it affects the
urban environment in a way they can easily understand. The
territorial development can be observed by citizens through
different information supports: reading newspaper articles,
for examples, or exploring narrative visualizations such as
interactive maps.
Data storytelling can play a big role in explaining the
factors involved in this kind of complex phenomena, such as
the metamorphosis of a city as the effect that administration
choices have on the territory. Indeed, human beings have
always used stories to convey information, because structuring
facts into a narrative schema is an effective way to present
their main features and to recall them, by making a point.
In this context, information visualizations can be used to
communicate in a story-like fashion, providing the readers
with a narrative experience and, when properly arranged,
piloting their attention and keeping them oriented across scene
transitions [3] [4].
This work studies how human beings process the informa-
tion conveyed by different data storytelling media. We compare
strategies using respectively semantic language (newspaper
articles) and perceptive language (maps) in the context of
urban changes. In particular, we consider the regeneration
process of the Italian city of Turin triggered by the XX
Olympic Winter Games. That competition, indeed, has played
the role of catalyst of an urban, social and economic renewal
[5]. In this paper, we evaluate the ability of two groups of
users to understand and to recall information about Turin’s
metamorphosis. The same information about the city has been
provided through information visualizations to the ﬁrst group
and through two newspaper articles to the second one.
Subjects have been asked to answer to a questionnaire
about the message they have extracted by the different sup-
ports. Moreover, in order to gain further insights about the
information processing, their ocular movements and other
statistics about their visual patterns [6] have been studied and
compared thanks to an eye tracking device.
In the following, we present related work needed to place
our research and experimental efforts in Section II. We delve
into the details of our comparison procedure in Section III. Re-
sults analysis is provided in Section IV. Finally, we conclude
and introduce future work in Section V.
II.
RELATED WORK
Storytelling is one of the main players within the In-
formation Visualization ﬁeld, especially when considering
250
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-340-7
COGNITIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

information comprehension and recall issues [7]. Narrative
visualizations help to turn information into knowledge that
people use to understand phenomena and to make decisions. In
particular, Data Storytelling exploits visualization features and
structures belonging to traditional storytelling for conveying
the information associated with digital data. By exploiting
perception and visual sense it is then possible to improve
the understanding and the recall of stories based on data
representing complex phenomena. Indeed, stories provide the
connecting fabric between facts to make them memorable [8].
A well-told story conveys great quantities of information in a
format that is easy to assimilate.
Storytelling effectiveness has been exploited, analyzed and
evaluated especially in the context of learning strategies. In
particular, the cognitive results have been typically veriﬁed by
supplying to the students a questionnaire or by interviewing
them after the visualization of the information support [9] [10].
Eye tracking is an outstanding tool for studies related to
visual search and visual perception. It allows for the recording
of eye movements during the visualization of information
supports and for the analysis of view patterns. It has been
widely exploited for this kind of analysis on supports such
as websites [11], videos [12], newspapers [13], maps [14]
[15], and others. Furthermore, it is currently widely adopted
in human-machine interface usability tests [16].
In this work, within the context of the evaluation of urban
changes communication strategies, we couple the traditional
methods for the informative power evaluation with the eye
tracking analysis in order to gain deep insights, both qualitative
and quantitative, about the cognitive features related to the
fruition of two different kind of information supports in time-
constrained conditions.
III.
EXPERIMENT
In the following, we describe the experiment we run.
A. Participants
Twenty-eight participants have volunteered in the exper-
iment. They are students at the University of Naples “Suor
Orsola Benincasa” (16 girls and 12 boys). None of them have
received money or course credit for their participation. Their
age range is 20-23. All of them come from Naples and its
surroundings and have normal or corrected to normal vision.
Participants have been divided into two groups, Group 1 and
Group 2, each of 14 subjects.
B. Materials
The two groups have been provided with information
displayed in two different ways:
-
Prototype 1: Infographic maps (perceptive information
supports)
-
Prototype 2: Articles (semantic information supports)
Figure 1. Prototype 1 supports
Figure 2. Prototype 2 supports
1) Prototype 1: Group 1 has been provided with two maps
of the city of Turin showing different states of urban decay
for each district by using colors (Figure 1). The level of urban
decay is in the legend of the infographic with increasingly
darker shades of color, starting from low urban decay (white)
up to a high level of urban decay (black). One district among
the others, the San Salvario one, has been highlighted in both
the ﬁrst and the second map, in order to make the viewer focus
on the decay trend of that area in particular.
2) Prototype 2: The second group of participants (Group 2)
has been provided with two articles from an Italian newspaper
(web edition) about urban decay in the San Salvario district in
2002 and in 2010 (Figure 2). Article 1 describes the umpteenth
fact of crime in a neighborhood characterized by degradation
and drug smuggling. In particular, it refers to the fact that
citizens are forced to fend for themselves, since the police is
not able to stem the ﬂow. Article 2 states that, according to the
collected data, the quality of life in San Salvario district, known
as a symbol of the drug dealing and crime, has improved a
lot. Reports of citizens now concern normal maintenance of
the roads. In both articles, two words have been highlighted:
“urban decay”, (“degrado” in Italian), because we wanted the
participants to focus on the topic, and “San Salvario”, which
is the name of the district where the facts are set.
C. Procedure
Participants have been instructed to simply observe the
pictures passing on the screen. The images have been showed
for 15 seconds each and have been presented in different
succession to avoid fatigue or list effects. After watching the
slide show, participants have been asked to answer a short
251
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-340-7
COGNITIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

questionnaire about what they had seen. In both cases, the
questionnaire was made by four open questions.
The questionnaire in the case of Prototype 1 was:
•
Question 1: Which city is represented in maps?
•
Question 2: What phenomenon is described in the
maps you’ve seen?
•
Question 3: Is the observed phenomenon increased or
decreased from the beginning to the end?
•
Question 4: With respect to the area highlighted in
light blue in the map, is the phenomenon increased or
decreased?
The questionnaire in the case of Prototype 2 was:
•
Question 1: In which city the facts described in the
articles take place?
•
Question 2: What kind of phenomenon is described in
the articles?
•
Question 3: Is the phenomenon increased or decreased
from the ﬁrst to the last article?
•
Question 4: According to the articles, which area of
the city is particularly struck by the phenomenon?
Answers to questions 2 and 3 are fundamental to compare
the subjects’ comprehension of the represented urban change.
Question 1 and question 4 are exploratory questions that have
been provided to the students in order to let the authors gain
further knowledge. In particular, question 1 allows for the
evaluation of the subjects’ ability to geographically contextu-
alize the phenomenon while question 4 concerns the cognitive
impact of the selective highlighting used in both supports. The
selective highlighting is a strategy adopted by the experiment
designers for driving the viewer’s attention on some speciﬁc
parts of the supports in order to help him in the information
extraction process. As already mentioned when describing the
supports, the highlighted parts were the topic name and the
district name in the articles and the San Salvario area in the
maps.
During the experiment, eye tracking data have been col-
lected. The Facelab 5.0 desktop eye tracking system [17] has
been exploited to observe, record and objectively measure sub-
jects’ behavior in presence of both the information supports.
Such system, developed by TEA Seeing Machines, consists of
two cameras mounted on a stereo head and of an infrared (IR)
pod. The IR pod emits infrared light, which is reﬂected off
users’ eyes; the reﬂection is recorded by the two cameras to
track the eye movements. Unlike wearable eye trackers, the
Facelab system is non-invasive, so that the subjects’ behavior
has not been affected by the presence of the tracking device.
A software suite called Eyeworks from Eyetracking Inc. [18]
has been used for data collection and analysis. In particular,
we have exploited such tool to perform Area-of-Interest (AOI)
analysis and to build useful data representations such as heat
maps, gaze cluster visualizations, gaze ﬁxation maps, and
statistical charts.
Figure 3. Areas of interest in Prototype 1 and Prototype 2
IV.
RESULTS
In order to generate statistics, it has been necessary to
identify the AOIs, i.e., the relevant target regions to analyze.
The heat map is a convenient method to aggregate results
and gives an immediate impression of the AOIs watched by
subjects. A color scale, moving from blue to red, indicates the
duration of gazes. In Prototype 1, the AOIs are the legend and
the district; in Prototype 2 the AOIs are the heading, the info
box, the title and the body text (Figure 3).
A series of metrics have been selected to evaluate the
participants’ ocular behavior we have captured by means of
the eye tracker. Particularly, we have focused on two aspects:
ﬁxations (FX) and gazes (GZ) [19] [6]. The more frequent
the gaze, the more important the area: if a particular region
on the screen attracts the user’s attention, the number of gaze
directed to that particular region is greater than that of any
other region on the screen [20]. It is assumed that a big number
of ﬁxations on a particular region indicates a signiﬁcant area
of interest. Fixation duration (FD) is considered a measure of
the visual complexity of an AOI: longer ﬁxations indicate the
difﬁculty of participants to extract information by a display
area. Time to ﬁrst Fixation (TF) is the time occurring between
the start of the task and the ﬁrst ﬁxation on an AOI. This
measure is informative about the scanning strategies adopted
by participants [20].
We have analyzed and herein provide the Means (M) and
the Standard Deviation (SD) for the measurements of the
aforementioned metrics in the experiment results shown in
Table I and Table III. Parametric tests (t-tests and F-tests) on
dependent means were realized for each of the measures to
compare the performances of participants in the different AOIs.
A. Results for Prototype 1 (perceptive support)
1) Heat map: Figure 4 represents a sample heat map we
have obtained from the eye tracking analysis of the testers
visualizing the Prototype 1 support. In the bottom-left part,
the support is represented without the overlapping heat map
in order to show that the most viewed region is exactly the
one with the bold cyan borders, corresponding to the San
Salvario district. Indeed, the red spots, over the legend and the
highlighted district, indicate that the group of subjects have
moved to these regions of interest for a signiﬁcant period of
time.
2) Gaze Observations in Each Region : Data on the number
of gazes in each region in Table I reveal that all subjects have
looked both regions (t(13) = 1.44, p = .17) and that the
252
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-340-7
COGNITIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Figure 4. Heat map for Prototype 1
TABLE I. Eye tracking data for Prototype 1.
Prototype 1
GZ
FX
AOIS
M
SD
M
SD
Map
309.08
130.46
11.43
5.00
Legend
221.43
125.77
7.07
2.81
Prototype 1
FD (sec)
TF (sec)
AOIS
M
SD
M
SD
Map
0.31
0.15
1.54
1.01
Legend
0.32
0.23
3.59
1.01
subjects have shifted the gaze more times on the map than to
the legend.
3) Fixations and Fixation Duration in Each Region: The
data collected conﬁrm that all subjects have watched both
regions. Most of subjects have focused their attention more
times on the map, in particular on the highlighted district,
rather than on the legend (t(13) = 2.35, p = .03). Moreover,
each ﬁxation has lasted almost the same time on the legend
and on the map, (t(13) = .08, p = .94).
4) Time to First Fixation in Each Region: During the
scanning phase, participants have started by looking at the map
and then they have switched to the legend (t(13) = 3.81, p =
.002). This is what we expected: it is a supporting evidence
that the task has been performed correctly because from the
legend the subjects have extracted the information to interpret
the map.
5) Answers to the Questionnaire: According to the results
represented in Table II, no subject has recognized the city map
represented in Prototype 1 (question 1). This is reasonable
since the considered sample of subjects (made by students
all living far from Turin) presumably is not familiar with the
Turin city map. Of the 14 people who have seen Prototype 1,
only one has not been able to recognize the urban decay
phenomenon described by the maps (question 2). 8 subjects
have responded correctly to question 3, by then understanding
when the general trend of the urban decay (incremented or
decremented, according to the order the pictures have been
presented). Finally, most of subjects (11 of 14) have been
able to correctly determine the trend of the decay level in the
highlighted district (question 4).
TABLE II. Questionnaire results for Prototype 1.
Prototype 1
Qst1
Qst2
Qst3
Qst4
Right answers
0
13
8
11
Wrong answers
14
1
6
3
Figure 5. Heat map for Prototype 2
B. Results for Prototype 2 (semantic support)
1) Heat map: Figure 5 represents the heat map we have
obtained from the eye tracking analysis of the testers visual-
izing the Prototype 2 support (Article 1). Red spots, over the
info box and the title, indicate that the group of subjects have
moved to these regions of interest for a signiﬁcant period of
time. Moreover, we can notice that the highlighted words in
the text have also captured the subjects’ gaze.
2) Gaze Observations in Each Region: Considering the
gaze results in Table III, the majority of subjects have mainly
looked the information box of the article and the title (t(13) =
.26, p = .79), as it can be noticed by the comparison with the
newspaper heading measurements. The text of the article has
been watched by only 8 of 14 subjects, probably because of
the time constraints (F(3.39) = 18.8, p = .000).
3) Fixations and Fixation Duration in Each Region: The
data provided in Table III conﬁrm that all subjects have
watched much more the info box and the title rather than to
the newspaper heading and the text (F(3.39) = 17.6, p = .000
). The ﬁxations have lasted almost the same time in each AOI
(F(3.39) = 2.12, p = .11), indicating a comparable visual
complexity between each AOI.
4) Time to First Fixation: As it emerges from the record-
ings, the subjects have adopted similar strategies to scan
the image, starting from the top of the page, i.e., from the
newspaper heading , to the bottom, i.e., the text of the article,
passing trough the info box. The participants have ended the
scanning phase on the title where they have spent most of the
time in order to get information (F(3.39) = 2.96, p = .04 ).
5) Answers to the Questionnaire: As Table IV shows, only
two subjects have realized that the phenomenon took place in
Turin. 8 of 14 have been able to recognize the phenomenon
described in the articles and have answered correctly to the
253
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-340-7
COGNITIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

TABLE III. Eye tracking data for Prototype 2.
Prototype 2
GZ
FX
AOIS
M
SD
M
SD
Heading
259.86
94.20
35.48
21.13
Title
245.67
116.66
83.57
40.51
Info box
118.66
67.28
89.04
37.77
Text
20.95
38.49
6.67
14.65
Prototype 2
FD (sec)
TF (sec)
AOIS
M
SD
M
SD
Heading
0.25
0.05
2.24
1.13
Title
0.23
0.07
5.21
2.97
Info box
0.15
0.26
2.31
1.56
Text
0.29
0.12
3.01
3.86
TABLE IV. Questionnaire results for Prototype 2.
Prototype 2
Qst1
Qst2
Qst3
Qst4
Right answers
2
8
7
2
Wrong answers
12
6
7
12
question 2. The other 6 subjects have not remembered exactly
what kind of issues was the article about, even if the topic
was extensively described in the news and the word “decay”
was highlighted in yellow. Of 14 subjects, half of the subjects
have answered correctly to question about the decrease or
increase of the phenomenon and the other half in the wrong
way (question 3). Finally, 12 subjects have not been able to
remember the name of the San Salvario district, despite of the
layout emphasis it has been given within the text.
The answers reﬂect the effects of a natural reading ap-
proach performed by young students in 15 sec. While they
known in advance they would have had only that limited time
interval to observe the support, they have not been instructed
to read as much as they can from the articles, nor to apply,
if known by them, any strategy of rapid reading (that is,
however, a quite rare skill). By relaxing the time constraints,
the subjects would have had, of course, the possibility of
acquiring all the needed information to answer the questions
correctly. Even without considering the application of fast
reading methodology, the ability of extracting information by
text should be considered quite high, since university students
are acquainted with the task, presumably more than other
categories of subjects involved with more practical and manual
activities or with a minor level of education.
C. Comparison
After the separate analysis of the behavior of the groups in
relation to Prototype 1 and Prototype 2, a between-groups-
analysis has been performed for comparing the heuristic
strategies adopted by the participants. Newspaper heading and
text of Prototype 2 have been excluded by the comparison
since they have been considered only by a minority of the
subjects for an irrelevant time, as it emerges by previous
analysis. The times of gaze observation on the legend and
district regions belonging to Prototype 1 and the ones on the
info box and title regions in Prototype 2 are nearly similar
(F(1.26) = 1.56, p = 0.22).
The frequency of ﬁxations in the legend and district regions
belonging to Prototype 1 and the one in the info box and
title regions in Prototype 2 are nearly similar (F(1.26) =
3.28, p = 0.08). The ﬁxation durations in the legend and
district regions belonging to Prototype 1 and the ones in the
info box and title regions in Prototype 2 are nearly similar
(F(1.26) = 0.156, p = 0.69). In time constrained contexts,
the totality of the subjects has adopted comparable heuristics,
within the regions considered most signiﬁcant.
In order to evaluate the informative power of the two
supports, a comparison has been also made between the correct
and the wrong answers to the questionnaires.
As the answers to question 1 show, almost all the partic-
ipants have not been able to geographically contextualize the
represented phenomenon, either by looking at the city map nor
by scanning the text articles. This is probably due to the fact
that the represented urban change involves an area which is
not the one the participants live in, so they are not familiar
with the cartographic representation of the city and with the
local peculiar urban and social problems.
Questions 2 and 3 focus on the topic and on the trend
comprehension, regardless the understanding of the involved
physical area. Performances in terms of correct answers seems
to show there is a better understanding of both the arguments
for participants looking at the perceptual support.
Questions 4 have been designed to explore the effectiveness
of the selective highlighting in the supports. Due to the
diversity between the kind of the support, questions 4 are
formulated differently but they both focus on the same purpose,
i.e., they check for the effects of higlights: in the ﬁrst case,
what is highlighted in the perceptual supports is an area and
the minimum effort the subject can do is observing the change
in the color; in the case of the semantic supports, words
are highlighted and the minimum effort the subject can do
is reading them. While the eye tracking has demonstrated
that the highlighted keywords in Prototype 2 have attracted
the subjects’ attention, almost nobody has been able to recall
the name of the district interested by the urban change. The
highlighted region of the map also captured the viewers’ gaze,
as showed by the eye tracker. Participants have focused on
the changes on such area and correctly interpreted the time
evolution of the phenomenon represented by the infographics.
Question 2 and 4 registered a signiﬁcant difference of
correct and wrong answers between Prototype 1 and 2. A chi-
square test has been performed by considering the answers
to questions 2 and 4. Such a test has showed that, despite
the semantic information is clearly and extensively described
through a textual description, synthetic perceptual information
is more effective for informational purposes (X2(1) = 12.65,
p = .000).
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Cities are living systems and urban changes are complex
phenomena that involve time and space. Understanding cities
metamorphosis is important for citizens and administrations
for several reasons: for example, to empower the weakest
areas by means of the presence of public services, to keep
under control the urban decay, to monitor the effects of
administrations’ choices in the long run, to support business
decision making on the territory and to directly involve citizens
in the administration policy.
254
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-340-7
COGNITIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

The aim of this study was to test the communicative
effectiveness of different data storytelling strategies in the
ﬁeld of urban changes. To this purpose, we have provided
two groups of 14 young students each with respectively an
infographic support and a textual support for a time interval
of 15 sec. All the subjects have no a priori hints about the
represented phenomena.
We have compared the informative power of the two
strategies on the basis of eye tracking data and answers to
ad-hoc designed questionnaires.
While questionnaires are a typical way to check the infor-
mation processing and comprehension in real experiments, by
the eye tracking we gain deeper insights with respect to the
classical path between the questions and the answers.
Thanks to the eye tracker device, we have observed the
fruition strategies of the subjects. We have found that they
have applied a similar scanning strategy for the understanding
of the infographics and of the news reports, i.e., within each
support, they focus on a single area that better synthesizes the
main information (the legend area for the map and the title for
the article).
On the other hand, by considering the answers to the
questionnaires, we have discovered that, in a time constrained
situation, the subjects better understand the phenomena when
they are depicted in the synthetic infographics rather than when
they are extensively described by narrative texts.
These data let us conclude that, for young people with
a medium-high level of education, the informative power of
infographics is stronger than the newspaper articles’ one in
time-constrained scenarios, where the users apply a scanning
strategy of the information support, rather than a careful
reading.
To generalize the statement, we ﬁrst need to enlarge and
differentiate the sample of participants in future experiments.
We can exploit such analysis in a future comparison with
people having a prior knowledge about the urban problems,
in order to assess how the understanding of the represented
phenomena changes when the recipient of the communication
strategy is already aware of (and directly touched by) the
topics.
Finally, we are going to apply the presented methodology
of evaluation of different data storytelling supports in more
complex urban changes evolution scenarios, as well as in
application domains with other communication goals.
REFERENCES
[1]
L. Kamal-Chaoui and J. Sanchez-Reaza, “Urban Trends and Policies
in OECD Countries,” OECD Regional Development Working Papers,
2012, ISSN: 2073-7009.
[2]
“The agenda of the Obama Administration about Urban Policy,” 2014,
URL: http://change.gov/agenda/urbanpolicy agenda/.
[3]
R. Kosara and J. Mackinlay, “Storytelling: The Next Step for Visual-
ization,” Computer, vol. 46, no. 5, 2013, pp. 44–50.
[4]
E. Segel and J. Heer, “Narrative visualization: Telling stories with data,”
Visualization and Computer Graphics, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 16,
no. 6, 2010, pp. 1139–1148.
[5]
P. Bondonio and C. Guala, “Gran Torino? The 2006 Olympic Winter
Games and the tourism revival of an ancient city,” Journal of Sport and
Tourism, vol. 16, no. 4, 2011, pp. 303–321.
[6]
K. Holmqvist, M. Nystr¨om, R. Andersson, R. Dewhurst, H. Jarodzka,
and J. Van de Weijer, Eye tracking: A comprehensive guide to methods
and measures.
Oxford University Press, 2011.
[7]
S. Bateman, R. Mandryk, C. Gutwin, A. Genest, D. McDine, and
C. Brooks, “Useful Junk? The Effects of Visual Embellishment on
Comprehension and Memorability of Charts,” in ACM Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 2010), Atlanta, GA, USA,
2010, pp. 2573–2582.
[8]
M. Austin, Useful ﬁctions: evolution, anxiety, and the origins of
literature.
University of Nebraska Press, 2011.
[9]
M. Jenkins and J. Lonsdale, “Evaluating the effectiveness of digital
storytelling for student reﬂection,” in ICT: Providing choices for learners
and learning. Proceedings ASCILITE Singapore 2007, 2007.
[10]
M. R. Davidson, “A phenomenological evaluation: using storytelling as
a primary teaching method,” Nurse Education in practice, vol. 4, no. 3,
2004, pp. 184–189.
[11]
E. H. Chi, P. Pirolli, K. Chen, and J. Pitkow, “Using information scent to
model user information needs and actions and the Web,” in Proceedings
of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems.
ACM, 2001, pp. 490–497.
[12]
V. Lavrusik, “Local Online News Video Design and Usability: What’s
working, what’s not,” Online Journalism Blog, 2009.
[13]
H. Bucher and P. Schumacher, “The relevance of attention for selecting
news content. an eye-tracking study on attention patterns in the recep-
tion of print and online media,” Communication, vol. 31, no. 3, 2006,
pp. 347–368.
[14]
V. Krassanakis, V. Filippakopoulou, and B. Nakos, “An application of
eye tracking methodology in cartographic research,” Proceedings of the
EyeTrackBehavior (Tobii), Frankfurt, 2011.
[15]
T. Opach and A. Nossum, “Evaluating the usability of cartographic
animations with eye-movement analysis,” in 25th International Carto-
graphic Conference, 2011, p. 11.
[16]
W. Gibbs and R. Bernas, “Visual Attention in Newspaper versus TV-
Oriented News Websites,” Journal of Usability Studies, vol. 4, no. 4,
2009, pp. 146–165.
[17]
URL: http://www.seeingmachines.com/product/facelab/.
[18]
URL: http://www.eyetracking.com/Software/EyeWorks.
[19]
A. Poole and L. J. Ball, “Eye Tracking in Human-Computer Interaction
and Usability Research: Current Status and Future,” in Prospects, Chap-
ter in C. Ghaoui (Ed.): Encyclopedia of Human-Computer Interaction.
Pennsylvania: Idea Group, Inc, 2005.
[20]
R. J. Jacob and K. S. Karn, “Eye tracking in human-computer inter-
action and usability research: Ready to deliver the promises,” Mind,
vol. 2, no. 3, 2003, p. 4.
255
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-340-7
COGNITIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

