Toward Modeling Task Difficulty:  
The Case of Chess 
 
 
Dayana Hristova, Matej Guid, Ivan Bratko 
Faculty of Computer and Information Science 
University of Ljubljana 
Ljubljana, Slovenia 
a0902496@unet.univie.ac.at, matej.guid@fri.uni–lj.si, bratko@fri.uni–lj.si  
 
 
Abstract— We investigate the question of experts’ ability to 
estimate task difficulty through a case study that asks players 
to rate tactical chess positions. In an eye tracking experiment, 
experts’ estimations are compared to the statistic–based 
difficulty ratings of the chesstempo.com website. The subjects’ 
solutions of chess problems and their considered chess 
variations are analyzed in connection to ChessTempo’s 
solutions. In addition, eye tracking and performance data (time 
and accuracy) are used as physiological indicators of 
subjectively perceived difficulty. In the course of our research, 
we also aim to identify the attributes of tactical positions that 
induce difficulty. Understanding the connection between 
players’ estimation of difficulty and the properties of the 
search trees of variations considered is essential for modeling 
the difficulty of tactical positions. 
Keywords– Task Difficulty, Problem Solving, Search Trees, 
Chess, Chess Tactical Problems, Eye Tracking, Chesstempo.com 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
    Modeling the difficulty of problems is a topic becoming 
increasingly salient in the context of the development of 
tutoring systems and dynamic difficulty adjustment (DDA) 
for gaming [1]. Since, in chess, as in other domains, there is 
no developed methodology to reliably predict difficulty for 
each person solving a problem, we are attempting to 
understand different ways of assessing difficulty. The 
starting point of our investigation is scrutinizing the 
relationship between a player’s chess expertise and their 
ability to assess the difficulty of a tactical problem.  
     We are primarily concerned with “task difficulty” that 
mediates between the “subjective experience of difficulty” 
(that cannot be objectified) and the “task complexity” – as 
an inherent quality of a task (e.g. the properties of its space 
state). In order to approach task difficulty we are using 
psychophysiological measures (eye tracking), performance 
measures (accuracy of solution, time, variations considered, 
ranking positions), as well as qualitative retrospective 
reports (on perceived difficulty and on variations 
considered). We define the difficulty of a problem as the 
probability of a person succeeding in solving the problem. 
Hence we have adopted the difficulty ratings of 
chesstempo.com – an online chess platform – as a reference. 
These ratings are based on two principles: 1) the success 
rate for the particular position; 2) the ChessTempo score of 
the user, who has attempted to solve it. These ratings 
provide a basis to analyse the ability of human experts to 
estimate the difficulty of a problem, and in our case – to 
predict the statistically accumulated measure of difficulty. 
    In the case of chess, the difficulty for humans is induced 
by exceeding the limitations of player’s cognitive abilities: 
to detect relevant motifs, to think strategically, to calculate a 
variation, and find a solution. The perception of difficulty is 
also influenced by psychological aspects, e.g. when the 
player is not able to calculate a variation all the way through 
to a checkmate, they have to deal with uncertainty 
(stemming from the incompleteness of the information set 
[2]). To our knowledge, in chess no work has been 
conducted that explicitly focuses on modeling the difficulty 
of chess tactical problems. Also, current research on 
expertise in chess has been mostly focused on the perceptual 
advantages of experts over novices [3]. Our study aims to 
explore the connection between task difficulty and 
expertise, as well as the variability among individuals. 
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we state 
our hypothesis and explain why modeling the difficulty of 
chess tactical positions is problematic. Section III describes 
our methodology. We present our preliminary results of data 
analysis in Section IV, which is followed by a thorough 
discussion of an illustrative example from the eye-tracking 
experiment. The final section of the paper is reserved for 
concluding remarks and directions for future work. 
II. 
TOWARD MODELING DIFFICULTY 
A. Hypothesis  
    Our hypothesis is that the players' ability to estimate the 
difficulty of a position is positively correlated with the 
players' chess strength measured by World chess federation 
(FIDE) Elo rating. However, we conceive of chess strength 
as only one among multiple factors influencing the ability to 
make good predictions. E.g. in the case of teaching, one 
should develop skills related to estimating difficulty in order 
211
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-340-7
COGNITIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

to select appropriate tasks for the students. Being a greater 
expert in a domain (e.g., being a stronger chess player) 
should (in principle) increase the chances of making better 
predictions – due to the better overview over the mass of 
possibilities. However, for a group of people of similar 
expertise, the problem's difficulty may vary due to their 
specific knowledge and individual style. Hence, we do not 
expect a high linear correlation between player’s Elo rating 
and their success in ranking the positions.  
B. Modeling the difficulty of tactical positions  
     We observed that the algorithm for estimating difficulty 
of chess positions in ordinary chess games proposed by 
Guid and Bratko [4] fails to perform well on chess tactical 
problems for the following reason: the programs tend to 
solve the problems very quickly, usually at the shallowest 
depths of search. Since the algorithm takes into account the 
differences in computer evaluations when changes in 
decisions take place with increasing search depth, the 
computer simply recognizes most of the chess tactical 
problems to be rather easy, and does not distinguish 
between positions of different difficulties (perceived by 
humans). Estimating difficulty of chess tactical problems 
therefore requires a different approach, and different 
algorithms. We ought to gain an insight into the way the 
players of different strength solve the tactical problems, and 
to better understand what may be the properties of such 
algorithm. Hence, we use physiological measures that gauge 
performance in chess players’ ability to assess the difficulty 
of tactical problems, and qualitative reports.  
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
     In the experiment, so far conducted with 11 strong chess 
players, eye tracking is used in order to gather perceptual 
data about performance and difficulty. In our experiment, 
chess experts are solving and then ranking according to their 
difficulty a selection of ChessTempo problems with 
established difficulty ratings (each solved by minimum 600 
people). The participants who have completed the 
experiment are 10 male and 1 female (avg. age= 48 years) 
chess experts. Their FIDE Elo ratings vary between 1900 
and 2300. The chess problems were displayed as ChessBase 
9.0 generated images, 70 cm from the players’ eyes. The 
players’ eye movements were recorded by an EyeLink 1000 
eye tracking device (SR Research), sampling at 500 Hz. 
Nine–point calibration was carried out before (each part of) 
the experiment session.  
     Participants were presented with 12 positions randomly 
selected from ChessTempo according to their difficulty 
ratings: 6 hard; 4 medium; 2 easy. The estimation of the 
difficulty level is relative to the level of skills of the 
participants, who, as already mentioned, are strong chess 
players. Each of the three difficulty classes is separated 
from the other by 350 points. The problems within each 
class have very similar difficulty rating. The 12 positions 
were presented in 3 blocks of four positions: randomized 
within the blocks and between blocks to avoid a sequence 
effect. The experiment with each player lasted between 20 
and 45 minutes. 
     The subjects were instructed to input their solution (their 
suggested best move) as soon as they have found a variation 
that occurs to be winning. For each position, they were not 
allowed to exceed the time limit of three minutes. 
Retrospective reports were obtained after the completion of 
the experiment. These reports serve as a key to 
understanding the way experts approached the presented 
position, and to the variations they considered. Chess 
experts are able to remember variations and are capable of 
reconstructing 
even 
full 
chess 
games. 
Hence, 
the 
retrospective reports obtained have high validity. After the 
experiment, participants were asked to rate the problems 
(from 1 to 12) in ascending order of their difficulty.  
     DataViewer is used to generate reports about the 
participants’ eye activity: saccades, fixations, interest areas, 
and trial report. The data analysis will be further discussed 
in the next section.   
IV. 
DATA ANALYSIS 
A. Kendall’s τ rank correlation coefficient  
     We computed the correlation between various difficulty 
rankings of our set of chess positions. The rankings come 
from individual players that took part in the experiment, and 
from the ChessTempo database. The ChessTempo ranking 
order was derived from the ChessTempo difficulty ratings 
of individual positions. The players did not estimate 
difficulty ratings, but produced their ranking orders directly. 
We used Kendall’s τ rank correlation coefficient which we 
applied to our data as follows. Given two rankings, 
Kendall’s τ is defined by:   
 
 
 
 
 
Here n is the number of all chess positions in the rankings, 
and nc and nd are the numbers of concordant pairs and 
discordant pairs, respectively. A pair of chess positions is 
concordant if their relative rankings are the same in both 
ranking orders. That is, if the same position precedes the 
other one in both rankings. Otherwise the pair is discordant. 
In our data, some of the positions were, according to 
ChessTempo, of very similar difficulty. Such positions 
belong to the same difficulty class. To account for this, the 
formula above was modified. In the nominator and 
denominator, we only counted the pairs of position that 
belong to different classes. 
     Fig. 1 shows for the 11 players the relation between the 
player’s 
Kendall 
rank 
correlation 
coefficient 
with 
ChessTempo ranking, and the player’s FIDE Elo rating. 
212
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-340-7
COGNITIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Pearson product–moment correlation coefficient (Pearson's 
r) was computed in order to determine the relationship 
between Kendall’s τ and the chess strength of the 
participants (reflected by their rating). There was a medium 
correlation that is statistically not significant between 
Kendall’s τ and FIDE Elo ratings (r = .436, n = 11, p = 
0.174). While a higher number of participants in this 
experiment is required, these initial results suggest that 
stronger players indeed tend to produce more correct 
rankings of chess tactical problems with respect to their 
difficulty.  
     In our experiment the strongest player was actually the 
best predictor of difficulty, by high margin. Furthermore, 
when ranking the extremes: 1 – easiest and 12 – hardest 
position; most players’ estimations were close to the 
respective end of the difficulty spectrum (± 2 positions). 
However, participants showed high variability in their 
estimation. There were even cases of positions that were at 
the same time rated as a 1 and a 12 by the different players.  
     Until we finish data collection and are able to calculate 
the final results, and check whether there is a statistically 
significant correlation between Elo ratings and Kendall’s 
coefficient for each participant, it is crucial to take positions 
of the experiment as case studies. This will allow us to 
identify aspects that have so far influenced participants’ 
problem solving and estimation of the task difficulty.  
B. Eye tracking data 
     A crucial part of the eye tracking data processing is the 
analysis of fixations and saccades in relation to the squares 
of the chessboard, defined as interest areas (IAs). We 
analyzed what percentage of the fixations fall on a particular 
interest area for both cases: 1) for each individual; 2) for all 
fixations of all participants. For the purpose of the analysis, 
we focus on the following phases: 1) the first 10 seconds 
after presentation; 2) the last 5 seconds preceding the input 
of a solution; 3) overall duration of the trial. The first two 
time phases are important for the data analysis as the first is 
conceptualized by Bilalić et al. [5] as a perceptual phase, 
and the second- as a conclusive decision making phase [5]. 
     In the sequel, we analyze position N4 (Fig. 2) – one of 
the positions that was systematically estimated as more 
difficult than its ChessTempo rating (1861) indicates. Only 
33% of the participants in our experiment inputted the 
correct solution, as opposed to a 50% Standard success rate 
in ChessTempo. According to both ChessTempo and to 
chess program Houdini the problem has only one good 
solution – Nc2-a1.  
     The retrospective accounts of the variations the players 
considered indicate the presence of two main motifs that all 
participants attended to: 1) weakness of Black King on e8; 
2) trapping Black Queen on b3. The diagrams from the 
perceptual phase and the retrospection data confirm that all 
participants spotted the first motif. The players considered 
different variations aiming at exploiting this motif (Fig. 2, 
solid arrows): attacking with Re4xe7 or strengthening their 
attack through playing Qc1-e3. During the perception phase 
and for the overall duration of the trial, the e7 square is the 
most attended IA – accounting for respectively 9.5%, and 
9.3% of the fixations. Another main piece in this motif – 
Re4 – is the third most visited area, accounting for 7.3% of 
the fixations in the perception phase.  
     The other salient motif – trapping the Black Queen on b3 
– has also been reported in the retrospections by all 
participants. As shown on Fig. 2 (with dashed arrows) three 
moves were considered by participants: Re4-b4, Nc2-d4 or 
Nc2-a1. The percentage of fixations recorded on a1 is low – 
0.3% of the whole trial. However, this may also be 
influenced by the fact that a1 is a corner square. Once the 
potentially winning move Nc2-a1 is spotted, the calculations 
should be focusing on the squares surrounding the Qb3 – to 
verify whether this move leads to a success in trapping the 
Queen. During the perceptual phase only the Knights on c2 
(2.9%) and c3 (8.9%), of all squares surrounding the Qb3 
were among the fixations with highest attendance. However, 
during the decision phase, in addition to the knights (c3 – 
 
Figure 1. Correlation between Kendall’s τ and FIDE Elo rating 
 
 
Figure 2. Position N4. The two main motifs: 1) pinned Bishop on e7; 2) 
trapped Queen on b3.  
213
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-340-7
COGNITIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

11.7%; c2 – 7.4%), players were also fixating more on other 
squares relevant to the second motif, such as: b3 (4.9%), a2 
(4.3%) and b2 (3.7%).  
C. Discussion of prelimiary results 
     Our data shows that despite of the differences in strength, 
participants’ line of thought focused on the above two 
motifs. This position has only one good solution (Nc2-a1), 
but two salient motifs (two families of branches of the 
search tree). The first motif triggers variations that do not 
contain the right solution. It is evident and invites for 
violent moves in the center of the board and along the e- 
file. This motif is even more appealing as White has two 
Knights at her disposal– pieces that are strong precisely in 
the center of the chessboard. The candidate moves are: 
Re4xe7 - direct attack; Qc1-e3 – strengthening White’s 
attack. The second motif’s candidate moves appear less 
intuitive. Choosing to move a Knight to the edge, or even to 
the corner (a1), is a rather counter intuitive move since 
Knights are considered to be strongest in the middle of the 
chessboard. Ultimately, the aforementioned characteristics 
of the problem create predisposition for increased difficulty 
even for skilled chess players. Hence, the success rate for 
this position was 33%.  
     66% of the participants identified the Knight on c2 as the 
piece that should be used in the first move of the winning 
variation in this tactical position. However, half of these 
players were simply unable to see the move Nc2-a1 because 
all chess players are taught not to move a night into a 
corner. For a good player, a move like Nc2-a1 is almost 
"unethical". For the same reason, the incorrect alternative 
Nc2-d4, putting the night in the center, is so natural that it 
makes the correct Nc2-a1 practically invisible to many 
players. This is an example of a mistake made due to 
negative transfer [6] when the player oversees the solution 
of the problem as a result of their training. In other words, 
seemingly good moves can increase the difficulty of the 
chess position due to simple (but misleading) heuristics that 
people may use in order to solve the problem. 
     The number of feasible options for the player, as well as 
for her opponent, defines the number of nodes that are 
searched by the player. Then, more importantly, the chess 
player, according to his ability, can distinguish between 
relevant and not relevant moves. A player's search tree, i.e. a 
set of moves and variations the player might consider as 
reasonable candidate moves, depends on cutting off 
branches that do not seem promising. Often violent moves, 
such as capturing or mating, are favored as they lead to 
immediate improvement in one’s situation. However, as in 
the case of position N4, the moves that seem to be the most 
promising are distracting the player from the correct 
solution.  
V. 
CONCLUDING REMARKS 
The preliminary data does not offer statistically significant 
results supporting or disproving our hypothesis that the 
ability to predict the ChessTempo ratings correlates with the 
player’s Elo rating. More conclusive results are expected 
upon completion of the data gathering. However, the 
mismatches between ChessTempo ratings and experts’ 
ranking of problems according to their difficulty shed light 
on aspects of tactical chess positions that influence the 
estimation of difficulty. One of them is the properties of 
player’s search tree. Furthermore, our case study in one of 
the problems also highlighted the impact of negative 
transfer [6] on problem solving and hence on the perception 
of difficulty.  
     Taking into account the limitations and the specificities 
of human problem solving, is a challenge for attempts to 
model the difficulty of chess problems. However, using 
performance and psychophysiology measures can provide 
the basis for modeling difficulty. This will enable the 
automatic detection of difficulty [2] of tactical positions that 
will be instrumental in the development of tutoring systems 
for chess. Since chess has proven itself in cognitive science 
research as a domain with high external validity, we hope 
that our work will be beneficial for modeling the difficulty 
of problems in other domains.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Sincere thanks to Grega Repovš, Anka Slana, Christian 
Armeni and Gregor Geršak for their support during the 
preparation of experiment this study is based on.  
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Hunicke and V. Chapman, “AI for dynamic difficulty 
adjustment in games,” in Challenges in game artificial 
intelligence, D. Fu, S. Henke and J. Orkin. Eds. Paper from 
the 2004 AAAI workshop, Technical report Wj–04–04, 
Menlo Park, CA: AAAI Press, July 2004, pp. 91–96. 
[2] G. Dosi and M. Egidi, “Substantive and procedural 
uncertainty: An Exploration of Economic Behaviours in 
Changing Environments” Journal of Evolutionary Economics  
Volume 1 (2), June 1991 , pp. 145–168, doi:10.1007/ 
BF01224917 
[3] E. Reingold and N. Charness, “Perception in chess: Evidence 
from eye movements,” in Cognitive processes in eye 
guidance, G. Underwood, Ed. New York: Oxford university 
press, pp. 325– 354, 2005 
[4] M. Guid and I. Bratko, “Search–Based Estimation of Problem 
Difficulty for Humans”. Artificial Intelligence in Education. 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science (AIED 2013), Memphis, 
USA, vol. 7926, July 2013, pp. 860–863, doi: 10.1007/978–
3–642–39112–5_131 
[5] M. Bilalić, P. McLeod and F. Gobet, “Why good thoughts 
block better ones: the mechanism of the pernicious 
Einstellung (set) effect” Cognition.;108(3), September 2008, 
pp. 652–661. doi: 10.1016/j.cognition.2008.05.005 
[6] R. J. Sternberg and K. Sternberg, “Cognitive psychology” 
Wadsworth: Cengage Learning, 2012 
 
 
214
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-340-7
COGNITIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

