Symbiotic Thinking … for  Cognitive Modeling as Well 
Marta Franova, Yves Kodratoff 
LRI, UMR8623 du CNRS & INRIA Saclay 
 Bât. 660, Orsay, France 
e-mail: mf@lri.fr , yvekod@gmail.com 
 
Abstract— The choice of a design paradigm influences the tools 
that may (or have to) be used and also the level of ambitions 
that may (or have to) be envisioned. This paper suggests, in 
Cognitive Science, exploring a particular design paradigm 
enabling to conceive cognitive theories that guarantee a 
possibility for future extensions while preserving the atemporal 
character of the previous achievements. One of the essential 
tools of this design methodology is symbiosis as a particular 
composition of building parts of such evolving theories. We 
have used these topics in a formalization of creative processes 
involved in the design of Symbiotic Recursive Pulsative 
Systems, as they are performed while designing a methodology 
for Automated Program Synthesis from formal specifications 
in incomplete domains. The paper thus concerns modeling 
human mental processes as well as human reasoning 
mechanisms. 
Keywords— Cartesian Systemic Emergence; Symbiotic Recursive 
Pulsative Systems; Symbiotic Thinking; cognitive models; 
implementation of human reasoning mechanisms. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
In contemporary science, a multidisciplinary systems 
modeling is usually performed by selecting some available 
logically justifiable (thus ‘mathematical’) tools and by 
adapting these tools to purposes for which these tools were 
not originally designed. As has been known already to 
Francis Bacon (see [1], p. 68), this approach may lead to 
artificial difficulties. More recently, Bertalanffy expressed 
the need for a change as follows: “It may be preferable first 
to have some nonmathematical model with its shortcomings 
but expressing some unnoticed aspect, hoping for a future 
development of a suitable algorithm, than to start with 
premature mathematical models following known algorithms 
and, therefore, restricting the field of vision” [3], p. 24. 
We have relied on Bertalanffy’s suggestion in our work 
with a design of a particular problem-solving system, namely 
a system that constructs recursive programs from formal 
specifications in incomplete domains (called here Program 
Synthesis in Incomplete Domains, PSID, for short). We 
realized that a necessary condition for the success of our task 
is including ‘symbiosis’ into the design of the system (thus 
conceiving a symbiotic system) and to our scientific 
reflection as well (thus performing ‘symbiotic thinking’). 
Roughly 
speaking, 
symbiosis 
concerns 
a 
particular 
composition of the parts of a system. Namely, the essential 
feature of a symbiotic composition is that, when eliminating 
an arbitrary part of a symbiotic system, not only the whole 
system but also all the remaining parts collapse, i.e., the 
system and its parts cease to exist or are mutilated. A typical 
example of a symbiotic system is provided by Peano’s 
definition of Natural Numbers (NAT). If we use the symbol 
♦ for symbiotic compositions, a formal representation of the 
systemic definition of NAT reads as: NAT = 0 ♦ Suc ♦ NAT, 
where Suc is the successor function. If we eliminate one part 
from this system, for instance 0, we may no more speak of 
Suc nor of NAT as such. This example illustrates that, while 
it might not be obviously noticeable, symbiosis is present in 
formulating primitive notions (such as 0, Suc, Nat) of 
deductive theories. 
The exactness required by mathematical sciences (see 
[12]) is not suitable for handling symbiosis. This maybe 
explains why Cognitive Science (CS) relies on modular tools 
and formulates modular models [2]. In this paper, we want to 
point out the advantage of designing evolving symbiotic 
systems/models not only in Computer Science (as illustrated 
by our work in PSID) but in CS as well. Indeed, such an 
evolving teleological orientation (teleos, lat. “end”) of CS 
research allows handling, in a creative way, problems that 
are out of the scope of modular systems. For instance, 
consider the goal specified informally by the following 
sentence: 
(g1) “Construct a scientific model of the human brain that 
solves all the questions and problems related to a 
formalization of the brain mental processes”.  
Researchers in CS will certainly argue that this goal is 
impossible. We would like to point out that this notion of 
‘impossible’ is related to the present scientific knowledge, 
scientific tools and models. In this paper, we will present 
some notions and tools that diminish the strength of this 
contemporary verdict ‘impossible’ to a somewhat weaker 
notion of ‘reasonable and achievable, provided that we 
change our paradigms, tools and that we put in an adequate 
effort’. Of course, a trade-off of this new approach is 
replacing the requirement of exactness by the requirements 
of rigor, control and prevention. By control is meant here the 
requirement to consider all secondary effects of the evolution 
in the process of construction of a particular system so that 
the constructed system needs no future maintenance, as it is, 
for instance, the case for Peano’s axioms. By prevention is 
meant here some careful anticipation of possible future 
practical needs, opening thus a way to a smooth extension of 
a previously, practically sufficient system. This can be 
illustrated by a smooth extension of NAT up to complex 
numbers. In other words, the acceptance of new essential 
values leads to interesting by-products, namely, to a creative 
freedom enabling to consider evolving systems and to non-
obsolesce of these systems at each stage of its evolution. 
Concerning these essential competitive returns of 
considering symbiosis in the systems design and modeling, 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-780-1
COGNITIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

our aim in this paper is to share the essential knowledge we 
have used in PSID and that we deem useful also for CS.  
The paper is structured as follows. Section II specifies the 
context of this paper. Section III introduces some 
fundamental notions that are necessary for understanding the 
topic of this paper. Section IV presents the main problems 
related to the use of Symbiotic Thinking in creation and 
modeling symbiotic systems. Finally, Section V presents 
related and future work. 
II. 
THE CONTEXT 
PSID as well as the brain are complex problem-solving 
systems. Therefore, it is necessary to point out how 
symbiosis is related to basic problem-solving paradigms. In 
this section we are going to recall two of these paradigms. 
We will explain also how symbiosis and modularity are 
related to these paradigms. Then, we present Cartesian 
Systemic Emergence as an effort to formalize a particular 
kind of scientific creativity. 
A. Paradigms 
Let us briefly draw the difference between modular and 
symbiotic Paradigms. 
In a modular system, the parts (called modules) of the 
system are units, entities or operations that can exist all by 
themselves, though in the modular system they are intended 
to be used together. Modular systems are designed usually 
via the paradigm that can be represented by the following 
formula:  
∀ Problem ∃ System solves(System,Problem). 
(P1) 
(P1) states that for any problem Pbi one can build at least 
one system (or a module) Si able to solve Pbi. Usually, Si is 
not able to solve a problem Pbj, for j ≠ i. This is why we call 
here heuristics such solutions. Relying on (P1) while 
constructing a system leads to a library of particular 
heuristics. One can therefore design a modular system S that 
is a modular composition of Si that were previously built. Of 
course, this does not imply that S necessarily represents a 
global solution for all possible problems Pbj, since a global 
solution is a unique universal method for all problems. 
Paradigm (P1) is useful when one of the main goals is to 
guarantee a simple maintenance of resulting systems [18] 
[13]. Most system designing approaches are thus based on 
this paradigm [6] [13] - [15] [18]. 
In contrast to modular systems, the creation of symbiotic 
systems usually relies on the paradigm expressed by the 
following formula: 
∃ System ∀ Problem solves(System,Problem). 
(P2) 
(P2) states that one may build at least one system that 
will solve all problems. The construction of a system via 
(P2) largely differs from the one of via (P1). (P2) has to 
result in a single universal system S. For instance, Peano’s 
arithmetic for NAT is an illustration in which (P2) has been 
used. Note that this illustrates that it is meaningful to rely on 
(P2) while creating a global system, even though the 
resulting system 
may not verify the completeness 
requirements. In other words, Gödel’s results [12] are not an 
obstacle for the use of (P2) while designing real-world 
problem-solving systems.  
In this paper, the systems conceived via paradigm (P2) 
are called P2-systems and the solutions to a problem 
conceived via (P2) are called P2-solutions. Recall once again 
that the main difference between a P2-system and a P1-
system lies in the fact that a P2-solution is a single unified 
universal method while a P1-solution is a modular library of 
heuristics. 
B. Cartesian Systemic Emergence 
In [5], the author gives an example of a highly smart 
people group failure to solve a multidisciplinary problem. 
The main reason for this failure is a lack of effort to build a 
common vocabulary allowing to integrate skills and 
knowledge of this group. This illustrates that collaboration 
on a multidisciplinary topic, as are PSID and (g1), being 
itself a complex dynamic system (see [21]) requires a 
preliminary elaboration of a ‘meta’ action-oriented theory to 
avoid failures due to missing directed integration of 
multidisciplinary knowledge and skills. Being aware of the 
importance of developing and studying symbiotic P2-
systems as well as a rather unusual character of symbiotic 
collaborations, we felt necessary to create solid foundations 
for this new type of research. We call Cartesian Systemic 
Emergence (CSE) the theory intended to represent these 
foundations [9]. In [22], we present a preliminary toy 
example to illustrate CSE in action. 
In this paper, we work exclusively in the context of 
symbiotic P2-systems. The next section presents the most 
important 
notions 
necessary 
for 
understanding 
the 
complexity and the essential advantages (and drawbacks) of 
considering symbiotic systems. 
III. 
SOME FUNDAMENTAL NOTIONS 
As said above, CSE is intended to become a theory to 
represent the foundations enabling to understand, perform 
and evaluate research on symbiotic P2-systems, be it in the 
form of a design or of a modeling of symbiotic P2-systems. 
More accurately, the goal of CSE is to formalize strategic 
aspects of human creation of informally specified symbiotic 
deductive-like problem-solving systems in incomplete 
domains following our pulsation model. This formalization 
is performed to prepare fundamentals for designing 
automated tools that help humans or that may even be able to 
perform alone this complex task. The goal of CSE is 
expressed in terms of five fundamental notions. 
Since the goal of CSE is to be considered in a P2- 
framework, i.e., CSE aims at a formalization that is a 
symbiotic P2-system. Therefore, all the fundamental notions 
that we need to define are symbiotically interrelated. As a 
consequence, each of these fundamental notions cannot be 
clearly described without referring to the other fundamental 
notions. This is why, in order to introduce such complex 
descriptions, we will present, at first, a rough description of 
their meaning independently of their aim to represent a basis 
of a P2-system. Such a rough description can also be used in 
the context of modular P1-systems.  
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-780-1
COGNITIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

As roughly described above, the symbiosis of parts of a 
system means that, if even only one of these parts is 
eliminated, not only the system collapses but also all the 
other symbiotic parts collapse as well. An informal 
specification of a system is a description of this system that 
is somewhat vague, i.e., what the words in this description 
exactly mean may be unclear. Standard deductive-like 
problem-solving systems are systems that have to be defined 
exactly by their corresponding axiomatic system. Incomplete 
domains are domains that are insufficiently formalized in the 
sense that there might exist several different interpretations 
corresponding to the considered formalization of the domain. 
Pulsation is a model for a particular kind of systems 
evolutive improvement.  
We will now provide more details about these notions.  
A. Symbiosis 
In the design of a deductive-like problem-solving system, 
we need to be aware of a particular interdependence, called 
here symbiosis, of the parts of the resulting system. By 
symbiosis, we understand a composition of several parts that 
is vitally separation-sensitive. By vital separation-sensitivity 
of a composition, we mean that eliminating one of its parts 
has three possible consequences.  It may be a complete 
destruction or a non-recoverable mutilation or uselessness of 
the remaining parts. This implies that the divide and conquer 
strategy, as well as analysis and synthesis are inappropriate 
tools when creating and observing symbiotic systems. 
Symbiosis is therefore different from synergy that is a 
mutually profitable composition of elements that are not 
destroyed nor mutilated by separation.  
A well-known picture that may be used for an intuitive 
understanding of symbiosis is the well-known so-called 
‘duck-rabbit’ illusion. This picture may be seen as a 
symbiosis of two parts, namely the ‘rabbit’ and the ‘duck’. In 
this picture, the result of removing one of its parts (the 
‘duck’, for instance) gives ‘nothing’. In other words, the 
‘rabbit’ disappears as well. This is an example of what we 
mean by ‘destruction’ in our definition of symbiosis. 
The symbiotic parts, however, do not necessarily need to 
coincide in the final symbiotic object as it is in the case of 
the just mentioned picture. They may have a symbiotic, 
possibly a hidden one, intersection that makes their whole 
symbiotic. From a systemic point of view, symbiosis of a 
system is embodied by the vitally separation-sensitive 
interdependence of all the notions and the parts of this 
system.  
B. Informal specification 
In the framework of CSE, an informal specification of a 
system is a description of this system by a sentence in which 
occur terms that are not yet exactly defined; they are 
underspecified. When considered out of a particular context, 
such a description, i.e., informal specification, may even 
seem absurd or the goal specified by it may seem impossible 
to reach. These terms in which a given concrete informal 
specification is expressed will evolve during the system 
construction. In other words, depending on some constraints 
and opportunities that will arise during the construction of 
the system, the meaning of the terms used in the starting 
specification will evolve and will make a part of the solution. 
The initial ambiguity of terms occurring in a given informal 
specification is eliminated by the provided solution. Their 
evolution will also bring an exact specification of the context 
to be considered. 
For instance, let us consider the above goal (g1). The 
notion of ‘brain’ is specified here informally, since no 
definite agreement has been provided as to what aspects, 
functions, etc. have to be considered. The same holds about 
the notion of ‘model’, ‘solve’. In order to point out that these 
notions will evolve during the research on this imprecisely 
formulated goal, in the framework of CSE, the notion of 
informal specification needs to be completed by stressing the 
difference between the notions of formalized (rigorous) and 
the one of formal (exact) specification. In CSE, a formalized 
specification is an intermediary state in the progress from 
informal to formal specification. It consists in a collection of 
not yet uniquely defined definitions and not yet exactly 
defined tools that plausibly point at a successful completion 
process. In such a completion process, some inventive steps 
may still be needed to complete these inexact but rigorous 
working definitions and tools so that their use and their 
evolution, through suitable experiences, lead to their final 
form (i.e., their exact form). A formalized specification 
allows thus to perform rigorous thinking. In CSE, a formal 
specification then consists in a complete solution represented 
by the working system and the complete knowledge 
necessary to the system construction, i.e., a particular kind of 
meta-knowledge. These all are needed in order to be used in 
further evolutive improvement. The notion of evolutive 
improvement will be introduced in Section D.  
The notion of informal specification plays an important 
strategic role in the Multidisciplinary Systems Design and 
Modeling (MSD) since it fulfills the role of balance between 
rigor and freedom known to be necessary in complex 
systems for them to evolve, transform and adapt [21]. 
To give illustrations of a formalized and of a formal 
specification, we need to introduce the notions of deductive-
like problem-solving system (in Section C) and of Pulsation 
(in Section D). These notions will help us also better 
illustrate what we mean by symbiosis.  
C. Deductive-like Problem-Solving Systems 
In P2-oriented MSD, explaining what we mean by a 
deductive system is important, since the goal of CSE is to 
build a deductive-like P2-system formalizing human creation 
of P2-symbiotic systems. By deductive systems we 
understand a particular kind of axiomatic systems in the 
sense that these systems formalize, in a compact finite way, 
the knowledge about a Real World Situation (RWS) with the 
aim to handle this knowledge in an efficient uniform way. 
Peano’s Axiomatic Definition (PAD) of NAT and 
Euclid’s Geometry (EG) are the best-known examples of 
deductive systems. They make a part of what has been 
called, in the above section, a formal specification.  
As can be illustrated by the evolution of PAD and EG, a 
formalization of an RWS leading to a deductive system 
consists of a ‘selection’ of essential primitive notions and 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-780-1
COGNITIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

axioms representing the essential relationships among these 
notions. 
Primitive notions are the notions that are not defined 
with the help of previously defined notions. Before a full 
formalization of an RWS, the meaning of these notions is 
specified, informally, by a large experience in RWS which 
shows that they are useful and essential for considering 
RWS. For instance, if we consider NAT, a large experience 
in natural numbers shows that the primitive notions in a 
formalization of NAT are not only 0 and Suc, but also NAT 
themselves. Indeed, we cannot (or do not know how to) 
provide a clear understanding of what we mean by natural 
numbers by referring to other already defined notions. The 
primitive notions of a deductive system are, in principle, 
symbiotic. For instance, as said above for NAT, we cannot 
specify informally what 0 signifies in another way than by 
referring, in this informal description, also to Suc and NAT.  
As said above, axioms of a deductive system express the 
statements about the relationships among the primitive 
notions. The essential particularity of these relationships is 
that, together, they provide a formal definition of all the 
primitive notions. In other words, it is not a particular axiom 
that defines a particular notion, all axioms are symbiotically 
necessary to provide a clear understanding (and thus a 
definition) of the meaning of a particular primitive notion. 
Since the primitive notions of PAD and EG are 
symbiotic, their axioms could not be determined via (P1). 
The axiomatic constructions of both these systems were 
determined via (P2) since in both cases the aim was to obtain 
one global system describing respective RWS.  
We shall now informally define what we mean by a 
deductive-like P2-symbiotic system. 
By a Deductive-like P2-Symbiotic System (P2-DSS) we 
mean a system such that its primitive notions are specified 
informally and the essential relationships among them, 
expressed by a finite number of axioms, provide their exact 
definition. 
Note that, to the best of our knowledge, the symbiotic 
character of the primitive notions and the axioms of a 
deductive system has never been mentioned in the literature 
before. 
D. Pulsation 
Pulsation is a model for evolutive improvement, 
including creation, of practically complete systems that are 
concerned with the factors of control and prevention. In other 
words, pulsation provides a rigorous framework for the 
completion process of incomplete systems. In similarity to 
the infinite sequence which is used in [10] to construct 
Ackermann’s function (see its standard definition in [20]), 
Pulsation relies on a construction of a potentially infinite 
sequence of systems that might be used to construct a global 
‘Ackermann’s system’ that contains all of these systems. In 
our work, by Pulsation we thus understand a progressive 
construction of a potentially infinite sequence S0, S1, …, Sn, 
Sn+1, … such that 
1. 
S0 is the initial informal specification,  
2. 
Si, for i > 0, is an incomplete, but a practically complete 
deductive system, 
3. 
Si ⊂ Si+1,Si ≠ Si+1  (for i = 0, 1, 2, …), and 
4. 
an infinite limit of this sequence represents an ideal, 
complete deductive system S.  
We say here that Si+1 is a practical completion of Si (for i 
= 0, 1, 2, …). The fourth requirement can formally be written 
in the form  
lim
n→∞ 
Sn      = S.
  
(1) 
Note that, in a potentially infinite sequence S0, S1, …, Sn, 
Sn+1, … , S0 is an informal specification, while S1 is a 
practically complete system. Therefore, the transition from 
S0 to S1 is the most difficult process, since it requires to go 
from informal specifications to designing all the formal 
specifications of the notions, the rules and the on-purpose 
tools that are to be used to describe S1. The transition from Si 
to Si+1 is an easier task not only because experience with 
handling symbiotic parts has been further developed but also 
because in this transition the notions and the tools of Si are 
considered in their formalized version. CSE is being 
developed to provide a reasonable solution to these two 
kinds of problems as well. 
E. Complementary Notions and Remarks 
In the MSD-framework, to consider the above-introduced 
notions as symbiotically interrelated, i.e., defined in terms of 
each other, is important for understanding the process of 
construction of a P2-DSS. For an RWS of a Problem-Solving 
System (PbSS) expressed by a P2-DSS, the primitive notions 
are specified by informal specifications of the goal of each 
primitive notion in the context of PbSS. In other words, the 
informal specifications of primitive notions express the 
‘what’ behind these notions. The axioms of P2-DSS, 
conceived for PbSS, express then the ‘how’ corresponding to 
each informally specified ‘what’. In other words, the axioms 
are procedures of PbSS. These procedures are defined 
symbiotically in a similar way as it can be perceived from 
the symbiosis of the axioms in PAD. 
This has a large implication for understanding the process 
of construction of a P2-DSS. Namely, it is necessary to 
understand that the process of specifying the primitive 
notions is symbiotic with the process of ‘introducing’ the 
axioms. In other words, the primitive notions and the axioms 
‘emerge’ together in the process of construction of P2-DSS 
for a considered RWS. 
Above, we have introduced the fundamental notions that 
contribute to understanding CSE and ST. These notions 
allow us to introduce, in multidisciplinary systems design, 
the notion of Symbiotic Recursive Pulsative Systems (SRPS) 
that are, by definition, systems that are implicitly or 
explicitly symbiotic, that are recursive either by systemic 
recursion or by the process of evolutive improvement via 
Pulsation, and that are pulsative, whenever the model of 
Pulsation 
(together 
with 
the 
notion 
of 
practical 
completeness) is used in their design. To point out that SRPS 
are developed via paradigm (P2), we may call them P2-
SRPS. 
Let us consider an example of a symbiotic system for 
which we put symbiosis together with recursion, Pulsation 
and P2-paradigm.  Thus, let us consider the above informal 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-780-1
COGNITIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

specification (g1) from CS. Now, we may ask whether a 
solution might not be something like 
lim
n→∞ 
Brainn      = Brain,
  
(2) 
where 
Brainn = Left_Brainn ♦ Right_Brainn ♦ RNKn & 
Left_Brainn = Brainn-1 ♦ RNK1n  & 
Right_Brainn = Brain n-1 ♦ RNK2n 
Here, RNKn is a new knowledge related to symbiotic 
composition of left and right brains in the n-th pulsation step, 
RNK1n and RNK2n are relevant new knowledge extending, 
by the process of practical completion, the previous 
knowledge 
respectively 
about 
Left_Brainn-1 
and 
Right_Brainn-1. This means that, with respect to mental 
processes instead of studying the brain as a synergy of two 
elements (left and right brain) [2], it might be interesting to 
explore the potential of this new symbiotic paradigm. Note 
also that (2) represents a recursive model of the brain, which 
explicitly indicates its evolutive character.  
The next section presents more information about ST. 
IV. 
SYMBIOTIC THINKING 
The goal of ST is, in the process of CSE, to create 
symbiotic compositions as well as to contribute to a relevant 
suggestion of missing parts relative to a designed P2-SRPS 
system. Thus, as a by-product of this goal, CSE also aims at 
a formalization of a particular kind of scientific invention of 
new scientific concepts (different from scientific discovery 
[4]) in the design process of a P2-SRPS system. ST is 
therefore the most complex facet of CSE.  
In order to describe ST, let us consider the goal of 
constructing a Problem-Solving System (PbSS) specified by 
an Informal Specification (InfS). Note that, as far as mental 
processes are concerned, the human brain can be considered 
as a real-world instance of a PbSS. As said above, ST is a 
conscious construction process aiming at two goals. One 
goal deals with a relevant evolving symbiotic composition of 
PbSS’s parts. The second deals with a relevant suggestion of 
missing parts. Achieving these two goals indirectly leads to a 
progressive refinement and completion of the notions in 
InfS.  
ST is indeed very complex since, in the PbSS’s design 
process, it simultaneously handles three tasks. The first deals 
with the symbiotic character of all parts of CSE. The second 
does with the symbiotic character of all parts of a PbSS 
(even those that are not yet specified in the construction 
process). The third deals with the symbiotic character of the 
environment for which PbSS is being developed.  
In the process of constructing a PbSS, some elementary 
parts of the system are specified by the needs that have been 
recognized in a relevant preliminary theoretical and 
experimental study of the given informal specification InfS. 
The consideration of the suggested parts as being informally 
specified and symbiotic allows  
(a) a freedom to design them in an original manner, 
(b) letting these parts evolve relying on the requirements 
that will appear in the design process, 
(c) their imperfections (from a theoretical or practical point 
of view) to be compensated by the other parts of the 
system or by the system itself, 
(d) a 
natural 
emergence 
of 
minimal 
forms 
of 
complementary constraints on the system, on its parts or 
on the environment. 
These particular competitive advantages of ST and CSE, 
provided an adequate effort, enlarge the possibilities of MSD 
in that they hand over realistic goals that have before been 
considered unreachable. 
For instance, for brain modeling, (a) and (d) together 
reflect considering complex experiences from the start so as 
avoiding simplicity factors to become, in future, obstacles to 
an effective ideas-activating process. The advantages (b) and 
(c) together reflect accepting the fact that research on 
symbiotic systems itself is a complex system [21] and thus it 
cannot be evaluated from a short-sided perspective of short 
or mid-term projects, as it is unfortunately usual in 
contemporary science. 
Note that, in this section, our aim is solely to present the 
role of ST and its advantages for designing a P2-SRPS.  We 
will not describe here its execution. The reason for this 
restriction lies in the fact that it would also require a detailed 
description of the strategic aspects of Program Synthesis 
from underspecified informal specifications in incomplete 
domains. We shall, therefore, address this topic in our future 
work.   
V. 
RELATED WORK 
In [9], we have pointed out that CSE might well be part 
of a challenge for CS, namely by developing CS models that 
capture all the essential characteristics of CSE, by finding 
methods and tools to study the emergence process in an 
active 
performance 
and 
developing 
on-purpose 
computational models for this particular way of thinking. 
Here we can enlarge our observation of CS problems that are 
similar to ST to conceptual blending as studied in [8]. As 
expressed by Fauconnier and Turner, conceptual blending is 
a non-deterministic intuitive process performed on small 
conceptual pockets constructed for purposes of local 
understanding and action ([8], p. 40), In contrast to this, ST 
performs consciously a goal-oriented symbiosis taking into 
account all the aspects (local as well as global, 
methodological as well as teleological, etc. as described in 
the above section). 
Furthermore, if Wittgenstein points out, in [19], the 
interest for duck-rabbit illusion from the philosophical and 
psychological points of view, thus formulating a challenge 
for CS from perception modeling perspective of unusual 
‘objects’, we point out here the challenge of modeling 
technological aspects of creating/modeling symbiotic 
systems. 
Even though the topic of considering ST (and CSE) in 
CS is challenging, we are convinced that a strong desire or 
need to solve problems that CSE and ST suggest to CS will 
lead soon or later to fruitful empowerment of CS.  
 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-780-1
COGNITIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The novelty of Cartesian Systemic Emergence lies in the 
fact that CSE is concerned with a formalization of the 
creation process of P2-SRPS axioms. So far, this problem 
has not been dealt with in modern exact sciences. However, 
the philosophical works of Francis Bacon [1], René 
Descartes [7], Peirce [16] and others express that 
experiences/experiments play an important role in creating 
the axioms. The symbiosis of axioms points out that these 
experiments/experiences have to be performed taking into 
account this particular feature of axioms. For Cognitive 
Science it would mean to revise all the knowledge on mental 
processes of the human brain in the light of a possible 
presence of symbiotic processes that necessarily would mean 
the presence of symbiotic parts in the brain. Our creative 
process and its creative formalization process lead us to be 
firmly persuaded about the presence of symbiotic processes 
in our brain. Researchers usually do not examine carefully 
their creative efforts (except for mentioning intuitive 
unconscious character of their productions, such as [17]). 
However, once we work in the framework that requires 
control and prevention, we no more have ‘unconscious 
intuitions’ since all the mental processes are conscious.  Of 
course, with respect to an enormous amount of experiences 
gained in the teleological experimentation process, the 
included knowledge is not expressed verbally in its formal 
form but in the form of their ‘rigorous’ informal 
specifications. This may be explained by an analogy of 
representing local computations of Ackermann’s function in 
the form of an on-purpose generated finite sequence of 
primitive recursive functions replacing the computationally 
intractable process (i.e., considering all the details of the 
considered knowledge) by a sequence of primitive recursive 
functions (i.e., the relevant details pointed out in the form of 
rigorous informal specifications). 
In this paper, we aimed at pointing out the advantages of 
considering symbiotic pulsative recursive systems also in 
Cognitive Science. Even though Symbiotic Thinking and 
CSE are not easy to grasp for formalistic minds (as implicitly 
shown in [11]), it seems to us that Cognitive Science can, 
hopefully with our help, benefit from an intensive 
exploration of recognition and of construction potentials 
present in Symbiotic Thinking and CSE.  
As for our future work on ST, describing ST in action 
shall need a description of the particularities of strategic 
aspects of PS from informal specifications in incomplete 
domains. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
F. Bacon, Novum Organum, P.U.F, 1986. 
[2] 
J. L. Bermúdez, Cognitive Science: An Introduction to the Science of 
the Mind, Cambridge University Press, 2014. 
[3] 
L. von Bertalanffy, General Systems Theory, George Braziller, 1969. 
[4] 
M. Boden, “Computational models of creativity”,  in R. J. Sternberg, 
(ed.): Handbook of Creativity, Cambridge University Press, 1999, pp. 
351–373. 
[5] 
R. Chauvin, Les Surdoués, Stock, 1975. 
[6] 
J. A. Crowder, Multidisciplinary Systems Engineering: Architecting 
the Design Process, Springer, 2018. 
[7] 
R. Descartes, “Principles of Philosophy” (« Les principes de la 
philosophie »),  in R. Descartes, Œuvres philosophiques (3 vol.), 
Edition de F. Alquié. T. 3, Classiques Garnier, Bordas, 1989, pp. 87-
525. 
[8] 
G. Fauconnier and M. Turner: The Way We Think: Conceptual 
Blending And The Mind's Hidden Complexities, Basic Books, 2003. 
[9] 
M. Franova and Y. Kodratoff, “Cartesian Systemic Emergence - 
Tackling Underspecified Notions in Incomplete Domains”, in O. 
Chernavskaya and K. Miwa (eds.), Proc. of COGNITIVE 2018: The 
Tenth 
International 
Conference 
on 
Advanced 
Cognitive 
Technologies and Applications, ISBN: 978-1-61208-609-5, 2018, pp. 
1-6. 
[10] M. Franova and Y. Kodratoff, Cartesian Systemic Pulsation – A 
Model for Evolutive Improvement of Incomplete Symbiotic 
Recursive Systems, International Journal On Advances in Intelligent 
Systems, vol 11, no 1&2, 2018, pp. 35-45. 
[11] J. 
Y. 
Girard, “The 
sign 
field 
or 
the 
bankruptcy 
of 
reductionism”  
(« Le 
champ 
du 
signe 
ou 
la 
faillite 
du 
réductionnisme »),  in T. Marchaisse, (dir.), Le théorème de Gödel, 
Seuil, 1989, pp. 145-171. 
[12] K. Gödel, Some metamathematical results on completeness and 
consistency, On formally undecidable propositions of Principia 
Mathematica and related systems I, and On completeness and 
consistency,  in J. van Heijenoort, From Frege to Godel, A source 
book in mathematical logic, Harvard Univ. Press, 1967, pp. 592-618. 
[13] H. Kopetz, Simplicity Is Complex: Foundations of Cyber-physical 
System Design, Springer, 2019. 
[14] J. L. Le Moigne, General system theory, modeling theory (« La 
théorie du système général, théorie de la modélisation »), P.U.F, 
1984. 
[15] M. S. Levin,  Modular system design and evaluation, Springer, 2015. 
[16] C. Peirce, In search of a method (A la recherche d'une méthode), 
Théétète - éditions, 1993. 
[17] H. Poincaré, L'invention mathématique,  in J. Hadamard, Essai sur la 
psychologie de l'invention dans le domaine mathématique, Editions 
Jacques Gabay, 1993, pp. 139-151. 
[18] C. S. Wasson, System Engineering Analysis, Design, and 
Development: Concepts, Principles, and Practices, Wiley-Blackwell, 
2015. 
[19] L. Wittgenstein, Remarks on the Philosophy of Psychology, Vol. 1, 
Wiley-Blackwell, 1991. 
[20] A. Yasuhara, Recursive Function Theory and Logic, Academic Press, 
New York, 1971. 
[21] H.P. Zwirn, Complex Systems: Mathematics and Biology (Les 
systèmes complexes: Mathématiques et biologie), Odile Jacob, 2006. 
[22] Y. Kodratoff and M. Franova, “Resonance Thinking and Inductive 
Machine Learning”, in. S. Sendra Compte (eds.), Proc. of The 
Fourteenth International Conference on Systems, ICONS 2019, 
ISBN: 978-1-61208-696-5, 2019, pp. 7-13. 
 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-780-1
COGNITIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

