When Brain Informs Us About Mind: a Neuro-Ergonomic Approach to Study Web 
Sites. 
 
Guercio Elena 
Telecom Italia S.p.A. 
Torino, Italy 
elena.guercio@telecomitalia.it 
Simona Collina 
Università degli Studi Suor Orsola Benincasa 
Napoli, Italy 
simona.collina@unisob.na.it 
Roberto Montanari; Chiara Ferrarini 
Università degli Studi di Modena e Reggio Emilia 
Reggio Emilia, Italy 
roberto.montanari@unimore.it; chiara.ferrarini@unimore.it 
Gabriele Garbin 
Università degli Studi di Trieste 
Trieste, Italy 
g@gabrielegarbin.it
 
 
Abstract— In two pieces of research the role of information 
processing to evaluate a web site dedicated to the green culture 
and information has been investigated. The first study was 
based on behavioral techniques whereas in the second study 
participants were requested to perform an fMRI experiment. 
The purpose of the two pieces of research was to analyze the 
usability, and cognitive load of the website but, most 
important, to validate the reliability of the neuro-ergonomic 
approach while carrying out these analyses. The results put 
into evidence a correlation between behavioural and 
neuroimaging 
results. 
More 
important, 
neuroimaging 
methodologies 
proved 
to 
be 
sensitive 
to 
study 
the 
understanding of users ‘cognitive load. 
Keywords- ergonomics; neuroscience; cognition; web-site; 
information processing 
I. INTRODUCTION  
Neuroergonomics is the application of neuroscience to 
ergonomics. Recent researches in experimental psychology 
felt the need to integrate the classic behavioural paradigms 
with 
the 
recent 
neuroimaging 
methodologies 
[5]. 
Neuroimaging results can test and constraint cognition by 
evidencing whether a cognitive model formulated on 
behavioural 
results 
is 
biologically 
valid. 
Second, 
neuroimaging techniques can provide interesting insight on 
whether a function is processed by the brain in a localised or 
in a holistic fashion, providing evidence on the debates on 
classic cognition versus new embodied theories [1;3]. At the 
same time, neuroimaging needs experimental psychology 
and behavioural tests to explain the steps necessary to 
perform a given cognitive activity. The activation of neural 
circuits cannot explain alone the complexity of the cognitive 
experience [4]. So far, the introduction of  neuroimaging 
techniques as the functional magnetic resonance (fMRI) has 
the advantage to map the brain circuits involved in a given 
activity thus reducing the gap between cognitive processes 
(mind) and the neural substrate supporting them (brain) 
whereas the behavioural methods clarify and specify the 
steps and the processes involved at each functional level. 
Since the birth of cognitive science these points have been 
source of interesting debates. However, not all the fields of 
cognition have been investigated in equal manner in this 
perspective and even if the application/integration of 
behavioural and neuroimaging methodologies to study 
mind/brain dichotomy is well known, for example, in 
perception, attention, memory, language, and reasoning, 
some fields, especially the ones positing at the User 
Interface, has been often neglected.  For this reason, data 
available in the ergonomic are far from being unitary.  
Some attempts are going in this direction: as noted by 
Parasuraman [2] neuroergonomics can be a powerful tool to 
investigate cognitive functions in the real world, in the 
context, thus overcoming classic lab research where each 
variable is studied almost in isolation. In this respect, many 
different approaches have been proposed to apply 
neuroscience 
and 
ergonomics: 
electroencephalography 
(EEG), which represents the electrical activity of neural cells 
populations, event related-brain potentials (ERPs) which 
detect a specific cognitive event, and more spatially 
sophisticated methods as the functional magnetic resonance 
(fMRI).  fMRI is becoming pervasive in neurocognitive 
research. It offers a very good spatial resolution and with an 
appropriate experimental design, the initial limit posited by 
the temporal resolution can be encompassed. So far, as it is a 
non-invasive method that offers the detection of brain 
activity while a cognitive task is performed, many areas of 
cognition make use of this method to investigate which 
neural circuits are responsible for a given cognitive process. 
One may argue that the method, for the limits given by the 
experimental set, may have ecological validity only when 
small portions of the cognitive activity are studied. However, 
the recent development of new experimental design gave the 
possibility to study also integrated-complex cognitive 
processes [6].  
In this paper, a new approach will be presented. Two 
experiments were performed: the first experiment aimed at 
evaluating participants performance in interacting a web site 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-273-8
COGNITIVE 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

dedicated to the green culture (GREEN in the following) 
through a well validated battery of behavioural tests. In the 
second experiment, participants performed an fMRI 
experiment on the same web-site. The results evidenced a 
high correlation among participants performance in the two 
experiments. Moreover, fMRI was a sensitive tool to 
measure the cognitive load and actual understanding of the 
web-site “conceptual model”, opening a new scenario in the 
ergonomic studies. 
The GREEN website investigated represents the major 
referent in Italy on the green world along three lines, namely 
ecology, environment and sustainability. As ecology is 
becoming more and more important in people lives, and the 
web site should be fruitful, easy and informative for 
everybody who wants to be informed on a green lifestyle. 
The website is structured in different sections: green world, 
news, events, experts, for company, shopping, community. 
These different sections have been studied in the two 
experiments. 
Following, the two experiments will be presented. In 
Experiment 1 behavioural data will be described and 
discussed. In Experiment 2 an fMRI experiment will be 
presented as a new methodology to study web interfaces. 
II. EXPERIMENT 1 
A. Participants 
Twenty adult participants (aged between 20 and 50) took 
part in the experiment. The 25% of them were female, the 
75% were male. All participants were native Italian speakers. 
They had normal or correct to normal vision. Each of them 
owns a computer and spends at least three hours per week on 
internet. They received no compensation or credits for their 
participation. 
B. Materials and methods   
The GREEN webpage has been selected as key study. 
Two versions of the page were created, one reflecting how 
the page appears on the web, Fig. 1, (experimental 
condition), and one representing only a wireframe, Fig. 2, 
with no colours and only category names information to use 
as a control condition.   
The logic followed was to compare the webpage with a 
wireframe in order to extract the weight of the form and 
content information. Six different tasks were built according 
to the web page and wire frame structure. The design was a 
two level within factors so that each participant performed 
the task in the web page and wire frame condition. In the 
following, the tasks’ list is reported:  
• 
Task 1: Search and visualize by clicking on it the 
most important news present in the website Task;  
• 
Task 2: Search and visualize the third information 
of the “focus on area”;  
• 
Task 3: Please find and click on the information 
that for you represent the most important advertising of the 
website;  
• 
Task 4: You want to plan an ecologic tour. Please 
search in GREEN where you can find an eco-travel planner 
and click on it;  
• 
Task 5: Buy a trash bin for waste separation;  
• 
Task 6: You want to learn how to farm in an 
ecologic way. Visualize the advice of the bio-farmer.   
C. Procedure 
Participants were tested individually in a quiet room. 
They were seated in front of a computer at a distance of 1 m 
from the screen. Instructions were given by the experimenter.  
Before the experiment proper, participants were asked to 
familiarize with the materials (website and wireframe); they 
were encouraged to explore the pages and think aloud on the 
content and form. Next they were presented with the 
websites and with the wireframe.  
The order of presentation of the tasks changed across the 
participants in a Latin-square design. In addition, if one 
participant was presented the website and then the wireframe 
condition, the following participant was presented them in 
reverse order so that materials were counterbalanced across 
participants.  
 
 
Figure 1. Example of the GREEN webpage 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-273-8
COGNITIVE 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
Figure 2. Example of the GREEN wireframe 
 
Data were collected using a logger system (i.e. the 
remote usability Loop11) to plot and log parameters as time 
to task conclusion, errors committed, etc. At the end of the 
task a questionnaire on usability and cognitive load was 
administered to each participant.  The experiment lasted for 
about one hour. 
D. Results 
Time to complete the tasks for the two conditions 
(webpage vs. wireframe) was recorded and submitted to t-
test, Fig. 3. The result of task 1, 2 and 3 put into evidence a 
difference (even if for task 2 was not significant) between the 
two conditions, with an advantage in time completion for the 
wireframe (Task 1 F= 2,137; Task 2= ns; Task 3 F= 3,650, 
respectively). The result of task 4, 5 evidenced the opposite 
trend (Task 4 = 2,134; Task 5= 4,036). No difference was 
observed for task 6.  
The percentage of errors was equally distributed across 
conditions. No other sources or interactions were found 
significant. 
E. Discussion 
The result of the behavioural experiment evidenced that 
participants easily found the information required as 
suggested by the low percentage of errors. The result of the 
tasks can be explained on a base of a form semantic 
distinction: in the first three tasks a strategy based on form 
could help in finding the information. So far, there was an 
advantage for the GREEN page compared to the wire-frame. 
This interpretation was supported by the results of the 
questionnaire administered. For the first three tasks the 
results evidenced that features as for example image 
dimension and position were crucial to correctly solve the 
task. On the contrary for task 5 and 6 content/semantic 
information were crucial so that a wireframe website, free of 
form information could help to solve the tasks. Task 6 was 
the more complex one: one possible hypothesis to explain 
the results is that here the joint effect of form and content 
gave rise to a null effect. Of course this is only a speculation 
as the result was null. Finally, the questionnaire administered 
after the task suggested that the website induce qualitative 
considerations among participants. However, data were 
equally distributed in a range from positive to negative 
evaluations. 
III. EXPERIMENT 2 
The aim of the second experiment was to study 
participants’ 
performance 
on 
the 
website 
from 
a 
neuroergonomic perspective. An fMRI experiment was 
designed in order to map the activation of the neural circuits 
involved in task performance reflecting the mental processes 
of the human-web interaction. The experiment was 
explorative in nature and can be considered a pilot 
experiment to test if fMRI is a useful tool in the research 
field.  
A. Participants 
Six participants were selected for the second experiment. 
All subjects were Italian monolingual or had no more than 
basic skills in one foreign language, as resulting after 
personal interview. All participants were healthy volunteers 
with a normal or corrected-to normal vision. None of the 
volunteers had a history of dyslexia or any neurological or 
psychiatric disorder. They were fully informed on the 
modality and execution of the scans before signing an 
informed consent agreement. Participant could leave the 
experiment at any time, although all completed the 
experimental sessions, and gave written permission to the 
treatment of personal data.  
B. Materials and methods 
The GREEN website was presented to participants in the 
1, 5 Tesla scanner. They could see the webpage projected as 
long as they want.  
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-273-8
COGNITIVE 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

. 
 
Figure 3. Time (sec) to complete the tasks (N=20) 
Experimental sessions and rest alternate each other. Six 
experimental 
tasks 
were 
performed 
by 
participants. 
Experimental sessions, comparable to that of experiment 1, 
were adapted to the fMRI experimental settings. Silent 
reading tasks substituted task involving movements in order 
to avoid movement artefact. For the same reason a silent 
reading was preferred to an overt speech. Following, the list 
of the tasks: 
• 
Task 1: Search the most important news in the 
website. When you find it read it silently;  
• 
Task 2: Search the third information in the “focus 
area” and silently read the first word;  
• 
Task 3: Please find the information that for you 
represent the most important advertising of the website and 
read the first word silently; 
• 
Task 4: Search the animals represented in the 
community and think how many is there; 
• 
Task 5: Think about an adjective to define the 
website; 
• 
Task 6: Think about an adjective to define the 
colours. 
C. Results 
Pre-processed images were analysed on blocked protocol. 
Rests period were taken as baseline.   
Encephalic volumes have been acquired using an MRI 
Achieva (Philips, The Netherlands) of 1.5T.  Images 
obtained have been analysed using the SPM5 (Standard 
Parametric Mapping) [7]  and the resulting activations have 
been identified with the results obtained by MSU (Michigan 
State University) and WFU PickAtlas. 
Images have been realigned and the variation of intensity, 
due to local differences in the magnetic field, has been 
corrected. Volumes have been normalized on the standard 
coordinate space MNI (Montreal Neurological Institute). For 
each participant, images sequences of each session have been 
submitted to a blocked- design t-test. Cumulative analyses 
have been run for the activation matrixes. Only cortical 
activations with a threshold of p<0.01 were considered 
statistically reliable. 
The cerebral activations obtained have been compared 
analysed, Table 1. Main results evidenced an activation of 
the frontal circuits (left and right) involved in linguistic 
tasks, but also involved in tasks requiring even simple 
problem solving, an example of activation areas is shown in 
Fig. 4. Linguistic components produced a strong activation 
that could have been overlapped other cognitive components, 
thus rendering difficult in task 4, for example the 
interpretation of the results.  
 
 
Figure 4. Example of activation areas for task 1 (experiment2) 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-273-8
COGNITIVE 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

TABLE I.  
ACTIVATION RELATED TO EACH TASK 
Task 
Areas 
 
Brodmann 
Areas 
1 
Middle and Inferior 
Frontal Gyrus (L, R) 
10, 11, 47 
2 
Frontal Lobe (L) 
11, 47 
3 
Frontal Lobe (L,R) 
10, 11, 45, 46 
4 
Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
(R) 
46, 45 
5 
Inferior Frontal Gyrus 
and Insula (L) 
47, 13 
6 
Parahippocampal Gyrus 
and Lingual Gyrus (R) 
27, 18 
IV. CONCLUSIONS 
In two experiments, we tested whether behavioural and 
neuroergonomic methods can integrate each other to study 
web user interface. The case study was the GREEN web 
page. The results evidenced that neuroergonomic can be a 
useful tool to investigate the neural circuits involved in 
complex cognitive activities. In addition, it can be 
informative of the cognitive load a task requires for 
participants, opening a new scenario in the ergonomic 
research. It is a granted data that ergonomic is very well 
studied in its perceptual and attentive components.  
However, less has been done on the central components 
of the activity as linguistic, semantic, comprehension 
components often required by tasks. Behavioural results 
evidenced that perceptual and semantic components can act 
with different weight and change the polarity of a result (task 
1,2,3 vs. 4,5). An indication in this direction is also 
evidenced by the fMRI experiment with areas of activation 
linked to the cognitive components sensitive to tasks’ 
requirements. 
But, even if the neuroergonomic results were comparable 
to the behavioural results some problems still persist: the 
second experiment was just a pilot, with a low number of 
participants and explorative tasks used. But, in order to start 
a new line of investigation our main goal was to assess 
whether the tool could be a sensitive one for our purposes. 
By adding new data through the use of neuroimaging 
technique we may now formulate new hypothesis, that can 
take into account not only the cognitive variables implicated 
in an ergonomic- at work- scenario, but taking into account 
also the impact of these variables and task requirements on 
participants performance, thus disentangling effects due to 
the cognitive activity per se from methodological issue. In 
this respect, fMRI is sensitive to detect the cognitive load 
required by a task. However, the use of neuroimaging 
technique will be possible only because of behavioural tests, 
more conceptually sophisticated, replicated and able to 
overcome the limit in ecological validity sometimes 
suffering neuroimaging designs and settings. The research 
presented reflects an interdisciplinary approach that can be 
fruitful for future studies. This will be the challenge. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Clark, Being There: Putting Brain, Body, and the World 
Together Again (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press), 1997. 
[2] R. Parasuraman, Neuroergonomics: research and practice 
Theor. Issues in Ergon. Sci., vol. 4, 2003, pp. 5-20.  
[3] F. Pulvermüller,, Words in the brain's language. Behavioral 
and Brain Sciences, 22, 1999, pp. 253-336.  
[4] P. Tabossi,Intelligenza naturale e intelligenza artificiale. 
Introduzione alla scienza cognitiva. Collana "Universale 
Paperbacks il Mulino", 1997. 
[5] R. Parasuraman "Putting the brain to work: Neuroergonomics 
past, present, and future". Human Factors, 50(3)eight, 2008, 
pp. 468-474. 
[6] U. Hasson, C. J. Honey,  Future trends in Neuroimaging: 
Neural processes as expressed within real-life contexts, 
NeuroImage 62, 2012, pp. 1272–1278. 
[7] www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm 
 
 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-273-8
COGNITIVE 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

