Proposal of an Educational Design to Improve High School Science Students’ 
Motivation to Enroll in a University’s Department of Science and Engineering 
Yuto Omae, Katsuko T. Nakahira, and Hirotaka Takahashi 
Nagaoka University of Technology 
Niigata, Japan 
e-mail: y_omae@stn.nagaokaut.ac.jp, katsuko@vos.nagaokaut.ac.jp, hirotaka@kjs.nagaokaut.ac.jp 
 
Abstract—Many Japanese students pursuing science and 
engineering majors drop out of the program due to a lack of 
motivation to learn. One reason is students' declining interest 
in science or engineering, mainly because their career goals are 
vague. Helping students make better choices when choosing a 
university/department by increasing their motivation is an 
effective way to improve this situation. One approach is to 
provide stimuli that increase students' interests and provide 
them with a feeling of satisfaction. Changing the educational 
environment is one way to provide these stimuli. We assume 
that students' motivation to study science and technology will 
increase if we contribute to constructing these environments. 
In this paper, we propose an educational design including 
micro-insertion to improve students’ motivation. 
Keywords-educational design; perception; motivation; micro-
insertion; teaching science. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
One goal of the Japanese government policy is to realize 
a "scientific and technological nation," due to the shortage 
of energy resources. Thus, the Japanese government has 
conducted many projects for training human resources of 
technology-focused public educational institutions (e.g., 
Super Science High School and Science Partnership 
Program [1][2]). As a result of these projects, the ratio of an 
enrollment to university in the department of science and 
engineering was 20% [3]. However, the dropout rate in this 
department is higher than that in Liberal Arts [4]. The major 
reasons that students drop out of the program are classified 
as “positive reasons (e.g., studying abroad, changing 
interests, aiming at acquisition of qualifications)” and 
“negative reasons (e.g., loss of motivation, insufficient 
credits, and student apathy)” [4]. The existences of the 
dropout students from the department of Science and 
Engineering become disincentive for the above purpose in 
Japan. As a result, young people not in education, 
employment, or training (NEET) and unemployment rates 
increase [5]. Therefore, it is important to address the 
negative reasons that students drop out. 
To address this issue, it is necessary to increase the 
motivation of high school students to enroll in university 
science and engineering. Thus, we focus on the high school 
science courses taken by the applicants to the department of 
Science and Engineering at the university level. In such 
courses, some students are highly motivated to enroll in 
courses at a university’s department of science and 
engineering, and others are not. The highly motivated 
students will choose and follow an appropriate path because 
they have a clear career plan. Those with low motivation 
will not do so because their career plan is vague. However, 
if they have many chances to come in contact with positive 
stimuli that increases their interest and gives them 
satisfaction, their motivation may increase. An education 
environment that is constructed using an educational design 
that has such an effect is one solution to improving students' 
motivation. Therefore, the instructor should be aware of 
each student’s situation because each student is unique; for 
example, one student may lack interest, while another 
student lacks confidence. For this reason, it is important to 
develop an educational design that includes "adaptive" 
methods. To improve student’s motivation effectively, the 
teacher must appropriately assess the shortage factors that 
affect a student’s motivation. Thus, it is useful for 
instructors to assess their students’ psychological state (e.g., 
interest, confidence, and satisfaction). 
However, if only one of the teachers assesses the 
motivation of students, it is jot sufficient to increase their 
motivation. To effectively increase student’s motivation to 
go to university science and engineering courses, many 
science teachers have to cooperate and aim to increase the 
importance factor (such as micro-insertion, mentioned later). 
Thus, to increase students’ motivation, we propose an 
educational design by which high school teachers of 
science-related subjects understand the important factors 
pertaining to Information Technology (IT) and cooperate 
with one another. The targeted students are high school 
students who have low motivation to enroll in university 
classes in science and engineering. 
Section II explains the details of the proposed 
educational design. Section III presents conclusions and 
discusses future work. 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

II. 
EDUCATIONAL DESIGN  
A. Factors Affecting Motivation  
A student’s motivation for the future is affected by 
interest, confidence and so on. For example, the student who 
thinks “I can learn something interesting by enrolling in the 
course” is likely to be motivated. However, the student who 
thinks “I cannot succeed in this course” is not likely to be 
motivated. If some external influence changes students’ 
perception, their motivation also changes. Figure 1 
illustrates an example. A new perception of science results 
from interaction between the current perception and an 
external influence. In addition, the student’s motivation 
increases due to this new perception. 
For example, when students experience uninteresting 
stimuli, their perception and motivation become negative. 
When they experience interesting stimuli, their perception 
and motivation improve (Figure 1). The aim of the present 
study is to increase students’ motivation to enroll in 
university’s department of science and engineering by 
improving their perception of science. Table I lists factors of 
perception that affect the motivation to enroll in university 
science and engineering courses. One theory regarding 
motivation for the future is the expectancy value model [6]. 
According to this model, choices for the future are affected 
by expectation of success, intrinsic value, and attainment 
utility value. Since satisfaction is also motivation for 
behavior selection [7], we assume that satisfaction affects an 
individual’s choices for the future. Therefore, we tentatively 
adopted intrinsic value, attainment utility value, expectation 
of success, and satisfaction as factors affecting the 
motivation to enroll in university classes in science and 
engineering.  We refer to these four factors as “science 
perception.” We assume that students’ motivation to enroll 
in science and engineering classes depends on their science 
perception, and that science teachers can change this 
perception. For example, if the teacher for the science 
subject performs the class to increase intrinsic value (e.g., 
talking to increase curiosity), their intrinsic value is increase. 
This increased intrinsic value raises students’ motivation to 
enroll in university science and engineering classes. Thus, it 
is important for science teachers to improve their students’ 
perception of science. We propose the use of micro-
insertion to accomplish this goal. 
B. Micro-insertion 
Micro-insertion is a teaching method proposed by 
Michael Davis for engineering ethics [8]. This method 
involves not only teaching engineering ethics as a major 
subject but also inserting ethical topics in other classes. The 
object of our research is not engineering ethics. However, 
this teaching method such as aiming at achievement purpose 
of the education with a part of lesson time in many subjects 
would be applicable to not only engineering ethics but also 
other purpose on education. Therefore, we include micro-
insertion in our educational design. Figure 2 (a) depicts 
typical education, and Figure 2 (b) depicts education using 
micro-insertion. Sample students in Figure 2 (a) and (b) 
have high enough factors except attainment utility value. In 
other words, the teacher should increase attainment utility 
value for these students. For example, in typical education, 
the mathematics teacher sets a high value on attainment 
utility value; the physics teacher sets a high value on 
 
Figure 2.  Typical education, micro-insertion, and problem. 
Intrinsic 
value
Expectation 
of success
Satisfaction
Attainment 
utility value
Science perception
These components are tentative.
-> High
-> Low
-> High
-> High
Sample
student 
The mathematics 
teacher
The physics 
teacher
The chemistry
teacher
(a) Typical Education
Intrinsic 
value
Expectation 
of success
Satisfaction
Attainment 
utility value
Science perception
These components are tentative.
-> High
-> Low
-> High
-> High
The mathematics  
teacher
The physics  
teacher
The chemistry
teacher
(b) Applied micro-insertion
The emphasized factor 
varies by teacher.
All science teachers uniformly set a 
high value on attainment utility value.
(c) Problem
The mathematics  
teacher
The physics  
teacher
The chemistry
teacher
For this class,
what is an important 
factor in science       
perception ?
Sample
student 
 
 
Figure 1. Change of perception and motivation. 
External influences
Current
perception
Current
motivation
New
perception
New
motivation
Before
After
Brain
New perception is made by interaction 
between current perception and 
external influences in the brain.
Motivation is made 
by perception.
Interaction
TABLE I.  FACTORS OF SCIENCE PERCEPTION AND ITS 
DEFINITIONS 
Factor 
Definition 
Intrinsic value 
The enjoyment one gets from engaging in the task or activity 
Attainment 
utility value  
The instrumental value of the task or activity for helping to 
fulfill another short or long-range goal and the link between 
the task and one’s sense of self and identity 
Expectation of 
success 
Confidence about one’s personal efficacy to master the task 
Satisfaction 
The degree of feelings such as "I want to do this task" after 
the task or activity about science in high school. 
 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

intrinsic value; and the chemistry teacher sets a high value 
on expectation of success. The emphasized factor varies by 
teacher, as depicted in Fig. 2 (a). Figure 2 (b) presents an 
example of a teaching method using micro-insertion. Unlike 
typical education, all science teachers uniformly set a high 
value on attainment utility value in their lessons. Because 
students are provided stimuli uniformly by all science 
teachers, we assume that the motivation to enroll in a 
university’s department of science and engineering will 
increase as a result of the use of micro-insertion (Figure 2 
(b)), unlike the situation with the typical educational 
approach (Figure 2 (a)).  
C. Application of IT 
One problem with the application of micro-insertion in 
education is illustrated in Figure 2 (c). Figures 2 (a) and (b) 
present an example of students whose attainment utility 
value increases. However, in reality, some students’ 
intrinsic value or expectation of success should increase. To 
understand an important factor from among science 
perception needed to increase student’s motivation, teachers 
must have expert education experience and a lot of time. 
This is very difficult. To solve this problem, it is necessary 
to construct a function that outputs the most effective factor 
in intrinsic value, attainment utility value, expectation of 
success and satisfaction to increase motivation to go to 
university science and engineering classes when we input 
student’s science perception. In addition, we need to 
construct a method that summarizes each student results in 
comparison to the whole class results. Therefore, we must 
develop a system using machine learning and statistics (IT).  
D. Proposed Educational Design 
Based on the information above, we propose an 
educational design using IT and micro-insertion (Figure 3). 
Figure 3 (α) depicts a high school science class of 
students who have applied to enroll in university science 
and engineering classes. This class includes both students 
with low motivation and those with high motivation.  The 
target of our proposed educational design is those with low 
motivation. We utilize a questionnaire to quantify the 
science perceptions of those students. The results are 
presented in Figure 3 (β). 
(β) in Figure 3 is a system to output an important factor 
in science perception to increase student’s motivation. First, 
to quantify students’ science perceptions, the system 
transforms 
responses 
to 
the 
questionnaire 
into 
a 
multidimensional vector consisting of intrinsic value, 
attainment utility value, expectation of success, and 
satisfaction. Next, this vector is input into an input-output 
(I/O) function. Finally, the I/O function outputs an 
important factor of science perception. This result depends 
on the students’ science perceptions. For example, some 
students’ motivation is strongly increased due to increasing 
intrinsic value. However, others’ motivation depends on 
increasing expectation of success. This result is sent to (γ) in 
Figure 3. 
 The staff of (γ) receives the results from (β). They 
summarize the results and send messages about them to 
science teachers (e.g., the target class has many students 
who need expectation of success to increase their motivation 
to enroll in science and engineering classes). The results 
vary, depending on students’ science perceptions in class. 
This result is sent to (δ) in Figure 3. 
In Figure 3, (δ) corresponds to teachers of science-
related subjects (e.g., mathematics, physics, and chemistry). 
These teachers follow an education design that includes 
micro-insertion as depicted in Figure 2 (b), referring to the 
information from the staff of (γ). For example, if many 
students need increased intrinsic value to increase their 
 
Figure 3.  Educational design. 
Input
…
Science class
taken by the applicants to the 
department of Science and 
Engineering at the university level.
Motivation: Low
System (IT)
Mathematics
The staff to summarize 
information
Teachers for 
science subjects
Physics
Chemistry
etc...
Motivation: High
…
Science perception
Science perception 
is constructed by
1. Intrinsic value
2. Attainment utility value 
3. Expectation of success
4. Satisfaction, etc...
Quantification form of 
multidimensional vector
from the answer of 
questionnaire of the 
students.
An important factor to 
increase motivation
I/O Function
Output
Answer to questionnaire
for quantification
of science perception
Summarize & Inform
Send
Micro-insertion
(α)
(β)
(δ)
(γ)
A rotation at
fixed intervals
Target students are
applicants to the
department of science
and engineering at
university level, but their 
motivation is low.
Micro-insertion means 
teachers for science 
subjects cooperate and 
improve student's science 
perception to increase 
motivation by using a part 
of lesson time.
(e.g., mathematics, physics, 
chemistry and so on)
Understing an important 
factor for this class.
Intrinsic value
Attainment utility value 
Expectation of success
Satisfaction, etc...
This result varies depending 
on students’ character.
Output, e.g.,
For this student, an 
important factor is Intrinsic 
value to increase motivation.
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

motivation to enroll in university science and engineering 
classes, the teachers of science-related subjects should give 
them information that will increase their intrinsic value as 
part of the lessons. Likewise, if many students need 
increased expectation of success to increase their motivation 
to enroll in university science and engineering classes, 
teachers of science-related subjects should give them 
information that will increase their expectation of success as 
part of the lessons. Applicants’ motivation to enroll in 
university science and engineering may increase as a result 
of using this educational design in various science-related 
classes rather than in only one subject. 
The proposed educational design, as illustrated in the 
process from (α) to (δ) in Figure 3, increases students’ 
motivation.  
III. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we proposed an educational design that 
increases students’ motivation to enroll in university science 
and engineering. The target is high school students with low 
motivation in science classes. To realize it, we will 
implement the following procedure. First, we need to 
determine the constituent factors of science perception that 
affect students’ motivation to enroll in university science 
and engineering (In this paper, we use intrinsic value, 
attainment utility value, expectation of success and 
satisfaction as science perception). Second, we need to 
develop a questionnaire to quantify these factors. Lastly, we 
need to construct a function to output an important factor to 
increase students' motivation when we input students' 
science perception. 
After resolving the above issue, we will verify the effect 
of our proposed educational design. We have conducted a 
questionnaire survey of high school students (n = 120). We 
are in the process analyzing the acquired data and will 
report the results in future work. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported in part by JSPS KAKENHI 
Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (No. 24501146). This 
work was also supported in part by Nagaoka University of 
Technology Presidential Research Grant (D). 
We would like to thank Takako Mitsui, Yoko Tsuchiya 
and Rai Shukuin at Yamanashi Eiwa Junior and Senior High 
School for cooperating on our research. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Surper Science High School. [Online]. Available from:  
https://ssh.jst.go.jp/ 2014.11.17 
[2] Science Pertnership Program. [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.jst.go.jp/cpse/spp/ 2014.11.17 
[3] Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and 
Technology, “Basic Research on School” [Online]. Available 
from: 
http://www.mext.go.jp/b_menu/toukei/chousa01/kihon/12679
95.htm 2014.11.17 
[4] C. Uchida, “Daigaku ni okeru kyu-taigaku ryunen gakusei ni 
kansuru tyousa (The 32th report of survey about the dropout 
students in the university)”, the report of the 32th meeting of 
the japanese association for college mental health, 2011. 
[5] Ministry of health, labourt and welfare, “NEET no zyoutai ni 
aru wakamoono no zittai oyobi siensaku ni kansuru tyousa 
kenkyu (Sruvey about actual state of young fellow for 
NEET)”, 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.mhlw.go.jp/houdou/2007/06/h0628-1.html 
[6] J. S. Eccles, “Where are all the women? Gender differences in 
participation in physical science and engineering”, American 
Psychological Association, 2005, pp. 199-210. 
[7] M. Kitajima and K. Naitou, “Syouhisya koudou no kagaku 
(Science for consumer behavior)”, Tokyo Denki University 
Press, 2010. 
[8] D. Michael, “Integrating ethics into technical courses: Micro-
insertion.” Science and Engineering Ethics 12.4, 2006, pp. 
717-730. 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

