 
Modeling Interaction in Automated E-Coaching 
A Case from Insomnia Therapy 
 
Robbert Jan Beun, Fiemke Griffioen-Both, 
René Ahn 
Information and Computing Sciences 
Utrecht University (UU) 
Utrecht, The Netherlands 
R.J.Beun@uu.nl, F.Griffioen-Both@uu.nl, 
R.M.C.Ahn@gmail.com 
Siska Fitrianie  
Interactive Intelligence Group 
Technical University Delft (TUD) 
Delft, The Netherlands 
S.Fitrianie@tudelft.nl 
 
Jaap Lancee  
Dep. of Clinical Psychology, 
University of Amsterdam (UVA) 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
J.Lancee@uva.nl
 
Abstract—This paper presents the work in progress on the 
Sleepcare-project. The aim of the project is to enhance the 
understanding of personalized self-help therapy with the aid of 
existing (mobile) technology, in particular in the domain of 
insomnia. For that, an agent-based e-coaching system is being 
developed in which various persuasion strategies for sustaina-
ble behavior change are evaluated. The e-coach is considered 
as a cooperative partner that combines various interaction 
modalities (e.g., dialogue, buttons, sensors) and that supports 
the individual with various exercises for insomnia therapy. 
Central in the approach is to improve the individual’s adher-
ence to these exercises. In this paper, we focus on the basic 
interaction model of the e-coach and some of its requirements, 
such as transparency, mutual commitment and adaptation. 
Keywords-cooperative agent; interaction model; e-coaching; 
cognitive behavioral therapy; insomnia. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Personal coaching covers a variety of areas: there are 
sport coaches, sleep coaches, time-management coaches, and 
even life coaches in psychology. Personal coaching is re-
garded as a systematic application of behavioral science to 
the enhancement of work performance and well-being for 
individuals that do not have clinically significant mental 
health issues or abnormal levels of stress [1].  
With advancing research in the field of information tech-
nology (IT), early attempts are made to replace a human 
coach with an automated system. In particular, health coach-
ing dialogue systems have been developed on the basis of 
research methods from persuasive technology and behavior 
medicine, ranging from the treatment of depression to sleep 
disorders [2][3][4][5]. Below, we will refer to these automat-
ed coaching activities as e-coaching. N.B. Strictly speaking, 
e-coaching also covers the inclusion of human therapists that 
communicate by means of IT. 
Compared to traditional human-human coaching, (mo-
bile) e-coaching offers important advantages: mobile IT 
permits the assessment of relevant momentary information 
and the delivery of fully automated feedback tailored to the 
individual and the current context; its infrastructure enables 
the obtainment of objective data from non-obtrusive sensory 
measurement and integration of these data into the treatment; 
and its communication platform facilitates information ex-
change between user groups, i.e., peers, human therapists, 
and medical institutions. The e-coach can be part of a 
stepped health-care structure where human care providers 
take over when problems are detected. 
This paper presents the general interaction model of an 
agent-based e-coaching system for Cognitive Behavior Ther-
apy (CBT). The model is applied in the context of the Sleep-
care-project [6], where a mobile e-coach is being developed 
that mimics the role of a personal coach and that offers a 
tailored counseling program in the domain of insomnia. In 
the project, we carefully try to separate coaching and insom-
nia related knowledge, and aim at experimental validation of 
persuasive strategies that improve adherence to exercises. 
Before we discuss the details of the model (Sections III and 
IV), we first briefly focus on some relevant properties of 
CBT for Insomnia (CBT-I, Section II). 
II. 
INSOMNIA THERAPY 
Insomnia is a sleep disorder with a prevalence of about 
10% in the general population [7]. People with insomnia 
have difficulty initiating and/or maintaining sleep which 
impairs daytime functioning [8]. Insomnia can have severe 
consequences (e.g., concentration problems, emotional insta-
bility, increased risk of accidents).  
Today, it is widely accepted that non-pharmacological 
treatments, such as CBT-I, produce sustainable positive 
changes in the condition of insomnia [9]. CBT-I is designed 
to change dysfunctional beliefs, attitudes and behavior that 
support sleep-disruptive habits, thoughts and emotions, and 
offers a variety of exercise types that differ in aim and prop-
erties [10]. For instance, relaxation exercises aim at a relaxed 
body and mind; sleep restriction involves curtailing the time 
spent in bed to build up a sleep debt during the day; sleep 
hygiene aims at managing environmental factors and non-
sleep related behavior that may be either detrimental or bene-
ficial for sleep. In human-human therapy, the actual interven-
tion is usually preceded by a one- or two-week baseline sleep 
diary monitoring period, but some exercises, such as relaxa-
tion, may be started right from the beginning. 
In general, the therapy has a particular time frame, a vari-
ety of assignments that may be scheduled in a particular 
order (allowing overlap), and a periodic evaluation of the 
assignments. We will return to this in Section IV-C. 
 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-340-7
COGNITIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
One of the major problems in CBT is non-adherence to 
the therapy [11] and CBT-I is no exception to this. In CBT-I 
there may be various reasons for non-adherence. Exercises 
may be too strenuous: people may enthusiastically start the 
therapy and discover that sizing down the time spent in bed 
or getting out of bed in the middle of a cold and dark night 
requires a great deal of effort. In addition, people may have 
doubts that an exercise contributes to a solution of the prob-
lem. Research has been done on improving the treatment 
efficacy of self-help therapy by the inclusion of persuasive 
strategies to support adherence to therapy exercises [12][13]. 
For instance, it was demonstrated that adding feedback to an 
online treatment for insomnia enhanced both adherence and 
efficacy [14]. Mimicking the persuasive characteristics of 
human coaching could be an important factor in the im-
provement of adherence, but introducing these strategies 
requires careful analysis of the coaching process.  
III. 
THE COACHING PROCESS 
The coaching process can be considered as a series of 
conversations between two individuals – the coach and the 
coachee – for the benefit of the coachee in a way that relates 
to the coachee’s learning process [15]. Crucial element is a 
relation of trust between coach and coachee. Often, therapy 
related activities are extrinsically motivated (by the coach 
telling the coachee what to do) and the coachee may not 
experience immediate intrinsic reward after performing an 
exercise. Within certain limits, the coach controls the life of 
the coachee. Therefore, a coach that suggests exercises that 
are too demanding or that do not manage the coachee’s ex-
pectations with respect to the required effort or outcome, will 
likely cause mistrust, frustration and premature withdrawal 
from the therapy. 
A coach should act as a cooperative partner who not only 
helps to set therapy related goals, but who also offers support 
to develop a personal treatment plan and uses persuasive 
strategies to improve adherence to the exercises. To apply 
this approach, the coaching process should have at least the 
following elements: a. the coach should be transparent about 
the source of, the importance of and rationale behind exer-
cises; b. the coach and coachee should agree on the invest-
ments in the therapy in terms of closing a contract (c.f. [16]) 
and c. the intervention and support should be adapted to the 
individual coachee on the basis of the unique circumstances 
and characteristics of the coachee [13]. These three elements 
will form the basis of the interaction scheme presented in 
Fig. 3 that models the interaction between e-coach and 
coachee. 
IV. 
BEHAVIOR MODEL OF THE E-COACH 
Fig. 1 shows the interaction scheme between the coachee, 
who interacts through a (mobile) communication device, 
external sensor devices, a communication medium, such as 
the internet, and the e-coach system. Sensor devices may 
deliver, for instance, sleep related and environmental infor-
mation, such as wake/sleep stage, and light and sound condi-
tions.  
The e-coach system consists of various interaction chan-
nels, an I/O-Manager that deals with technicalities of the in- 
and output, and a supportive agent that communicates with 
the coachee to initiate and support the coaching process in 
accordance with the therapy and communication standards.  
A. Constraint based dialogue act generation 
For the generation of supportive behavior by the e-coach, 
we propose a constraint-based approach [17]. The basic idea 
is that the coaching model of a well-formed coaching process 
needs to conform to a number of constraints. Whenever 
constraints are violated and detected, they have to be re-
paired by the e-coach by the generation of a dialogue act.  
A constraint describes, for example, that the coachee 
should adhere to the details of a commitment: doing relaxa-
tion exercises twice a day. This constraint is violated when 
the coachee performs less relaxation exercises and the coach 
resolves the conflict with a dialogue act, e.g., by explaining 
the importance of the assignment. 
Violations are not necessarily negative, however: if the 
coachee shows an outstanding performance and the coach 
did not generate a compliment, this is an undesirable state 
that has to be repaired. In this respect, the coaching process 
may be regarded as the maintenance of a balanced state [18]; 
as long as the coaching model is balanced, nothing happens. 
The constraint approach is depicted in Fig. 2. The e-
coach detects violations (constraint checker) and generates 
dialogue actions (dialogue action generator) on the basis of 
three types of information: background knowledge about 
timeless information (e.g., information about sleep disorders, 
persuasive strategies, constraints), the coaching process 
(history, plans, therapy schedule), and a repository that re-
flects information from the coachee’s point of view (e.g., 
feelings, sleep quality, circumstances). Together, they form 
the information base of the coach. The generated dialogues 
are communicated to the coachee through the I/O manager 
using one of the communication channels. The I/O manager 
sends new information arising from the interaction with the 
coachee to the information base (via the updater). 
 
Figure 1. The basic interaction of a CBT-I adherence e-coach 
 
Figure 2. A constraint-based e-coach system. 
E-coach system
Dialogue action
generator
Constraint
checker
Information base
 
 
 
Updater
I/O
manager
- Background
- Coaching process
- Coachee info
channel
channel
channel
 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-340-7
COGNITIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
B. Conversational Behaviour 
There are a number of dialogue actions between the 
coachee and the coach that update the information base 
(coaching process and repository) of the coach and change 
the state of the coachee. They can take place through various 
channels, most of them on a smartphone. Dialogue actions 
are the basic communicative actions that are the building 
blocks of more elaborate interaction recipes, such as intro-
ductions and evaluations of an exercise. 
Both coach and coachee can take the initiative to start the 
interaction. The partners make working agreements as soon 
as possible and plan regular briefing sessions where they 
discuss, negotiate and plan the therapy and the coach pro-
cess.  
In one of the early introduction sessions, the coach intro-
duces the schedule, which is essentially a shared agenda that 
corresponds with an object in the coaching model. All plans 
and agreements the coach and coachee make are stored into 
the schedule, where they can be viewed by both partners. In 
addition, both coach and coachee can initiate a conversation 
if one of them does not agree anymore with the specifics of a 
plan or agreement. 
C. Interaction model of basic coaching process 
The coaching process (introduced in Fig. 3) consists of 
three phases: an opening phase consisting of a two-way 
learning process between the coach and coachee, an inter-
vention phase where the actual therapy is conducted and a 
closure phase during which the therapy can be ended.  
The goal of the opening phase is twofold: improving 
transparency through a process of alignment and establishing 
commitment to the therapy in the form of an agreed contract. 
Depending on the extent of the process, alignment may refer 
to various types of information at three different levels [13]: 
the therapy level (time and effort investments, goals, insom-
nia-related knowledge), communication level (interface 
design, gender) and ethical level (privacy, trust, risks). Based 
on the information exchange, the coach may advise the 
coachee to withdraw from the therapy, for example on the 
basis of contra-indications in CBT-I, such as addiction and 
depression. In that case, the coach may refer the coachee to 
an experienced human therapist or a general practitioner 
(inclusion/exclusion advice). The coachee however, makes 
the final decision about whether to continue. 
The intervention phase consists of different types of ex-
ercises, all aiming at support to reach the coachee’s goal. The 
timing of each exercise is entered into the schedule in the 
introduction phase. The coach uses the schedule to initiate 
communication about a new exercise. Fig. 3 shows four 
exercises partially overlapping, as an example of a therapy 
plan. 
The closure phase starts after all exercises have been 
performed or when the coachee desires to withdraw from the 
therapy. In this phase, the coach and coachee may evaluate 
the progress of the coachee, have a discussion about why the 
coachee ends the therapy, or make plans for relapse preven-
tion. Discussing the (ending of the) therapy may give im-
portant information for future support strategies. 
D. Exercise support 
Although the exercises can be very different, they follow 
the same four steps (see Fig. 4). Every exercise starts with an 
introduction to the exercise (step A). During step B, the 
coach explains what is expected of the coachee and they can 
negotiate about the specifics of the exercise (e.g., frequency 
and timing of the assignments). When the coach and coachee 
agree, they establish a commitment by ‘signing’ a contract. 
The exercise properties are stored in the schedule, so that the 
coachee can view and adapt them and the coach can respond 
to constraint violations (e.g., by sending reminders to the 
coachee if the task is not executed on time). Step C consists 
of the coachee performing the exercise based on the schedule 
agreed upon in the plan & commit process. The final step D 
is a briefing session evaluating the performance at a sched-
uled time (committed to in the contract in step B). The coach 
may use adherence data and will ask the coachee about their 
 
Figure 3. The interaction model of a basic coaching process. 
 
1. Opening phase
Introduction
coach/coachee
Inclusion/
exclusion advice
Introduction
therapy
Plan & commit
2. Intervention phase
Exercise 2
Exercise 1
Exercise 3
Exercise 4
3. Closure phase
Close therapy
 
 
 
 
 
Schedule
time
 
Figure 4. Interaction model of an exercise. 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Exercise
C. Task
execution
A. Introduction
D. Evaluation
B. Plan &
commit
Schedule
time
 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-340-7
COGNITIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
opinion. After evaluation, the exercise either ends, or contin-
ues with discussing the plan for the next cycle of the exer-
cise.  
V. 
DISCUSSION 
This paper presents a generic constrained based interac-
tion model applied in the domain of automated CBT-I. Since 
CBT-I is considered as an amalgam of a wide range of indi-
vidual and communicative activities, it is to be expected that 
the model pertains to other mobile e-coaching domains as 
well. Therapy related exercises can be viewed as a particular 
type of activities that should be scheduled and adhered to by 
the coachee. Moreover, in all domains, e-coach and coachee 
should align, build mutual agreement about the investments, 
and evaluate and adapt exercises and communication to the 
individual characteristics of the coachee.  
To improve exercise adherence, three elements were in-
cluded that play a crucial role in the communicative behavior 
of the e-coach: transparency, adaptation and commitment to 
contracts. These elements can be found in various stages of 
the therapy. Transparency is implemented in the extensive 
introduction of the therapy and exercises at various levels; 
adaptation to personal circumstances or preferences is estab-
lished in the introduction stage (plan and commit) and the 
various briefing sessions; the closing of various contracts is 
implemented in the introduction and intervention phases 
where the coachee can either commit to an agreed plan or 
withdraw from the treatment or exercise. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The aim and strength of the Sleepcare project is the ge-
nericness of the approach, i.e., developing a system that can 
be applied to many coaching domains. In addition, develop-
ing a mobile phone app allows the coach to support the 
coachee at any time, not only during therapy hours. The 
generic nature together with the limitations of smartphone 
applications (limited resources, small screen, etc.) provide a 
challenge: the need for designing an efficient system with 
many functionalities and still compact enough to run on a 
mobile phone. 
Currently in the Sleepcare project, a smartphone app is 
being developed and tested. The latest version contains a 
sleep diary tool, a relaxation exercise and is able to send 
reminders. Three reminder settings are currently being tested 
in an experiment: no reminders, self-scheduled reminders 
and opportunity detection reminders. 
Future work consists of further development, implemen-
tation and empirical validation of the model in the domain of 
CBT-I. Important questions to be answered are how coach-
ing strategies and sleep related knowledge can be separated 
to guarantee the generic nature of the coaching model and 
how the abstract interaction scheme can be transformed into 
user-friendly and natural interface characteristics. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is supported by Philips and Technology 
Foundation STW, Nationaal Initiatief Hersenen en Cognitie 
NIHC under the Partnership programme Healthy Lifestyle 
Solutions.  
REFERENCES 
[1] M.A. Grant, “A personal perspective on professional coaching and 
the development of coaching psychology”, International Coaching 
Psychology Review, 1(1),  2006, pp. 12- 22.  
[2] T.W. Bickmore, D. Schulman, and C.L. Sidner, “A reusable 
framework for health counseling dialogue systems based on 
behavioral medicine ontology”, J. of Biomedical Informatics, 44, 
2011, pp. 183-197. 
[3] O.A. Blanson Henkemans, P.J.M. van der Boog, J. Lindenberg, 
C.A.P.G. van der Mast, M.A. Neerincx, and B.J.H.M. Zwetsloot-
Schonk, “An online lifestyle diary with a persuasive computer 
assistant providing feedback on self-management” Technology & 
Health Care, 17(3), 2009, pp. 253-257. 
[4] F. Both, P. Cuijpers, M. Hoogendoorn, and M. Klein, “Towards Fully 
Automated Psychotherapy for Adults: BAS - Behavioral Activation 
Scheduling via web and mobile phone”, In: Proc. of the 3d Inter. 
Conf. on Health Informatics, HEALTHINF'10, 2010, pp. 375-380. 
[5] C.A. Espie et al., “A Randomized, Placebo-Controlled Trial of Online 
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for Chronic Insomnia Disorder 
Delivered via an Automated Media-Rich Web Application”, Sleep, 
35(6), 2012, pp. 769-781B. 
[6] Sleepcare project, http://www.ikgalekkerslapen.nl [accessed 11th 
April 2014] 
[7] M.M. Ohayon,“Epidemiology of insomnia: What we know and what 
we still need to learn”, Sleep Medicine Reviews, 6(2), 2002, pp. 97-
111. 
[8] American Psychiatric Association. "Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 
of Mental Disorders", Fifth Edition. Arlington, VA: American 
Psychiatric Association, 2013. 
[9] C.M. Morin et al., “Psychological and behavioral treatment of 
insomnia: Update of the recent evidence (1998-2004)”, Sleep 2006, 
29, pp. 1398-1414. 
[10] C.M. Morin and C.A. Espie, “Insomnia. A clinical Guide to 
Assessment and Treatment”, New York: Springer; 2003. 
[11] T.W. Bickmore, D. Mauer, F. Crespo, and T. Brown, “Persuasion, 
task interruption and health regimen adherence”. In: de Kort Y. 
IJsselsteijn W, Midden C, Eggen B, Fogg BJ (eds) Persuasive 
technology. LNCS volume 4744. Springer, Berlin, 2007,  pp 1–11. 
[12] C. H. G. Horsch, W. P. Brinkman, R. M. van Eijk, and M. A. 
Neerincx, “Towards the usage of persuasive strategies in a virtual 
sleep coach”, Proc. of UKHCI 2012 Workshop on People, Computers 
and Psychotherapy, 2012. 
[13] R. J. Beun, “Persuasive strategies in mobile insomnia therapy: 
alignment, adaptation, and motivational support”, Personal and 
Ubiquitous Computing, 17(6), 2013, pp. 1187-1195.  
[14] J. Lancee, J. van den Bout, M.J. Sorbi, and A. van Straten, 
“Motivational support provided via email improves the effectiveness 
of internet-delivered self-help treatment for insomnia: A randomized 
trial”, Behaviour Research and Therapy, 2013, 51, pp. 797-8056. 
[15] J. Starr, “The coaching manual. The definitive guide to the process, 
principles and skills of personal coaching”. London: Pearson Prentice 
Hall Business, 2008. 
[16] R. Cialdini, “Influence, Science and Practice”, HarperCollings 
College, New York, 1993. 
[17] R.M.C. Ahn, “Basic Sleep Coach Knowledge Architecture.” 
Sleepcare Internal Document, 23112013, 2013. 
[18] R.J. Beun. "On the generation of coherent dialogue: a computational 
approach". Pragmatics & Cognition, 9(1), 2001, pp. 37-68. 
 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-340-7
COGNITIVE 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

