Modeling and Studying Cooperative Behavior between Intelligent Virtual Agents by 
Means of PRE-ThINK Architecture 
 
Dilyana Budakova 
Department Of Computer Systems and 
Technologies 
Technical University of Sofia, Branch 
Plovdiv, Plovdiv, Bulgaria 
dilyana_budakova@tu-plovdiv.bg  
Lyudmil Dakovski   
Department of Communication & 
Computer Technologies 
European Polytechnic University 
Pernik, Bulgaria 
lyudmil.dakovski@epu.bg  
Rumen Trifonov 
Department of Computer Systems 
Technical University of Sofia 
Sofia, Bulgaria 
r_trifonov@tu-sofia.bg 
 
 
Abstract—This paper studies the behavior of cooperation 
between Intelligent Virtual Agents (IVA). The significant role 
of social emotions and empathy in realizing this complex type 
of social behavior has been proved. For the purposes of the 
experiment, a programming system with a scenario has been 
proposed, according to which intelligent virtual agents with 
PRE-ThINK architecture sort out the tasks at their workplace. 
When they mutually show consideration for the plans of the 
other agent, they manage to realize these plans. Their overall 
emotional state improves. They are friendly and perfect 
themselves. The dynamics of making decisions has also been 
shown: in problematic situations when mixed emotions occur; 
in justification the choices of tasks they make; in defining 
priorities and planning actions. Experiments with the agents 
have been discussed both for the case of collaborative behavior 
and for lack of communication, comments on the sequences 
from the chosen types of behavior have been given. The 
cooperative behavior is achieved by controlling the thoughts of 
the agents.     
Keywords-Intelligent Virtual Agents (IVA); architectures for 
IVA; social behavior; mixed emotions; cooperation. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
One of the biggest challenges in social and biological 
sciences is to understand the basic and the auxiliary 
mechanisms, facilitating and favoring the process of 
collaboration between people and groups of people [4][7]-
[10][12][13][15][17]-[19][23][28].  
The experiment conducted by Burton-Chellew et al. [23] 
by means of a public goods game proves that when people 
unite in groups in order to compete with other similar groups 
of people for a monetary award, they are more inclined to 
make greater investments within their own group than when 
they play individually. The members of the group see 
themselves as collaborators, not as competitors. The bigger 
their contribution to the purpose of cooperation, the stronger 
this image and vice versa. They proved that the strength of 
the emerging emotions of anger and guilt in an individual, 
who is a member of a group for cooperation, is a function of 
both his/her own contribution to the purpose of cooperation, 
and of the other members’ contribution to the purpose of this 
cooperation. 
Cooperation and competition between groups of people 
can be observed in academic research teams, in the army, in 
sports teams, etc. [28]. On the one hand, the competition 
between groups of people is the biggest form of competition, 
existing in the world. However, on the other hand, the 
establishment of competing groups favors the arousal of 
stable and strong cooperation between the group members 
[17]-[19][23]. This fact has not been studied yet to the depth 
at which other forms of achieving and maintaining 
cooperation have already been studied, e.g., by receiving 
penalties or rewards [6][11][16]. 
The present paper studies the behavior of cooperation 
between 
IVAs 
with 
PRE-ThINK 
architecture. 
A 
programming system and a scenario have been proposed, by 
means of which the complexity of cooperative behavior has 
been proved. This behavior is regarded here as a social type 
of behavior, requiring cooperation between the IVAs: 
sharing; empathy; expressing and understanding social 
emotions; knowledge of the circumstances, in which a 
conflict situation could begin; capabilities for recognition of 
the probable conflict situations; knowledge of the actions for 
solving or preventing conflict situations. This complex social 
behavior aims at finding the best solution for all members of 
a team in every situation. It can prevent from lots of conflict 
situations; can improve the fulfillment of the tasks; can 
improve the emotional state of the team members. Therefore, 
it is expected that the IVAs, which cooperate with the users, 
will easily gain their trust and will become irreplaceable 
friends and collaborators in any group united by common 
interests. For comparison, by means of a separate experiment 
it has been shown how the lack of cooperation (in particular 
– lack of communication and empathy) leads to: occurrence 
of conflict situations and problems; impossibility for the 
IVAs to achieve their goals and fulfill their plans: worsening 
the emotional state of the IVAs.  
The rest of the paper is structured as it follows: in Section 
II, the modern tendencies in this field are considered, 
together with the motivation to model social behavior of 
collaboration. In Section III, the programming system and 
the scenario are presented. The concept and nature of the 
experiments with the system are explained in Section IV. 
The dynamics of the process of decision making by the IVAs 
both in case of lack of communication between them and in 
case of cooperation are considered in Section V. The 
experimental results are discussed in Section VI. In the 
Section VII, a number of conclusions are drawn and 
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Relational Database 
Thoughts, Actions,  
Emotions, Needs 
and Rationalities 
 
Time simulation - minutes, hours, days  
Module for initialization of the scenario. 
 
The programmer can enter: the engagements of the IVA for 10 
experimental days; the duration of the work over the tasks to 
be fulfilled by the IVA every day at their workplace;   
 
 
 
 
Interface with the user 
The users can track the progress of time and work, as well as IVA’s 
condition during the experiment.  
 
            
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Structural scheme of the program system 
Procedural and 
Declarative  
Realization of the 
Principles, 
Investigations and 
Knowledge;   
 
Module for realization of the scenario and for modeling the 
IVA with PRE-ThINK architecture.  
IVA’s behavior; IVA’s state; Decisions making for achieving the 
goals according to the agent’s principles, priorities, appraisals and 
experience. Generation of thoughts; Strategy for choice of thoughts  
 
 
directions for further development of the programming 
system are given. 
II. BACKGROUND 
Many researchers [3][25]-[27][29] model IVA’s behavior 
in order to establish trust between the user and the IVA. For 
this purpose IVAs are modeled, having the capability to 
express so-called moral emotions (regret, joy, compassion, 
remorse) [5][25]. There has already been much work that 
promotes cooperation, through trust- and reputation-building 
models, in multi-agent systems [5]. 
A great amount of contemporary neurophysiologic 
research confirms the main role of emotions in rational 
behavior [1]. 
Ortony, Clore, and Collins (OCC) model defines a 
cognitive approach for looking at emotions [30]. This theory 
is extremely useful for the project of modelling agents which 
can experience emotions. The cornerstone of their analysis is 
that emotions are “valence reactions.” The authors do not 
describe events in a way that will cause emotions, but rather, 
emotions can occur as a result of how people understand 
events. 
The first modification to the OCC model is to allow the 
definition of different emotions with respect to others, which 
are known as social emotions. Social emotions can be 
defined as one’s emotions projecting on or affected by 
others. 
According to Lee et al. [24] mixed emotions, especially 
those in conflict, sway agent decisions and result in dramatic 
changes in social scenarios. However, the emotion models 
and architectures for virtual agents are not yet advanced 
enough to be imbued with coexisting emotions [24]. Modern 
cognitive architectures, which could be appropriate and 
would have good results in modeling complex social 
behaviour are ACT-R [31], Soar [32], CLARION [33],  
PRE-ThINK [21]. 
The PRE-ThINK architecture [20][21][22] allows for 
modelling an IVA, having capabilities to detect and analyze 
conflicts. Problem situations evoke conflicting thoughts, 
accompanied by mixed emotions and they are related to a 
number of different ways of action. The agent considers in 
advance (Pre-Think) in what way each possible action in a 
critical situation would reflect over all individuals concerned 
by it. The originated thoughts are assessed from emotional, 
rational and needs-related points of view in accordance with 
the knowledge, priorities and principles of the agent. Agent’s 
behavior motivators are its needs according to Maslow’s 
theory [2]. 
It is assumed that an IVA, capable of detecting a critical 
situation, of analyzing it and choosing the best possible 
option to take care of all individuals concerned, would easily 
gain trust. Such a behavioral model is presented in this paper 
with the help of the PRE-ThINK architecture.  
III. DESCRIPTION OF THE PROPOSED PROGRAMMING 
SYSTEM AND SCENARIO 
For the purpose of the experiment, a prototype of the 
programming 
system 
and 
IVAs 
with 
PRE-ThINK 
architecture were modeled. Their structural scheme is given 
in Fig. 1. The main modules of the programming system are: 
Module for simulating the passage of time; Module for 
initialization of the scenario; Module for realization of the 
scenario; Module for modeling IVA with PRE-ThINK 
architecture; Module for generation and choice of the 
thoughts, which will take part in considering the possible 
actions for solving the conflict situation; Module for decision 
making; Interface with the user.  
The system supports a Relational Database and a 
Knowledge Base. The components of the PRE-ThINK 
architecture - Principles, Investigations and Knowledge - are 
realized in a procedural and declarative way, while the 
components Thoughts, Actions, Emotions, Needs and 
Rationalities are presented in relational databases by means 
of tables and relationships among them. This way of 
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

TABLE III. PAYOFF MATRIX OF THE PROPOSED SCENARIO 
 
 
 
 
 
IVA Lilly 
 
 
 
 
Lighter Tasks 
 
Complex Tasks 
 
IVA 
Mira 
 
Lighter Tasks 
Lack of enough 
lighter tasks 
IVA Lilly - bonus 
IVA Mira - time 
 
Complex Tasks 
IVA Lilly - time 
IVA Mira - bonus 
Lack of enough 
complex tasks 
 
presenting allows for easy adding or deleting: actions for 
solving problem situations; thoughts to each possible action; 
arguments to each thought; emotional, needs-related and 
rational assessments of each thought-action.  
The system allows for applying various strategies for 
choice of thoughts, which will take part in the process of 
decision making. For instance: it is possible that all thoughts 
are taken into consideration in making a decision; it is also 
possible to define randomly which and how many thoughts 
will be taken into account; another option is to choose the 
thoughts depending on the correspondence between their 
emotional assessment and the emotional state of the IVA or 
between their needs-related assessment and the needs of the 
agent at the moment, etc. There are thoughts, deserving 
attention; there are also thoughts to be suppressed and even 
overcome (misleading thoughts) in order to come to a good 
decision. In the experiment, presented here, the thoughts are 
randomly chosen.  
The scenario, proposed and realized especially for the 
purposes of the present study, includes only participation of 
IVAs. It is intended that a further development of the 
programming system and the scenario will also include 
active participation in the experiment on the side of the 
users, who will interact with the IVAs and receive advice 
from them.  
According to the proposed scenario for the first part of 
the study, two IVAs are students and at the same time work 
for a company. They go to work every day and have a set of 
tasks to fulfill for the day. The tasks are of various levels of 
complexity. Those of them, which require more than 45 
minutes of work on them, are considered to be complex. 
Those, which can be fulfilled for 15 to 45 minutes are 
regarded as light. 
It is considered that an IVA has fulfilled his/her daily 
obligations if he/she has managed to fulfill eight (8) tasks 
(regardless of their complexity).  
An IVA gets a bonus if he/she manages to fulfill four (4) 
complex tasks within a day.  
ТABLE I. 
COMPLEXITY AND DURATION OF THE WORK OVER THE 
TASKS FOR A DAY AT WORK. 
 
 
Complexity 
and 
Duration 
С 60 
С 75 
L 30 
С 65 
L 30 
С 60 
L 35 
L 20 
L 35 
L 45 
С 80 
L 35 
L 25 
L 15 
L 25 
С 70 
 
Every day the IVAs receive exactly sixteen (16) tasks 
with different time for fulfillment. The number of complex 
tasks is always six (6). So, the IVAs always have the 
necessary number of tasks needed for a successful day at 
work. However, they do not have a sufficient number of 
complex tasks to be able to get a bonus at the same time. On 
the other hand, the number of lighter tasks is insufficient for 
giving both of them the chance to fulfill their obligations by 
working on them only.  
Table I presents an exemplary distribution of the tasks, 
got by the IVAs at their workplace within a workday. By the 
symbol C the complex tasks are marked, and the lighter ones 
are marked by L. The duration of the work over the tasks is 
measured in minutes.  
ТABLE II. А)  PLANNED ENGAGEMENTS AND INTENTIONS OF THE IVA 
MIRA FOR THE NEXT 10 DAYS. 
Monday 
Tuesday 
Wednesday 
Thursday 
Friday 
 
Examination 
 
Party 
 
Work 
Work 
Work 
Work 
Work 
 
Monday 
Tuesday 
Wednesday 
Thursday 
Friday 
Examination 
 
 
Work for 
a bonus 
Work for 
a bonus 
Work 
Work 
Work 
Work 
Work 
ТABLE II. B) 
 PLANNED ENGAGEMENTS AND INTENTIONS OF THE IVA 
LILLY FOR THE NEXT 10 DAYS. 
Monday 
Tuesday 
Wednesday 
Thursday 
Friday 
 
Examination 
 
Work for 
a bonus 
 
Work 
Work 
Work 
Work 
Work 
 
Monday 
Tuesday 
Wednesday 
Thursday 
Friday 
Party 
 
 
Work for 
a bonus 
 
Work 
Work 
Work 
Work 
Work 
 
According to the scenario, the IVAs (Mira and Lilly) 
sometimes have examinations, sometimes they struggle for a 
bonus, and sometimes hurry for a party. When they have an 
exam or hurry for a party, they strive to take 8 light (minor 
tasks) and leave work as soon as possible. When the IVAs 
need more money or when they struggle to get a bonus, they 
strive to fulfill first the required four (4) complex tasks for 
the day and are ready to stay longer hours at their workplace. 
When the IVAs do not have any other engagements for 
the day except for being at the workplace, and when they do 
not struggle for a bonus, they fulfill the tasks in their 
sequence and without any interest to the level of complexity. 
For the IVAs, it is important to always fulfill the 
compulsory eight (8) tasks per day. Therefore, two conflict 
situations are possible (Table III) – when:  
- 
There is an exam and a party for the IVAs on the 
same day – (lack of enough lighter tasks); 
- 
Both IVAs have decided to work for a bonus on the 
same day – (lack of enough complex tasks).  
These conflict situations can evoke mixed emotions in 
the virtual agents. The IVAs have to be able to recognize 
them and, after consideration, find the best possible solution. 
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

s
impTh
needTh s
s
emotTh
Th s
I
W
E
A
_
.
_
_
.
_
*
*

Table II presents all planned engagements of each of the two 
IVAs (Mira and Lilly) for 10 days.  
IV. CONCEPT AND NATURE OF THE EXPERIMENTS 
Two experiments with the programming system have 
been conducted. Each of them tracks the behavior of the 
virtual agents within ten (10) experimental days. 
The following aspects are tracked in each of the two 
experiments: how many tasks each of the IVAs has fulfilled 
on each of the considered workdays; what is the level of 
complexity of the fulfilled tasks; what is the emotional state 
of each of the virtual agents; what level of importance has 
been assigned to the different engagements of an agent per 
day. The aim is to show in which case best results are 
achieved in terms of work done at achieved personal aims by 
the IVAs, as well as to show the emotional state of the 
virtual agents. 
In the first experiment, each virtual agent tries to realize 
his/her aims and engagements for each of the considered 
workdays not interested in the intentions and aims of the 
other agent. There is no communication between the two 
agents. There is no coordinated planning of aims and 
intentions, correspondingly. 
In the second experiment, the virtual agents cooperate 
between each other. Each of them is interested not only in 
his/her own engagements and aspirations but also in the aims 
and intentions of the other agent. At the beginning of the 
week (on Monday) the agents share and coordinate their 
engagements for the week (from Tuesday to next Monday). 
If they think that there may arise a conflict situation on one 
of the next days, they have two options: 1. To shift the time 
of their commitments so that the conflict situation is avoided; 
2. To choose a day to fulfill in advance some of the complex 
tasks, planned for days when they are engaged with urgent 
commitments outside the company. 
V. DYNAMICS OF THE PROCESS OF DECISION MAKING 
For the purposes of the experiment, IVAs with  
PRE-ThINK architecture are used [20][21]. The PRE-ThINK 
architecture 
consists 
of 
the 
following 
components: 
Principles, 
Rationalities, 
(+/-) 
Emotions, 
Thoughts, 
Investigations, Needs and Knowledge.  
The IVA makes his/her decisions based on his/her 
principles. The following IVA principles have been 
modelled: “Choose the better possible action"; "Neglect the 
basic needs until reaching a definite threshold of 
dissatisfaction, giving priority to the highest-order needs”; 
“Evaluate the desires and commitments of the other IVAs as 
your own”; “Your personal commitments are as important as 
those, of the others”.  
The agent has a set of thoughts related to the fulfillment 
of the tasks at the workplace and outside the company – 
thoughts, related to: self-observation; the other IVA’s state; 
the way in which the agent could help to solve the 
problematic situations. 
Each thought is related both to an emotion, and to a need, 
and also has its rational component – importance – with a 
value from 1-3. Each thought is also related to an action. 
As it concerns the emotional component of the thoughts – 
only the following emotions are taken into account: anxiety – 
a negative emotion with a value of (-1) and gladness – a 
positive emotion with a value of (+1). 
The hierarchy of needs according to Maslow’s theory [2] 
is used – physiological (ph), safety (s), love and belonging 
(lb), esteem and self-assessment (es), self-actualization (sa), 
aesthetics (a). Weights of the needs are introduced – Wneed, 
corresponding to their priority: Wph,=10; Ws=20; Wlb=30; 
Wes=40; Wsa=50; Wa=60; When, because of the occurrence 
of an event, one or more needs prove to be unfulfilled, i.e., 
there is a crisis situation, then the needs rearrange so that the 
unfulfilled ones receive first priority. The unfulfilled needs 
are arranged in an order, opposite to the order of needs 
weights in a normal state of the agent. 
Each action of the IVA is related to a need: the 
performance of the duties – to the need of safety; the 
meetings with friends – to the need of love and belonging; 
the struggling for a bonus – to the need of esteem and self-
esteem; the examinations – to the need of self-actualization; 
the possession of more funds – to the aesthetics needs. 
Let a thought addressed to the situation s be denoted by 
Th_s. If the importance of the thought Th_s is denoted by 
Iimp.Th_s, the weight of the need, related to this thought is 
expressed by WneedTh_s, the emotion implied by this thought 
is marked by Eemot.Th_s, then, following the formulae for 
calculating the assessment value of the thought ATh_s, 
corresponding to the situation s, will be [21]: 
(1) 
 
If a thought is partially related to more than one need, 
then the sum of the weight percentages of the needs to which 
it is related is taken into account in the formulae. 
Each thought is related to an action. The assessment 
values of the thoughts related to one and the same action in 
one and the same situation are put on the one basin of the 
“thoughts balance”. The assessment values of the thoughts 
for the same situation, but related to another action, are put 
on another basin etc. Our “thoughts balance” will have as 
many basins as the alternative actions considered by the 
agent in the particular situation are. The module of the 
assessment values is summed and the action from the basin 
having the highest assessment value is undertaken [21]. 
A. The First Experiment 
Here is an example of the thoughts, generated during the 
first experiment, when both IVAs only think about their own 
planned actions and are not interested in the plan of the other 
IVA. The second day of the experiment, when the IVAs 
Mira and Lilly have an examination is considered. 
Mira’s first thought: 
I have an examination today so I will fulfill 8 easy 
tasks in order to leave work at the earliest and go to the 
exam. 
A thought, focused on the fulfillment of the tasks at the 
workplace and on the examination. Positive emotion – 
gladness Eemot.Th1_1 = 1, that she will manage both to pass the 
exam and to fulfill the tasks; rational component – 
importance with value Iimp.Th1_1=3; motivator – the need of 
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

50
1*50*1
)
3_ (1
 
exam  
Th
A
40
1*20*2
)
2_ 2(
 
 
agentwork
Th
A
210
1*70*3
)
3_ 2(




agent exam work
Th
A
210
1*70*3
)
_
1_1(


exam
work
Th
A
20
1*20*1
)
2_ (1
 
 
work
Th
A
90
1*30*3
)
1_ 2(
 
agentexam  
Th
A
self-actualization Wsa=50 and safety Ws=20, WneedTh1_1=70, 
action – going to the examination after fulfilling the 
compulsory 8 (easy) tasks for the day. 
 
 
(2) 
 
Mira’s second thought: 
I have an examination today. However, I have to be at 
work and therefore I will not go to the exam. 
A thought, focused on the fulfillment of the tasks at the 
workplace. Negative emotion – anxiety about the safety at 
the workplace Eemot.Th2_1 = -1; rational component Iimp.Th2_1 = 
1; motivator – the need of safety with weight Ws=20; 
WneedTh_s = 20; action – postpones the examination.  
 
 
 
(3) 
 
Mira’s third thought: 
I have an examination today and therefore I will not 
go to work. 
A thought, focused on the examination. Negative emotion 
– anxiety about the examination - Eemot.Th3_1 = -1; rational 
component – Iimp.Th3_1 =1; motivator – the need of self-
actualization Wsa=50; WneedTh3_1 = 50; action – goes to the 
examination and does not go to work. 
    
 
(4) 
 
The thoughts about the two alternative actions are 
weighed as if on a balance and the IVA takes the decision for 
action. 
Thoughts of going to the exam: 
ATh1_1 (work and exam) = 210 
ATh3_1 (exam) = -50 
Thoughts of postponing the exam: 
ATh2_1 (exam) = -20 
 
It is obvious that here the thoughts of going to the exam 
outweigh. The most important thought which will be realized 
is the first thought. The IVA Mira will go to work in order to 
fulfill the norm of 8 (though easy) tasks and then will go to 
the exam in time. 
B. The Second Experiment 
In the second experiment, when the IVAs consider the 
first conflict situation, the following thoughts are generated: 
Mira’s first thought: 
Lilly and I have an examination on the same day. i.e., 
we have the same commitment with the same priority. 
Consequently, it will not be fair if any of us gives up her 
commitment. 
A thought, focused on the relationship between the 
agents; negative emotion – anxiety about the exam Eemot.Th1_2 
=-1; rational component – importance with a value of 
Iimp.Th1_2 =3; motivator – need of love and belonging 
Wlb=30; WneedTh1_2=30; action – both of them go to the exam 
without postponing it. 
(5) 
 
Mira’s second thought: 
Lilly and I have exams on the same day. We could 
postpone our exams in order to fulfill our task at the 
workplace by a schedule. There will be next dates for 
these exams. 
A thought, focused on the relationships between the 
agents and the priorities at the workplace; negative emotion 
– anxiety about the exam Eemot.Th2_2 =-1; rational component 
– importance with value IimpTh2_2 = 2; motivator – the need of 
safety at the workplace Ws=20; WneedTh2_2=20; action – 
fulfilling the obligations at the workplace by a schedule and 
postponing the exams. 
(6) 
 
Mira’s third thought: 
If we go to our exams tomorrow, we could take and 
fulfill today two of the complex tasks, envisaged for 
tomorrow. Thus we will be able to follow the work 
schedule on the one hand, and go to the exam, on the 
other hand.   
A thought, focused on the relationships between the 
agents at the workplace, on the work and on the exam; 
positive emotion – safety and gladness - Eemot.Th3_2 =1; 
rational component – importance with value Iimp.Th3_2 = 3; 
motivators – the need of safety with weight Ws=20 and the 
need of self-actualization with weight Wsa=50; WneedTh3_2 = 
70; action – fulfilling the complex work tasks in advance 
(since there will not be any time to fulfill them on the day of 
the exam), going to the exam without postponing it. 
 
(7) 
 
Thoughts in support of the idea of both IVAs going to 
the exams: 
ATh1_2 (agent_exam) = -90 
ATh3_2 (agent_exam_work)  = 210 
Thoughts in support of the idea of both IVAs 
postponing their exams: 
ATh2_2 (agents_work)  = - 40 
The thoughts about the two alternative actions are 
weighed as if on a balance and the IVA takes the decision for 
action. 
It is obvious that here overweigh the thoughts of Mira 
and Lilly of going to their exams after fulfilling in advance 
the complex tasks, for which there will be no time on the day 
of the exams. 
 
One more example: 
In the second experiment, when the IVA Lilly has 
planned a party and Mira has an examination, Lilly’s 
thoughts are the following: 
Thought 1: 
I have planned a party for Monday, but Mira has an 
examination. She would probably also like to leave work 
earlier. The examination is more important than a party 
and I could help her by organizing the party on the next 
day. We will all be glad and have a good time together. 
We will also fulfill our tasks at the workplace. 
A thought focused mainly on the relationship between the 
agents; positive emotion – gladness from the opportunity to 
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
 
 
 
 
20
1*20*1
)
2_3(
 
 
work
Th
A
90
1*30*3
)
1_3(


agentwork
Th
A
help in solving the complex situation Eemot.Th1_3 =1; rational 
component – importance with value Iimp.Th1_3 = 3; motivator – 
the need of love and belonging with weigh Wlb=30; WneedTh_s 
= 30; action – having a party on the next day, which is free 
of commitments. 
 
 
(8) 
 
Figure 2а. Experimental results for the case of no cooperation between 
the IVAs (Mira and Lilly). It can be seen that there are no complex tasks 
fulfilled on the second and on the sixth day.  On the nineth and tenth day 
only IVA Mira fulfills the needed 4 complex tasks in order to receive a 
bonus. Anxiety in the IVAs stays high. 
 
Thought 2: 
If I do not postpone the party and Mira does not 
postpone the exam, we will not be able to fulfill our tasks 
at the workplace. I could try to work overtime, but I will 
be very tired. 
A thought, focused mainly on the fulfillment of the 
obligations at the workplace; negative emotion – regret 
Eemot.Th2_3 =-1; rational component – importance Iimp.Th2_3 = 
1; motivator – need of safety with weight Ws=20; WneedTh2_s3 
=20; action – work over the complex tasks in advance. 
(9) 
 
The thought to postpone the party for the next free of 
commitments day outweighs here obviously and this is the 
action, which is taken up. 
VI. DISCUSSION OF EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS  
The results from the described above experiments with 
the IVAs Lilly and Mira are given in Fig. 2a and Fig. 2b. For 
each of the ten (10) observed days the following data are 
shown: the number and the level of complexity of the 
fulfilled tasks; the duration of work of the agents, measured 
in hours; the summarized emotional state of the IVA 
depending on whether they have managed to realize all their 
stated commitments. 
Figure 2b. Experimental results for the case when the IVAs distribute 
their commitments in advance. (Mira and Lilly).  It can be seen that on the 
second and on the sixth day all complex tasks are fulfilled. Mira manages 
to fulfill the needed 4 complex tasks and receives a bonus on the nineth day 
of the expeiment, while Lilly receives her bonus on the tenth day. The 
tendency is that anxiety reduces with time due to averting the conflict 
situations. 
From Fig. 2a, it can be seen that, in case of no 
communication, the IVAs often do not manage to fulfill their 
work obligations because they have other tasks with greater 
priority. For instance, during the first week on Tuesday and 
the second week on Monday, they leave work without 
fulfilling their norm because they have examinations and 
meetings with friends. On the other hand, on Thursday the 
second week they try to work more and earn a bonus but fail 
again. It turns out that because of the lack of communication 
and coordination between them, they compete for the 
complex tasks for the day. 
Thus, day by day, their anxiety and dissatisfaction with 
respect to the workplace grow. If this tendency continues a 
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

longer time the threshold of dissatisfaction for the need of 
safety will be overcome. 
When this happens, the fulfillment of the obligations at 
the workplace will become first priority for the IVAs. All 
other commitments will have lower priorities. In further 
conflict situations they will have to miss examinations or 
meetings with friends. Their anxiety and dissatisfaction will 
grow further. Then, the IVAs may face extremely complex 
problematic situations and they will have to choose what to 
give up – work, university or friends. They may have to look 
for a new job or a new subject to study at the University. The 
occurrence of these extremely complex situations can be 
prevented by improving the communication and by 
cooperation between the agents. 
From Fig. 2b it can be seen that the IVAs have managed 
to redistribute their plans and commitments in a way that has 
allowed them to prevent all conflict situations.  
Firstly: Lilly has decided to meet her friends on Tuesday 
– the 7th day of the experiment – instead on Monday – the 
6th day of the experiment. Thus on Monday Mira will be 
able to fulfill most of the easier tasks and go to her exam in 
time. Secondly: Mira has decided on Wednesday (the 8th 
day of the experiment) to work for a bonus, instead on 
Thursday (9th day of the experiment). Thus she gets a bonus, 
and Lilly gets her bonus on the next day (9th) of the 
experiment. 
The most complex conflict occurs on the second day 
(Tuesday, first week) of the experiment, when both IVAs 
have examinations. This is because the assessment for 
importance of the commitment is one and the same. It is 
impossible to make a decision whose exam to be postponed. 
Therefore, they decide that each of them will fulfill two of 
the complex tasks on the day before the exams. It means that 
on the day of the exams they will have to fulfill five (5) 
easier tasks and one (1) complex task each. Thus only by 
coordinating their work, the IVAs manage to achieve all their 
goals and commitments and there is no stress at their 
workplace. On the contrary, they are glad because they get 
bonuses whenever they want, pass their exams and meet 
their friends with no problems. 
Of course if the needs of money grow more or if the 
commitments outside the company grow more, this solution 
will not be good enough. But in the cases when the 
possibilities of coordination and cooperation between the 
IVAs are exhausted, the solution can be found: 
1) 
By employing more IVAs (for the cases when Mira 
and Lilly will have to leave work earlier), and 
2) 
By increasing the number of complex tasks, 
available for the two IVAs (for the cases when they more 
often want to work for bonuses). 
VII. CONCLUSION 
Cooperation is a complex social behavior, requiring 
empathy and preliminary consideration. It is related to 
planning and making decisions in complex situations, when 
mixed emotions arise. The realization of cooperation requires 
understanding of behavior, emotions, reasons and interests 
both of us and of the other participants in a considered 
scenario. This paper studies the cooperative behavior 
between IVAs. The significant role of social emotions and 
empathy in realizing this complex type of social behavior has 
been proved. For the purposes of the experiment, a 
programming system with a scenario have been proposed, 
according to which intelligent virtual agents with PRE-
ThINK architecture distribute between the two of them the 
tasks at their workplace. When they mutually show 
consideration for the plans of the other agent, they manage to 
realize these plans. Their overall emotional state improves. 
They are friendly and self-actualize themselves. The 
dynamics of making decisions has also been shown as it 
follows: in problematic situations when mixed emotions 
occur; in justification the choice of tasks to fulfill; in 
defining priorities and planning actions. Experiments with 
the agents have been discussed both for the case of 
cooperative behavior and for lack of communication, 
comments on the sequences from the chosen types of 
behavior have been given.   
Based on his/her own principles, knowledge and 
priorities in a critical situation, the agent evaluates the 
possibilities for action from emotional, rational and needs-
related point of view and chooses the best possible action. 
The purpose of the software agent is to possibly take the best 
care of all his collaborators. It is assumed that such behavior 
would facilitate the establishment of trust between the IVAs 
and the users on the one hand; on the other hand, it could 
avert a great part of the conflict situations, which occur every 
day, including at the workplace (mainly due to the lack of 
cooperation and empathy). 
It is envisaged to develop this prototype of a 
programming system by a learning module. It will allow the 
IVAs to learn by assessing not only their thoughts but also 
the thoughts of the other IVAs, with which they cooperate. 
When an IVA decides that another IVA’s thought is a 
sufficiently strong argument in favor of a given action, then 
he/she will be able to save and use it in the future. 
Thus, through communication, the IVAs will enrich with 
new and stronger arguments in support of a given action; 
they will gain more and more trust; they will be more and 
more useful for the users and will become irreplaceable, 
precious friends and members of every team in the world and 
in each sphere of life. 
Experiments, in which the different IVAs will use 
different strategies for choosing the thoughts to take part in 
considering the possible actions for solving a given 
problematic situation, will be of interest.   
The experiments will be extended with the aim to cover 
situations, in which rearrangement of the IVA’s priorities 
will occur. An interesting question will arise in relation to 
the way in which the IVAs express empathy when their 
priorities are in a different order. The assessments of the 
desires and aims of the others will be different then. Certain 
arguments will look value for some IVAs, other arguments 
will be important to other IVAs. We believe that the results 
from such experiments will be of great interest to the 
scientific world. 
 It is intended that the programming system is extended 
by allowing the users to participate in the scenario, to 
communicate with the IVAs and receive advice from them.  
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

The programming system can be useful as a Socially 
Assistive Аpplication (SAA). In general, SAA are intended 
to motivate the users and make them change their social 
behavior. These applications are useful not only for people 
with social deficits, since all people sometimes need to share 
a problem or an experience and receive advice from a friend 
or a specialist. On the other hand, Cloud computing 
technologies give the chance to realize  in the cloud data 
centers, knowledge base, task planners, deep learning, 
information processing. This will allow the users, IVAs and 
robots to share knowledge about and solutions for 
problematic situations and apply them when necessary.  
And last but not least, modeling cognitive processes will 
help for their better understanding and management. This, in 
its turn, will lead to a better quality of life.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is supported by: the Technical University 
of Sofia and its Branch in Plovdiv; the Centre for education 
and innovation at TU-Sofia; and the Scientific and research 
sector at TU-Sofia. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. R. Damasio, “Descartes' Error. Emotion, Reason and the 
Human Brain,” Avon Books, 1994. 
[2] A. H. Maslow, “Motivation and personality,” Addison 
Wesley Longman, Inc. USA, 1970. 
[3] R. S. Picard, “Affective computing,” The Mit Press, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, London. 1998. 
Article in a journal: 
[4] S. Bowles and H. Gintis, “The evolution of strong reciprocity: 
cooperation 
in 
heterogeneous 
populations. 
Theoretical 
Population,” Biology, 65(1), 2004, pp. 17−28. 
[5] C. M. deMelo, P. Carnevale, and J. Gratch, “The Impact of 
Emotion Displays in Embodied Agents on Emergence of 
Cooperation with People,” Teleoperators and Virtual 
Environments, vol. 20, no. 5, 2012, pp. 449-465.  
[6] E. Fehr and S. Gachter, “Altruistic punishment in humans,” 
Nature, 415(6868), 2002, pp. 137−140. 
[7] H. Gintis, “Strong reciprocity and human sociality,” 
Theoretical Biology, 206(2), 2002, pp. 169−179. 
[8] H. Gintis, “The hitchhiker's guide to altruism: Gene-culture 
coevolution, and the internalization of norms,” Theoretical 
Biology, 220(4),  2003, pp. 407−418. 
[9] H. Gintis, S. Bowles, R. Boyd and E. Fehr, “Moral sentiments 
and material interests,” The foundations of cooperation in 
economic life., Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005. 
[10] A. Gunnthorsdottir and A. Rapoport, “Embedding social 
dilemmas in intergroup competition reduces free-riding. 
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes,” 
101(2), 2006, pp. 184−199. 
[11] O. Gurerk, B. Irlenbusch, and B. Rockenbach, “The 
competitive advantage of sanctioning institutions,” Science, 
312, doi:10.1126/science.1123633, 2006, pp. 108–111. 
[12] J. Henrich, R. Boyd, S. Bowles, C. Camerer, E. Fehr, H. 
Gintis, R. McElreath, M. Alvard, A. Barr, J. Ensminger, M. S. 
Henrich, K. Hill, F. Gil-White, M. Gurven, F.W. Marlowe, J. 
Q. Patton, and D. Tracer, “Economic man in cross-cultural 
perspective: behavioral experiments in 15 small-scale 
societies,” The Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 28 (6), 
[discussion 815–55], 2005, pp. 795−815. 
[13] L. Lehmann, F. Rousset, D. Roze and L. Keller, “Strong 
reciprocity or strong ferocity a population genetic view of the 
evolution of altruistic punishment,” Vol 170, pg 21, American 
Naturalist, 2007, 170(4):661. 
[14] J. Sabater, C. Sierra, “Review on computational trust and 
reputation models,” Artificial Intelligence Review, 2005, pp. 
33—60. 
[15] J. H. W. Tan and F. Bolle, “Team competition and the public 
goods game,” Economics Letters, 96(1), 2007, pp. 133−139. 
[16] C. Wedekind and M. Milinski, “Cooperation through image 
scoring in humans,” Science, 288(5467), 2000, pp. 850−852. 
[17] S. A. West, A. S. Griffin, and A. Gardner, “Evolutionary 
explanations for cooperation,” Current Biology, 2007a, 
17(16), R661−R672. 
[18] S. A. West, A. S Griffin and A. Gardner, “Social semantics: 
altruism, cooperation, mutualism, strong reciprocity and 
group selection,” Evolutionary Biology, 2007b, 20(2), pp. 
415−432. 
Article in a conference proceedings: 
[19] R. Boyd, H. Gintis, S. Bowles and P. J. Richerson, “The 
evolution of altruistic punishment,”  The National Academy 
of Sciences of the United States of America, 100(6), 2003, pp. 
3531−3535. 
[20] D. Budakova, L. Dakovski, “Computer Model of Emotional 
Agents,” IVA’06, LNAI 4133, poster, 2006, pp. 450. 
[21] D. Budakova, “Behavior of Home Care Intelligent Virtual 
Agent with PREThINK Architecture,” ICAART’2011, Rome, 
Italy, 2011, pp. 157-167. 
[22] D. Budakova, L. Dakovski, “Social Behavior investigation of 
An Intelligent Virtual Agent with the help of typical working 
student’s life scenario modeling,” ICAART 2012, Vilamoura, 
Algarpe, Portugal, 6-8 February, ISBN: 978-989-8425-96-6, 
2012,  pp. 317-324. 
[23] M. N. Burton-Chellew, A. Ross-Gillespieb, S. A. West, 
“Cooperation in humans: competition between groups and 
proximate emotions, Evolution and Human Behavior”, 
Elsevier, 31, 2010, pp. 104–108.  
[24] B. P. H. Lee, E. Ch. Ch. Kao, V. W. Soo, “Feeling 
Ambivalent: A Model of Mixed Emotions for Virtual 
Agents,” IVA 2006, LNAI 4133, Springer, 2006, pp. 329-342. 
[25] C. M. de Melo, L. Zheng and J. Gratch, “Expression of Moral 
Emotions in Cooperating Agents, Intelligent Virtual Agents,” 
Amsterdam, Sep. 2009, pp. 14-16.  
[26] J. Gratch, N. Wang, J. Gerten, E. Fast and R. Duffy, “Creating 
Rapport with Virtual Agents,” International Conference on 
Intelligent Virtual Agents, Paris, France, 2007. 
[27] R. Niewiadomski, M. Ochs and C. Pelachaud, “Expressions 
of empathy in ECAs,” IVA’2008, Tokyo, Japan, LNAI, Vol. 
5208, 2008, pp. 37-44. 
[28] M. Puurtinen and T. Mappes, “Between-group competition 
and human cooperation,” Royal Society B-Biological 
Sciences, 276(1655), 2009, pp.355−360. 
[29] T. W. Bickmore, L. M. Pfeifer and M. K. Paasche-Orlow, 
“Health Document Explanation by Virtual Agents,” IVA’07, 
Paris, France, LNAI, 2007, pp. 183-196. 
[30] A. Ortonty, G. L. Clore, A. Collins,  “The Cognitive Structure 
of Emotions,” Cambridge University Press, 1988. 
[31] C. Dimov,  J. N. Marewski and L. J. Schooler, “Constraining 
ACT-R models of decision strategies: An experimental 
paradigm,” Cognitive Science Society, Austin, 2013, pp. 
2201-2206.  
[32] S. Mohan, A. H. Mininger, J. E. Laird, “Towards an Indexical 
Model of Situated Language Comprehension for Real-World 
Cognitive Agents,” Conference on Advances in Cognitive 
Systems, 2013, pp. 153-170. 
[33] R. Sun,  “Motivational representations within a computational 
cognitive architecture,” Cognitive Computation, Vol.1, No.1, 
2009, pp. 91-103 
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

