Directional-Change Event Trading Strategy: Proﬁt-Maximizing Learning Strategy
Monira Essa Aloud
Department of Management Information Systems, College of Business Administration
King Saud University, KSA
email: mealoud@ksu.edu.sa
Abstract—Many investors seek a trading strategy in order to
maximize their proﬁt. In the light of this, this paper derived
a new trading strategy (DCT1) based on the Zero-Intelligence
Directional Change Trading Strategy ZI-DCT0, and found that
the resulting strategy outperforms the original one. We enhanced
the conventional ZI-DCT0 by learning the size and direction
of periodic ﬁxed patterns from the price history for EUR/USD
currency pairs. To evaluate DCT1, experiments were carried out
using the bid and ask prices for EUR/USD currency pairs from
the OANDA trading platform over the year 2008. We compared
the resulting proﬁts from ZI-DCT0 and DCT1. The analysis
revealed interesting results and evidence that the proposed DCT1
investment strategy can indeed generate effective electronic trad-
ing investment returns for investors with a high rate of return.
The results of this study can be used further to develop decision
support systems and autonomous trading agent strategies for the
FX market.
Keywords-Trading strategies; Autonomous trading agent
strategies; Pattern recognition; FX Market.
I. INTRODUCTION
Electronic trading strategies have become a hot topic in
the ﬁeld of ﬁnancial markets, and numerous strategies have
been developed. Investors are always looking for a trading
strategy that maximizes their proﬁts. The ﬁnancial literature
has featured a long debate on the effectiveness of the technical
analysis of ﬁnancial market time series [1–8]. Some argue
that prices are not predictable based on historical information,
since all the relevant public information is mirrored in the
prices. In contrast, recent studies [8,9] have uncovered empir-
ical evidence of various price anomalies, and therefore have
conﬁrmed positive observed evidence on the effectiveness of
technical analysis for analyzing ﬁnancial price time series.
Trend Following (TF) trading strategy is a widely used
investment strategy due to the simplicity of the principle on
which it is based and its effectiveness [10–13]. TF adopts
a rule-based investment strategy based on the directions of
market price trends, where a trader takes advantages of the
price trend on the assumption that the current price trend will
continue in the same direction. Furthermore, the underlying
assumption of TF is that a trader will follow the price trend
with the assumption that some traders have market information
prior to the general public which is reﬂected in the direction of
the price trend [10]. A TF trader places a buy order when the
price is rising, while a sell order is placed when the price is
falling. The ﬁnancial literature reveals successful investments
based on a TF trading strategy in stock markets [11], currency
markets [14] and commodity futures’ markets [13]. Similar
to the TF investment strategy is the Contrary Trading (CT)
strategy with regard to the direction of the market price trend.
A CT trading rule places a buy order in anticipation that
the price will move in the opposite direction. For example,
a trading rule may indicate a buy order opportunity when the
price falls by 0.03% and afterwards places a sell order if the
price rises by 0.06%.
Despite the effectiveness of TF and CT investment strate-
gies, comparatively few works have explored the application of
learning in order to enhance TF and CF investment strategies.
Aloud et al. [15] have constructed a trading strategy called
ZI-DCT0 based on pooling two approaches: (i) the DC event
approach [16] and (ii) TF and CT investment approaches.
Trading in the ﬁnancial markets is highly active at some times,
but calm down at others which makes the ﬂow of physical
time discontinuous. For that reason using ﬁxed time scales
for studying the price changes in the market runs the risk
of missing important price activities. The DC event approach
captures periodic activities in the price time series to detect
major periodic patterns based on the trader’s expectations of
the market. Given a ﬁxed threshold size, the DC approach
characterizes periodic price trend movements in the price time
series, where any occurrence of a DC event represents a new
intrinsic time unit, independent of the notion of physical time
change. A comparable trading strategy to the ZI-DCT0 is
introduced by Alﬁ et al. [17] in which a trader places an
order if the price ﬂuctuations exceed a deﬁned threshold. The
threshold is determined by the trader, and remains constant
during the traders’ trading period in the market. The main
difference between ZI-DCT0 and the one introduced in [17],
is that ZI-DCT0 considers the direction and the overshoot of
price movements in the traders’ trading activities.
In the light of this, the work reported in this paper introduces
a new trading strategy called Directional-Change Trading
(DCT1) derived from ZI-DCT0, where ZI-DCT0 has been
enhanced by the incorporation of a learning model fed by
historical dataset, with the aim of determining the size and
direction of periodic patterns in the price time series. As such,
the DCT1 is able to recognize periodic patterns in a price time
series such as DC events. This may be the key to providing
effective decision support for traders in the ﬁnancial markets.
DCT1 applies a simple learning mechanism which avoids the
complexity of artiﬁcial intelligent trading strategies and also
the vagueness of zero-intelligence and Buy-and-Hold trading
strategies in which traders trade randomly, subject to budget
constraints.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. A brief
literature review of related works is presented in Section II.
The ZI-DCT0 trading strategy is described in Section III. The
new trading strategy is depicted in Section IV together with
a description of the core mechanism of the DCT1 trading
strategy. The experimental design and results are presented
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

in Section V. A summary and conclusions are provided in
Section VI.
II. RELATED WORK
A considerable amount of scientiﬁc research has explored
artiﬁcial intelligence and cognition techniques in terms of ﬁ-
nancial data processing and ﬁltering, knowledge discovery and
building potential adaptive trading strategies for investment in
the ﬁnancial markets. Agent-based adaptive systems have been
applied effectively to study and understand complex ﬁnancial
market phenomena as a means of studying the behaviour of
individual agents within a ﬁnancial market setting, the trad-
ing interaction effects, emergent macro properties, knowledge
discovery with regard to trading behaviour, designing adaptive
investment trading strategies, and the impact of market rules
or policies, among others.
Our paper relates to a large body of literature on investment
trading strategies that is too vast to survey here. Therefore,
we limit our literature review to the most inﬂuential works
with regard to designing investment trading strategies. In the
literature, the design of the trading strategy ranges from simple
budget constrained Zero-Intelligence (ZI) strategy as in [18–
20], to complicated intelligent strategy, such as in [21,22].
ZI strategy was introduced by Gode and Sunder [20] to
examine the continuous double-auction (CDA) mechanism
where the strategy implies random trading, subject to budget
constraints. Thus, ZI strategy does not carry out observation
nor learning the price trend movements. Gode and Sunder’s
experimental results show that markets operating with human
traders and ZI constrained traders converged to the equilibrium
price whereas the market operating with ZI unconstrained
traders did not. In following work, Gode and Sunder [23]
examined the lower-bounds of the level of learning required for
a trading strategy to achieve sufﬁcient outcomes. The results
show that a simple budget constrained ZI strategy is capable
to accomplish satisfactory outcomes. Thus, they conclude that
learning is not required. Their results show that the theoretical
equilibrium price in ﬁnancial markets is determined more by
market structure than by the level of intelligence of the traders
in that market.
Alﬁ et al. in [17,24,25] show that representation of trading
strategy uses to great extend a simple learning mechanism
which depends on observing the price’s movements. In partic-
ular, each agent commits to a ﬁxed threshold, as a result the
agent places an order when the price ﬂuctuations are above
this threshold. The strategy does not consider the direction
and the overshoot of the price movement where the overshoot
represents the size of the price movement beyond the deﬁned
threshold by the agent.
The availability of historical ﬁnancial data provides ex-
tensive rich resources for predicting future price changes in
ﬁnancial time series. The possible reward of a useful tool for
forecasting changes in the price of ﬁnancial assets is without
doubt a major motivator. Financial forecasting has attracted
the attention of researchers from a variety of computer science
areas. Techniques from Artiﬁcial Intelligence, and in particular
Evolutionary Computation, have been used extensively in the
design of ﬁnancial forecasting techniques for predicting future
price changes in ﬁnancial time series. The most commonly
used techniques are Artiﬁcial Neural Networks (ANNs) [26],
Genetic Algorithms (GAs) [27], Genetic Programming (GP)
[28] and Learning Classiﬁer Systems (LCS) [29,30]. Austin
et al. [31] provide an overview of the research conducted by
the Centre for Financial Research at Cambridge University’s
Judge Institute of Management, which has been researching
trading techniques in FX markets for forecasting intraday or
daily exchange rates.
In this section, our intention is to provide a brief illustrative
description of the artiﬁcial intelligence techniques used in
ﬁnancial forecasting and provide a brief description of some
of the most relevant works in the ﬁeld.
In ﬁnancial forecasting, ANNs are probably the most heav-
ily exploited artiﬁcial intelligence technique. There are many
studies in the literature on the subject of ANNs. Amongst
them are [32–35]. The ANNs technique has been applied in
diverse areas of ﬁnance. Wong and Selvi in [26] provide a good
survey of the literature on ANNs between 1990 and 1996. An
additional recent survey can be found in [36]. Yao and Tan
in [37] provide empirical evidence of the appropriateness of
ANNs with regard to the prediction of foreign exchange rates.
In ﬁnancial forecasting, the input data is a fundamental
issue in terms of the success or failure of ANNs, as is the
case with other forecasting techniques. Nevertheless, this issue
is particularly important in the case of ANNs owing to the
lack of ﬂexibility of ANNs techniques. A number of works in
which ANNs are combined with genetic algorithm techniques
is demonstrated by [38]. Further relevant examples are the
studies done by [33–35,39–43].
GAs were invented by John H. Holland in 1975 [27].
GAs belong to the evolutionary algorithms ﬁeld which offers
very popular techniques in optimization and machine learning
problems. GAs use a generation of individuals where each
individual is a candidate for a possible solution to the problem.
A new population is produced by means of selecting the ﬁttest
individuals from the current population through the application
of genetic operators such as crossover and mutation.
In the ﬁnance area, GAs are not limited to forecasting. GAs
are not just used for forecasting but they are also important
in modelling learning in an ABM. Examples of relevant
works which have involved ﬁnancial forecasting using the GAs
technique are [44–48]. There is a number of limitations of
GAs, such as the ﬁxed size structure of the individuals and
their representation. Nevertheless, GAs can be used as a meta-
heuristic or in combination with other forecasting techniques,
to advance the predictions’ performance as can be seen in the
works done in [38,49].
LCS is a machine learning mechanism wherein a population
of rules is evolved and modiﬁed by genetic algorithms. Since
GAs are used to select and modify the population of rules,
this means that the representation of the rules has to be done
with binary strings. Holland and Miller [50] proposed the use
of an LCS to model economic agents. The SF ASM used an
LCS to forecast price changes in time series [51]. In addition,
an LCS was used to perform ﬁnancial forecasting in the work
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

done in [29,30].
LCS has the same limitations as GAs in terms of the
representation and the ﬁxed size structure of the individuals of
the population. An alternative technique to the GAs and LCS
is the genetic programming technique.
The reported studies above adopted different investment
strategy methodologies to perform pattern deduction in price
ﬁnancial market time series. However, these methodologies
require demanding ﬁnancial interpretation ability which means
that they cannot be used by regular investors in order to
interpret actual investment trading behavior.
III. ZI-DCT0
ZI-DCT0 [15] is a trading strategy based on the DC event
approach [16]. DC event approach is an approach for studying
the ﬁnancial time series based on intrinsic time rather than
physical time. Physical time adopts a point-based system while
intrinsic time adopts event-based system. Physical time is
homogenous in which time scales equally spaced based on
the chosen time unit (e.g., seconds). In contrast, intrinsic time
is irregularly-spaced in time given that time triggers at periodic
events of price revolution. The basic unit of intrinsic time is
an event where event is the total price change exceeding a
given ﬁxed threshold deﬁned by the observer.
Given a ﬁxed threshold of size (△xDC), the absolute price
change between two local minimum and maximum prices is
decomposed into directional-change (DC) event of size △xDC
and its associated overshoot (OS) event. The OS event is the
absolute price change beyond the △xDC threshold. A DC
event can be either an upturn event or a downturn event. An
upward run is a period between an upturn DC event and the
next downturn event. In contrast, a downward run is a period
between a downturn DC event and the next upturn DC event. A
downturn (upturn) DC event terminates an upward (downward)
run, and starts an upward (downward) run.
Prior to studying and analyzing an asset’s price time series,
two variables are deﬁned: the last high and low prices where
they are assign as initial value the asset’s price at the start
of the price time series sequence. During an upward run, the
last high price is continuously adjusted to the maximum of the
current price pt at time t and the last high price. During the
period of a downward run, the last low price is continuously
adjusted to the minimum of the current price pt at time t
and the last low price. An upturn DC event occurs once the
absolute price change between the current price and the last
low price is higher than the deﬁned threshold of size △xDC.
In contrast, a downward DC event occurs once the absolute
price change between the current price and the last high price
is lower than the deﬁned threshold of size △xDC.
A ZI-DCT0 commits himself to a ﬁxed threshold and a
method for trading where the method can be one of two
forms: CT or TF trading. Algorithm 1 demonstrates the trading
mechanism for ZI-DCT0. ZI-DCT0 provide evidence in [52]
to generate good quality trading strategy in terms of the
trader’s return of investments, analyzing price movements and
reproducing the statistical properties of the FX market trading
behavior when used in an agent-based market. The restrictions
Algorithm 1 The core trading mechanism for the ZI-DCT0.
Require: initialise variables (event is upturn event, x =pt,
△xDC (Fixed ) ≥ 0)
if event is upturn event then
if pt ≤ x × (1 − △xDC)
event ← downturn event
x← pt
Sell→ZI-DCT0 CT, Buy→ZI-DCT0 TF
else
x← max ( x, pt)
end if
else //Event is downturn event
if pt ≥ x × (1 + △xDC) then
event ← Upturn event
x← pt
Buy→ZI-DCT0 CT, Sell→ZI-DCT0 TF
else
x← min ( x, pt)
end if
endif
of ZI-DCT0 is the randomness and consistent in choosing the
threshold and the type of trading.
IV. DCT1
DCT1 is an intelligence trading strategy driven from the
ZI-DCT0 in which the strategy involves learning toward
identifying the estimated size and the direction of periodic
patterns from an asset’s price time series. DCT1 aims to
overcome the two major limitations of the ZI-DCT0 which
are the randomness in choosing the threshold and the type of
trading (CT or TF). To overcome such limitation, the central
idea behind the DCT1 is that the trader will learn from the
historical dataset of an asset’s price time series earlier to the
process of choosing a threshold and a type of trading.
Algorithm 2 illustrates the core trading mechanism for a
DCT1 trader. Prior to trading in the market, a DCT1 trader
will examine the status of the asset’s price movements using
the historical price dataset for the asset. Such examination aims
for deﬁning to great extend the most ﬁtted practical threshold
and type of trading for the trader as regard to the proﬁtability.
In detail, a DCT1 trader will examine the proﬁtability of
the asset in terms of its historical price data using a deﬁned
number of verity thresholds which are generated randomly
within a deﬁned range. For each threshold value, the DCT1
trader will examine the historical price data set for the asset
using the directional-change event approach from two points
of view ﬁrstly as a CT while and secondly as a TF trader
(as described in Section III). Subsequent to the DCT1 trader
making a trade, the Rate of Investment (ROI) as a performance
indicator will be computed. ROI is a performance measure
deﬁned as the total return to a trader’s investment over a
deﬁned period, divided by the cost of the investment. The ROI
is expressed as a percentage, and is either positive or negative,
125
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Algorithm 2 The core trading mechanism for the DCT1.
Require: initialise variables (e = upturnEvent, x = p0,
highestROI = 0)
Input (pn, λmin, λmax) // pn training price dataset is used to train
trader to ﬁnd the best investment threshold and type of trading; n
length of training dataset;λminis the minmum thrshold; and λmax
is the maximum thrshold.
For (i = 0; i ≺ 30; i + +) do// Examining 30 randomly
generated thresholds
Begin
△xDC = GenerateRandomThreshold[λmin, λmax]
For (y = 0; y ≺ 2; y + +) do // Examining two trading
types where y = 0 is CT and y = 1 is TF
Begin
For (t = 0; t ≺ n; t + +) do //Loop training price dataset
Begin
if (e = upturnEvent) then
if pt ≤ x × (1 − △xDC)then
e ← downturnEvent
x← pt
CT→Buy, TF→Sell
else
x←max (x, pt)
end if - Upturn event price examination
else //e = downturnEvent
if pt ≥ x × (1 + △xDC) then
e ← upturnEvent
x← pt
CT→Sell, TF→Buy
else
x← min (x, pt)
end if - Downturn event price examination
endif - Event Examination
ROI = Evaluate()//ROI (rate of investment) is the
result of evaluting the trader proﬁt/loss for the given values of
△xDCand y.
end for - End loop training price dataset
if (ROI ≻ highestROI)then
λ = △xDC // best threshold λ
ω = y // best type of trading ω
highestROI = ROI
endif
end for - End loop trading type
end for - End loop random threshold
which means that correspondingly, the trader achieves either
a proﬁt or makes a loss.
Towards the end of the examination, the threshold and the
type of trading that results in the most proﬁtable outcome with
reference to the ROI will be chosen for the DCT1 trader’s
decision with regard to placing an order.
V. EXPERIMENTS DESCRIPTION
In this section, we report on the experiments undertaken
in the Agent-Based FX Market (ABFXM) that we developed.
Our aim in particular, is to examine the proﬁtability of the
two strategies in term of the agents’ return of investments;
this can subsequently inform the design of trading strategies
and decision support systems for the trading in the ﬁnancial
market.
A. Dataset
In this study, we used a high-frequency dataset (HFD) for
EUR/USD historical prices provided by OANDA Corporation
which is an online foreign currencies trading platform. HFD
in ﬁnance refers to an extremely huge quantity of data which
is the complete record of transactions and their associated
characteristics at frequencies higher than on a daily basis [53].
According to Dacarogna et al. “The number of observations in
one single day of a liquid market is equivalent to the number
of daily data within 30 years” ( [9], p. 6).
The dataset contains data samples of EUR/USD prices
spanning the year of 2008 where each record contains three
ﬁelds: (a) a bid and (b) an ask EUR/USD price at (c) a
timestamp. This dataset is fed into the ABFXM via the market-
maker. The time-span of the price dataset is very important in
the study, given that different amounts of data examination
possibly will provide ratios of precision interesting to study.
B. Agent-Based FX Market
In this section, we provide an overview of the ABFXM
[15], which was developed to simulate the intraday trading
activity at the level of an FX market-maker market. For a
further detailed description of the ABFXM design, we refer
interested reader to [15].
The FX market is where the exchange of currencies in which
buying and selling currencies takes place. It is a decentralized
market and operates 24 hours a day hence it is considered
the largest and most liquid ﬁnancial market in the world.
The FX market is not an individual market given that it is
composed of a global network of market-maker markets that
connect investors from all around the world. Investors can
be governments, central and commercial banks, institutional
and individual investors, etc. Generally FX trading ﬁrms are
market-makers [9]. A market-maker is a ﬁrm which supplies
liquidity for currencies, and subsequently quotes both a buy
and a sell price for a currency on its platform. The market-
maker buys from and sells to its investors as well as other
market-makers accordingly makes earnings from the differ-
ence between the bid and the offer price.
The ABFXM developed in [15] populated with N trading
agents who participate in the market by means of buying and
selling currencies. For simplicity, there is one currency pair
(EUR/USD) available for trading in the ABFXM. A currency
pair in the ABFXM is represented as base/quote wherein these
two currencies are traded. We denote bt at time t as the bid
price by which a trading agent j can sell the base currency
and buy an equivalent amount of the quoted currency to buy
the base currency. This means agent j is opening a short
position. Similarly, the ask price at at time t is the offer
price at which agent j can buy the base currency and sell
an equivalent amount of the quoted currency to pay for the
base currency, opening a long position. During the market run,
the market-maker uses a historical high-frequency EUR/USD
126
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

prices dataset to issue price quotes and feed these prices into
the market. The prices are fed over a deﬁned one month period
and therefore the trading agents act in response.
Each trading agent is capable of holding, at time t during the
market run, two different types of asset: a risk free asset (cash),
and a risky asset (currency). Before the ABFXM launch,
based on a continuous uniform distribution, each individual
trading agent will be assigned a home currency and a margin
ratio. Every trading agent j has a portfolio expressed in its
home currency. The portfolio records the results of the agent’s
transactions during the market run. The Net Asset Value (NAV)
at time t denoted by NAVj,t represents the current cash value
of an agent j’s account. In particular, the NAVj,t is the amount
of cash in the agent j’s account plus all unrealized proﬁts and
minus all unrealized losses associated with all the account’s
open positions.
The clearance mechanism of the ABFXM is simple where
every market order at time t will be totally executed, whereas
limit orders will be executed when their constraints are satis-
ﬁed. A market order is an order for immediate execution in the
market at the current price of the currency. On the contrary, a
limit order is an order in which an agent a speciﬁes the price
at which it is willing to buy/sell a number of currency. An
update will take place for each agent’s portfolio that has an
executable order at time t . Afterward, the market’s time turns
from t to t + 1 . Thus, the bid and ask prices are adjusted to
the prices at time t+1 using the historical bid and ask prices.
Hence based on the recent bid and ask prices, the portfolio
will be updated for each agent holds an open position at time
t + 1 . Finally, each open position at time t + 1 will be verify
for a margin call, which is a procedure to close out the agent’s
open position once the amount of cash in its account is under
the minimum margin required to cover the size of its currently
open position. The purpose of the margin call act is to stop
an agent from losing more than the amount of cash available
in its account.
C. Assumption
We make the following six assumptions in modelling the
agents’ trading mechanism:
Assumption 1 We assume that the trading agents endowed
with 10,000 amounts of cash and without any shares.
Assumption 2 We assume that a position cannot be ad-
justed.
Assumption 3 A position is only opened by a market order
or a limit order.
Assumption 4 We restrict the quantity of positions held by
an agent a at time t to be one opened position.
Assumption 5 The market does not imply fees for the
transactions.
Assumption 6 A trading agent invests 100% of it cash when
buying, and 100% of it shares when selling.
In essence, the most important reason for these simpliﬁ-
cation assumptions is that by making these assumptions the
complexity of the trading strategy is reduced to a level that
can be studied and compared within the scope of this work.
Simplicity and uniﬁcation the initial variable of the agents’
Table I
ROI RESULTS FROM THE SIMULATION
Trading Strategy
Trend Type
AVG. Threshold
ROI
ZI-DCT0
TF
0.7 %
0.5 %
ZI-DCT0
CT
0.7 %
- 8.9 %
DCT1
TF
0.9 %
6.2 %
characteristics is fundamental block to clearly compare the
efﬁciency of the two trading strategies. Therefore, allocating
variable quantities results in a substantial complication of the
comparison analysis. The relaxation of these six assumptions
does not affect the generality of the simulation results shown
in our paper. However, we are aware of the importance of the
role of quantity and diversity as a choice variable.
D. Results
One way to evaluate the performance of the DCT1 trading
strategy is to look at the trading proﬁts it generates. Therefore,
we used the ROI as a performance indicator. The simulation
uses historical bid and ask prices for the EUR/USD currency
pair over a deﬁned six month period during 2008, by feeding
these prices into the market via the market-maker, and having
the agents act in response to the price changes. The learning
process for the DCT1 traders is over a four month period. The
results generated from the simulation run are averaged over 10
independent simulation runs, each run adopting different initial
seeds provided by random number generators, and different
ranges of threshold values. We performed each independent
simulation run with the same parameter conﬁguration values,
but with different seeds and ranges of threshold values, to
ensure that the results of the simulation are consistent; this
allows us to establish the robustness and accuracy of the
simulation results.
We report the ROI results from the simulation run for three
investment strategies: (i) TF ZI-DCT0; (ii) CT ZI-DCT0 and
(iii) DCT1. The comparison of the performance of DCT1 with
that of the ZI-DCT0 over a six month period is given in Table
I. For the sample test period, the average ROI of the DCT1
is 6.2%, while for ZI-DCT0 TF is only 0.5%. An important
observation to highlight is that the detected DCT1 threshold
value and type of trading for the different simulation runs
are roughly the same. Thus, this conﬁrms that ﬁnancial price
time series exhibit periodic patterns. This is a good starting
result regarding automats’ trading strategies; though a full
study through comparison with different trading strategies over
different time periods and using different assets price time
series will be more comprehensive, as this will show the full
picture and effectiveness of the adopted trading strategy.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we proposed a new trading strategy (DCT1)
designed as a decision making support system tool for ﬁnancial
investors. It is derived from the ZI-DCT0. The main contribu-
tion of this paper is the combination of classical TF and CT
investment rules and a learning model from historical prices
with regard to ﬁnancial time series, which can signiﬁcantly
127
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

improve computational effectiveness and the predictability of
price trend directions, and uncover periodic patterns. TF and
CT strategies, owing to their investment efﬁciency, have been
widely adopted by investors. To the best of our knowledge,
no related research in the literature has investigated TF and
CF investment strategies within a learning model based on
the detection of periodic directional change patterns. This
study has demonstrated the feasibility of employing learning
as part of a trading strategy in that DCT1 is designed to
adapt to market price trend directions and hence deduct
periodic patterns. Future work will consider the combination
of evolutionary learning techniques with a DC event approach
for developing trading strategies for investment in ﬁnancial
markets.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank the Deanship of Scientiﬁc Research
in King Saud University for their support. We would like to
thank the OANDA Corporation for providing the FX market
datasets. We are very grateful to Prof. M. Fasli, Prof. E.
Tsang, Prof. R. Olsen and Dr. A. Dupuis for their insightful
suggestions and advice during the course of this study. We
would also like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their
useful comments and suggestions.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Leroy, “Risk aversion and the martingale property of stock prices,”
International Economic Review, vol. 14 (2), pp. 436–446, 1973.
[2] A. Beja, “The limits of price information in market processes,” Tech.
Rep. 61, Research Program in Finance, University of California, Berke-
ley, 1977.
[3] R. Lucas, “Asset prices in an exchange economy,” Econometrica,
vol. 46(6), pp. 1429–1445, 1978.
[4] S. Grossman and J. Stiglitz, “On the impossibility of informationally
efﬁcient markets,” The American Economic Review, vol. 70, no. 3,
pp. 393–408, 1980.
[5] J. Tirole, “On the possibility of speculation under rational expectations,”
Econometrica, vol. 50 (5), pp. 1163–1181, 1982.
[6] A. Lo, “Stock market prices do not follow random walks: evidence
from a simple speciﬁcation test,” Review of Financial Studies, vol. 1
(1), pp. 41–66, 1988.
[7] E. Tsang and S. Martinez-Jaramillo, “Computational ﬁnance,” IEEE
Computational Intelligence Society Newsletter, pp. 3–8, 2004.
[8] R. Cont, “Empirical properties of asset returns: stylized facts and
statistical issues,” Quantitative Finance, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 223–236, 2001.
[9] M. Dacorogna, R. Gençay, U. Müller, R. Olsen, and O. Pictet, An
introduction to high-frequency ﬁnance.
San Diego: Academic Press,
2001.
[10] M. Covel, Trend following: How great traders make millions in up or
down markets. Financial Times Prentice Hall, 2004.
[11] S. Fong, J. Tai, and Y. W. Si, “Trend following algorithms for technical
trading in stock market,” Journal of Emerging Technologies in Web
Intelligence, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 136–145, 2011.
[12] S. Fong, Y. Si, and J. Tai, “Trend following algorithms in automated
derivatives market trading,” Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 39,
no. 13, pp. 11378–11390, 2012.
[13] A. Szakmarya, Q. Shenb, and S. Sharmac, “Trend-following trading
strategies in commodity futures: A re-examination,” Journal of Banking
& Finance, vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 409–426, 2010.
[14] J. James, “Simple trend-following strategies in currency trading,” Quan-
titative Finance, vol. 3, pp. 75–77, 2003.
[15] M. Aloud, E. Tsang, and R. Olsen, “Modelling the FX
market
traders’ behaviour: an agent-based approach,” in Simulation in Com-
putational Finance and Economics: Tools and Emerging Applications
(B. Alexandrova-Kabadjova, S. Martinez-Jaramillo, A. Garcia-Almanza,
and E. Tsang, eds.), Hershey, Pennsylvania: IGI Global, 2012.
[16] M. Aloud, E. Tsang, R. Olsen, and A. Dupuis, “A directional-change
events approach for studying ﬁnancial time series,” Economics Papers,
vol. No 2011-28, 2011.
[17] V. Alﬁ, M. Cristelli, L. Pietronero, and A. Zaccaria, “Minimal agent
based model for ﬁnancial markets I: origin and self-organization of
stylized fatcs,” The European Physical Journal B, vol. 67, no. 3, pp. 385–
397, 2009.
[18] G. Daniel, Asynchronous simulations of a limit order book. PhD thesis,
University of Manchester, 2006.
[19] J. Duffy and M. Unver, “Asset price bubbles and crashes with near-zero-
intelligence traders,” Economic Theory, vol. 27, pp. 537–563, 2006.
[20] D. Gode and S. Sunder, “Allocative efﬁciency of markets with zero
intelligence (Z1) traders: market as a partial substitute for individual
rationality,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 101, no. 1, pp. 119–137,
1993.
[21] S. Martinez-Jaramillo and E. Tsang, “An heterogeneous, endogenous
and co-evolutionary GP-based ﬁnancial market,” IEEE Transactions on
Evolutionary Computation, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 33–55, 2009.
[22] D. Cliff and J. Bruten, “More than zero intelligence needed for contin-
uous double-auction trading,” Tech. Rep. HPL-97-157, HP Laboratories
Bristol, 1997.
[23] D. Gode and S. Sunder, “Lower bounds for efﬁciency of surplus extrac-
tion in double auctions,” in The Double Auction Market: Institutions,
Theories, and Evidence. Santa Fe Institute Studies in the Sciences of
Complexity (D. Friedman and J. Rust, eds.), pp. 199–219, Cambridge:
Perseus Publishing, 1993.
[24] V. Alﬁ, M. Cristelli, L. Pietronero, and A. Zaccaria, “Minimal agent
based model for ﬁnancial markets II: statistical properties of the linear
and multiplicative dynamics,” The European Physical Journal B, vol. 67,
no. 3, pp. 399–417, 2009.
[25] V. Alﬁ, M. Cristelli, L. Pietronero, and A. Zaccaria, “Mechanisms of
self-organization and ﬁnite size effects in a minimal agent based model,”
J. Stat. Mech, vol. P03016, 2009.
[26] B. Wong and Y. Selvi, “Neural network applications in ﬁnace: a review
and analysis of literature,” Information & Management, vol. 34, pp. 129–
139, 1998.
[27] J. Holland, Adaptation in Natural and Artiﬁcial Systems. Ann Arbor,
MI: University of Michigan Press, 1975.
[28] J. Koza, Genetic Programming: on the Programming of Computers by
Means of Natural Selection. Cambridge: The MIT Press, 1992.
[29] S. Schulenburg, P. Ross, and S. Bridge, “Strength and money: an LCS
approach to increasing returns,” in Advances in Learning Classiﬁer
Systems, vol. 1996 of Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pp. 114–
137, Springer-Verlag, 2000.
[30] S. Schulenburg and P. Ross, “Explorations in LCS models of stock
trading,” in Advances in Learning Classiﬁer Systems, Lecture Notes in
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, no. 2321, pp. 150–179, Springer-Verlag, 2002.
[31] M. Austin, G. Bates, M. Dempster, V. Leemans, and S. Williams,
“Adaptive systems for foreign exchange trading,” Quantitative Finance,
vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 37–45, 2004.
[32] E. Azoff, Neural Network Time Series Forecasting of Financial Markets.
New York, NY, USA: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1994.
[33] A. Refenes, Neural Networks in the Capital Markets. New York, NY,
USA: John Wiley & Sons, Inc, 1994.
[34] R. Trippi and E. Turban, Neural networks in ﬁnance and investing: using
artiﬁcial intelligence to improve realworld performance. Burr Ridge:
Irwin Professional Publishing Co., 1996.
[35] G. Zhang, B. Patuwo, and M. Hu, “Forecasting with artiﬁcial neural
networks: the state of the art,” International Journal of Forecasting,
vol. 14, pp. 35–62, 1998.
[36] Y. Shachmurove, “Business applications of emulative neural networks,”
International Journal Of Business, vol. 10, 2005.
[37] J. Yao and C. Tan, “A case study on using neural networks to perform
technical forecasting of forex,” Neurocomputing, vol. 34, no. 1-4, pp. 79–
98, 2000.
[38] S. Hayward, “Genetically optimized artiﬁcial neural network for ﬁnan-
cial time series data mining,” in Simulated Evolution and Learning (T.-
D. Wang, X. Li, S.-H. Chen, X. Wang, H. Abbass, H. Iba, G.-L. Chen,
and X. Yao, eds.), vol. 4247 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
pp. 703–717, Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 2006.
[39] R. Batchelor and G. Albanis, “Predicting high performance stocks
using dimensionality reduction techniques based on neural networks,” in
Developments in Forecast Combination and Portfolio Choice (C. Dunis
and A. Timmerman, eds.), pp. 117–134, Kluwer Academic Publishers,
2001.
128
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

[40] M. Dempster, T. Payne, Y. Romahi, and G. Thompson, “Computational
learning techniques for intraday fx trading using popular technical
indicators,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, vol. 12, no. 4,
pp. 744–754, 2001.
[41] S. Gutjahr, M. Riedmiller, and J. Klingemann, “Daily prediction of the
foreign exchange rate between the US dollar and the German mark using
neural networks,” in Joint PACES / SPICES Conference, pp. 492–498,
1997.
[42] J. Yao, C. Tan, and Y. Li, “Option prices forecasting using neural
networks,” Omega: The International Journal of Management Science,
vol. 28, pp. 455–466, 2000.
[43] H. Zimmermann, R. Neuneier, and R. Grothmann, “Multi-agent model-
ing of multiple FX-markets by neural networks,” IEEE Transactions on
Neural Networks, Special issue, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 735–743, 2001.
[44] F. Allen and R. Karjalainen, “Using genetic algorithms to ﬁnd technical
trading rules,” Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 51, pp. 245–271,
1999.
[45] R. Bauer, Genetic Algorithms and Investment Strategies.
New York:
John Wiley & Sons, 1994.
[46] W. Leigh, R. Purvis, and J. Ragusa, “Forecasting the NYSE composite
index with technical analysis, pattern recognizer, neural networks, and
genetic algorithm: a case study in romantic decision support,” Decision
Support Systems, vol. 32, pp. 361–377, 2002.
[47] S. Mani, “Financial forecasting using genetic algorithms,” Applied
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, vol. 10, pp. 543–566, 1996.
[48] T. Lux, , and S. Schornstein, “Genetic learning as an explanation of
stylized facts of foreign exchange markets,” Journal of Mathematical
Economics, vol. 41, no. 1-2, pp. 169–196, 2005.
[49] M. Versace, R. Bhatt, O. Hinds, and M. Shiffer, “Predicting the exchange
traded fund dia with a combination of genetic algorithms and neural
networks,” Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 27, pp. 417–425,
2004.
[50] J. Holland and J. Miller, “Artiﬁcial adaptive agents in economic theory,”
The American Economic Review, vol. 81, pp. 365–370, 1991.
[51] W. B. Arthur, J. H. Holland, B. LeBaron, R. Palmer, and P. Tayler, “Asset
pricing under endogenous expectations in an artiﬁcial stock market,” in
The economy as an evolving, complex system II (W. Arthur, D. Lane,
and S. Durlauf, eds.), pp. 15–44, Redwood City, CA: Addison Wesley,
1997.
[52] M. Aloud and M. Fasli, “The impact of strategies on the stylized facts in
the fx market,” tech. rep., University of Essex, United Kingdom, 2013.
[53] R. Engle, “The econometrics of ultra-high frequency data,” Economet-
rica, vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 1–22, 2000.
129
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

