Measuring Cognitive Loads
Based on the Mental Chronometry Paradigm
Kazuhisa Miwa∗, Kojima Kazuaki†, Hitoshi Terai‡, and Yosuke Mizuno∗
∗Graduate School of Information Science, Nagoya University, Nagoya, JAPAN
†Learning Technology Laboratory, Teikyo University, Utsunomiya, JAPAN
‡Faculty of Humanity-Oriented Science and Engineering, Kindai University, Iizuka, JAPAN
Email: miwa@is.nagoya-u.ac.jp, kojima@lt-lab.teikyo-u.ac.jp,
teraihitoshi@gmail.com, y.mizuno@cog.human.nagoya-u.ac.jp
Abstract—The cognitive load theory distinguishes three types of
cognitive loads: intrinsic, extraneous, and germane. Measuring
each cognitive load individually is challenging. In this study,
we developed a measurement method based on the mental
chronometry paradigm. Participants played 8 by 8 Reversi games
with a computerized experimental environment. A 2 x 2 x
2 mixed design experiment was performed wherein the three
types of cognitive loads were manipulated. The experimental
results supported almost all our predictions drawn from assumed
cognitive processes, implying a possibility that our methodology
can be used for measuring cognitive loads.
Keywords - cognitive load theory; intrinsic; extraneous; ger-
mane
I.
INTRODUCTION
The cognitive load theory (CLT) has played a central role
in designing learning environments [1][2]. The theory distin-
guishes three types of cognitive loads: intrinsic, extraneous,
and germane. Intrinsic load is deﬁned as the basic cognitive
load required to perform a task. As the difﬁculty of the
task increases and the degree of expertise of the performer
decreases, there is an increase in the intrinsic load. Extraneous
load is deﬁned as the wasted cognitive load that does not relate
to the primary cognitive activities, but emerges reluctantly. One
reason that the extraneous load occurs is due to the inappro-
priate design of the learning material. For example, when the
related information is not properly arranged, the extraneous
load increases by the efforts of performing irrelevant searches
to gather the related information. Germane load is deﬁned as
the load used for learning, such as for constructing schemata
activities.
Figure 1 illustrates the relationship among the three cog-
nitive loads [3]. Figure 1 (a) illustrates the state in which the
cognitive load exceeds the limits of the performer’s working
memory capacity due to the increase in the extraneous load.
In this situation of overload, learners make enormous errors,
spend too much time performing the task, and occasionally,
may be unable to perform the task. Figure 1 (b) shows
cognitive loads that fall within a range where learners perform
a task easily and show good results. CLT proposes that in
such a situation where there is memory capacity to spare, it
is important to increase the germane load to activate learning
activities, as illustrated in Figure 1 (c).
For measuring such cognitive loads, multiple measurement
approaches have been developed. The ﬁrst methodology is
based on participants’ subjective ratings. Two primary indexes
are well known: NASA-Task Load Index (NASA-TLX) [4]
and SWAT, which includes three measures: time load, mental
Figure 1. The three types of cognitive loads.
effort load, and psychological stress load [5]. These indexes
measure one-dimensional cognitive loads. Recently, some trials
wherein each of the three types of cognitive loads is separately
measured have been developed [6][7][8][9].
Another approach attempts to measure the cognitive loads
objectively based on task performances. A representative
method is to estimate cognitive loads by secondary task
performance [8][10]. Participants are required to respond to a
stimulus as a secondary task while engaging in a primary task
wherein high cognitive loads are assumed when the response
time of the secondary task is longer. In addition, psychophysi-
ological measures, such as cardiac activity, electro-oculogram,
respiration, and event-related potentials, have also been used
recently [10].
Measuring cognitive loads is a big challenge in CLT. In this
study, we try to measure cognitive loads based on the mental
chronometry paradigm [11]. Mental chronometry assumes that
reaction time (RT) is reﬂected by the amount or the number
of stages of cognitive processing. Each type of cognitive load
arises from related cognitive processing. In this paper, we
examine the RT of participants when engaging in a task is
predictable based on assumed cognitive loads that arise from
the participants’ cognitive processing.
In the following, ﬁrst, we will present our cognitive model,
and how each of the three cognitive loads appears based on the
model in Section 2. In Section 3, we will present experimental
settings. Then, in Section 4, we will present our predictions
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Figure 2. Assumed cognitive processing and intrinsic, extraneous, and
germane cognitive loads.
that are expected to be observed if our assumptions in our
model are valid, and all of those are supported in Section 5.
The discussion and conclusions are drawn in Section 6.
II.
MANIPULATION OF COGNITIVE LOADS
In this study, the three types of cognitive loads are more
directly and individually manipulated. The task used in our
experiment is the 8 by 8 Reversi game. Figure 2 shows the
assumed cognitive processing of participants who engage in
the task. First, they perceive the pattern of discs arrangement,
and understand the game status. Then they hypothesize a
next move in which their own disc is placed on one of the
possible locations on the board and predict changes in the
disc arrangement. The arrangement changes each time the
participant and their opponent takes a turn. Participants search
the problem space of the disc arrangements and determine the
best move based on the estimation of each possible move, and
actually perform the next move.
A. Intrinsic load
To determine the next move, the intrinsic cognitive load
arises in every stage of cognitive processing, as depicted in
Figure 2. In the low intrinsic load condition of our experiment,
an advisor computer agent hints at the participants’ possible
next move; therefore, the intrinsic cognitive processing of the
participants is minimized (see Figure 3). In the high intrinsic
load condition, there are no hints presented.
B. Extraneous load
Figure 4 shows an example disc arrangement of low and
high extraneous load conditions. When the low extraneous
load condition is considered as the control condition, normal
black and white discs are presented, whereas when the high
extraneous load condition is considered, two kinds of Japanese
letters (whose meanings are white and mortar, respectively) are
Figure 3. An example screen shot in the low intrinsic load condition wherein
the participant’s best move (shaded square) is presented.
Figure 4. Example screen shots in low and high extraneous load conditions.
presented. In the latter condition, there is high cognitive load
functioning from the extraneous load in the perception and
understanding stage because the two letters are perceptually
similar.
C. Germane load
The germane cognitive processing was manipulated based
on the experimenter’s instruction. The intrinsic and extraneous
cognitive loads were caused by performance-based processing
whereas the germane load was due to learning-based process-
ing. In this study, learning means to ﬁnd effective heuristics
and strategies of disc moves in order to win. To perform these
kinds of activities, participants need to monitor and regulate
their cognitive processing reﬂectively from the meta-cognitive
perspective. In the high germane load condition, in order to
let the participants perform the germane cognitive processing
more actively, they were told to report the effective heuristics
that were learned after games, whereas in the low germane
load condition, there were no such instructions.
III.
EXPERIMENT
A. Apparatus
Figure 5 shows the overall conﬁguration of our experimen-
tal system [12]. In our experimental environment, a participant
plays the 8 by 8 Reversi games against a virtual opponent
(i.e., opponent agent) on a computer. In the low intrinsic load
condition, the virtual partner (i.e., partner agent) assists the
participant in selecting winning moves. Both agents, opponent
and partner, are controlled by a Reversi engine, Edax, which
suggests the best move by assessing future states in the game.
The opponent’s competence can be controlled by setting the
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Figure 5. Overall conﬁguration of the Reversi-based learning environment.
maximum depth to which Edax searches for future game states.
The partner agent recommends the candidate’s best move
among valid squares before the participant makes a move.
B. Experimental design and procedure
A 2 x 2 x 2 mixed design experiment was performed: the
three factors comprised (1) the intrinsic load factor (between:
low and high), (2) the extraneous load factor (within : low
and high), and (3) the germane load factor (between: low and
high).
C. Participants and Procedure
A total of 40 undergraduates in Nagoya University partic-
ipated in our experiment. All participants were not expert in
playing Reversi even though they had experiences to play the
game. Ten, ten, eleven, and nine participants were assigned to
each of the intrinsic and germane conditions: low and low, low
and high, high and low, and high and high, respectively.
Participants played a total of ten games, half of which (1st,
3rd, 5th, 7th, and 9th) were performed in the low extraneous
condition and the other half (2nd, 4th, 6th, 8th, and 10th)
were performed in the high extraneous condition. Participants
started each game at the initial stage where 32 discs had
already been placed on the board. Before the primary games,
participants performed one training game for understanding the
manipulation of the experimental system.
IV.
PREDICTIONS
If we successfully manipulate the three factors relating to
intrinsic, extraneous, and germane loads, and RT is determined
based on the amount of cognitive processing that causes each
of the cognitive loads assumed in Figure 2, the following
predictions are expected to be veriﬁed.
A. Germane processing manipulation
A signiﬁcant main effect of the germane load factor is
conﬁrmed. This indicates that RT in the high germane load
condition is longer than RT in the low germane load condition.
Figure 6. Result of Experiment
B. Intrinsic processing manipulation
A signiﬁcant main effect of the intrinsic load factor is
conﬁrmed. This indicates that RT in the high intrinsic load
condition is longer than RT in the low intrinsic load condition.
C. Extraneous processing manipulation
Signiﬁcant interaction was found between the intrinsic and
extraneous load factors. There is a simple main effect of the
extraneous factor at the high intrinsic load condition, but no
effect at the low intrinsic load condition. In the low intrinsic
load condition, the perception and understanding stages are
not crucial because it is possible to determine the next move
without cognitive processing at these stages.
V.
RESULT
Figure 6 presents the result of the experiment. The vertical
axis shows average RT for each of the conditions. The horizon-
tal axis shows the four experimental conditions of the intrinsic
and germane load factors. The legend shows two experimental
conditions of the extraneous load factor.
The statistical analysis shows the following: (1) the main
effect of the germane load factor reached signiﬁcance (F(1, 36)
= 27.23, p < 0.01). There was no interaction observed between
the germane load factor and the other two factors (F(1, 36) <
1, n.s. with intrinsic; F(1, 36) < 1, n.s. with extraneous); (2)
the main effect of the intrinsic load factor reached signiﬁcance
(F(1, 36) = 46.77, p < 0.01). There was an interaction with
the extraneous load factor (F(1, 36) = 4.55, p < 0.05), but
no interaction with the germane load factor (F(1, 36) < 1,
n.s.); (3) the main effect of the extraneous load factor did
not reach signiﬁcance (F(1, 36) < 1, n.s.). But, as mentioned
above, an interaction between the extraneous and intrinsic load
factors was detected. However, the simple main effect of the
extraneous load factor at the high intrinsic load condition did
not reveal signiﬁcant differences. These results supported the
ﬁrst two predictions and partially supported the last prediction.
VI.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
In this study, we presented a cognitive model on which
we hypothesized three types of cognitive loads. Based on
the assumptions, we manipulated the intrinsic load by help
information, the extraneous load by task representation, and the
germane load by an experimenter’s instruction. We predicted
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

experimental results that should be observed if the assumption
and manipulation are valid.
The experimental results conﬁrmed almost all predictions,
thus supporting our methodological hypothesis: we can mea-
sure the three types of cognitive loads based on RT with the
manipulation of the three types of cognitive processing relating
to intrinsic, extraneous, and germane cognitive loads.
One limitation is that the simple main effect of the ex-
traneous factor at the high intrinsic load condition was not
detected, even though the interaction between extraneous and
intrinsic factors was found. This implies that our manipulation
for controlling the extraneous load by replacing black and
white discs with perceptually similar Japanese characters did
not function well. Another manipulation of the extraneous load
should be tested in further research.
More importantly, in the current experiment, we only
discussed RT while engaged in the task. Additionally, task
performances and learning effects should be analyzed. Espe-
cially the amount of germane load, as learning-based activities,
may affect learning effects while the intrinsic and extraneous
loads, as performance-based activities, may inﬂuence task
performances.
Another crucial step is to investigate this methodology
based on the mental chronometry paradigm combined with
the methodology based on participants’ subjective ratings. The
combination of such subjective and objective measurements
may lead to more stable foundations for CLT.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This
research
was
partially
supported
by
HAYAO
NAKAYAMA Foundation for Science & Technology and
Culture, and JSPS KAKENHI Grant Numbers 15H02927,
15H02717.
REFERENCES
[1]
J. Sweller, “Cognitive load during problem solving: Effects on learning,”
Cognitive Science, vol. 12, no. 2, 1988, pp. 257–285.
[2]
J. Sweller, J. J. Van Merrienboer, and F. G. Paas, “Cognitive architecture
and instructional design,” Educational psychology review, vol. 10, no. 3,
1998, pp. 251–296.
[3]
J. J. Van Merri¨enboer and J. Sweller, “Cognitive load theory in
health professional education: design principles and strategies,” Medical
education, vol. 44, no. 1, 2010, pp. 85–93.
[4]
S. G. Hart and L. E. Staveland, “Development of nasa-tlx (task load
index): Results of empirical and theoretical research,” Advances in
psychology, vol. 52, 1988, pp. 139–183.
[5]
G. B. Reid and T. E. Nygren, “The subjective workload assessment
technique: A scaling procedure for measuring mental workload,” Ad-
vances in psychology, vol. 52, 1988, pp. 185–218.
[6]
P. Ayres, “Using subjective measures to detect variations of intrinsic
cognitive load within problems,” Learning and instruction, vol. 16, no. 5,
2006, pp. 389–400.
[7]
G. Cierniak, K. Scheiter, and P. Gerjets, “Explaining the split-attention
effect: Is the reduction of extraneous cognitive load accompanied by an
increase in germane cognitive load?” Computers in Human Behavior,
vol. 25, no. 2, 2009, pp. 315–324.
[8]
K. E. DeLeeuw and R. E. Mayer, “A comparison of three measures of
cognitive load: Evidence for separable measures of intrinsic, extraneous,
and germane load.” Journal of educational psychology, vol. 100, no. 1,
2008, pp. 223–234.
[9]
E. Galy, M. Cariou, and C. M´elan, “What is the relationship between
mental workload factors and cognitive load types?” International Journal
of Psychophysiology, vol. 83, no. 3, 2012, pp. 269–275.
[10]
R. Brunken, J. L. Plass, and D. Leutner, “Direct measurement of cog-
nitive load in multimedia learning,” Educational Psychologist, vol. 38,
no. 1, 2003, pp. 53–61.
[11]
D. E. Meyer, A. M. Osman, D. E. Irwin, and S. Yantis, “Modern mental
chronometry,” Biological Psychology, vol. 26, no. 1, 1988, pp. 3 – 67.
[12]
K. Miwa, K. Kojima, and H. Terai, “An experimental investigation on
learning activities inhibition hypothesis in cognitive disuse atrophy,”
in Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Advanced
Cognitive Technologies and Applications (Cognitive 2015), 2014, pp.
66–71.
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-462-6
COGNITIVE 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

