A Neurochemical Framework to Stress and the Role of the Endogenous Opioid 
System in the Control of Heart Rate Variability for Cognitive Load 
 
Sergey Parin 
Lobachevsky State University  
Nizhny Novgorod, Russia  
e-mail: parins@mail.ru 
Anna Polevaia 
Lobachevsky State University  
Nizhny Novgorod, Russia  
e-mail: a.dostoevskaya@gmail.com 
Sofia Polevaia 
Nizhny Novgorod State Medical Academy,   
Lobachevsky State University 
Nizhny Novgorod, Russia 
e-mail: polevaia@ipfran.ru 
 
 
Abstract— This paper presents a complex analysis of the stress 
and shock phenomena. These specific reactions represent non-
specific, 
protective, 
stepwise, 
multi-systemic, 
reduced 
psychophysiological responses to injury or threat. Finding 
psycho-physiological, neurochemical and patho-physiological 
mechanisms of stress and shock is an important task 
nowadays. It is relevant not only from the theoretical, but also 
from practical point of view, as every day thousands of people 
die from shock. At the beginning of 1980s, it has been 
suggested to look at stress and shock as processes based on 
similar mechanisms of hyperactivation of three neuro-
endocrine systems: sympatho-adrenal system, hypothalamic-
pituitary-adrenal axis and endogenous opioid system. The 
mechanisms of stress and shock are related to a significant 
reduction of regulatory mechanisms. On the basis of these 
theoretical 
concepts, 
we 
created 
an 
explicit 
psycho-
physiological model of stress that describes in mathematical 
form, how neuro-endocrine input modulates cardiac responses 
during the first phase of stress reaction. Here, we give a 
comparative analysis of the heart-rate variability dynamics. 
This analysis was carried out for drug-addicts with reduction 
of endogenous opioid receptor apparatus, and for healthy 
volunteers in the context of cognitive loads of different levels. It 
is shown that such specific reactions as the reduction of the 
hart-rate autonomic regulation mode and the lack of adaptive 
variations in the heart-rate structure as response to the 
changing external information context, are typical for the 
examined drug-addicts.  
Keywords – stress; endogenous opioid system; heart rate 
variability; cognitive functions 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Stress (or general adaptive syndrome) is a nonspecific 
reaction to injury, according to the theory of H. Selye [1][2]. 
This theory was globally recognized over the past decades. 
However, many of its key points become questioned at the 
ХХI century. E.g., the use of the term “adaptation” has led to 
confusion that any impact is stressor. Lack of attention to the 
results of researching the functions of the endogenous opioid 
system (EOS) has led to stagnation of studies of 
neurochemical stress mechanisms. Our methods include 
psycho-physiological,  Electro-encephalography (EEG), 
Event-Related Telemetry (ERT), Hart-Rate Variabitily 
(HRV), respirography, measurement of hemodynamic etc., 
 
biochemical, 
radioimmunoassay, 
psychophysical 
(computer laterometry and campimetry), psychological, and 
mathematical approach. A total of 1850 animals (7 species) 
and 800 subjects participated in the studies. 
Note that stress represents a simplified (reduced) reaction 
to an emergency, which provides decreasing individual 
deviations of psychological, physiological, biochemical, and 
other indicators from the normal value. This is the result of 
depleting the regulatory mechanisms: three neuroendocrine 
stress-protective systems have exclusive dominance. This 
standardization provides nonspecific protection that is 
optimal only in emergency situations [7]. 
It should be emphasized that the stress phenomenon itself 
appears to be wide-spread and rather normal for modern life. 
However, this actually represents a danger due to the 
possibility of stress-to-shock transition. Shock represents a 
special case of stress thus, they have similar physiological 
mechanisms [2][4]. However, the shock (in contrary to the 
stress) always leads to devastating and life-threatening 
consequences. 
Stress is a basic extreme process. It may be the main 
component of the extreme condition, a forming factor, and a 
response to the extreme action. It is known that H. Selye had 
argued that the shock is an extreme degree of stress. It is 
widely believed, that the question about the mechanisms of 
extreme functional states has been studied in detail. But it is 
far from being true. E.g., for many decades, the basic 
physiologic mechanisms of stress (and particularly, shock) 
have traditionally been reduced to the emergency activation 
of two neuroendocrine complexes: the sympathetic-adrenal-
medullary system (SAS) and hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal 
(HPAS) system. No doubt, these two systems, providing 
various nonspecific patterns of psychic, motor, metabolic 
and visceral functions, form mainly the first two stages of 
stress: anxiety and resistance. At the same time, the 
mechanisms of the third stage of stress — the stage of 
exhaustion — were studied superficially. This is to a big 
extent connected with the “hypnosis” of the classic idea to 
treat it as a period of complete disintegration of regulatory 
and executive mechanisms. In contrast to this misconception, 
it has been proven convincingly that the stage of exhaustion 
is also a regulated process similar to the first two stages of 
stress [7]. The only difference is that EOS becomes the basic 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-531-9
COGNITIVE 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
 
neuroendocrine control system providing minimization of 
the energy consumption and transfer of the organism to 
hypobiotic mode. Besides, EOS does work in all three stress 
stages with different extent of dominance. These statements 
were supported by the results of numerous experiments on 
animals, as well as by calculations within the neuron-like 
mathematical model. However, the researches by means of 
noninvasive methods of monitoring functional state of an 
individual in the condition of daily life (and primarily, under 
cognitive loads), are undoubtedly very important.   
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, the 
problem of strict formalization of the stress process is 
discussed. In Section III, we present the neuron-inspired 
model of stress-protective systems. In Section IV, we present 
a complex of methods, directed to the study of the dynamic 
aspects of EOS activity in the functional system. In Section 
V, the psycho-physiological markers of EOS activity during 
interactive communication with information images are 
determined. Further working perspectives are discussed in 
Section VI. 
II. 
FORMALIZATION OF THE STRESS PHENOMENON  
In spite of various studies of the problem, some very 
important points concerning the definition and marker of the 
stress process should be clarified. 
A. 
4BDefinition of Stress 
Classic postulates (H.Selye) read: «Stress (general 
adaptation syndrome) is a non-specific response of the body 
to the physical or psychological effects of violating its 
homeostasis»; «Stress is a reaction based on the interaction 
of two regulatory stress reactive systems: SAS and HPAS»; 
«Stress is adaptive response»; «Stress response has three 
stages: alarm, resistance, and exhaustion stages» [1][2].  
Our postulates are somewhat different: «Stress is a 
nonspecific phase systemic protective reduced psycho-
physiological reaction to injury or threat»; «Stress is a 
systemic reaction based on the dynamical interplay of three 
regulatory neuroendocrine systems: SAS, HPAS, and, most 
important, EOS»; «Stress is not an adaptive, but protective 
response»; «Stress is a phasic response. Stages of stress are 
associated with considerable dominance of one of the stress-
protection systems: alarm stage – SAS domination, 
resistance stage – HPAS domination, exhaustion stage – 
EOS domination» [6]-[8]. 
B. 
4BMarkers of Stress 
Classic postulate (H.Selye) reads: the endocrine markers 
of stress correspond to increased levels of cortisol, 
epinephrine, norepinephrine, Adrenocorticotropic Hormone 
(ACTH), Corticotropin Releasing Hormone  (CRH), etc. 
Our postulate reads: the endocrine markers of stress are 
increased levels of enkephalins, endorphins, dynorphins, etc. 
Neurophysiological marker is simultaneous increase of 
the autonomic balance index and fall in the total power 
spectrum of HRV [4][6][7]. 
Below, the results of the measurement of cardiovascular 
reactivity and cognitive functions of the opiate-dependent 
patients are presented. 
III. 
THE THREE-COMPONENT MODEL 
The algorithm is based on the hypothesis of dynamic 
interaction between SAS, HPAS and EOS (Fig. 1) and 
realized via the neuron-likely network equations. 
Figure 1.  The qualitative characteristics of dynamics of the stress-
protection systems (extracted from [6][7], short version). 
In order to describe the neurochemical processes during 
the stress process, we use the model based on the neuron-
likely network equations, which consists of four elements, 
representing SAS, HPAS and two components of EOS 
(quick and the slow ones), see Fig. 2. Model (1) has been 
realized as a discrete algorithm in the MATLAB 
environment; here:  
M1 – SAS activity; 
M2 – HPAS activity; 
M3 – EOS slow component activity; 
M4 – EOS quick component activity; 
 i – typical Mi activity period; 
aji – the parameter indicating the influence of Mj on Mi; 
Ti – the parameter of Mi self-excitation. 
The activity of each Mi system is controlled by 
interaction with other three systems, and by the self-
excitation. The values outside the interval are truncated to its 
ends.  
The influence parameters aji and the typical periods i 
were chosen according to neurobiological data. In 
accordance with the activity attenuation and systems` 
depletion, the Ti parameters change with time. 
Figure 2.  The algorithm of functional system of stress. 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-531-9
COGNITIVE 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
 
 
 
The dynamics of R-R intervals in the stress process has 
been chosen as a test parameter for the model functioning. It 
is an integral characteristic of the functional state depending 
on the activity of the stress-protective systems. This 
parameter is used for indicating the severity of stress in 
experiments and clinical practice. The model calculations are 
in a good agreement with experimentally measured changes 
in R-R intervals during acute stress in healthy adults (Fig. 3). 
 
 
Figure 3.  Examples of comparison of model calculation results (red line) 
with the experimental data during electrically induced pain stress. 
These results were obtained within the neuron-based 
model suggested. It has been tested and proved to give stable 
results, which reproduce the interaction dynamics of 
neurochemical stress-protective systems, RR changes in 
stress and shock, and the elements of pharmacological 
correction of this integral body state. We hope that the 
suggested model can serve as a useful tool for further 
research of the neurobiological mechanisms of stress and 
shock at the system and cell level, and for finding the best 
methods for the extreme-states treatment. 
IV. 
THE METHODS  
Our 
information technology 
ERT 
provides 
long 
continuous 
collection, 
transmission, 
storage 
and 
preprocessing the time-synchronized recordings of heart-rate 
data and psycho-physiological test results [9][10] (Fig. 4). 
The optimum size and power consumption of the sensors of 
physiological signals, microprocessors and devices for radio 
signal reception and transmission were chosen. Data are 
transmitted to the Smartphone or personal computer via 
Bluetooth. Then, the data in processed form are transmitted 
via Global System for Mobile Communications (GSM) 
channels to a dedicated server system (StressMonitor WEB 
application) on the Internet. There, the preprocessing and 
spectral analysis of rhythmograms is performed in pseudo-
time, allowing us to determine the initial point of the stress 
process with an accuracy of up to a few seconds. The result 
has the form of the spectrogram, which provides the 
possibility to determine automatically the place, time, and 
events associated with stress for a particular person in his 
everyday activity. Thus, the HRV spectral  analysis 
corresponds to: 
Total Power (0,015-0,6 Hz); 
 
Figure 4.  Mobile heart-rate telemetry system: WEB-application Stress 
Monitor.ru. 
Low Frequency band (0,04-0,15 Hz) (LF); 
High Frequency band (0,15-0,6 Hz) (HF); LF/HF ;  
Very High Frequency band (0,6-2 Hz) [11]-[14].  
For the purpose of the cognitive function study, a WEB-
platform Apway.ru has been developed. It provides the 
universal framework for design and testing. Besides, a 
similar system has been constructed, with a computer being 
the source of the signal and current registrar (Fig. 5). The 
distortions and errors introduced by human into the managed 
attribute information on the image represent a characteristic 
of the cognitive system. The system includes a module for 
the stimulus formation in a wide range of amplitude-time 
values, a virtual measurement mode control panel, a module 
for registration of operator motor responses, a database, and 
a module for report generation in the form of tables and 
graphs. The efficiency of cognitive functions was estimated 
by the absolute and differential thresholds, and the 
sensorimotor coordination errors. We used the following 
computer tests: the computer laterometry, the computer 
campimetry, the Stroop task, the test “Clock face”, the 
simple sensorimotor activity. 
 
Figure 5.  Cognitive simulator: WEB-platform Apway.ru: A - Color 
discrimination thresholds in shade (computer campimetry); B - Level of 
cognitive conflict (Stroop test ); C - Tests for sensorimotor activity.  
V. 
THE RESULTS 
Two groups of subjects participated in the study: 54 
opiate-dependent patients during opiate withdrawal (26 men 
and 28 women, with a mean age of 22.5 (±1.2)) and 25 
healthy control participants (12 men and 13 women, with a 
mean age of 21.5 (±1.3)). An independent samples t-test 
revealed significant difference in frequency-domain indices 
of HRV (p<.03). The opiate dependent patients exhibited 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-531-9
COGNITIVE 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

 
 
reduced 
LF, 
HF, 
TP 
(LFm=233.95; 
HFm=203.77; 
TPm=765.88) and increased LF/HF ratio (LF/HFm=1.87) in 
comparison with healthy control participants (LFm=447.37; 
HFm=700.94; TPm=1592.34; LF/HFm=0.98) in rest context. 
ANOVA (General Linear Models) revealed significant 
difference in frequency-domain indices of HRV between 
contexts different cognitive loads for healthy control 
participants (F=15.48, p<.05) but no this difference for 
opiate- dependent patients (F=1, p>.05) (Fig. 6). 
The opiate-dependent patients respond to incentives with 
frequency 5 Hz without errors in tests for sensorimotor 
coordination. The healthy control participants respond 
without errors only to incentives with frequency no more 2.5 
Hz.  
However, the opiate-dependent patients demonstrated 
increased delay of motor component of reactions (p<0.01). 
The subjects could make an unlimited number of attempts 
during setting a predetermined time in the test “Clock face”. 
They turned to the next task, when the error of the set time 
seemed satisfactory to them. Most opiate-dependent patients 
were satisfied by the error of the set time from 0 to 2 (74%). 
Most healthy control participants were satisfied with the 
error of the set time from 2 to 4 (76%). 
Figure 6.  Reduction of autonomic regulation of heart rate in drug-addicts. 
Dynamics of RR-intervals for the tested drug-addicts (a) and healthy 
people (b); the beginning of orthostatic test is shown by a red marker. 
The opiate-dependent patients are people with disorders 
of EOS. It is quite natural that the results of our study show 
cognitive and cardiovascular changes, which are associated 
with reduced activity of EOS. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Summarizing all presented arguments, we can infer that:  
• 
Stress is an integrative psycho-physiological response to 
injury or threat of injury. Its psychological component is 
assessment of the threat power and formation of 
protective strategies; 
• 
Its physiological component provides the energy supply 
for cognitive and motor functions by enhancing the 
effect of regulatory systems SAS, HPAS, and EOS [3]-
[5]; 
• 
Stress is a nonspecific reaction. It develops regardless of 
the type of stress factor and has the typical autonomic 
markers (e.g., the simultaneous increase in the 
autonomic balance index and decrease in the total power 
spectrum of HRV). This differs from a variety of 
specific regulation mechanisms for adequate load; 
• 
Stress is not an adaptive response, but a protective 
reaction, in analogy with inflammation [6]. It is based 
not only on functional, but also on structural changes 
(e.g., the "Selye triad"); 
• 
Stress is a systemic response. It is based on the dynamic 
interaction of three stress-protection systems: SAS, 
HPAS, and (it is especially important) EOS; 
• 
 Stress is a three-step process. The stages of stress are 
associated with the dominance of one of the stress-
protection  systems: the alarm corresponds to the 
dominance of SAS, the resistance – HPAS, the 
exhaustion – EOS; 
We believe that the proposed refinements (corrections) of 
the 
stress 
conception 
could 
provide 
rather 
clear 
understanding of the phenomenon and draw attention to the 
systemic aspects of the problem.  
The proposed technology ERT has already proven its 
efficiency in a variety of natural, clinical and experimental 
contexts,  namely, in the study of the EOS role in control 
of HRV, in mapping stressful road infrastructure in 
metropolitan areas, in the study of spatial dynamics of stress 
in bus and private car drivers; in the study of autonomic 
regulation of patients with chronic headache; in the 
monitoring the stress of translators in course of simultaneous 
translating, etc.   
We have shown that the disorders of EOS could result in:  
• 
Increased operation speed in the case of simple 
sensorimotor reactions;  
• 
 Increased requirements to control accuracy;  
• 
 Decreased efficiency of central cardiac-rhythm-control 
system.  
We can infer that the lack of adaptability of autonomic 
regulation during cognitive tasks is a specific feature of 
opiate-dependent patients. Thereby, EOS activity is 
represented in VHF component of HRV.  
However, there are still the problems for further 
researches. In particular, it would be interesting to compare 
the results of our model with the stress\shock model 
presented by Chernavskaya [14]. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was partially supported by the Russian 
Foundation for Humanities, grant 15-06-10894_a, grant 16-
06-00133_a, and RFBR, grant 16-06-00501_a. 
REFERENCES 
[1]  H. Selye, “The general adaptation syndrome and the diseases 
of adaptation”, J. Clin. Endocrinol Metab., vol. 6, pp. 117–
230, 1946. 
[2] H. Selye. The physiology and pathology of exposure to stress. 
Montreal: Acta Inc. Medical Publishing, 1950.  
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-531-9
COGNITIVE 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

[3] E. V. Golanov, S. B. Parin, and V. V. Yasnetsov, “Effect of 
nalorphine and naloxone on the course of electronociceptive 
shock in rabbits”, Bull. Exp. Biol. Med., vol. 93(6), pp. 765–
767, 1982.  
[4] E. V. Golanov, A. A. Fufacheva, and S. B. Parin, “Plasma β-
endorphin-like immunoreactivity and its variations in 
baboons”, Bull. Exp. Biol. Med., vol. 100(6), pp. 1653–1655, 
1985. 
[5] E. V. Golanov, A. A. Fufacheva, G. M. Cherkovich, and S. B. 
Parin, “Effect of ligands of opiate receptors on emotiogenic 
cardiovascular responses in lower primates”, Bull. Exp. Biol. 
Med., vol. 103(4), pp. 478–481, 1987.  
[6] S. B. Parin, “Humans and animals in emergency situations: 
neurochemical mechanisms, evolutionary aspect”, Vestnik 
NSU, vol. 2(2), pp. 118–135, 2008.  
[7] S. B. Parin, A. V. Bakhchina, and S. A. Polevaia, “A neuroc 
hemical framework of the theory of stress”, International 
Journal of Psychophysiology, vol. 94, pp. 230–234, 2014.  
[8] E. V. Runova et. al., “Vegetative correlates of arbitrary 
mappings of emotional stress”, STM, vol. 5(4), pp. 69–77, 
2013. 
[9] S. Polevaia et al., “Event-related telemetry (ERT) technology 
for study of cognitive functions”, International Journal of 
Psychophysiology, vol. 108, pp. 87–88, 2016. 
[10] J. Taelman, S. Vandeput, E. Vlemincx, A. Spaepen, and S. 
Van Huffel, “Instantaneous changes in heart rate regulation 
due to mental load in simulated office work”, Eur. J. Appl. 
Physiol., vol. 111(7), pp. 1497–1505, 2011. 
[11] J. P. Headrick, S. Pepe, and J. N. Peart, “Non-analgetic effects 
of opioids: cardiovascular effects of opioids and their receptor 
systems”, Curr. Pharm., vol. 18(37), pp. 6090–6100, 2012. 
[12] J. F. Thayer, F. Ahs, M. Fredrikson, J. J. Sollers, and T. D. 
Wager, “A meta-analysis of heart rate variability and 
neuroimaging studies: implications for heart rate variability as 
a marker of stress and health”, Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev., vol. 
36, pp. 747–756, 2012. 
[13] G. J. Taylor, “Depression, heart rate related variables and 
cardiovascular disease”, Int. J. Psychophysiol., vol. 78, pp. 
80–88, 2010.  
[14] O. D. Chernavskaya and Ya. A. Rozhylo, “The Natural-
Constructive Approach to Representation of Emotions and a 
Sense of Humor in an Artificial Cognitive System”, IARIA 
Journ. of Life Sciences, vol. 8(3&4), pp. 184–202, 2016.   
  
 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-531-9
COGNITIVE 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

