Problems of the System Approach to the Study of Psychophysiology of 
Aesthetic Emotions Concerning an Architecture
Olga Chebereva 
Federal State Budgetary Educational Institution of Higher Education "Nizhny Novgorod State University of Architecture and 
Civil Engineering" 
Nizhny Novgorod, Russia 
 e-mail: chebereva_on@nngasu.ru, chebereva@mail.ru, chebereva02@gmail.com 
Abstract— The forming in architectural creativity is the 
process 
of 
generation 
of 
architectural 
forms, 
the 
morphogenesis of "structural information”. The search for 
principles, methods, and regularities of the forming process, 
i.e., the semiotic basis of the theory should be carried out as the 
search for cognitive principles and objective psycho-
physiological foudation for creation and perception of the 
spatial environment by humans. This paper is aimed to reveal 
the essence of the interrelation between psychophysiology and 
geometric semantics of architectural form as a lingosemyotic 
structure. This interrelation represents the affective and 
reflexogenic basis of the spatial imagination and the 
corresponding dominant activity of the neural network. It 
turns out to be the basis of the theoretical concept of the study 
of psychophysiology of aesthetic emotions in the perception of 
form. The main subject of the paper is discussion of proper 
theoretical base for revealing the directions of experemental 
work providing objective results in neiroscience and for 
developing the architecture education methods. A list of 
necessary expepiments on personal emotional reactions on 
architecture objects is proposed.  
Keywords - architecture; structural information, cognitive; 
spatial imagination; neural network; emotional perception; 
experimental aesthetics. 
I.
INTRODUCTION 
Neuropsychology of perception of the architectural form 
and artificial spatial environments by humans is an actual 
scientific problem. The study of it has become a special 
subject of the American Academy of Neuroscience for 
Architecture. There is a whole direction of "healing 
architecture" in European projects for healthcare. While 
studying the influence of three-dimensional visual stimuli on 
the brain, Russian and European scientists may potentially 
need a multidisciplinary study of the processes related to 
cognition and perception.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II 
differentiates streams of aesthetic rating and cognition of 
recognizable pattern vs archetype of perception [1]-[5]. 
Section III presents theoretical basis for the separation 
psychophysiologically 
conditioned 
modes 
of 
spatial  
imagination according to Duran [6] and some visual 
geometric representations of those modes [7]-[9]. In Section 
IV, it is given a brief comparison of the concepts discussed 
by Duran [6] and Ukhtomsky [10]. In Section V, it is 
proposed a list of necessary experiments. The conclusion 
outlines future effects and unresolved problems of 
investigating the connection between formal characteristics 
of an architectural form as a visual stimulus and psycho-
physiological responses.   
II.
COGNITION OF RECOGNIZABLE PATTERN VS  
PERСEPTION OF ARCHITYPE
From the variety of conceptions [2], we see that cognitive 
and perception processes (see Table 1) are the interaction of 
two informative horizons, i.e., the language of concepts and 
the visual language representing a three-dimensional lattice 
for sliding the composite design. The experimental aesthetics 
of Fechner (Table 1) discerns associative and direct factors 
of the aesthetic impact of the form, similar to the concept of 
Shapoval [3] (see Fig. 1).  
Figure 1. 
Two streams of  aesthetic evaluation. 
There is a wide connection between the streams of aesthetic 
impact and combinatoric levels of architectural  form. The 
structure of architectural form is a kind of two-level 
grammatics (see Table 1). 
TABLE I. 
COMBINATORIC LEVELS OF ARCHITECTURAL FORM
Researcher
Combinatorial level of architectural form
Signs, symbols,
Pattern 
associations
formal geometric
(archetypes)and 
Absrtract assotiations
 Fechner [1]
associative factor
formal factor
Jenks [4] 
signifier
signifying 
Alekxander[5] 
pattern language
-
general 
recognizable 
types of forming 
geometry 
archetypes
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-609-5
COGNITIVE 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Primary geometrical elements give abstract associations 
because of connection with genetic archetypes of artificial 
perception. The problems of genetic archetypes (primary 
instruments of forming the architectural object), rhythm, 
meter, space, metaphor, etc. equally (if not more) belong to 
the problem area of architecture, which is usually defined as 
the theory of architecture. The rhythm archetype has no clear 
foundation in the theory of architecture: there is a lack of 
general theory of composition at the formal and subject 
levels [1]. The fundamental archetypes of architectural 
forming are determined as geometrical manifestations of 
revealed anthropological structures of the imagination [6]. 
This implies the reflexes based on archetypal groups of the 
spatial-imagination basic patterns [6]. Stable morphological 
artifacts of the architecture could be called “ARCHItypes” 
by analogy with recognizable types in other fields of culture. 
The neuropsychological studies of the archaeologist and 
anthropologist David Lewis Williams [7] are interesting in 
this regard. His experimental work shows that the motor 
skills of the modern subjects at drawing geometric primitives 
are completely analogous to the cave ones [7]: metric linear 
grid, ornamental concentric and rhythmic motives, spiral 
forms, etc (see Fig. 2).  
Figure 2. Comparison of the entoptic forms depicted under laboratory  
conditions (after Siegel 1977) and in Neolithic art [7]. 
All this is currently used by the formal contemporary art 
and architecture. That is why ARCHItypes should be 
considered as stable and typologically recognizable elements 
of architectural forms and composite structures composed of 
them, bearing certain symbolic meanings and correlated with 
the 
epoch 
and 
style. 
Archetypes 
are 
geometrized 
manifestations of the spatial-imagination modes having a 
reflexogenic nature, as it was shown in Williams’s 
experiments and Picasso drawings (see Fig. 2 and Fig. 3). 
Let us recall that the primary art examples are more ancient 
than languages and architecture for more than 40 800 years 
BC [8]. From this viewpoint, the imagination mechanisms 
for the mass, space, and metro-rhythmic ratio represent the 
"archetypes" of architectural form [1]. The primary elements 
of architecture and the rules for their connection are still the 
main problem in the theory of architectural composition, 
being not its specific subject.
Figure 3. Drawings of Picasso (extracted from [9]). 
Figure 3 represents the drawing of Picasso (1924) included 
in the illustrated edition "Unknown Masterpiece" [9].
III.
DURAND’S COGNITION CONCEPT 
A.  Durand’s concept about archetypes of spatial 
imagination 
An interesting research of the archetype revealing in art 
structures has been performed by Durand (1921-2012) in the 
middle of the XXth century [6]. This research was based on 
the reflexology of Bekhterev, Jung's psychotherapy statistics, 
and the seminars "Eranos" (see [6] and refs. therein). The 
Durand’s concept is completely compatible with the system-
active approach [2] currently used in researches on the 
theory of architecture. It refers to the triad of the thinking 
and modalities as the base for the superstructure. This triad 
involves the imagination, the subject, and the object of 
imagination. Within the Durand’s concept, this triad 
confronts the 
absolutely 
opposite (with 
respect 
to 
imagination) concept, i.e., “the time is death" [6]. An 
analysis of imagination modes leads to the inference that 
they are based on both, psychological as well as 
physiological mechanisms of perception and interpreting the 
physical laws and phenomena of the material world. From 
the viewpoint of Durand, anthropological structures of 
imagination, i.e., the process of forming appears to be 
essentially the result of the mode geometrization.  
Since we are talking about very ancient archetypes of 
spatial imagination, only psychophysiological basis of 
Durand’s concept is employed. It consists of three basic 
imagination modes. The first one is the postulated 
imagination mode corresponding to a social thinking [6]. The 
main psychophysiological mechanisms of the postulated 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-609-5
COGNITIVE 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

correspond to the instinct “toward the goal", the 
extrapolation instinct, etc. Spatial geometrization of 
postulated mode is based on biomechanical functions of the 
skeletal musculature and vestibular apparatus, and on the 
peculiarities of interaction with other individuals. In the triad 
of Vitruvius [11], the postulated corresponds to the “benefit”, 
as well as to the "function" (see Fig. 4). The form depends on 
its purpose. This concept includes the aggregate of social 
meanings of the form and its ideology as indirect function 
providing the social certainty of the form.  
Figure 4. Vitruvian triad. 
The scheme for geometrization of postulated imagination 
in architectural form becomes to be a structural frame for the 
dynamic and static axes. This mode is based on the 
geometrization of the uprightness instinct and the resistance 
to gravity (tectonics, in analogy to "gravitational forming"). 
Postulated basis underlies the parametric descriptions of the 
boundaries of objects and spaces, as a subject of social 
agreement. The same refers as well to movement 
representation in general, including the spatial element 
connection scheme, functional routes, etc.   
Figure 5. The Toyo Ito project of the National Taichung Theater [12]. 
The formal and semantic bases of the postulated mode of 
spatial imagination are linked with geometric metaphors of 
physical phenomena, such as configuration of force fields, 
momentums, trajectories, lines of forces, directions, points of 
force application, etc. Visual representation of these 
metaphors is very close to mathematical concepts in a 
symbolic graphic form used in natural sciences since 
Euclid’s "Elements". So, postulated elements of the spatial 
imagination are inspired by anatomic proprioceptive signals 
(receptors in the muscles, tendons, joints) and corresponding 
excitation in the neuron ensemble. This statement could be 
illustrated by the project of Toyo Ito [12] with the plan based 
on a math concept (Voronoi diagram, see Fig. 5).  
Implementation of the postulated imagination in the 
architectural form occurs mainly in the structure static and 
dynamic (tonic) axes, but also manifests itself in a gradient 
distribution of visual masses along these axes.  
The digestive mode of imagination corresponds to the 
ontogenetic modality of thinking. The digestive mode is 
based on the physiological food instinct, i.e., the need for 
potential energy for building systems. This is similar to 
individual growth of a particular organism (the ontogenesis 
process). The digestive metaphor in the architecture could be 
associated with the mass. In the triad of Vitruvius «Utilitas, 
Firmitas, Venustas» [11], it actually corresponds to the 
«structure»; the same is the "strength". The digestive mode 
represents the constructive definiteness of the form. The 
basis of the mental representations of the "mass" is a material 
body or, in a broader sense, matter in a condensed state. 
Anatomically, the digestive mode is controlled by the 
interoceptive signals (from receptors of internal organs) to 
the Central Nervous System (CNS). Implementation of the 
digestive imagination mode is realized in the mass-to-space 
ratio in the architecture forms. 
The copulative imagination mode should be interpreted 
more broadly as a regime of change, organizing rhythms, 
divisions, intervals, and fluctuations in the proportions of 
mass and space. Durand’s copulative mode implies that an 
imagination is inherent to the human physiological processes 
of higher nervous activity, biophysics, phylogenetics, i.e., 
anthropogenic modality of thinking. The semantic subtext of 
rhythm is a manifestation of the most important property of 
life, i.e., the changes. The copulative mode highlights the 
difference between psychological states (joy, sorrow) as 
functional transition from one process to another one, from 
one mode to the next one, and affects the psychophysiology. 
General physical sense and the archetype of the copulative 
imagination mode is the wave, i.e., the oscillatory nature of 
the matter in general, including biological and physiological 
processes (the electrogenesis in CNS). In the triad of 
Vitruvius, the manifestation of copulative imagination mode 
is expressed by the term "Aesthetics"; aesthetic certainty of 
the form. Physiologically, this mode is based on the signals 
from exteroceptive receptors (cutaneous, visual, auditory, 
olfactory ones), subconscious internal perception of 
electrogenesis (alternating currents) of the brain and CNS, 
and low energy electromagnetic fields of the body cells.  
The thesis "primary characteristic of architectural 
masterpiece is the space" [1] corresponds to the antithesis of 
the imagination triad as an objective source "the time is 
death". The time (under the relativity) and the death 
(biological or cultural memory termination) exist in the 
physical sense only where any substance is presented, i.e., 
the substance in a condensed state, or the biological life. The 
imagination modes control the space as objective (i.e., 
existing regardless of imagination) reality. An artistic 
extreme metaphor "time as death" is opposite to the notion of 
“mass” as emptiness or vacuum, i.e., the something that is 
opposite to the human beings. 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-609-5
COGNITIVE 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

A single natural-scientific source of discoveries and 
"white spots" of the theory of composition is called by the 
term "physiomimetics". It was introduced by Soar and 
Andreen [13] for modeling the spatial structures for 
buildings by analogy with the molecular lattices. But this  
Figure 6. Interrelation and integration between phisiomimetical methods 
and the principles of architeture forming. 
term reflects the core of all methodological techniques of 
architectural forming, in line with the fundamental and 
applied physics (in math models), not only bionics (Fig.6).  
B. Durand’s concept and Anokhin’s “cognitom”  
Figure 7. Comparison of the “cognitom” formalization accoding to 
Anokhin [11] and the hierarchy of formal compisition properties. 
Architectural forms represent the systemic encoded 
visual “information” in stereo-metric elements of the 
form/space, reflecting the multidimensional data from the 
highest physiological functions. At the same time, the 
functions work as filters and are included into the 
conversion mechanisms (see Figs. 6, 7, 8). The triad of 
imagination (according to Durand: imagining-imagination-
fantastic) is a three-step statement, which corresponds to the 
graphs structure of “cognitom”, i.e. a hypennetwork brain 
model proposed by Anokhin [14]. Similar interconnection 
exist between the “cognitom” formalization of the 
architecture of mind and the hierarchy of formal 
composition properties [15] (see Fig. 6). The highest level 
usually 
represents 
typical 
patterns, 
compositions 
(ARCHItypes), the lowest collects plimary visual elements 
(extraception stimulus and arhetypes), the middle one 
includes instruments of interconnection 
of elements 
(intraception archetypes).  
IV.
DURAND’S CONCEPT AND UKHTOMSKY’S 
DOMINANCE  
Interesting results come from the consideration of 
architecture history as the homological sets of various forms. 
The architectural form itself becomes a derivative of the four 
spatial operators, which are geometrical representations of 
abstract psychophysiological associations (see Fig. 9). The 
system of higher mental functions is controlled by a dynamic 
dominance. According to Ukhtomsky [10], the principle of 
dominance is applicable to the strategies of visual 
perception, which were studied by Arnheim [14]. The 
dominance might serve as the most determining factor 
integrating feelings in the process of visual perception into 
the whole picture-«gestalt». The linguistic approach [5] to 
architecture is unable to explain, how a suite of primary 
geometric elements transform into the «enigmatic signifier» 
[4]. The way of transmission of multidimensional data of 
elements into the symbolic form of architecture is the actual 
problem of the architectural theory. 
Figure 8. Four «nucleatides» of architecture form have complementary 
pairs crossing each other. 
Any architectural form can be represented as a vector 
field model. The model’s complexity depends on the forming 
paradigm. The change of paradigms is connected with 
revolutions of scientific knowledge, which implies that the 
science changes the ideology of art [16]. Consideration of the 
archetypical imagination modes in the light of physiology 
and the hypothesis on bi-similar basis of spatial imagination 
(see Fig. 1, Table 1) leads to a natural-science concept of the 
geometrical imagination. This implies that there is mutual 
reflection 
of 
the 
conscious- 
(ARCHItypes) 
and 
subconscious-level (archetypes) regularities, phenomena, 
principles of matter organization in living and nonliving 
nature (see Fig. 6). This concept explains the hypothesis of 
supra-modality of visual art and music according to 
Korsakova-Kreyn [17]. 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-609-5
COGNITIVE 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

The dominance is also controlled by the experiences and 
beliefs, as well as by the physiology. According to Maslow 
[18], the pyramid of self-censorship reflects the "upward" 
sequence of dominances from the lowest to the highest 
level. Durand repeated Ukhtomsky regarding the concept of 
an art.  
Three functional modes of imagination, i.e., digestive, 
copulative, and postulated ones, could be called as the mass 
mode; the metro-rhythmic mode; and the tonic-axis mode of 
the architectural structure. The concept "the time is death" 
transforms into the mode of space-time. The proof of 
interrelation between the dominance principle and the  
geometry forming could be provided by representation of the 
ontological categories of architecture (i.e., function, design, 
style, etc.) as a set of connected parameters. Ancient 
Egyptian architecture describes the mass prevalence. The 
Gothic and Baroque architecture actualizes the vertical 
elements (prevalence of the postulated mode). The analysis 
of actual for each style set of formal parameters gives the 
sequence of imagination modes in the history of architecture, 
which is equal to the structure of pyramid of self-censorship 
according to Maslow (see Fig. 9). 
The projection of this concept onto the forming process 
gives an understanding of the form scale as a consequence 
of interaction of copulative and digestive imagination modes 
(see Figs. 8, 9). The archetypes and manifestations of the 
anthropomorphic scale vs socio scale (Neolithic community 
had about 30-40 people) emerged in the Neolithic period.  
Figure 9. 
Comparison Preliminary graphical analysis of the actualization of imagination modes in the history of architecture. 
V.
CONSEQUENCES FOR FUTURE EXPERIMENTS
Figure 10. Structural information from the forming processes. 
So, the architecture form appears at the intersection of 
four imagination modes (see Fig. 8), namely the material of 
architecture (mass/space), composition tools (and the metro-
rhythmic frames of axes). They could be treated as 
"operators" of the three-dimensional form related to 
"structural information" (see Fig. 10) and semantic features. 
Analysis of the form as a set of parameters of archetype 
modes opened the way for researching dominances of 
emotional perception (Fig.7). It is reasonable to combine the 
tracking of physiological processes (the frequency of 
respiration, palpitation, EEG parameters, etc.) with purely 
cognitive tasks associated with individual perception and 
spatial thinking of the subjects. This includes the following 
groups of studies with the fixation of the physiological 
systems work and the objects of the subject’s concentration: 
1. Experiments on the mental rotation of figures (spatial 
and impossible) without changing the proportions. In this 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-609-5
COGNITIVE 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

case, the analysis of the results should take into account the 
different character of the silhouette, the discrete or specific 
configuration of the forms. 
Experiments on the mental rotation of figures (spatial and 
impossible) with changed the proportions, color, texture, etc. 
2. Testing the physiological changes when displaying 
video with different scenarios of perception of the same 
architectural form, as well as groups of architectural forms of 
different styles, groups of architectural objects that are 
topologically equivalent (homologous series of architectural 
forms). 
3. Video rotation of models of architectural forms with 
the study of fixation of attention on their structure, 
comparison of little changes of the similar structures. 
4. The study of the role of the part, the relationship 
between details and the whole, a group of experiments on the 
perception of generalized models of known architectural 
objects. 
5. Perception of monotonous visual media and 
architectural fields (short and long surfaces, facades). 
6. Cognitive tasks before and after the experiment. 
7. The comparison of the perception of artificial three-
dimensional objects with the perception of natural 
prototypes. 
It is necessary also to account for the possibility of 
cognitive dissonance and other stress factors in the subjects' 
reaction, comparison of results for different age and other 
categories of subjects. For diagnostics of the physiological 
reactions, not so expensive equipment is needed, such as 
fMRI, the thermal imager, ECG, EEG, and the eye-tracker 
(to account for the attention-fixing points of the testing 
subjects). 
VI.
CONCLUSIONS 
It is necessary to mark that a structure of an architectural 
form can be taken as a system of psychophysiologicaly 
encoded visual stimulus information. The systemic 
relationship between psychophysiological concepts and the 
theory of formal composition promises an effective 
experimental study. The list of experimental study proposed 
in this paper is not completed because it should be 
supplemented by wide graphic and video series of visual 
stimuli. A convincing chain of relations between the formal 
characteristics of the architectural form as visual stimuli and 
neural responses is not complete. However, the developed 
theoretical base guarantees not only the right direction of the 
experimental strategy, but also its reliability. The main aim 
of this study is to find clear interrelations between the 
geometry of architectural form and the way of emotional 
perception. The second aim is to establish an interrelation 
between emotional reactions and phisiomimetic patterns of 
forming to reveal possible new ways in architecture 
forming. The third goal is to clarify possible new directions 
in architectural education, namely  methods, strategies, 
necessary new disciplines, etc. However, the greatest 
difficulty of the forthcoming work will be precisely the 
analysis of the experimental data.
REFERENCES
[1]
L. Azizyan, I. Dobritsyna, G. Lebedeva. Theory of 
composition as a poetics of architecture. Moscow: Progress-
Tradition, 2002.  
[2]
Y. Yankovskaya, “The architectural composition and 
semiotics are the genesis of ideas”, Architecton: news from 
universities, vol. 7, 2004.  
 Availble from http://archvuz.ru/2004_2/3. Retrieved 
2018.01.06 
[3]
A. Shapoval. The Theory of Formal Composition: A 
Textbook for Universities. Kazan: "Design quarter", 2016. 
[4]
Cr. 
Alexander. 
A 
pattern 
language.Towns.Buildings.Construction. Oxford University 
Press. 1977.  
[5]
Ch. A. Jencks. The New Paradigm in Architecture. Yale 
University Press. 2002.  
[6]
G. Durand. Les structures antropologiques de l’imaginaire. 
Paris:Dunod, 1992.  
[7]
 J. D. Lewis-Williams, “Discussion and Criticism. on Vision 
and Power in the Neolitic: Evidence from the Decorated 
Monuments”, Current Antropology, vol. 34(1), pp. 55-56, 
1993.   
[8]
“Paleolithic paintings in El Castillo cave in Northern Spain.
Uranium-series dating reveals Iberian paintings are Europe’s oldest 
cave art”, University of Bristol news. vol. 14, 2012. Available 
from http://www.bris.ac.uk/news/2012/8560.html.  Retrieved 
2018.01.06 
[9]
“Pablo Picasso Asemic line drawing”. Available from:   
http://seks-ua.blogspot.ru/2013/10/pablo-picasso-asemic-line-
drawing.htm Retrieved 2018.01.06  
[10] E.Y.Zueva and K.B. Zueva. The Concept of Dominance by 
A.A. Ukhtomsky and Anticipation. Springer International 
Publishing Switzerland, 2015. 
[11] V. Mako. Architecture and Ideology. Cambridge Scholars 
Publishing, 2014. 
[12] Toyo Ito& Associates:  Architects, Projects. Available from 
http://toyo-ito.co.jp/WWW/Project_Descript/2015-/2015-
p_04/2015-p_04_en.html   Retrieved 2018.01.06 
[13] R. Soar
and D. Andreen, “The Role of Additive 
Manufacturing and Physiomimetic Computational Design for 
Digital Construction”, Architectural Design, Vol. 82(2), pp. 
126–135, 2012.  
[14] K. Anokhin, “Cognitom is a hyper-network model of a 
dump”, Lecture given in Kurchatov Institute. Available from: 
http://neuroinfo.ru/conf/Content/Presentations/Anokhin2015.p
df.  Retrieved 2018.01.06 
[15] R. Anheim. Art and visisual perception: A phichology of the 
creative eye. University of California press. Berkeley and Los 
Andgeles, California, 1997. 
[16] L. Shlain. Art and phisics:parallel visions in space, time, and 
light. New York: W. Morrow & Company, Inc.,1991  
[17] M. Korsakova-Kreyn and W. J. Dowling, “Emotional 
Processing Music: Study in Affective Responses to Tonal 
Modulationin Controlled Harmonic Progressions and Real 
Music”, Psychomusicology: Music, Mind and Brain, vol. 
24(1), pp. 4/20, 2014. 
[18] Abraham H. and Maslow. Motivation and Personality (2nd 
ed.) N.Y.: Harper & Row, 1970. 
[19] S.Parin, 
S.Polevaya, 
A.Polavaya, 
“A 
Neirochemical 
Framework to Stress and the Role of the Endogenous Opioid 
System in the Control of Healf Rate Variability for Cognitive 
Load” Proc. of COGNITIVE  2017: The Ninth International 
Conference on Advanced Cognitive Tecnologies and 
Applications, pp. 16-20, Copyright ©IARIA, 2017.,2017 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-609-5
COGNITIVE 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

