EEG-controlled Table Bike for Neurorehabilitation Based on 
Sensorimotor-rhythm BCI 
Jin-Chern Chiou1,2,3, Sheng-Chuan Liang1, Chia-Hung Yen1,Chun-Jen Chien1, Yung-Jiun Lin1,3, Tien-Fu Chang2, 
Nei-Hsin Meng3,4, Ching-Hung Lin3, Jeng-Ren Duann1,3,5,6 
 
1Biomedical Engineering Research and Development Center, China Medical University, Taichung Taiwan 
2Institute of Electrics and Control Engineering, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan 
3Biomedical Electronics Translational Research Center, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan 
4Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, China Medical University Hospital Taichung Taiwan 
5Institute of Clinical and Medical Science, China Medical University, Taichung Taiwan 
6Institute for Neural Computation, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093 USA 
 
t17988@mail.cmuh.org.tw, t19362@mail.cmuh.org.tw, asusm6nb@gmail.com, t20840@mail.cmuh.org.tw, 
t18628@mail.cmuh.org.tw, stevechang10000@yahoo.com.tw, nsmeng@ms13.hinet.net, eandy924@gmail.com, 
duann@sccn.ucsd.edu
 
Abstract—This work demonstrates an EEG-controlled 
table bike for neurorehabilitation based on the 
sensorimotor rhythm (SMR) BCI using a wearable ultra 
light-weighted 4-ch wireless EEG device designed and 
developed by our group. The 4-ch wireless EEG module 
was used to acquire high quality EEG signals from the 
scalp locations of C3 or C4 or both. The acquired EEG 
data were then processed and analyzed using an EEG 
translation module, also designed by our group, to 
extract the SMR features. Consequently, the SMR 
features were used to turn ON and OFF a commercially 
available table bike for neurorehabilitation process. 
Finally, the feasibility of the devised EEG-controlled 
table bike was tested on normal subjects using a motor 
imagery experiment, in which the subjects were asked to 
perform a motor imagery task every time a ‘go’ cue was 
displayed at the center of a computer screen and move 
the table bike without physical hand movement. In total, 
12 healthy normal subjects and one chronic stroke 
patient participated in this study. The success rate at 
which the subjects/patient could successfully move the 
table bike after the cue onsets was used to evaluate the 
feasibility of the device. Our result showed that most of 
the subjects and patient could easily learn how to 
operate the EEG-controlled table bike with only few 
sessions of training (no more than 30 minutes) and 
achieve around 80% success rate.  
Keywords-neurorehabilitation; sensorimotor rhythm 
(SMR); brain-computer interface; EEG. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In order to put the brain in the loop of neurorehabilitation 
process [1], this work devised a brain-computer interface 
(BCI)-based electroencephalography (EEG) controlled table 
bike for training patients after stroke attack and restoring 
their motor control potentially through reorganizing the 
otherwise missing or degenerated fiber tracts directly or 
indirectly caused by stroke. Recent development of BCI-
based neurorehabilitation has proved beneficial in helping 
the patients to restore their motor control, which was 
damaged by stroke and/or other brain injury or degeneration 
[2, 3]. Among all the BCI-based neurorehabilitation 
mechanisms, motor imagery induced sensorimotor rhythm 
(SMR) is probably the most pronounced brain signature, 
which has been largely applied to interface with 
rehabilitation hardware or robots for neurorehabilitation 
process [1, 4]. Although such SMR feature is ubiquitous 
across different brain imaging modalities, such as functional 
magnetic 
resonance 
imaging 
(fMRI), 
electroencephalography 
(EEG), 
and 
megnetoencephalography (MEG), EEG is so far the most 
preferable modality for this purpose, due mainly to the cost 
and availability [4, 5]. 
However, the form factor of most currently available 
EEG devices is still too bulky for portable or even wearable 
requirement for neurorehabilitation process. In addition, the 
wires connecting the EEG electrodes and the signal 
acquisition computer could be an obstacle to the EEG-based 
neurorehabilitation device as they can accidently be caught 
by the moving arms of the device and thus disrupt the 
rehabilitation process. As a result, wireless transmission of 
digitized EEG data to the feature extraction module for 
looking for SMR patterns can be valuable to make the 
rehabilitation process smooth [6]. On the other hand, given 
that the source of SMR is known to be present in the 
sensorimotor and superior parietal cortices and can be 
extracted using scalp EEG with electrodes placed on the 
locations near C3 or C4 or both [7, 8]. Therefore, an EEG 
system with three to four channels should be more than 
enough 
for 
the 
SMR-based 
BCI 
neurorehabilitation 
application. It is thus possible to devise a light-weighted, 
wearable wireless EEG acquisition and analysis system to 
monitor the onsets and offsets of SMR features and integrate 
into a rehabilitation device or robot for controlling the ON 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

and OFF of the movement of the device. Such a combination 
might largely alleviate the limitations on the degree of 
freedom of rehabilitation hardware or robot and allow more 
versatile rehabilitation processes. 
II. 
METHODS 
A table bike was connected to a newly developed high-
quality wireless 4-ch EEG recording system and an EEG 
signal translation module to continuously record high-quality 
EEG from the scalp at C3/C4 region, extract the motor-
imagery induced sensorimotor rhythm (SMR) feature in the 
EEG data, and translate the EEG feature into control signal 
to turn on/off the table bike. The wireless 4-ch EEG system 
samples EEG signal at 2K Hz with 24-bit resolution and 
transmits the digitized EEG signals wirelessly through 
Bluetooth 2.0 protocol to a signal acquisition module, such 
as a laptop or a smart phone. In addition, the wireless EEG 
device provides extremely high quality EEG signals with 
input referred noise of 1.5 uV, which outperforms most of 
the existing wireless EEG systems. The device itself weights 
about 22 g, suited for the applications in need of portable or 
even wearable EEG device. 
The brain signal translation module receives digitized 
EEG signals from the wireless 4-ch EEG system and extracts 
the motor imagery induced event-related desynchronization 
of EEG sensorimotor rhythm as features. Finally, it translates 
result of detection into control commands to turn ON and 
OFF the table bike. The speed of the table bike movement 
was preprogrammed by the rehabilitation physician to fit the 
different requirements for different stroke patients. Although 
the current form factor of the table bike might not be optimal 
for neurorehabilitation process for stroke patients, the light-
weighted wireless EEG and brain signal translation module 
can be easily adapted to any forms of rehabilitation devices. 
As a result, it can fit the requests of most rehabilitation 
physicians for devising the most suitable rehabilitation 
protocol for each individual stroke patient. 
To evaluate the feasibility of the mind-controlled table 
bike, we conducted a pre-clinical test on 12 healthy normal 
subjects (5 female and aged 30 +/- 5 yrs., recruited from 
National Chiao Tung University campus) and one young (30 
yr.) chronic stroke patient (6 mo. after stroke attack, 
recruited from China Medical University Hospital, CMUH). 
The experimental protocol was as follows: First, a 2-sec 
resting period was cued with a white cross at the center of a 
computer screen to ask subject to pay attention to the study 
as the task cue would be delivered any time soon. Then an 
execution cue (green disk) was delivered at the center of 
computer screen for 6 secs to ask subject to start motor 
imagery by imagining he/she is pushing the table bike 
forward using his/her hands without physical hand 
movements. If the subject could successfully move the table 
bike in the motor imagery trial, it was counted as a 
successful move; otherwise, it was counted as a failed move. 
The percentage of successful movement was used to evaluate 
the feasibility of the devised mind-controlled table bike. 
Informed consents were obtained from all subjects before the 
experiment. CMUH IRB approved the experimental protocol. 
III. 
RESULT 
For the 12 healthy normal subjects, the success rate was 
80.06%. Among the 12 subjects, 7 of them had finished 4 
additional runs of experiments in separate occasions (within 
two-month duration). The average success rates for all 
subjects were 82%, 86%, 92%, 67%, 79%, 74%, 74%, 
respectively. For the young stroke patient recruited from 
CMUH, fMRI of the same type of motor imagery task and 
diffusion tensor images (DTI) of this patient were used to 
determine the optimal scalp channel location. After the 
channel location had been determined, the patient 
participated in the motor imagery task and finished one 
session of experiment. The success rate of this patient was 
higher than 81%. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
In this study, we demonstrated an integrated work to 
interface 
a 
commercially 
available 
table 
bike 
for 
neurorehabilitation process with an ultra light-weighted, 
wearable wireless 4-ch EEG device and an EEG translation 
module to extract SMR signatures from the digitized EEG 
signals. Both the wearable wireless EEG module as well as 
the EEG translation module were designed and developed by 
our group. The output of the EEG acquisition and translation 
modules could be used to trigger ON and OFF the table bike 
for facilitating the BCI-based neurorehabilitation process. 
Finally, we conducted a motor imagery experiment to 
evaluate the feasibility of the devised BCI-based EEG-
controlled table bike. The percentage of successfully 
detecting the SMR induced by the motor imagery and 
moving the table bike accordingly was used to rate the 
performance of the devised EEG-controlled table bike. 
Although the current study was mainly tested on the normal 
subjects, it is possible to translate the results of this work to 
clinical settings and help the patients after stroke attacks to 
regain the controls, at least in part, over their peripheral 
muscles. 
The previous study showed that the accuracy of 
sensorimotor rhythm (SMR) feature detection might vary 
from subject to subject due partly to individual differences in 
the anatomies of sensorimotor cortex [2]. In our result, we 
did show individual differences in the performance in terms 
of success rate across different subjects. However, within the 
same subjects, the success rates were quite reproducible 
across different visits. It is also worth noting that the average 
success rate for this study was higher than the results as 
reported previously. This is mainly because that in our test 
result, only the ‘move’ condition was used and thus could 
bias the performance toward higher success rate for moving 
the device. That is, subjects and/or patients could maintain 
their performance to move the table bike without switching 
to the OFF mode for stopping movement. It was relatively 
easier for the subjects/patient to perform continuously the 
motor imagery task without alternating their mind between 
‘move’ and ‘stop’ conditions as was reported in previous 
study. Nonetheless, the protocol with such a high success 
rate might be preferable from the standpoint for encouraging 
stroke patients and easing their training. 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Although 
the 
reported 
wireless 
EEG-based 
neurorehabilitation device achieved such a high success rate 
among the normal subjects participated in this study, two 
major problems associated with the report device still largely 
concerned us: (1) what type of stroke patients can most 
benefit from the reported device, and (2) where is the best 
site on the scalp to place the EEG electrode such that the 
SMR features can be easily extracted for controlling the 
rehabilitation device? To answer the first question, we are 
currently incorporating the diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) 
technology to evaluate the integrity of the fiber tracts after 
stroke onset. We hypothesize that only the patients with the 
downstream fiber tracts intact or less contaminated by stroke 
attack might best benefit from the wireless EEG-based 
neurorehabilitation device. Thus, we are evaluating the 
integrity of the downstream fiber tracts of stroke patients and 
trying to establish a protocol for screening patients for the 
proposed rehabilitation process.  
On the other hand, we are also testing the process to 
determine the best EEG electrode placement to extract the 
SMR features from the patients’ scalp with either whole-
head EEG or functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) 
or even their combination. For EEG process, we are to wire 
patient with a 64-channel EEG device with whole-head 
coverage and run through the motor imagery and/or motor 
observation tasks (depending on if the patient is able to 
perform motor imagery task or not). As the C3 and C4 
locations might become suboptimal after stroke attack, we 
will then search among the whole head and find out which 
channel(s) contains most promising SMR features for the 
further use. This can be the most straightforward way to 
figure out the best channel location(s) for the proposed 
neurorehabilitation process, but the process can be tedious 
given that patients might have some difficulties and concerns 
about capping for EEG recordings. Alternatively, we are to 
determine the best location(s) to place the EEG channels 
using fMRI examination, where patients are placed in an 
MRI scanner and asked to perform motor imagery and/or 
motor observation tasks. The scalp locations correspond to 
the fMRI activation patterns can be the target channel 
locations for extracting the SMR features. However, such an 
examination can be expensive and may add extra loading to 
the patients and their families. Incorporating the fMRI 
session with the regular follow-up examinations might be a 
potential solution.  
Although the devised rehabilitation table bike with 
wearable wireless EEG frontend has been successfully 
applied to one young chronic stroke patient, it is still too 
early to draw a conclusion regarding the effectiveness of the 
rehabilitation device. First, given that the patient participated 
in this test was young and thus with above average 
motivation to involve in any possible training protocol so as 
to help her recover from the stroke attack as much as she can. 
As a result, the test on this patient only might favor the 
reported wireless EEG-based neurorehabilitation device. As 
a result, the conclusion can only be drawn after a large-scale 
clinical trial. In this end, we are to propose a clinical trial 
protocol to our hospital to conduct a large-scale clinical trial 
with well-controlled patient population, stroke phase, and 
protocol. In so doing, we hope to prove the effectiveness of 
the reported neurorehabilitation device on improving the 
recovery from the disabilities in the limbs caused by stroke 
attack.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been supported in part by the “Aim for the 
Top University Plan” of National Chiao Tung University and 
Ministry of Education of Taiwan. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
J. J. Daly and J. R. Wolpaw, Brain-computer interface in neurological 
rehabilitation, Lancet Neurol., vol. 7, pp. 1032-1043, 2008. 
[2] 
G. Pfurtscheller, C. Neuper, G. R. Muller, Graz-BCI: state of the art 
and clinical applications, IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 
11, pp. 177-180, 2003.  
[3] 
J. N. Mak and J. R. Wolpaw, Clinical applications of brain-computer 
interfaces: Current state and future prospects, IEEE Rev. Biomed. 
Engr., vol. 2, pp. 187-199, 2009. 
[4] 
N. Nirbaumer and L. G. Cohen, Brain-computer interfaces: 
communication and restoration of movement in paralysis, J. Physiol., 
Vol. 579, pp. 621-636, 2007. 
[5] 
J. J. Daly, R. Cheng, J. Rogers, K. Litinas, K. Hrovat, and M. 
Dohring, Feasibility of a new application of noninvasive brain 
computer interface (BCI): A case study of training for recovery of 
volotional motor control after stroke, J. Neurological Physical 
Therapy, vol. 33, pp. 203-211, (2009). 
[6] 
C. T. Lin, L. W. Ko, J. C. Chiou, J. R. Duann, R. S. Huang, S. F. 
Liang, T. W. Chiu, and T. P. Jung, Noninvasive neural prostheses 
using mobile and wireless EEG, Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 96, pp. 
1167-1183, 2008. 
[7] 
G. Pfurtscheller, C. Neuper, C. Brunner, and F. Lopes da Silva, Beta 
rebound after different types of motor imagery in man, Neurosci. Let. 
vol. 378, pp. 156-159, 2005. 
[8] 
A. Solodkin, P. Hlustik, E. E. Chen, and S. L. Small, Fine modulation 
in network activation during moroe execution and motor imagery, 
Cerebral Cortex, vol. 14, pp. 1246-1255, 2004. 
 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-218-9
COGNITIVE 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

