Modeling Situation Awareness: The Impact of Ecological Interface 
Design on Driver’s Response Times 
Thomas Friedrichs, Andreas Lüdtke 
R&D Division Transportation – Human Centered Design 
OFFIS – Institute for Information Technology 
{friedrichs, luedtke}@offis.de 
 
 
Abstract— Endsley’s Situation Awareness (SA) theory and a 
variety of SA-measurement methods like SAGAT and SPAM 
aim to explain how humans make errors and assess the SA of 
operators in dynamic workspaces. However, in order to 
evaluate the impact of future assistance systems on the SA of 
operators at design time, predictions about operator 
performance are needed. In this work, existing SA 
measurement methods are used to construct a cognitive model 
which predicts driver reaction times on the basis of SA to road 
and system events. Ecological Interface Design variants will be 
used as a test case to show how information presentation 
influences driver performance. 
Keywords-situation awareness; cogntivie systems; evaluation; 
ecological interface design; response time; dynamic systems. 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Truck platooning is defined as a series of trucks that 
drive with close distances and automatic longitudinal control. 
In our case, all trucks are equipped with a cooperative cruise 
control system which communicates with other trucks in 
order to cooperatively control the distances and the speed of 
each truck. Braking maneuvers are executed automatically. 
All drivers maintain lateral control all the time. The driver of 
the lead truck uses a conventional cruise control system 
(with optional sensor based braking assistance) and observes 
the driving scene. The lead truck driver is also responsible 
for emergency braking actions. The benefits of driving in a 
platoon include reduced fuel consumption, better use of the 
infrastructure and improved safety. Bergenheim et al. 
provide an overview of platooning systems [1].  
However, drivers in a platoon are not in a fully 
automated setting where no manual actions are needed. They 
are required to constantly steer the truck. Furthermore, they 
have to regain full control over the vehicle very quickly if 
necessary. This can happen if the system reaches its 
functional limits or a road hazard requires immediate 
intervention of the driver. Drivers also have to remember 
when platooning maneuvers like splitting, merging or 
expanding will happen and need to receive sufficient support 
with these tasks [2]. Another aspect is that if the system 
makes actions (e.g., adapts the speed automatically), the 
driver should not be surprised [2], which is an issue known 
as “Automation Surprises” [3]. 
 
Figure 1. Close-following scene in a platoon. 
It is therefore important that the driver maintains a 
sufficient level of Situation Awareness (SA) which is defined 
as “[…] the perception of the elements in the environment 
within a volume of time and space, the comprehension of 
their meaning, and the projection of their status in the near 
future” [4]. SA incorporates three levels: Level 1 is the 
perception of information, Level 2 is information integration 
and Level 3 is the projection of the future status. In 
platooning, the short inter-vehicle distances lead to problems 
with the visual perception (SA Level 1) of the environment 
because of the back of the trailer directly in front of the 
driver (see Figure 1). Thus, drivers miss crucial visual 
information. Another aspect is that the lateral control is with 
the driver, while longitudinal control is a system function. 
Drivers might get bored and uninformed about the driving 
situation because they are by default not required to drive 
fully manual (SA Level 2 and 3). Both factors can contribute 
to human-out-of-the-loop problems because the SA of the 
driver is impaired. If an operator gets removed from the 
control loop, the responses get slower and breakdowns or 
malfunctions might occur [2][5]. Short response times are a 
crucial factor in driving, because even fractions of a second 
can make the difference between an accident and avoidance. 
For example, a truck which moves with a velocity of 
80 km/h covers a distance of 22,22 m in one second. 
It is assumed that if the driver is in the loop and therefore 
has a sufficient SA, response times are minimal. Response 
time is here defined as the time interval from where a certain 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

stimulus is perceived to where a possible action can be 
executed. It does not include the time from onset until 
perception, time for motor movement or task completion. It 
is therefore a “cognitive” response time.  
It becomes evident that drivers in a platoon need to 
receive support in order to maintain a good SA because of 
the occlusion they are not able to do this themselves. An 
approach is to offer platooning support in the form of an 
information system which serves as a “third eye”. It supports 
the drivers so that they can maintain a sufficient level of SA. 
Such a system will be referred to as a Platooning Support 
System (PSS). It consists of a HMI that displays information 
about the system state and the driving context. This 
information can include: 
• 
Sensor readings 
o 
Distance readings 
o 
Vehicle velocity 
• 
Environmental information 
o 
Weather information 
o 
Topographic information 
o 
Road status 
• 
Platooning / navigation information 
o 
Merge / split maneuvers 
o 
Accordion maneuvers 
o 
Route information 
o 
System status, future actions 
 
It is not sufficient to only display this information; 
drivers have to understand the variables and the interplay 
between them in an easy way. A promising way to do this, is 
to display continuous information about the changes and 
linkages of relevant information from the environment [6]. 
This approach is grounded in the margins of the Ecological 
Interface Design framework, which proved to increase 
operator knowledge in complex and dynamic environments 
[7]. For example in electric cars, often the flow of energy is 
visualized. If the car runs in electric power mode, energy 
flows from the battery to the engine and when the car brakes, 
energy flows from the brakes back to the battery. This 
information presentation offers a good way of informing the 
driver about a variety of parameters and the status of a 
complex system in an easy to understand and efficient way.  
Continuous information presentation can give drivers the 
ability to track the changes in an evolving situation, which in 
turn can lead to a better understanding of the dynamics of the 
situation. This approach uses functional information of the 
situation, which is relevant to the driver’s goals. In terms of 
SA, continuous information supports on Level 2 and 3 
because the comprehension (Level 2) and projection 
(Level 3) are supported. This is important because if drivers 
can anticipate what either the system does in the future or 
how the road status changes, it is assumed that the response 
times of the driver to these events decrease. Results from 
other domains show that such a support can increase SA 
even in unanticipated situations [8]. PSS therefore should use 
the continuous information approach for information 
relevant for safe driving. Relevant variables can include 
relative distances to the surrounding cars, relative speeds, 
system status and changes, future system actions and so on.  
In contrast to continuous information support, there are 
situations where immediate actions and warnings are needed. 
For example, if there is a pressure decrease in one of the 
trucks tires, the driver needs to get informed immediately. 
Here, continuous information would be inappropriate. This is 
because tire pressure rarely gets into a dangerous state and 
therefore the effort to keep track of continuous information 
would be too high. This approach is referred to as event-
based information presentation. Here, drivers are only 
informed about a certain status change by a warning sound, 
message or other indication in the cockpit when an 
immediate action is necessary. For a close-following 
scenario in the platooning context, certain information can be 
visualized using this approach, for example blind spot 
warnings or changes of the speed limit. A balanced 
combination of continuous and event-based information 
presentation is a promising approach to support drivers’ SA 
in close-following and at the same time it reduces the 
complexity of HMIs.  
However, when designing such a system it is not clear if 
information is better presented in a continuous or event-
based way. The traditional way of testing such a system 
would involve experts, focus groups and most importantly, 
human testers. The latter are not only the most valuable 
source of feedback, from a legal perspective, human testing 
is a requirement for the homologation of a new product like a 
PSS. The evaluation effort for a PSS is very high, because it 
is much effort to plan, conduct and analyze tests with human 
testers. Moreover, dynamic situations are very complex and 
a variety of scenarios have to be covered, what makes this 
approach even more complex.  
Therefore, the objective of this work is to create a 
cognitive model of driver SA which predicts response times 
of a cognitive agent under the influence of visual interface 
design variants. For this, a traffic simulation is used, which 
includes a platooning scenario. Experiments with real drivers 
will be performed to calculate the model fit. Two different 
HMI designs, which will be developed in the scope of the 
COMPANION project [9], will serve as test cases. One 
design will show functional information in a continuous way, 
the other design will use event-based warnings. 
In Section 2, the current state of the art of cognitive 
modeling in dynamic contexts is described. Section 3 
presents related work in Situation Awareness modeling. 
Section 4 describes the approach. In Section 5, the proposed 
methodology is explained. The paper concludes with 
Sections 6 and 7, which cover open issues and a final 
summary. 
II. 
COGNITIVE MODELS OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR 
To be able to profit from user data and at the same time 
avoid high costs and time consuming test procedures, 
cognitive architectures like ACT-R have shown to be an 
alternative way to the classic user testing methods. These 
models are able to simulate and predict human behavior, 
even in dynamic and complex environments. Initially such 
models replicated experiments conducted with humans in 
order to expand the knowledge about human cognition. 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

Today, cognitive models are able to produce valid 
predictions of human behavior even in complex and 
dynamic use cases like aviation and driving. For example, 
pilot [10] and driver models [11][12] gained a lot of 
attention in cognitive modeling. It was shown that the 
effects of devices like telephones and visual displays on the 
performance of the driving task can be simulated with a 
cognitive driver model and a traffic simulation [13][14].  
The SA theory involves several cognitive processes. The 
theory builds upon these cognitive processes to describe 
how information directs operator performance. SA can help 
to explain when and why errors occur. However, the SA 
theory is not able to make predictions about operator 
performance. It is however possible to measure SA. State of 
the art methods include SAGAT (Situation Awareness 
Global Assessment Technique) [15], SPAM (Situation 
Present Assessment Method) [16] or SART (Situation 
Awareness Rating Technique) [17]. The SA measurement is 
often performed within a task simulation. These include 
driving simulations, flying simulations or air-traffic control 
simulations. SAGAT was introduced by Endsley to measure 
the SA of pilots. It is an offline measure where the 
simulation is stopped and questions about the situation are 
asked. 
In contrast, the SPAM method is an online measure. The 
simulation does not have to be stopped to query operator 
SA. While the simulation is running, the operator is 
presented with a stimulus that indicates that they have to 
answer a situation related question. The operator decides 
when he will answer the question after the presentation of 
the stimulus. When the operator is able to listen and answer 
the query, he indicates that. Then, the question is asked 
while the simulation is running permanently. The time from 
the presentation of the question until the answer is here 
referred to as response time. Durso et al. state, that if the 
operator has “in consciousness the information needed to 
answer a query”, response time is shorter [16]. Operators 
would still be able to answer correctly if they are able to 
search the display or environment for it. In that case, 
response time would be longer. It could be shown that the 
SPAM measures response time and accuracy have 
predictive power and are able to add to the incremental 
validity of a larger battery of cognitive tests [16]. 
For this work, the SPAM method itself, and results from 
existing studies where SPAM was applied, will contribute to 
the development of the model. Due to the following reasons 
this approach was chosen: First, SPAM offers performance 
measures for dynamic contexts. With latencies, such as 
response times, an important aspect of operator performance 
is evaluated because it guides how fast operators act. This is 
especially important for safety critical environments like 
driving. Second, SPAM is built to attribute to the dynamic 
characteristics of situations. SPAM does not interrupt the 
simulation, which underlines the dynamic aspect. Third, it 
can assess SA of the operators when “it is successful, rather 
than only when SA fails” [16]. These factors attribute to the 
applicability of SA measurements inside a cognitive 
architecture. 
III. 
RELATED WORK 
The SA theory gained a lot of attention and 
measurements of operator SA were developed and widely 
applied in various domains. SAGAT consists of a closed-
loop simulation where (in that case) pilots fly a given 
scenario. At a random point in time, the simulation gets 
paused and the screen goes black. The pilot has to answer 
several questions (randomly selected from a larger set) 
concerning the situation to measure his knowledge. The 
answers of the pilot are compared to the aspects of the real 
situation to find out where the differences between the real 
and the perceived situation are. This method makes it 
possible to identify the SA elements pilots perceive and 
process depending on prior identified goals and tasks. Thus, 
it is possible to assess relevant knowledge of operators in a 
dynamic context. The development of SA evaluation 
methods also resulted in a use of this method in the industry 
where it is used to design new systems, train operators and 
measure the performance of operators to ensure optimal 
performance. SAGAT also got transferred to the driving 
domain where it was used in a variety of studies [18]. There 
has been work on driver reaction times to unexpected and 
expected road events, which revealed shorter brake response 
times for expected events [19]. 
Baumann and Krems propose that SA construction is 
comparable to language and text comprehension and state 
that “In both cases an integrated mental representation of the 
perceived 
and 
processed 
pieces 
of 
information is 
constructed.” [20]. Their algorithmic approach to model SA 
aims to understand SA as a whole in order to extend the 
knowledge about the cognitive processes, which attribute to 
Endsley’s initial theory [20]–[22]. Matthews [23] integrated 
driver’s awareness of spatial, temporal, goal and system into 
a model of SA which is goal oriented and includes strategic, 
tactical and operational driving. The model aims to 
understand how modern intelligent transportation systems 
impact driver performance. Gugerty [24] used direct and 
indirect measures to assess driver’s knowledge of the 
locations of other cars. This work provides implications 
about how people maintain SA in dynamic tasks like 
driving. In another work, Gugerty [25] reviews models and 
theories of attention, SA, comprehension and multitasking. 
Measures of SA are also presented. A collection of SA 
measurements is provided by Gawron where different 
techniques are presented [26]. 
IV. 
PROPOSED APPROACH 
To be able to meet the objective of this work, it is 
planned to complete the following tasks: 
 
1. 
Analysis 
of 
the 
fundamental 
cognitive 
processes which lead to variation in response 
and retrieval time of operators 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

2. 
Development of a theory of how these 
cognitive processes lead to variances in 
response 
times 
under 
consideration 
of 
continuous 
and 
event-based 
information 
techniques 
3. 
Implementation of the theory from Step 2 in a 
cognitive architecture  
4. 
Test of two design variants with the model and 
a driving simulation and predict response times 
to road and system events 
5. 
Verification and model fit by an empirical 
evaluation of the model 
 
It is planned to conduct the work in step 1-3 in two 
iterations. Starting from a first version, the model will be 
evaluated along the building process with human data. The 
question this work should answer is: How can the influence 
of continuous and event-based information on driver’s 
reaction time to road / system events under partly automated 
driving be modeled with a cognitive architecture? 
A. Significance and Innovation 
Although SA helped to get insights about operator 
performance, to the knowledge of the author, no cognitive 
model incorporates SA as a foundation for the measurement 
of specific performance values like response times. Thus, 
this work extends the state of the art by proposing a method 
for the computational evaluation of assistance systems under 
the aspect of operator response time. To date, evaluations of 
SA are performed manually in complex settings with test 
personnel. Although the information gain with the existing 
methods is large, the applicability of these methods in the 
design process of assistant systems is limited. With 
cognitive models, design variants can be evaluated before 
actual user testing to identify presentation techniques, which 
are suitable for tests with users. Thus, the effort to evaluate 
such systems would decrease with the evaluation approach, 
this work offers.  
To the knowledge of the author there are no models 
which allow an evaluation of driver reaction to external 
events under the consideration of information support from 
an assistance system. While the idea of system evaluation 
with cognitive models itself is not new, the approach of 
practically applying knowledge from existing SA rating 
techniques is novel and adds a valid contribution to the 
field. This is because models, which try to model SA in a 
cognitive architecture, assemble complex relationships 
between perception, memory and decision making in order 
to model a large amount of cognitive processes. The 
approach presented here is based on observations of existing 
test procedures and aims at the prediction of one specific 
performance measure (response time) as a resulting measure 
of SA. Thus, the complexity of the SA theory is limited to 
one factor, which makes the model building process less 
complex and manageable. 
V. 
METHODOLOGY 
The existing work introduced in the related work part of 
this proposal will be evaluated. The fundamental cognitive 
processes will be analyzed and based on this, a theory of 
how the response time under the influence of continuous 
and event-based information presentation are constructed, 
will be developed. This theory will be included in an 
existing driver model which will be the foundation for the 
development of the SA model. The driver model was built 
within the cognitive architecture CASCaS [10][27]. The 
CASCaS driver model consists of top-down visual attention 
mechanisms [27], bottom-up visual attention mechanisms 
are currently under development and will be integrated in 
the future. The symbolic representations of objects from the 
environment are transferred into the memory of the driver 
model. Concerning the Level 1 SA mechanisms, there is 
considered to be sufficient state of the art cognitive 
processes already implemented in the CASCaS architecture, 
so the perceptual part of the model will not be considered.  
The driver model will serve as a starting point for the 
exploration of how to include the cognitive processes, which 
will be developed in the model building process. 
Furthermore, a driving simulation is used where the 
cognitive driver model will be placed in. In such a closed-
loop simulation, the model will be tailored to the use case in 
the platooning field. It will be supported by a symbolic 
representation of the two design variants which include 
continuous and event-based information presentation. In 
such a scenario, data will be generated from the model.  In 
another step, the same scenario will be applied with human 
testers in a driving simulator. From the empirically gained 
data in this experiment, the model data will be compared to 
and the model fit will be calculated.  
VI. 
QUESTIONS AND ISSUES 
There are some issues which have to be considered. 
First, having response time as a dependent variable, it is 
important to examine and control the independent variables 
which lead to response time as a predictor of SA. Second, 
factors like experience, motivation and general cognitive 
capabilities attribute to driver performance. It is not clear at 
the moment how the interaction between these factors and 
the impact on performance measures like response time will 
add to the complexity of the model. Thus, for now it is 
assumed that these factors can be controlled by the study 
design. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
The presented dissertation project proposes a method to 
assess the impact of Ecological Interface Design variants on 
response times to road and system events of truck drivers. 
The foundation for this research includes current Situation 
Awareness measurements in dynamic contexts. The project 
extends the state of the art by using a specific performance 
measure (response time) as an indicator of SA inside a 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

cognitive architecture. Thus, the evaluation of driver 
assistance systems will be supported at design time. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The research received funding from the European 
Commission Seventh Framework Program (FP7-ICT–2013-
10) 
under 
Grant 
Agreement 
No. 
610990, 
Project 
COMPANION. The authors thank Sebastian Feuerstack, 
Bertram Wortelen, Jan-Patrick Osterloh, Christian van Göns 
and Christian Denker for  their helpful comments on earlier 
versions of this paper. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
C. Bergenheim, S. Shladover, E. Coelingh, C. Englund, 
and S. Tsugawa, “Overview of platooning systems,” 
Proceedings of the 19th ITS World Congress, 2012. 
[2] 
M. Saffarian, J. C. F. de Winter, and R. Happee, 
“Automated Driving: Human-Factors Issues and Design 
Solutions,” Proceedings of the Human Factors and 
Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, vol. 56, no. 1, Oct. 
2012, pp. 2296–2300. 
[3] 
N. Sarter, D. Woods, and C. Billings, “Automation 
surprises,” Handbook of human factors and ergonomics, 
vol. 2, 1997, pp. 1926–1943. 
[4] 
M. Endsley, “Toward a Theory of Situation Awareness in 
Dynamic Systems,” Human Factors: The Journal of the 
Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, vol. 37, no. 1, 
Mar. 1995, pp. 32–64. 
[5] 
D. Kaber and M. Endsley, “Out-of-the-loop performance 
problems and the use of intermediate levels of automation 
for improved control system functioning and safety,” 
Process Safety Progress, vol. 16, no. 3, 1997, pp. 126–
131. 
[6] 
G. H. Walker, N. a. Stanton, T. a Kazi, P. M. Salmon, and 
D. P. Jenkins, “Does advanced driver training improve 
situational awareness?,” Applied ergonomics, vol. 40, no. 
4, Jul. 2009, pp. 678–87. 
[7] 
K. J. Vicente and J. Rasmussen, “Ecological interface 
design: Theoretical foundations,” IEEE Transactions on 
Systems, Man and Cybernetics, vol. 22, no. 4, 1992, pp. 
589–606. 
[8] 
C. M. Burns, G. Skraaning, G. a. Jamieson, N. Lau, J. 
Kwok, R. Welch, and G. Andresen, “Evaluation of 
Ecological Interface Design for Nuclear Process Control: 
Situation Awareness Effects,” Human Factors: The 
Journal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, 
vol. 50, no. 4, Aug. 2008, pp. 663–679. 
[9] 
“COMPANION Project.” [Online]. Available: 
http://www.companion-project.eu/. 
[10] 
A. Lüdtke and J. Osterloh, “Simulating perceptive 
processes of pilots to support system design,” Human-
Computer Interaction–INTERACT, 2009, pp. 471–484. 
[11] 
D. D. Salvucci, “Modeling Driver Behavior in a Cognitive 
Architecture,” Human Factors: The Journal of the Human 
Factors and Ergonomics Society, vol. 48, no. 2, Jun. 2006, 
pp. 362–380. 
[12] 
L. Weber, M. Baumann, A. Lüdtke, and R. Steenken, 
“Modellierung von Entscheidungen beim Einfädeln auf 
die Autobahn,” 8. Berliner Werkstatt Mensch-Maschine-
Systeme, 2009, pp. 86–91. 
[13] 
J. Lee, J. D. Lee, and D. D. Salvucci, “Evaluating the 
distraction potential of connected vehicles,” Proceedings 
of the 4th International Conference on Automotive User 
Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular Applications - 
AutomotiveUI, 2012, pp. 33–40. 
[14] 
D. D. Salvucci, “Rapid prototyping and evaluation of in-
vehicle interfaces,” ACM Transactions on Computer-
Human Interaction, vol. 16, no. 2, Jun. 2009, pp. 1–33. 
[15] 
M. Endsley, “Situation awareness global assessment 
technique (SAGAT),” Proceedings of the IEEE 1988 
National Aerospace and Electronics Conference, 1988, 
pp. 789–795. 
[16] 
F. T. Durso, M. K. Bleckley, and A. R. Dattel, “Does 
Situation Awareness Add to the Validity of Cognitive 
Tests?,” Human Factors: The Journal of the Human 
Factors and Ergonomics Society, vol. 48, no. 4, Dec. 
2006, pp. 721–733. 
[17] 
M. A. Vidulich and E. R. Hughes, “Testing a Subjective 
Metric of Situation Awareness,” Proceedings of the 
Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, 
vol. 35, 1991, pp. 1307–1311. 
[18] 
N. Rauch, B. Gradenegger, and H. Krüger, “Die SAGAT-
Methode zur Erfassung von Situationsbewusstsein im 
Fahrkontext,” in Fortschritte der Verkehrspsychologie, 
vol. 1, J. Schade and A. Engeln, Eds. VS Verlag für 
Sozialwissenschaften, 2008, pp. 197–214. 
[19] 
G. M. Fitch, M. Blanco, J. F. Morgan, and A. E. Wharton, 
“Driver Braking Performance to Surprise and Expected 
Events,” in Proceedings of the Human Factors and 
Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, 2010, pp. 2076–
2080. 
[20] 
J. Krems and M. Baumann, “Driving and situation 
awareness: A cognitive model of memory-update 
processes,” Human Centered Design, 2009, pp. 986–994. 
[21] 
M. Baumann and J. Krems, “A comprehension based 
cognitive model of situation awareness,” Digital Human 
Modeling, 2009, pp. 192–201. 
[22] 
M. Baumann and J. F. Krems, “Situation awareness and 
driving: A cognitive model,” in Modelling driver 
behaviour in automotive environments, Springer, 2007, 
pp. 253–265. 
[23] 
M. Matthews and D. Bryant, “Model for situation 
awareness and driving: Application to analysis and 
research for intelligent transportation systems,” 
Transportation Research Record: Journal of the 
Transportation Research Board, vol. 1779, 2001, pp. 26–
32. 
[24] 
L. Gugerty, “Situation awareness during driving: Explicit 
and implicit knowledge in dynamic spatial memory.,” 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, vol. 3, no. 
1, 1997, pp. 42–66. 
[25] 
L. Gugerty, “Situation awareness in driving,” in 
Handbook for driving simulation in engineering, medicine 
and psychology, 2011, pp. 19/1–19/8. 
[26] 
V. J. Gawron, Human performance, workload, and 
situational awareness measures handbook. CRC Press, 
2008. 
[27] 
B. Wortelen, M. Baumann, and A. Lüdtke, “Dynamic 
simulation and prediction of drivers’ attention 
distribution,” Transportation Research Part F: Traffic 
Psychology and Behaviour, vol. 21, Nov. 2013, pp. 278–
294.  
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-390-2
COGNITIVE 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications

