  
Interorganizational Relationships, Interorganizational Process Redesign, and E-
Integration in the Supply Chain: A Social Exchange and Transaction Cost 
Perspectives 
 
Cheng-Hung Chuang 
Department of Information Management, Chia Nan University 
of Pharmacy and Science, Tainan, Taiwan 
e-mail: stanleyjazz@gmail.com 
 
Shwu-Ming Wu 
Department of Human Resource Management, National 
Kaohsiung University of Applied Science, Kaohsiung, Taiwan 
e-mail:mingwu@cc.kuas.edu.tw 
Ing-Long Wu 
Department of Information Management, National Chung 
Cheng University, Chia-Yi, Taiwan 
e-mail: ilwu@mis.ccu.edu.tw 
 
 
 
 
Abstract—Supply chain is complex and dynamic in its inter-
firm nature and thus, an Internet-enabled integration for 
supplies and customers, namely e-integration, is key to its final 
success. However, although there has been a high adoption rate 
of e-integration, the level of realized performance is low. Most 
firms choose to automate only the processes of that firm and its 
partners in an isolated manner or to automate outdated 
existing processes between partners. To effectively implement 
e-integration, interorganizational process redesign (IOPR) is 
necessary for the processes with both suppliers and customers. 
The process redesign is here defined as an important mediator 
for the final e-integration success. Moreover, the nature of the 
redefined processes is strategically founded on the structure of 
interorganizational relationships (IOR). Social exchange and 
transaction cost issues are widely used to define IOR in the 
supply chain. Based on these concepts, this study thus proposes 
a research model to examine a firm's e-integration through the 
mediator of IOPR with both suppliers and customers from the 
drivers of IOR. The important findings confirm the mediator 
of process redesign and the drivers of IOR. 
 
Keywords-Supply Chain, E-Integration; Interorganizational 
Process Redesign; Interorganizational Relationships; Social 
Exchange Theory; Transaction Cost Economics. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Supply chain management (SCM) mainly concerns an 
integration of various key business processes between 
partners to effectively provide products/services that add 
value to customers and other stakeholders [28]. SCM is 
complex and dynamic in nature. The enabling role of IT, in 
particular for the Internet technology, is an important 
concern in the supply chain [36]. This results in a new 
concept for being able to effectively coordinate supply chain 
partners using this technology. Frohlich [8] referred to this 
new concept as "e-integration," and discussed how upstream 
and downstream partners could be broadly integrated in the 
entire supply chain using this technology. The key issue is 
the high adoption rate of supply chain technologies but low 
realized performance [35].   
The major reason for this may be that most firms choose 
to automate only the processes of that firm and its trading 
partners in an isolated manner or to automate outdated 
existing processes between participants [6]. To effectively 
implement e-integration, it is necessary to first redesign the 
entire 
supply 
chain 
processes 
across 
organizational 
boundaries, including suppliers and customers [1]. In other 
words, 
e-integration 
is 
closely 
associated 
with 
interorganizational process redesign (IOPR), which is 
defined as an important mediator to successfully realize e-
integration [5,21]. In this current study, we define IOPR to 
include process redesign with upstream suppliers and with 
downstream customers [7,8].  
The nature of the redefined processes with suppliers and 
customers is strategically founded on the structure of 
interorganizational relationships (IOR) [7,24]. Supply chain 
relationships not only concern social exchange issues, but 
also involve the economic issues implied by a contract [15]. 
Social exchange theory (SET) has been used to examine the 
development of IOR from a non-profit perspective [9]. A 
summary for the research of SET in the IOR has identified 
trust, 
commitment, 
reciprocity, 
and 
power/relative 
dependence as the main determinants [3,16]. Transaction 
cost economics (TCE) intends to explain the governance 
structure of contractual relations for different markets by 
analyzing the transaction cost of trading activities from a 
profit perspective [37]. Such purpose for mitigating market 
uncertainty has been widely used as the basis of the analysis 
of interorganizational issues [13]. Market uncertainty is 
therefore the main determinant of TCE issue in IOR. 
In sum, this study proposes a research model to examine 
a focal firm's e-integration implementation through the 
mediator of interorganizational process redesign from the 
initial drivers of IOR. However, few studies have considered 
the basic role of IOR to IOPR with suppliers and with 
customers in a supply chain. 
The rest of this article is organized as follows. First, a 
review of literature provides the basis for defining the 
research model. Next, we describe the research design for 
measurements and sample design. We then discuss 
hypotheses testing. After that, findings and discussions are 
presented. Finally, this article provides conclusions and 
suggestions from the results. 
 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

  
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW AND HYPOTHESES 
DEVELOPMENT 
Based on the above discussion, Figure 1 provides a 
pictorial depiction of this research model. The followings 
sections discuss the theoretical foundation of this model and 
the development of hypotheses. 
Figure 1 Research model 
 
A. IOPR and E-integration 
Many studies on the e-integration issue have questioned 
whether or not the Internet-enabled supply chain actually 
improves partners' performance [8].  The evidence suggests 
that there is a need for this to be accompanied by a 
fundamental organizational change of suppliers and 
customers so as to be consistent with the focal firms' 
business processes [29]. In other words, there is a need for 
the focal firms to first redesign the entire supply chain 
processes with their suppliers and customers to effectively 
implement e-integration [13]. Afterward, the IT automation 
is further deployed to enable the new processes rather than 
the old ones [12]. 
Earlier studies have revealed that EDI together with 
reengineering of the interorganizational processes can 
improve the initiatives of participated external firms and the 
benefits of all firms in the overall supply chain [10]. Further 
studies have also noted that EDI must involve organizational 
changes in partners’ business processes to realize the 
potential 
efficiency 
provided 
by 
this 
technological 
innovation [33]. Additional studies have also argued that 
those who have already implemented the SCM philosophy 
with EDI would have to follow a path of BPR and indeed 
reengineer the interorganizational processes with their 
partners [30].  
The following develops relevant hypotheses. Researchers 
indicated that it is important for organizations implementing 
e-integration as a means of creating a more integrated supply 
chain to be associated with the need for a structural change 
of their processes in a cross-organizational level, including 
upstream suppliers and downstream customers [22,29]. 
Supplier integration with their processes is especially 
important in terms of a long replenishment's lead-time, 
frequent deliveries, and reduced buffer inventories with 
trading partners [8,24]. Next, tight integration with customer-
side processes, such as organizational buyers or channels, 
shows the importance of connecting to many potential 
benefits, such as sale forecasting, production planning, and 
customer relationship management. Studies have showed 
how the inventory replenishment, customer service, and 
delivery costs can all be improved significantly by 
redesigning the processes of the distribution channel 
partnerships [2]. Accordingly, two hypotheses are  proposed. 
H1: The process redesign with suppliers has a 
positive effect on e-integration implementation. 
H2: The process redesign with customers has a 
positive effect on e-integration implementation. 
B. IOR and IOPR 
Many scholars have argued that implementing SCM 
generally must be associated with an important concern with 
IOR across trading partners [3,13]. In particular, the main 
activity 
for 
implementing 
SCM 
lies 
in 
process 
redesign/integration among partners [15]. Since IOPR is 
dynamic and complex in nature, analysis of the redefined 
processes with suppliers and customers requires an 
understanding of the fundamentals of IOR. IOR not only 
incorporates social exchange issues, but also involves the 
economic elements explicated in a contract [15,34]. 
SET in the supply chain has been defined differently for 
various research purposes. Some studies have proposed two 
elements in SET, trust and commitment, that are needed for 
maintaining relational stability in the supply chain alliance 
[16,39]. Other studies have modeled how justice/reciprocity 
and power/relative dependence in SET affect long-term 
orientation and relational behaviors toward partners [9]. 
Additional studies have focused on mutual adaptation 
between partners for developing strategic alliance based on 
trust and power in SET [11]. Given these theoretical 
foundations of SET in the supply chain, we thus 
comprehensively define four main dimensions in IOR, trust, 
commitment, reciprocity, and power. 
Further, TCE has been considered to examine the 
economic issues in building supply chain relationships [38]. 
TCE refers to the concept of what kind of institution (firms, 
markets, franchises, etc.) minimizes the transaction costs of 
producing and distributing a particular good or service. Often 
these relationships are categorized by the kind of contract 
involved. TCE constitutes two situational conditions (i.e., 
asset specificity and uncertainty), two beliefs about human 
behavior (i.e., opportunism and bounded rationality), and one 
transactional condition (i.e., frequency) [37]. Since this study 
mainly concerns IOR building for the partners, we thereby 
consider two situational conditions for their connection and 
importance to this issue, that is, asset specificity and 
uncertainty.  
Basically, asset specificity refers to the extent to which a 
party is "tied in" in terms of its investment made in a two-
way or multiple-way business relationships. From this 
definition, asset specificity is similar to the power/relative 
dependence in SET. This line of thinking for reducing 
market uncertainty with suppliers has been widely used as 
the basis of the analysis of interorganizational activities [13]. 
Specifically, many studies have pointed out that market 
uncertainty prompts firms to establish and manage 
Process Redesign
with Suppliers
Commitment
Trust
Reciprocity
Power
E-integration  
Implementation
Uncertainty
Process Redesign
with Customers
H1
H2
H3
H4
H5
H6
H7
H8
H9
H10
H11
H12
Interorganizational 
Process Redesign
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

  
relationships in order to achieve stability, predictability, and 
dependability in their relations with partners [29,39]. We 
thus define market uncertainty as an important dimension in 
IOR. 
The following defines the five dimensions of IOR and 
relevant hypotheses. Trust is defined as “the willingness of a 
party to be vulnerable to the actions of another party based 
on the expectation that the other party will perform a 
particular action important to the trustee, irrespective of the 
ability to monitor or control the other party” [19].  
Specifically, in a buyer-supplier relationship, high trust 
facilitates more open communication and the willingness to 
take risks between partner firms, thereby generating greater 
knowledge and appreciation for each other’s contribution to 
the relationship [16]. Trust with suppliers exerts a positive 
effect on supply chain proximity, that is, suppliers are really 
concerned with the success of buyer firms [25]. Accordingly, 
trust would drive partner firms with upstream suppliers and 
downstream customers to redesign their business processes 
in a consistent way to reach the common goal [15]. 
Therefore, two hypotheses are proposed. 
H3: Trust has a positive effect on the process redesign  
with suppliers. 
H4: Trust has a positive effect on the process redesign  
with customers. 
The concept of commitment from Morgan and Hunt [23] 
is defined as “an exchange belief of partners that an ongoing 
relationship with another is so important as to warrant 
maximal efforts at maintaining it; that is, the committed 
party believes that the relationship endures indefinitely”. 
Several studies have argued that commitment can improve 
communications and better coordinate buyer-supplier 
relationships [14,26]. This literature has given impetus to the 
deployment of BPR in supply chain, that is, between 
upstream suppliers and between downstream customers, for 
assuring commitment in their alliance [13,17]. Accordingly, 
two hypotheses are proposed. 
H5: Commitment has a positive effect on the process  
redesign with suppliers. 
H6: Commitment has a positive effect on the process  
redesign with customers. 
Social relationships are formed and maintained 
because the partner firms offer reciprocal benefits to one 
another over time [18]. More importantly, the motives of this 
reciprocity emphasize cooperation, collaboration, and 
coordination of key business activities among partners for 
their common goals [9]. Moreover, reciprocity in the supply 
chain relationships can facilitate information sharing 
between trading partners [13]. For the upstream side, 
reciprocity can help suppliers to build virtual business 
networks, so suppliers can have better access to up-to-date 
information. 
Similarly 
for 
the 
downstream 
side, 
customers/buyers can acquire better customer services, 
purchase more easily, and obtain the newest product 
information. Accordingly, two hypotheses are proposed. 
H7: Reciprocity has a positive effect on the process  
redesign with suppliers. 
H8: Reciprocity has a positive effect on the process  
redesign with customers. 
Power is indicative of a dependent relationship on its 
focal firm in a partnership. In IOR, there is an emphasis on 
the necessity for mutual and symmetric dependence structure 
to foster long-term relationships, whereas asymmetric 
relationships are associated with less stability and more 
conflict [3]. When there is greater power symmetry in the 
IOR, there is more interdependence between suppliers and 
buyers. To be able to exercise a power relationship in the 
supply chain, especially within the symmetry structure, the 
redesign of interorganizational processes is an important 
precursor to assure that the supply chain is taken as a whole, 
as a set of interrelated activities rather than as pair-wise 
activities [7]. Therefore, two hypotheses are proposed.  
H9: Power has a positive effect on the process redesign 
with suppliers. 
H10: Power has a positive effect on the process redesign 
with customers. 
Since SCM aims at building a mutual understanding of a 
partnership to facilitate the exchange of various components 
and products with suppliers and customers, the partnership is 
clearly in the position to reduce uncertainty within an 
unpredictable market [28]. Moreover, the firms facing 
market uncertainty have a greater incentive to adopt IOS for 
improving information exchange and collaboration between 
their trading partners [28]. The motivation for reducing 
market uncertainty suggests that an attempt to integrate 
supply chain activities by using Internet technology to 
support collaborative behaviors must be accomplished by re-
engineering interorganizational business processes [29]. 
Thus, two hypotheses are proposed.  
H11: Uncertainty has a positive effect on process  
redesign with suppliers. 
H12:Uncertainty has a positive effect on process  
redesign with customers. 
III. 
RESEARCH DESIGN 
A. Instrument 
A survey was conducted to collect empirical data, and the 
research design is described below. 
1) Basic Information: This part collects information 
about organizational characteristics including industry type, 
annual revenue, number of employees, and experience on 
process redesign and e-integration, as well as respondent 
characteristics including work experience, education level, 
gender, and position. 
2) Elements of IOR: This part consists of five 
elements:trust, 
commitment, 
reciprocity, 
power, 
and 
uncertainty. Moreover, IOR is defined with two target 
dimensions for this study, relationships with upstream 
suppliers and downstream customers. The measurement 
items for trust are adapted from the instrument developed by 
[16,39], including five items for each dimension. The 
measurement items for reciprocity are adapted from the 
instrument developed by [13,27], including four items for 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

  
each dimension. The measurement items for power are 
adapted from the instrument developed by [31], including 
four items for each dimension. The measurement items for 
uncertainty are also adapted from the instrument developed 
by [31], including four items for each dimension. 
3) IOPR: The IOPR for the entire supply chain signifies 
the integration of key business processes between a focal 
firm and both its upstream suppliers and its downstream 
customers. IOPR has two dimensions with both upstream 
suppliers and downstream customers. The measurement 
items for IOPR are adapted from the instrument defined by 
[8], each containing four items. The processes for the 
upstream 
suppliers 
include 
procurement, 
scheduling, 
inventory, and demand. The processes for the downstream 
customers consist of marketing, order, service, and demand. 
4) E-integration Implementation: The e-integration 
implementation is defined as the extent to which a focal 
firm establishes IT capabilities for the consistence of data 
and the rapid transfer of supply chain related information 
across trading partners. There are two dimensions for this 
instrument, 
data 
consistency 
and 
cross-functional 
applications integration. The measurement items for them 
are adapted from the instrument defined by [32], including 
three items and four items respectively. 
B. Sample design 
To qualify for this study, firms must have extensive 
experience 
with 
technology 
investments 
and 
the 
management of supply chain systems. Thus, it is assumed 
that larger firms would be more likely to have these types of 
experience. We selected a study sample of 1200 
manufacturing firms, including high-tech and traditional 
manufacturing, and 300 service firms, including retailing, 
banking, and software service, from the 2012 list of firms 
published by the Taiwan Stock Exchange Corporation. Top 
managers, including CIOs or supply chain executives, are the 
persons most likely to be familiar with these issues. Both 
executives were therefore selected as the respondents. 
C. Scale Validation 
Initially, a pretest was conducted for the scale. The scale 
was carefully examined by selected practitioners and 
academicians in this area of research including translation, 
wording, structure, and content. These comments were used 
to revise the scale in order to guarantee initial reliability and 
content validity. Once the questionnaire had been finalized, 
we sent 1500 questionnaires to sample subjects. A total of 
285 questionnaires were returned, and after deleting 
incomplete and invalid responses, there was a sample size of 
269 responses - an overall response rate of 17.93 percent. 
CIO and supply chain executives are the main respondents 
for this survey and occupy a larger proportion, 37.92% and 
27.88%, respectively. Among them, 72.5 percent of sample 
firms are high-tech manufacturing and 26 percent are service 
industries, including retailing, banking and so on. Sample 
respondents indicate 37.9 percent of CIOs and 27.9 percent 
of supply chain executives. 
D. Measurement Model 
Partial Least Square (PLS) is a structural equation 
modeling (SEM) technique that uses a nonparametric and 
component-based approach for estimation purposes. PLS has 
a minimal demand for sample size and residual distribution 
[4]. We used PLS for this analysis. Firstly, a measurement 
model is defined to assess reliability, and convergent and 
discriminant validity for the scale. Further, a structural model 
is used to perform path analysis.  
The testing results are below. Cronbach’ α values are all 
larger than 0.8. Item loadings range from 0.71 to 0.86 and 
are significant at the 0.01 level. Composite construct 
reliabilities range from 0.84 to 0.95 and average variances 
extracted (AVE) range from 0.57 to 0.67. The results 
indicate that all constructs have high degrees of reliability 
and convergent validities. The square root of AVE for each 
construct is larger than its correlations with all the other 
constructs. Thus, all constructs also meet the criteria of 
discriminant validity. 
PLS does not provide a significance test or confidence 
interval estimation. We re-sampled 1000 times with 
Bootstrapping analysis to obtain a stable result for these 
analyses. Next, path coefficient (β) was used to indicate the 
relationships 
between 
variables 
and 
coefficient 
of 
determination (
2
R ) for endogenous variables was calculated 
to assess the predictive power of this model.  
IV. 
HYPOTHESIS TESTING 
Figure 2 shows the testing results of the structural model. 
Most hypotheses (11 hypotheses) are significantly supported 
at p<0.05 or 0.01. In contrast, Hypothesis 10 is not 
significantly supported. Specifically, both the process 
redesign with suppliers and with customers played a critical 
role in determining e-integration implementation (p<0.01, 
β=0.40 and 0.35). They jointly explained 36% of variance 
for e-integration implementation (
R2
=0.36). Thus, 
hypothesis 1 and 2 are supported. Trust had a positive effect 
on the process redesign with suppliers (p<0.01) and with 
customers (p<0.01) (β=0.34 and 0.33). Thus, hypothesis 3 
and 4 are supported. Commitment was a notable determinant 
of the process redesign with suppliers (p<0.05) and with 
customers (p<0.01) (β=0.20 and 0.24). Thus, hypothesis 5 
and 6 are supported.  
Reciprocity was reported as an important antecedent of 
the process redesign with suppliers (p<0.01) and with 
customers (p<0.01) (β=0.26 and 0.29). Thus, hypothesis 7 
and 8 are supported. Power showed a positive impact on the 
process redesign with suppliers (p< 0.01), but a non-positive 
impact on the process redesign with customers (β=0.30 and 
0.10). Hypothesis 9 is supported, but Hypothesis 10 is not 
supported. Uncertainty had an influential role in determining 
the process redesign with suppliers (p<0.05) and with 
customers (p<0.01) (β=0.19 and 0.26). Thus, hypothesis 11 
and 12 are supported. Moreover, these IOR related variables 
jointly explained 42% and 44% of variance for the process 
redesign with suppliers and with customers, respectively 
(
2
R =0.42 and 0.44). 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

  
Next, we examined the argument of the mediating effect 
of IOPR in the research model. We can compare the results 
by testing the original research model against a competing 
model with the addition of two extra direct relationship 
structures for suppliers and customers from IOR to e-
integration implementation, each relationship structure 
including five paths (five variables in IOR) [32]. The 
difference between the 
2
R  values was non-significant. This 
indicates an important mediating role of process redesign in 
influencing e-integration implementation from the initial 
driver of IOR. 
 
Figure 2. Result of the structure model 
V. 
FINDINGS AND DISCUSSIONS 
According to Figure 2, five defined variables in IOR are 
all important precursors of the process redesign with 
suppliers. However, four defined variables in IOR have the 
same important role in determining the process redesign with 
customers but the power variable does not have this role. In 
general, IOR has a high predictive power on both the process 
redesigns with suppliers and with customers (
2
R =42% and 
44%). The reasons behind this are discussed below.  
In an interorganizational relationship, a high level of trust 
would foster open communication and the willingness to 
take risks for a focal firm and its trading partners, thereby 
generating greater information sharing for each other’s 
contribution to the relationship. This, in turn, would facilitate 
the need for the process redesign with suppliers and with 
customers for information flow integration.  
Relational commitment in alliances brings about mutual 
respect for buyers and suppliers and reduces the need for 
competition from rivalries, that is, integrating processes and 
activities for trading partners to sustain collaborative 
relationship. Thus, commitment would drive focal firms to 
integrate and redesign information, physical, and financial 
flows with suppliers and customers. 
Reciprocal benefit is a motivator or facilitator for 
cooperation, collaboration, and coordination among trading 
partners [27]. This would create the need for a focal firm to 
integrate and redesign processes and activities with its 
trading partners. In particular, trading partners will be more 
likely to enjoy information sharing if focal firms share 
information with their suppliers and customers (information 
feedback). 
In contrast, power is related to the process redesign with 
suppliers and is not related to the process redesign with 
customers. Customers (channels or business buyers) are 
always in a position to take advantage of the buyer-side 
market to select their partners. Thus, focal firms have less 
bargaining power over their customers and the dependency 
relationship between them is imbalanced. It is opposite for 
upstream suppliers. This can cause upstream suppliers to 
develop a high level of information sharing with focal firms.  
Uncertainty in interorganizational interactions is much 
greater since two organizations that have different business 
objectives and stakeholders are involved in a transaction. 
Focal firms need to develop long-term relationships with 
suppliers and customers to minimize market/environmental 
uncertainty. Accordingly, uncertainty can create a need for 
focal firms to integrate and redesign their business process 
with suppliers and customers to minimize the transaction 
costs. 
Next, both the process redesigns have a critical role in 
determining the implementation of e-integration with a high 
explanatory power (36%). The process redesign with 
suppliers and with customers can create a unique form of 
alliance that is difficult to copy or imitate for competitors 
and eventually develop superior firm performance in terms 
of a successful implementation of e-integration. Indeed, 
previous studies have argued for the importance of business 
processes as a mediator to drive business performance 
regarding IS-related deployments such as knowledge 
management. This finding is particularly significant in the 
supply chain. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND SUGGESTIONS 
Firstly, when focal firms and their partners are planning to 
implement e-integration, the development of IOR should be 
the initial step for building a conceptual agreement. 
Important considerations for the dimensions of IOR with 
upstream suppliers are, listed in the order of their effect: trust, 
power, reciprocity, commitment, and uncertainty. Important 
considerations for the dimensions of IOR with downstream 
customers are, listed in the order of their effect: trust, 
reciprocity, 
uncertainty, 
and 
commitment. 
Further, 
interorganizational process redesign is the next step in 
preparation for building new processes that facilitate cross-
partnering IT deployment. 
There are also implications for researchers. First of all, we 
approached e-integration implementation by defining two 
distinct process redesigns, that with suppliers and that with 
Process Redesign
with Suppliers
Commitment
Trust
Reciprocity
Power
E-integration  
Implementation
Uncertainty
Process Redesign
with Customers
.40**
.35**
.34**
.33**
.20*
.24**
.26**
.29**
.30**
.10
.19*
.26**
Industry Type
Firm Size
R2 = 0.42
R2 = 0.44
R2 = 0.36
.30**
.11
Legend: (1) Value of Path : Path coefficient
  (2) R2 : Coefficient of determinant
  (3)  *: p < 0.05, **: p < 0.01
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

  
customers. Few previous studies have proposed a similar 
structure for implementing e-integration. This approach can 
provide differentiated understanding for different types of 
trading partners regarding focal firms in executing their BPR. 
The process redesign with suppliers and with customers 
could thus be solved more clearly and effectively. Further, 
we comprehensively considered the dimensions of IOR from 
the perspectives of SET and TCE. This would increase the 
explanatory 
power 
of 
IOR 
for 
the 
mediator 
of 
interorganizational process redesign. Both of these unique 
features are thoroughly discussed in the research model. 
Although this research has produced some interesting 
results, a number of limitations may be inherent. Firstly, the 
response rate is lower than desirable, despite the various 
efforts to improve it. This may be because the respondents 
lack relevant work experience in the interorganizational 
process redesign and e-integration implementation. However, 
the response sample demonstrates no systematic non-
response bias. Next, the questionnaires were distributed only 
to focal firms, which must answer many questions about the 
status of their suppliers and customers. However, the 
answers to these questions would be more reliable if the 
suppliers and customers could provide the answers 
themselves. Finally, since senior managers of larger firms are 
always busy, some of the questionnaires may have been 
completed by subordinates, and so the data may have some 
biases or inaccuracies. 
REFERENCES 
[1]. 
R. Angeles, “Anticipated IT infrastructure and supply chain 
capabilities for RFID and their associated deployment 
outcomes,” 
International 
Journal 
of 
Information 
Management, vol. 29, issue 3, 2009, pp. 219-231. 
[2]. 
R. D. Buzzell and G. Ortmeyer, “Channel partnerships 
streamline distribution,” Sloan Management Review, vol. 36, 
issue 3, pp. 85-96. 
[3]. 
J. H. Cheng, “Inter-organizational relationships and 
information sharing in supply chains,” International Journal 
of Information Management, vol. 31, issue 4, 2011, pp. 374-
384. 
[4]. 
W. W. Chin, B. L.Marcolin, and P. R. Newsted, ”A partial 
least squares latent variable modeling approach for 
measuring interaction effects: Results from a Monte Carlo 
simulation study and an electronic-mail emotion/ adoption 
study,” Information Systems Research, vol. 14, issue 2, 
2003, pp. 189-217. 
[5]. 
T. H. Clark, D. C. Croson, and W. T. Schiano, “A 
hierarchical model of supply-chain integration: Information 
sharing and operational interdependence in the US grocery 
channel,” Information Technology & Management, vol. 2, 
issue 3, 2001, pp. 261-288. 
[6]. 
T. H. Clark, and D. B. Stoddard, “Inter-organizational 
business process redesign: Merging technological and 
process innovation,” Journal of Management Information 
Systems,” vol. 13, issue 2, 1996, pp. 9-28. 
[7]. 
B. B. Flynn, B. Huo, and X. Zhao, “The impact of supply 
chain integration on performance: A contingency and 
configuration 
approach,” 
Journal 
of 
Operations 
Management, vol. 28, issue 1, 2010, pp. 58-71. 
[8]. 
M. T. Frohlich, “E-integration in the supply chain: Barriers 
and performance,” Decision Sciences, vol. 33, issue 4, 2002, 
pp. 537-556.  
[9]. 
D. A. Griffith, M. G. Harveyand, and R. F. Lusch, “Social 
exchange in supply chain relationships: The resulting 
benefits of procedural and distributive justice,” Journal of 
Operations Management, vol. 24, issue 2, 2006, pp. 85-98. 
[10]. A. Gunasekaran and E. W. T. Ngai, “Information systems in 
supply chain integration and management,” European 
Journal of Operational Research, vol. 15, issue 9, 2004, pp. 
269-295. 
[11]. L. Hallen, J. J. ohanson, and N. Seyed-Mohamed, “Interfirm 
adaptation in business relationships,” Journal of Marketing, 
vol. 55, issue 2, 1991, pp. 29-37. 
[12]. M. Hammer, “Reengineering work: Don’t automate, 
obliterate,” Harvard Business Review, vol. 68, issue 4, 1990, 
pp. 104-112. 
[13]. P. K. Humphreys, M. K .Lai, and D. Sculli, “An inter-
organizational information system for supply chain 
management,” 
International 
Journal 
of 
Production 
Economics, vol. 70, issue 3, 2001, pp. 245-255. 
[14]. S. D. Hunt, C .J. Lambe, and C. M. Whittmann, “A theory 
and model of business alliance success,” Journal of 
Relationship Marketing, vol. 1, issue 1, 2002, pp. 17-34. 
[15]. D. A. Johnston, D. M. McCutcheon, F. I. Stuart, and H. 
Kerwood, “Effects of supplier trust on performance of 
cooperative supplier relationships,” Journal of Operations 
Management, vol. 22, issue 1, 2004, pp. 23-38. 
[16]. I. W. G. Kwon and T. Suh, “Trust, commitment and 
relationships in supply chain management: A path analysis,” 
Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, vol. 
10, issue 1, 2005, pp. 26-33. 
[17]. K. H. Lai, T. C. E. Cheng, and A. C. L. Yeung, 
“Relationship stability and supplier commitment to quality,” 
International Journal of Production Economics, vol. 96, 
issue 3, 2005, pp. 397-410. 
[18]. E. Lawler, B. S. Teng, and J. Yoon, “Emotion and group 
cohesion in productive exchange,” American Journal of 
Sociology, vol. 106, issue 3, 2000, pp. 616-657. 
[19]. R. C .Mayer, J. H. Davis, and F. D. Schoorman, “An 
integrative model of organizational trust,” Academy of 
Management Review, vol. 20, issue 3, 1995, pp. 709-734. 
[20]. H. 
Mendelson 
and 
R. 
R.Pillai, 
“Clock-speed 
and 
informational response: Evidence from the information 
technology industry,” Information Systems Research, vol. 9, 
issue 4, 1998, pp. 415-433. 
[21]. R. P. Mohanty and S. G. Deshmukh, “Reengineering of a 
supply chain management system: A case study,”Production 
Planning & Control, vol. 11, issue 1, 2000, pp. 90-104. 
[22]. D. Moitra and J. Ganesh, “Web services and flexible 
business processes: Towards the adaptive enterprise,” 
Information & Management, vol. 42, issue 7, 2005, pp. 921-
933. 
[23]. R. M. Morganand and S. D. Hunt, “The commitment-trust 
theory of relationship marketing,” Journal of Marketing, vol. 
58, issue 3, 1994, pp. 20-38. 
[24]. J. A. Muckstadt, D. H. Murray, J. A. Rappold, and D. E. 
Collins, “Guidlines for collaborative supply chain system 
design and operation,” Information systems Frontiers, vol. 3, 
issue 4, 2004, pp. 427-453. 
[25]. R. Narasimhan and A. Nair, “The antecedent role of quality, 
information sharing and supply chain proximity on strategic 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

  
alliance formation and performance,” International Journal 
of Production Economics, vol. 96, issue 3, 2005, pp. 301-
313. 
[26]. D. Narayandas and V. K. Ranga, “Building and sustaining 
buyer-supplier 
relationship 
in 
mature 
industrial 
markets,”Journal of Marketing, vol. 68, issue 3, 2004, pp. 
63-77. 
[27]. C. Oliver, “Determinants of interorganizational relationships: 
Integration and future directions,” Academy of Management 
Review, vol15, issue 2, 1990, pp. 241-265. 
[28]. K. A. Patterson, C. M. Grimm, and T. M .Corsi, “Adopting 
new 
technologies 
for 
supply 
chain 
management,” 
Transportation Research Part E: Logistics & Transportation 
Review, vol. 39, issue 2, 2003, pp. 95-121. 
[29]. D. Power and P. Singh, “The e-integration dilemma: The 
linkages between Internet technology application, trading 
partner relationships and structural change,” Journal of 
Operations Management, vol. 25, issue 6, 2007, pp. 1292-
1310. 
[30]. D. Power and A. Simon, “Adoption and diffusion in 
technology implementation: A supply chain study,” 
International 
journal 
of 
Operations 
& 
Production 
Management, vol. 24, issue 6, 2004, pp. 566-587. 
[31]. G. Premkumar, K. Ramamurthy, and C. S. Saunders, 
“Information processing view of organizations: An 
exploratory examination of fit in the context of 
interorganizational relationships,” Journal of Management 
Information Systems, vol. 22, issue 1, 2005, pp. 257-294. 
[32]. A. Rai, R. Patnayakuni, and N. Seth, “Firm performance 
impacts of digitally enabled supply chain integration 
capabilities,” MIS Quarterly, vol. 30, issue 2, 2006, pp. 225-
246. 
[33]. C. Ranganathan, J. S. Dhaliwal, and T. S. H. Teo, 
“Assimilation and diffusion of web technologies in supply-
chain management: An examination of key drivers and 
performance impacts,” International Journal of Electronic 
Commerce, vol. 9, issue 1, 2004, pp. 127-161. 
[34]. D. M. Rousseau, S. B. Sitkin, R. S. Burt, and C. Camerer, 
“Not so different after all: A cross-discipline view of trust,” 
Academy of Management Review, vol. 23, issue 3, 1998, pp. 
393-404. 
[35]. M. Subramani ,“How do suppliers benefit from information 
technology use in supply chain relationships?” MIS 
Quarterly, vol. 28, issue 1, 2004, pp. 45-73. 
[36]. H. L.Weiand and E. T. Wang, “The strategic value of supply 
chain visibility: Increasing the ability to reconfigure,” 
European Journal of Information Systems, vol. 19, issue 2, 
2010, pp. 238-249. 
[37]. O. E. Williamson, “Comparative economic organizations: 
The 
analysis 
of 
discrete 
structural 
alternatives,” 
Administrative Science Quarterly, vol. 36, issue 2, 1991, pp. 
269-296. 
[38]. O. 
E. 
Williamson, 
“Outsourcing: 
Transaction 
cost 
economics and supply chain management,” Journal of 
Supply Chain Management, vol. 44, issue 2, 2008, pp. 5-16. 
[39]. J. Yang, J. Wang, C. W. Y. Wong, and K. H. Lai, 
“Relational stability and alliance performance in supply 
chain,” Omega, vol. 36, issue 4, 2008, pp. 600-608. 
 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

