The Integration of Home Collected Data 
into the Veterans Administration Health System 
The Home Telehealth VistA Integration Project: The Sharing of Computable Data 
George C. Blankenship, Jr.  
Consultant to Home Telehealth IT PMO 
Alexandria, Virginia 
BlankenG@GWU.edu 
 
Daniel L. Maloney 
U. S. Department of Veterans Affairs 
Home Telehealth IT PMO 
Silver Spring, Maryland 
Daniel.Maloney@VA.gov 
 
Abstract—In 2004, the US Department of Veterans Affairs was 
confronted with the creation of an enterprise application based 
upon multiple triage systems supplied by vendors who had 
dramatically different levels of experience with system 
integration or with Health Level 7 International Standard.  
One objective of the application was to leverage the capabilities 
of the existing Electronic Medical Record and medical software 
wherever possible.  In order to accomplish the objective a 
strong integration approach was required.  The selected 
approach was the development of a reference engine that could 
be used to validate the communication between existing 
applications and newly procured triage systems. The approach 
also included the development of supplements that are specific 
to the usage of the international standards.  The triage system 
validation is performed in three phases.  The first two phases 
are directed by a set of functional validation objectives.  The 
third phase is a limited deployment supporting actual patients 
to minimize risk to patient care during a national rollout.  The 
objectives are the slaving of patient identity and demographics 
to the enterprise identity management, the collection of patient 
survey responses, and the placement of triage system generated 
progress notes and home collected vital signs in an enterprise 
database.  A direct result of this integration is the automatic 
inclusion of the Home Telehealth program in the standard 
enterprise outcomes analysis and availability of the program 
data to whole clinical team.  This paper describes the 
integration process and problems that were confronted during 
the first five years of the program.  The paper represents the 
opinion of the authors and is not a statement of any official 
position of the Department of Veterans Affairs. 
Keywords; telehealth; home telehealth; telemental health; 
HL7; CCOW; protocol validation; realtime HL7 transactions 
I. 
 VA INTEGRATION OF HOME BASED CARE 
A. Background 
The United States Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) 
[1] Home Telehealth program is clinically managed by the 
Office of Telehealth Services (OTS) [2].  The program is 
supported by the VA’s Office of Information & Technology 
(OIT) [3] Home Telehealth Program Management Office.  
The program uses a telemedicine approach for the care of 
patients with a chronic illness such as diabetes, congestive 
heart failure or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.  Care 
is also provided for patients suffering from post-traumatic 
stress disorder.  Equipment is placed in the patient’s home to 
evaluate the health of the patient much as would be done 
during a home visit by a nurse.  The data collected by the 
home equipment is sent to a triage system that analyzes the 
data and ranks the patient for attention by a nurse in a remote 
location. 
The VA has an integrated health system based upon an 
Electronic Medical Record (EMR) that allows clinical 
personnel to access all patient data that has been collected at 
any VA medical facility in the US and abroad.  A patient’s 
data can be presented as an aggregation independent of the 
original visit location.  The VA’s approach to patient care is 
based upon the ability to access a patient’s complete medical 
record from any VA location.  The core component of the 
health system is the Veterans Health Information Systems 
and Technology Architecture (VistA) [4].  
The objective of the Home Telehealth VistA Integration 
project is the integration of the Home Telehealth triage 
systems into the VA health system.  This is a real time 
sharing of data between an individual triage system and the 
VA EMR.  This integration approach starts with the 
establishment of a patient record in the triage system using 
VA identifiers and the synchronization of the patient identity 
using the VA identity management system.  With a 
consistent identity, the triage system is able to send patient 
data collected at the home to VA systems in a computable 
form so that the data can be used in standard VA patient care 
analysis packages. 
The approach is for the triage systems to present the 
collected information to VA systems such that it has the look 
and feel of data collected by any other VA medical facility.  
The data is then available to all VA medical personnel and 
all of the VA medical outcomes analysis processing engines.  
The home care component of the patient’s medical program 
is no longer an isolated data island, but is a system integrated 
into the VA’s approach to patient care. 
B. Veterans Health Administration Home Telehealth 
Environment 
The Veterans Health Administration (VHA) [5] is home 
to the largest integrated health care system in the United 
States consisting of 152 medical centers in addition to almost 
1,400 community-based outpatient clinics, community living 
centers, Vet Centers and Domiciliary.  The health care 
system is divided into 23 geographical regions; each region 
58
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

 
is called a Veterans Integrated Service Network (VISN).  
Together these health care facilities provide comprehensive 
care to over 8.3 million Veterans based upon data from 
FY2010.  In 2000, VHA started two Home Telehealth pilots 
in two VISNs.  In 2003, the number of pilots increased to 
seven.  In 2004, the number of pilots increased to eight.  In 
2005, the Home Telehealth moved from a set of pilots to a 
nationally supported program.  In 2012 the program is 
supporting over 70,000 patients across the United States and 
its territories. 
The 
national program 
replaced 
the pilots 
with 
standardized systems and a standardized design.  The 
program from its inception included the federally mandated 
security approach with a strong disaster resiliency and the 
integration with the VistA.  This process started in 2005 with 
the installation of new Home Telehealth triage systems from 
each supplier in one VA data center.  All the patients in the 
pilots were migrated to the new systems.  Each supplier 
added a resilient system in a second VA data center.  Each 
supplier was required to replicate their databases between the 
centers and alternate the active system between the data 
centers as part of the Home Telehealth program Continuity 
of Operations Plan (COOP).  Once each supplier was 
supporting patients in the new data centers, they started 
preparing for VistA Integration. 
C. Telemedicine 
Telemedicine is the use of technology to bridge 
geography in order to provide patient care.  One, or more, of 
the care providers (doctors) are not co-located with the 
patient.  The original telemedicine model was consultation 
via a telephone.  Telemedicine has now progressed to the 
collection of patient information via the collaboration of 
multiple systems across a wide geography.  This use of 
technology promises to reduce the cost of patient care while 
actually improving the care. [6]  Among the key attributes of 
telemedicine that make it attractive are: 
1. Ability to provide the right care cost effectively, 
2. Agility to respond to a sizable space of conditions, 
and 
3. Ability to adapt to integration with other care 
systems. 
D. The Triage System 
The program is built around a set of triage systems 
procured from vendors experienced in providing remote 
home health care.  Prior to the integration, patient identity 
and demographics information was manually entered into the 
triage system.  The manual creation of the patient identity is 
impacted by the keystroke errors and the copying of 
information from other system displays.  The unreliable data 
entry creates a problem when a care nurse wishes to correlate 
data in the triage system with data in the VA EMR. Vigilant 
manual correction of patient information is required to create 
effective reports on care. 
The each triage system vendor supplies a device that is 
placed in the patient’s home.  The intent of the device is to 
mimic the actions of a visiting nurse.  The patient interacts 
with the device according to a treatment plan implemented in 
a Disease Management Protocol (DMP).  The DMP defines a 
set of questions to be presented to the patient by the home 
unit over a period of days and answered using the home unit.  
The DMP may also require the collection of vital signs.  The 
DMP is constructed to discover the patient’s condition 
through answers to the questions and the collection of vital 
signs.  The patient interacts with the home unit on a 
scheduled basis.  The data collected by the home unit is sent 
to the triage system for analysis.  The triage system displays 
the results of the analysis on the clinical desktop used by the 
care nurse.  The analysis ranks each patient under the nurse’s 
care for attention.  The average nurse in the VA Home 
Telehealth program manages around 200 patients.  
E. VistA Integration 
The VistA Integration plan uses messages defined by 
Health Messaging Level 7 International Standard [7] (HL7) 
to communicate with VA medical systems and HL7 Clinical 
Context Object Workgroup [8] (CCOW) defined application 
context control to integrate the triage system clinical desktop 
with the standard VA desktop applications.  The VA has an 
extremely mature HL7 environment.  The first challenge of 
the integration was the verification that each triage system 
has an HL7 engine implementation that would allow the 
integration.  A special set of tools had to be developed to 
perform the verification.  The second challenge was the 
implementation of a CCOW environment for the triage 
system clinical desktop.  Each triage system has a complex 
clinical desktop that requires an extensive validation testing.  
The solution of these two challenges allowed the program to 
start the piloting of VistA Integration in 2005 for a limited 
number of patients out of the rapidly growing population of 
Home Telehealth patients.   
F. Shared Data Implications 
The triage system receives data from multiple sources 
within the home.  The use of this data requires that the triage 
system maintains an appropriate data quality inspection.  The 
triage systems are time synchronized with the VA systems 
and all patient data is displayed in the time zone of the 
patient.  The home units are synchronized with servicing 
triage system.  However, some of the home equipment can 
be used in a disconnected mode with internal power and a 
manual configuration.  The disconnected operation allows 
for the device to loose time synchronization with the home 
unit.  Every submission of each such device must be 
evaluated for potential time errors along with other data 
errors.   
II. 
INTEGRATION STRATEGY 
In 2004, the VA was confronted with the integration of 
multiple triage systems developed by vendors with a varied 
amount of integration experience or HL7 experience.  The 
VA objective of the integration was to leverage the 
capabilities of the existing VA EMR and medical software 
wherever possible.  In order to accomplish the objective a 
strong integration approach was required. 
59
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

 
The fundamental components of the selected approach 
was based upon the development of a document [9] that 
defines all the transactions used by the Home Telehealth 
program and a reference engine that implements all the 
transactions and processing rules defined in the document.  
The document supplements the HL7 and CCOW standards 
with the specific to the VA encoding definitions and 
processing rules.  The reference engine emulates a triage 
system to existing VA systems in order to validate the 
transactions and encoding definitions.  The reference engine 
also emulates VA systems to the triage system in order to 
validate the conformance and operation of the triage system's 
HL7 engine and transaction processing.  This use of a 
reference engine presents a reliable base for the integration 
of the triage systems into the mature VA integrated 
environment. The triage system validation was performed in 
three phases.  The first two phases were directed by a set of 
functional validation objectives in two different testing 
laboratories.  The third phase was a limited deployment 
supporting actual patients to minimize risk to patient care. 
The experience gained since the program’s inception in 
2005 is that successful real time processing of transactions 
requires a reliable, predictable and consistent performance of 
the HL7 engine.  These required characteristics are achieved 
by the proper handling of exceptional conditions that occur 
during transmission and other events that occur during 
normal system operation.  The objective of the first 
laboratory testing was to verify that each target system is 
capable of the real time processing requirements required for 
VistA Integration. 
The second phase was performed in the VA Integration 
Test Laboratory (ITL).  The ITL contains a full environment 
of the VA systems and software that would peer with a triage 
system.  In the ITL, the triage system was evaluated while 
supporting test patients.  VA clinicians evaluated the triage 
system clinical desktop; VA IT staff evaluated the system 
logs for proper system performance. 
The third phase was a limited national release of a 
production version using a slow start approach.  The 
production system was first brought into use at a single VA 
facility for Home Telehealth patient care for a five week 
evaluation period.  A second and the third facility were 
added to the environment at weeks three and four as the 
testing progresses.  The operation was evaluated at the end of 
each week.  At the end of evaluation period, national use was 
authorized. 
III. 
INITIAL FUNCTIONALITY 
The initial function set design started in the fall of 2004.  
The first triage system validation started in the fall of 2005.  
The initial functionality included the transactions for patient 
synchronization between the triage system and the VA, the 
automatic generation of patient progress notes, the collection 
of patient survey responses, the collection of the weekly 
patient census, and the collection of patient vital signs.  Each 
of these transactions is carried by an HL7 message. 
A. Patient Synchronization with the VA 
Fundamental 
to 
the 
synchronization 
of 
patient 
information between the VA and the triage system is the 
addition of the Integrated Control Number (ICN) to the 
patient record in the triage system.  The ICN is a VA defined 
globally unique number assigned to each patient and part of 
the registration for health care within the VA.  Patients can 
be established in a triage system either manually via the 
triage system clinical desktop or via an HL7 transaction from 
VistA.  A patient established manually is considered a legacy 
patient; that is, a patient that has not been VistA Integrated.  
A legacy patient becomes VistA Integrated via an HL7 
transaction from VistA.  All communication between a triage 
system and a VA system uses HL7 messaging.  As part of 
the VistA Integration process, the Master Patient Index 
(MPI) is notified by the triage server that it is a treating 
facility for the patient.  Systems registered with the MPI 
receive identity and demographics updates from the MPI for 
each patient registered.  Processing applications are able to 
query the MPI for those facilities that have patient data 
(treating facilities).  This allows VA applications to 
aggregate patient data from all facilities that have serviced 
the patient. 
A side effect of VistA Integration is that the triage system 
is able to participate in a CCOW patient context on each 
clinical workstation.  VHA requires all clinical applications 
support CCOW patient context.  With patient context, all 
clinical applications on a workstation display data for the 
same patient; those applications that do not have access to 
records of the patient in the context do not display data for 
any patient.  This is a critical patient safety feature in a 
heterogeneous world where data from multiple databases 
could be displayed on a single workstation used by a 
clinician or multiple clinicians.  This feature protects 
clinicians from the confusion that might arise due to the 
necessary use of multiple clinical applications in the 
management of patient care.  The primary clinical desktop 
for the VA EMR is the Computerized Patient Record System 
(CPRS).  Patient progress is usually documented in progress 
notes built using CPRS.  Since the Home Telehealth triage 
systems are accessible only by a Home Telehealth care 
nurse, the nurse must manually create patient progress notes 
for the care provider.  The “copy and paste” operation is the 
primary tool used to move data from the triage system 
clinical desktop to the CPRS progress note editing panel.  
Without CCOW, there is a significant risk that the 
information in a manually created progress note contains 
erroneous information (for example, information from the 
wrong patient or multiple patients). 
B. Progress Notes 
The Home Telehealth triage system creates a data island.  
Patient progress notes created by the triage system are not 
available to the VA medical staff except via an external 
method such as the creation of a printed copy.  The reports 
generated by the triage system are not part of the official VA 
medical record. 
60
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

 
The VistA Text Integration Utility (TIU) allows external 
systems to create a progress note via an HL7 message.  The 
note is placed in the patient’s VA EMR for processing by a 
clinician.  The clinician is able to edit the note using CPRS.  
After reviewing the note, the clinician either deletes the note 
from the system or electronically signs the note making it an 
official entry in the patient’s medical record.  The signed 
notes are available to the patient’s care provider and other 
clinicians.  Through the use of the VistA TIU application, a 
Home Telehealth triage system is able to create a report that 
is placed in the patient’s VA EMR as a progress note.  This 
process creates a note with all of the proper metadata so that 
the standard VA analysis routines are able to collect 
information on the existence of patient progress notes.  A 
major use of the progress note analysis applications is 
accounting and care tracking.   
C. Weekly Patient Census 
Each triage system sends a weekly report of patients and 
equipment to the Home Telehealth Census system.  The 
census includes information about each patient being 
serviced.  Of primary importance is the date of the start of 
service, the date of end of service, the servicing VistA 
facility, the equipment in patient’s home, the DMP directing 
the patient care, and the patient’s compliance with the care 
plan.  The Home Telehealth Census system supplies the 
VHA Support Service Center (VSSC) with a list of the 
patients in the Home Telehealth program along with their 
service periods, the VA facilities performing the service and 
the triage system that is monitoring each patient.  The VSSC 
uses this information along with other data collected from 
VA systems to perform an outcomes analysis of all patients 
in the Home Telehealth program as it does for all VA other 
programs.  The VA clinicians have access to these reports 
via the standard VSSC reporting application. 
D. Patient Surveys 
Each patient is given two evaluation surveys every 90 
days on a staggered schedule.  The Patient Satisfaction 
survey is aimed gathering data on the patient’s satisfaction 
with the program and the provided care.  The VR-12 ADL 
(Activities of Daily Living) survey gathers data on the 
patient’s perspective of their medical state.  These surveys 
are sent by the triage system to the patient’s home unit.  The 
surveys are presented as part of the DMP with the results 
returned to the triage system as part of the daily collection.  
The results collected by the triage system are sent to the 
Home Telehealth Survey system.  Various reports are 
generated on the survey responses so that a realistic view of 
the patient’s perspective is always available. 
E. Patient Vitals 
The DMP that directs the patient’s care program may 
require that the patient supply vital signs.  Each vital sign 
may be collected by a device that is directly connected to the 
home unit or manually entered by the patient into the home 
unit.  Each collected reading is annotated with the date and 
time of collection.  The readings are sent to the triage 
system.  The triage system analyzes the readings and 
displays the readings along with other data collected as part 
of the patient’s daily session with the home unit on the 
clinical desktop.  The Home Telehealth nurse uses the 
information collected by the home unit and the triage system 
analysis to evaluate the patient’s condition.  The Home 
Telehealth program currently supports the collection of 
pulse, pulse oximetry, blood glucose, blood pressure, 
temperature, weight and pain.  As part of the analysis 
provided by the triage system, the nurse is able to see a trend 
analysis report for each vital sign collected and other data.  
The triage system also sends the vital sign collections to the 
VA’s Health Data Repository (HDR).  The patient’s care 
provider and other VA clinical team members are able to 
view all of the patient’s data stored in the HDR using the 
standard VA applications such CPRS and VistA Web.  The 
Home Telehealth data is displayed as part of an aggregation 
collected from all sources within the VA; each data value 
source can be easily identified in either a table or trend graph 
presentation.  Home Telehealth data is also tagged with 
identity of the device that collected the measurement or 
tagged as self-entered. 
IV. 
INITIAL RELEASE ACCOMODATIONS 
The National Rollout of the initial release started in 
August of 2005.  During the first three years of the rollout 
the program was confronted with a number of conditions that 
required adjustments to various components of the program. 
The major feature of the initial release was the 
synchronization of patient identity in the triage systems with 
the VA.   This capability was the basis for the integration of 
data collected by the triage system with data collected by 
other VA systems and the participation of the triage system 
clinical desktop in a CCOW controlled patient context.  In 
the seven years of use the synchronization of patient identity 
has provided the capabilities that were desired.  The program 
is able to report on itself to level of detail that allows for a 
realistic evaluation of the provision of care. 
However, some of the features of the initial release had to 
be adjusted to accommodate the local autonomy within the 
VA medical centers and VISNs, to accommodate the use of 
disconnected end devices in the home, to adapt to an 
infrastructure that does not normally move real-time 
transactions and to integrate a system that monitors the 
enterprise application environment. 
A. Local Autonomy Accomodations 
The VA EHR system is extremely complex with a 
number of components that are configured locally to meet 
the needs and objectives of the administration of an 
individual medical facility.  Administration policy is defined 
at the national level (VA/VHA), the regional level (VISN) 
and at the local level (VAMC).  The VA provides a 
significant amount of autonomy so that the regions and local 
facilities have the flexibility to meet the needs of a diverse 
set of patients.  This autonomy gives the VA a unique agility 
for an organization of its size.  This autonomy presents the 
VA with a challenge when developing national rules and 
tailoring systems to operate with a national frame of 
61
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

 
reference.  Generally the approach is to give the local 
organization flexibility by pushing the creation of 
information tagging to the local system.  In the case of Home 
Telehealth, there is no local system; Home Telehealth is a 
national application.  The rules that define the tagging of 
information must be defined in a manner that a national 
system is able to meet the requirements.  This set of 
objectives seems to be self-contradictory in a world that 
allows for local autonomy; however, the VA has positioned 
itself to confront these types of problems.  
Accounting is one item of major importance in any 
organization.  The organization uses accounting information 
to distribute funding, create staffing level, and other 
operational related items.  Within the VA some of the 
accounting information is collected from clinics associated 
with progress notes.  Since the Home Telehealth program is 
a national program, the clinic names must follow a national 
algorithm and with objectives that are set nationally.  The 
original requirements collection team did not discover the 
wide variation of local collection requirements.   The 
majority of the VA medical facilities wished to have 
accounting information collected at a central aggregation 
point (the VAMC level).  A few of facilities wished to have 
the data collected at the servicing location level.  An 
extremely small number wished to have the accounting 
information collected using the patient’s DMP assignment or 
diagnosis.  The original design had the requirement to collect 
the accounting information at the VAMC level.  It was 
discovered that the servicing location could easily be 
accommodated with a minor modification; however, the 
collection of data based up DMP or diagnosis presented a 
problem.  In January of 2010, the decision was made to start 
a study group to understand the requirements for accounting 
aggregation.  During the study period the generation of 
progress notes by the triage systems has been suspended.  
B. Vital Sign Date/Time Validation 
The home unit follows a medical treatment program that 
will present questions to the patient and collect vital signs.  
The questions and the responses are presented and collected 
through integrated componentry of the home unit.  While 
some of the vital signs could be collected via an integrated 
collection unit, some cannot.  In some cases, the independent 
device can be connected to the home unit during the 
collection; otherwise the patient must either manually enter 
the data from the vital sign collection device or cause the 
device to transfer the vital sign to the home device at a later 
time using a stored collection time.   
The use of an independent device introduces problems 
that have not been generally addressed by the manufacturer 
or a standards group.  Some of the problems are intractable 
and seem insolvable.  For example, the reading collected by 
the device might be from someone other than the patient.  
The use of the device by someone else in the home is not 
detectable by the home unit.  While the use of the device by 
someone other than the patient can be precluded with the use 
of some sort of biometric control, the cost of such a sensor 
would be prohibitive and the evaluation of the readings can 
indicate that there is the possibility of a problem with an 
individual reading.   
Other problems, such as incorrect readings can be 
addressed.  There are many reasons for incorrect readings.  
The reasons range from device failure to a misreading of the 
device display.  Every reading has two components, 
date/time of the reading (the date/time label for the reading 
value) and the reading value itself.  A wrong date/time label 
for a reading value will position the value in the wrong place 
of a trend graph or hide the reading if the displayed date 
range does not cover the date/time label.  Manually entered 
values use a date/time label assigned by the home unit.  
However, manually entered values cannot be verified 
automatically and are not desired by the care providers 
(doctors).  Data collected by devices that are connected to 
the home unit are generally considered reliable by care 
providers, and thus preferred.  Devices that are connected to 
the home unit at the time of the collection receive a date/time 
label from the home unit.  Devices that can be used 
independently of the home unit use a stored collection time 
based upon an internal clock; thus, they can have an 
unreliable time.  This set of problems was brought home to 
attention of the Home Telehealth program through the use of 
battery powered blood glucometers.  These glucometers are 
able to perform a series of observations while disconnected 
from the home unit; each observation is tagged with distinct 
set of metadata such as date/time label.  If there is a problem 
with the battery such as fading power, the internal clock may 
run erratically or the collection analysis may supply incorrect 
results.  Battery replacement may lead to resetting the clock 
and the collection analysis components of the glucometer.  
Those devices that allow the internal clock set by the patient 
are inherently inaccurate.   
The VA decided that the problems created by the use of 
independent devices required a study group.  The transfer of 
patient vital signs from the home to the HDR was suspended 
until the study group published an acceptable set of business 
rules covering the use of the devices.  The study group was 
convened in July of 2008; their recommendations were 
published in August of 2009.  In June of 2010, the business 
rules were approved.  The triage system vendors are 
currently updating their systems to use the approved 
date/time business rules and will be undergoing the 
validation during the first half of 2012. 
C. Real-time Processing Implications 
Historically, the use of HL7 has been to move 
transactions that do not have real-time processing 
requirements.  HL7 transactions are forwarded (sent) on a 
publish/subscribe model and many transactions are sent only 
because they meet a subscription profile.  Each application 
that receives transactions using this model is often flooded 
with transactions that are not really required.  Selected 
transactions are deemed to be perishable; that is, the 
information content loses its significance over time.  This 
approach has a tendency to weaken the requirement for a 
transaction delivery guarantee; that is, a significant number 
of transactions do not really need to be delivered. The 
62
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

 
publish/subscribe approach generally uses a manual action 
(alert), if a transaction cannot be delivered.  If a transaction 
cannot be processed by an application, an alert is generated 
for a manual action.  The injection of a manual component as 
the first recovery to exceptional conditions and transient 
errors leads to large impact on the transaction latency.  The 
bound for transaction latency becomes the response time to 
an alert.  The generation of the alert may be long after the 
exceptional condition due to an alert skid.  The alert may be 
based upon a queue tolerance and not the lack of delivery of 
an individual transaction. 
With respect to the Home Telehealth program, the mode 
of the transaction latencies is measured in seconds, generally 
less than 10 seconds; the median has the same shape.   
However, the average is impacted by the manual intervention 
approach.   The Home Telehealth program has analyzed all 
of daily transactions since September 2005.  The biweekly 
moving average latency until 2009 was generally multiple 
hours due to the response time of the data center and network 
staff to an alert.  The assumption made at the design time of 
the network support team was that all HL7 transactions had 
overnight urgency.  The response to an exceptional condition 
could be delayed for hours.  The Home Telehealth program 
generally does not meet this model.  The design criteria for 
the transaction latency bound in the Home Telehealth 
program is 10 minutes. 
In order to achieve the biweekly moving average 
transaction latency target of 10 minutes, the program 
changed from an alert driven first recovery to an ordered 
exceptional condition recovery based upon automated first 
response.  The fundamental problem that needed to be 
addressed had been clearly highlighted by the daily analysis 
of the Home Telehealth messages and transactions.  The key 
problem was the delivery of acceptance of messages.  The 
program mandated that all HL7 message delivery was to be 
keyed 
to 
the 
receipt 
of 
a 
message 
acceptance 
acknowledgement within a preset period.  If a message did 
not receive an acceptance acknowledgement within the 
period, the message was to be resent.  Only after the 
proscribed number of delivery attempts is exceeded is it 
permissible to base the response on an alert.  This allows for 
the automatic recovery from transient problems and 
temporary system outages.  As a result of this approach to 
message acceptance, each of the HL7 partners is required to 
detect duplicate messages and resend the acceptance 
acknowledgement message.  The analysis also revealed that 
another delivery problem occurred when the HL7 
infrastructure cleared a message due to stalled transmission 
queue.  The clearing of messages occurred automatically as 
part of an assumption that the manual recovery would restart 
the messages.  The program mandated that each HL7 
transaction delivery was to be keyed to the receipt of an 
application acknowledgment within a preset period.  If a 
transaction did not receive an application acknowledgement 
within the period, the transaction was to be resent.  Only 
after the proscribed number of processing requests is 
exceeded is it permissible to base the response on an alert.  
This allows for the automatic recovery from the loss of a 
transaction in the HL7 infrastructure and system outages.  As 
a result of this approach to transaction acknowledgement, 
each of the HL7 partners is required to detect duplicate 
transactions and resend the application acknowledgement.  
The Home Telehealth program implemented the automated 
response to exceptional conditions in 2008.  The end result 
of these changes was a dramatic drop in the biweekly 
moving average transaction latency to the desired target 
value of 10 seconds.   
D. Application Monitoring 
A major problem is the realm of enterprise distributed 
processing is the ability to detect off-line or overloaded 
dependent entities.  All networks are built on the platform of 
a strong network management with a monitoring element.  
Trunk utilization is constantly monitored.  Network nodes 
are monitored for throughput.  When a network node or a 
trunk presents a problem a network map is updated 
indicating the problem area and an automatic recovery 
should already have been initiated. 
Unfortunately the network monitor does not monitor the 
enterprise applications that really define a distributed 
collaborative processing system.  The Home Telehealth 
program extends the network approach to the applications 
that define the Home Telehealth system.  The applications 
are the triage servers with their clinical desktops and the 
applications that reside on the VA systems shown in Figure 
1.  The Home Telehealth Network Monitor probes each 
application element of the Home Telehealth enterprise 
environment.  The results of the probes are displayed on a 
national map.  Figure 1 is the status display for the system 
components that exchange HL7 transactions with the triage 
servers.  The left hand column of the Network Monitor 
window changes the display to the results of other probe 
types.  The monitor probes the VA WAN (the VA Intranet) 
for performance statistics, the Vendor Servers (triage 
systems) for clinical desktop latency, and the HL7 Servers 
(HL7 transactions partners).  The HL7 transaction partners 
are probed for operational state and the latency of a test 
transaction.  
 
Figure 1: Home Telehealth Network Map (HL7 Servers) 
V. 
FUTURE FUNCTIONALITY 
The Home Telehealth program is currently completing its 
initial capability release and bringing on new triage system 
63
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

 
suppliers.  The next releases will add automated tools to 
develop and manage DMPs, medical orders to configure the 
triage systems, the VistA Integration of a wound care 
application, and the tracking of home equipment from order 
to disposal, the mining of the Survey and DMP responses.  
The following sections give a short description of each of the 
future capabilities. 
A. Disease Management Protocol Standardizaton 
The current DMPs are a mix of triage system vendor 
supplied question sets and VA sets supplied to the triage 
system vendors in printed or printable documents.  A future 
release will include a DMP development tool that will create 
a machine readable version.  The triage system vendor will 
be able to generate the question set using automation rather 
than manually creating the question set. 
B. Medical Orders 
Each patient treatment plan is manually defined on the 
clinical desktop.  The treatment plan includes the diagnosis, 
DMP, home device and sensors to collect the patient vital 
signs.  A future release will include the definition of an HL7 
transaction to perform this function. 
C. Wound Care 
Some of the triage systems include a wound care 
application.  The basis of a wound care system is the analysis 
of pictures of the lesion.  The triage system wound care 
applications will be required to connect to the standard VA 
image application (VistA Imaging) so that the wound care 
images can be made available to other VA staff. 
D. Equipment Inventory 
The home units are re-used as patients move in and out of 
the program.  The application will be expanded to track the 
home units from order to decommissioning. 
E. Mining of Survey Responses 
At the current time the Patient Satisfaction and VR-12 
ADL (activities of daily living) surveys are presented only in 
aggregation reports.    The plan is to report at the patient 
level. 
F. Collection and Mining of DMP Responses 
At the current time the DMP responses are stored only in 
the triage system.  Once the data is placed in the EMR, the 
DMP responses can be used in the outcomes analysis of the 
patient’s treatment. 
REFERENCES 
[1] United States Department of Veterans Affairs. United States 
Department of Veterans Affairs Web Site. 2011; Available from: 
http://www.va.gov/ [retrieved 4,2012]. 
[2] United States Department of Veterans Affairs. VHA Office of 
Telehealth 
Services. 
2011; 
Available 
from: 
http://www.telehealth.va.gov/ [retrieved 4, 2012]. 
[3] United States Department of Veterans Affairs. Office of Information 
& 
Technology 
(OI&T) 
Home. 
2011; 
Available 
from: 
http://www.oit.va.gov/ [retrieved 4, 2012]. 
[4] Department of Veterans Affairs Office of Enterprise Development, 
VistA-HealtheVet Monograph, 2008; Available by request from the 
authors. 
[5] United States Department of Veterans Affairs. VA Health Care. 2011; 
Available from: http://www.va.gov/health/default.asp [retrieved 4, 
2012]. 
[6] Darkins, A., et al., Care Coordination/Home Telehealth: the 
systematic implementation of health informatics, home telehealth, 
and disease management to support the care of veteran patients with 
chronic conditions. Telemed J E Health, 2008. 14(10): p. 1118-26. 
[7] Health 
Level 
Seven 
International. 
2012; 
Available 
from: 
http://www.hl7.org/ [retrieved 4, 2012]. 
[8] Clinical Context Object Workgroup. 2012; Available from: 
http://www.hl7.org/Special/committees/visual/index.cfm [retrieved 4, 
2012]. 
[9] George C. Blankenship, J., Home Telehealth HL7 Functions 
Overview, U.S.D.o.V. Affairs, Editor 2012;  Available by request 
from the authors. 
64
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

