Enablers of Optimal Work Systems in Industry 
Review, Framework and Likert-scale Survey for Improving Intra-Organisational Communication of 
Finnish Case Companies 
 
Seppo Väyrynen, Kari Kisko, Henna Filppa, Mirja Väänänen 
Industrial Engineering and Management 
University of Oulu 
Oulu, Finland 
emails: {seppo.vayrynen, kari.kisko, henna.filppa, mirja.vaananen}@oulu.fi 
 
 
 
Abstract— The paper constructs a work systemic framework 
for more detailed communication analyses and developments.  
This aims to promote effectively desired and prevent undesired 
outcomes in companies. In the empirical part the paper piloted 
new measuring scales and presents their application in 
surveying the perceptions of the work systems of real 
industrial organisational cases (N=6). The tentative scales 
seemed to be consistent, reliable (Cronbach’s Alpha) and able 
to show differences both between companies and groups of 
employees within companies. As far as both research and 
practice, finally, recommend new kind closer and synergic 
connections between issues of communication developments, 
quality management, productivity, well-being at work and 
human resources management. These would be useful as far as 
ICT-enabled collaboration is developed, too. The review 
section of this paper reveals that actually the author team has 
for 
15 
years 
implicitly 
emphasised 
human-centred 
communication 
as far 
as 
its 
studies 
are 
concerned. 
Participatory human-centred approach has been an essential 
feature of almost all Research and Development (R&D) related 
to achieving an optimal system for production, services, and 
products. Though R&D has been aiming to cover and analyse a 
wide variety of as well tangible and intangible work systems 
issues, opinion now is that the author team’s should have been 
dealt more explicitly already earlier.  
Keywords-human communication; human resourses (HR); 
Likert-scale; perceptions of own work; quality management.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
A work system comprises a combination of people, 
technology, and tasks within a space and other work 
environment (tangible and intangible), and the interaction of 
these 
components 
within 
a 
managed 
goal-oriented 
organisation with its processes (Figure 1). Holistic 
ergonomics aims to optimise work systems, as far as 
performance and effectiveness, including in a key role 
people without detriment to their health, safety, or other 
factors of well-being at work. In other words of the work 
systems standard, optimisation may be evaluated based on 
measures of three categories (1) health and well-being, (2) 
safety, and (3) performance (the quantity and quality (Q) of 
production 
with 
minimal 
non-conformities) 
[1][2]. 
According to this holistic thinking, the factors of both well-
being and productivity at work comprise a lot of synergy.  
This paper is interested in the above interactive system 
and particularly in the creation of a contextual framework 
for communication needed to run the manufacturing and 
services of six Finnish industrial case companies, and 
generally later in other companies. Together with The 
Finnish Work Environment Fund, these companies are 
funding this study, which is being conducted at the 
University of Oulu.  
We see Communication (C) as an essential factor of 
work system interaction that operates between and within 
system components (Figure 1). The following definition of 
communication guides the current study: “the act or process 
of using words, sounds, signs, or behaviours to express or 
exchange information or to express your ideas, thoughts, 
feelings, etc., to someone else”[3]. In general, in intra-
organisational work systems, and even more so in cross- and 
inter-organisational contexts, the channels and flow of 
Information and Communication (IC) are essential for 
effective businesses and the individuals within them. Such 
communication is today more and more enabled, aided, 
mediated and supported by Technology (T). Though we 
focus predominantly on face-to-face communication, ICT 
should be more explicitly taken into account in the work 
systems. T has been considered to bring both pros and cons 
to communication. This study tries to promote the pros of T 
in terms of its potential to improve both the quality and 
quantity of communication. For instance, the Health, Safety 
and Environment ICT (HSE ICT) relates a lot to 
communication while fulfilling the tasks of reporting and 
the collection of data, data storage, information processing, 
and distribution of information to decision makers inside the 
organisation [4].  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

Input 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.The balanced work system model [47], modified to represent the 
outcomes as well, i.e., desired and undesired results at work [2]. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
Industrial expressions of the role of communication at 
work can be typically mentioned, eg., as follows:  
First, according to Reason [5], communication problems 
fall into three categories:  
 
System failures, in which the necessary channels of 
communication do not exist, or are not functioning, or 
are not regularly used  
 
Message failures, in which channels exist, but 
necessary information is not transmitted  
 
Reception failures, in which channels exist, the 
right message is sent, but it is either misinterpreted by 
the recipient or arrives too late.  
 
Second, Hugnes and Ferrett emphasise the role of 
communication to be as follows: ”The safety culture of an 
organisation is the product of individual and group values, 
attitudes, perceptions, competencies and patterns of 
behaviour that determine the commitment to and the style 
and proficiency of, an organisations health and safety 
management. Organisations with a positive safety culture 
are characterised by communications founded on a mutual 
understanding of the importance of safety and by confidence 
in the efficacy of preventive measures. [6]" Third, an 
increasing trend within current work organisations is 
moving jobs at multiple sites. It means that employees are 
mobile, visiting many distributed sites with face-to-face 
communication situations, while at the same time frequently 
using mobile ICT as an essential tool during their work 
tasks and shifts. That these people predominantly work 
alone is generally understood to be a challenge to manage 
well. One such example of this business situation is short-
haul truck driving. ICT innovation proposals related to 
improving communication within the supply chain partners 
of this mobile and distributed work system have been 
studied by Reiman, Pekkala and Väyrynen [7].  
Fourth, it is worth to mention that Saari showed in his 
analysis that disturbances in the information processes of a 
work system and human communication comprise an 
important factor behind accidents at work [8].  
Fifth, Glendon, Clarke and McKenna [9] concluded, that 
in highly demanding or busy work situations such as safety 
critical situations, communication factors typically include 
ones of language, hierarchy, authority, avoiding conflicts, 
fears, attitudes, behaviour styles, rigid role differentiation, 
the complexity of the tasks, the impersonality of the media, 
communication via IT or within team where each member 
can see and hear each other, among others. These factors 
have typically been studied in relation to aviation incidents 
or crashes, flight simulator training, and medical care.  
Sixth, to guarantee an optimal communication in a work 
system, in addition to the intra- and intergroup interactions 
of employers, managers and supervisors, and employees, 
communication with external stakeholders is also important. 
Fluent and frequent contacts to and between internal and 
external stakeholders can be provided only by increasing the 
role of communication technology. Dul et al. show a lot of 
strategic and wise visions for ergonomics and human factors 
related, eg., to various stakeholders affecting and affected 
by modern businesses. They speak quite much about 
communication generally; but according to our opinion, not 
as such within work systems, as our study aims [10].  
Figure 2 shows the key contextual issues of this study 
collected for the description, analysis and evaluation of the 
framework of communication in the companies. Eight 
cumulative issues are reviewed in more detailed way in 
Table 1. Related issues covered in the past papers by the 
authors of this study include the following:  
 Implementation of telemedicine [11]  
 Utilizing employee’s knowledge in metal industry 
[12]  
 Developing mobile communication services for the 
elderly [13]  
 Case describing a collaboratively-developed software 
application for improving service quality [14]  
 Increasing 
hospital staff participation into the 
development processes [15]  
 Participatory design science approach on the optimum 
work system [16]  
 Short 
haul 
drivers’ 
two-way 
assessments 
of 
prerequisites and communications contributing  
employee and customer satisfaction [7]  
 Regional workplace development in the context of 
sociotechnology and knowledge [17]  
(+) Desired, eg 
production, 
well-being at 
work 
Organisational 
(al Context) 
Human 
Task 
Work 
Environment 
Output 
Technology 
(-) Undesired, eg 
nonconformity, 
harm, losses 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

 Multifaceted analysis of truck transportation's work 
system by drivers and stakeholders [18]  
 Microinnovations [19]  
 Managing well-being at work [20]  
 Concurrent engineering activities using videophone 
communication [21]  
 User-centered development of video telephony for 
servicing [22]  
 Video-based ergonomic development of work system 
cases [23]  
 HSEQ integrated (asset) management in process 
industry network [24]  
 Communication in high tech product development 
projects [25]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Key effective issues chosen for the description, analysis, and 
evaluation of a framework for communication. 
 
Lessons learned from all the above, we define the scope of 
our whole study called Kitkaton Kommunikointi (KIKO), in 
English Frictionless Communication (FriCo), focusing 
explicitly consciously on communication possesses the 
potential to reveal many means of enhancing interaction 
within a work system, for the benefit of management, 
workforce, and stakeholders. According to the review 
above, our assumption is that too much of communication 
issues are thought to be implicit in our former studies. That 
is why we see that a lot of inductive study related work 
communication at the field is needed, too. This later part of 
our study relies on ethnography and user-study-style 
observational and other methods of contextual [61] data 
collection. More explicit picture of the practice and quality 
of communication and evidence of the importance of the 
quality of communication enables to understand, model, 
measure, promote, and manage generally better within the 
work system.  
 
 
TABLE 1. A SHORT DESCRIPTION WITH REFERENCES TO KEY 
ISSUES CHOSEN FOR THE DESCRIPTION, ANALYSIS AND 
EVALUATION OF A FRAMEWORK FOR COMMUNICATON.  
 
 
Lasswell, the US scientist, once described that every act 
of communication is ultimately an answer to one aspect of 
Most 
relevant 
general 
academic 
and 
practical 
back-
grounds 
Main points, messages, or results. 
Referenc
e(s) 
Work 
system 
(WS) 
People, technological tools 
tasks, work environment, and interaction of 
these components within an organisation. 
[1][47] 
Out-
comes of 
WS in 
general 
Work systems’ optimization may be 
evaluated based on measures of categories 
(1) health and well-being, (2) safety, and (3) 
performance (the quantity and quality 
conformity). 
[1][33][3
4][2][23] 
Well-
being at 
work 
Means safe, healthy, and productive work in 
a well-led organisation by competent 
workers and work communities who see 
their job as meaningful and rewarding. 
[48] 
(Total) 
Quality 
Manage
ment 
(TQM), 
Excel-
lence 
•Production process, products, 
services, system, continuous improvement  
 •Safety and productivity as integral inherent 
parts of quality 
•Employee and supplier participation 
 
[49][50][
43][42] 
Participa-
tion 
Involving people as employees, consumers 
and citizens, in development, individuals and 
organisations, driving forces of potential 
benefits comprise involvement in process, 
motivation, competence and confidence. 
[51][22][
55][56] 
Stake-
holders, 
networks 
Especially employees, customers, owners, 
partners, business networks, community, 
citizens, regulating society, i.e. affecting, 
affected, involved organisations and 
individuals. 
[52][17][
53][57][
58][59][
60] 
HSEQ, 
Social 
responsi-
bility 
(SR),  
sustain-
ability 
Products and services satisfy requirements 
for quality and excellence, responsible 
organisations have also to be concerned 
about the well-being of their employees, 
their work environment, impact of 
operations on the local community, and 
long-term effects of their activities and 
products. 
 
[35][54] 
ICT 
Developments in computer technology, 
telecommunication technology and media 
technology have given rise to new 
interactive activities such as social media, 
gaming, and to 
an explosion of information transfer. 
People’s lives have become more and more 
dependent on ICT and virtual networks. ICT 
developments have brought about many 
changes in work organisation and 
organisational design, including more focus 
on teamwork, the rise of virtual 
organisations, remote work including 
working from home, fading borders between 
occupational and private life, and increased 
complexity of networks.  
[10][47] 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

the following question: Who (says) What (to) Whom (in) 
What Channel (with) What Effect [26]. We find this 
understanding of communication quite straightforward and 
rudimentary. While it may be useful in other cases, it 
appears less useful for the current study. The objectives of 
this study are of a much more multi-disciplinary and diverse 
nature than are encompassed in Lasswell's understanding 
about communication.  
The objectives of the KIKO study are as follows:  
 To develop the interaction skills of the supervisors and 
employees of the case companies.  
 To study the case companies’ communication and find 
those factors which contribute to or detract from 
purposeful interaction and operation.  
 To identify interaction challenges in the case 
companies to create new solutions and operation models, 
and to try to formulate an approach to an innovative 
procedure for enhancing individual and organisational 
communication being applicable in other companies 
(“KIKO R&D service package” as a recommendation of 
a good practice).  
 
As a part of the preliminary actions of the whole KIKO 
study, a literature review and a field survey of employees’ 
and supervisors’ opinions and perceptions was required. The 
literature review is presented in the introduction and 
background. That is why the following additionally 
objective for starting the KIKO needed to be fulfilled: 
describing and measuring the starting points generally, and 
especially clarifying the perceived situation and conditions 
of the case companies by a questionnaire directed to the 
supervisors and employees. 
III. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
The current study is comprised of activities divided into 
three work packages (WPs): 
 
WP1:Training and evaluating communication 
skills in a special laboratory using the consultative 
approach. 
 
WP2:Observing 
and 
developing 
the 
communication practices and culture between 
employees and supervisors within the case 
companies (e.g., in workshops, manufacturing 
lines, sites, offices, R&D spaces, etc.)  
 
WP3:Identifying and analysing the communication 
pros, cons and challenges of each case company 
based on WPs 1 and 2. Based on  the results and  
conclusions of the WPs1 above, the case 
companies are arranging collaborative workshops 
with researchers, and thereby creating new 
solutions, operation models, and management 
practices to improve the current practises (see 
design science, [16][27].  
 
The current KIKO study utilises the consultative 
psychological 
approach, 
and 
relevant 
methods 
of 
ergonomics, quality management, and organisational 
development (mainly in the fields of ethnography and 
participatory development, and design). 
The study will be carried out with six companies or 
company units that represent significant Finnish companies 
in the fields of technology [28] and energy (electric power 
distribution). KIKO was and is being conducted during 
2013 and 2014. Not only is the Federation of Finnish 
technology industries interested in research on optimal 
work system in companies [29], so are the European metal, 
engineering and technology industries [30].  
In the initial phase of the study before the WPs, an 
examination of the literature and a survey on the 
perceptions of the features of the work systems were carried 
out. The former is briefly presented in the introduction and 
in the discussion chapter of this paper. The latter, a field 
questionnaire, was comprised, of background information 
questions and allowed free space for writing respondent's 
own views and opinions. In the main part of the 
questionnaire, the satisfaction part of the questionnaire, a 5-
point Likert scale was used. Each respondent was asked to 
give his or her opinion (i.e., “how much do they agree” 
with the presented opinion or work system conditions 
description) on the statements presented (see Appendix). 
The potential choices consisted of ”1 equals strongly 
disagree” to ”5 equals strongly agree”. The employees 
(blue-collar 
workers 
and 
clerical 
employees) 
and 
supervisors (managerial staff and experts) were asked to fill 
in the number 1, 2, 3, 4 or 5 according to how they felt 
about their work system and communication within it. 
The questionnaire was directed at the entire staff 
(employees and supervisors) of all the participating case 
units. The questionnaire was introduced by first stating that 
it would takes less than 10 minutes to complete. 
The field survey was predominantly conducted utilising 
a web-based questionnaire, but some of the respondents 
who did not have access to web were given a paper 
questionnaire. The questionnaires were distributed to the 
employees and supervisors of the participating companies. 
Of the distributed questionnaires, a total of 448 was 
delivered back to the researches, as follows:  
 
Case I, bigger company, total response rate 77%, 
employees (N=220) and supervisors (N=21) 
 
Case II, bigger company, total response rate 55%, 
employees (N=15) and supervisors (N=9) 
 
Case III, smaller company, total response rate 
100%, employees (N=8) and supervisors (N=2) 
 
Case IV, smaller company, total response rate 61%, 
employees (N=48) and supervisors (N=10) 
 
Case V, smaller company, total response rate 51%, 
employees (N=32) and supervisors (N=7) 
 
Case VI, bigger company, total response rate 49%, 
employees (N=41) and supervisors (N=18) 
The statistics software package (SPSS 22.0) was utilised 
both for a wide variety of basic descriptive purposes and in 
trials to predict developed dependent variables using 
various independent variables.  
The dependent variables of the study were as follows: 
(i) Perceived holistic well-being, (ii) Perceived satisfaction 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

with communication, and (iii) Perceived satisfaction with 
IT-mediated communication. The sums of the variables 
comprised: (i) statements 1,2,6,7,12,14,15,16, 17,18,20,21; 
(ii) statements 3,4,5,10,11,13,19; (iii) statements 8,9,22 (see 
Appendix). The modelled and piloted tentative sum indexes 
(i.e., the corresponding averages of the sums) for i, ii, iii 
were calculated separately for the employees and 
supervisors, the different case companies, and then 
analysed and checked in terms of their reliability using 
Cronbach’s Alpha (i.e., the consistency or repeatability of 
the measures collected from the questionnaires). The 
Cronbach’s Alpha for every statement sub-group on the 
questionnaire was estimated and compared with the 
recommended limits of statistical significance in the 
literature [31][32]. In addition, we put into trial whether 
indexes (i), (ii), and (iii) showed differences as far as case 
companies (i.e., case I-VI, bigger or smaller) and staff 
categories (employee, supervisor). 
IV. 
RESULTS 
First of all, a general view on the distribution of 
opinions about the perceived work system and own role and 
contribution there were revealed, i.e, ratings generally and 
as far as all interesting sub-groups. 
The appendix shows all questions about the level of 
accomplishment and choices assigned toward each subject 
matter in question (averaged opinions on statement / ratings 
on 5-point Likert scale,  x± standard deviation (sd)), by 
employee and supervisor, and total average opinion based 
on agreement levels given to all the 22 statements in all case 
companies.  
The values of the piloted sum indexes varied in the way 
presented in the Table 2.  
 
TABLE 2. THE THREE SUM INDEXES (i) PERCEIVED HOLISTIC 
WELL-BEING 
(ii) 
PERCEIVED 
SATISFACTION 
WITH 
COMMUNICATION AND (iii) PERCEIVED SATISFACTION WITH 
IT-MEDIATED 
COMMUNICATION. 
THESE 
INDEXES 
WERE 
CALCULATED 
SEPARATELY 
FOR 
THE 
EMPLOYESS 
AND 
SUPERVISORS, THE DIFFERENT CASE COMPANIES. 
 
 
Figure 3 shows averaged scores by staff category and 
case company. Cronbach’s Alpha for every chosen 
statement sub-group of the questions, i.e., tentative 
measuring scales, was estimated and compared with the 
recommended limits in the literature: 
Alpha for i= 0.87 (Good), Alpha for ii=0.72  (Good), 
Alpha for iii=0.62 (Acceptable) 
 
Figure 3. Average Likert-scores for employees and supervisors in case 
companies. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
Our results of the current pilot empirical study indicate 
that choosing communication as a study issue, and the 
probable one in need for enhancement, seems to be right. 
Effective communication needs to be recognised as an 
integral capability in every organisation. Methods for the 
measuring, managing, and developing in a participatory, and 
business-tailored way should be further developed. The 
literature 
review 
shows 
Health 
and 
Safety 
(HS) 
communication to be frequently emphasised in an important 
British textbook on management and workforce [6]. In 
Finland, this emphasis would be important, and not only 
HS, but also Environment and Quality (EQ), and other 
outcomes, and enabling work system features as well. 
According to our opinion, KIKO-related multi-disciplinary 
R&D studies seem to have their relevant place.  
An optimal work system approach has a lot of 
similarities with quality prize models(excellence models) 
like European or US ones [33][34], as far as taking care of  
the both enablers and results of the good practises of work 
and inc business. Communication might not only be in 
relation with more or less directly measureable issues – it is 
a value as such, a part of human and social assets. 
Our past emphasis on the concept of participation is 
quite near, we think, to the concept of collaboration. Both 
concepts 
are 
probably 
highly 
correlated 
with 
communication. In a tentative modelling of communication 
at work, we try to present key issues, at least as thinking 
about our emphasis on this paper. The issues relate closely 
to the work system, management, quality assurance, 
Case
i
ii
iii
total
Case I
3.5
3.6
3.3
3.5
Case II
3.8
3.9
3.5
3.8
Case III
3.7
3.7
3.8
3.7
Case IV
3.3
3.4
2.8
3.2
Case V
3.5
3.8
3.4
3.5
Case VI
3.6
3.7
3.2
3.6
Supervisors
3.8
3.9
3.6
3.8
Employees
3.4
3.6
3.2
3.4
Bigger comp.
3.6
3.7
3.3
3.6
Smaller comp.
3.5
3.7
3.3
3.5
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

integrated management [35] and finally, “well-being in 
work system”. This probably quite new term sounds to be 
feasible. We think we can continue, with our field company 
partners, using this preliminary choice. To be more 
comprehensive, we think some elements have to be added to 
our questionnaire to cover full enough the work systems in 
companies such as collaborators of this study. 
To sum up thoughts we found in international literature, 
our future steps should especially include more issues linked 
with the modelling of well-being in the work system, or 
Quality of Work(ing) Life (QWL) [20][36][37][38], lean 
management [39][40][41], and emerging views of ICT (the 
variety of communication channels, ambient, mobile 
technology, 
moving 
multi-site 
jobs, 
remote 
work, 
embedded, Enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems, 
“social media”, video). QWL (Quality of Work(ing) Life) is, 
in addition to Quality of Products and Services and Quality 
of Work Force, defined together to form Quality [42]. This 
conclusion by Dzissah et al. correlates positively quite much 
with our study’s prerequisites and models through the work 
system and communication are not emphasized by them.  
The later actual work packages of the KIKO study will most 
probably further contribute as far as many issues and results, 
and conclusions, of the current questionnaire part, first 
phase of the whole study. 
As far as the work system is concerned, our assumption 
is 
that 
qualitatively 
(and 
quantitatively) 
enhanced 
communication has power to increase desired and 
correspondently decrease the undesired outcomes of the 
work system. We hope to get more evidence of this. In any 
case, 
we 
suggest 
that 
more 
means 
to 
improve 
communication like ones to improve quality are to be 
developed and implemented. In our introduction, we did not 
consider much able to be learned from Lasswell’s older 
questions (i.e., Who (says) What (to) Whom (in) What 
Channel (with) What Effect [26]). Instead, we felt that 
answering the set of questions why, who, when, where, 
what, and further how (i.e., so-called the five Ws and one H, 
see Hutchison [43]) might be more useful. That is why the 
latter questions are often seen the important first steps 
towards quality developments, excellence and integrated 
management, and now being well-being in the work system 
included. 
Glendon, Clarke and McKenna [9], suggest looking at 
even 
more 
and 
specific 
topics 
within 
industrial 
organisations, such as the hierarchy, team structure, team 
performance, centralisation degree of the teams and 
networks, attitudes, and the quality of communication. The 
latter strongly relates to the roles and systems of ICT in 
company and individual levels, too. More precisely, 
Glendon, Clarke and McKenna encourage us to study the 
aspects in the following way: with adequate dissemination 
of top-down communications…, but also bottom-up 
communications… ease worker relations… reduced status 
distinctions operate through encouraging communication, 
sharing ideas, and promoting greater concern and trust 
among workers [9]. 
Referring to the literature, we conclude that our current 
review and questionnaire support, generally, our own past 
socio-technical holistic emphasis: as far communication 
developments, 
we 
recommend 
synergic 
design, 
development and implementation approach [44][45][46] 
[10]. Further, our past and current concepts, give an 
approach to apply the contextual design [61] for developing 
ICT systems useable for supporting collaboration within 
companies.  
This paper focuses on general and Human Resource 
(HR) management, assessment and developments of well-
being at work (system), total quality and further productivity 
and safety issues, i.e., to achieve more desired and less 
undesired outcomes within work system contexts. Other 
later coming papers based on the same KIKO study will 
provide broader views on these multi-professional and –
disciplinary 
research 
and 
development 
issues 
of 
communication in companies. 
As far as our pilot questionnaire, generally, and new 
Likert-style scales constructed specially, we found them 
useful as a starting point for enhancing communication 
R&D, e.g., in later sections of the KIKO project. Tentative 
three scales based of the chosen sub-sets of statements 
proved to be consistent and reliable measuring scales and 
applicable to surveying real industrial case organisations. Of 
course, the pilot scales need further trials with more case 
organisations, and careful evaluation.  
VI. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Standard EN ISO 6385:2004 - Ergonomic Principles in the 
Design of Work Systems, CEN, Bryssels. 
[2] S. Väyrynen, "Review of Machinery Risk Prevention Through 
Efforts 
Expended 
on 
Design, 
Management, 
Quality, 
Ergonomics and Usability," Project Reports of the Work 
Science No 20, Oulu: Oulu University Press, 2005, ISBN 
951-42-7822-4. 
[3] (2013, Dec.) The Merriam-Webster Dictionary. [Online]. 
Available: http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/ 
[4] U. Kjellén, "Prevention of Accidents through Experience 
Feedback," New York: Taylor & Francis, 2000. 
[5] J. Reason, "Managing the risks of organisational accidents," 
Aldershot, England: Ashgate Publishing Limited, 1997. 
[6] P. Hughes and E. Ferrett, "Introduction to health and safety at 
work," Oxford, UK: Elsevier Butterworth-Heineman, 2003. 
[7] A. Reiman, J. Pekkala, and S. Väyrynen, "Short haul drivers’ 
work and different work environments outside the cab – New 
tool for two-way assessments," in Proceedings of the IADIS 
International conference ICT Society and Human Beings, G. 
Bradley, Eds. Freiburg, Germany, 2010. 
[8] J. Saari, "Accidents and disturbances in the flow of 
information," in Journal of Occupational Accidents, vol. 6, 
1984, pp. 91-105. 
[9] A. I. Glendon, S. Clarke, and E. F. McKenna, "Human Safety 
and Risk Management," 2nd ed., CRC Press, Taylor & Francis 
Group, 2006, p. 500. 
[10] J. Dul et al., "A strategy for human factors/ergonomics: 
developing the discipline and profession," in Ergonomics, 
2012, DOI:10.1080/00140139.2012.661087. 
[11] H. Kirvesoja et al., "Implementation criteria for videophone 
system used in telemedicine: A case in Finnish health care," 
in 
Human-Computer 
Interaction: 
Communication, 
cooperation, and application design, H-J. Bullinger and J. 
Ziegler, Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on 
Human-Computer Interaction, Eds. Munich, Germany: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers, 1999, pp. 271–275. 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

[12] K. Kisko and A. Reiman, "Improving productivity by utilizing 
employee’s knowledge – A case study from metal industry," 
in Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on 
Occupational Risk Prevention, P. Mondelo, M. Mattila, W. 
Karwowski, and A. Hale, Eds. La Coruna, Spain, 2008. 
[13] M. Mikkonen, S. Väyrynen, V. Ikonen, and O. Heikkilä, 
"User ad concept studies as tools in developing mobile 
communication services for the elderly," in Personal and 
Ubiquitous Computing, vol. 6, no. 2, 2002, pp.113-124. 
[14] M. Ojala and S. Väyrynen, "Service Manager Software 
(SeMaSo): 
a 
case 
decribing 
a 
participatory-developed 
application for improving service quality of older citizens," 
AALIANCE conference, Malaga, Spain, March 11-12, 2010.  
[15] H. Paananen (Filppa), M. Häikiö, S. Väyrynen, and A. 
Syväjärvi, "New methods for increasing the hospital 
personnel participation into the development processes - case 
Lapland 
Hospital 
District," 
in 
Healthcare 
Systems 
Ergonomics and Patient Safety 2011, Proceedings on the 
International Conference on Healthcare Systems Ergonomics 
and Patient Safety (HEPS 2011), Sara Albolino et al., Eds. 
Oviedo, Spain, June 22-24, 2011.  CRS Press/Balkema , 
Taylor&Francis 
Group, 
2011, 
pp. 
245-247. 
ISBN 
9780415684132. 
[16] H-K. Rajala and S. Väyrynen, "Participative design science 
approach on the optimum work system: an argumentative 
review-based model with a case," in Theoretical Issues in 
Ergonomics Science, vol. 12 no. 6, 2011, pp. 533-543.  
[17] A. Reiman and S. Väyrynen, "Review of Regional Workplace 
Development Cases: A Holistic Approach and Proposals for 
Evaluation and Management," in International Journal of 
Sociotechnology and Knowledge Development, vol. 3 no. 1, 
2011, pp. 55-70. 
[18] A. Reiman, J. Pekkala, S. Väyrynen, A. Putkonen, J. 
Abeysekera, and M. Forsman, "Delivery Truck Drivers’ and 
Stakeholders’ Video-assisted Analyses of Work Outside the 
Truck Cabs," in International Journal of Sustainable 
Transportation, 2013, DOI:10.1080/15568318.2013.765933. 
[19] P. Saariluoma, A. Hautamäki, S. Väyrynen, M. Pärttö, and E. 
Kannisto, "Microinnovations among the paradigms of 
innovation research - what are the common ground issues," in 
Global Journal of Computer Science and Technology, vol. 11, 
no. 12, 2011, pp. 12-23.  
[20] J. Sinisammal, P. Belt, J. Härkönen, M. Möttönen, and S. 
Väyrynen, "Managing Well-Being at Work during 2010s — 
Expert Viewpoints," in Open Journal of Safety Science and 
Technology, vol. 2, no. 25-31, 2012. 
[21] V. Tornberg and S. Väyrynen, 1999: "Concurrent engineering 
activities using videophone communications," in Human-
Computer Interaction: Communication, Cooperation, and 
Application Design, Proceedings of HCI International '99 (the 
8th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Human-Computer 
Interaction), vol. 2, Munich, Germany, August 22-26, 1999. 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Publishers. London, pp. 256-
260. 
[22] S. Väyrynen, J. Röning, and I. Alakärppä, "User-Centered 
Development of Video Telephony for Servicing Mainly Older 
Users: Review and Evaluation of an Approach Applied for 10 
Years," in Human Technology, vol. 2 no. 1, 2006 pp. 8-37. 
[23] S. Väyrynen and N. Nevala, "VIDAR as a tool in ergonomic 
development: Double utilisation model and work system 
cases," Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on 
Occupational Risk Prevention ORP2010, Valencia, Spain, 
May 5-7, 2010. An interactive CD-ROM edited by P. 
Mondelo, W. Karwowski, K. Saarela, A. Hale, and E. 
Occipinti, p. 10, ISBN 978-84-934256-8-5.  
[24] S. Väyrynen, M. Koivupalo, and J. Latva-Ranta, "A 15-year 
development 
path 
of 
actions 
towards 
an 
integrated 
management system: description, evaluation and safety effects 
within the process industry network in Finland," in 
International 
Journal 
of 
Strategic 
Engineering 
Asset 
Management, vol. 1, no. 1, 2012, pp. 3-32. 
[25] M. Väänänen, "Communication in high technology product 
development projects – Project personnel’s viewpoint for 
improvement," Doctoral dissertation, Department of Industrial 
Engineering and Management, University of Oulu, 2010. 
[Online]. Available: http://jultika.oulu.fi/Record/isbn978-951-
42-6295-1. 
[26] (2013, Dec.) Lasswell's model. [Online]. Available: 
http://communicationtheory.org/lasswells-model/ 
[27] A. R. Hevner, S. T. March, J. Park, and S. Ram, "Design 
science in information systems research," MIS Quarterly, vol. 
28, no. 1, 2004, pp.75-105.  
[28] (2014, Jan.) Teknologiateollisuus. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.teknologiateollisuus.fi/en/ 
[29] 
(2014, 
Jan.) 
Työhyvinvointi. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.tyohyvinvointi.info/in-english 
[30] (2013, Dec.) CEEMET Our commitment to health & safety, 
Council of European Employers of Metal, Engineering and 
Technology-Based 
Industries. 
[Online.] 
Available: 
http://www.ceemet.org/en/Home/Top-themes/OUR-
COMMITMENT-TO-HEALTH-amp-SAFETY.htm 
[31] 
(2013, 
Dec.) 
SPSS 
FAQ. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.ats.ucla.edu/stat/spss/faq/alpha.html 
[32] 
(2013, 
Dec.) 
Gliem&Gliem. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://scholarworks.iupui.edu/bitstream/handle/1805/344/Gli
em+&+Gliem.pdf?sequence=1 
[33] (2013, Sep.) EFQM Excellence Model. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.efqm.org/the-efqm-excellence-model 
[34] (2013, Sep.) Baldrige Criteria. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.nist.gov/baldrige/publications/criteria.cfm 
[35] G. Wilkinson and B. G. Dale, "Integrated management 
systems," in Managing quality, 5th ed., B. G. Dale, T. van der 
Wiele, and V. V. Iwaarden, Eds. Chichester, UK: Wiley-
Blackwell, 2007, pp. 310-350. 
[36] R. C. Rose, L. Beh, J. Uli, and K. Idris, "An Analysis of 
Quality of Work Life (QWL) and Career- Related Variables," 
in  American Journal of Applied Sciences, vol. 3, no. 12, 
2006, pp. 2151-2159. 
[37] E. MacEachen, J. Polzer, and J. Clarke, "‘‘You are free to set 
your own hours’’: Governing worker productivity and health 
through flexibility and resilience," in Social Science & 
Medicine vol. 66, 2008, pp. 1019-1033. 
[39] M. I. Raja, "Lean manufacturing - an integrated socio-
technical systems approach to work design," Doctoral thesis, 
Glemson University, 2011. 
[40] D. Averill, "Lean Sustainability: Creating Safe, Enduring, and 
Profitable Operations," CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group, 
2011. 
[41] I. Kouri, "Lean Management in a nutshell", The Federation of 
Finnish Technology Industries, Helsinki, 2011.  
[42] J. S. Dzissah, W. Karwowski, and Y. N. Yang, "Integration of 
Quality, Ergonomics, and Safety Management Systems," in 
International Encyclopedia of Ergonomics and Human 
Factors, vol. 2, W. Karwowski, Eds. London:  Taylor & 
Francis. 2000, pp. 1129-1135. 
[43] D. Hutchison, "Safety, Health and Environmental Quality 
Systems 
Management: 
Strategies 
for 
Cost-Effective 
Regulatory Compliance," Lanchester Press Inc, 1997. 
[44] E. Mumford, "Redesigning Human Systems", Hershey, PA: 
Information Science Publishing, 2003. 
[45] K. Eason, "Information technology and organisational 
change," London: Taylor & Francis, 1998. 
[46] S. Väyrynen, H. Kirvesoja, E. Kangas, and V. Tornberg, 
"Multi-criteria ergonomic evaluation: A weighted objectives 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

model for participative product design," in  Occupational 
Ergonomics, vol. 2, 1999/2000, pp. 125–134. 
[47] P. Carayon and M. Smith, "Work organization and 
ergonomics," in Applied Ergonomics vol. 31, 2000, pp. 649-
662. 
[48] H. Anttonen and T. Räsänen, "Well-being at Work – New 
Innovations and Good Practices," Eds. Finnish Institute of 
Occupational Health, Helsinki, 2008. 
[49] B. G. Dale, T. van der Wiele, and V. V. Iwaarden, "Managing 
Quality," 5th ed., Eds. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 2007. 
[50] T. Cecich and M. Hembarsky, "Relating principles to quality 
management," in Safety Through Design: Best Practices, W. 
Christensen, and F. Manuele, Eds. National Safety Council, 
Itasca, Illinois, 1999, pp.67–72. 
[51] J. Wilson and H. Haines, "Participatory Ergonomics," in 
International Encyclopedia of Ergonomics and Human 
Factors, vol. 2, W. Karwowski, Eds. London:  Taylor & 
Francis, 2000, pp. 1282-1286. 
[52]  R. S. Kaplan and D. P. Norton, "Strategy Maps: Converting 
Intangible Assets into Tangible Outcomes," Boston: Harvard 
Business School Publishing Corporation, 2004. 
[53] K. J. Zink, "Stakeholder-oriented management concepts as 
challenge for macro-ergonomics - how can macro-
ergonomics 
successfully 
contribute 
to 
quality 
and 
sustainability?," in Proceedings of NES2011 (Wellbeing and 
Innovations 
Through 
Ergonomics) 
J. 
Lindfors, 
M. 
Savolainen, and S. Väyrynen, Eds. Oulu, Finland 18-21 
September 2011, pp. 7-14, ISBN 978-951-42-9541-6.  
[54] K. J. Zink and K. Fischer, "Do we need sustainability as a 
new approach in human factors and ergonomics?," in 
Ergonomics, vol. 56 no. 3, 2013, pp. 348-356. 
[55] M. Nagamachi, "Requisites and practices of participatory 
ergonomics," 
in 
International 
Journal 
of 
Industrial 
Ergonomics, vol. 15 no. 5: 1995, pp. 371-377. 
[56] J. Wilson, "Participatory ergonomics," in Evaluation of 
human work – a practical ergonomics methodology, J. 
Wilson, and N. Corlett, Eds. London: Taylor & Francis, 2005, 
pp. 933–962. 
[57] M. E. Porter, "Competitive Advantage: Creating and 
Sustaining Superior Performance,"  New York: The Free 
Press, 1985. 
[58] O. Brown, "Macroergonomic Methods: Participation," in 
Macroergonomics. Theory, Methods and Applications, H. W. 
Hendrick, and B. M. Kleiner, Eds. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates, 2002, pp. 25–44. 
[59] B. M. Kleiner and H. W. Hendrick, "Human Factors in 
Organizational Design and Management of Industrial Plants," 
in International Journal of Technology and Human 
Interaction, vol. 4, no. 1, 2008, pp. 114–128. 
[60] H. W. Hendrick, "Macroergonomics: The Analysis and Design 
of Work Systems," in Reviews of Human Factors and 
Ergonomics vol. 3, no. 1, 2007, pp. 44-78. 
[61] H. Beyer and K. Holtzblatt, “Contextual Design: Defining 
Customer-Centered Systems”, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 
1997, ISBN 155860411.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

 
 
 
 
Appendix. Statements amounted 22, and basic descriptive 
statistics for each one. Distribution of the ratings in 
percentages on 5-point Likert scale are colour-coded (see 
right side of the figure).  
 
 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

