Context Awareness Monitoring Model for Smart Office Environment 
Nor Azlina Aziz Fadzillah, Nasiroh Omar, Siti Zaleha Zainal Abidin, and Nor Azylia Ahmad Azam 
Faculty of Computer And Mathematical Sciences 
University Technology MARA, 
Shah Alam, Malaysia 
e-mail: norazlina@perlis.uitm.edu.my; nasiroh@tmsk.uitm.edu.my;  
sitizaleha533@salam.uitm.edu.my; azylia@tmsk.uitm.edu.my 
 
 
Abstract—Administrators conventionally write information on 
paper or on a notice board to monitor subordinates’ activities 
within an organization. Unfortunately, the information cannot 
be stored and retrieved for future use. This paper presents a 
case study for the implementation of a smart notice board. The 
analysis focuses on the presence and transition of staff work 
activities. The staff activities are evaluated to allow 
administrators to be aware of their work status. Based on the 
smart office board design, we propose a context-aware 
monitoring model in a smart office environment. This model 
provides a platform to gather useful information of staffs 
during 
their 
working 
hours. 
Therefore, 
top-level 
administrators can identify staff status (present, absent or 
busy) and perform statistical analyses on staffs’ availability. 
Thus, they can plan, schedule, make decisions and prepare 
reports instantly. 
Keywords-collaborative; context-aware; monitoring user 
activities; workspaces; smart office; smart notice board. 
I. INTRODUCTION  
Generally, an organization uses a notification board to 
inform their staff of theirs’ daily activities. The activities 
depend on the current work mode, which deals with different 
tasks, tools, and information [1]. Nevertheless, networked 
collaborative virtual environments allow workers to work in 
a shared virtual space at real-time. However, virtual space 
lacks contextual elements as in a real life-working situation. 
The virtual workspace should make optimum use of human 
computer interaction. It should provide relevant information 
or services to adapt the system behaviours for a specific user 
[2]. In addition, context-awareness is one of the vital 
features, which helps users to map their tasks by considering 
the parallel interaction in networked virtual environments 
[3]. 
A context-aware service should provide accurate 
information to assist people in setting goals, making plans 
and performing the necessary actions in their daily work 
activities. Recognizing people activities in a virtual work 
space will help users to react automatically to a person’s 
identity, location, activity, and facial expression [4]. They 
should be informed about others’ work to obtain the 
information at the right time, right place and communicate 
in a meaningful way. 
Today, most people spend a lot of time working in 
spaces, like offices and committee rooms. Most of the 
researchers are focused on the development of smart and 
intelligent working environments [5]. A smart environment 
is defined as a situation in which a user interacts with 
another user in a flexible, personalized and domain-specific 
manner [6],[7]. The goals of a smart environment are to 
support and provide task-relevant information services to 
sense context in a variety of user environments [8]. The 
smart environment can provide a unique service in 
designing, researching and addressing issues in a multi-
agent system [9]. There are some examples of smart 
environments such as the smart home [10], [11], [12], the 
smart hospital [13], the smart freeway [14] and the smart 
office [5].  
The smart office is defined as an environment that 
enables the user to adapt user needs, routine tasks, 
preferences, and access on-time services [15]. It represents a 
user’s work, as in a normal office. In addition, it allows the 
user to acquire and apply knowledge to improve their 
experience and synchronous communication in a particular 
environment [7],[16]. The synchronous communication and 
data are integrated with other information to enable users to 
gain knowledge of current and past activities in the working 
environment [1].  
Furthermore, the smart office handles several devices 
that supports everyday tasks, anticipates user intentions, and 
reduces the conflict in decision making [5]. There are several 
examples of smart office systems such as intelligent meeting 
rooms [5], the virtual secretary [17], and the smart doorplate 
project  [18]. This paper focuses on designing a smart notice 
board as part of the smart office environment. Designing a 
context-aware system in a smart office environment is a 
complex and challenging issue. Most of the studies do not 
fully address specific characteristics of context management 
[19]. Therefore, in Section II, we will analyze and categorize 
the most common characteristics used in the smart office 
environment.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section III 
observes smart office scenarios and related activities for a 
smart office in an academician environment. Next, Section 
IV presents a context-aware monitoring model for the smart 
office environment. Finally, Section V discusses the 
conclusion in relation to the research work. 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-287-5
COLLA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

II. 
CONTEXT CATEGORIZATION 
Human activities can be classified into personal, 
community, and social activity [20]. Each of the activities 
will involve different types of context depending on the 
location, time, resources, task, and situation. The context has 
been used as a tool to select the correct action, improve the 
quality and efficiency of case-based reasoning within the 
diagnostic domain virtual workspace [21]. When dealing 
with a different state or situation, context is the key element 
used to infer possible action and support the user with 
contextual information [22]. It is crucial to understand 
context and its relation with adaptability (i.e. device, 
environmental setting, and time) to construct context-aware 
software development that is  beneficial to the users [23].  
Many researchers define and classify context to support 
and develop context-aware systems. Dey and Abowd [24] 
identified four primary context types (i.e., location, identity, 
time, and activity). It provides task-relevant information and 
interaction between the user and the context-aware 
application. Prado [2] defines three types of context (i.e., 
device-related, environmental and user context). This context 
deals with the impact of application on different user 
interfaces, information and functionality of context. In order 
to model the relationship of activities and situations in a 
context-aware system, Kofod and Cassens  [22] suggest five 
categories of user context (i.e., personal, task, social, spatio-
temporal and environmental context).  
Soylu et al. [23] propose eight categories to develop 
context-aware systems (i.e., user, device, application, 
information, environmental, time, historical and relational 
context). In addition, Villegas and Muller [25] classify five 
categories of context (i.e., individual, human, artificial, 
activity and compositional relations context) to control and 
govern context information within a smart environment. 
Furthermore, Kapitsaki et al. [26] apply three context 
categories within the tourist service (i.e., user, context 
information and services). It is found that user, system, 
physical, time and history are the most important context for 
mobile map applications [27]. Generally, it is concluded that 
most of the context-aware systems involve three main 
contextual entities: user, activity and events. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. 
The contextual entities. 
Fig. 1 depicts the most common context entities within 
the smart environment. All of these entities are dependent 
on the application, environment and goal, which the 
context-aware system is used. Based on this contextual 
entities, we observed the academicians’ work modes to 
illustrate the context–aware activities within the smart office 
environment. 
III. OBSERVING SMART OFICE ACTIVITIES 
This study is conducted as an observation case study on 
staff activities during office hours. It is built on monthly 
activity that requires users to fill in information on the 
notice board. The aim of this case study is to extract 
important features to be used in designing a smart notice 
board. Contextual elements in the case study are analyzed in 
order to provide accurate information about staff work 
activities.  The information is useful for the management to 
plan, schedule, and take appropriate action. Through the 
smart notice board, top-level management can identify 
whether staff are present, absent or busy. In addition, staff 
data can be used for further statistical analyses when top 
level management need to make decisions based on the 
system’s report. 
Scenario: Assume academicians are users in the smart 
notice board working environment. Let U be the set of 
lecturers = {U1,…..,Un}. Lecturers can insert their monthly 
activities in a smart notice board as shown in Table I. The 
activities are based on daily activity, which involves 
contextual ontology. Contextual ontology is referred to as 
the shared understanding of some domains such as entities, 
relations, functions, and instances [28]. It provides a shared 
vocabulary and matches specific user queries, service 
descriptions and information in a context-aware system 
[29]. Each member of staff will input all monthly activities 
for the duration of the office hours (8.00 am – 5.00 pm). 
 
TABLE  I 
SMART NOTICE BOARD REPRESENTATION 
Day 
1 
2 
3 
…… 
…… 
…… 
31 
 
Person 
U1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
U2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
U3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Un 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Users are categorized into two levels; academicians and 
administrators. The users’ contextual activities can be in the 
form of teaching, research and development (RnD Context), 
administration and personal context. Contextual activity 
relates to an event based on three contextual elements, 
 
☺☺☺☺ 
USER 
 
ACTIVITIES 
EVENTS 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-287-5
COLLA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

which are sensed-data, time-line and location. Table 2 
presents the details of the user classification, their 
contextual activities, and events as portrayed in Fig. 1. 
TABLE  II 
CONTEXTUAL ONTOLOGY EXAMPLE 
USER 
CONTEXTUAL 
ACTIVITY 
EVENTS 
 Administration 
 Academicians 
 Dean (U1) 
 Assistant 
Dean (U2) 
 SeniorLecture
r (U3) 
 Lecturer (U4) 
 
 Teaching Context 
 Teaching(C1) 
 Evaluation (C2) 
 Invigilation (C3) 
 RnDContext 
 Conference (R1) 
 Consultation (R2) 
 AdminContext 
 Clerical Work 
(A1) 
 Meeting (A2) 
 Personal Context 
 On Leave (P1) 
 Undefined (P2) 
 SensorData 
 DateNTime 
 Morning(T1) 
 Breakfast(T2) 
 Afternon(T3) 
 Lunch (T4) 
 Evening(T5) 
 Location 
 Home (L1) 
 Office (L2) 
 Classroom (L3) 
 Meeting room 
(L4) 
 Conference 
room(L5) 
 
The activities can be divided into two states: present and 
not present as described in Table 3. The data will be input 
based on individual activity. The contextual activities are 
classified as present (i.e., teaching, consultation and 
meeting) and not present (i.e., conference, on leave, 
undefined). For example, a teaching schedule will be 
extracted from a class schedule, and the faculty provides 
these schedules for each semester. Consultation and on 
leave will be input as individual activities and conferences 
are based on the application and calls for meeting. Each of 
the users will input their activities for the whole semester 
based on the academic calendar, except for on call activities.  
TABLE  III 
CONTEXTUAL ACTIVITY OF STAFF PRESENCE 
User 
Contextual Activity  
Event 
Present 
Not Present 
Dean  
Assistant Dean  
SeniorLecturer  
Lecturer  
 
Class  
Consultation  
Meeting  
 
Conference  
On Leave  
Undefined 
Breakfast 
Lunch 
Classroom 
Meeting room 
Conference 
room 
 
When dealing with a context-aware system, it should 
select the most appropriate content and features depending 
upon the usage context, such as context views [30]. Fig. 2 
summarizes the context view for a smart notice board 
application.  
 
User: 
Contextual activities 
Events: 
 
Lecturer 
(U4) 
Teaching (C1), 
Evaluation (C2), 
Meeting(A2), 
Consultation(R2) 
 
Timeline : 
 Morning(T1),; 
Afternoon(T3);Evening(T5) 
 
Location-: 
Office(L2), Classroom(L3), 
Meeting room(L4) 
Figure 2. Context entities for a smart notice board application 
The context view is used to view shifts from one-node to 
other in the state transition activities. The graphical notation 
simplifies and helps the software developer to analyze, 
redesign and define the software requirements between 
users and environmental services [31],[32]. Fig. 3 shows a 
general context view of the state of transition for 
academician activities during office hours. This scenario 
shows how one user (U4) represents normal daily activities, 
which involve the time-line (i.e., morning (T1), afternoon 
(T3), and evening (T5)), location (i.e., office (L2), classroom 
(L3), meeting room (L4)) and contextual activities (i.e., 
teaching (C1), evaluation (C2), consultation (R2) and 
meeting (A2)). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. General context view of state transition activities 
The activities are considered as dynamic since it might 
change from one-node to another node. All of the activities 
will be analyzed and monitored by top-level administrators. 
They should be aware of each activity in order to identify 
the work status whether the staffs are present, absent or 
busy. The provision of awareness is a key factor for keeping 
users up-to-date with what happens around them [33]. 
Therefore, a notification system is important to deliver 
current information effectively without causing unwanted 
distraction to ongoing tasks [34]. Through the notification 
system, the top-level administrators can use the information 
to make necessary actions and achieve the task objectives. 
We illustrate four scenarios in academic work activities 
to determine the most available time for all academicians’ 
staff. 
The 
scenarios 
show 
common 
activities 
for 
academicians, which involve three contextual entities 
(regardless of their location): 
 
i. User -  Dean (U1), Assistant Dean  (U1), Senior Lecturer 
 
(U1), Lecturer (U4) 
ii. Contextual activities - Available (√), Not available (X) 
iii. Events - D ay (1, 2, 3, and 4) 
Time slots:  Morning (T1), Breakfast (T2), 
Afternoon (T3), Lunch (T4) Evening (T5) 
  
 
User: 
 
 
 
 
Time-line:                                      
 
 
 
Location:                                        
 
 
 
 
Contextual  
Activities: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C
1 
C
2 
A
2 
R
2 
U
4 
 
T
3 
T
1 
T
5 
T
5 
 
L
3 
L
3 
L
2 
L
4 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-287-5
COLLA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

The four scenarios represent the daily activities from day 
one until day four. In each scenario, it will involve the four 
types of user (i.e., dean, assistant dean, senior lecturer, and 
lecturer). The contextual activities are considered as 
available (√) and not available (X). The available activities 
refer to free time, whereas not available means the users are 
on duty (i.e., teaching, conference, meeting, or on leave). 
The events are based on five standard time slots (morning, 
breakfast, afternoon, lunch and evening). The time slot for 
breakfast and lunch are blocked out as break-time.  Each 
user will input data into the smart notice board system. 
  
Scenario 1: In this scenario, it shows that all users are busy 
and not available. 
TABLE  IV 
SCENARIO 1 OF ACADEMICIANS ACTIVITIES 
DAY 
     1 
TIME 
T1 
T2 
T3 
T4 
T5 
USER 
CONTEXTUAL ACTIVITIES 
U1 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
U2 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
U3 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
U4 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
 
Scenario 2: In scenario 2, it shows only 50% of the users 
available during the morning slot and most users are not 
available during the afternoon and evening slots. 
TABLE  V 
SCENARIO 2 OF ACADEMICIANS ACTIVITIES 
DAY 
   3 
TIME 
T1 
T2 
T3 
T4 
T5 
USER 
CONTEXTUAL ACTIVITIES 
U1 
X 
 
X 
 
√ 
U2 
X 
 
X 
 
X 
U3 
√ 
 
X 
 
X 
U4 
√ 
 
√ 
 
X 
 
Scenario 3: In scenario 3, it shows 80% of the users are 
available in the evening slot. 
TABLE  VI 
SCENARIO 3 OF ACADEMICIANS ACTIVITIES 
DAY 
     2 
TIME 
T1 
T2 
T3 
T4 
T5 
USER 
CONTEXTUAL ACTIVITIES 
U1 
X 
 
√ 
 
X 
U2 
√ 
 
X 
 
√ 
U3 
X 
 
X 
 
√ 
U4 
X 
 
X 
 
√ 
 
Scenario 4: In scenario 4, it shows all users (100%) are 
available in the morning slot.   
TABLE  VII 
SCENARIO 4 OF ACADEMICIAN ACTIVITIES 
DAY 
   4 
TIME 
T1 
T2 
T3 
T4 
T5 
USER 
CONTEXTUAL ACTIVITIES 
U1 
√ 
 
X 
 
X 
U2 
√ 
 
√ 
 
X 
U3 
√ 
 
X 
 
X 
U4 
√ 
 
√ 
 
X 
The scenarios show, that the most available time for all 
staff is during scenario 3 (80%) and scenario 4 (100%). 
Therefore, the administrator can monitor and make a 
decision to do any activity such as call a staff meeting, a 
conference or an evaluation of staff performance. As data is 
stored within the computer system, statistical reports along 
with general reports can be produced at real time. Based on 
the context awareness-monitoring model, a smart notice 
board system will be developed. 
 
IV. CONTEXT AWARENESS MONITORING 
MODEL 
Adapted from a previous study (Fig. 4), the monitoring 
manager will interpret, filter and select rules to analyze and 
manage the interactive data.  
 
 
Figure 4. A general context awareness monitoring model [35] 
Based on the four scenarios, the rules represent the logic 
and reasoning mechanism to choose the most available time 
for all staff.  
Scenario 1-4 : General Rules 
 
IF (user({U1,…..,Un}) 
 
 
AND (day(({D1,…..,Dn}) 
 
 
AND (time(({T1,…..,Tn}) 
 
THEN 
 
 
isAvailability ({yes, no}) 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-287-5
COLLA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

The monitoring process deals with the communication 
between at least two of the users who should observe their 
enviroment and activities (shown in Fig. 5). The awareness 
provides information about the activity and the availability 
of all users. Besides the rules, the contextual media (e.g., 
text, graph, colour-coded, keyword, image, and messages), 
will be considered as an important elements to monitor user 
activities within the collaborative workspace [35],[36]. For 
example; the change of colour in text (e.g., available, or not 
available), shows different action has been taken by a user. 
The person who monitored the system, should also be aware 
of the signal given by the other user. 
 
Figure 5. The user interaction in contextual awareness activities [36] 
The implementation of the smart notice board system, 
involves the communication between an object (i.e., user, 
task, and resources) and the monitoring system [37]. This 
communication is governed by a monitoring process, which 
consists of the contextual monitoring components (i.e., 
contextual activity, event, time, and location) as depicted in 
Fig. 6. The sensor-data detects the presence of any action 
during the execution time in the monitoring process system. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. The monitoring process components 
In order to design the smart office notice board system, 
all of the monitoring process components are mapped into 
the context-monitoring model (shown in Fig. 7). 
 
 
Figure 7. Context monitoring model for smart office environment 
 
The context monitoring model design focuses on the 
development for a smart office notice board system. This 
system will be developed and manipulated by programmers 
in commonly available languages (e.g., Java, C, or C++). 
The data analysis is based on the user activities and the 
assessment on the availability of free time for each user. 
Basically, the monitoring process deals with the contextual 
media elements, which automatically senses the contextual 
activities. This will allow sensors to configure the 
appropriate action in response to user requirements. The 
sensors will recognize and respond to the performance of 
the activity. The result of tracking activities will be 
displayed in an assessment console. Through the data 
analysis, this information will be utilized and helps the top-
level management in decision making. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper has analyzed user activities in a smart office 
environment. Basically, a context-aware system involves 
three common entities namely: user, activity and events. We 
Monitoring Process 
Object 
Contextual Activity 
Event 
Time 
Location 
Object 
Contextual Monitoring Component  
Sensor Data 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-287-5
COLLA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

illustrated 
a 
scenario 
of 
contextual 
elements 
for 
academicians in their working environment by using a smart 
notice board prototype. The contextual awareness elements 
provide information about the activities and availability of all 
staff. Finally, a context awareness-monitoring model for the 
smart office environment has been proposed. The context-
aware system should offer easier and more intuitive ways for 
the service provider to add and to subscribe new services 
through the historical context, log in service and feedback 
systems so as to enhance and better deliver a more 
appropriate quality of services [38]. Therefore, our future 
work will analyze and construct a general platform for 
monitoring a user activities system, which can be applied to 
any smart office environment. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank Ministry of Higher 
Education and University Technology MARA Malaysia 
(RAGS Grant) for the financial support. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
W. Geyer, H. Richter, L. Fuchs, T. Frauenhofer, S. 
Daijavad, S. Poltrock, and I. B. M. T. J. Watson, “A team 
collaboration space supporting capture and access of 
virtual meetings,” 2001, pp. 188–196. 
[2] 
A. G. De Prado, “Context-Aware Services : A Survey on 
Current Proposals,” Service Computation 2011, The Third 
International 
Conferences 
on 
Advanced 
Service 
Computing, pp. 104–109, 2011. 
[3] 
G. Niezen, B. J. J. van der Vlist, J. Hu, and L. M. G. Feijs, 
“From events to goals: Supporting semantic interaction in 
smart environments,” The IEEE symposium on Computers 
and Communications, pp. 1029–1034, Jun. 2010. 
[4] 
J. Krumm, S. Shafer, and A. Wison, “How a Smart 
Environment Can Use Perception,” in Workshop on 
Sensing and Perception for Ubiquitous Computing (part of 
UbiComp 2001). 
[5] 
C. Ramos, G. Marreiros, R. Santos, and C. F. Freitas, 
“Smart 
Offices 
and 
Intelligent 
Decision 
Rooms,” 
Handbook 
of 
Ambient 
Intelligence 
and 
Smart 
Environments, pp. 851–880, 2010. 
[6] 
J. Weissman and Z. Zhang, “Smart Environments : 
Middleware Building Blocks for Pervasive Network 
Computing ( A Position Paper ),” Developing an 
Infrastructure for Mobile and Wireless Systems, pp. 90–
105, 2002. 
[7] 
M. Youngblood, D. J. Cook, and L. B. Holder, 
“Seamlessly Engineering a Smart Environment,” 2005 
IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man and 
Cybernetics, vol. 1, pp. 548–553. 
[8] 
A. K. Dey, G. D. Abowd, and D. Salber, “A Context-Based 
Infrastructure for Smart Environments,” pp. 1–15, 1999. 
[9] 
D. J. Cook, “Multi-agent smart environments,” Journal of 
Ambient Intelligence and Smart Environments, vol. 1, pp. 
51–55, 2009. 
[10] 
M. Lyons, P. Lyons, A. T. Cong, H. J. Steinhauer, S. 
Marsland, J. Dietrich, and H. W. Guesgen, “Exploring The 
Responsibilities Of Single- Inhabitant Smart Homes With 
Use Cases,” Journal of Ambient Intelligence and Smart 
Environments, vol. 2, pp. 211–232, 2010. 
[11] 
M. Jahn, M. Jentsch, C. R. Prause, F. Pramudianto, A. Al-
akkad, S. Birlinghoven, and S. Augustin, “The Energy 
Aware Smart Home,” in Future Information Technology 
(Future Tech), 2010, pp. 1–8. 
[12] 
A. Helal, D. J. Cook, and M. Schmalz, “Smart home-based 
health platform for behavioral monitoring and alteration of 
diabetes patients.,” Journal of diabetes science and 
technology, vol. 3, no. 1, p. 141, Jan. 2009. 
[13] 
A. Coronato, M. Esposito, and G. Pietro, “A multimodal 
semantic location service for intelligent environments: an 
application for Smart Hospitals,” Personal and Ubiquitous 
Computing, vol. 13, no. 7, pp. 527–538, Apr. 2009. 
[14] 
S. 
K. 
Lo, 
“A 
collaborative 
multi-agent 
message 
transmission mechanism in intelligent transportation 
system–A smart freeway example,” vol. 184, pp. 246–265, 
2012. 
[15] 
I. Marsá-maestre, E. De Hoz, B. Alarcos, and J. R. 
Velasco, “A Hierarchical , Agent-based Approach to 
Security in Smart Offices,” 2006. 
[16] 
C. Röcker, “Services and Applications for Smart Office 
Environments - A Survey of State-of-the-Art Usage 
Scenarios,” International Conference on Computer and 
Information Technology (ICCIT 2010), pp. 385–401, 2010. 
[17] 
M. Danninger and R. Stiefelhagen, “A context-aware 
virtual secretary in a smart office environment,” in 
Proceeding of the 16th ACM international conference on 
Multimedia, 2008, 2008, pp. 529–538. 
[18] 
J. Petzold, F. Bagci, W. Trumler, and T. Ungerer, “Next 
Location Prediction Within a Smart Office Building,” 
Cognitive Science Research Paper Unversity of Sussex 
CSRP, vol. 577, p. 69, 2005. 
[19] 
H. Vahdat-nejad, K. Zamanifar, and N. Nematbakhsh, 
“Context-Aware Middleware Architecture for Smart Home 
Environment,” vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 77–86, 2013. 
[20] 
Y. Lee, S. Oh, C. Shin, and W. Woo, “Ubiquitous Virtual 
Reality and Its Key Dimension” Proc. of IWUVR, vol. 9, 
pp. 5–8, 2009. 
[21] 
M. Vladoiu and Z. Constantinescu, “U - Learning Within 
A Context-Aware,” vol. 3, no. 1, 2011. 
[22] 
A. Kofod-petersen, “Using Activity Theory to Model 
Context Awareness : a Qualitative Case Study,” Modeling 
and Retrieval of Context, pp. 1–17, 2006. 
[23] 
A. Soylu, P. De Causmaecker, and P. Desmet, “Context 
and Adaptivity in Context-Aware Pervasive Computing 
Environments,” 2009 Symposia and Workshops on 
Ubiquitous, Autonomic and Trusted Computing, pp. 94–
101, 2009. 
[24] 
A. K. Dey and G. D. Abowd, “Towards a Better 
Understanding of Context and,” 1999, pp. 304–307. 
[25] 
N. Villegas and H. Muller, “Managing dynamic context to 
optimize smart interactions and services,” The smart 
internet, pp. 289–318, 2010. 
[26] 
G. M. Kapitsaki, G. N. Prezerakos, N. D. Tselikas, and I. 
S. Venieris, “Context-aware service engineering: A 
survey,” Journal of Systems and Software, vol. 82, no. 8, 
pp. 1285–1297, Aug. 2009. 
[27] 
A. Nivala and L. T. Sarjakoski, “Need for Context-Aware 
Topographic Maps in Mobile Devices,” Proceeding of 
ScanGIS 2003, pp. 15–29, 2003. 
[28] 
T. Gu, X. H. Wang, H. K. Pung, and D. Q. Zhang, “An 
Ontology-based 
Context 
Model 
in 
Intelligent 
Environments,” Proceeding of communication networks 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-287-5
COLLA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

and 
distributed 
systems 
modeling 
and 
simulation 
conference, pp. 270–275, 2004. 
[29] 
T. Broens, S. Pokraev, M. Van Sinderen, J. Koolwaaij, and 
D. 
Costa, 
“Context-aware, 
ontology-based, 
service 
discovery,” Ambient Intelligent, pp. 72–83, 2004. 
[30] 
T. Hussein, W. Gaulke, and T. Linder, “Improving 
collaboration by using context views ¨,” 2010. 
[31] 
R. Paiano, A. Pandurino, L. Mangia, P. Marra, and M. 
Russo, “Collaborative Business Applications: A New 
Methodological Approach,” IBIMA Business Review 
Journal, vol. 2011, pp. 1–18, Jun. 2011. 
[32] 
A. R. Tripathi, D. Kulkarni, and T. Ahmed, “A 
specification 
model 
for 
context-based 
collaborative 
applications,” Pervasive and Mobile Computing, vol. 1, no. 
1, pp. 21–42, Mar. 2005. 
[33] 
L. Ardissono and G. Bosio, “Context-dependent awareness 
support in open collaboration environments,” User 
Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 
223–254, Aug. 2011. 
[34] 
L. McCrickard, D. S., Czerwinski, M., & Bartram, 
“Introduction: design and evaluation of notification user 
interfaces.,” Journal of Human-Computer Studies, vol. 
58(5), pp. 509–514., 2003. 
[35] 
N. A. A. Fadzillah, N. Omar, and S. Z. Z. Abidin, “A 
Framework for Monitoring User Activities in Networked 
Collaborative Workspace.” Unpublished. 
[36] 
N. A. A. Fadzillah, N. Omar, and S. Z. Z. Abidin, 
“Activity-Based Entities Relationship in Monitoring 
Context Awareness,” in Context-Aware Systems and 
Applications, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013, pp. 1–9. 
[37] 
N. A. A. Fadzillah, N. Omar, and S. Z. Z. Abidin, 
“Application-based context awareness in collaborative 
workspaces: A Review,” 2012, pp. 411–415. 
[38] 
S. Lee, J. Chang, and S. Lee, “Survey and Trend Analysis 
of Context-Aware Systems,” Information An International 
Interdisciplinary Journal, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 527–548, 
2011.  
 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-287-5
COLLA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

