Valuing Built Heritage through the Promotion of Oral Heritage via Participation in 
the Digital Age 
Feedback from the Stories of the Old City of Kairouan 
Khaoula Stiti  
BATir dept. - Université Libre de 
Bruxelles   
Brussels, Belgium 
National School of Architecture and 
Urban Planning – University of 
Carthage 
Tunis, Tunisia  
e-mail: Khaoula.stiti@ulb.be 
Safa Achour  
National School of Architecture and 
Urban Planning – University of 
Carthage 
Tunis, Tunisia  
 e-mail: 
safa.achouryounsi@enau.ucar.tn  
 
 
Samia Ben Rajeb 
BATir dept. - Université Libre de 
Bruxelles   
Brussels, Belgium 
e-mail:  samia.ben.rajeb@ulb.be 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract— As part of the tools of the recent global boom in the 
democratization 
of 
knowledge, 
Information 
and 
Communication Technologies (ICT) have been giving growing 
support to participation in cultural heritage. This paper 
presents “Ahkili Aliha”, an event during which tribunes of 
speech were open to the inhabitants of Kairouan, Tunisia, 
serving the (re)promotion of the patrimonial site of Kairouan 
through the promotion of oral heritage and collective memory. 
Based on the Ahkili Aliha event case study, the main objective of 
this research is to examine the relevance and contribution of 
participation and ICT for the promotion of oral heritage and 
consequently the promotion of built heritage of patrimonial 
sites. The study presents critical analyses of the linearity of the 
patrimonialization process in old Tunisian cities and 
considers the role of participation and ICT in resuming paused 
or incomplete patrimonialization processes.  
Keywords- participation; ICT; oral heritage; built heritage; 
patrimonialization; collaborative action research. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Two perceptions of the heritage seem to be often in 
opposition: while researchers perceive the heritage as a 
testimony of the history and a necessary element to preserve 
the memory of the past, the people perceive the heritage as 
buildings and territories to be lived in according to living 
arrangements today 1. At the same time, another opposition 
is existing between tangible and intangible heritage. Eichler 
2 emphasizes the existence of patterns of neo-colonialism 
that may subject communities to complementary power 
asymmetries that jeopardize their authoritative voices 
throughout intangible cultural heritage practices: neo-
colonial relations become apparent in a variety of ways, 
encompassing written versus oral heritage, material versus 
intangible heritage, disadvantaged regions under the 
UNESCO umbrella and ultimately competing State alliances 
played out to the detriment of the Global South. The main 
objective of this article is to examine (1) the capacity of 
participation 
and 
Information 
and 
Communication 
Technologies (ICT) to promote oral heritage, and (2) the 
capacity of oral heritage promotion on built heritage. We 
focus on how intervening in collaborative action research 
makes possible and activates the feeling of belonging of 
participants, allowing them to retrace the history of the city 
and better promote the oral and built heritage. For this 
purpose, the article is based on feedback from the 
collaborative action-research project Ahkili Aliha. This 
project aimed to involve young people in the promotion of 
the historical center of their city by creating an immersive 
journey through stories told by the inhabitants retracing the 
memory of places and buildings.  The specificity of this 
project was to promote the patrimonial site of the old city of 
Kairouan through activities carried out by youth and non-
experts in cultural heritage and history while involving 
experts and researchers in these fields. The aim was to 
maintain links of dialogues without hierarchal distinction 
between institutional knowledge and non-institutional 
knowledge and between tangible heritage and intangible 
heritage, in this case, oral heritage. The article first describes 
the frameworks we used to carry out our study: the context of 
the feedback project Ahkili Aliha, its approach: the 
collaborative action research, and the theoretical framework: 
the process of patrimonialization of Tunisian old cities. Then, 
it exposes the research design through a presentation of the 
research problem, the research methods, and the case study 
of Ahkili Aliha. The overview of the results allowed us to 
validate the role of participation and ICT in heritage 
promotion through the examination of the different 
components of the project Ahkili Aliha. The study presents 
critical analyses of the linearity of the patrimonialization 
process in old Tunisian cities and considers the role of 
participation and ICT in resuming paused or incomplete 
patrimonialization processes.  
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-976-8
COLLA 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

II. 
RESEARCH FRAMEWORKS 
A. Research context: Ahkili Aliha project  
       The researchers of Université Libre de Bruxelles, 
Belgium (ULB) and the members of Edifices & Mémoires, 
Tunisia (E&M) defined the Ahkili Aliha project in line with 
mobilizing young people to fight against the destruction of 
cultural heritage.  Ahkili Aliha means in Arabic “tell me 
about it/her”. In this context, Ahki can also be translated as 
narrate, tale and yarn. The targeted objectives were to enrich 
a collective memory around multiple and shared values and 
to contribute to the feeling of common belonging: living 
together. Kairouan, known as one of the oldest UNESCO 
sites in Tunisia and referred to as the fourth holy (or sacred) 
city of Islam and the first holy city in North Africa, has 
witnessed several activities related to violent extremism in 
recent years. The Medina of Kairouan has problems with 
security and delinquency and several young people have been 
radicalized. To tackle this issue, Ahkili Aliha project aimed to 
promote a sense of identity and belonging in youth in their 
city. The funding of Ahkili Aliha was obtained from the 
“Prevent Violent Extremism” fund from the United Nations, 
co-funded by the Government of Canada. 
The vision of the project was to help ward off violence 
and extremism is to help youth speak up and/or act. To do 
this, the research over nine months (April to November 2019) 
had brought together different partners:  
• 
Key civil society organization: Edifices & 
Mémoires (E&M), a Tunisian nongovernmental 
organization working for the preservation and 
promotion of the Tunisian architectural and 
urban heritage through communication between 
scientific research and citizen action. It aims to 
bring together several disciplines related to the 
appropriation of heritage to go beyond simplistic 
museification 
in 
favor 
of 
a 
global, 
contextualized, and multidisciplinary reflection 
on heritage and the awareness of collective 
memory. E&M considers that the challenge is to 
move from a “frozen” heritage to a heritage 
designed and lived by all. 
• 
Scientific 
partner: 
research 
unit 
AIA 
Architectural engineering, BATir department, 
Ecole Polytechnique; Université libre de 
Bruxelles. 
The 
unit 
is 
specialized 
in 
participatory approaches and the study of citizen 
actions in favor of collective intelligence.  
• 
Institutional partner: National Heritage Institute, 
Tunisia. The immediate partner was the regional 
office of the National Heritage Institute in 
Kairouan. 
• 
Local civil society organizations: the main local 
civil society organizations are: We Love 
Kairouan, Junior Chamber International of 
Kairouan, UNESCO, ISESCO, ALECSO Club 
of Kairouan. These organizations helped reach a 
big number of the population, especially young 
people, 
for 
the 
implementation 
of 
the 
project.             
     The complete organigramme of Ahkili Aliha is presented 
in Figure 1 below.  
 
 
Figure 1. Ahkili Aliha organizational chart 
 
In previous work “in press” 3, we classified 
participation actors into three groups: actors by knowing, 
actors by knowledge, and actors by action. In Ahkili Aliha 
project, actors by knowing are represented in the local civil 
society organizations as well as inhabitants who participated 
in the project. Actors by knowledge are represented in the 
scientific partner, the experts, as well as the managers from 
E&M since they are all architects and experts in built 
heritage. Actors by action are represented in the funders and 
the institutional partners in Kairouan. The project manager 
played an important and crucial role in the project 
implementation. The financial, logistic, and administrative 
managing was guaranteed in collaboration with the different 
officers from E&M. Born and raised in the city of Kairouan, 
the project manager had ease to connect with the local civil 
society organizations for the punctual collaboration. The 
scientific partners cooperated with the project manager to 
guarantee the scientific application of the participatory 
approach followed in Ahkili Aliha. A regular contact with 
funders was established between the project manager and the 
administrative representative of UNESCO and the “Prevent 
Violent Extremism” fund. Since the project manager was also 
an architect and a doctoral researcher in ICT use in heritage 
promotion, she was an actor by knowing and an actor by 
knowledge at the same time. Collaborative action-research 
was the approach followed in Ahkili Aliha and the framework 
for the interactions between actors.   
B. Ahkili Aliha as action-research project 
       Training in the safeguarding and in the promotion of 
cultural heritage and encouraging and supporting creativity 
among youth was among the aims of this action-research 
project. Action research is a proactive strategy in which 
research has political and social relevance. Action research in 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-976-8
COLLA 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

architecture and design is a form of learning through 
doing/making, which chimes both with Paulo Friere’s 
conceptions of learning during action 4,  and importantly 
with a core tenet of participatory design, mutual learning 5. 
In action research, it is important from an epistemological 
point of view to clearly identify the difference between the 
research question targeted by researchers and the action 
expected by the people. In Ahkili Aliha, the researchers aimed 
to validate the role of participation and ICT in valuing oral 
heritage to promote built heritage, while the action fulfilled 
by the inhabitants, elder people and youth especially, was to 
organize the event of Ahkili Aliha, as a day where both oral 
heritage and built heritage from aside, and both institutional 
knowledge and non-institutional knowledge are celebrated. 
C. Theoretical framework: Patrimonialization of Tunisian 
old cities 
       In this section, we build a theoretical framework for 
patrimonialization based on the works of Emmanuel 
Amougou 6 and Zeineb Youssef 7 to discuss later in this 
paper the roles that participation and ICT can play in the 
patrimonialization process. In the book “The patrimonial 
question”, the process of patrimonialization creates links, 
requirements, and implications according to Amougou. 
Among these elements, we cite (1) the social global links (the 
emergence of the question of heritage and its (re)definition, 
(2) the institutionalization (the mechanisms of diffusion of 
the patrimonial legitime values), (3) the professionalization 
(confirmation invention of agents on object, knowledge 
speech, practices and techniques of legitimation), (4) new 
social links appearing to redefine objects from new social 
challenges) and (5) the practical traductions (applications of 
different dispositions such us restoring, renovation, etc.). 
      Youssef 
[7] 
emphasizes 
that 
the 
process 
of 
patrimonialization is linear and composed of phases sub-
composed of steps. Thus, as said by Youssef, the construction 
of the patrimonial profile for Tunisian medinas is possible 
within 6 different scenarios according to the steps they are 
composed of. The process of patrimonialization is composed 
of 3 phases: identification, conservation, and exploitation. 
The first phase of identification is composed of awareness 
and selection. The second phase of conservation is composed 
of protection and conservation. The final phase of 
exploitation is composed of exhibition and valorization. 
Different scenarios can result from the presence and/or the 
absence of steps in each context. The following table 
explains each scenario according to the patrimonialization 
steps achieved. 
 
 
Figure 2. Phases and steps of patrimonialization adapted from Youssef [7]. 
III. RESEARCH DESIGN 
A. Research problem  
     In the Ahkili Aliha case study that we analyze in the 
following pages, we shall examine the capacity of 
participation and ICT to promote oral heritage, and therefore, 
the promotion of built heritage. We focus on how intervening 
in collaborative action research makes possible and activates 
the feeling of belonging of participants, allowing them to 
retrace the history of the city and better promote the oral and 
built heritage.  
B. Research methods  
     The research design is based on two techniques involving 
collecting qualitative data and adapted to action-research 
projects. While the first part consists of the research design 
aims to reconstruct the Ahkili Aliha project process through 
documents analysis, the second part is based on participant 
observation carried out during the first participatory 
workshop and meetings with the E&M team. Since 
participant observation didn’t take place during the entire 
project, it was completed by the documents analysis 
technique. Thus, it can be said that this study uses grounded 
theory methods composed of two different techniques to 
achieve comprehensive and authentic data collection.  
1) In-Depth documents analysis 
    Document analysis is often used in combination with other 
qualitative research methods as a means of triangulation ‘the 
combination of methodologies in the study of the same 
phenomenon 8. Drawing upon multiple (at least two) 
sources of evidence; that is, to seek convergence and 
corroboration using different data sources and methods. 
Apart from documents, such sources include interviews, 
participant or non-participant observation, and physical 
artifacts 9. The documents that we analyze in our study are 
produced before, during, and after the project, mainly project 
submission documents, periodic reports to funders, and 
emails between the people involved in the project. 
 
 
 
 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-976-8
COLLA 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

2) Participant-observation  
     Participant observation can be used to explore the entire 
range of themes and topics that qualitative research methods 
are generally used for and may be particularly useful 
whenever the aim is to understand a phenomenon or a setting 
from the perspective of those who live, experience, and/ or 
are affected by it. It is also a research approach that may be 
exploited in participatory action research 10. We were able 
to observe the interactions between the people involved in the 
project during the project and after that. In the next section, 
we describe the two participatory workshops which took 
place in the beginning and in the middle of the Ahkili 
Aliha project, since they were the major occasion where 
different actors had the opportunity to meet and design 
together. 
C. Choice of components of Ahkili Aliha Project  
      The phases of the collaborative methodology of the Ahkili 
Aliha project had been specified to ensure the participation of 
the partners in all the phases of the project.  Table I details 
each component (first column) by specifying the different 
steps that have been given and prepared (second column) and 
the activities realized (third column) with the partners 
involved (fourth column).  
TABLE I.  
COMPONENTS OF THE AHKILI ALIHA PROJECT 
Components 
Steps 
Activites 
Partners included  
I. Promotion of 
the collective 
memory of a 
place, the route 
Taking contact 
- Town and neighbourhood visit  
- Identification of historical buildings 
- Selection of the lead narrator 
- Édifices & Mémoires 
- Local CSO 
Participatory 
workshop 
- Study of selected buildings to identify the main elements of the route: 
history, architectural value, personal value, choice of place 
- Identification of locations (including the location of the central stage) 
according to the potential of the place to convert it into a stage, the 
proximity of the different places with the length of the route, the 
accessibility 
- Checking the coherence between the selected buildings and the main 
narrative told on the urban scene  
- Identification of related activities 
-  Route design 
- Édifices & Mémoires 
- Lead narrator 
- Local CSO 
- Scientific partner 
Realization 
- Dissemination of the event and its publication  
- Preparation of related activities (local products booths)  
- Preparation of guided tours 
- Preparation of music concert by local musicians at the end of the route  
- Cultural Professionals (artists, experts 
in cultural management and in 
mediation) 
- Édifices & Mémoires 
- Local CSO 
- Scientific partner 
Simulation 
-  Design an urban scene in the city (also starting point for the guided 
tours) 
All partners 
II. Promote the 
individual 
memory of a 
place, the box 
Taking contact & 
workshop 
- Meet the young people interested in the project through local CSO 
- Select Profiles 
- Identify the stories to capture in the box 
- Define the place where the box is set up 
- Professionals in video capturing and 
processing 
- Édifices & Mémoires 
- Lead narrator 
- Local CSO 
- Scientific partner 
Training 
- Prepare young people to conduct an interview with the people to be 
interviewed in the box 
Box design & 
installation 
- Choosing the van where the filming will take place 
- Customizing the van with the parameters of visibility, its identity 
image, its intimacy as the filming place and the security of the 
equipment contained therein  
Concretisation 
- Filming and capturing  
- Processing the captured data 
- Professionals in video capturing and 
processing 
- Édifices & Mémoires 
- Narrators 
- Local CSO 
- Scientific partner 
Simulation 
- Test the feasibility of the projection and the equipment at the selected 
locations along the route 
III. Ahkili Aliha 
narration & route event 
- Urban storytelling event: guided tours provided by the young people 
who participated in the workshops: screening of the catches, 
exhibition of local products, discovery of the built heritage of the city  
- Musical concert on stage  
All partners 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-976-8
COLLA 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

IV. RESEARCH RESULTS  
A. Participation to promote the oral heritage  
1) Participation to promote the collective memory of a 
place, the Route 
     The participatory workshop that took place at the 
beginning of the project allowed the participants to 
express their relationships with the heritage of their city as 
well as engage in participatory reflections to choose together 
the route and the delimitation of the area of activities. This 
co-design of the event encourages formal and informal 
moments of exchange, by mixing all the partners, which 
allowed a better appropriation of the project by the 
participants. The co-creation of the route allowed the 
reshaping of the collective memory of the city that the 
participants have in common. 
 
 
Figure 3. The partners during the participatory workshop. 
 
2) Participation to promote the individual memories of a 
place, Stories from the Box 
        The box installed open to the public served to capture 
the stories of the city through the testimonies of its 
inhabitants. This box was a van equipped with cameras, 
microphones, and light. The van was rented and decorated on 
both sides and from behind with a catchphrase written in 
Tunisian dialect to attract the attention of passers-by. The 
project took the same design of the van's skin for the banner 
to keep the same visual identity. The banner was fixed on the 
rampart of the old city in the Martyrs Square where the 
billboards of the major cultural events and citizen actions of 
the city are fixed. It is also used to warn passers-by, when the 
van is not parked, of the date and time of the opening of the 
studio. The van was parked all week of registration in the 
same square, which gives access to the Medina. It was the 
liveliest square with the most frequented cafés by most of the 
people who live or have lived in Kairouan and who present 
the project’s target for the interviews. In front of this square, 
there is a commercial district and the cultural complex of the 
city which are frequented rather by young people.  The studio 
is open every day at the Martyrs Square from 6pm to 10pm 
to avoid the daytime heat and to have the presence of the 
inhabitants who frequent the square to drink a coffee, meet 
their friends or take a walk in the old city. In the mornings, 
the van recording team went to people who could not move 
to the Martyrs Square and with whom they have made 
appointments in advance to interview them. Therefore, this 
was an opportunity to go around the city to have more 
visibility and make the project known. 
 
 
Figure 4. The van designed for recording the stories. 
 
       In the box, one could thus enter it to tell in complete 
intimacy the aspect of the city they want to share (urban 
legend, historical fact, a story about an important personality, 
significant event, etc.). This Box allowed people who have 
oral narratives around the history of the city, the 
neighborhood, a character, event, and even legends to tell and 
share them. All these catches were processed and then 
disseminated on the day of the event in various places that 
were visited and open to the public as part of the route 
organized.  Recording interviews was the major step in the 
project. It made it possible to create all the social and 
historical content for the programming of the event and the 
visit route of the monuments.  
 
 
Figure 5. A person telling their memories in the box (left) and a person 
telling their memories indoors (right). 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-976-8
COLLA 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

B. ICT and media use to promote the heritage  
       In cultural heritage, people draw upon the digital 
technologies of social media to represent their heritage 
independently of museums and archives 11. In this regard, 
the activities performed by people can be individual 
practices, social media presence and the organizational 
network of NGOs, local traditional media, and public 
archives constitutes the crowdsourced heritage 12. In Ahkili 
Aliha, both “conventional” media like Radio and ICT like 
social media were used to promote the event and engage more 
people. Social media accounts managed by E&M were used 
to encourage participation, while radio was used to promote 
the event.  
1) Social media event teaser 
    A mobilization video was broadcasted via the Edifices et 
Mémoires Facebook page. The date chosen to lunch the 
teaser was August 10, 2019, a day before Eid (a religious 
celebration for Muslims). While the Eid is celebrated across 
Tunisia, where it’s an official day off, it represents great 
importance for Kairouan due to its Islamic heritage. The 
event teaser published was accompanied by a text in Arabic 
and French communicating the concept of the Ahkili 
Aliha project and specifying the dates and the place of 
recording of the interviews. To reach a maximum number of 
people, the Ahkili Aliha project members chose three 
influential people to tell the story that links each one of them 
to the heritage of Kairouan. This aimed to show that heritage 
belongs to everyone and is not reserved for an elite or experts 
and to ensure high visibility of the event and encourage 
people to participate in the recordings. These people 
appearing in the teaser represent a variety of profiles, 
including:  
• 
First person: a septuagenarian who lived in the 
Medina of Kairouan for several years. His testimony 
presents a "social proof" to encourage the less young 
and the inhabitants of the Medina to come and tell 
their stories.  
• 
Second person: a basketball player who is an 
emblematic figure of Kairouan. His appearance in 
the video represented a surprise to his fans who 
expected an interview about a basketball game or his 
sports career. In the video the player sent a message 
to the inhabitants of Kairouan to safeguard this 
heritage that presents their identity. His appearance 
aroused the interest of young fans of this player in 
the heritage of Kairouan.  
• 
Third person: a young woman active on social 
networks. After telling her story, the woman 
launches a call for participation in the Ahkili Aliha 
project.            In 
the 
teaser, not 
putting 
a 
recognized expert in the video was decided by 
the Ahkili Aliha project designers (1) to show that 
heritage is not only limited to experts and (2) to 
confirm that oral heritage is also cultural heritage 
that can be shared and promoted thanks to the 
contributions of the inhabitants.  
2) Radio  
    The concept and objectives of the project, as well as the 
funding agencies and partners, were presented by the project 
manager in a morning radio show in August 2019. The 
purpose of the radio talk for the Ahkili Aliha project members 
was to invite listeners to participate in the week of recording 
interviews and to announce the date of the closing event. The 
use of Radio was also to reach an audience who is still using 
the conventional media channel.  
C. Oral heritage promotion for built heritage promotion 
  Interactive visit routes have been set up, in close 
collaboration with the partners, highlighting the lived and 
told stories of the selected neighborhood. Through the visits, 
2 main objectives were targeted: First, raise awareness among 
people of the rich oral heritage being a gateway for a better 
appropriation and promotion of their built heritage. And 
second, in the longer term, fight against the destruction of 
cultural heritage through training in the safeguarding of 
cultural heritage.  
 
 
 
Figure 6. Visitors exploring the old city during the Ahkili Aliha event day. 
 
      Local musicians performed a concert at the end of the 
guided tours. Some stalls were set up to sell and promote 
regional products or local crafts. The aim of the event day 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-976-8
COLLA 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

was to create an opportunity to transmit the collective 
memory from one generation to another. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
A. Non-linearity of Patrimonialization process 
     The medina of Kairouan is a UNESCO heritage since 
1988. To be included on the World Heritage List, sites must 
be of outstanding universal value and meet at least one out of 
ten selection criteria. The old city of Kairouan meets five out 
of the ten selection criteria of UNESCO. We emphasize that 
the old city of Kairouan has reached at least the step of 
conservation for two reasons: (1) due to its UNESCO heritage 
classification and the national and regional efforts to preserve 
the old city, and (2) the institutionalization, the 
professionalization, and the practical traductions are 
confirmed. This leads to four possible scenarios when it 
comes to the patrimonialization of the old city of Kairouan: 
either it is in full patrimonialization process, in a de-
patrimonialization scenario, or in re-patrimonialization or in 
an over-patrimonialization scenario.  
 
 
Figure 7. Phases and steps of possible patrimonialization scenarios for the 
old city of Kairouan. 
 
Based on the participant-observant method, we found out that 
“celebrating” the city, is a common feeling among its 
inhabitants on specific religious occasions, such as the month 
of Ramadan and the celebration of the birthday of the prophet 
Mohamed. This temporary, but strong connection to the old 
city is widely present and shared among the participants 
of Ahkili Aliha project. While in the rest of the year, 
participants said they experienced feelings of belonging to 
their city, these feelings seem to be not as strong as during 
the special occasions. This helps us deduct that the 
patrimonialization process of the old city of Kairouan, is not 
a constant linear phenomenon. In fact, it seems to be a variant 
cyclical phenomenon, that depends on different factors, such 
as the times and the occasions of the connection that the 
inhabitants feel toward their heritage, and therefore the 
practices they have in the city and other political events that 
tend to value, even “glorify” the cities. We cite here the 
example of the designation of Kairouan as the Islamic Culture 
Capital for 2009 by The Islamic World Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organization, ICESCO. Once a step 
is achieved the patrimonialization process is done, it can be 
also withdrawn or broken if the factor behind it is not present 
anymore. Hence, we represent the patrimonialization process 
as a succession of phases, such as Youssef [7]. Every step 
takes the form of a circle, to represent two scenarios: (1) with 
the horizontal arrow to signify that the step may lead 
thereafter but directly to the next step, or (2) with two circular 
arrows, to signify that the step may be withdrawn and lead to 
the previous step. 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Patrimonialization process in nonlinear representation 
 
While the absence of the steps of the phase of exploitation 
does not cancel the patrimonialization process, we emphasize 
that participation and ICT can be a tool to fill the gaps of the 
missing steps in uncomplete or broken patrimonialization 
process scenarios.  
B. The role of participation and ICT to resume or restore 
broken exploitation steps in patrimonialization  
     The new dimensions of cultural practices have generally 
been articulated around the notions of networking, 
connectivity, and participation. The new media, such as the 
ones based on ICT, are a major part of participatory cultural 
systems 13. In the patrimonialization process, the actors 
play different roles in the steps. While the Faro convention 
puts the people at the heart of the processes of identification, 
management, and sustainable use of heritage, some steps of 
the patrimonialization are still exclusive to the actors by 
action and actors by knowledge (our last work to cite), mainly 
the protection and conservation steps. While participation 
guarantees the inclusion of a big number of actors around 
cultural heritage projects and experiences, it plays an 
important role in the reconciliation of tangible heritage and 
intangible heritage. The study case of Ahkili Aliha allowed us 
to show that actors by knowing to contribute more with 
knowledge related to intangible heritage, such as stories and 
legends, while the actors by knowledge contribute with their 
expertise in built heritage, such as information about history 
and buildings. Participation represents the core concept, with 
a variety of approaches to follow, in the Ahkili Aliha project 
it is the collaborative action-research. ICT represent the tool 
that 
provides 
a 
common 
ground 
for 
actors 
of 
patrimonialization to meet and share their knowledge. 
Together, participation and ICT provide an opportunity for 
cities like Kairouan, to resume and restore their 
patrimonialization process.  
 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-976-8
COLLA 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9. The steps of exhibition and/or valorization (in green) where 
participation and ICT can play a role to resume uncompleted or suspended 
or broken patrimonialization process. 
VI. CONCLUSION 
Contributions. This article has made it possible to highlight 
the contribution of participation and ICT in a context for the 
promotion of oral heritage and built heritage in the 
framework of collaborative action research. It also allowed to 
underline that the promotion of the built heritage and 
patrimonial sites cannot be done independently from the 
promotion of oral heritage and the other constituents of the 
intangible heritage.  The discussion allowed to consider the 
role of ICT and participation in the steps of exhibition and/or 
valorization to resume uncompleted or suspended or broken 
patrimonialization process.  
 
Prospects. A crucial work is to be expected as a result of this 
project, which consists of analyzing the data collected from 
the box of Ahkili Aliha project. The data captured can 
represent solid work support for a reflection on patrimonial 
values of heritage and their links with different actors 
identified since the heritage value cannot simply be linked to 
the historical value but its nonquantified values to the 
individuals and the communities. 
      When it comes to the future of the Ahkili Aliha project, 
the Regional Commission of Culture had expressed its 
interest in inviting the project team to present the Ahkili Aliha 
project as part of the Kairouan Intangible Heritage Festival 
that will take place in April 2020 (unfortunately it was 
postponed because of the pandemic). The partner 
associations and citizen volunteers who participated in the 
Ahkili Aliha project also expressed their interest in making 
the second edition of Ahkili Aliha Kairouan in the period of 
Mouled, a religious festivity that the city of Kairouan is 
known for. 
REFERENCES 
1 S. Ben Rajeb and H. Béjar, “Participatory Approach for a 
"Collaborative Heritage Observatory" in Tunisia”, The Ninth 
International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, 
Systems and Applications), IARIA, 2019, pp 12-19, ISBN: 978-1-
61208-722-1 
2 J. Eichler “Intangible cultural heritage, inequalities and 
participation: who decides on heritage?”, The International Journal 
of Human Rights, 25:5, pp 793-814, Sept. 2020, doi: 
10.1080/13642987.2020.1822821 
3 K. Stiti and S. Ben Rajeb, “2W + 1H systematic review to 
(re)draw Actors and Challenges of Participation(s): Focus on 
Cultural Heritage”, Architecture, ISSN: 2673-8945 
4 P. Friere, “Pedagogy of the oppressed”, New York: The 
Continuum International Publishing Group Inc, 1970 
5 F. Kensing and J. Greenbaum, “Heritage: Having a say”, 
Routledge international handbook of participatory design, pp. 21-
36, 2013 
6 
E. 
Amougou, 
« La 
question 
patrimoniale. 
De 
la 
« patrimonialisation » à l’examen des situations concrètes », 
L’Harmattan, Paris, 282 p, 2004 
7 Z. Youssef and F. Kharrat, « Le processus de patrimonialisation 
des Médinas de Sousse et Mahdia en Tunisie: vers la reconstitution, 
l'évaluation et la comparaison », International conférence : Les 
Médinas à l'époque contemporaine (XX-XXI e siècles): oscillations 
entre patrimonialisation et marginalisation, Tours, France, 2015 
8 N. K. Denzin, “The research act: A theoretical introduction to 
sociological methods”, New York: Aldine,  p. 291, 1970. 
9 R. K. Yin, “Case study research: Design and methods”, 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1994 
10 M. Minkler and N. Wallerstein, “Community based 
participatory research for health: Process to outcomes”, 2nd Edition, 
Jossey Bass, San Francisco, 2008 
11 A. van der Hoeven, “Historic urban landscapes on social media: 
The contributions of online narrative practices to urban heritage 
conservation”, City, Culture and Society, Volume 17, pp 61-68, 
2019, ISSN: 1877-9166, doi: 10.1016/j.ccs.2018.12.001. 
12  M. Roszczyńska-Kurasińska, A. Domaradzka, B. Ślosarski, 
and A. Żbikowska, “Facebook Data as Part of Cultural Heritage 
Investments Toolbox: Pilot Analysis of Users Interests and 
Preferences Concerning Adaptive Reuse”, Sustainability 13, no. 4: 
2410, 202, doi: 10.3390/su13042410 
13  H. Jenkins, “Convergence culture: Where old and new media 
collide”, New York University Press, 2006 
 
 
 
 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-976-8
COLLA 2022 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

