  
Collaborative Mapping and the Reliability of Volunteered Data 
Christian Voigt  
Technology & Knowledge   
Centre for Social Innovation  
Vienna, Austria 
voigt@zsi.at 
Susanne Dobner 
Technology & Knowledge   
Centre for Social Innovation  
Vienna, Austria 
dobner@zsi.at 
Manuela Schmidt 
Research Group Cartography   
Technical University Vienna   
Vienna, Austria 
manuela.schmidt@tuwien.ac.at
 
 
Abstract— Participation platforms, such as OpenStreet 
Map.org or Wheelmap.org represent a shift from a world 
defined by the few to a world where almost everyone can par-
ticipate voluntarily. Emerging cultures of participation offer 
powerful mechanisms to raise awareness of some of today's 
most pressing societal problems. However, just because citizens 
could contribute to these platforms, does not mean that they 
will actually do it. Engaging volunteers and offering straight-
forward means of participation whilst simultaneously ensuring 
that volunteers meet the necessary quality standards remains a 
known challenge. In this paper, we explore the robustness of a 
collaborative mapping process, specifically collecting accessi-
bility data of cities' built environment. The paper combines 
theoretical considerations from the field of participatory de-
sign and actual data from the authors' recent experiences with 
crowdsourcing open accessibility information. Finally, the 
paper makes the case for enhancing a categorical approach to 
mapping with a stronger consideration of a map's purpose and 
a healthy scepticism towards overly simplified crowdsourcing 
mechanisms.  
Keywords- participation platforms; digital maps; volunteered 
geographic information; participatory design.   
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Participation platforms, such as Wikipedia.com (creating 
knowledge collectively), Thingiverse.com (sharing digital 
designs) or Wheelmap.org (collecting accessibility infor-
mation on a map) represent a shift from a world defined by 
the few to a world where almost everyone can participate [1].  
Accompanying these platforms are emerging cultures of 
participation that offer powerful mechanisms to raise aware-
ness of some of today's most pressing societal problems.  For 
example, people have been successfully engaged through the 
volunteering of geo-referenced data about the scale of an 
environmental disaster or the level of noise pollution [2] [3].  
Fischer [1] makes the point that improving participation 
platforms requires a shift from 'design for use' to continuous-
ly involving users in the development of a service, even if 
that service is already in use. Put differently, participation 
platforms depend on their ability to massively engage 
prosumers (i.e., people who provide parts of the services they 
consume for free) and deliver the aggregated results of par-
ticipants in the needed quality [4].  A critical success factor  
in this effort are users as co-designers (i.e., users who direct-
ly participate in the design of the service so that emerging 
needs are met as soon as they are identified). The focus of 
our paper is on the design and use of participation platforms 
that are open source and create open data, thereby adding to 
the creation of informational commons.  
Centerpiece of this paper is Wheelmap.org, a participa-
tory platform and online map service to find and categorize 
wheelchair accessible places. However, just because citizens 
have the opportunity to actively contribute to this platforms, 
does not mean that they will actually do it. Ongoing en-
gagement of existing and new citizens is a known challenge 
to participation platforms [5] and we cannot simply assume 
that our theories about interaction, group formation or moti-
vation in the off-line world will also hold in virtual or hybrid 
worlds. The need for good engagement strategies is clear, 
more users and more long-term users increase not only the 
quantity of contributions (i.e., the number of places with 
accessibility attributes) but also the quality and consistency 
of contributions (i.e., the reliability of indicated accessibility 
conditions). This paper explores the potential of participatory 
design (PD) as a means to co-design mapping criteria  in 
order to increase the quality of mapping initiatives. From its 
very beginnings, PD in organizations aimed at balancing 
power relations in order to ensure technology serves all 
stakeholders. Global participation systems, such as Wikipe-
dia or OpenStreetMap, however, are not so much shaped by 
managerial, top down decisions but live and evolve through 
the active participation of those who use the systems. The 
open source equivalent to centralized management are dem-
ocratic governance structures, which process users' critical 
reflections and comments. Nonetheless, the methods of PD 
are still applicable; interviews, user diaries and visual arti-
facts (photos or drawings) bring people in and make their 
voices heard.  
Our paper is based on recent experiences with initiatives 
promoting the mapping of open accessibility information 
[ref. authors of this paper]. One of these initiatives involved 
55 cartography students, who, over the course of three 
months, mapped places on wheelmap.org. Wheelmap, 
founded in 2010 by the German non-profit organisation 
'Sozialhelden', is an online map service to find and catego-
rize wheelchair accessible places based on a traffic light 
system: red (not wheelchair accessible), yellow (partly 
wheelchair accessible), green (wheelchair accessible). The 
service is based on OpenStreetMap (OSM) project, an open 
source digital map of the world. OSM contains, among many 
other things, information about the accessibility of specific 
points-of-interest, ranging from hospitals and train stations to 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

playgrounds and bars. OSM's growth relies on the ongoing 
crowdsourcing effort of its community.  
There are a number of issues that need to be investigated 
in order to better understand what influences the quality of 
collaborative mapping and to what extent participatory de-
sign can be a remedy.     
• 
Semantic issues: Crowdsourcing physical attributes 
of geographic places is based on interpretation work, 
which is inherently plagued by ambiguity. Hence, 
common sense is an insufficient base for mapping 
and establishing protocols for action is one of the 
measures taken to limit ambiguity [2]. The question 
here is how far can these protocols go and what role 
can learning and community membership play to 
help with disambiguation.         
• 
Digital divide:  Technologies used during online  
mapping range from paper maps and Apps on 
Smartphones to Image Databases and more ad-
vanced OSM Editors. However, open-source map-
ping is only effective if people have the physical and 
social means to access the technology. For example, 
people need smartphones with appropriate data plans 
in order to connect to online groups where they can 
access the latest information and help [6].  
• 
Internet literacy issues: Closely related to the issue 
of 'access to technology' is the fact that people need 
a minimum of knowledge in order to get connected 
and use online mapping services. This leads to the 
question of whether design can inscribe knowledge 
to minimize the required learning curve for using the 
technology.   Yet, a minimum level of Internet liter-
acy is needed, e.g.,  understanding the hypermedia 
structure of the Internet and having a basic orienta-
tion in order to navigate between the different sides 
and services [7].   
'Semantic issues' and related quality issues with mapping 
results have been the main motivation to explore volunteer 
participation, participatory design, semantic issues and mu-
tual learning as a possible solution. The potential role of PD 
is conceptualized by using Star and Griesemer's  notion of 
'boundary objects' [8], which conveys succinctly what we 
need from collaborative processes: consistency of results 
(i.e., the mapping of reliable accessibility information) and 
variability in utilizations (i.e., the ongoing refinement of our 
mapping criteria, co-evolving with our understanding of 
accessibility and barriers). The paper is organized as follows: 
In section 2, we discuss collaborative mapping platforms and 
the role participatory design could take to improve participa-
tion quantitatively as well as qualitatively. Section 3 contin-
ues with an in-depth discussion of a specific collaborative 
mapping case, focusing on the operational and conceptual 
dimensions of the mapping process. Finally, in section 4 we 
elaborate a non-trivial trade off between the need for a sim-
ple yet intuitively compelling categorization system for ac-
cessibility mapping.  Section 5 concludes with a brief sum-
mary of findings and their implications for future crowd-
based accessibility maps.  
II. 
COLLABORATIVE MAPPING  PLATFORMS  
One way of creating engagement is letting users partici-
pate in the design or refinement of crowd-based data collec-
tions. In the case of volunteering geo-located accessibility 
data, co-design can have a double motivating aspect: (a) 
optimizing intuitive use increases mappers perceived self-
efficacy and (b) improving the coherence of mapping catego-
ries makes a difference for everyone using the map, hence, 
mappers sense the importance of their actions [5]. It's clear 
that not every mapping activity can lead to changes in the 
design of the mapping application, but it can well entail a 
rethinking of how we design mapping events and what ad-
vice to give mappers along the way.  
A. Participatory Design for Mapping Applications  
We start with Simonsen and Robertson's [9] definition of 
participatory design as mutual learning situations based on  
collective reflection. The need to reflect on design decisions  
and learn from these reflections applies to participation plat-
forms as well.  Also DePaula's description of PD as a balanc-
ing effort between different actors’ needs, motivations, and 
values in order to create "socio-technical-political conditions 
that reduce the gap between design practices and use practic-
es" [10, p. 162], holds for participation platforms, at least to 
some extent. Eventually PD is also evaluated against the 
degree of empowerment people get from a process that takes 
on their goals and values. A process that is highly iterative, 
integrating feedback on design changes and their impacts 
[11].    
B. Digital Maps  
Digital maps as participation platforms have become 
enormously effective tools for raising awareness and influ-
encing power relations [12]. Maps have shifted from repre-
senting stable knowledge about territories to data collection 
platforms enabling the creation of multiple maps on the fly. 
A trend supporting the uptake of digital maps is the steady 
increase of mobile communication, which enables complete-
ly new ways for citizens to engage with online services in an 
ad-hoc fashion, wherever they are. 85 per cent of 
touchscreen phones released from 2010 onwards can use the 
global navigation satellite system (GNSS) [13]. A well-
known example is the OpenStreetMap project, founded in 
2004 at the University College London with the goal to cre-
ate a free database with geographic information of the entire 
world. A plethora of spatial data, such as roads, buildings, 
land use areas, or points of interest is entered into the pro-
ject’s database. Similar to other community-based projects 
on the Internet, any user can start contributing to the project 
and editing data after a short online registration.  
III. 
CASE DESCRIPTION 
A. The Purpose of Collaborative Mapping: Open 
Accessibility Information   
An increasingly aging population, as well as a change in 
awareness of the needs of people with mobility impairments 
raises the importance of having open information on accessi-
bility. In Vienna alone, 24% of the city's population will be 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

aged 65 plus by 2030 [14]. Open accessibility data include 
information about geo-located entrances, parking spots or 
toilets and their accessibility. However, in a wider context, 
the location of other points of interests (POIs), such as lifts 
or characteristics of pathways, e.g., their slope and width, 
also form part of an informational ecosystem that increases 
the mobility of people with mobility constraints. Open-
StreetMap makes these data openly available and free of 
charge.  
Over the last 4 years (2012 - 2015), over 8.800 places on 
average were tagged each month according to their accessi-
bility using the wheelchair  tag (wheelchair={yes, limited, 
no}) [15].  However, even major tourist destinations, such as 
London, Vienna or Paris  show relatively low percentages 
(less than 8%) of accessibility related information in OSM 
like whether a street has sidewalks or not [16].  Hence, even 
though OSM has a rapidly growing community and has 
proven to deliver good spatial data quality, completeness of 
area coverage and longevity of volunteer engagement are 
remaining challenges for OSM [17].  
Geographic information in terms of streets, buildings and 
other spaces is mostly complete in larger cities, however, this 
is not the case with open accessibility data. Multiple stake-
holders have covert or explicit interests in the mapping of 
barriers.  For example, there is some political brisance to 
exposing a city's lack of accessibility. This is not a concern if 
the platform is primarily driven by citizen activism, but gets 
problematic if a collaboration with city officials, e.g., urban 
planning or public transport departments, is sought after [18].  
But apart from the political dimension of designing and 
using participation platforms addressing accessibility issues 
in cities, there is also the challenge of engaging a sufficiently 
large community that can carry the OSM mission to create a 
digital map of the world - we would add - including accessi-
bility information. Crowdsourced or volunteer-based ser-
vices depend on people's interest- and preference-driven 
decisions of where and when to spend their time. There is a 
rich body of literature dedicated to 'volunteerism in non-
profit organizations’, studying the decisions of volunteers in 
terms of 'engagement', 'commitment' and 'well-being' [19] or 
using similar concepts describing psychological empower-
ment of volunteers, including 'sense of community', 'per-
ceived self-efficacy' (i.e., the possibility to master the task at 
hand) and 'causal importance' (i.e., the understanding that 
volunteering serves the common good) [5]. 
The following sections are describing a mapping action, 
which we organized in collaboration with a group of cartog-
raphy students. The mapping action had a twofold objective: 
(a) gaining a better understanding of the current traffic light 
design for categorizing the accessibility of places and (b) 
boosting mapping engagement and create awareness around 
urban accessibility. 
B. Collaborative Mapping Technology: Wheelmap 
The specific application we used for accessibility map-
ping was Wheelmap.org, an open-source mapping applica-
tion aiming to support the cause of better wheelchair-
accessibility. Once the application is installed, everyone can 
contribute information about the accessibility of a point of 
interest (POI). Additionally, if mappers register, they can 
upload photos and add more specific comments on why a 
place is not or only partially wheelchair accessible. Registra-
tion is kept as simple as possible, only requiring a self-
chosen user name and a password. No additional personal 
information is requested. The goal is to involve as many 
people as possible and avoid privacy issues or cumbersome 
registration procedures.   
The tagging follows a traffic light metaphor (Fig. 1). 
Grey indicates places with an unknown status, that is we 
cannot say whether the place is wheelchair accessible or not.  
Places shown in green have been tagged as accessible, i.e., 
one can enter the building with wheelchairs, and for build-
ings where one would expect a public toilet to be available, 
the toilet would be accessible as well.  Places in red are not 
wheelchair accessible, that would be the case if the entrance 
has a step higher than 7 cm and no ramp [20]. When viewing 
a map, the user will be shown all available POIs from a set of 
12 categories, e.g., shopping, sport or tourism.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Mapping accessibility on the Wheelmap. 
Clicking on the yellow icon for a restaurant (cf. Fig. 1) 
will open a pop-up window with the address and additional 
comments.  
C. The collaborative mapping process  
Together with a major university in Vienna, we orga-
nized a mapping action following a critical cartography ap-
proach [21]. Critical cartography implied that students re-
flected on the functionality of the digital map, as well as on 
ways in which the map influenced their views on accessibil-
ity.  Altogether 55 students (about half of the class, 47%) 
participated in the voluntary task to map places on the 
Wheelmap. Two thirds were female students and one third 
male. We did not record the age of participants, but they 
resembled a typical, rather homogenous, group of students in 
their second year at university (approx. 20 - 25 years). The 
mapping action was introduced during a course called ‘The-
matic Cartography in Regional Planning’ (October to De-
cember 2014). Students could obtain bonus points for their 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

participation, those could be of help if they had missed the 
better grade by just a few points. Their task included (a) their 
feedback on their experience when using the Wheelmap and 
(b) their feedback on their mapping experience, specifically 
when deciding between the color codes of the mobile map-
ping application (cf. Fig. 1). In concrete terms, students were 
asked to:  
• 
categorize at least five places without accessibility 
information. These places appeared in grey on the 
Wheelmap.  
• 
revisit at least three places, which have been catego-
rized as 'partially wheelchair accessible'. These plac-
es appeared yellow on the Wheelmap.  
• 
consider the appropriateness of the place's categori-
zation and change its status if necessary.   
Additionally, we explained that the purpose was to ad-
dress the non-trivial challenge inherent in a categorization 
system needed to be simple enough to engage as many vol-
unteers as possible but also meaningful enough to be of help 
to people searching accessible places. Students recorded their 
experiences in a mapping protocol consisting of a discussion 
of places visited including a place's conditions that could 
explain a categorization (task 1) or a change in categoriza-
tion (task 2). Almost all students included photographs of the 
places visited in their protocols and a reflection on how their 
mapping influenced their views on accessibility in the city of 
Vienna.    
Further information was obtained by two of the authors 
analyzing the 55 mapping protocols we got. Primarily quan-
tifying students' reasoning about their mapping decisions. All 
in all, we scanned the protocols for the following information 
(I) How many barriers had been considered when categoriz-
ing a place?; (II) What types of barriers had been considered 
when categorizing a place?; and (III) In what ways were 
photos helpful in understanding the categorization of a 
place? All three types of information were then analyzed  in 
relation to specific mapping decisions, namely (i) changing 
the categorization of a place; (ii) leaving a place's categoriza-
tion as is and (iii) categorizing a place for the first time. 
Options (i) and (ii) were most interesting as we were inter-
ested in the effects of considering more than one barrier, 
possibly broadening the range of barriers or taking a picture 
of a barrier.  
 
Figure 2.  Type of mapped places (n=445). 
However, some of our quantifications could be incom-
plete. For example, a mapper might have contemplated four 
types of barriers but reported only one in his or her mapping 
protocol. We believe that this is a limitation inherent to most 
self-reported data and difficult to prevent, if there is no other, 
more reliable data source to compare with.  
Altogether, 279 new places had been categorized using 
the Wheelmap App and another 166 places had been re-
viewed and partly re-categorized (Fig. 2). Mappers found 
168 completely accessible places and 277 places with barri-
ers. Out of the 166 revisited places with limited accessibility, 
51% remained unchanged and 49% changed, either to com-
pletely accessible or not accessible. Shops and restaurants 
were most prominent among the types of places that had 
been mapped. Access points to public transport received 
comparatively little attention.   
IV. 
CASE DISCUSISON  
An underlying issue of our case not yet discussed is the 
'accountability aspect' when providing accessibility data. Put 
differently, the question is whether lay people, i.e., volun-
teers, can be trusted with providing this information and 
should not trained members of public authorities assume this 
task. In a review of the adoption of participatory geographic 
information systems (PGIS), Brown [18] lists several reasons 
for the fact, that participation in data collection has been 
promoted more by academics than by government agencies, 
including fear of the public, lack of experience in participa-
tory processes and distrust in lay knowledge. At the core of 
these concerns is mostly a misunderstanding in that volun-
teers are not to be seen as a replacement for technically qual-
ified experts but as a way to add local knowledge or lived 
experience. Both forms of knowledge, technical and experi-
ential should be considered valuable sources of information 
to inform users of GIS.  
Yet, our initial question was whether accessibility map-
ping done by lay people was problematic or controversial 
due to ambiguous or fuzzy classification systems. Since we 
did not want to compare the accuracy of lay mapping with 
expert mapping, we focused on the replicability of mapping 
results. In the end, we found two main conditions that trig-
gered changes of mapped barriers: (1) a place contained 
multiple, aggregated barriers and (2) the mapper expanded 
his or her very notion of what a barrier is. The following 
discusses the mapping process on two different levels [22]:  
• 
The operational level: How to apply mapping crite-
ria to more complex buildings (shopping centers, 
train stations, museums, etc.)?  
• 
The conceptual level: How can we make the concept 
of accessibility more tangible in order to ensure a 
sufficiently high quality of mapping outcomes?   
These levels also reflect the semantic challenges of mapping 
categories outlined earlier in the introduction of the paper.  
A. Operational Level: How many Barriers are there? 
When assessing the accessibility of more complex struc-
tures, e.g., a supermarket, a train station or a bank, we will 
often find that multiple types of barriers exist.  For example, 
there is an ongoing debate whether supermarkets are acces-
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

sible if they have no steps at the entrance and sufficient 
space between shelves, but lack a payment option at the exit 
that is mounted at a height accessible for wheelchair users.  
Hence, before starting the mapping project we empha-
sized the need to attempt a functional mapping rather than a 
categorical approach. Functional mapping would start with 
the question of 'What is the purpose of this place?' and could 
lead to a discovery of barriers not previously considered. On 
the contrary, the approach followed by the Wheelmap app 
(cf. Fig. 1) suggests a categorical approach (steps not higher 
than 7 cm and sufficient spaces within a location). The 
height of credit card readers, counters or door handles for 
example, is not explicitly mentioned.   
We are aware that reducing a rather complex concept, 
such as 'accessibility' to a number of physical properties is a 
compromise a crowdsourcing platform has to make in order 
to keep things feasible and draw in as many volunteers as 
possible. But what consequences does it have if we switch 
from a categorical to a functional approach for mapping? 
Fig. 3 compares places with multiple, aggregated barriers 
with places that had been categorized taking a single barrier 
into account. As highlighted with the slightly darker bar, if 
mappers revisited a place already categorized, chances that 
they were to change the existing categorization were twice as 
high if they took into consideration multiple barriers (24% 
compared to 12%).  
 
Figure 3.  Mapping of aggregated or single barriers (n=277). 
However, we cannot tell whether the places that changed 
their mapping status had already been mapped with multiple 
barriers in mind or whether the mappers revisiting the place 
simply saw a combination of barriers where previously only 
single barriers had been checked.  Comments on changes 
from green to yellow (e.g., non-accessible toilet in a restau-
rant with an accessible entrance) or on changes from yellow 
to red (e.g., a movie theatre with accessible entrance but no 
wheelchair place in the cinema hall) seem to suggest that 
considering more possible barriers led to the changes. 
Fig. 4 compares changes from yellow ('partially accessi-
ble') to red ('not accessible') depending on whether multiple 
or single barriers had been considered. Again the likelihood 
of a place to change to 'not accessible' is almost twice as high 
(25% versus 47%) if mappers take into account multiple 
barriers.  
 
Figure 4.  Impact of aggregated barriers  
on categorization changes  (n=127). 
Still, the objective of a categorization system cannot be 
to consider as many potential barriers as possible and thereby 
reduce the availability of accessible places if this is not abso-
lutely necessary. Students became aware that striking a bal-
ance between mapping existing barriers, as well as producing 
useful accessibility information was a challenge not yet 
completely solved.  
The relatively recent increase of Linked Open Data could 
provide a solution to his issue in the long term. Rather than 
trying to capture all accessibility related information through 
a single application, needed information could be combined 
accessing different sources. Ding et al. [23] conducted a 
survey of open accessible information, and found that differ-
ent sources of similar accessibility information used different 
levels of aggregation. For example, whereas the accessibility 
of train stations in the Wheelmap is mostly based on tagged 
entrances and toilets, similar accessibility information in-
cluded in the national rail station dataset (UK), is based on 
tags, such as 'ramp for train access' or 'accessible ticket ma-
chines'.  Rather than trying to establish an all-embracing 
standard of tags, Ding and colleagues suggest to link open 
data.   Linked data principles would allow for integrating 
data sets using different data structures, as ontology match-
ing is a known approach to overcome semantic heterogeneity 
[23]. One possible first step in that direction could also be to 
direct users of the Wheelmap to another site, if that site of-
fers additional information to the place the user had just 
inquired.  
B. Conceptual Level: Our Notions of Barriers and the Role 
of Photos   
The right to personal mobility is recognized globally as a 
human right, as reflected in the Convention on the Rights of 
Persons with Disabilities of the United Nations, which states 
that nations: "must take measures to ensure that persons with 
disabilities have equal access to the physical environment, to 
transportation, to information and communications, and to 
other facilities open or provided to the public" [24]. Follow-
ing from this statement, it becomes clear that mobility and 
physical accessibility is a precondition to having choices in 
life, be it the school that is accessible or not, the workplace 
or the means of transport people with disabilities can or 
cannot use.  
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

Matthews [25] surveyed different user groups (in regards 
to age and types of wheelchair) and listed the following most 
frequently mentioned barriers: steps, high curbs, deep gut-
ters, gravel surfaces, lack of dropped curbs, narrow pave-
ments, steep gradients and cobbled surfaces. Even though 
this might be already a fairly comprehensive list, given the 
methodology applied, types of barriers can be differentiated 
into normative (i.e., prescriptive) barriers and positive (i.e., 
descriptive) barriers [26]. Since we did not use an a-priori 
normative framework for our mapping action, we were par-
ticularly interested in the formulation and use of descriptive 
barriers.   Fig. 5 shows the types of barriers that had been 
mapped. The most frequently mentioned barriers were steps 
(48.8%) and narrow spaces (22.8%). Next were barriers 
related to height (10.5%) and a category other (7.7%). 'Other 
barriers' included things like double doors, doors too heavy 
or ramp too steep.  
 
 
Figure 5.  Types of barriers mapped (n=391) 
Next, we wanted to see whether the explicit reference to 
a new type of barriers would influence the possibility that an 
existing categorization would change.  
 
 
Figure 6.  Impact of 'steps' and 'narrowness'  
on categorization changes  (n=124). 
For that, we compared 124 places that were tagged 'par-
tially wheelchair accessible' either because they had steps or 
narrow spaces inside (Fig. 6). We would argue that 'steps' as 
it is mentioned on Wheelmap's mobile app interface is a pre-
scriptive category and 'narrowness' an emerging, descriptive 
category. What we can see in Fig. 6 then, is that both catego-
ries have similar effects, in 39% of the cases the 'new', 
emerging category 'narrowness' co-occurred with changing a 
place into 'not accessible'. Since the majority of the places 
that changed into 'not accessible' were cafes, bars or res-
taurants, having emphasized the functional approach to map-
ping could be another reason for the relatively high impact of 
'narrowness' as a new type of barriers. 
Throughout the mapping action participants were en-
couraged to take pictures of the barriers they analyzed.  Our 
initial hypothesis was that photos would help the specifica-
tion of barriers and therefore enhance clarity and transparen-
cy of the mapping decisions.  Hence, two of the authors 
looked through the 215 photos taken during the mapping 
project and classified them according to their effect on un-
derstanding mapping decisions (Fig. 7).  
 
 
Figure 7.  The effect of photos on status clarity (n=215). 
A photo was said to be 'enriching' whenever the photo 
showed more then what was expressed in the verbal descrip-
tion of a barrier.  
 
 
Figure 8.  A clear picture of barriers 
For example, rather than having to speculate whether 
double doors at the entrance might be a barrier that could be 
overcome, a photo such as in Fig. 8 supports the visualiza-
tion and individual evaluation of a barrier, be it the shape of 
the curb or the steepness of the slope that can make a differ-
ence.  If a photo just showed a panoramic view of a location 
without a clear focus on a barrier, we decided that the photo 
had 'no effect' on our understanding of the accessibility of a 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

place. 'Confirming' photos were similar to Fig. 8, only that 
they represented less complex situations of single stairs or 
steps. They are still useful as they help to avoid surprises if 
users go by verbal descriptions only.   
C. Learning with Boundary Objects and Probabilistic 
Models  
One reason to go through a detailed evaluation of a map-
ping process on an operational and conceptual level was to 
make a case for learning the pros and cons of mapping cate-
gories, as well as learning when a good description of the 
place is more needed than a general debate about the 'right' 
mapping categories.   
Spinuzzi suggests a methodology that aims to understand 
'knowledge' by doing, i.e., "the traditional, tacit, and often 
invisible ways of how people perform their everyday activi-
ties and how those activities may be shaped productively" 
[11]. Categorization work of volunteer mappers can be re-
searched under just the same premise: What are the often 
tacit perceptions that shape mapping decisions? Hence, a 
conceptual extension to PD is the notion that collaborative 
mapping involves learning, similar to communities-of-
practice, where the transition from peripheral to genuine 
participation requires changes in doing, talking, thinking and 
feeling [4]. If we think of collaborative mapping as the pro-
duction of socially constructed knowledge, i.e., a shared 
knowledge creation experience, then Star and Griesemer's 
'boundary objects' [8] can be a useful paraphrase of 'flexible 
mapping categories'. Boundary objects are " objects which 
are both plastic enough to adapt to local needs and con-
straints of the several parties employing them, yet robust 
enough to maintain a common identity across sites. They are 
weakly structured in common use, and become strongly 
structured in individual-site use" [8]. 
If we continue with the metaphor of the 'robust core' of 
mapping decisions, a prescriptive set of barriers could serve 
just this purpose. However, Fig. 5 presented only a relatively 
small data set of 391 barriers and 'narrowness' became an 
example for a barrier, previously not much considered. What 
if we were to analyze the accessibility of thousands of plac-
es? How many additional types of barriers could we discover 
and how would we want to map them? We can assume that a 
very long list of barriers would be impractical in the context 
of crowdsourcing. When relying on volunteer contributions, 
we would suggest that the categorization of  'accessibility' 
couldn’t be managed through a checklist of accessibility-
defining attributes, no matter how comprehensive. We would 
rather aim for mappers to develop a mental model of acces-
sibility in order to decide whether a place is accessible or 
not.  
In such situations, mappers need to be able to adapt their 
categorization procedures and develop new categories of 
accessibility in accordance to the place they want to map.  
Barsalou [27] suggests two ways for how we acquire new 
categories: (a) we learn from exemplars (several objects have 
overlapping characteristics and therefore suggest a category) 
and (b) we learn by recombining features of existing catego-
ries. An example for the latter would be the combination of 
an attribute like 'width of passage' with 'available space in 
front of a door' to form a new category 'maneuvering space'. 
In a shop that has just one long corridor, wheelchair users 
should be able to turn around at the end of the corridor, espe-
cially if they use an electric wheelchair.  The underlying idea 
would be that it is not enough if a wheelchair can move 
ahead, if in fact the user of a wheelchair needs to make a 
turn.        
V. 
CONCLUSION: CO-DESIGN DRIVES ENGAGEMENT  
The paper started with the claim that large scale partici-
pation platforms offer new possibilities for addressing long-
standing societal problems, such as creating awareness for 
the accessibility of cities. We then presented collaborative 
mapping and digital maps as a typical instance of a participa-
tion platform which in many aspects is already a success 
story, offering an open source alternative to commercial 
products, such as Google Maps. Next, we linked collabora-
tive mapping to the case of Wheelmap.org, an accessibility 
mapping platform built on top of the OSM.  Using 
wheelmap.org as a case study, we concentrated on issues 
around the operational and conceptual foundations of the 
mapping process. The case discussion made clear that 'con-
ceptualizations of barriers' and 'rules of mapping' are critical 
components of an application's design and impact the quality 
of the mapping done.   
Being foremost concerned with ambiguities and reliabil-
ity issues of accessibility mapping, we focused on identify-
ing issues with mapping complex places and - often tacitly 
hold - concepts of accessibility and barriers. We found that 
efforts to raise awareness of accessibility barriers often faced 
the challenge that the public cannot relate to accessibility 
data if they are not able to relate to the meaning of accessi-
bility, either because they think it does not apply to their 
lives or because they cannot make the link to the personal 
context of their daily experiences [28]. Yet, if we want peo-
ple to challenge their believes and to contribute to improving 
the accessibility of their cities, we need mechanisms that 
allow people to contextually relate with accessibility. Re-
search on awareness raising through crowd-based accessibil-
ity maps by Goncalves [28] has shown the effectiveness of 
contextual cues when people are asked to relate with past 
experiences or memories.  Moreover, without implying cau-
sation, Goncalves showed that people who took pictures 
during an accessibility-mapping event reported considerably 
more places than those participants who did not take pic-
tures.   
Yet, the implicit engagement strategy in this paper has 
been to make crowdsourcing also a co-design and mutual 
learning activity. To summarize, this paper (a) highlighted 
the need for switching from a categorical to a functional 
approach for mapping; (b) demonstrated the value of involv-
ing volunteer mappers as co-designers in order to optimize 
designs at the operational and conceptual level; and (c) sug-
gested an explicit learning component as part of the collabo-
rative mapping process, using a boundary objects metaphor 
in order to balance flexibility and feasibility when collabora-
tively mapping accessibility.   
 
 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research has been supported by cap4access, a pro-
ject funded by the European Commission in the 7th Frame-
work Program. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
G. Fischer, "Understanding, fostering, and supporting cultures 
of participation", interactions, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 42–53, 2011. 
[2] 
M. F. Goodchild, "Citizens as sensors: the world of volun-
teered geography", GeoJournal, vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 211–221, 
2007. 
[3] 
E. Hornecker et al., "UbiComp in opportunity spaces: chal-
lenges for participatory design", in Proceedings of the ninth 
conference on Participatory design: Expanding boundaries in 
design-Volume 1, pp. 47–56, 2006. 
[4] 
P. Ehn, "Participation in design things", in Proceedings of the 
Tenth Anniversary Conference on Participatory Design 2008, 
pp. 92–101, 2008. 
[5] 
J. Gonçalves et al., "Citizen motivation on the go: The role of 
psychological empowerment", Interacting with Computers, 
vol. 26, no. 3, p. 196-207, 2014. 
[6] 
N. Selwyn, "Reconsidering political and popular understand-
ings of the digital divide", New Media & Society, vol. 6, no. 3, 
pp. 341–362, 2004. 
[7] 
A. J. Van Deursen and J. A. van Dijk, "Modeling traditional 
literacy, Internet skills and Internet usage: An empirical 
study", Interacting with computers, vol. 28, no. 1, p. 13-26, 
2016. 
[8] 
S. L. Star and J. R. Griesemer, "Institutional Ecology, `Trans-
lations’ and Boundary Objects: Amateurs and Professionals in 
Berkeley’s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, 1907-39", Social 
Studies of Science, vol. 19, pp. 387–420, Aug. 1989. 
[9] 
J. Simonsen and M. Hertzum, "Participative design and the 
challenges of large-scale systems: Extending the iterative PD 
approach", in Proceedings of the tenth anniversary confer-
ence on participatory design 2008, pp. 1–10, 2008. 
[10] R. DePaula, "Lost in translation: a critical analysis of actors, 
artifacts, agendas, and arenas in participatory design", in Pro-
ceedings of the eighth conference on Participatory design: 
Artful integration: interweaving media, materials and prac-
tices-Volume 1, pp. 162–172, 2004. 
[11] C. Spinuzzi, "The methodology of participatory design", 
Technical Communication, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 163–174, 2005. 
[12] J. W. Crampton, "Maps as social constructions: power, com-
munication and visualization", Progress in Human Geogra-
phy, vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 235–252, 2001. 
[13] M. Schaefer and T. Woodyer, "Assessing absolute and rela-
tive accuracy of recreation-grade and mobile phone GNSS 
devices: a method for informing device choice", Area, vol. 
47, no. 2, pp. 185–196, 2015. 
[14] Statistics Austria, "Population census und structure", 2016. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.statistik.at/web_de 
/statistiken/menschen_und_gesellschaft/bevoelkerung/index.h
tml. [Retrieved: September, 2016]. 
[15] R. Spindler, "OpenStreetMap Wheelchair History: A subset 
of wheelchair tagged nodes of a Planet OSM-Full-History", in 
Unpublished Database, 2015. 
[16] M. Bakillah et al., "Toward a collective tagging Android 
application for gathering accessibility-related geospatial data 
in European cities", in Agile Conference, pp. 21-26, 2015. 
[17] M. Haklay, "How good is volunteered geographical infor-
mation? A comparative study of OpenStreetMap and Ord-
nance Survey datasets", Environment and planning B: Plan-
ning and design, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 682–703, 2010. 
[18] G. Brown, "Public Participation GIS (PPGIS) for regional and 
environmental planning: Reflections on a decade of empirical 
research", Journal of Urban and Regional Information Sys-
tems Association, vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 7–18, 2012. 
[19] M. Snyder and A. M. Omoto, "Volunteerism: Social issues 
perspectives and social policy implications", Social Issues 
and Policy Review, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–36, 2008. 
[20] Hans Voss, "D3.2 Technical Design,  Collective Awareness 
Platforms for Improving Accessibility in European Cities & 
Regions", in 7th Framework Programme, 2015. 
[21] J. W. Crampton and J. Krygier, "An introduction to critical 
cartography", ACME: an International E-journal for Critical 
Geographies, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 11–33, 2005. 
[22] F. Barcellini, L. Prost, and M. Cerf, "Designers’ and users’ 
roles in participatory design: What is actually co-designed by 
participants?", Applied ergonomics, vol. 50, pp. 31–40, 2015. 
[23] C. Ding, M. Wald, and G. Wills, "A survey of open accessi-
bility data", in Proceedings of the 11th Web for All Confer-
ence, pp. 37-40, 2014. 
[24] United Nations, "Convention on the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities", 2007. [Online]. Available: http://www.un.org/ 
disabilities/default.asp?navid=15&pid=150. 
[Retrieved:  
September, 2016]. 
[25] H. Matthews, L. Beale, P. Picton, and D. Briggs, "Modelling 
Access with GIS in Urban Systems (MAGUS): capturing the 
experiences of wheelchair users", Area, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 34–
45, 2003. 
[26] A. Páez, D. M. Scott, and C. Morency, "Measuring accessibil-
ity: positive and normative implementations of various acces-
sibility indicators", Journal of Transport Geography, vol. 25, 
pp. 141–153, 2012. 
[27] L. W. Barsalou, "Deriving categories to achieve goals", Goal 
Directed Learning. MIT Press, Cambridge MA, pp. 121–176, 
1995. 
[28] J. Goncalves, V. Kostakos, S. Hosio, E. Karapanos, and O. 
Lyra, "IncluCity: Using contextual cues to raise awareness on 
environmental accessibility", in Proceedings of the 15th In-
ternational ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and 
Accessibility, pp. 17-24, 2013. 
 
 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

