Gathering Insights on Citizen Participation
Towards Building an Instrument to Study Citizen-Centric Communities
Tobias Siebenlist, Agnes Mainka
Department of Information Science
Heinrich Heine University
D¨usseldorf, Germany
Email: {tobias.siebenlist,agnes.mainka}@hhu.de
Abstract—Smart cities are not only about technological develop-
ments but also about committed citizens (which can be described
as smart citizens) and projects that have been started by them.
The opening up of administration and the idea of transparency
will gradually lead to more data being published for free use. To
generate added value from these raw data, however, they must be
processed creatively. This paper addresses the development of an
instrument to study communities concerned with open data and
the development of tools, visualisations and projects of all kinds
for their cities and their fellow citizens. The focus is on citizens,
their backgrounds and their motivations for participation.
Keywords–Citizen Participation; Community; Smart Citizen;
Open Data; Smart City.
I.
INTRODUCTION
When one thinks of smart cities [1], the focus is often
on technical aspects, such as sensors or digitisation aspects in
general. Administrations are also opening up, offering more
transparency and new opportunities for citizens to participate.
However, do smart cities also take their citizens on the way
to become inhabitants of a smart city, maybe so-called smart
citizens [2] and deﬁne their role? Moreover, what kind of
people are these citizens who are already actively involved in
this transition phase, want to participate and shape something
with and for their city and fellow citizens.
Studies in the ﬁeld of Smart Cities often refer to concrete
projects within cities, to the transformation within the frame-
work of digitisation as well as to ﬁelds such as sharing services
or the opening of administrative activity (open government
[3]). The area of Smart Cities is not limited to these factors and
offers a wide range of aspects worth considering. An overview
of the different elements is given in [4]. All these aspects are
important, and some of them lead to more free and open data
being available. This is particularly the case when you look
at E-government and primarily Open Government and thus
the right of citizens to inspect documents and processes. This
right involves the publication of open government data, which
should be available in machine-readable form as raw data. The
data sets are often made available by cities and municipalities
on open data portals and can be easily obtained. However,
someone has to work with this data, develop something from it,
create added value. Since these are data from speciﬁc cities, the
citizens of these cities, in particular, can gain insight into what
is happening in their city. These citizens, who have further
knowledge of the city in which they live, are therefore partic-
ularly suitable for further processing. Depending on the type
of further processing, various skills are required. In this article,
the focus is therefore on the interested and committed citizens
who join forces to do something for their city, their fellow
citizens and thus also themselves. Therefore, the ﬁrst steps on
to a research tool are described to develop an understanding of
who these committed citizens are and what motivation drives
them to get involved. The Open Knowledge Labs, initiated by
the Open Knowledge Foundation, are used as a starting point,
as interested people develop tools or visualisations for their city
without too particular reference to speciﬁc topics. Initially, the
Open Knowledge Labs in Germany will be included, but the
tool to be developed should not be explicitly limited to this, but
can also be used for other countries and similar communities.
The structure of this paper is as follows. In Section 2,
the Open Knowledge Labs in Germany will be introduced.
The related work is mentioned in Section 3. In Section 4,
the methodology towards creating the instrument is described.
Finally, in Section 5, conclusions are drawn, and future work
is mentioned.
II.
OPEN KNOWLEDGE LABS IN GERMANY
It is difﬁcult to identify why individual citizens take part in
participatory processes and how (e.g., using a digital service
provided by the city via the web or an app). Sometimes an
app is only tested or used sporadically, or a single request to a
speciﬁc service is made. On the other hand, groups that meet
regularly to develop their city or develop something for their
city often have established a long-term interest and motivation
for this topic. These communities can then be examined
regarding their composition, how the individual members ﬁnd
their way into the community and what motivates them to deal
with such topics in their free time. However, these are only
a few aspects that affect the participants. Examples of such
groups are the Open Knowledge Labs (OK Labs), which were
initiated by the Open Knowledge Foundation. The focus is
initially on Germany, where the Code for Germany project was
started. The project aims to network developers, designers and
people interested in open data, who meet regularly to exchange
ideas and work together. The aim is to develop and promote
projects and applications around open data concerning the own
city. All people are welcome, regardless of their professional
or personal background. The term Code is not meant to be
restrictive: it is not only about programming, but it is also
a desired ability. Currently, there are 25 Open Knowledge
Labs in different parts of Germany. In the context of a future
study, the instrument will be used at all 25 labs in Germany
to obtain an overview of the composition, topics, motivations
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-645-3
COLLA 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

and organisation. In the following, the instrument is to be
made adaptable and standardised concerning the aspects of
the investigation so that it can also be used in other countries.
The consideration of local peculiarities is explicitly provided
for. The study concerns the participants, the organisers and
the environment of the labs. The focus is on the people, their
backgrounds and motivations in this citizen-centred approach.
The individual dimensions of the investigations are explained
in more detail in the section Methodology.
III.
RELATED WORK
The study of communities dedicated to a topic is not
fundamentally new and has already been carried out for
different types of communities and taking into account various
aspects. For example, an empirical study on the participation
in free and open source (online) communities shows that ”70%
of the surveyed members, stated that meeting and talking to
people with similar interests was one of their main reasons
for their participation.” [5] The basic motivation has been
described in this paper as to perform some function and to do
something. Whereas social exchange seems to be important,
problem solving was the reason with the most votes. As the
instrument will use a citizen-centric approach, one central
aspect is the motivations why and how citizens engage in
such communities and projects. As open source communities
seem to have a similar approach (despite they often exist in
the form of an online community instead of local groups that
meet regularly), research on these communities can be helpful
to build a research instrument for Open Knowledge Labs. The
motivation for participation in open source software commu-
nities has been investigated by Ke & Zhang [6]. They relied
on different motivational theories and referred to different
types of motivations in the context of open source software
communities regarding the participational aspect. From that,
they composed their research model which focuses ”... the
interaction effects of external motivation and personality traits,
and of identiﬁcation motivation and personality traits.” [6] This
research model can be a basis for the studying the motivational
aspects in our instrument. Their results based on a study carried
out in speciﬁc open source communities, collected using an
online survey.
In contrast to these and other such studies, the Open
Knowledge Labs have a distinctive characteristic: the meeting
does not take place because of a ﬁxed, tangible goal, but be-
cause of the interest and motivation to do something for one’s
environment. It is not clear what kind of results are obtained,
what tools are used or how the results are communicated
and disseminated. There are presumably very heterogeneous
groups here, which are dedicated to different projects and
which are connected only by the common motivation for
the improvement of the city. Regarding improving the city,
however, many aspects, such as the environment, transport,
communication, are possible. The intended instrument should,
therefore, be as general and broad as possible, so that many
factors can be included in the inventory and a multi-perspective
overview emerges as a result, which can be used for further
investigations. Through such a common interest, a parallel can
be drawn with other types of communities: Communities of
Interest [7] or Communities of Practice [8]. In a study on the
classiﬁcation of communities, Herranz et al. [9] highlighted the
differences between Communities of Interest and Communities
Open Knowledge
Lab
Exchange
Communication 
Organizational
factors
City 
People 
Figure 1. Core Dimensions of the Research Instrument
of Practice. Based on this study, a categorisation of Open
Knowledge Labs as Communities of Interest seems more
appropriate, as they have a complex character, can change
in personnel at any time and pursue common goals that are
not tied to speciﬁc methods or tools. The further development
of the instrument can build on this classiﬁcation. From the
research results obtained, an evidence-based decision can sub-
sequently be made regarding categorisation of the individual
Open Knowledge Labs.
IV.
METHODOLOGY
To get a complete picture of these communities and their
members, a research tool is being developed to investigate
these and other aspects. The dimensions of this instrument
are shown in Figure 1.
The ﬁve core dimensions (People, Organisational factors,
Communication, City, and Exchange) build up the basis for
the investigation instrument. Every dimension carries further
aspects with it, which need to be further developed and reﬁned.
The aspects of the individual dimensions are described in more
detail below.
A. People
Since the approach of the investigation instrument is aimed
in particular at the participating citizens and their motivation
as well as their professional and personal characteristics, this
aspect comes ﬁrst. In addition to general demographic data
such as age, gender and the number of participants, the
professional background (training and current employment)
and in particular the motivational factors for participating in
such a community are collected. The evaluation also distin-
guishes between lab leads, regular participants and sporadic
participants. Also, the wishes and expectations of participants
and potentially interested parties are asked. If possible, the
reasons why people have left an Open Knowledge Lab should
also be collected.
B. Organizational factors
The organisational factors include aspects that deal with
the organisation of an Open Knowledge Lab. This consists of
the organisational and management structure, as well as local
and temporal factors. Is there a ﬁxed location for the meetings
and a ﬁxed time frame? How often do meetings take place
and is there the possibility of spontaneous changes regarding
space and the extension of meetings? Besides, the ﬁnancing
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-645-3
COLLA 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

of projects and the legal status of Open Knowledge Labs are
examined.
C. Communication
The fact that a community exists like an Open Knowledge
Lab must ﬁrst get around. This dimension deals with various
aspects of communication. How are meetings announced and
where can I ﬁnd out more about the idea, the current projects
and in general get more information on the Open Knowledge
Lab? It is examined whether a website exists, which social
media channels and community tools are used for what purpose
and in what frequency, and generally how the public relations
work of the individual labs is carried out. Among other things,
it is essential to know how new members can ﬁnd their way to
an Open Knowledge Lab and how completed projects can be
prominently presented, which in turn can arouse the interest
of other interested citizens and representatives of the city.
D. City
The involvement of the city or people from the admin-
istration in the activities of the Open Knowledge Lab is an
important aspect when it comes to implementing projects to
improve the city. Here, it is examined whether the city or
municipality operates an Open data portal or there are persons
in the administration who are responsible for this area. Also,
the connection to the administration is considered concerning
whether an exchange and, if applicable, participation in Open
Knowledge Lab meetings have been realised and what expe-
riences have been made with them. Furthermore, the involve-
ment in urban decision-making processes, the transparency of
the administration as well as the general state of the city on
the way to a smart city is considered. This makes it possible
to assess the Community’s activities with the development
phase of the city. It is also of interest what experience the
citizens have already had with contact with the administration,
what paths they prefer and what possibilities can be created
here in joint projects. Studies like this from Reddick &
Anthopoulus [10] can be consulted to investigate interaction
with administrations further. Another aspect is to investigate
whether institutions (such as universities) or associations (such
as digital innovation hubs or business incubators) exist in the
respective city that promote the presence and development of
smart citizens.
E. Exchange
Open Knowledge Labs are usually not the only one of
communities working on digital projects. For projects from
the Open Source environment, as well as other community
projects (e.g., Linux, OpenStreetMap, etc.) there are often
local user groups that come together for similar reasons, but
often with more concrete projects and ideas. This dimension
investigates whether there is cooperation or contact with other
communities in the city or the surrounding area and to what
extent this can inﬂuence the work. Besides, there is a link to
the organisational factors, for example, the question of whether
several communities share a meeting point.
F. Realization
The instrument will be used in surveys and interviews.
These methods are used to collect data during personal visits
to all Open Knowledge Labs. Alternatively, the data can also
be obtained online and gathered again on a regular basis.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The presented instrument should enable an inventory of
data on people and their motivation to participate in topic-
speciﬁc groups in participatory activities to improve the city.
Before a ﬁrst concrete application, the individual dimensions
and the aspects contained therein are rechecked and supple-
mented or revised. Also, tests are carried out in which the
aspects are processed within the framework of speciﬁc surveys
or interview guidelines. The contacts to some labs already
exist, and the membership of the authors creates direct access
to the persons. The results will provide a ﬁrst insight into
the structures, composition and working methods of Open
Knowledge Labs, which are not yet available and have not
yet been examined in their entirety. From this data collection,
measures to optimise the work and possible positive and
negative inﬂuences can be discovered. In further steps, the
data can be used for analytical purposes and international
comparisons, for example, if corresponding data collections
also take place in other countries. Similarly, this can lead to
further dialogue between citizens and the city administration
and strengthen mutual understanding if both sides approach
and work together transparently.
REFERENCES
[1]
R. G. Hollands, “Will the real smart city please stand up? intelligent,
progressive or entrepreneurial?” City, vol. 12, no. 3, 2008, pp. 303–320.
[2]
P.
Cardullo
and
R.
Kitchin,
“Being
a
‘citizen’
in
the
smart
city:
up
and
down
the
scaffold
of
smart
citizen
participation
in
dublin,
ireland,”
GeoJournal,
Jan
2018.
[Online].
Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10708-018-9845-8
[3]
M. Janssen, Y. Charalabidis, and A. Zuiderwijk, “Beneﬁts, adoption
barriers and myths of open data and open government,” Information
systems management, vol. 29, no. 4, 2012, pp. 258–268.
[4]
L. G. Anthopoulos, Understanding Smart Cities: A Tool for Smart
Government Or an Industrial Trick?.
Springer, 2017, vol. 22.
[5]
A. Schoﬁeld and G. S. Cooper, “Participation in free and open source
communities: An empirical study of community members’ perceptions,”
in IFIP International Conference on Open Source Systems.
Springer,
2006, pp. 221–231.
[6]
W. Ke and P. Zhang, “Motivations for participating in open source
software communities: Roles of psychological needs and altruism,”
PACIS 2008 Proceedings, 2008, p. 76.
[7]
G. Fischer, “Communities of interest: Learning through the interaction
of multiple knowledge systems,” in Proceedings of the 24th IRIS
Conference, vol. 1. Department of Information Science, Bergen, 2001,
pp. 1–13.
[8]
E.
Wenger,
“Communities
of
practice:
A
brief
introduction,”
2011.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.ohr.wisc.edu/cop/articles/communities practice intro wenger.pdf
[9]
S. Herranz, D. D´ıez, P. D´ıaz, and S. R. Hiltz, “Classifying communities
for design,” in From research to practice in the design of cooperative
systems: Results and open challenges.
Springer, 2012, pp. 97–110.
[10]
C. Reddick and L. Anthopoulos, “Interactions with e-government, new
digital media and traditional channel choices: citizen-initiated factors,”
Transforming Government: People, Process and Policy, vol. 8, no. 3,
2014, pp. 398–419.
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-645-3
COLLA 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

