Peer Group Counseling as a Tool for Promoting Managers’ Communication Skills 
in Industrial and Planning Organizations 
 
Heli Kiema, Matleena Mäenpää, Tarja Leinonen and Hannu Soini 
Research Unit of Psychology 
University of Oulu 
Oulu, Finland 
{heli.kiema, matleena.maenpaa, tarja.leinonen, hannu.soini}@oulu.fi 
 
 
 
Abstract— In this study, we focus on investigating and 
developing communication skills for managers and employees 
from industrial and planning based organizations that 
participated in Frictionless Communication (FriCo) project. 
Our main aim was to explore the effectiveness of Peer Group 
Counseling – training method (PGC) in promoting managers’ 
communication skills and to find out the possible changes in 
these skills before and after the training. We used Counseling 
Response 
Observation 
System 
(CROS) 
to 
examine 
communication skills in 11 managers during the training. In 
examining the communication skills with CROS, we focused on 
the periods before and after the training. Communication skills 
were increased after participating in PGC training. The 
theoretical background and the training method are presented 
first, then we describe the methods and measures used in this 
study and last, the results and conclusions of the study are 
presented. It seems that the training method (PGC) is effective 
for improving communication skills. This study points out also 
the importance of communication skills in working life and for 
subjective well-being at work. 
Keywords-communication; 
communication 
skills; 
training; 
counseling; organizations; leadership. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The role of communication skills in working life has 
clearly increased lately and the demand for developing 
communication skills for managers and personnel overall has 
risen. Communication and information processes have 
become vital for success specifically in knowledge 
organizations. [1] Social relationships and communication 
are important factors of working conditions in creating 
functionality to work, engagement and commitment for 
employees’ [2]. Current research also suggests concentrating 
on the relationship between supervisor and subordinate and 
developing communication skills in managers [3]. Dialogic 
leadership brings out the idea that it is more vital to 
concentrate on the interactional process of supervisor and 
subordinates instead of individual characteristics of the 
leader [3][4][5]. The quality of the relationship between 
supervisor and subordinate can be seen by Leader-member 
exchange theory (LMX) [6]. The impact of the quality of this 
relationship has been shown to have great impact for 
example on employee job satisfaction, well-being, reduced 
staff turnover and innovativeness [7][8][9]. The baseline of 
LMX lies in social theory [8] and social exchange theory 
[11][12].  
A growing body of research indicates to a large number 
of problems related to psychological health in work settings 
[13][14]. Psychological health problems reflect mostly on 
job stress and burn out. One important cause for job stress 
and burn out seems to be related to social interactions and 
lack of social contact [15]. Social skills and communication 
skills are associated with two indicators of psychological 
well-being: reduced symptoms of depression and life 
satisfaction [16]. Bakker et al. [7] have suggested one option 
for developing working life and subjective well-being by 
bringing out the concept of work engagement [17][18]. Even 
though it has been seen that social interaction is an important 
factor in creating engagement of employees, there is not 
much research about this relationship between social 
interaction and employee engagement. Hayase [18] points 
out that there is a positive relation between internal 
communication and employee engagement. Current research 
also shows that internal communication is associated with 
commitment, discretionary effort and meaningful work 
which can all be seen as factors of work engagement [2][18]. 
When planning the Frictionless Communication (FriCo) 
project, the baseline was the demand arising from the 
working life for improving the communication skills of 
young engineers [19][20]. The impact of engineers’ 
communication skills in adjusting to jobs and achieving 
career goals seems to be meaningful [21]. Many of the 
engineers work in leadership positions already at the very 
beginning of their career, which creates the demand for 
leadership skills which are not however developed much 
during university training (see for example [22]).  
There is a relationship between social skills and greater 
well-being (lower level of stress and social skills). The 
competitiveness depends more on intangible assets that are 
mostly related to the social interaction of people in 
organizations and can be identified by psychological and 
social capital. For competitiveness and creating innovations, 
there is a demand for qualitative and fluent communication 
in organization knowledge creation process. Leaders’ 
relational behavior is positively associated with social capital 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

in organizations. Social capital includes the feeling of 
enthusiasm which is positively associated with employee job 
performance. [23][24]  
The field of communication skills and management is 
still quite new and growing. There is some study to be found 
on supervisory communication skills but this kind of 
systematic training like peer Group Counseling –training 
method (PGC) on communication skills in supervisors or 
managers is still quite new and infrequent. Zohar et al. [25] 
bring out a discourse-based intervention for modifying 
supervisory communication for creating safety climate and 
improve performance. Guidance-based leadership training 
program also concentrates on communication skills training 
[26].   
Communication skills’ training is not that noticeable in 
the field of management but in the area of counseling and 
therapy it is clearly seen as very important. In counseling and 
therapy sessions the role of communication skills is clearly 
significant and counselors and therapists are systematically 
trained in such skills. Most of the theories in the background 
of this method PGC also lie in counseling and therapy. These 
skills are needed in building a successful counselor/therapy 
and client relationship as well as in supervisor – subordinate 
relationship. [27][29]  
This kind of setting is also quite common among health 
professionals, especially in doctor-patient relationships [29]-
[33]. Moore and Wilkinson [29] have shown results of 
communication skills training for health professionals. In this 
setting with three trials on 347 health professionals showed a 
significant positive effect on communications behaviors and 
the study suggests providing communication skills training 
for health professionals. One important finding is also that 
nurses used more emotional speech than untrained 
counterparts. This result was also seen in patients who also 
used more emotional terms when interviewed by trained 
nurses.    
Work 
engagement 
is 
an 
emerging 
concept 
in 
occupational health psychology and it reflects on job 
resources and personal resources. The concept of work 
engagement includes a positive, fulfilling, affective-
motivational state of work-related well-being that is 
characterized by vigor, dedication and absorption. Job 
resources can be divided into physical, social and 
organizational aspects of the job. Job can fulfill human needs 
like autonomy, relatedness and competence [32]. In this 
study we concentrate on the social support of the job 
resources which support and satisfy the need for autonomy 
and the need to belong. [35][17][34]  
In the project FriCo funded by The Finnish Work 
Environment Fund, we used PGC training for developing the 
communication skills of the participants. PGC method has 
been developed at the Research Unit of Psychology at the 
University of Oulu [36][37]. The main purpose of the FriCo 
project was to develop communication skills in Finnish 
industrial and planning organizations. The communication 
skills were developed at individual, work community and 
organizational level and the methods in the project are PGC 
(individual level), ethnographic (work community level) and 
participating planning (organizational level). The project 
develops 
communication 
skills 
in 
order 
to 
create 
innovativeness in organizations and develop management 
and leadership that are associated with performance of work 
community, profitability and subjective well-being.   
PGC, also known as consultative method, is based on 
structured role working, where the participants are given the 
opportunity to contemplate their own and other participants’ 
experiences of their work issues in emotionally safe and 
peaceful environments [37]. Consultative method is divided 
into three phases: orientation, counseling and discussion 
session and sharing. The phases help the participant to focus 
on different stages in the discussion and be able to define the 
concepts of the task of the counselor for the participants. [37] 
Consultative method is based on multidimensional and 
process like action [38]. Multidimensionality reflects on a 
negotiating and inquisitive approach to problem solving. It 
can be seen in interaction situations that the focus on 
discussion is on the matter of the client. Consultative method 
emphasizes the skills in communication that help the owner 
of the matter to recognize his emotions and knowhow and in 
that way reach the real problem. Consultative method is 
developed by peer learning principles [39] [41]. The method 
focuses on the experiences and expertise of the participants 
in communication training.   
The focus of PGC is on basic skills in counseling and 
communication. Those skills can be seen as professional 
counseling and communication skills and those skills can be 
divided into following items: conducting, listening, dialog, 
concentricity, reflecting, attending skills, focusing, and 
agreement. [41][42][43][44]  
The approach in this study to counseling and 
communication skills is based on the Human Relation 
Counseling Model (HRCM) framework that derives from 
many formal theoretical points including  phenomenological 
theory and client centered theory [42][44]. HRCM 
emphasizes a client-centered, problem-solving and helping 
relationship. The behavior changes and actions (outcomes) 
can be the result of one or both of the following: 1) the 
client’s exploration and understanding of his or her own 
feelings, thoughts or actions, or 2) the client’s understanding 
of and decision to modify pertinent environmental and 
systematic variables [44]. We used the Counselor Response 
Observation System (CROS) to measure the communication 
skills of the participants. CROS consists of Counseling 
Response Coding System (CRCS) which includes the 
categories reflecting to Ivey’s micro skills on counseling and 
Skilled Verbal Response Scale (SVRS) which consists of 
seven dimensions of skillful counseling [46][47]. Micro 
skills in counseling can be divided into verbal and nonverbal 
skills and in this study and in CROS the focus is on verbal 
skills: listening, attending and influencing skills [46].   
The background of SVRS lies in the definition of helpful 
verbal responding in HRCM. CRCS categories are derived 
from Ivey’s micro skills. Micro skills model includes 
combination of a response and its focus and a preliminary 
model included 12 categories for each response variable 
(perception check, reflection, specifying question, summary, 
conclusion, direction, suggestion, self-disclosure, feedback, 
leading to logical consequences, immediacy, confrontation) 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

and seven categories for the response focus variable (feeling, 
action, explanation, history, facts, strengths, context). [47]  
CROS consists of six SVRS items as presented in 
Figure1: 1) the counselor speaks of things that the client has 
not mentioned, 2) the counselor uses open questions, 3) the 
counselor focuses on exploring the client’s problems, 4) the 
counselor does not share opinions or give advice, 5) the 
counselor does not act mechanically, 6) the counselor uses 
specifying questions [46].   
 
 
Figure 1. Dimensions of SVRS (Rantanen et al. 2013) 
 
The purposes of the study is to 1) describe the typical 
communication skills and types of the participants in the 
beginning of the training based on CROS, 2) present the 
changes in communication skills during the training and 3) 
present the participants’ feedback about the training and its’ 
effectiveness.  
In this study we use SVRS to describe the typical 
communication skills of the participants and to analyze the 
changes in communication skills in training. We analyze the 
written feedback of participants to provide qualitative insight 
into the effectiveness of PGC as a training method.  The 
study of the role of communication skills in organizations 
and working life is an important theme today and for the 
future in occupational health psychology and organizational 
psychology.  
 
II. 
METHOD 
 
   We present here the methods we use in this study. We 
begin with participants and then describe procedure of the 
training method and research design, then continuing on 
measures and data analysis. 
A. Participants 
In this study we examine 11 managers and employees 
who work in industrial and planning organizations and 
participated in FriCo project. 11 participants take part in the 
communication skills training. The communication skills’ 
training was firstly planned for managers but we had to 
replace two of them with other specialists because of time 
problems. 8 of 11 in training are male and 3 of 11 female. 
There were no specific selection for sex and the large amount 
of men is explained by the field of the companies (mostly 
engineers). PCG training method includes all the participants 
working in both roles: as subordinate (usually client) and 
supervisor (usually counselor).  The professional status of 
participant does not play any role in this training design 
neither does sex.  
B. Procedure 
The study is executed during the communication skills 
training with 11 participants taking part in the FriCo project. 
All the participants work as both supervisor (counselor) and 
subordinate (client) in the counseling sessions (discussion 
sessions). The training method in consultative session is 
based on structured role working when all the participants 
are required to work as a counselor and a client [37]. We use 
subordinate-supervisor design in this FRICO project as it is 
more suitable for the participants coming from industrial and 
planning organizations. This training in FRICO is planned 
for managers and that’s why we change the counselor- client 
design into supervisor – subordinate design. That doesn’t 
influence on communication or communication training.  
 
PGC, also known as consultative method, is based on 
structured role working, where the participants are given the 
opportunity to contemplate their own and other participants’ 
experiences of their work issues in emotionally safe and 
peaceful environments 
 
 The sessions are all videotaped. The communication 
skills training session include an intervention during the 
session. The communication skills of each participant are 
measured with SVRS scale.   
 
C. Research Design 
The subjects are observed in a peer consultation team as 
presented in Figure 2. A peer consultation team includes a 
supervisor (counselor), a subordinate (client), a counselor 
(supervisor) and observers (2-6). PGC training requires 
working in both roles as a supervisor (counselor) and a 
subordinate (client) to be able to adapt communication skills. 
Working in both roles gives important information via 
practice about consistency and client-centeredness [46]. We 
examine the whole consultation sessions and SVRS scores 
are given to all the participants when working in the role of 
the client.  
 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

 
Figure 2. Peer Group Counseling method – roles 
 
D. Measures 
1) CROS 
 
We 
use the 
CROS 
to 
measure 
the 
level of 
communication skills. CROS consists of CRCS and a SVRS, 
and in this study we focused on SVRS as the aim is to 
examine the skill level of the participants’ communication 
skills [46]. SVRS focuses on measuring skilled responses of 
the counselor during a counseling session. The task of 
counseling is to help the client to explore and understand 
his/her problem. The counselor can make the most of the 
counseling session by focusing on the client’s message in a 
personal, consistent and thorough way. Measuring skillful 
response is based on these qualities. The SRVS consists of 
six observational items (rated on 4-point Likert scale, 0 = not 
at all, 1= a little, 2 = somewhat, 3= a lot). SVRS measures 
the degree of the counselor’s ability to help the client to 
explore his/her problem [45]. 
 
 
2) Data Analysis 
 
We collect the feedback from each participant after each 
day of training as well as after completing the training. The 
feedback is collected in the form of open questions and the 
received qualitative data is analyzed by using constant 
comparative method (for example [47]). Based on the data it 
is possible to create an understanding of how the participants 
experience the PGC method and which facts in their opinion 
advanced the learning process.  
The training sessions are videotaped for later analysis 
and feedback. A few the participants commented that the 
presence of the camera had made them feel nervous at first, 
but during the training recording was forgotten. The actual 
recordings are however considered to be a good tool for 
getting feedback and observing one’s own action in the 
communication situations. Based on the comments from the 
participants a small training group creates a safe and relaxed 
atmosphere, which makes concentrating on the practices 
easier. The immediate feedback after the training sessions, as 
well as discussions and sharing with the other participants 
and with the trainer is evaluated as the most effective factor 
for learning the PGC method.  
 
 
III. 
RESULTS 
 
SVRS scores in the first training session do not show any 
typical ways for managers to respond in the communication 
situations. It can be seen rather that they each are responding 
in their own typical ways. None of the six dimensions 
includes into SVRS scale is considered as better as or worse 
than the others. When comparing SVRS scores in the first 
training session and in the second training session the results 
show that most of the participants were able to improve their 
communication skills during the training (see Table 1). 
SVRS scores had increased from the first training session to 
the second training session (session1: mean 10.71 and 
session2: mean 13.29). It seemed that client-centeredness 
had improved the most for these participants, which was 
seen in this training mostly in dimension scenario “counselor 
speaks of 
things 
that 
client 
has 
not 
mentioned”. 
Unfortunately, all of the participants were not able to attend 
the second training session and therefore are missing the 
second scores, but for those who attended both of the 
sessions it seems that the training method has been effective 
and we can show preliminary results.  
 
 
TABLE 1. PARTICIPANTS’ SVRS SCORES IN FIRST AND SECOND 
COMMUNICATION TRAININGN SESSION (11 participants took part in 
first counseling and 7 participants took part in second counseling session) 
 
PARTICIPANTS 
SVRS SCORES1 
SVRS SCORES2 
 1 
7 
15 
2 
7 
13 
 
3 
15 
17 
 
6 
12 
12 
 
7 
13 
11 
 
8 
10 
11 
 
11 
11 
14 
 
p= 0,000, sd svrs1=2,98, sd svrs2=2,21, mean svrs1 10,71, mean 
svrs2 13,29 
 
 
 
We also analyze the feedback from the participants 
qualitatively using grounded theory. At the beginning of the 
training the participants report feeling some confusion 
concerning the PGC method, but as training progressed, the 
participants started to comment quite quickly that the method 
felt good in the sense that participating and actual training 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

started immediately. The orientation to the training sessions 
via a short theory overview (for example concerning the link 
between the communication skills and work well-being) was 
appreciated by the participants, but there were however 
several statements that PGC method could not be adopted via 
theory or by memorizing: based on the comments, adopting 
PGC method requires concrete practices, self-involvement as 
well as ability to reflect and change one’s own actions. The 
participants reported that they gained practical and 
applicable tools for better communication during the training 
period. The overall comments concerning the usability of the 
method in everyday work were very positive. 
 
“The method starts to clear up and sometimes at work I 
remember to listen more carefully and catch their message 
instead of offering a solution”,  
 “The method is clearing up and I am already using it at 
work, it is comforting to know that it is possible to train 
one’s communication skills  
“Good experience. I would recommend this to others too. 
First I thought that there should be more theory included, 
but later on I noticed that this method is good. I got tools to 
improve my communication and learned what my strengths 
and challenges are [when communicating]”  
“Practices and watching them [from the video recordings] 
as well as evaluation have been an educating ensemble, 
which created an opportunity to see one acting in a 
communication situation. The skill, how to give feedback 
has improved during the training.”  
“Very good practices. It is good to get the feedback 
concerning the performance right in the middle of practice 
session.”  
“Practice, practice, practice and feedback. It is not possible 
to learn these things via theory sessions. This training 
model is very good. A half-day training session is 
convenient and starting time at 12 o’clock is good as well.”  
“The special feature of this training is that you can’t learn 
it “by heart”. It requires assimilation, reflecting one’s own 
action and changing one’s personal ways to act. 
Challenging tasks, which most probably everyone is not 
capable of handling.”  
 “There could be more practices for each trainee, for 
example the whole day reserved for the training and each 
trainee could practice several times a day.”   
 
When we further analyze the feedback from the training 
and compared the data with SVRS scores, it could be seen 
that those participants who were capable of analyzing their 
own leader experience and reflect on their own action in the 
practices during the training, received higher SVRS scores in 
the second training session. We also notice a correlation 
between the participants’ self-reflection and increasing 
SVRS scores between the first and the second training 
session.   
 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
 
In this study we describe an example of a communication 
skills training method and show results derived from the 
project FriCo [20][21]. We show here that our method PGC 
had increased communication skills for the participants, 
measured with CROS. These are preliminary results but we 
can see this training method and the subject of 
communication skills and organization success as an 
important area to be investigated in the future. We can 
recommend PGC as a tool for promoting communication 
skills in managers within different organizations. The 
effectiveness of this training demands active participation, 
commitment and self-reflection. We note the connection 
between high SVRS scores and self-reflection: participants 
that had used self-reflection during the training had higher 
scores in SVRS compared to those that had not used self-
reflection. 
Our 
previous 
studies 
also 
showed 
the 
effectiveness of the method in developing counseling and 
communication skills (for example [36]). There is a need for 
further study in examining this method with a larger sample 
and we can only show preliminary results in this paper. We 
are also interested in examining the connection between 
communication skills and well-being at work which would 
benefit this method and research as well as give important 
information for the research and study of well-being and the 
Quality of Working Life (QWL).   
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] King, W.R.”Communications and information processing as a 
critical success factor in the effective knowledge organization”. 
International Journal of Business Information Systems, vol.10, 
no5, pp31-52. 2005 
[2] W. B. Scahufeli and A. B. Bakker, “Job demands, job 
resources, and their relationship with burnout and engagement: a 
multi-sample study”, Journal of Organizational Behavior 25, pp. 
293-315, 2004. 
[3] W. N. Isaacs, “Dialogic leadership”, The Systems Thinker, vol. 
10, no. 1, pp. 1-5, 1999.   
[4] P. Hersey, and K. Blanchard, “Situational leadership, 
perception, and the impact of power, Group and Organization 
Management” 4, pp. 418-428, 1979. 
 [5] G. Yukl. Leadership in Organizations (5th ed.), Upper Saddle 
River: Prentice-Hall, 2002 
[6] G. B. Graen & M. Uhl-Bien, “Relationship-Based Approach to 
Leadershop: Development of Leader-Member Exchange (LMX) 
Theory of Leadership over 25 Years: Applying a Multi-Level 
Multi-Domain Perspective”,Leadership Quarterly, vol6, no2, 
pp.219247, 1995  
[7] R. Loi, K. W. Chan and L.W. Lam, “Leader-member-
exchange, organizational identification, and job satisfaction: A 
social identity perspective”. Journal of Occupational and 
Organizational Psychology, 87, pp. 42-61, 2013.  
[8] G. B. Graen and M. Uhl-Bien, “Relationship-based approach to 
leadership: development of leader-member exchange (LMX) 
theory of leadership over 25 year: applying multi-level multi-
domain perspective”, Leadership Quarterly, 6, pp. 219-247, 1995.  
9] B. Erdogan and J. Enders, “Support from the top: Supervisors' 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

perceived organizational support as a moderator of leader-member 
exchange to satisfaction and performance relationships”, Journal of 
Applied Psychology, Vol92(2), pp. 321-330, March 2007.  
[10] R. L. Kahn, D. M. Wolfe, R. P. Quinn, J .R. Snoek and R. A. 
Rosenthal, Organizational stress: studies in role conflict and 
ambiguity, Wiley, New York, 1964.  
[11] P. M.  Blau, Exchange and power in social life, Wiley, New 
York, 1964a.  
[12] G.C. Homans, “Social behavior as exchange”, American 
Journal of Sociology, Vol. 63, No. 6, pp. 597-606, May 1958.  
[13] G. P. Harnois and P. Gabriel, Mental health and work: impact, 
issues and good practices, Geneva, World Health Organization, 
2000.  
[14] V. Rousseau, C. Aube, F. Chiocchio, J. Boudrias and E. M. 
Morin, “Social interactions at work and psychological health: the 
role of leader-member exchange and work group integration”, 
Journal of Applied Psychology, Volume 38, Issue 7, pp. 1755-
1777, July 2008.  
[15] W. B. Schaufeli and M. C. W. Peeters, “Job stress and burnout 
among correctional officers: a literature review”, International 
Journal of Stress Management, Vol. 7, No. 1,, pp 19- 48, 2000.  
[16] S.  Segrin and K. N. Rynes, “The mediating role of positive 
relations with others in assocations between depression, social 
skills and perceived stress”, Journal of Research in Personality, 43, 
pp. 962-971, 2009.  
[17] A. B. Bakker, W. B. Schaufeli, M. P. Leiter and T. W.  Taris, 
“Work engagement: An emerging concept in occupational health 
psychology”, Work and Stress 22:3, pp. 187-200, 2008.  
[18] L. K. T. Hayase, Internal communication in organizations and 
employee engagement, Univerisity Libraries, University of 
Nevada, Las Vegas, 2009.   
[19] P. Sageev and C. J.  Romanowski, “A message from recent 
engineering graduates: results of a survey on technical  
communication skills”,  Journal of Engineering Education, pp. 
685-692, October 2001.  
[20] The Finnish Work Environment Fund: Database of research 
and development projects: KIKO Kitkaton kommunikointi. 
[Online] Available from: http://www.tsr.fi/tutkimustietoa/tata-
tutkitaan/hanke?h=112299 
[21] Frictionless communication (FRICO): [Online] Available 
from: http://www.kiko-hanke.com/ 
[22] K. Harmaala, ” Developing technical studies in higher 
education, The feedback of newly graduated and the discussion in 
work seminar – report” Technical academics TEK, 2012 
[23] M. P. Senge, The fifth discipline: the art and practice of the 
learning organization,  London: Random House Business, 2006.  
[24] A. Carmeli, B. Ben-Hador, D. Waldman and D. E.  Rupp, 
“How leaders cultivate social capital and nurture employee vigor: 
implications for job performance”, Journal of Applied Psychology, 
94:6, pp. 1553-1561, 2009.  
[25] Zohar, Doc, Polachek and Tal, Discourse-based intervention 
for modifying supervisory communication as leverage for safety 
climate and performance improvement: a randomized field study, 
Journal of Applied Psychology, 99:1, pp. 113-244, 2014.  
[26] J. Ylitalo,”Impact dynamics of Guidance-based Leadership 
Training Program, Aalto University publication series Doctoral 
Dissertations 106, 2012. 
[27] A. O. Horvath, A. C. Del Re, C. Fluckiger and D. Symonds, 
In J.C. Norcross (Ed.) Psychotherapy, 139-149, 2011 
[28] D.E. Orlinsky, K.. Grave and B. K. Parks, “Process and 
outcome in psychotherapy – noch einmal”, In A.E. Bergin and S.L. 
Garfield (Eds.) Handbook of psychotherapy and behaviour change. 
pp. 275-310, New York: Wiley, 1994  
[29] P. M. Moore, S. S. M. Wilkinson and S. R. Mercado, 
“Communication skills training for health care professionals 
working with cancer patients, their families and/or careers”, 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews: 2, 2004.  
[30] P. Maguire and C. Pitceathly, “Key communication skills and 
how to acquire them”, BMJ, 325:7366, pp. 697-700, 2002.  
[31] J. M. Clayton et al. ”Evaluation of a novel individual 
communication-skills training intervention to improve doctors’ 
confidence and skills in end-of-life communication, Palliative 
Medicine, 27:3, pp. 236-243, 2012. 
[32] C. J. Randall et al. “Effect of communication skills training 
for residents and nurse practioners on quality of communication 
with patients with seriours illness”, Journal of the American 
Medical Association, 210:21, pp. 2271-2281, 2013. 
[33] M. Stephen and H. O’Brien, “Communication skills training 
for doctors increases patient satisfaction, Clinical Covernance: An 
international Journal, 11:4, pp. 1477-7274 (28) 2006 
[34] E. L. Deci and R. M. Ryan, Intrinsic motivation and self-
determination in human behavior, New York: Plenum, 1985.  
[35] A. B. Bakker and W. B. Schaufeli, “Job demands, job 
resources, and their relationship with burnout and engagement: a 
multi-sample study”, Journal of Organizational Behaviour, 25, pp. 
293-315, 2004  
[36] T. Suorsa, A. Rantanen, M. Mäenpää, H. Soini, ”Toward a 
subject-scientific research counselling in A. Marvakis, J.  Motzkau, 
D. Painter, R.  Kuto-Korir, G. Sullivan, S. Triliva and M. Wieser 
(Eds) Doing psychology under new conditions, Captus University 
Press, 2013.  
[37] M. Renko, M. Uhari, H. Soini and M. Tensing, ”Peer 
consultation as a method for promoting problem-based learning 
during a paediatrics course”, Medical Teacher, Vol. 24, No. 4, pp. 
408-411, 2002.  
[38] E. Schein, Process Consultation Revisited. Building the 
helping relationship. Reading, MA:Addison-Wesley, 1999.  
[39] K. J. Topping, Peer assisted learning. A practical guide for 
teachers, Newton: Brookline Books, 2001  
[40] K. J. Topping and S. Ehly, “Peer assisted learning: a 
framework for consultation”, Journal of Educational and 
Psychological Consultation, 12, pp. 113-132, 2002.  
[41] A. Ivey and M. Ivey, Intentional interviewing and counseling. 
Facilitating client development in a multicultural society. 6th ed. 
Belmont: Thomson Books/Cole, 2007. 
[42] V. Peavy, Sociodynamic counselling. A constructive 
perspective for the practice of counseling in 21 st centurum, 
Victoria: Trafford publishing, 1997. 
[43] B. Okun, Effective helping. Interviewing and counseling 
techniques, 6th ed. Pacific Grove: Thomson Books/Cole, 2002. 
[44] C. R. Rogers, A theory of therapy, personality and 
interpersonal relationships: as developed in the client-centered 
framework, New York: McGraw Hill.1959. 
[45] A. E. Ivey, Microcounseling: innovations in interviewing 
training. Springfield, IL: Charles C Thomas, 1971. 
[46] A. Rantanen and H. Soini, “Development of the counseling 
response observation system. Measurement and evaluation in 
counseling and development”, 46:4, 247-260, 2013. 
[45] B. G. Glaser and A. L. Strauss, A. L. The discovery of 
grounded theory: strategies for qualitative research. New York 
(N.Y.), 1967. 
 
 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

