Gamiﬁcation Elements in Immersive Virtual Reality
Comparing the Effectiveness of Leaderboards and Copresence for Motivation
Katharina Jahn
Chair of Information Systems
University of Siegen
Siegen, Germany
e-mail: katharina.jahn@uni-siegen.de
Abstract—With the ability to present a completely different
environment to users through head-mounted displays, immersive
virtual reality (IVR) offers many opportunities to enhance
users’ motivation and learning. Recent research in the sports
context indicates that social facilitation effects occurring with real
humans do not necessarily arise when users see a virtual human
on a 2D screen. However, whether the increased copresence
that immersive virtual reality offers a) can provide increased
social facilitation effects compared to 2D screens and b) pro-
vides enhanced effectivity compared to traditional gamiﬁcation
elements is still unclear. To investigate this research gap, a 2
(copresence: low vs. high) x 2 (leaderboard: no leaderboard vs.
leaderboard) between-subjects laboratory experiment is proposed
in this research in progress paper. The expected results can
contribute to explain the effects of gamiﬁcation elements in IVR
for intrinsic motivation and performance.
Index Terms—virtual reality; copresence; gamiﬁcation; multi-
user; leaderboards.
I. INTRODUCTION
With Immersive Virtual Reality (IVR) technology becoming
more and more affordable, new opportunities arise to facilitate
learning. IVR has not only the ability to create a high sense
of being in a distant environment (telepresence), it can also
create a high sense of owning a virtual body (self-presence),
being with others (social presence) and being with others in
a distant environment (copresence) [1]–[3]. The experiences
made in IVR can indeed affect cognition and behavior [4]–
[6]. For example, IVR enables users to see a virtual body
visually similar to the self doing sports from both ﬁrst and third
person perspective. When the avatar then gains or loses weight
according to activity, long-term activity levels of the user can
be facilitated [4]. Such designs relying on embodiment of users
are not easily possible without IVR.
The characteristics of IVR offer the possibility to design
gamiﬁcation elements used in traditional devices more effec-
tively, especially in relation to learning scenarios with multiple
individuals. Gamiﬁcation describes the use of game elements
in non-gaming contexts and requires the use of gamiﬁcation
design elements [7][8]. Gamiﬁcation design elements are
aimed at motivating or engaging users and are instantiated
as objects and mechanics (i.e., interaction rules) [8]. Related
to other virtual individuals, they can consist in the inclusion
of leaderboards, e.g., a list of the top ten users or displaying
multiple users in the application [9][10]. Whereas the inclusion
of gamiﬁcation design elements, such as leaderboards, satisﬁes
individuals’ need to feel competent and might induce increased
feelings of autonomy, displaying multiple users can satisfy
the need for relatedness and can serve a social facilitation
effect [11]. According to research on social facilitation and
inhibition effects, being observed by other humans while doing
a simple task can create social facilitation, whereas it inhibits
task performance for complex tasks [12].
For collaborative learning situations, especially the ability
of IVR to display quite realistic avatars, which create a high
degree of copresence, can create a fundamentally different ex-
perience compared to traditional virtual learning environments
(e.g., 2D screen at desktop computer). Research on comparing
the sense of copresence using a large 2D display or a head-
mounted display (HMD) to interact with a single virtual human
indicates that individuals can feel the same degree of being
colocated in a room with a virtual human in both scenarios
[13]. However, their perception in which room they were
colocated varied, with participants viewing a 2D environment
feeling colocated in the actual room, whereas participants with
HMD felt colocated in the virtual room. Additionally, it is
still unclear how copresence is affected when copresence with
multiple individuals should be elicited.
Up to now, whether the higher immersion offered in IVR
a) can be used to recreate social facilitation effects present for
real humans and b) can compete against traditional gamiﬁca-
tion elements is still unclear. To address this research gap, this
research in progress paper focuses on the area of facilitating
engagement in the sports domain in which users located at
different places are colocated in a virtual environment and
aims at proposing a design methodology to investigate the
following research question:
Research Question. Which collaborative gamiﬁcation design
elements lead to increased motivation and performance?
The paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, the hypothe-
ses are developed on the basis of self-determination theory and
literature on gamiﬁcation. In Section 3, the methodological
approach is described. Finally, Section 4 concludes with the
expected contribution of the proposed experiment and sugges-
tions for future research.
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-722-1
COLLA 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

II. BACKGROUND AND HYPOTHESIS DEVELOPMENT
This section describes self-determination theory in relation
to gamiﬁcation to develop hypotheses regarding the effect of
copresence and leaderboards on motivation.
A. Self-determination theory and Gamiﬁcation
Self-determination theory [14][15] describes how humans
develop extrinsic and intrinsic motivation. It proposes that
the satisfaction of three psychological needs, competence,
autonomy, and relatedness, is relevant for the development
of motivation. Need for competence describes that individual
strive to experience feelings of achievement during interaction
with their environment [16]. On the other hand, need for
autonomy relates to the experience that actions result from in-
dividuals’ own volition, whereas need for relatedness describes
that individuals strive to belong to other individuals [15]. The
development of the research model (see Figure 1) for this
research-in-progress paper on the basis of self-determination
theory is described below.
For the area of gamiﬁcation, self-determination theory can
act as a theoretical lens to explain how different gamiﬁcation
elements motivate. Sailer et al. [9] could show that the
inclusion of badges, leaderboards, and a performance graph
increased the satisfaction of need for competence and auton-
omy compared to presenting only points. On the other hand,
when users could choose their avatars and are presented with
a story, as well as teammates, their need for social relatedness
was more satisﬁed than when they viewed only points. It is
therefore hypothesized that the presentation of leaderboards
will increase the satisfaction of need for competence and
autonomy.
Hypothesis 1. Using leaderboards leads to higher satisfaction
of need for competence than using no leaderboards.
Hypothesis 2. Using leaderboards leads to higher satisfaction
of need for autonomy than using no leaderboards.
Additionally, increased copresence should lead to higher
satisfaction of need of relatedness than low copresence.
Hypothesis 3. High copresence leads to higher satisfaction
of need of relatedness than low copresence.
B. Gamiﬁcation Elements and Performance
Research on the social facilitation effect of virtual humans
can be differentiated in whether it has investigated the effects
of virtual humans displayed on traditional 2D screens or in
IVR with a HMD.
For 2D screens, research has indicated that being with
virtual human has similar effects as being with a real human,
at least when the task for which performance is measured is
a cognitive task. Speciﬁcally with regard to inhibition effects,
both virtual humans and real humans inhibit performance for
female, but not male participants in a pattern recognition and
categorization task [17]. Likewise, with regard to facilitation
effects, Liu et al. could show that effects are comparable
between virtual humans and real humans, but without detecting
gender effects [18]. Additionally, Park et al. could show that
social inhibition effects arise for both virtual and real humans
in a complex task, whereas for easy tasks, a social facilitation
effect could be observed [19]. However, the social facilitation
effect comparing presence versus absence of a virtual human
of Park et al. could not be replicated in a recent study [20].
Surprisingly, when the task is not a cognitive task but a
sports-related, effects between virtual and real humans become
apparent, as shown by a recent study [21]. Here, cycling
performance could be enhanced when competitive individuals
were paired with a real human, but not when they were paired
with a virtual human.
In IVR, initial research suggests that social inhibition effects
are at a similar level for virtual and real humans, whereas no
social facilitation effects could be found for virtual or real
humans [22]. Additionally, computer controlled agents seem
to provide less copresence than human-controlled avatars,
and here, inhibition effects could only be found for human-
controlled avatars [23]. One paper compared the effect of
HMD and 2D screens, which indicated that inhibition arises
only when using IVR but not when using 2D screens for
robotic agents [24]. However, all of these studies were con-
ducted in the domain of cognitive tasks. As the research in
progress paper at hand is planned in the context of the sports
domain, it can be assumed, in line with research on cycling
performance [21], social facilitation effects will arise. How-
ever, as Snyder et al. could only ﬁnd social facilitation effects
for individuals paired with a real human, it is hypothesized that
the high copresence condition will lead to higher performance
than the low copresence condition.
Hypothesis 4. High copresence leads to higher performance
than low copresence.
As previous research on gamiﬁcation elements has shown
that leaderboards increase performance [25], the same is
assumed for the context of this study.
Hypothesis 5. Using leaderboards leads to higher perfor-
mance than using no leaderboards.
A meta-analysis in the context of self-determination theory
could show that satisfaction of the three psychological needs
predicts performance [26]. We therefore hypothesize:
Hypothesis 6. Performance is positively related to satisfaction
of need for competence.
Hypothesis 7. Performance is positively related to satisfaction
of need for autonomy.
Hypothesis 8. Performance is positively related to satisfaction
of need for relatedness.
III. METHOD
In this section, the set-up of the experiment, the gamiﬁcation
design elements, and the planned data analysis is described.
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-722-1
COLLA 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

Fig. 1. Research Model
A. Participants and Design
I will use a 2 (copresence: low vs. high) x 2 (leaderboard:
no leaderboard vs. leaderboard) between-subjects laboratory
experiment with 80 student participants recruited from the
local university to test the proposed hypotheses.
B. Materials and Measures
Virtual Reality. Participants will use a virtual environment
programmed with Unity 3D displayed with HTC Vive during
the experiment. For body tracking, ﬁve HTC Vive Trackers
(for hip, both feet and both hands) in combination with Hi5
VR Gloves are used. Avatars will be created in Adobe Fuse.
The measurements for the three psychological needs, the
manipulation checks, and the indicator for performance are
described below. The scales for the three psychological needs
and the manipulation checks are measured on a 7-point scale
ranging from “strongly disagree” to “strongly agree”.
Satisfaction of Need for Competence. The need for compe-
tence scale is taken from Sailer et al. [9] and adapted to the
context of the study. The scale consists of four items. One
example item is “During the gamiﬁed task I had feelings of
success”.
Satisfaction of Need for Autonomy. The need for relatedness
scale is adapted from the autonomy in relation to task mean-
ingfulness scale from Sailer et al. [9]. The scale consists of
three items and one example item is “It was worthwile doing
the task”.
Satisfaction of Need for Relatedness. The need for related-
ness scale is adapted from Sailer et al. [9]. The scale consists
of three items and one example item is “While doing the task
I felt like I was part of a team”.
Performance. For learning performance, the times partici-
pants have raised their feet in the marching in place task is
counted.
Manipulation checks. For copresence, the copresence scale
from Poeschl and Doering [27], as well as the copresence
scale from Bailenson et al. [28] are used as manipulation
check, consisting of three items each. An example item is
“”I was aware that other people were with me in the virtual
room.” for the Poeschl and Doering scale and “Even when the
’other’ was present, I still felt alone in the virtual room” for
the Bailenson et al. scale. For Leaderboards, we use the item
”I was informed about how other players performed on the
task” as manipulation check.
C. Gamiﬁcation Design Elements
Leaderboard. Leaderboards will be implemented by dis-
playing the number of repetitions from ﬁve other users. In the
no leaderboard condition, an empty leaderboard is presented.
Copresence. In the low copresence condition, participants
will see four other virtual humans (2 male, 2 female) who
will do the task with them on a television screen. On the high
copresence condition, the players will be in the same virtual
room as the participants.
D. Procedure
One week prior to the ﬁrst IVR session, we will invite
participants to the laboratory to create pictures for the avatars
used in the experiment. One week later, when participants
enter the laboratory, they will be ﬁtted with the HTC Vive
trackers. When they put on the HMD, they will see a room
with a large mirror and a large television screen on the wall
in front of them. When they look in the mirror, they see
the virtual avatar that looks similar to themselves, which
they also see from ﬁrst person perspective. Participants will
see their own points above the mirror and television screen.
Additionally, participants in the leaderboard condition see a
leaderboard displayed above their points, which they will be
made aware of by the experimenter.
For participants in the low copresence condition, the televi-
sion screen will show four participants who enter the room on
the screen and train with them. On the other hand, participants
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-722-1
COLLA 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

in the high co- presence condition, the four trainees enter
the same virtual room as the participant. Then, they will be
instructed on how to do the marching task. In this task, they
have to alternately lift their feet to a speciﬁc height displayed
in IVR for ten training trials in which the experimenter
validates that the participants perform the action correctly.
Then, they are told that they can do as many repetitions as
they want. After they have ﬁnished, participants ﬁnish the
motivation and presence questionnaire in IVR. Afterwards,
they are thanked and debriefed.
Data Analysis: The data will be analyzed using four 2x2
ANOVAs for the three psychological needs competence, au-
tonomy, and social relatedness, as well as performance. Addi-
tionally, the complete model will be tested using covariance-
based structural equation modeling.
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH
The proposed experiment can contribute to literature on
gamiﬁcation and IVR and answering the research question in
several ways. First, the study helps to gain insight into which
gamiﬁcation elements are most effective in IVR to increase
motivation and performance. Additionally, the experiment
contributes to explain motivational working mechanisms of
gamiﬁcation elements against the background of self determi-
nation theory. Finally, the experiment can contribute to explain
conditions under which social facilitation effects arise.
On
this basis, future research can investigate whether the proposed
working mechanisms of this model generalize to other areas in
the sport domain, as well as sport-unrelated domains, such as
knowledge work, and application areas outside of IVR. From
a practice perspective, collaborative gamiﬁcation elements can
then be used to enhance motivation in multi-user scenarios
(e.g., applications supporting health behavior). Furthermore,
future research can develop algorithms that implement these
collaborative gamiﬁcation elements efﬁciently.
REFERENCES
[1] U. Schultze, “Embodiment and Presence in Virtual Worlds: A Review,”
Journal of Information Technology, vol. 25, no. 4, Dec. 2010, pp. 434–
449.
[2] M. Slater and S. Wilbur, “A Framework for Immersive Virtual Environ-
ments (FIVE): Speculations on the Role of Presence in Virtual Environ-
ments,” Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, vol. 6, no. 6,
Dec. 1997, pp. 603–616.
[3] B. G. Witmer and M. J. Singer, “Measuring Presence in Virtual Environ-
ments: A Presence Questionnaire,” Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual
Environments, vol. 7, no. 3, Jun. 1998, pp. 225–240.
[4] J. Fox and J. N. Bailenson, “Virtual Self-Modeling: The Effects of
Vicarious Reinforcement and Identiﬁcation on Exercise Behaviors,”
Media Psychology, vol. 12, no. 1, Feb. 2009, pp. 1–25.
[5] S. A. Osimo, R. Pizarro, B. Spanlang, and M. Slater, “Conversations
between self and self as Sigmund Freud: A virtual body ownership
paradigm for self counselling,” Scientiﬁc Reports, vol. 5, Sep. 2015,
p. 13899.
[6] C. J. Falconer et al., “Embodying self-compassion within virtual reality
and its effects on patients with depression,” British Journal of Psychiatry
Open, vol. 2, no. 1, Jan. 2016, pp. 74–80.
[7] S. Deterding, M. Sicart, L. Nacke, K. O’Hara, and D. Dixon, “Gam-
iﬁcation. Using game-design elements in non-gaming contexts,” in
Proceedings of the 2011 annual conference extended abstracts on Human
factors in computing systems - CHI EA ’11.
Vancouver, BC, Canada:
ACM Press, 2011.
[8] D. Liu, R. Santhanam, and J. Webster, “Toward Meaningful Engage-
ment: A Framework for Design and Research of Gamiﬁed Information
Systems,” MIS Quarterly, vol. 41, no. 4, Apr. 2017, pp. 1011–1034.
[9] M. Sailer, J. U. Hense, S. K. Mayr, and H. Mandl, “How gamiﬁcation
motivates: An experimental study of the effects of speciﬁc game design
elements on psychological need satisfaction,” Computers in Human
Behavior, vol. 69, Apr. 2017, pp. 371–380.
[10] S. Sch¨obel, M. S¨ollner, and J. M. Leimeister, “The Agony of Choice –
Analyzing User Preferences regarding Gamiﬁcation Elements in Learn-
ing Management Systems.” in International Conference on Information
Systems (ICIS), Dublin, Ireland, 2017, p. 23.
[11] S. Thiebes, S. Lins, and D. Basten, “Gamifying Information Systems -
a synthesis of Gamiﬁcation mechanics and Dynamics,” in Proceedings
of the European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS) 2014, Tel
Aviv, Israel, 2014.
[12] R. B. Zajonc, “Social Facilitation,” Science, vol. 149, no. 3681, Jul.
1965, pp. 269–274.
[13] K. Johnsen and B. Lok, “An Evaluation of Immersive Displays for
Virtual Human Experiences,” in 2008 IEEE Virtual Reality Conference,
Mar. 2008, pp. 133–136.
[14] R. M. Ryan and E. L. Deci, “Self-Determination Theory and the
Facilitation of Intrinsic Motivation, Social Development, and Well-
Being,” American Psychologist, 2000, pp. 68–78.
[15] E. L. Deci and R. M. Ryan, Intrinsic motivation and self-determination
in human behavior.
New York: Springer Science+Business Media,
1985, oCLC: 930653832.
[16] S. Rigby and R. M. Ryan, Glued to games: how video games draw us in
and hold us spellbound, ser. New directions in media.
Santa Barbara,
Calif: ABC-CLIO, 2011.
[17] C. Zanbaka, A. Ulinski, P. Goolkasian, and L. F. Hodges, “Effects of
Virtual Human Presence on Task Performance,” International Conference
Artiﬁcal Reality Technologies, 2004, p. 9.
[18] N. Liu and R. Yu, “Determining effects of virtually and physically
present co-actor in evoking social facilitation,” Human Factors and
Ergonomics in Manufacturing & Service Industries, vol. 28, no. 5, Sep.
2018, pp. 260–267.
[19] S. Park and R. Catrambone, “Social Facilitation Effects of Virtual
Humans,” Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and
Ergonomics Society, vol. 49, no. 6, Dec. 2007, pp. 1054–1060.
[20] N. Baldwin, J. Branyon, A. Sethumadhavan, and R. Pak, “In Search of
Virtual Social Facilitation Effects,” Proceedings of the Human Factors
and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, vol. 59, no. 1, Sep. 2015, pp.
90–94.
[21] A. L. Snyder, C. Anderson-Hanley, and P. J. Arciero, “Virtual and
Live Social Facilitation while Exergaming: Competitiveness Moderates
Exercise Intensity,” Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology, vol. 34,
no. 2, Apr. 2012, pp. 252–259.
[22] C. Zanbaka, A. Ulinski, P. Goolkasian, and L. F. Hodges, “Social
Responses to Virtual Humans: Implications for Future Interface Design,”
CHI 2007, San Jose, California, USA, 2007.
[23] C. L. Hoyt, J. Blascovich, and K. R. Swinth, “Social Inhibition in
Immersive Virtual Environments,” Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual
Environments, vol. 12, no. 2, Apr. 2003, pp. 183–195.
[24] K. Emmerich and M. Masuch, “The Inﬂuence of Virtual Agents on
Player Experience and Performance,” in Proceedings of the 2016 Annual
Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction in Play.
New York, NY,
USA: ACM, 2016.
[25] E. D. Mekler, F. Br¨uhlmann, A. N. Tuch, and K. Opwis, “Towards
understanding the effects of individual gamiﬁcation elements on intrinsic
motivation and performance,” Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 71,
Jun. 2017, pp. 525–534.
[26] C. P. Cerasoli, J. M. Nicklin, and A. S. Nassrelgrgawi, “Performance,
incentives, and needs for autonomy, competence, and relatedness: a
meta-analysis,” Motivation and Emotion, vol. 40, no. 6, Dec. 2016, pp.
781–813.
[27] S. Poeschl and N. Doering, “Measuring Co-Presence and Social Pres-
ence in Virtual Environments &ndash; Psychometric Construction of a
German Scale for a Fear of Public Speaking Scenario,” Studies in Health
Technology and Informatics, 2015, pp. 58–63.
[28] J. N. Bailenson et al., “The Independent and Interactive Effects of
Embodied-Agent Appearance and Behavior on Self-Report, Cognitive,
and Behavioral Markers of Copresence in Immersive Virtual Environ-
ments,” Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, vol. 14, no. 4,
Aug. 2005, pp. 379–393.
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-722-1
COLLA 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

