ShareLab, Support for Collective Intelligence 
1 deadline, 11 designers, 1 project 
Samia Ben Rajeb 
LUCID Lab for User Cognition & Innovative Design 
University of Liège, Belgium 
e-mail: samia.benrajeb @ ulg.ac.be 
Alexandru Senciuc 
Independent research 
Paris, France 
e-mail: alexandru.senciuc @ gmail.com 
Irene Pluchinotta 
LAMSADE - Paris Dauphine University, France 
DICATECh - Technical University of Bari, Italy 
e-mail: irene.pluchinotta @ gmail.com
 
 
Abstract— This paper presents the implementation of a 
collaborative action research approach aimed to assist in 
constructing collective intelligence. Named ShareLab, this 
project was implemented as part of a call to an international 
competition bringing together different skills originating from 
varying cultures so as to produce a common project in a very 
short time. What is the origin of ShareLab? How was it put 
into play? What are its advantages and limitations? This 
article aims to answer these questions thanks to the feedback 
obtained from this competition experience. 
Keywords-collaborative 
action-research; 
case 
study 
of 
collaborative activity; managing collaborative design project; 
adaptive collaboration; collective intelligence. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Architectural design is a complex activity that operates in 
an increasingly coercive regulatory environment and that has 
to deal with the competition and urgency resulting from 
ever-shorter deadlines. Under competitive circumstances, the 
challenge of the designers is not only to comply with all 
these constraints, but also to propose creative and innovative 
ideas that can win over a jury. To address these constraints 
fully, architectural firms (whether small, medium or large) 
innovate through interdisciplinary approaches to combine 
various skills needed to carry out the project. Nevertheless, 
faced with this variety of contributors to the project, certain 
information related to the constraints and design arguments 
is lost; the risk of generating misunderstandings and 
disagreements grows, and managing group cohesion 
becomes more and more difficult [1]. 
With regard to this problem, we propose the employment 
of a novel approach, entitled ShareLab. It targets the 
cohesion of a group in order to gradually bring about a 
collective intelligence [2]. In this vein, this article first 
sketches the main scientific contributions that have identified 
those components promoting collective intelligence. We then 
propose to connect those findings to create and define our 
unique approach, while demonstrating its significance thanks 
to the concrete case of a multidisciplinary, collaborative 
work carried out as part of an international architectural 
competition. 
Our article is divided into four parts. Section II will 
introduce the theoretical framework of our study by 
highlighting the concepts that characterize collaborative 
activity and the approach that best cultivates it. Section III 
will describe the context of our study and the design team. 
Section IV will present the methodology implemented. 
Finally, the conclusion will address the contributions and 
limitations of this experience, with possible avenues for 
improvment. 
II. 
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK 
A. Specifying collective activity components before 
choosing tools 
To define our research framework, let us start by 
distinguishing between what pertains to cooperation and 
what pertains to collaboration in collective design activities. 
We hold that collaboration entails instances in the design 
process where multiple contributors interact together around 
the same objective and the same tasks, thus difficult to 
separate [3]. Conversely, in times when they cooperate, each 
player carries out his or her own task in parallel with the 
others. These two distinct stages of the collective design 
process involve different tools and procedures. 
For roughly the past twenty years, the field of Computer 
Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) - has been developing 
many supports for collective activity. However, most of 
these scientific contributions remain rather technically 
centered and too often neglect the organizational aspect in 
addition to personnel management. Most tools proposed 
therein are intended to assist the cooperation of contributors 
by facilitating asynchronous, remote exchanges. These 
cannot, however, be used when the project is sufficiently 
advanced. The sketch phase, during which the most 
important design choices are decided upon, enjoys little 
instrumental aid from the collaborative perspective. 
However, meeting up despite long distances, exchanging 
ideas in real time, maintaining trust between members, 
managing both cognitive and operational synchronizations, 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-436-7
COLLA 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

collectively sharing artifacts, and developing awareness and 
common ground are primordial in ensuring a collective 
design project. On their own, current tools are not enough to 
manage all these elements of collaborative activity. Our 
research question lies herein: how can we combine these into 
an inclusive model that is applicable under real conditions? 
B. Orientation towards a collaborative action research 
approach 
To answer this question, we propose here to define, 
contextualize and integrate all of these elements composing 
collaborative activity, within the framework of an approach 
that invites the contributors to reflect upon their situation. To 
this aim, ShareLab - defined by the LUCID laboratory at the 
University of Liège and developed as part of this contest 
with TARTAR, a design team - employs an interventionist 
approach. This method aims to support work situations that 
involve multiple collaborators, working together for the first 
time to design, in this case, an architectural project in a 
competition with a very short deadline. That is why our 
approach integrates all of these collaborators and attempts to 
engage them in "a critical and dynamic reflection about a 
situation that concerns them" [4]. Inspired by the methods of 
"collaborative action research" [5], the aim of this approach 
is to focus the attention of all players both on the results of 
the competition and on their processes and methods of 
working with multiple people. This type of method is not 
opposed to conventional scientific approaches, but rather 
supplements them by managing the concerns of participants 
in a situation created by the intervention of researchers 
wanting to develop a shared understanding of that situation 
[6]. All contributors (researchers and practitioners, observers 
and designers) work together to build whole new meanings 
related to their activity, thanks to the synergy of their views, 
self- and mutual appraisal of their actions, self- and co-
training, and co-evolution of the methods implemented in 
order to work together [7]. Although the principles of the 
approach applied here are part of a specific, predefined, 
theoretical framework, it remains necessary to implement a 
protocol that integrates the specifics of each work group and 
their project, as well as the context and the constraints that 
they will have to manage. 
By implementing the concept of ShareLab, our objective 
is not to impose a sole method, but rather to adopt an 
integrated approach that encourages group cohesion and that 
aims to bring about collective intelligence. To adopt an 
integrated approach while maintaining each designer's 
individuality: our assumption considers the collective 
activity in design as complex, difficult to generalize and 
which result is first thought, negotiated, valued, challenged 
and co-built by the group before it even exists. 
III. 
A SHARED RESPONSE TO A DESIGN COMPETITION 
Cohesion in a work group is not something to be taken 
for granted, even less so when the group members do not 
know each other and assemble for the first time, as is often 
the case. Players might exit the framework of their habitual 
activity, but their past experiences still shape how they work 
with others [8]. Their mutual interactions are thus subjected 
to several emerging and recurring factors, such as trust, 
culture, 
language, 
individual 
specificities, 
tools 
and 
mediation procedures between them, etc. [9]. Other factors 
also come into play, like the notion of leadership or 
motivation to participate in a joint project [10]. As part of the 
competition involved in this study, the group of designers 
and researchers had aspired to create an innovative process 
motivated by the novelty of the situation bringing them 
together, even before starting the design itself. For the group, 
this involves going beyond their own experiences and areas 
of expertise so as to incorporate the interests and fields of 
others in achieving an unprecedented joint result.  
A. Presentation of the competition and project produced 
The work team in our study concerns one of three 
winners of an international architectural design competition 
that attracted 1.749 applications from 90 different 
nationalities [11]. This team focused on the problem of "the 
rise of sea levels around the world." Dubbed TARTAR, it 
consists of 11 people working together for the first time, 
whose academic backgrounds are different (graduates of 
France, Romania, Tunisia or Italy), and whose skills (as 
practitioners, professors, researchers, and students) also 
come from diverse backgrounds (architecture, urban 
planning, engineering and humanities). Such diversity, at the 
heart of their participation in this contest, and their 
motivation comprise the specific character of this team. 
Their premise was that an original idea could only take shape 
within the diversity of all the points of view made up of each 
of the project participants. To help them reach their goal, the 
definition of the organizational protocol itself was put 
together beforehand along with the collaborators and evolved 
over time from their feedback. The result of this competition 
was therefore based on this organization and on this co-
constructed process. The project was born from the diversity 
of skills, on the one hand, and, on the other, from the 
awareness of problems caused by the rising waters (from 
inventory of various specialties), and the latest scientific 
discoveries in the fields of artificial intelligence and 
synthetic biology. 
The project submitted by the group consisted in creating 
new territories through a cooperative system connecting a 
digital data system and an evolving material inspired by 
coral. 
B. Organizational setup  
The organizational structure created here strives to 
support collective decision-making and to develop an 
environment that promotes understanding between group 
members. The ShareLab complements this structure and is 
based on principles which are defined enough to be 
understood by all, but also open enough to be re-appropriated 
and easily adaptable to changes in the project and how the 
actors interact. 
This 
organizational 
protocol, 
called 
Collective 
Intelligence Support Protocol (CISP), aims to manage the 
team in the collective design of their project, all the while 
integrating space-time constraints on the one hand, and 
levels and production capacity of each individual within the 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-436-7
COLLA 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

group on the other [12]. This protocol ensures the 
coordination of the team and its operational synchronization 
(relative to the sharing of tasks, according to the definition 
given by Falzon and Darses [13]. It provides a structure for 
production level management, deadlines to be met, exchange 
tools, work produced and the role of each player in the 
process. Based on a multi-layer system, the work group was 
initially 
divided 
into 
four 
interconnected 
teams: 
"Organization", "Research" of concept, "Exploration" and 
"Production" of project. Based on this division, the design 
stage was then divided into three phases: research phase, 
exploration phase and production phase. Each team was 
responsible for its own phase, but all teams were involved in 
all phases (cf. Figure 1). Wishing to complete the 
organizational structure, ShareLab was set up to manage the 
transition from one phase to another and thus ensure the 
construction of a collective intelligence in the group. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Relationship between each work phase and the involvement 
level of each team in that phase. 
IV. 
DEFINITION OF SHARELAB 
ShareLab arose from reflections built on observing 
collective activities in action in an architectural, design, and 
engineering 
firm 
setting 
[14]. 
Aimed 
at 
a 
more 
interventionist approach and drawing on methods from 
"collaborative action research," the LUCID laboratory at the 
University of Liège has sought to define a process of co-
reflection in which the problem definition, analysis and the 
recommendations 
come 
from 
both 
researchers 
and 
practitioners themselves. 
Based on "activity theory model" and following the work 
of the CRADLE Finnish research team from the University 
of Helsinki [15], ShareLab attempts to foster common 
ground, helping synchronization within a group whose work 
habits, procedures and tools are not yet clearly defined. 
Indeed, the "activity theory model" (cf. Figure 2) 
provides the means to understand collective activity by 
taking into account the actions and contributions of each 
individual (subject) in the group (community) focused on an 
activity (object), to meet a common goal (outcome). This 
model also connects these elements with (1) the explicit or 
implied rules defined between the subjects and their 
community, (2) the tools used by the subject to act on the 
object, and (3) tasks to be performed on the object by each 
member of the community in order to achieve the final goal 
collectively [16]. This type of model should be analyzed very 
carefully because (relative to the 5 principles of "activity 
theory" as defined by Engeström [17]) it is necessary to 
incorporate an activity model with other activity systems. 
While the overall goal of the group is the same, the sub-goals 
of the individuals can differ. It is therefore essential to see 
the model as a continuously shifting network of nodes of 
activities faced with a set of contradictions [18]. These may 
occur within the same node, between the nodes of a same 
system, between the existing system and the objective, or 
between one activity system and another, involved in the 
production of a common outcome. 
In a system where neither instruments nor rules nor even 
a division of tasks has been defined, this consists in making 
the three nodes interact throughout the design process. As 
part of this competition, the definition and implementation of 
our ShareLab are aimed at better anticipating conflicts and 
helping the group build its own collective intelligence (see 
the linking circle in Figure 2).  
 
 
Figure 2.  Activity theory model applied to the TARTAR project, 
according to Engeström, 1987 [19]. 
"Change Laboratory is a method for developing work 
practices by the practitioners. Basing on the theoretical 
conceptions of the dual (double) stimulation (L. Vygotsky) 
and expansive learning (Y. Engeström) it facilitates both 
intensive, deep transformations and continuous incremental 
improvment. The method is developed and registered by the 
Center of Activity Theory and Developmental Work 
Research, Universityof Helsinki " [20]. In line with the 
Change Laboratory, ShareLab rather intervenes upstream, 
when the participants have not yet built any awareness, 
trust between them has not been acquired, the shared items 
still not defined, the common ground unincorporated, and 
cognitive and operational synchronization not ensured.  
To better know each other, especially to meet a common 
objective on a short deadline, the ShareLab tends to support, 
through an iterative process, design collaboration and 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-436-7
COLLA 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

collective ideation by involving all stakeholders and by 
integrating the maturity of their thinking and the progress of 
their joint project. 
ShareLab was then imagined to join together these five 
key concepts, through an iterative process, to foster 
collective ideation (cf. Figure 3). 
Let us examine these notions individually, to elicit the 
theoretical concepts and to indicate how they are 
implemented, in conjunction with one another, in our model. 
 
Figure 3.  Evolving and growing strategy of building collective 
intelligence within ShareLab. 
A. Synchronization 
In a collective work, all contributors must know the 
objectives, processes, project context, topics and tasks to be 
done. This mutual knowledge improves the efficiency of the 
participants in their work together and facilitates dialogue 
between them. Two synchronization modes are distinguished 
and complement each other [13]: cognitive synchronization 
(on areas of shared skills and knowledge) and operational 
synchronization (relative to the distribution of tasks between 
collaborators). For its part, cognitive synchronization 
emerges from a process of discussion, negotiation and 
evaluation between collaborators. When tasks are new or not 
clearly divided, the operational synchronization plays an 
important role in the coordination of collective activity. It 
ensures, in fact, the definition of these tasks and their 
planning in connection with the common goal of the group. 
These synchronizations are not acquired but instead emerge 
from a process of discussion, negotiation and evaluation in 
which common ground co-evolves between collaborators. 
B. Common ground. 
The involvement of multiple skills requires taking into 
account the multiplicity of viewpoints [21] via an 
argumentative and negotiation processes. Everyone tries to 
ensure that their views are well understood by others [22]. 
These views are regulated little by little during the process to 
converge gradually towards a shared understanding of 
project data. This shared understanding has been described 
by common ground [23]. This common ground is critical to 
collaboration: it helps to pool specific skills and contributes 
to the acquisition of new skills needed to work in a group. It 
also participates in the referential interpretation process by 
increasing the speed with which the referent is identified by 
collaborators. Common ground is thus not a prerequisite. It 
follows the same process of collaboration, involving a 
procedure of pooling and it stems from system rules, 
negotiations and sharing of artifacts, tools, and conventions 
[24]. 
C. Between the sharing of artifacts and tools 
 Mirroring the process of refining ideas, artifacts continue 
to evolve through the exchange of different views between 
collaborators. They promote "reflective conversation" [25], 
allowing individual participants to shape their thoughts and 
share them with others. These artifacts provide a common 
basis between the participants. They are called intermediary 
objects when not completely fixed but remain changeable 
throughout the process [26]. These intermediary objects can 
encourage mediation, translation and/or representation. 
These artifacts are also called boundary objects [27] when 
they 
comprise 
fixed 
materials 
for 
negotiation 
and 
collaboration. To manage the sharing of these artifacts, it is 
equally necessary that the designers agree on the tools to use 
to work together. This conscious sharing of artifacts and 
tools is possible, however, only once trust has been 
established between designers. Indeed, a lack of knowledge 
of the situation, context, tools and specificities of each 
member can cause conflicts, leading the group to 
unsatisfactory decision-making for the project [28]. 
D. Management of trust by respect for the individual and 
the collective 
Within a complex, multidisciplinary group activity, each 
participant must maintain the distinctiveness of their point of 
view and develop their own analysis of the problem to solve 
it. Yet this variety of perspectives may undermine the 
coherence of the project and may even induce a series of 
conflicts in the group. Avoiding groupthink while preserving 
group cohesion is the major challenge of any collective, 
multidisciplinary activity [3]. That is why it is worth 
developing methods that can promote integration of this 
diversity of perspectives, bringing about common knowledge 
that nurtures the project and participates in its development. 
Combining these views would, according to Belkadi [28], 
prevent conflicts and thus foster trust between project 
collaborators. Note however that trust-building strategies are 
not the same at the beginning or end of an activity [29]. 
Early on in an activity, social communications reflecting the 
enthusiasm of each participant and individual initiatives best 
promote trust, while, at the end of the process, individuals 
tend towards a concordance of views and more predictable 
communications with clear answers given in compliance 
with deadlines. All these parameters are facilitated by the 
construction of an awareness among the different members 
of the group evolving in a dynamic frame of trust, 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-436-7
COLLA 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

encouraging each player to circulate their own knowledge, 
references and experiences with others [30]. 
E. Awareness 
Many cognitive and social science studies have focused 
on the concept of awareness as a central parameter of any 
collective activity [31]. Many definitions have been 
proposed, as well as typologies aimed at specifying these 
various aspects. One of the best-known typologies is that of 
Caroll et al. [32], where the authors distinguish three types of 
awareness: social awareness (relating to the consciousness 
of an activity’s social context); action awareness (relating to 
the consciousness of all participants’ tasks and contributions 
in the process); and activity awareness (relating to design 
activity within the group). We add the notion of spatio-
temporal context awareness which considers the context and 
the interaction spaces. These various modes of awareness are 
facilitated by pooling, which may be spontaneous in an 
informal framework (spontaneous pooling) or controlled, in 
a more planned – but not imposed – one, and that participates 
in the sharing of knowledge, experience and references 
between contributors (controlled pooling). 
V. 
IMPLEMENTATION 
ShareLab was set up as part of this four-month-long 
competition, with a threefold objective: 
• 
to face the incongruity of managing creativity in a 
group in a very short timeframe; 
• 
to 
organize 
the 
transition 
from 
cooperative 
circumstances to collaborative ones; 
• 
to ensure a comprehensive group approach while 
respecting the specificity of each member. 
Thus, ShareLab offers participants a collaboration-
friendly environment and the emergence of new ideas in a 
process adapted to the reality of their activity. The principle 
behind this is that ShareLab is supervised and supported by 
the intervention of researchers working together with 
designers. Indeed, each ShareLab, marking the transition 
from one phase to another, was co-built with the previous 
phase’s team leader. Before meeting with all contributors in 
the group, the researcher redefines the following with the 
leader: 
• 
What are the objectives before the start of this 
phase? 
• 
What are the objectives achieved at the end of this 
phase? 
• 
What are the requirements, prerequisites and 
difficulties encountered during this phase? 
• 
What are the goals to be achieved in the next phase? 
Based on these concerns, the researcher and the co-leader 
build the protocol together to be applied in each ShareLab 
session, which is generally divided into three stages: 
1) management awareness and building a climate of trust 
by: 
• 
presenting each new member of the group: On what 
are they working now? Do they have other priorities 
outside of the competition? Do they have references 
or ideas to share? Do they have difficulty using a 
given tool, sharing data or answering another 
member’s request? 
• 
co-defining the objectives of this new ShareLab, 
marking the transition from one phase to another; 
2) management of sharing and building a common 
ground: by the co-design and co-development of ideas from 
pooling work done in the previous phase and using several 
methods from Design Thinking and Serious Game (Set, 
Search, Imagine, Model, Select, Implement); 
3) management of operational synchronization: by co-
distribution of tasks and co-definition of the objectives of 
each team in the next phase. 
As shown in Figure 4, the ShareLab has been used 
several times along the design process: during its 
introduction (when designers meet for the first time), during 
its finalization (when designers finalize their rendering and 
synthesize the project together) and during each articulation 
between phases (for example, when the exploration team 
seeks to pass on the production team. 
Let's take the example of the first ShareLab session: its 
aim was first to establish trust in the group, since all 
individuals meet for the first time. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Different modalities established for each ShareLab. 
It was then necessary to invite them to participate, as a 
sub-team, to a common activity on the theme of water, but 
outside their usual work area and using a new approach they 
did not applied before (here by taking photos at a water park 
of any reference concerning the topic of water). 
A synthesis of this work had then to be co-built by the 
group creating a mind mapping with all the collected data. 
This 
approach 
allows 
to 
deconstruct 
their 
own 
representations by putting them in a non-standard situation. 
To force them to quickly collaborate with others in order to 
produce a common result in a small challenge far from the 
contest topic, invited them to go through a deconstruction 
phase prior to co-building a new common perception. 
VI. 
INITIAL FINDINGS 
Before even attempting to equip participants to manage 
their processes and artifacts, one must take into account their 
interdependence and the context in which their collective 
activity will evolve. The application prescribed by a 
coordinator is never just the work carried out by the 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-436-7
COLLA 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

collaborator. It is first interpreted and reconstructed by the 
subject through his or her own internalized psychological 
instruments [33]. That is why it is relevant to build the 
objectives of each task together, with its specific 
characteristics and interdependencies, rather than impose one 
without trying to share and synchronize tasks performed by 
one member or the entire group during the previous phase. 
Throughout the evolution of design and negotiation 
processes enabled by ShareLab, group maturity can come 
about. Taking a step back from one’s own activities makes it 
possible to co-/self-assess and to improve the procedures and 
ways of working together. During ShareLabs, discussions 
and negotiations, based on their production and their ideas, 
resonate in each designer, causing various interpretations 
through the use of post-it, words play, or other types of 
games helping them to share and to compare their points of 
view. 
Agreeing on the relevance of a particular action helps to 
clarify the options of each member and encourages iteration, 
creativity and the emergence of innovative proposals. This 
way, participants extend their skills and possible fields of 
inquiry, while taking into account each other’s views. 
The members of the group evolve together in this way 
and jointly develop some agility in learning to change. As a 
catalyst of collective intelligence, the foundations of 
ShareLab involve: 
• 
participation of all contributors in the project early 
on and the involvement of a team of researchers, 
helping the group to build the objectives of each 
phase together, specifying their activity; 
• 
an approach that aims to be interventionist and 
scalable via each other’s interactions; 
• 
joint definition of tasks, procedures and tools, as 
well as a co-evaluation of these resources; 
• 
taking into account the space / time necessary for 
exchanges and for the work to be achieved. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND PERSPECTIVES 
A. Contributions 
ShareLab makes it possible to offer a forum for all 
collaborators while helping them manage their specificities 
and differences in a very short design time. This approach is 
intended, firstly, to formalize a collaborative action approach 
capable of supporting collective intelligence within a work 
group. This feedback from players also allows the method to 
be improved, to reconsider it with respect to new application 
contexts and to help it grow by setting up a dialogue with 
other approaches simultaneously involving the object, the 
group and tools to support them in their activity. Although 
the absence of specific procedures associated with the 
establishment and definition of ShareLab could be regarded 
as a limitation, it can also be considered an advantage as it 
takes into account the specificity of each group, of each 
phase and of every possible iteration of the design process. 
We believe that this versatility allows collaborators to better 
meet their initial objective by taking into account the wide 
variety of parameters, contexts and approaches. 
B. Limitations 
While ShareLab reflects the emerging movement and 
dynamics of collective activity, it is also true that it alone 
cannot surmount the complexity of the project and of the 
context in which the players evolve. That is why it is 
imperative that this approach, even in a rationalized form, 
should not aim at too systemic a vision of production, at the 
risk of forgetting the contributors and their specificity in a 
group. 
The motivation that characterizes all members of the 
group participating in the contest is the incorporation of all 
areas of expertise, cultures, experiences and views involved 
in the project. Yet isn’t this motivation the cause of 
ShareLab’s success? This parameter should undoubtedly be 
considered in the construction of intelligence within the 
group. 
Furthermore, the feedback mentioned in this article has 
been explained on the basis of reports and video recordings 
of ShareLab conducted throughout the competition. This 
feedback could have been richer if it had been built on the 
basis of a reconstitution to participants after the final 
rendering; unfortunately, such was not feasible here. 
C. Future work 
A critical perspective, suggested in light of this feedback, 
is to support this method with the following stipulations: 
• 
by confronting the protagonists with their own 
activities and by putting them face-to-face with their 
experiences and contradictions that had occurred in 
the process; 
• 
by applying this method to other collective design 
contexts, such as design and engineering; 
• 
by complementing it with other methods, such as 
analysis protocols or participatory approaches 
involving users in the study as well. 
An epistemological framework is also needed to deal 
with the concepts that can define collective activity and 
manage its complexity. Faced with strong levels of inertia in 
work habits, the real challenge now is to implement 
strategies to better manage the group cohesion inside the 
design activity contradictions. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The LUCID thanks the eleven members of the TarTar 
team for their active participation in ShareLab. 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Fay and M. Frese, “Self-starting behavior at work: Toward 
a theory of personal initiative,” in Motivational psychology of 
human development: Developing motivation and motivating 
development, Elservier, Amsterdam, pp. 307-337, 2000.  
[2] T. W. Malone, R. Laubacher, and C. N. Dellarocas, 
Harnessing Crowds: Mapping the Genome of Collective 
Intelligence,, MIT Center for Collective Intelligence Working 
Paper, Cambridge, 2009. 
[3] J. F. Boujut and P. Laureillard, “A co-operation framework 
for product–process integration in engineering design,” in 
Design Studies 23 (6), pp. 497–513, 2002.  
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-436-7
COLLA 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

[4] M. Bourassa, R. Philion, R., and J. Chevalier, "L’analyse de 
construits, une co-construction de groupe", in Éducation et 
francophonie, 35(2), pp. 78-116, 2007. 
[5] A. Dolbec, “La recherche-action, dans La recherche en 
éducation: étapes et approches,” in CRP, Sherbrooke, pp. 181-
208, 2004. 
[6] J. Dubost and A. Lévy, “Recherche-action et intervention,” in 
Vocabulaire de Psychosociologie, Références et positions J. 
Barus-Michel, E. Enriquez, and A. Lévy, Eds. Éres, Paris, pp. 
391-416, 2003.  
[7] C. Couture, N. Bernarz, and S. Barry, “Conclusion. Multiples 
regards 
sur 
la 
recherche 
participative, 
une 
lecture 
transversale,” in La recherche participative, Multiples regards, 
M. Anadòn and L. Savoie-Zajc, Eds. PUQ, Québec, , pp. 205-
221, 2007.  
[8] W. J. Orlikowski, “Knowing in practice  Enacting a collective 
capability,” in Distributed organizing, Organisation Sciences, 
13(3) pp. 249–273, 2002. 
[9] F. T. T Phua, “Construction management research at the 
individual level of analysis: Current status, gaps and future 
directions,” in Construction Management and Economics, 31 
(2). pp. 167-179, 2013. ISSN 0144-6193. 
[10] L. A. Dechurch and M. A. Marks, “Leadership in multiteam 
systems,” in Journal of Applied Psychology, 91(2), 311, pp. 
311-329, 2006. 
[11] http://www.jacquesrougeriecompetition.com [retrieved: July, 
2015] 
[12] A. Senciuc, I. Pluchinotta, and S. Ben Rajeb, “Collective 
Intelligence Support Protocol: a systemic approach for 
collaborative architectural design,” in Lecture Notes in 
Computer Science (in press), Springer, 2015. 
[13] F. Darses, F. Detienne, P.Falzon, and W. Visser, "A method 
for analyzing collective design processes", in ECCE 10 : 
Confronting Reality, P. Wright, E. Hollnagel, and S. Dekker 
(Eds), Sweden, pp. 47-56, 2001. 
[14] S. Ben Rajeb and P. Leclercq, “Instruments for Collective 
Design in a Professional Context: Digital Format or New 
Processes ?", in Proceedings of the 8th International 
Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions, 
ACHI, Lisbon, pp. 72-79, 2015. 
[15] Y. Engeström, et al., “Knotworking in academic libraries: 
Two case studies from the University of Helsinki,” in Liber 
Quarterly, 21 (3/4), pp. 387-405, 2012. 
[16] Y. Engeström, “From individual action to collective activity 
and back: Developmental Work Research as an interventionist 
methodology,” in Workplace studies, P. Luff, J. Hindmarsh, 
and C. Heath, Eds. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 
pp.150-168, 2000. 
[17] Y. Engeström, “Expansive learning at work: toward an 
activity theoretical reconceptualization,” in Journal of 
Education and Work, 14 (1), pp. 133- 156, 2001.  
[18] K. Kuutti, “Activity Theory as a Potential Framework for 
Human-Computer Interaction Research,” in Nardy, pp. 17-44, 
1996. 
[19] Y. Engeström, R. Engeström, and T. Vähäaho, “ When the 
center does not hold: the importance of knotworking,” in 
Activity theory and social practice: Cultural-historical 
approaches, S. Chaiklin, M. Hedegaard, and U-J. Jensen, Eds. 
Aarhus, Aarhus University Press, pp.345-374, 1999. 
[20] J. Virkkunen, R. Vilela, M. Querol, and M. Lopes, "The Change 
Laboratory as a tool for collaborative transforming work activities: an 
interview with Jaakko Virkkunen", in Saúde e Sociedade, 23(1), pp. 
336-344, 2014. 
[21] F. Détienne, G. Martin, and E. Lavigne, “Viewpoints in co-
design: a field study in concurrent engineering,” in Design 
Studies, 26, pp. 215-241, 2005.  
[22] J. Roschelle and S. Teasley, “The construction of shared 
knowledge in collaborative problem solving,” in Computer-
supported collaborative learning, C. O'Malley , Eds. Berlin, 
Springer, pp. 69-97, 1995. 
[23] M. Murer, M. Jacobsson, S. Skillgate, and P. Sundström, 
"Taking things apart: Reaching common ground and shared 
material understanding", in Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ACM, 
pp. 469-472, 2014. 
[24] F. Cabitza, A. Cerroni, A., and C. Simone, C, "Knowledge 
artifacts within Knowing communities to foster Collective 
Knowledge", in Proceedings of the 2014 International 
Working Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces, ACM, 
pp. 391-394, 2014. 
[25] D. A. Schön, The reflective Practitioner: How professionals 
think in action, NY: Basic Books, New York, 1983.  
[26] P. Laureillard, “The Role of Graphical Representations,” in 
Inter- Professional Cooperation, Everyday engineering: An 
ethnography of design and innovation, D. Vinck, Eds. MIT 
Press, pp. 178-202, 2003.  
[27] S. L. Star, “The structure of III-Structured Solutions: 
Heterogeneous problem Solving, Boundary Objects and 
Distributed Artificial Intelligence,” in Distributed Artificial 
Intelligence, M. Huhns, Ed. San Francisco, Morgan 
Kaufmann Publishers Inc., Vol. 2, pp. 37-54, 1989. 
[28] F. Belkadi, E. Bonjour, M. Camargo, N. Troussier, and B. 
Eynard, “A situation model to support awareness in 
collaborative design,” in International Journal of Human-
Computer Studies, Elsevier, 71 (1), pp.110-129, 2013. 
[29] S. L. Jarvenpaa and D. E. Leidner, “Communication and Trust 
in Global Virtual Team”, Organization Science, 10(6), 
pp.791–865, 1999.  
[30] M. H. Hsu, T. L. Ju, C. H. Yen, and C. M. Chang, 
“Knowledge sharing behavior in virtual communities: the 
relationship between trust, self-efficacy and outcome 
expectations,” in International Journal of Human-Computer 
Studies 65 (2), pp. 153-169, 2007.  
[31] M. 
L. 
Maher, 
“Designers 
and 
collaborative 
virtual 
environments,” 
in 
Collaborative 
Design 
in 
Virtual 
Environments, Intelligent Systems, Control and Automation: 
Science and Engineering, 48(1), pp. 3-15, 2011. 
[32] J. M. Carroll, D.C. Neale, P. L. Isenhour, M. B. Rosson, and 
D. 
S. 
McCrickard, 
“Notification 
and 
awareness: 
synchronizing 
task-oriented 
collaborative 
activity,” 
in 
International Journal Of Human-Computer Studies, 58, pp. 
605-632, 2003.  
[33] Y. Engeström, J.Virkkunen, M. Helle, J. Pihlaja, and R. 
Poikela, “The Change Laboratory As A Tool For 
Transforming Work,” in Lifelong Learning in Europe, 1 (2), 
pp. 10 -17, 1996. 
 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-436-7
COLLA 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

