Collaboration through Virtual Teams: Towards an Operational Model for  
Virtual Project Leadership in the Automotive Industry 
 
Anatoli Quade  
School of Business and Technology 
University of Gloucestershire 
Ulm, Germany 
E-Mail: Anatoli.quade@arcor.de 
 
 
 
Martin Wynn and David Dawson 
Computing and Engineering; Business School 
University of Gloucestershire 
Cheltenham, UK 
E-Mail: MWynn@glos.ac.uk 
E-Mail: DDawson@glos.ac.uk 
 
Abstract – Companies from various sectors of the economy are 
confronted with the new phenomena of digitalization and 
globalization and are faced with the challenges of formulating 
and implementing new business models, updated strategies and 
different ways of working. In the automotive sector, 
globalisation has required new developments in project 
management practices and support technologies, notably those 
relating to the challenges of collaborating over distance between 
and within dispersed teams. Researchers and practitioners have 
started to think more comprehensively about the complexity of 
projects with dispersed teams, and how best to manage them. 
This interim paper is the result of the distillation of relevant 
literature relating to virtual teams. It presents a set of critical 
success factors for virtual teams and outlines a provisional 
model for virtual team leadership and management. This model 
is currently being evaluated and developed through in-depth 
interviews with field practitioners working in the automotive 
sector. The confirmed model will provide operational guidance 
for practitioners and an analytical framework for further 
research studies. 
Keywords – Project management; virtual teams; virtual 
leadership; German automotive industry; V-CORPS model  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The globalisation of automotive companies has brought 
new challenges for project management, such as projects 
being led from a distance, with dispersed team members and 
teams. Lipnack and Stamps [1] noted that twenty-first-century 
problems require twenty-first-century organisation and 
innovation. Researchers and practitioners have started to think 
more comprehensively about the complexity of projects with 
dispersed teams, and the new possibilities for project 
management and required changes in processes, technology 
support and people competencies. This has given rise to the 
concept of “virtual leadership” or “e-leadership”, which are 
more or less synonymous, focusing on the social influencing 
capabilities of leaders of dispersed (or “virtual”) teams, 
whereby collaboration and communication technologies are 
of heightened significance in the pursuit of project goals. 
Jugdev et al. [2] concluded that project management can 
be seen as a holistic discipline for achieving organisational 
efficiency, effectiveness, and innovation. Team leading plays 
a key role here. An examination of the extant literature on 
virtual leadership reveals issues relating to project complexity, 
social process, value creation, conceptualisation and 
practitioner development [3]. Virtual teams face a number of 
issues that can impede effective project delivery – different 
time zones, different cultures, lack of face-to-face meetings, 
reduced productivity and increased miscommunication [4]. 
The current research project has the goal of rethinking 
project management leadership for dispersed teams in the 
automotive industry, looking particularly at team leading from 
a distance and its influence on team members. As recently 
noted in the National Instruments Research Handbook [5] 
“within the next 10 years, we will see remarkable change in 
the automotive industry from improved engine efficiency to 
autonomous vehicles to electrification” and virtual project 
management will likely be of increasing importance in an 
industry undergoing rapid and radical change. Berlin et al. [6] 
see this as consisting of four main trends - Connectivity, 
Autonomous Driving, Shared Services and Electric, for which 
the acronym CASE is often used. This is leading to major 
changes in many aspects of the industry’s operations [7], 
where issues need to be resolved in parallel and at speed, often 
in different geographical locations. Effective operation 
through virtual teams is thus essential. 
An examination and analysis of the available literature 
provides the basis for the development of a conceptual and 
operational model for future automotive projects led from a 
distance. This model can act as a framework for the building 
and leading of dispersed teams, and is currently being 
evaluated through practitioner interviews. The model will 
enable the identification of those elements of virtual 
leadership which can be adapted to the automotive sector, and 
how such elements can be used to more effectively influence 
people from a distance.  
This paper is structured around five main sections. 
Following this Introduction, Section 2 outlines the research 
methodology and positions the two research questions 
addressed in this paper. Section 3 then reports the Critical 
Success Factors (CSFs) drawn from current literature relevant 
to the research aim. This is followed in Section 4 by a 
discussion of the provisional model for virtual team leadership 
based on concepts drawn from the extant literature, but 
amended to reflect the realities of virtual team operations. The 
final Section 5 provides an overall conclusion to the issues 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-797-9
COLLA 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

discussed in the paper and briefly outlines future work that 
will be done to further develop the model. 
II. 
RESEARCH METHODOLGY 
The research methodology is based on a qualitative 
inductive approach, using a conceptual literature review and 
case 
study 
methodology 
employing 
semi-structured 
interviews. The epistemological position is interpretivist. 
There are several stages to the project which are currently 
ongoing. 
Available literature in the automotive industry and in other 
industry sectors has been investigated to ascertain current 
thinking on the leading and management virtual teams 
working on specific projects. This has established whether 
concepts and ideas can be adopted from other sectors and 
whether these can be of value for leading virtual teams in the 
automotive industry. This is a conceptual review which aims 
to synthesize areas of conceptual knowledge that can 
contribute to a better understanding of virtual team leadership 
and management, and lead to the development of an 
operational model. 
A conceptual literature review has many benefits. It can 
provide an overview of the literature in a given field, 
encompassing the foremost ideas, models and debates, 
especially the concept that is not explicitly stated before – in 
this case the dynamics of virtual team leadership and 
management. It can provide the basis for a summary of the 
existing evidence concerning this theme, and identify gaps in 
the current literature that may highlight possible areas for 
further investigation. It can also help build a framework or 
model for new research activities. A conceptual review is 
particularly suitable when the research area is in the early 
stages of development, where key questions remain 
unanswered and an accurate picture of current thinking and 
evidence to date is required to promote the development of 
new methodologies [8] [9].  
This review has allowed the identification of critical 
success factors for the successful leading of virtual teams, and 
the construction of a provisional model for virtual team 
leading and management. A model of virtual project 
leadership in the automotive industry does not yet exist, and 
this research aims to address this gap in the literature and in 
practice. The Research Objectives (ROs) addressed in this 
paper are: 
RO1. To review existing literature on virtual leadership 
and virtual teams and identify critical success factors for the 
e-leadership of virtual teams in the automotive industry. 
RO2. Through a conceptual review, to develop a new 
operational model for the e-leadership of virtual teams that 
minimises personal contact and optimises project outcomes in 
the automotive industry. 
III. 
CRITICAL SUCCESS FACTORS 
Project management has become more versatile and 
complex, in terms of people and project leading, over the past 
few 
decades, 
especially 
when 
project 
teams 
are 
geographically dispersed. This has been done with the 
support of a variety of project management methods and 
concepts and the use of faster and cheaper communication 
technology, which have facilitated the achievement of project 
goals and milestones more effectively. Whether these 
methods would also work for virtually-managed teams in the 
automotive industry is a gap in the literature. A review of the 
extant literature suggests a number of factors as critical to the 
building and leadership of virtual teams (Figure 1). These 
may be seen as key concepts emerging from the literature 
search on project management and team development, which 
the authors have considered of particular relevance to virtual 
team leadership and management. They are taken from the 
literature on both the automotive industry and other different 
industry sectors, and the relevant elements of project 
management methodologies. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Critical Success Factors for virtual team building and leading  
These CSFs are as follows: 
Build trust: A number of authors, including Maes and 
Weldy [10] and Ford, et al. [11], have emphasised that trust 
between leaders and their team members, as well as among 
team members themselves, is the most important aspect for 
leading from a distance, and that it is possible to see trust as 
a key starting point for working with virtual teams. The 
building of trust is a pre-requisite for team cohesiveness, and 
the gaining of trust is part of social influence for distance-led 
team members, as discussed by Scheunemann and Bühlmann 
[12]. It is a major challenge in overcoming distance and time 
barriers, and winning over team members. Building trust is 
an essential and challenging aspect for leading, and this is 
highlighted in the literature [10] [13]. Ford et al. [11] describe 
trust as the key to a capable virtual team.  
Create a team structure: Working with team members in 
a number of locations entails a different work attitude and 
way of working. To achieve this, the creation of a team 
structure that can support virtual working is essential, to 
connect the team members and foster a collective, shared 
approach to the working behaviour of the team. This structure 
can be viewed as a contract for team members that allows 
Critical 
success 
factors for 
virtual teams
Build trust
Create team 
structure
Avoid 
cultural and 
language 
barriers
Overcome 
time and 
distance 
barriers
Influence 
through 
horizontal 
communica-
tion
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-797-9
COLLA 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

them to pursue individual and project objectives effectively. 
Klitmøller and Lauring [14] note that the team structure is 
essential when it comes to communication and knowledge 
sharing, because these are more challenging in a virtual team 
environment than with face-to-face counterparts. 
Avoid cultural and language barriers: The avoidance of 
the possible negative impact of cultural differences is a 
necessary preventive measure to mitigate possible bias 
between the different team members. Nader et al. [15] note 
that cultural barriers are a serious impediment to the 
effectiveness of virtual teams. It is essential that the general 
understanding and respect of culture is recognised by the 
leader, and that neither origin nor gender plays a role in the 
team, with only ability and merit counting. 
Language barriers are an important issue which cannot be 
underestimated. Due to the fact that the members of virtual 
teams often do not speak the same language, many companies 
opt for mutual understanding through English [12]. It is 
essential that the leader considers this issue and 
accommodates 
language 
differences 
during 
complex 
negotiations. Team members may need to develop agreed 
procedures for avoiding misunderstandings and time wasting 
through misinterpreted instructions or information. 
Overcome time and distance barriers: One of the most 
important pre-requisites for successful virtual working is the 
effective management of time and distance barriers. The 
“follow the sun methodology” allows the phased deployment 
of teams around the globe, and the increased use of 
collaboration and communication tools can facilitate more 
autonomous work, and yet also allow all team members to be 
in one virtual space during critical situations. Effective 
communication across time and distance barriers is essential 
to give team members a form of security (the feeling that they 
are not alone), and can be seen as the “project life-blood” of 
the team. Layng [4] found that communication was a key 
factor in the success of virtual teams. 
There is a range of available technologies to support 
communication and co-working in virtual teams [16], which 
have seen increased deployment in the lockdown periods 
brought in as a response to the coronavirus pandemic. In 
addition to standard phone, texting and email, there are more 
sophisticated messaging services like Microsoft Teams, 
WhatsApp and Facebook Messenger. Video conferencing 
and meeting tools such as Skype and Zoom support virtual 
meetings across time and distance boundaries, and many of 
the standard project and document management tools will be 
used by virtual teams. Similarly, if virtual teams are 
interacting with the customer, shared access to customer files 
(probably via a customer relationship management system) 
will be necessary. The use of the Cloud to provide shared 
access to these software systems is an option.  
Influence through horizontal communication: Many 
project leaders work with multi-functional teams drawn from 
different departments, without direct line management 
authority. Influencing skills thus come to be of particular 
importance, especially in virtual teams when there are limited 
opportunities for face-to-face meetings. The influencing of 
team members can take place through adopting elements of 
nonviolent 
communication 
(Observations, 
Feelings, 
Needs/Values, and Requests) to minimise escalation of 
disagreements and minor disputes among team members. 
Alistoun and Upfold [17] discuss how virtual team leaders 
can be trained to successfully influence team members, 
deploying computer-mediated communication, building 
trust, shortening subjective distance, sharing information, 
processing gains and losses, dealing with feelings of 
isolation, 
encouraging 
participation, 
and 
enhancing 
coordination and cohesion. If the leader can appear to 
communicate on the same hierarchical level as team members 
(horizontal communication), the leader is seen to be on the 
“same wavelength” as the team members, only revealing their 
true hierarchical position in urgent or emergency situations. 
Influencing team members is a topic which has an impact on 
team and work behaviour, and must be considered before and 
during the project, and constantly being improved upon by 
getting to know the team members. 
To have social influence on team members, virtual team 
leaders need to use a range different communication 
technology to ensure a social presence [18]. The use of 
communication technology makes the virtual socialisation of 
team members possible, allowing leaders to assess their 
teams’ capabilities, and receive, provide and accept feedback 
from their team members. For team members, it promotes a 
sense of connectedness to leaders, as well as allowing leaders 
to create a social presence [19]. 
These CSFs suggest the key issues for establishing a 
successful virtual team, but also indicate which factors are 
necessary for successful virtual leading. The tendency to 
work virtually is growing [10], and recent research reports an 
improvement in the effectiveness of virtual teams from less 
than 30% in 2006 [20] to 68% in 2016 [21].  
IV.     DEVELOPMENT OF THE V-CORPS MODEL 
Based on the conceptual review of extant literature, this 
section presents an initial model for virtual leadership of 
teams in the automotive industry. It builds upon the Tuckman 
and Jensen [22] model for co-located teams which has been 
adapted to the realities of virtual leadership through the 
incorporation of new technical and human working aspects. 
In addition, elements of project management methodologies 
are incorporated into the five-stage model (Table 1). This 
takes into account a number of management challenges for 
virtual teams, including differences in employment and, 
occupational health legislation, norms regarding social 
interaction, a lack of mutual knowledge of context and access 
to dispersed knowledge, stress and fatigue issues, and data 
security [23] [24].  
It is important to note the differences between co-located 
and virtual teams, and how they communicate to reach their 
goals. As pointed out by Berry [25], a co-located team is a 
group of individuals who interact interdependently and who 
are brought together or come together voluntarily to achieve 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-797-9
COLLA 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

certain outcomes or accomplish particular tasks, and are able 
to have face-to-face conversations or meetings at any time. 
Virtual teams could theoretically comprise the same 
individuals as co-located teams, with the premise of working 
over the world and communicating through the use of 
information and communications technology. Virtual team 
members consist of individuals spread across geographies, 
cultures and time zones.  
Managing virtual teams is different to, and more complex 
than, managing face-to-face teams. Virtual teams are groups 
of individuals that still share most of the characteristics and 
dynamics found in traditional teams. The challenge for virtual 
teams is in cultural differences, mentalities, work-settings etc., 
which are of significance for the virtual leader when 
influencing team members from a distance. Cortellazzo et al. 
[26] state that when focusing on behavioural norms, it is 
particularly important for virtual teams to have a clear 
definition of the norms pertaining to their use of 
communication tools, through which information flows and 
activities are performed. Berry [25] suggests that the effective 
management of virtual teams requires knowledge and 
understanding of the fundamental principles of team 
dynamics, regardless of the time, space, and communication 
differences between virtual and face-to-face working 
environments. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
These considerations and the CSFs discussed above 
underpin the development of a 5-stage model for virtual 
leadership and management of virtual teams. The stages in the 
model (given the acronym V-CORPS) are outlined below. 
Creating the team: To support virtual team members in 
achieving a high level of performance, some key 
considerations need to be taken into account in the creation of 
the team. The choice of the appropriate team members is vital 
– not only those that have the relevant work experience for 
project requirements, but also those that are able to work 
remotely, being self-motivated and independent [12]. The 
project manager has to make a pre-analysis of the team 
members and speak to their line mangers to get an impression 
of their ability to work in a virtual environment. This pre-
analysis is essential prior to taking the next steps of team 
member selection, since virtual teams tend to be more 
sensitive to trust issues and the need for communication [27]. 
Caulat [20] concludes that people who are very process-
oriented and structure-driven might be effective when 
managing the virtual process of communication between the 
members during a project, but might find it challenging to 
facilitate and participate in virtual meetings where spontaneity 
is required.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE I. CSFS IN THE V-CORPS MODEL 
 
CSF/ V-CORPS 
Stage 
Creation 
Organisation 
Relationship 
Building 
Performance 
Evaluation 
Sign-off & Closure 
Build trust 
First impressions 
– preferably via a 
face-to-face 
meeting – are 
important in 
building trust. 
Clearly define project 
tasks and responsibilities 
and assign roles for 
individual team 
members. 
Conduct the “Big Five” 
analysis of each team 
member.  
Offer support in 
critical situations. 
Performance 
evaluation underlines 
mutual dependence of 
team members in 
achieving successful 
project outcomes.  
Acknowledgement of 
lessons learned and 
reflection on team 
leading can reinforce 
mutual trust and 
respect. 
Create team 
structure 
Explain and apply 
corporate policies 
for team working. 
Clarify expected 
outcomes. 
Define and agree terms 
and conditions, project 
rules and team 
composition.  
Introduce ‘team 
working contract’ and 
a team chat/forum to 
facilitate team 
communication.  
Highlight the 
importance of the 
team structure in 
achieving project 
success.  
Team dissolution. 
Creation of long-lasting 
relationships. 
Avoid cultural 
and language 
barriers 
Establish whether 
any cultural or 
language barriers 
exist. 
Clarify support actions 
and steps to be taken in 
the event of language or 
cultural issues. Provide a 
common understanding 
of working posture and 
customer requirements 
Equal treatment and 
support during 
breakdown of 
communication. 
Explain how and when 
to escalate properly to 
avoid time wasting. 
Stress the importance 
of a standard work-
culture across the 
team. Ensure that 
team performance 
comes before 
individuality. 
 
Private contact data 
exchange (if desirable). 
Stay in touch with team 
members after project 
closure. 
Overcome time 
and distance 
barriers 
Investigate and 
evaluate 
implications of 
geographical 
differences and 
discuss how to 
overcome them. 
Define ways of working 
to accommodate time 
and distance issues. 
Establish technology 
platforms to be used for 
virtual team operations. 
Show dependencies 
between tasks and 
team members. 
Implement simulation 
procedures to avoid 
unnecessary product 
testing. 
Review impacts of 
time and distance 
differences across the 
team. Adjust working 
practices accordingly. 
Provide appropriate 
training.  
Avoid anxiety about 
separation and project 
closure. 
 
Influence 
through 
horizontal 
communication 
Round of 
interviews. 
Project manager 
treats team 
members as 
equals. 
Highlight the importance 
of teamwork and the 
value of the project to 
the company. 
 
Intervene only when 
necessary e.g., key 
decisions, supportive 
role, problem 
escalation. 
Create a relaxed 
environment while 
focusing the team on 
specific project 
milestones. Avoid 
coercion. 
Project evaluation. 
Encourage mutual 
support. Team 
members leave the 
project feeling 
appreciated. 
 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-797-9
COLLA 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

Cross-cultural awareness is also necessary for team 
cohesion, influence and trust promotion. It is essential that the 
project manager be in place as the first team-building measure, 
with an overview of team member actions and reactions, 
especially during the team creation period. The project 
manager can assess how team members score against the 
project CSFs. Building trust, as Seshadri and Elangovan [28] 
note, is an interpersonal challenge faced by managers to foster 
collaboration with team members through communication and 
building relationships. Caulat [20] argued that, by working 
with cultures as diverse as Japanese, Indian, Swedish and 
Russian, she realised that cross-cultural awareness may help 
in understanding each other, but that it is certainly not 
sufficient for establishing a sound basis for the development 
of trust within the team. Although the pre-investigation of 
team members is essential, it is the first meeting where the 
project manager meets his team face-to-face, and can leave a 
positive, lasting impression, which can establish the tone and 
modus operandi for future project procedures [29]. 
Organisational structure implementation: Maintaining a 
uniform team structure before and during the project is an 
essential factor in avoiding time-consuming discussions 
regarding the modus operandi of the team. The organisation 
of virtual team structures needs special consideration, not only 
for the establishment of working procedures, but also 
regarding 
social 
aspects, 
and 
the 
avoidance 
of 
miscommunication or misunderstandings which can affect the 
entire team’s behaviour. It is essential to sensitise each team 
member to the potential impact of social behaviour. This 
structure is significant in facilitating communication and 
knowledge sharing, which is more challenging than with face-
to-face counterparts [14]. A clear organizational structure is 
also of particular importance when dealing with a complicated 
project environment that includes challenges in language, 
political climates, organisational policies, time zones, and 
cultures [30]. To counteract these challenges, it is essential to 
outline the CSFs for the project through the organisation stage 
and discuss each of them with the team members, to define 
rules for working with each other. The project manager may 
need to act as a moderator between the team members and 
intervene in critical situations (e.g. escalations between team 
members).  
It is also essential to consider the language skills of the 
team members before and during the project process, because 
virtual workers with low language proficiency invoke 
apprehension and uncertainty in individuals [31]. The 
organisational structure can be used as the framework, within 
which issues can be tackled and team cohesion enhanced, and 
through which the project manager can discuss and explain 
what he/she expects from team members. 
Relationship building: The team organization structure 
provides the starting point for relationship building between 
the project manager and the team members. Building 
relationships is the foundation of all teamwork, especially for 
virtual teams, and can help counteract the multiple negative 
aspects of working over distance [4]. It is necessary to 
confront prejudices about the working performances of the 
different nationalities of team members.  
It is advisable that communication between the individual 
team members takes place at least two weeks before the start 
of the project [4], as this will, in the best case, enable the group 
to become more socially grounded through a personal meeting 
or by participating in "virtual water cooler communication", 
thereby increasing their loyalty to the group [32] [33]. This 
will support relationship building and similarities between the 
team members can be found before the project starts. It is 
important for virtual leading teams to create a social 
environment to promote team cohesion, which will be 
established through interpersonal challenges for the project 
manager and ensure that team members communicate with 
each other, build relationships and foster trust [27]. This builds 
commonalities, which creates sympathy, trust and encourage 
team spirit.  
In the relationship building phase, a number of techniques 
can be used, such as Goldberg’s Big Five model [34] for 
assessing and understanding personality traits. Project 
managers can try to analyse themselves and the team members 
to find out what kind of leadership is right for each member, 
and how to employ the right team member in the right 
position. This model is also useful for relationship building 
between team members, for working from a distance and 
improving mutual influencing effectiveness. The leader must 
not neglect the social behaviour of the team members, and one 
possible tactic here is to book a short slot at the beginning of 
each team meeting to speak about non-project themes. This 
gives an added value of trust, which can greatly improve team 
effectiveness and relationship building. 
Performance evaluation: Leading a team during a project 
is an evolving and ongoing process. It is essential to update 
the team regularly and be responsible for enabling 
communication.  
The more team members are up to date, the better their 
performance is, and the fewer miscommunications and 
misunderstandings there are. It is advisable to try to bring 
more personality and dependency to the virtual world. 
It is also important to make clear to team members that 
their performance levels depend on each other, and to get them 
to consider what kind of impact their performance has on 
project outcomes and the company. 
The quality and effectiveness of information exchange also 
impacts on team performance – used correctly, it can empower 
individuals, alter behaviour, and help develop a cohesive 
team.  
The same is true for decision-taking, where team 
performance counts. Care taken by the project manager (for 
example in including all team members in certain decisions) 
can enhance the overall performance of the whole team. In 
virtual teams, language and mental barriers must be 
considered. Shared understanding of key decision options is 
important. Horizontal communication is essential, where team 
members get the feeling that they are on the same working 
level and can contribute to a discussion and decision. 
Sign-off and closure: The bonding between team members 
during the project phases can create a form of psychological 
contract, which will reflect the social team influence of the 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-797-9
COLLA 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

project manager, and that of the team members themselves. 
The dissolution of this contract is a key element of the project 
sign-off and closure stage, and it is an important aspect for the 
possible future creation of new virtual teams. King [35] 
defines a psychological contract as an individual’s belief in 
the perception of reciprocal obligations between that person 
and another party. For working in a virtual team, this can be 
considered as a contract between team members, which is 
unofficial, but essential for the project. 
The disbanding of the psychological contract will likely 
involve a meeting between the project manager and the entire 
team on site, when project completion meetings can be held 
with each team member. Project disbandment can be done in 
a virtual way, but psychological effectiveness, in terms of the 
appreciation of individual team members, is not as valuable as 
when there is a local presence face-to-face. In the final 
discussion, both positive and negative aspects of the project 
can be reviewed, and the further growth of the team in 
subsequent projects can be discussed. The project manager 
should also have their team ready at the end of the project to 
give some reflection and feedback on the project management 
process, so that negative aspects can be aired and reviewed. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In the final analysis, as Tuckman [36] concluded in his 
studies of group development, the outcomes from the 
performance evaluation stage will be critical to final project 
results. Nevertheless, other stages in the formation of a virtual 
team – for example, team structure development and 
promoting team cohesion – are an important part of the 
leadership process. This means, for the leader, that they have 
to bring the team to the most effective performance level to 
fulfil the project requirements [37]. It is also important that 
virtual teams are equipped with the process capability to 
respond to changes quickly and effectively [38]. 
This paper has built upon concepts discussed in the 
existing literature to identify five critical success factors for 
virtual teams and develop a provisional model (V-CORPS) 
for virtual team leadership and management, based on an 
adaptation of Tuckman’s model for co-located teams to the 
virtual world. The CSFs have relevance to each of the five 
stages in the V-CORPS model (Table 1), and this can be used 
as a guideline and point of departure for those assembling and 
leading virtual teams. Future research will now apply, test 
and refine this framework. The model is being further 
developed through semi-structured interviews with 18 
interviewees who are experienced project managers in the 
automotive industry (vice president, director, head of project 
management) as well as a number of team members (from, 
for example, purchasing, quality assurance and product 
development departments) working on international and 
global projects. In conjunction with the assessment of 
relevant literature, the analysis of the expert interviews will 
be the basis for the confirmation of critical success factors 
and validation of the model for leading virtual projects over 
distance. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Lipnack and J. Stamps, “Vitual teams The new way to 
work”. Strategy and Leadership, vol. 27, Iss. 1, pp. 14-19, 
1999. DOI: 10.1108/eb054625.  
[2] K. Jugdev, J. Thomas, and C. Delisle, “Rethinking Project 
Management: Old Truths and New Insights”, International 
Project Management Journal, vol. 7, no. 1, pp.36-43, 2001. 
[3] P. Svejvig and P. Andersen, “Rethinking project 
management: A structured literature review with a critical 
look at the brave new world”, International Journal of Project 
Management, vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 278-290, 2015. 
doi:10.1016/j.ijproman.2014.06.004. 
[4] J. Layng, “The Virtual Communication Aspect: A Critical 
Review of Virtual Studies Over the Last 15 Years”, Journal 
of Literacy and Technology, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 172-218, 
2016. 
[5] National Instruments, Automotive Research User Handbook: 
prototypes and testbeds to validate the transportation 
solutions of tomorrow, National Instruments, 2018. 
[6] C. Berlin, R. Bretting, H. Dunker, G. Fuchslocher, S. 
Grundhoff, and Y. Polchow, Automobil Produktion, IAA 
Sonderheft [in English: Automobile Production, IAA Special 
Issue], Pattensen: Media Manufactur, 2019. 
[7] K. Felser and M. Wynn, “Digitalization and IT 
Backsourcing: Towards a Transformational Model for the 
German Automobile Industry”, eKNOW 2020: The Twelfth 
International Conference on Information, Process, and 
Knowledge Management. pp. 53-62. 2020. ISSN 2308-4375.  
[8] C. Mulrow, “Rationale for systematic reviews”, British 
Medical Journal, vol. 309, Iss. 6954, pp. 597-599, 1994. 
[9] B. Kitchenham, “Procedures for performing systematic 
reviews”, Keele University vol. 33, pp. 1-26.  
[10] J. Maes and T. Weldy, “Building Effective Virtual Teams: 
Expanding OD Research and Practice”, Organization 
Development Journal, vol. 36, no. 3, pp.83-90, 2018. 
[11] R. Ford, R. Piccolo, and L. Ford, “Strategies for building 
effective virtual teams: Trust is key”, Business Horizons, vol. 
60, no. 1, pp. 25-34, 2017. 
[12] Y. Scheunemann and B. Bühlmann, “It’s Time for a Virtual 
Team Driver’s License”. Evernote + Google, 1 – 23, 2018. 
Available 
at: 
https://evernote.com/c/assets/marketing/virtual-team-
management/virtual-team-whitepaper-r3.pdf. 
[Retrieved 
May, 2020] 
[13] V. Seshadri and N. Elangovan, “Role of Manager in 
Geographically Distributed Team”, Journal of Management, 
vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 122-129, 2019. Available at: 
http://www.iaeme.com/JOM/issues.asp?JType=JOM&VTy
pe=6&IType=1 [Retrieved May, 2020]. 
[14] A. Klitmøller and J. Lauring, “When global virtual teams 
share knowledge: Media richness, cultural difference and 
language commonality”, Journal of World Business, vol. 48, 
no. 3, pp. 398-406, 2013. doi:10.1016/j.jwb.2012.07.023. 
[15] A. Nader, A. Shamsuddin, and T. Zahari, “Virtual Teams: a 
Literature Review”, Australian Journal of Basic and Applied 
Sciences, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 2653-2669, 2009. 
[16] N. Harris-Briggs, Virtual Team Technology and the 
Workplace of the Future, Avocar Business Blog, 2018. 
[Online]. 
Available 
at: 
https://www.avocor.com/blog/virtual-team-technology-and-
the-workplace-of-the-future/ [Retrieved May, 2020]. 
[17] G. Alistoun and C. Upfold, “A Proposed Framework for 
Guiding the Effective Implementation of an Informal 
Communication System for Virtual Teams”, Proceedings of 
the European Conference on Information Management & 
Evaluation, 2012. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-797-9
COLLA 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

[18] A. Walvoord, E. Redden,  L. Elliott, and M. Coovert, 
“Empowering followers in virtual teams: Guiding principles 
from theory and practice”, Computers in Human Behavior, 
vol. 
24, 
no. 
5, 
pp. 
1884-1906, 
2008. 
doi:10.1016/j.chb.2008.02.006. 
[19] L. Cowan, “e-Leadership: Leading in a Virtual Environment 
– Guiding Principles For Nurse Leaders”, Nursing 
Economics, vol. 32, no. 6, pp.312-322, 2014. 
[20] G. Caulat, Virtual leadership. 360 The Ashridge Journal, pp. 
6-11, 2006. 
[21] C. Solomon, Trends in Global Virtual Teams, 2016. 
Available 
at: 
http://cdn.culturewizard.com/PDF/Trends_in_VT_Report_4
-17-2016.pdf     [Retrieved May, 2020]. 
[22] B. Tuckman and M. Jensen, “Stages of Small-Group 
Development Revisited”, Group & Organization Studies, 
vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 419-427. 1977. 
[23] P. Pyöriä, “Managing telework: risks, fears and rules”, 
Management Research Review, vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 386-399, 
2011. doi:10.1108/01409171111117843. 
[24] J. MacDuffie, “HRM and Distributed Work”, The Academy 
of Management Annals, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 549-615, 2007. 
doi:10.1080/078559817. 
[25] G. Berry, “Enhancing Effectiveness on Virtual Teams: 
Understanding 
Why 
Traditional 
Team 
Skills 
Are 
Insufficient”, Journal of Business Communication, vol. 48, 
no. 2, pp. 186-206, 2011. doi:10.1177/0021943610397270. 
[26] L. Cortellazzo, E. Bruni, and R. Zampieri, “The Role of 
Leadership in a Digitalized World: A Review”, Front 
Psychol, 
vol. 
10, 
pp. 
1-21, 
2019 
doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2019.01938. 
[27] B. Rosen, S. Furst, and R. Blackburn, “ Overcoming Barriers 
to Knowledge Sharing in Virtual Teams”, Organizational 
Dynamics, 
vol. 
36, 
no. 
3, 
pp. 
259-273, 
2007. 
doi:10.1016/j.orgdyn.2007.04.007. 
[28] V. Seshadri and N. Elangovan, “Role of Manager in 
Geographically Distributed Team”, Journal of Management, 
vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 122-129, 2019. Available at: 
http://www.iaeme.com/JOM/issues.asp?JType=JOM&VTy
pe=6&IType=1  [Retrieved May, 2020].  
[29] I. Zigurs, “Leadership in Virtual Teams: Oxymoron or 
Opportunity?”, Organizational Dynamics, vol. 31, no..4, pp. 
339 – 351, 2003. 
[30] D. Barnwell, S. Nedrick, E. Rudolph, M. Sesay and W. 
Wellen, “Leadership of International and Virtual Project 
Teams”, International Journal of Global Business, vol. 7, 
no.2, pp. 1-8, 2014. 
[31] T. Neeley, P. Hinds, and C. Cramton, “The (Un)Hidden 
Turmoil 
of 
Language 
in 
Global 
Collaboration”, 
Organizational Dynamics, vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 236-244, 2012. 
doi:10.1016/j.orgdyn.2012.03.008. 
[32] A. Akkirman and D. Harris, “Organizational communication 
satisfaction in the virtual workplace”, The Journal of 
Management Development, vol. 24, nos 5/6, pp. 397-409, 
2005. 
[33] H. Duckworth, “How TRW Automotive helps global virtual 
teams perform at the top of their game”, Global Business and 
Organizational Excellence, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 6-16, 2008. 
doi:10.1002/joe.20237. 
[34] L. Goldberg, “An Alternative ‘Description of Personality’: 
The Big-Five Factor Structure”, Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, vol. 56, no. 6, pp. 1216 – 1229, 1990. 
[35] J. King, “White-collar reactions to job insecurity and the role 
of the psychological contract: Implications for human 
resource management”, Human Resource Management, vol. 
39, no. 1, pp 79-92, 2000.  
[36] B. Tuckman, “Developmental sequence in small groups”, 
Group Facilitation, Vol. 3, pp. 384-399, 2001. 
[37] G. Schmidt, “Virtual Leadership: An Important Leadership 
Context”, Industrial and Organizational Psychology, vol. 7, 
no. 2, pp. 182-187, 2015. doi:10.1111/iops.12129. 
[38] G. Lee, A. Epinosa, and W. Delone, “The effect of process 
ambidexterity on the success of distributed information 
systems development”, Academy of Management Annual 
Meeting 
Proceedings, 
vol. 
1, 
pp. 
1-6., 
2009. 
doi:10.5465/ambpp.2009.44265097. 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-797-9
COLLA 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

