 Developing an Online Academic Community of Practice 
 
KatyaToneva 
Information Services 
St Mary’s University College 
London, UK 
Katya147@yahoo.com 
Iain Cross 
School of Management and Social Science 
St Mary’s University College 
London, UK 
Iain.Cross@smuc.ac.uk 
 
 
Martin Scarrott 
Information Services 
St Mary’s University College 
London, UK 
Martin.Scarrott@smuc.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract—Constructivist approaches to learning suggest that 
learning within groups is more effective than individual 
learning. Communities of practice are an example of how 
individuals can 
unite around 
a common theme and 
collaboratively work together in order exploit the collective 
knowledge 
of 
the 
group 
members. 
Higher 
education  
professionals  may  find  particular benefits of working within 
such communities due to the diverse nature of the profession 
and the wide knowledge and experience that can be found 
among their peers. At St Mary’s University College, London, 
U.K., a strong tradition of excellence in teaching and 
learning guides institutional strategies to enhance the 
learning experience for students. An 
online 
academic 
community of practice is being developed in order to 
heighten the dissemination of good practice among colleagues 
and improve the sense of community among staff. This paper 
describes the stages of the development process. It is 
argued that the developing community of practice is already 
improving collaboration and dissemination of good practice 
among St Mary’s staff. The key benefits are accessibility, 
interactivity and feeling of ownership. As the community 
evolves and matures, it is expected that knowledge sharing 
and collaboration will continue to increase, if the barriers that 
have been identified can be overcome successfully. 
 
Keywords–online Academic Community of Practice (ACoP); 
Microsoft 
SharePoint; 
Moodle; 
social 
constructivism; 
interaction; collaboration. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Contemporary education often draws upon constructivist 
approaches, which suggest that learning is more effective 
when knowledge is constructed by individuals, rather than 
by the ordering and memorisation of facts [1, 2]. 
Constructivism originates in the work of Jean Piaget and 
Lev Vygotsky [3]. Whilst both emphasised the role of the 
individual in constructing models of understanding, 
Vygotsky argued that individual learning was mediated by 
social interaction and cultural setting. Therefore, knowledge 
is not isolated from the environment in which it is 
constructed 
but 
is 
instead 
copied 
from, 
or 
directly reflects, existing models of socially-produced 
understanding [3]. 
    Vygotsky formulated the concept of the ‘zone of 
proximal development’: that is, the distinction between what 
an individual can achieve by independent thought and what 
is possible ‘through problem solving…in collaboration with 
more capable peers’ [4]. Other workers (including Peter 
Woods and Jermone Bruner) have suggested that the 
gradual withdrawal of this collaborative support leads to the 
development of ‘scaffolding’ [5, 6]. Scaffolding forms an 
architecture of understanding, providing a structure in which 
the learner can develop their knowledge whilst reducing the 
level of support required from ‘more capable’ peers. 
Learning within groups or communities in which the 
interactions between individuals are applied to resolve 
practical or real-world problems has gained widespread 
recognition among contemporary educationalists. 
Communities may take different forms based on the aim 
of the community and the way that individuals interact. 
Communities can take different forms: knowledge-based 
communities, learning communities and collaborative 
communities of practice [7]. Knowledge-based communities 
are typically focussed on resolving problems based on the 
group’s collective knowledge, and undergo a process of re- 
adaption in response to other group members. The aim of a 
learning community is to further understanding: knowledge 
acquisition is equally shared among group members and the 
sum outcome of group’s endeavours is greater than that of 
any individual. A third type of community, communities of 
practice, have their origins in the model of professional 
development through apprenticeships (the original work of 
Etienne Wegner [8, 9] and Jean Lave). 
Communities 
of 
practice 
(CoPs) 
focus 
on 
the 
development of professional practices, where ‘like-minded’ 
individuals 
are 
united 
by 
‘joint 
enterprise, 
mutual 
engagement and shared repertoire’ [7]. CoPs can therefore be 
defined as ‘groups of people who share a concern or a 
passion for something they do and learn how to do it better as 
they interact regularly’ [8]. 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-287-5
COLLA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

Numerous examples of CoPs exist. MirandaNet [10] 
provides an online community for professionals associated 
with information and communications technology (ICT) 
education.  The Education Communities portal [11] 
provides access to numerous CoPs with a collective 
focus on education and pedagogic research, and offers the 
ability to easily establish new CoPs. One growing focus 
for the use of CoPs is in developing and strengthening 
the 
links 
between education and the business and 
enterprise communities through providing an online arena 
in which ideas can be exchanged and collaborations 
developed (i.e., [12]). 
CoPs may be particularly beneficial for professional 
development as, for example, the nature of the ‘problem’ of 
interest, or focus of the community, is often difficult to 
define, and identifying exactly what it is may require 
extensive negotiation amongst individuals [7] potentially 
deepening their understanding of the ‘problem’. Members of 
a CoP are strongly united by their shared interest in 
‘problems’, which may be derived from the shared 
institutional identity and process, or from a common 
professional practice context [7, 9]. These principles may be 
particularly relevant to professional development in higher 
education. It is recognised that there is continued tension 
within the definition of the Higher Education Professional 
(HEP). 
Pressure to be a skilled teacher and researcher has led to 
the identity of HEPs being increasingly diverse, complex 
and open to constant re-negotiation [13, 14, 15]. The 
teaching aspect of the dual professionalism of HEPs can be 
overlooked if HEPs feel defined by their subject specialism. 
Many HEPs have higher degrees and research degrees that 
are subject-specific rather than focussed on teaching. 
Developing as an HE teacher is often seen as a ‘bolt-on’ 
to subject-specialisms, evidenced in the U.K. by newly 
appointed HEPs undertaking teaching qualifications, such as 
postgraduate certificates and achieving fellowships of the 
Higher Education Academy (an independent organisation in 
the U.K. dedicated to supporting professional recognition 
for HEPs and enhancing teaching and learning [16]). It has 
been suggested that in order for HE teaching to become a 
‘valid’ profession, HEPs must engage in scholarship and 
research comparable to that dedicated to their subject 
specialism [17]. CoPs provide a constructivist environment 
in which HEPs can develop and share teaching expertise. 
Drawing   on   this   theoretical   framework,   St   Mary’s 
University College, U.K., is establishing an academic 
community of practice (ACoP) in order to support academic 
staff in disseminating good practice and developing the use 
of e-learning (Section 2). In particular, the ACoP will be 
used to support a parallel project investigating the use of 
audio feedback for students (Section 3). Section 4 outlines 
the technical platform that supports the newly developed 
online ACoP. Section 5 provides a framework for the 
development of the ACoP and an analysis of how potential 
difficulties and hindrances to the success of the ACoP 
project may be overcome. The last section outlines our 
intentions for the future development of the ACoP. 
 
II. CONTEXT – ST MARY’S UNIVERSITY COLLEGE 
 
St Mary’s is a relatively small higher education institution 
with around 5,000 students and 150 academic staff. It has a 
Catholic foundation and although initial teacher education is 
at the heart of its mission it is engaged with a broad range of 
disciplines from English and Media Arts to Management 
Studies and Applied Physics. Learning technologies have 
been used for a number of years and online learning began 
to develop around 2003. At the current time almost all of the 
University College’s programmes of study use online 
learning technology in some form although much of the 
practice is limited to content dissemination rather than using 
it to support more contemporary pedagogical approaches. 
St  Mary’s  has  a  Learning,  Teaching  and  Assessment 
Strategy and the use of technologies to improve students’ 
learning opportunities is embedded into that strategy. The 
strategy is enabled (in part) by a Learning Resources and 
Technology Strategy which focuses on the provision of 
various tools and supporting academic staff (and students) 
in their use. There is no “top down” managed approach for 
technology enhanced teaching and learning and so practice 
has evolved over a number of years. A number of staff 
clearly see ways in which technology can enhance students’ 
learning and such staff have been leading the way in trying 
to encourage their colleagues to adopt new and innovative 
approaches. Recently, St Mary’s has recognised the need for 
setting up institutional requirements for using the internal 
Virtual Learning Environment (VLE) and all academic staff 
will be expected to follow these guidelines from September 
2013. 
One of the barriers to improving pedagogical practice has 
been a lack of sharing. Staff work in academic schools and 
learning is delivered in the form of programmes (e.g., Sports 
Science or Geography). Staff tend to identify strongly with 
the programme of study with which they are connected but 
are perceived to have limited contact with staff in other 
academic disciplines or support roles. 
A  number  of  attempts  have  been  made  to  increase 
cooperation and collaboration between staff including the 
establishment of a formal teaching qualification for staff, 
promotion of Higher Education Academy fellowships and 
regular teaching and learning ‘away days’. 
    In relation to the use of learning technologies, a network 
of e-champions has been established. The e-champions have 
a key role not only in supporting their colleagues 
pedagogically and technically in the use of the available 
tools, but also in disseminating their own practice and 
experience. These efforts will now be supplemented by the 
establishment of the ACoP, coordinated by the University 
College’s e-Learning Advisor. 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-287-5
COLLA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

The e-Learning Advisor role is a supporting role designed 
to help motivate staff to embrace the use of technology to 
enhance learning and provide appropriate support. This role 
is located in the Information Services Department which is 
responsible for providing and supporting a broad range of 
learning support for students and staff. 
The technical infrastructure is supported by the IT 
Department although a number of the online learning tools 
used are outsourced to third parties rather than being 
provided internally. 
The ACoP will enhance a wide range of online 
interactions and will promote collaboration, ubiquitous 
access, increased flexibility, choice and support. Due to the 
rapid pace at which e-learning is developing within higher 
education, it is envisaged that the ACoP will provide a 
flexible working framework which will be adapted as 
necessary to ensure that the university college can respond 
pro-actively to such a changing environment. 
The ACoP supports the aims of the Teaching, Learning 
and Assessment Strategy which outlines the specific 
objective for academic staff “to develop and implement an 
effective framework for sharing good practice”. In the 
context of providing increased flexibility, the Information 
Services Department and the e-Learning Committee 
highlighted the implementation of the online ACoP as a 
high priority in its staff development strategy. 
 
III. 
CONTEXT – JISC TRANSFORMATION 
PROGRAMME 
 
St Mary’s has received funding from Jisc (a U.K. charity 
which works throughout higher and further education to 
support and champion the use of digital technologies [18]) 
to develop the use of audio technologies for delivering 
formative feedback to students. This is part of Jisc’s wider 
funding stream, the Transformations Programme. This 
programme is funding a number of higher education 
institutions with the aim of supporting ‘large-scale 
organisational change’ [19]. The audio feedback project at 
St Mary’s focusses on the Enhanced Student Experience 
strand of the programme [20]. 
The work being undertaken at St Mary’s involves a group 
of academics from several diverse programmes using audio 
feedback. The e-learning team has supported academics in 
using of a number of alternative approaches to delivering 
audio feedback, such as delivering collective feedback 
through one large audio file or uploading individual 
commentaries on pieces of work. The team also have 
provided advice on the technical dimensions to the project. 
The ACoP will be used to disseminate examples of good 
practice to academics throughout St Mary’s in order to 
ensure that the project meets Jisc’s requirement for 
‘organisation-wide impact’ [19]. A rich and diverse range of 
feedback   has   been   gathered   by   the   e-learning   team 
(including audio and video interviews with staff and 
students, and quantitative and qualitative questionnaire data) 
regarding the experiences of students and academics in 
using audio feedback. 
To support academics who are interested in using audio 
feedback, these materials will be developed into case studies 
and disseminated on the ACoP. This will enable the whole 
academic community at St Mary’s to engage in the project 
outcomes and to seek advice, examples and support from 
those who have experience of using audio feedback. 
Ultimately, this will enhance the student experience at St 
Mary’s and increase student satisfaction and engagement 
with feedback activities. 
 
IV. 
THE TECHNICAL PLATFORM 
 
St Mary’s University College uses Microsoft SharePoint 
2010 to provide internal staff and student intranet services 
(branded as StaffNet website for service information and 
collaboration for staff, and as SIMMSpace website for 
advice and service information for current students). 
The StaffNet website is used for publishing of web-based 
news, service information and internal documentation for 
staff members, for collaboration websites for staff groups, 
for personal storage areas and profile pages for individual 
staff. StaffNet is the web area that is being used to develop 
the online ACoP. 
SharePoint   has   delivered   significant   benefits   to  the 
institution by providing a reliable and stable platform on 
which to host internal communication and information 
services. In addition, SharePoint is serving as the gateway to 
other online services such as the Moodle VLE (branded 
simmsCAPital). The simmsCAPital VLE (integrated with 
the TurnitIn plagiarism detection service) is used for 
developing the courses of study, for online submission of 
coursework and providing feedback to students. Feedback is 
delivered through both traditional formats (e.g., written 
comments and numerical grades) and e-learning can be 
instrumental for establishing CoPs. 
This technical platform offers a significant  opportunity 
for the development of a CoP. Technology can facilitate 
collaborative and community-driven learning, for example 
by overcoming geographic barriers, facilitating sharing of 
resources and removing the need for scheduled times for 
face-to-face meetings [21, 22]. 
CoPs  can  be  supported  by  blogs,  wikis  and  other 
resource-sharing facilities (such as Google Docs and 
Microsoft SharePoint) which enable collaborative learning. 
These technologies tend to offer a relatively informal 
approach to structuring ideas and interactions which is well 
aligned with the social constructivism inherent within 
functioning CoPs [7, 8, 9]. 
This project will establish an ACoP implemented within 
Microsoft 
SharePoint 
that 
supports 
professional 
development and the sharing of good practice in the context 
of teaching in higher education. 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-287-5
COLLA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

V. RATIONALE AND DEVELOPMENT 
FRAMEWORK 
 
The rationale for the design of the St Mary’s ACoP was 
informed by conducting interviews with the e-champions. 
They identified the following themes as important aspects in 
ensuring that the online ACoP would be successful at 
meeting the aim of sharing best practice to enhance 
learning: 
 
• 
Sharing of information to promote best practice; 
• 
Avoiding duplication and effort (e.g., in the production 
of guidelines); 
• 
Disseminating high-quality information; 
• 
Facilitating the retrieval of appropriate information at 
the point of need; 
• 
Supporting the teaching and practice within the 
University College programmes; 
• 
Encouraging collaborative working; 
• 
Improving access to knowledge and information; 
• 
Bringing different streams of information together; 
• 
Promoting communities of practice by bringing 
together disparate groups with a shared interest (tutors, 
administrators, senior managers); 
• 
Providing on-going support, feedback and shared 
knowledge for the ACoP stakeholders; 
• 
Raising the profile of academic groups and identifying 
ways in which they can contribute; 
• 
A potential for forming links with other organisations to 
provide a coordinated approach to information- 
provision. 
 
These themes are therefore considered to be the desired 
‘core characteristics’ of the St Mary’s ACoP. In order to 
embed these characteristics into the design of the ACoP, the 
following sequence of stages of development is being 
utilised: a) the potential stage; b) the building stage; c) the 
engaged stage; d) the active stage and e) the adaptive stage 
[23]. The development of St Mary’s ACoP is evaluated in 
the following sections based on the descriptions given in 
[20], based on feedback collected from members of St 
Mary’s staff. 
     a) The potential stage: This involves facilitating 
connections among individuals who are potential members 
of the community. Communities at this stage are a group of 
individuals with some occasional interaction concerning a 
shared interest [24]. 
During this stage a conceptual framework of the ACoP 
integrating 
the 
relevant 
pedagogical 
theories 
and 
technological solutions was developed, in order to respond 
to the requirement for a more systematic way of interacting. 
The theoretical and practical appreciation of management 
of change (for example, discussing suitable approaches for 
involving e-champions and senior managers in the ACoP 
development) was also considered. Web-spaces and 
meetings, such as staff development workshops, have been 
used to promote the ACoP to staff throughout the University 
College and to engage their interest in the project. At this 
stage, face-to-face meetings and discussions have been held 
with academic leaders, e-learning strategy developers and 
other academic staff and tutors to identify existing expertise 
and the needs of staff. 
b) The building stage: During this stage, core members of 
CoPs develop a shared understanding of the purpose of the 
community and the ways in which it will function. The 
community begins to develop the necessary structures to 
allow expertise to be shared within the community [23]. 
It is also the stage at which the community is 
acknowledged to exist and potential members of the 
community are reached out to. Since this is considered a 
‘fragile’ part of the community development [24] specific 
action was taken to develop the St Mary’s online ACoP to 
encourage contribution and interest from members. 
A case study template was established within the ACoP 
in order to support a consistent way for presenting show 
cases by academic staff. Standard activities, such as writing 
collaborative documents and articles were introduced. 
This has resulted in the production of a structured ACoP 
(Figure 1) with a number of features to facilitate community 
interactions and the sharing of good practice, including 
personal webpages, interactive feedback features and details 
of other projects within the University College (e.g., the Jisc 
Transformation Project). 
 
 
Figure 1.   The front page of the ACoP on SharePoint 
 
c) The engaged stage: A community at this stage has 
gained enough momentum to survive. The community has a 
common purpose as it increases in size. Community 
members continue to build trust, loyalty and commitment 
and provide outreach to new members. Members also 
collaborate to share their knowledge [23]. 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-287-5
COLLA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

This was evidence in the St Mary’s ACoP as teaching and 
learning materials, links to social and digital media and 
embedded objects such as videos and audio files have been 
posted online. 
In order to continue expanding the size of the ACoP, 
training (including online tutorials  and  face-to-face 
sessions) is being provided by the e-learning advisor to 
enable staff to make contributions which showcases their 
best practice in teaching and learning. 
d) The  active  stage  is  when  communities  continue  to 
expand their membership. At this point it is clear to the 
community what it is able to contribute to the wider 
organisation. Members of the group collaborate to exploit 
their combined knowledge base. The community is 
publicised throughout the organisation to highlight how it 
can benefits that organisation. Members may also begin to 
work with other external groups [23]. 
The St Mary’s ACoP has not fully reached this stage. It is 
expected that the full transition into this stage will be 
evident from staff being actively and sustainably engaged 
with the ACoP and developing the use of a wider range of 
digital media to do so (e.g., blogs, wikis, discussion forums 
and collaborative working). Some evidence that the St 
Mary’s ACoP is beginning to reach this stage can be seen in 
the use of the ACoP to write collaborative articles. 
e) The adaptive stage: At this stage a community is able 
to respond to changing external boundaries. It does this by 
continually renewing and evaluating its purpose and 
functionality to effectively use knowledge and resources. 
The community may move towards setting the agenda of its 
collective shared expertise and may demonstrate influence 
beyond its immediate area of expertise [23]. 
This is an advanced stage of community formation and 
one that the St Mary’s ACoP is expected to achieve in the 
future through links with national and international CoPs, 
demonstrating a leading role in developing teaching and 
learning strategies at the University College and providing a 
focus for professional development at St Mary’s. 
 
VI. 
POTENTIAL BENEFITS, BARRIERS 
AND CRITICAL SUCCESS FACTORS OF 
THE ACoP. 
 
Our observations and the collected feedback from staff 
show that there are potential benefits to be derived from 
sharing and learning within the online ACoP. There is a 
sense of connectedness and a deepening of knowledge to be 
derived from the interactions and peer support via the 
ACoP. 
This will also help instil a sense of community among St 
Mary’s staff. Peer support is particularly valuable in the 
context of professional development, as members of the 
community who are new to HE are able to draw on the 
experiences of other staff. 
One significant potential benefit of the St Mary’s ACoP 
is in the dissemination of other projects running  across  the   
institution, such as the Jisc audio feedback project. 
    The ACoP is already facilitating engagement from across 
St Mary’s as a range of resources showcasing innovative 
and successful use of audio feedback has been made 
available via the ACoP. 
However, academic staff who have been involved in the 
ACoP commented on some potential barriers to these 
benefits being realised. For example, some members of the 
community may have basic technical literacy skills and may 
therefore feel intimidated or not confident in participating in 
the ACoP. 
Another potential barrier to the success of the ACoP is 
the commitment of individuals to participate. Whilst there 
has been a good initial response to the ACoP and 
individuals have begun to demonstrate a willingness to 
engage in with the community, as the ACoP matures there is 
the risk that the enthusiasm to participate will decline. 
Engagement may only extend as far as viewing the material 
rather than contributing expertise (i.e. being a ‘read only’ 
participant). 
    One  mechanism to help develop a sustainable community  
is to ensure that there is leadership [25].  In the case of a 
CoP, this may be a moderator or facilitator. 
A facilitator has been established for St Mary’s ACoP, 
and is encouraging tutors to engage with this newly 
developed 
online 
environment 
for 
professional 
development. They will be working to promote the ACoP 
and encourage its development through activities such as 
marketing on the StaffNet intranet, embedding the ACoP 
into professional development and promoting the ACoP and 
its advantages through the relevant College Committees. 
However,   it   is   acknowledged   that   frameworks   for 
developing online CoP in other institutions may vary in 
terms of technological and pedagogical approaches, and 
may focus on different activities. 
For example, one of the authors has had experience in 
developing an online CoP for Middlesex University, 
London, where the technological framework was based on 
Google Apps and the main collaborative activities were 
around project and research work [26]. 
Critical success factors (CSFs) for the online ACoP have 
been identified. These include usability of the available 
technology, appreciation of the cross-institutional dimension 
of the ACoP, a sense of belonging and a common sense of 
purpose among members and shared understandings and 
ownership. 
The  potential  benefits,  potential  barriers  and  critical 
success factors are shown in Table I (a new adaptation from 
[26]). Our initial exploration of these potentials and 
success factors may help to both address the difficulties of 
establishing an ACoP at St Mary’s and also provide a basic 
framework for other HE institutions developing their own 
ACoPs. 
 
     
 
 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-287-5
COLLA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

Potential 
Benefits 
Potential 
Barriers 
CSFs 
Enhanced 
learning 
environment 
Perpetuation 
vs. variety and 
flexibility 
Good use of interactive 
tools based on Microsoft 
SharePoint and Moodle 
(demonstrated by the 
online activities and 
engagement by staff and 
students, analysed in 
review reports). 
Knowledge 
sharing 
Culture of 
independence 
Institutional   promotion 
of the online ACoP as a 
communication 
media 
(demonstrated 
via 
workshops 
and 
other 
institutional events). 
Building 
up knowledge 
and expertise 
Maintaining 
the interaction 
and 
information 
flow 
Common values, shared 
understanding, varied 
communications 
(demonstrated by the 
online activities). 
Feeling of 
connection 
Read-only 
participants 
Sense of purpose, sense 
of belonging, sense of 
ownership 
(demonstrated by active 
online communications 
and sharing). 
 
TABLE I. 
POTENTIAL BENEFITS AND 
BARRIERS, AND CRITICAL SUCCESS FACTORS 
(CSFs) OF THE ACoP  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To ensure the longevity and sustainability of the online 
ACoP, engaging and collaborating through the ACoP needs 
to become part of standard practice rather than seen as a 
novel standalone project. In an effort to achieve this, there 
should be clear institutional aims and time frames. 
For example, the ACoP could become a primary 
repository for material relating to workshops, induction 
events and guest speaker seminars. We will work towards 
this by involving representatives from each department to 
collect or design relevant resources and publish these at the 
online ACoP. 
The longevity of the ACoP can also be ensured by 
effectively incorporating future developments in social 
networking technologies. Allowing the ACoP to adapt to 
these will help ensure its continued relevance to new 
members and facilitate new forms of interaction and 
collaboration. 
Links to other professional online communities of 
practice should also be established in future to exploit of 
other sources of expertise and enhance the depth and 
breadth of discussion within St Mary’s ACoP. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 
The initial experience of developing an online ACoP at St 
Mary’s University College has been successful. The process 
has demonstrated that Microsoft SharePoint can be used 
effectively to establish an online ACoP. The St Mary’s 
ACoP has been designed to support the development of 
collaborative resources, to gain access to e-resources and 
disseminate good academic practice. It is anticipated that 
the online ACoP will help to continuously enhance the 
professional practices of St. Mary’s staff and facilitate 
collaboration with other stakeholders as it develops in the 
future. The use of the ACoP will be promoted throughout 
the institution and become increasingly embedded within 
the culture of academic best practice at St Mary’s. 
The initial assessment of the use of the ACoP suggests 
that it is being successfully used as a focal point for the 
dissemination of good practice in teaching and learning. 
This includes communicating the outcomes of other projects 
that are enhancing teaching and learning at St Mary’s. It is 
evident that there are a series of benefits to the staff and 
institution which arise through the use of the ACoP, 
including accessibility, flexibility, interactivity and the 
sense of ownership and community that the users have 
begun to develop. This provides the rationale for on-going 
development and promotion of the ACoP. 
The ACoP has developed through a series of stages, each 
associated with specific activities. This sequence and set of 
activities may serve as a framework for other institutions 
who wish to establish an ACoP, although it is recognised 
that the potential benefits and barriers to success may vary 
in other organisations depending on the institutional context 
and aims of individual ACoPs. The ACoP is expected to 
expand in size, develop a wider range of multimedia 
resources and become central to professional development 
at St Mary’s. 
Having established an ACoP, future research will focus 
on the long term development of the St Mary’s ACoP. A 
three-year longitudinal study is being initiated which will 
provide a valuable insight into the development of online 
CoPs. In particular, the relationship between the cultural 
characteristics of the organisation and knowledge sharing 
will be investigated. Furthermore, future work will address 
the potential for critical success factors of St Mary’s ACoP 
to vary in different stages of the development of 
communities. This will contribute to the evolution of future 
communities by facilitating approaches that can overcome 
the barriers to their use, particularly in the context of CoPs 
for professional development in higher education. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] T. Ward, K. Monaghan, and R. Villing, “MyVLE: A 
case study in building a universal telematic education 
environment     for     a     small     university,”     EURODL, 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-287-5
COLLA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

http://eprints.nuim.ie/1267/1/Ward_Monaghan.htm., 
October 2010. (Accessed: 16/05/2013) 
[2] G. M. Kundi and A. Nawaz, “From objectivism to social 
constructivism: 
The 
impacts 
of 
information 
and 
communication technologies (ICTs) on higher education,” 
Journal of Science and Technology Education Research, 
vol. 1, pp. 30-36. 
[3]  B.  J.  Wadsworth,  Piaget’s  Theory  of  Cognitive  and 
Affective Development, Boston: Pearson, 2004. 
[4] L. S. Vygotsky, Mind in Society: The development of 
higher  psychological  processes,  Massachusetts:  Harvard, 
1978. 
[5] N. Selwyn Education and Technology: key issues and 
debates, London: Continuum, 2011. 
[6] R. D. Pea, “The social and technological dimensions of 
scaffolding  and  related  theoretical  concepts  for  learning, 
education, and human activity,” The Journal of the Learning 
Sciences, vol. 13, pp. 423-451, 2004. 
[7] D.  McConnell,  E-learning  Groups  and  Communities, 
Maidenhead: Open University Press, 2006. 
[8]  E. Wenger, Communities   of   practice: a brief 
introduction, 2006, http://www.ewenger.com/theory 
(Accessed: 18/05/2013) 
[9] E. Wegner, Communities of practice: learning, meaning 
and identity, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998. 
[10] MirandaNet 
http://www.mirandanet.ac.uk/, 
2013. 
(Accessed: 15/05/2013) 
[11]EducationCommunities, 
www.educationcommunities.org/, 
2013 
(Accessed: 
15/05/2013) 
[12]  Jisc Business & Community Engagement, 
http://bce.jiscinvolve.org, 2013. (Accessed: 15/05/2013) 
[13]  B.  Macfarlane,  Teaching  with  integrity,  Abingdon: 
RoutledgeFalmer, 2004. 
[14] J. Nixon, “Professional identity and the restricting of 
higher education,” Studies in Higher Education, vol. 21, pp. 
5-16, 1996. 
[15]  G.  Nicholls,  Professional  development   in  Higher 
Education, London: Kogan-Page, 2001. 
[16]  Higher Education Academy, “About Us”, 
http://www.heacademy.ac.uk/about, 
2013. 
(Accessed: 
18/05/2013) 
[17] G. R. Luedeke, “Professionalising teaching practice in 
higher  education:  a  study  of  disciplinary  variation  and 
‘teaching-scholarship’,” Studies in Higher Education, vol. 
28, pp. 213-228. 
[18] Jisc, “About Us”, http://www.jisc.ac.uk/aboutus.aspx, 
2013. (Accessed: 15/05/2013) 
[19]  Jisc, “Transformations Programme”, 
http://www.jisc.ac.uk/whatwedo/programmes/transformatio 
ns.aspx,  2012. (Accessed: 15/05/2013) 
[20] Jisc, “Transformations Programme, Programme Strand 
A–Enhanced Student Experience”, 
http://www.jisc.ac.uk/whatwedo/programmes/transformatio 
ns/stranda.aspx,  2012. (Accessed: 15/05/2013) 
[21] E. Wenger “Communities of practice – a brief 
introduction”, 
www.ewenger.com/theory, 
June, 
2006. 
(Accessed: 18/05/2013) 
[22]   S.   Ziovas,   M.   Grigoriadon   and   M.   Samarakou, 
“Supporting  learning  in  online  communities  with  social 
software: An overview of community driven technologies”, 
http://cdn.intechopen.com/pdfs/8604/InTech- 
Supporting_learning_in_online_communities_with_social_s 
oftware_an_overview_of_community_driven_technologies. 
pdf (Accessed: 18/05/2013) 
[23] P. Gongla and C. R. Rizzuto, “Evolving communities 
of practice: IBM Global Services experience,” IBM Systems 
Journal, vol. 40, pp. 842-862, 2001. 
[24]  E.  Wenger,  R.  McDermott,  and  W.  M.  Snyder, 
“Cultivating communities of practice”, Harvard Business 
Press: Harvard, 2002. 
[25] P. Gannon-Leary and E. Fontainha “Communities of 
Practice and virtual learning communities: 
benefits, 
barriers 
and 
success 
factors”, 
http://www.elearningeuropa.info/files/media/media13563.pd 
f (Accessed: 18/05/2013) 
[26] K. Toneva, K. Doncaster and D. Bravenboer, "Using 
Virtual Spaces for Online Communities to Facilitate Project 
Development  and  Collaborative  Learning",  The  Fourth 
International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line 
Learning, January, 2012, 
http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&articleid 
=elml_2012_4_60_50105 (Accessed: 18/05/2013) 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-287-5
COLLA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

