Visualizing A Dynamic Web-Based Collaborative Idea Selection  
Algorithm for Increasing Acceptance in Innovation Processes 
 
 
Graham Horton 
Computer Science Department 
University of Magdeburg 
Magdeburg, Germany 
graham@ovgu.de 
David Bobles, Jana Goers 
Idea Development and Application Lab 
Zephram GbR 
Magdeburg, Germany 
david@zephram.de, jana@zephram.de
 
 
Abstract – In order to maintain competitiveness, companies 
must constantly find new and better business ideas. They use 
innovation processes for managing idea generation and 
implementation. This process involves the employees that will 
be responsible for the implementation of these ideas, and the 
success of an innovation venture depends on their motivation. 
Especially during the first idea phase there is a high risk of 
making an evaluation error, which may reduce acceptance of 
the result and consequently also motivation. The authors have 
previously developed the so-called threshold group idea 
selection algorithm, which although fast suffers from a less-than 
optimal acceptance by the group. In this paper, we assume that 
acceptance depends on the understanding of how a selection is 
achieved by the group. We therefore created a dynamic, web-
based interaction design for the algorithm that visualizes the 
effects of decisions made during the collaborative selection 
process. We applied basic visualization principles and chose 
appropriate input devices for different types of collaboration 
phases. Our findings indicate that the acceptance level of the 
improved threshold algorithm achieved nearly the same 
acceptance as the commonly used, but significantly more 
expensive group discussion method.  
Keywords-Innovation; 
Dynamic 
Interaction 
Design; 
Idea 
Selection; Acceptance; Group Evaluation; Collaboration. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This Section motivates the research work. An important 
application, a motivation and the requirements for a solution 
will be given. 
A. Background 
Business innovations are crucial for companies to survive. 
They provide companies with a competitive advantage by 
reinventing their processes, products, services or business 
models. Increasing market dynamics creates the need 
especially for faster innovation creation [25].  
Companies waste a lot of money in the development of 
unsuccessful ideas. An IBM study [7] discovered that less 
than 1% of the company's ideas are economically successful, 
while 99% of their innovation efforts are lost in the selection 
and development process of the ideas. 
In order to manage ideas, companies use innovation 
processes. An innovation process is divided into the Front End 
and the Back End [22]. The Front End defines the 
development of an idea from its generation up to a business 
concept ready for implementation, whereas the Back End 
develops and brings ideas to market that are ready for 
implementation. The Front End tends to be unstructured and 
uncontrolled in contrast to the Back End. This makes it 
difficult for a company to ensure their innovation successes. 
These processes are designed and managed by an innovation 
manager. An innovation manager usually has to manage 
hundreds of ideas, concepts and projects.  
A Stage-Gate process [9] is one common model for an 
innovation process (see Figure 1. ). It divides the process into 
stages and gates. In the stages, innovation projects are 
developed. Gates are decision points for whether a project 
should proceed to the next development stage. The Stage-Gate 
process was originally proposed for the Back End, but it can 
also be applied to the Front End. The Front End starts directly 
after the idea generation and ends with the investment or 
development decision by management. After that, the 
development of the projects starts in the Back End. 
 
  
Figure 1.  Front End of Innovation Process 
 
For the Back End of the process there are many tools to 
support the successful development of ideas. The two major 
differences between the Front End and the Back End are the 
number and the quality of ideas. The Back Ends needs to deal 
with few but well defined ideas whereas the Front End needs 
to deal with hundreds of ideas that are ill defined. Especially 
gate 0 lacks methods that support innovation managers 
accordingly to this situation. Decision Maker (DM) need to 
choose here among hundreds of ideas that are uncertain and 
ambiguous. They lack time for discussing their opinions in 
detail [3]. If five engineers had to discuss 100 ideas and each 
discussion only lasted five minutes, this would cost about 42 
man hours, which is too expensive. 
The next problem associated with gate 0 is the 
involvement of the DM. In order to increase the chances of 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

developing successful innovation, the innovation manager 
needs a motivated team [17] that will engage in a challenging 
development phase after they have made their decision. If – in 
their individual opinions – promising ideas were declined or 
bad ideas were selected, the DM will lose motivation. This 
may significantly decrease the probability of a successful 
implementation.  
B. Motivation 
A group selection method for gate 0 would provide a 
selection result which is both fast and also achieves a high 
level of acceptance. Two common selection methods lack 
either speed or acceptance of selection results: 
 
Individual selection. Each DM is assigned a subset 
of the ideas and independently selects or rejects them. 
The overall selection result is then simply the union 
of the results of each individual DM. This method is 
very quick and easy to understand, but severely lacks 
group acceptance [14]. This lack of group acceptance 
is assumed to be due to the lack of transparency in 
how the group achieves their overall selection: each 
group member only evaluates their own subset of 
ideas and is asked to accept the evaluation of the other 
group members without seeing or discussing 
important questions. A discussion is often used for 
clarifying the selection goal and how they should 
apply to the selection alternatives. 
 
Group discussion. Each idea is discussed face-to-
face. The group then votes to select or reject each 
idea. With this approach, every DM sees every idea 
and gets the chance to discuss them with the other 
DM. This process is fully transparent. DM can follow 
every discussion and are able to observe how the 
group reaches their overall selection result. This 
method delivers selection results with a high level of 
acceptance, but is very slow and exhausting for the 
group [14]. 
Goers et al. [14] proposed a collaborative, computer 
supported threshold algorithm for combining the advantages 
of the speed of the individual selection method and the high 
acceptance rate of selection results of the group discussion. 
The threshold algorithm achieves a selection in three phases. 
In the first phase, the ideas are divided into subsets and each 
subset is assigned to a different DM. These then carry out a 
local selection and identify the idea, which represents the 
threshold between acceptance and rejection of ideas within 
their subsets. In the second phase, DM discuss their threshold 
ideas, make the selection and identify the global threshold 
idea. In the third phase, each DM compares their decisions for 
their own subset from phase one to the newly discussed global 
threshold idea from phase two, and completes the selection. 
This threshold algorithm is a trade-off between the pure fast 
individual selection that lacks acceptance in selection results 
and the expensive group discussion that generates a high 
acceptance in selection results. The algorithm combines the 
advantages of both methods while expending a minimal 
amount of effort to avoid their respective disadvantages. 
The threshold algorithm performs twice as fast as the 
group discussion and generates less cognitive load. However, 
it produces only a moderate level of acceptance for the 
selection results. So, although the threshold algorithm appears 
to be more appropriate for the selection of ideas in gate 0 than 
the usually used methods, there is still room for improvement, 
and our research aims at increasing its acceptance without 
compromising its speed advantage. 
The lack of group acceptance may have many influencing 
factors such as group behavior or psychological factors. An 
example could be the trust each DM has in the ability to 
evaluate alternatives. No process would be able to create a 
high level of group acceptance if the DM did not trust each 
other's abilities to evaluate alternatives.  
This 
work 
examines 
the 
influence 
of 
process 
understanding for group acceptance. We assume that low 
acceptance arises from a lack of process understanding. The 
DMs cannot trace how their individual decisions or group 
discussion input might have an impact on the overall selection 
result. The reason lies in the execution of the algorithm: 
 
Number of individually considered ideas. The 
threshold algorithm parallelises the selection task in 
order to obtain speed, thus every DM only evaluates 
a small subset of the ideas. For all other ideas, the 
DMs are forced to trust in the selection abilities of the 
other DMs.  
 
Decision consequences on overall selection. DMs 
make their judgments individually and as a group. 
Each decision effects the overall selection. But the 
DMs cannot track and therefore cannot reconstruct 
how the overall selection result is produced due to the 
invisible calculations of the algorithm. 
It is thus the limited control over the ideas, the limited 
visibility of ideas and the non-traceability of the selection 
process that may cause misgivings and therefore result in the 
lack of acceptance of the overall selection result. 
In 1980, Davis developed a technology acceptance model 
[11]. It states that a user accepts a technology if two attributes 
are fulfilled: usefulness and ease of use. A user would accept 
a technology if he perceives the technology is useful. This 
includes the perceived quality of result and process 
understanding. If from the user's point of view, the technology 
is easy to use, the user is more likely to accept it. That requires 
the low complexity of the technology as well as the usability. 
The original implementation of the threshold algorithm did 
not allow the DM to trace individual decisions and see for 
themselves how the overall result is achieved. The algorithm 
gathers their evaluations but did not show them the invisible 
calculations of the selection. The acceptance of selection 
results suffers when the calculations are invisible, even if the 
calculation is simple. 
Also, Briggs [6] suggests visualising collaboration 
processes in order to motivate groups, improve a group's 
performance and to improve the exchange of information. In 
the threshold algorithm, DM will see their own subset and 
their decisions as well as the group ideas and decisions, but 
have no visualization about the subsets of other decisions 
makers. This might have led to a lack of acceptance in the 
selection results for the threshold algorithm. 
Human Computer Interaction (HCI) approaches could 
improve the group acceptance of the selection result. This is a 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

discipline that closes the gap between the much higher 
abilities of computers and the abilities of humans. The 
threshold algorithm drives the selection process and calculates 
the overall selection result. It is neither a very complex nor a 
difficult method, but the distributed and invisible selection 
task makes it difficult to follow the selection process. HCI is 
a chance to support the threshold algorithm so that the DMs 
only need to provide their individual expertise to the 
evaluation of ideas. The computer then takes care of 
calculations and transparency issues and saves time of the 
DMs. 
C. Requirements 
An improved threshold selection algorithm therefore 
needs to fulfill the following requirements: 
Requirement 1: Acceptance. The selection at gate 0 will 
decide which ideas are worth investing more effort in. The 
DM will not only be responsible for making a decision but 
also for developing and even implementing the ideas. A 
subjectively unacceptable decision in gate 0 will decrease 
their motivation. However, each DM evaluates only a subset 
of the ideas and is expected to accept the selection results for 
the majority of the ideas, which he/she is not even shown. 
Nevertheless, the process needs to make sure that the group 
will come to an accepted selection result in order to ensure the 
motivation for the idea implementation. This acceptance 
needs to be comparable to the group discussion method. 
Requirement 2: Process understanding. The original 
threshold algorithm only allows to trace partial selection as 
their own decisions and the group decisions. Decisions made 
by other DM and their influence on the overall selection result 
are neither traceable nor explained. Even though the selection 
calculation is simple, the DM cannot follow the effect of their 
own decision on the overall group selection result and the 
decisions of other group members contribute to the overall 
selection result. We assume that a higher process 
understanding will lead to a higher acceptance of the selection 
result. The DM need to be able to comprehend how the 
threshold algorithm comes to an overall selection. 
Requirement 3: Traceability. The original threshold 
algorithm does not allow DM to trace the effects of individual 
and group decisions on the overall selection. But to ensure that 
the DM understand the selection calculations of the threshold 
algorithm, they need to trace how their individual decisions or 
decisions by other DM will influence the overall selection 
result. 
Requirement 4: Speed. The threshold algorithm should be 
able to evaluate hundreds of ideas fast in gate 0 in order to 
save time of the most valuable resource of a company. So it 
should keep the speed advantage over the group discussion. 
D. Assumptions and hypothesis 
We investigated two variants of the threshold algorithm. 
Both of them are collaborative and web-based computer 
supported systems. The first variant of the algorithm uses 
visualization support whereas the second variant works with 
no visualization support. 
The visualization of the threshold algorithm is based on 
the following assumptions: 
Assumption 1: The visualization of the selection process 
of the threshold algorithm increases the understanding of it. 
Assumption 2: A higher level of understanding of the 
achieved selection results is more likely to make them 
accepted by the group. 
Assumption 3: The visualization support of the threshold 
algorithm does not take longer than the threshold algorithm 
without the visualization. 
Hypothesis. The threshold algorithm with a visualization 
of the selection process yields a comparable acceptance to the 
group discussion. The acceptance level of the threshold 
algorithm without visualization support is lower. 
E. Structure of this study 
Our work will be presented in four Sections. The next 
Section will give an overview of the related work. It will 
describe our group decision making problem as well as 
potential solutions in human computer interaction. Little 
previous work could be found for applying HCI approaches 
for our specific group decision making problem. 
Section III describes the group decision making algorithm 
and the application of interaction as well as visualization 
approaches in order to increase the level of group acceptance. 
Five visualization approaches will be adapted to the specific 
needs of the selection algorithm as well as appropriate 
interaction types for different collaboration phases during the 
algorithm will be developed. 
In order to investigate the hypothesis that the new 
visualization and interaction of the selection algorithm 
actually increases the group acceptance, Section IV presents 
the experimental design, findings and their interpretations. 
Our conclusions are made in Section V. Here we hope to 
give some general indicators for which kind of group decision 
algorithms the applied visualization approaches could 
increase the level of group acceptance. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The algorithm delivers a collaborative decision making 
solution whose performance will be increased by using 
principles from Human Computer Interaction, Collaboration 
Interaction and Visualization. This Section describes the link 
between these disciplines.  
A. Characterisation within decision making 
The threshold algorithm can be classified in four 
dimensions of decision analysis methods (TABLE I. ) [28]. 
The first dimension describes the number of DMs that are 
involved in the decision method. There are decision analysis 
methods that work for multiple DM. Every DM needs to 
evaluate at least every idea and provide the method with their 
judgment. After that the decision method calculates an 
aggregated result.  
The second dimension describes the number of criteria the 
method is able to work on. The threshold algorithm is a single-
criterion method. 
The measurement of scale describes the type of judgments 
the DM uses to evaluate alternatives. The threshold algorithm 
uses nominal judgments. For a selection of ideas a nominal 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

judgment is sufficient. The nominal judgments are: select or 
reject idea.  
The last dimension describes the decision making result. 
Either the DM generate a choice, or they are sorting the 
alternatives according to some qualitative criterion or they are 
generating a ranking. The threshold algorithm generates a 
selection, so it generates a choice. 
TABLE I.  
TAXONOMY OF DECISION ANALYSIS METHODS 
#DM 
Single 
Multi 
#Criteria 
Single 
Multi 
MoS 
Nominal 
Ordinal 
Interval 
Ratio 
Res. 
Choice 
Sorting 
Ranking 
 
B. Characterisation within HCI 
In order to make the calculations the threshold algorithm 
needs individual and group judgments. The requested 
information cause interaction: 
 
Computer-Human interaction: The algorithm 
requests individual decisions. 
 
Computer-Group 
interaction: 
The 
algorithm 
requests group decisions. 
 
Facilitator-group interaction: The selection method 
is conducted by a facilitator. 
Furthermore, the proposed approach will encourage 
interactions that support process understanding and increase 
the group acceptance of the selection: 
 
Face-to-face Human-Human interaction: Group 
decisions 
need 
a 
group 
discussion 
about 
interpretations of the criterion and a consensus where 
the threshold that distinguishes ideas that are worth 
putting more effort in and ideas that are dispensable. 
 
Human-Computer interaction: Visualising the 
individual decision effects on the overall selection 
result. 
 
Group-Computer interaction: Visualising the 
group decision effects on the overall selection result 
as well as the limitations that result from the threshold 
algorithm rules for the DMs. 
 
Facilitator-Computer interaction: The facilitator 
conducts the threshold algorithm, supervises the 
progress and supports the face-to-face group 
discussion. 
 
Our 
approach 
combines 
a 
web-based 
software 
architecture, dialogue architecture and interface visualizations 
for the interactions with individuals and a group in order to 
conduct the threshold algorithm. 
C. Approaches for collaboration interaction 
Baltes' et al. [2] meta-analysis on computer-mediated 
communication and group decision making suggests that face-
to-face decision making outperforms computer-mediated 
methods in three key factors (effectiveness, DM satisfaction 
and time). This analysis investigated only methods that use 
exclusively face-to-face or exclusively computer-mediated 
communication (e.g. video conferencing, chat, e-mail). 
However, 
our 
threshold 
algorithm 
combines 
both 
communication media. Individual phases use computer-
mediated interaction and group discussion uses face-to-face 
communication. 
Other findings [24] suggest that especially in situations 
where a group needs to make a decision under risk, a 
computer-mediated group discussion performs less well than 
a face-to-face version. The computer-mediated discussion 
contained less argumentation than the face-to-face discussion. 
This emphasises to conduct the group discussion of the 
threshold algorithm in face-to-face form. 
Our approach concentrates on designing a collaboration 
interaction that involves different individual phases, a group 
discussion and the collaboration interaction during the whole 
decision process. 
D. Approaches for visualization 
Visualization is able to increase the process understanding 
because it supports the ability to process information quickly, 
and thus reduces search efforts for information during the 
process, makes patterns and trends visible and channels the 
attention of participants. 
Gutwin et al. [16] investigated the difference between the 
visualization of computer systems for single users and for 
multiple users. The findings suggest that in collaboration 
systems the effects of the actions of a user needs to be 
visualized. Applying these findings to the threshold algorithm 
means to visualize dynamically which actions lead to the 
current selection state. 
Cooper et al. [10] claims that pairwise comparison 
methods are seldom used in practice because DMs are 
skeptical about the intransparent calculation of evaluation 
results. Another finding by Condon et al. [8] supports this 
claim. Condon's research investigated using visualization for 
avoiding negative decision behaviour (trying to cheat the 
algorithm) in the pairwise comparison method AHP. His 
findings show that a visualized feedback of the effect of the 
input of DM support the process understanding and by that 
hopefully the acceptance of evaluation results. 
Alonso et al. [1] visualizes consensus by presenting the 
group a real-time consensus value in order to allow them to 
follow their level of consensus and build a higher level of 
consensus. However, the visualization consist exclusively of 
the presentation of a number and is not focused on creating a 
higher level of understanding of a decision process. 
The aspects of visualization of complex process were 
investigated by Bobrik [4]. The suggestion is to provide the 
user with a familiar and recognizable environment, and 
visualize effects of individual actions on a process-wide level. 
Different types of HCI during the threshold algorithm could 
benefit from this. Individual phases could be performed at 
individual computers (laptop, tablet) while group phases 
could be performed at a table (multi-touch-monitor, multi-
touch-table). 
In order to enable quick access to relevant data from a 
complex, often multidimensional data set, preattentive 
visualizations [18] are used. Applications are critical systems 
where a visualization might help to anticipate actions needed 
before the system gets actually in a critical state. An 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

anticipated selection result would support a DM in coming to 
a decision due to the visibility of the decision effect. 
Gonzalez et al. found that dynamic visualization has a 
significant impact on decision quality [15]. Especially the use 
of animated visualization of process steps improved the 
decision quality. 
Brath outlines basic visualization parameters [5] for 
reducing distractions and channeling attention: length, width, 
light intensity, texture, colour, conditions, affinity, nearness, 
connectivity, continuity, symmetry, and many more. These 
visualization parameters could structure the information and 
dialogue during the threshold algorithm.  
Furthermore Preim et al. [27] describes a visualizing effect 
for directing the attention of users called preattentive 
perception. Users tend to focus their attention more to a 
different element in an otherwise homogeneous group of 
elements. This effect can be activated when using strong 
saturated colours, different forms or different frames. This 
visualizing effect can be used for directing the attention of 
users. This could be used to create a higher level of 
understanding of a process. 
In decision making methods, visualization is often used for 
information pooling or information structuring of the 
alternatives [20] [23]. It supports the overview. But alone it is 
not sufficient for increasing the process understanding of the 
threshold algorithm. 
Visualizations have been used in education for sorting 
algorithms [29]. Partially the basic visualization parameters 
were adapted to the visualization of sorting algorithms. An 
effective visualization of these algorithms then is able to 
obtain the same level of understanding as a detailed lecture but 
in less time. Our approach is also an algorithm. By applying 
these principles, we hope to achieve a similar improvement in 
process understanding. 
In summary, visualization can support understanding of 
processes or algorithms and the effects of individual actions 
on a system. By applying these principles to the threshold 
algorithm, we hope to increase the group acceptance of the 
selection. 
III. 
DYNAMIC COLLABORATION INTERACTION 
This Section describes the dynamic collaboration 
algorithm and the application of the performance-increasing 
collaboration and visualization approaches.  
A. The threshold algorithm 
In this Section, the threshold algorithm introduced in [14] 
will be described. The threshold algorithm processes M ideas 
with d DMs. The result is a set of selected S and a set of 
rejected R ideas. In order to achieve this, the threshold 
algorithm works in three phases. 
Phase 1: Individual selection.  
 
Input is a set of M ideas. 
 
The set is split into subsets of size five. Each subset is 
assigned to a DM. 
 
Each DM selects which ideas are worth putting more 
effort in and which are not. Ideas are marked as 
selected S = {S1, S2, …, Sd} and rejected  
R = {R1, R2, …, Rd} where indices refer to the subsets 
created by each DM. 
 
Each DM chooses from his or her own selected ideas 
the idea which is just good enough to put more effort 
into T = {t1, t2, …, td}. This type of idea is called the 
personal threshold idea. 
 
Visualization tasks: Initially, each DM only sees five 
ideas. DMs must be made aware what the others are 
doing and understand the implications of choosing a 
personal threshold idea. 
Phase 2: Group selection. 
 
Inputs are the personal threshold ideas from Phase 1 
T = {t1, t2, …, ti}. 
 
The group comes together in a face-to-face 
discussion.  
 
This discussion is important to reach an overall 
consensus about the threshold that distinguishes the 
ideas that are worth to put more effort in and those 
not. Inevitably, this discussion draws out individual 
interpretations of the criterion. The group then agrees 
on their interpretation of the criterion. 
 
The group decides which of the personal threshold 
ideas are worth putting more effort into or not. 
 
The group chooses the idea, which is just good 
enough to put more effort into from the set of selected 
personal threshold ideas. This idea is called the global 
threshold idea tg. 
 
Visualization tasks: DMs need to determine the 
meaning of the criterion. After that they need to 
understand the concept of a global threshold idea. The 
effects of the group decision on individual subsets of 
ideas needs to be visible. 
Phase 3: Individual reselection 
 
Inputs are the global threshold idea tg (a symbol for of 
the threshold that distinguishes the ideas), the mental 
model of the meaning of the criterion and the already 
partitioned individual subset of ideas from phase 1. 
 
According to the global selection or rejection of the 
personal threshold idea, each DM needs to reconsider 
their selection of phase 1. 
 
If DM i's personal threshold idea was rejected in 
phase 2 then they need to reconsider their selected 
ideas Si. 
 
If DM i's personal threshold idea was selected but was 
not the global threshold idea then they need to 
reconsider their rejected ideas Ri.  
 
If DM i's personal threshold idea is also the global 
threshold idea tg then they do not need to reconsider 
either rejected or selected ideas. 
 
Visualization task: Each DM only sees a subset of the 
ideas. DMs must be made aware what the others are 
doing. The consequences of the reselection according 
to the position of the personal threshold idea 
compared to the global threshold idea must be 
understood. Transparency of the reason of the 
reselection rules is needed. 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

During the whole selection process, the visualization of 
the current selection state is needed. Therefore the 
visualization should be dynamic. 
B. Applying visualization approaches 
In order to solve the interaction and visualization task, four 
general visualization approaches were adapted. 
1: Dynamic application. According to Gonzalez et al. 
[15], the evaluation quality increases when using a dynamic 
approach. Since the threshold algorithm needs to process 
inputs of various DMs, visualising decision effects and the 
collaboration the application should be distributed and 
dynamic. All DMs therefore work on a web-based application 
which is accessible from devices such as laptops, tablets and 
smartphones. 
2: Collaboration. Gutwin et al. [16] claims that in 
collaboration systems the effects of the actions of users should 
be made visible. That indicates that each DM needs to 
understand the decision process and how the threshold 
algorithm calculates the overall selection result. Furthermore 
the DM needs to be able to visualize own and other decision 
effects. Each phase contains an individual view (Figure 2.) 
that is surrounded by a small representation of the work of the 
other DMs. At all times, each DM is able to follow the 
decisions of the other group members (Figure 3.). The current 
selection result can be identified at all times. 
 
  
Figure 2.  Simulated screenshot of individual view 
  
Figure 3.  Simulated screenshot of overall view 
3: Traceability. The DM should be able to track what the 
current decision for an idea is. The colours of the container of 
an idea was used. The colour of the border symbolises the 
selection information of phase 1. The colour of the filling of 
the container represents the selection information of the group 
discussion or the individual reselection. The colour code: 
 
Green = selected 
 
Red = rejected 
 
Orange = threshold 
Figure 4. visualizes an example. For the idea in the first 
container, a decision has not yet been reached. The idea in the 
second container is a personal threshold idea. The group 
discussion rejected the idea in the third container, which was 
a former personal threshold idea in phase 1. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Visualization of decision tracking for ideas 
4: Incremental instructions. The three algorithm phases 
are led by a facilitator. Each phase could only be started on his 
order. The DMs in individual phases receive their 
assignments, and in the face-to-face environment the 
facilitator guides them through the algorithm. 
5: Channel attention:  Colours and objects were chosen 
carefully and only according to the interaction and 
visualization task defined in Section III.A. The decision of an 
idea is visualized by the colour code described in 3: 
Traceability. Every other element is coloured in neutral 
perceived grey colour tones. This is according to the main rule 
for preattentive perception [27] (spare use of visualization 
elements) and therefore allows a targeted direction of the 
attention of the user. 
The colour of elements will change during the process but 
only piece by piece. This allows the DM to follow slowly the 
process steps without the need of explanation. For example, in 
the first phase when each DM makes a decision two 
parameters visualizes this. At first the position of the element, 
left for rejected ideas and right for selected ideas. This alone 
would not allow a preattentive perception, only colours, forms 
or the change of frames would create a preattentive 
perception. That is the reason for the second parameter, 
marking the decision visible by using colours (following the 
decision colour code, see 3: Traceability). Every decision the 
DM creates, the visualization makes the effect visible. So, the 
DM is able to follow the process steps quickly. 
C. Applying interaction approaches 
For phase 1 and 3, the DMs work separately on a single 
computer (see Figure 5. ). Due to the web-based application, 
access to the threshold algorithm is open to every device with 
a monitor and an Internet connection. The input devices could 
be a mouse, a keyboard and a touch-sensitive monitor. Each 
DM is technically capable to fulfill the given selection task but 
also receives impressions about others, their tasks and their 
progress. 
 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

 
Figure 5.  Individual selection computer-support 
However, phase 2 of the threshold algorithm is a face-to-
face group discussion in contrast to phase 1 and 3 (see Figure 
6. ), where each DM works individually. But during the group 
discussion DMs should also be able to monitor group decision 
effects on their individual subsets. Baltes et al. [2] and Introne 
[20] suggest conducting group discussions in face-to-face 
environments. The more familiar the environment for the 
given task the better for the collaboration result according to 
Bobrik [4]. So the group discussion takes place in a face-to-
face environment but is supported with a multi-touch monitor. 
This multi-touch monitor presents the DM with the group 
selection task as well as the overview of the effects of group 
decisions on their individual subsets. Again due to the web-
based application the group immediately receives a response 
to group decisions. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Group discussion computer-support 
IV. 
EXPERIMENTS 
In this Section the results, observations and interpretations 
of the experiments will be described as well as the limitations 
of our work. 
A. Experimental Design 
We designed an experiment to test our assumptions and 
hypothesis from Section I.D. Our goal was to find out if 
visualization could be a tool for increasing acceptance of 
results for the threshold algorithm. Other factors could play an 
important role in the acceptance of a selection result for a 
group such as trust in other DM or the influence of a web-
based support system. So this experiment should show if 
further investigation in this matter could be beneficial.  
We were also interested in whether the additional 
visualization meets our requirements from Section I.C. 
The following methods were compared: 
 
Method 
M1: 
Threshold 
algorithm 
without 
visualization   
 
M2: Threshold algorithm with visualization 
Furthermore, we compared the results of the experiments 
for M1 und M2 to results of the methods M3 and M4 from a 
previous study [14]. The design of the experiments for M3 and 
M4 were conducted under the same conditions and for the 
same parameters as the methods M1 and M2. One difference 
of M3 and M4 is that they were conducted face-to-face without 
any computer support: 
 
M3: Group discussion in which each idea was 
discussed by the group and reached a consensus 
whether to select or reject the idea. They pick an idea 
and discuss whether the idea is worth putting more 
effort in or not. If they are not in consensus they need 
to discuss the idea and come to a conclusion.  
 
M4: Parallel individual selection in which the set of 
idea was divided into equal subsets. Each DM 
received one subset and selected and rejected ideas 
independently. The overall selection result is the 
unification of all individual selections.  
We had 30 participants who were mostly students from the 
Computer Science department of the University of 
Magdeburg without any experience in idea selection methods.  
Inexperienced participants were important, because we will 
measure the connection between the understanding of a group 
decision process and the resulted acceptance of the selection. 
Experience with group decision making method could 
influence the perception and subsequently our measurements. 
We divided the 30 participants into six decision-making 
groups. Three of these carried out M1 and the other three 
conducted M2. M3 and M4 were conducted in the previous 
study with 20 participants. The results were normalized for 
comparison with M1 and M2. This study investigated if an 
algorithm could be find that enables at the same time an 
efficient and acceptable selection result in a group. 
For the execution of the threshold algorithm we used 25 
ideas for attracting new customers to a supermarket. Each 
decision-making group was instructed by a computer-
mediated and face-to-face facilitator. The criterion given to 
each group was "Could this idea attract new customers to our 
supermarket?" Students know supermarkets and should be 
able to make appropriate selection decisions. 
Each decision-making group was subsequently asked to 
fill in an evaluation form and the time needed for the selection 
was measured. 
B. Results and interpretation 
In Section I.C, we state the requirement that with the 
visualization and interaction adaptations the threshold 
algorithm should not lose its time advantage. The results in 
0show that M2 still performs almost twice as fast as the group 
discussion. M1 does not perform quite as well as the threshold 
algorithm with visualization. 
 
 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

TABLE II.  
ACTUAL DURATION 
in Minutes 
M1 
M2 
M3 
M4 
Mean 
15:40 
13:40 
24:30 
06:00 
Min 
13:00 
12:00 
13:00 
04:00 
Max 
19:00 
16:00 
34:00 
10:00 
 
Another requirement of Section I.C was that the DM 
understand the process and could comprehend the overall 
selection result. In the evaluation form the participants were 
asked to respond to the statement: "The selection method is 
understandable." on a five-point Likert scale from 0 to 4 
points. For each measurement and method the total achievable 
sum and actual achieved sum were built and converted into a 
percentage. The results in TABLE III. show a value of 82% 
for the question whether M2 leads subjectively to a higher 
process understanding, which meets our expectation (see 
Section I.D, assumption 1). 
M2 almost reached the process understanding of M3. 
Surprisingly the process understanding of M3 is only 90%. It 
could be assumed that the process understanding of the group 
discussion should be at the maximum. Nevertheless, M2 
performed better than without the visualization and nearly as 
well as M3. 
TABLE III.  
SUBJECTIVE PROCESS UNDERSTANDING 
M1 
M2 
M3 
M4 
75% 
82% 
90% 
63% 
 
We also wanted to get a more objective way to verify the 
process understanding results. This is the reason why the 
evaluation form contained questions in exam-style. Five 
multiple choice test questions on the functionality of the 
threshold algorithm were given. The number of correct, wrong 
and "don't know" answers is shown in TABLE IV. As 
expected, M2 reaches a higher number of correct answers. 
Surprisingly was that M2 reached twice as many correct 
answers than M1. By contrast, M2 made nearly as many wrong 
answers as M1. M3 and M4 were not investigated in this 
manner, because in the former study the objective process 
understanding was not an issue.   
TABLE IV.  
OBJECTIVE PROCESS UNDERSTANDING 
 
correct 
wrong 
don't know 
M1 
23 
25 
27 
M2 
43 
23 
9 
 
 
The threshold algorithm with the additional visualization 
reaches both subjectively and objectively a better process 
understanding than the threshold algorithm without the 
additions. This meets our assumption in Section I.D. 
Another expectation is that the additional visualization of 
the threshold algorithm increases the group acceptance of the 
selection. The participants were given three types of 
questions. We were interested in the assumed group 
acceptance, the personal view on the acceptance of the overall 
selection result and if the threshold algorithm would in general 
lead to accepted group selections. 
At first we were interested in the assumed group view of 
acceptance. The participants were given the statement "I 
assume that the group accepts the overall selection result." and 
were asked whether this statement fits (4 points) or does not 
fit (0 points) their perception on a Likert scale. For each 
method the total points from all participants were calculated 
and converted to a percentage. TABLE V. shows the 
corresponding values. M2 performed better than M1 and nearly 
as well as M3.  
TABLE V.  
SUBJECTIVE ASSUMED GROUP ACCEPTANCE  
M1 
M2 
M3 
M4 
75% 
82% 
86% 
74% 
 
Secondly, we were interested in the personal view of the 
acceptance of the selection result. The participants were asked 
if the statement "I accept the overall selection result." fits (4 
points) or does not fit (0 points) their perception on a Likert 
scale. For each method the total points from all participants 
were calculated and converted to a percentage. TABLE VI. 
shows the results. Surprisingly, M2 reaches even a higher 
acceptance than M3. It is an interesting finding. It seems that 
the assumed group acceptance of the selection was 
underestimated by the group members. 
  
TABLE VI.  
PERSONAL ACCEPTANCE OF SELECTION 
M1 
M2 
M3 
M4 
60% 
87% 
84% 
60% 
 
Finally, we were interested in the assumptions of the 
participants whether the threshold algorithm would lead in 
general to accepted selection results. The statement given in 
the evaluation form was "I assume that the selection method 
in general will lead to group accepted selection results." The 
participants should answer if this statement fits (4 points) or 
does not fit (0 points) their perception on a Likert scale. For 
each method, the total points from all participants were 
calculated and converted to a percentage. 
As shown in TABLE VII. a value of 85% is achieved for 
M2, whereas a value of only 62% is achieved for M1. M3 and 
M4 were not tested, because the general ability for group 
acceptance was not an issue in the former study. 
TABLE VII.  
GENERAL ABILITY FOR GROUP ACCEPTANCE 
M1 
M2 
62% 
85% 
 
 
 
It is an interesting finding: although each DM still only 
sees one-third of the ideas, the opinion is strong that the 
selection method would provide a group accepted selection 
result. This was achieved just by adding visualization support 
to the algorithm. 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

The additional visualization for the threshold algorithm 
exceeded our expectations. Our second and third assumptions 
are fulfilled. The findings support the hypothesis stated in 
Section I.D. 
C. Other Obserations 
In addition to our planned experimental investigations, 
participants also gave some voluntary feedback: 
1: Relevance of the discussion. The discussion was 
perceived as very supportive for the decision-making task. It 
improves perspectives on ideas and the criterion. This results 
in a new research question: How could the threshold algorithm 
profit more from the effects of the useful discussion? 
2: Multiple phases improve decision quality. The 
multiple views on ideas during the different phases give the 
chance to reconsider already made decisions. During the 
process, helpful information and expertise of others changes 
the participants' views on criteria and ideas. Given the 
application area, this is not a surprising comment. But we 
underestimated the impact on the decision quality in the 
opinion of the DMs. How could we encourage such a thought? 
3: Too restricted in the reselection. In the re-selection 
phase, the threshold algorithm lets the DMs only reconsider in 
certain ways. That leads to the possible rejection of ideas that 
otherwise would have been accepted. This is especially true 
when new information changed the point of view of the DM. 
In combination with the observation that multiple views on 
ideas change, the DMs should be able to reconsider all (and 
not just some of) their already made decisions in the third 
phase of the algorithm. 
D. Limitations 
The experiment was carried out using a task that all 
participants had similar experiences and views. Real-life tasks 
could be harder because experts may represent different views 
(such as Marketing, Engineering and Sales), and – in the case 
of radical innovation projects – have little or no expertise. 
The participants were selected for their inexperience in 
selection methods so that we can obtain an unbiased view on 
our approach. However, DMs with experience in selection 
methods might reject the threshold algorithm a priori due to 
its unfamiliarity. 
The experiment was conducted in one room, face-to-face 
facilitated and in one sitting. By contrast, the threshold 
algorithm would be able to schedule the three phases on 
different dates. This change in format could decrease the 
overall algorithm performance because participants will have 
forgotten the inputs linking each phase to its successor. 
The algorithm was tested with five DMs and 25 ideas. 
Results may change when these parameters are varied. 
The experiments were carried out with a small number of 
subjects, which limits the statistical basis of the conclusions 
drawn. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
A summary of this work as well as the applicability and 
open questions for future work are presented in this Section. 
A. Summary 
The selection of ideas supported by the original threshold 
algorithm lacked group acceptance in comparison to the group 
discussion of all ideas. Our approach was to increase 
acceptance by applying approaches from human computer 
interaction. The visualization and interaction additions to the 
threshold algorithm performed nearly as well in process 
understanding and group acceptance of selection as the group 
discussion. At the same time, the threshold algorithm was able 
to maintain its speed advantage. 
This result was possible because we were able to improve 
understanding of the basic principles of the threshold 
algorithm and at the same time make it transparent how the 
current selection result is generated by each DM and by the 
group overall. Our approach applied basic visualization rules, 
a dynamic web-based application, dynamic visualizations and 
appropriate media for every DM throughout the whole 
selection process. 
B. Applicability 
The threshold algorithm is a collaboration algorithm with 
changing types of individual and group involvement. This is 
needed for the performance of the algorithm but causes also 
intransparencies and misunderstandings. In order to achieve a 
higher level of acceptance or process understanding, applying 
visualization and interaction approaches could be beneficial in 
other scenarios: 
 
Many group selection methods deal with acceptance 
issues. 
 
Methods that divide (decision) tasks into individual 
and group phases. 
 
Methods where invisible individual decisions lead to 
a lack of process understanding for others. 
 
C. Open questions and future work 
This investigation demonstrated new perspectives for the 
threshold algorithm:  
 
Evaluation errors are dangerous in this selection 
phase. Especially a false rejection error can lead to 
high opportunity costs. By making hidden profiles 
visible in the group discussion of the threshold 
algorithm the value for applications in business 
increases. The resulting research question: How could 
we use the mining of hidden profiles [19] for 
increasing 
quality 
of 
the 
group 
discussion 
respectively the definition of the global threshold?  
 
The concept of a threshold is hard to understand for a 
DM. In the evaluation form, the function of the 
threshold algorithm was often answered incorrectly. 
Are there visualization or interaction approaches that 
are able to support the understanding of this basic 
element in order to improve group discussion and 
decisions? 
 
Each DM still only saw only one-third of the ideas. 
Making the overall selection during the decision-
making process explorable might help to improve the 
overall group acceptance of the selection. How could 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

the threshold algorithm benefit by exploring the 
reasons for others' decisions? 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Alonso, E. Herrera-Viedma, F. Cabrerizo, F. Chiclana, and 
F. Herrera. "Visualizing consensus in group decision making 
situations." In Fuzzy Systems Conference, 2007, pp. 1-6. 
[2] B. Baltes, M. Dickson, M. Sherman, C. Bauer, and J. LaGanke, 
"Computer-Mediated Communication and Group Decision 
Making: A Meta-Analysis", Organizational Behavior and 
Human Decision Processes, Volume 87, Issue 1, 2002, pp. 156-
179. 
[3] R. Berth, "The Return of Innovation", Kienbaum-Werkstudie, 
Kienbaum Consultants International 1993, (in German).  
[4] R. Bobrik, "Configurable Visualization of complex process 
models", University of Ulm, Dr. Hut-Verlag, Germany, 2008 
(in German). 
[5] R. Brath, "99 Effective Information Visualization – Gidelines 
and Metrics for 3D Interactive Rrepresentations of Business 
Data", Thesis, National Library of Canada, 1999. 
[6] R. Briggs, "On theory-driven design of collaboration 
technology and process", Groupware: Design, Implementation 
and Use, Springer-Verlag Berlin-Heidelberg, 2004, pp. 1-15. 
[7] C. Christensen, "The innovator's dilemma: when new 
technologies cause great firms to fail", USA, Harvard Business 
School Press, 1997. 
[8] E. Condon, B. Golden, and E. Wasil, "Visualizing group 
decisions in the analytic hierarchy process, Computers & 
Operations Research", Volume 30, Issue 10, 2003, pp. 1435-
1445. 
[9] R. Cooper, "Stage-Gate Systems: A New Tool for  Managing 
New Products", Business Horizons, 1990,  Vol. May-June, pp. 
44-54.  
[10] R. Cooper, S. Edgett, and E. Kleinschmidt, "Portfolio 
Management for New Products", Perseus Publishing, 2001, pp. 
71-72. 
[11] F. Davis, "A technology, acceptance model for empirically 
testing new end.user information systems: Theory and results", 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, PhD Thesis, 1980. 
[12] A. Dix, "Human Computer Interaction", Pearson Education, 
2004. 
[13] J. Figueira, S. Greco, and M. Ehrgott, Multiple  Criteria 
Decision Analysis: State of the Art Surveys, Springer, Boston, 
MA, 2005.  
[14] J. Goers, G. Horton, and N. Kempe “A Collaborative  
Algorithm for Computer-Supported Idea Selection in the                            
Front End of Innovation,” 45th Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences, 2012, pp. 217-226. 
[15] C. Gonzalez and G. Kasper, "Animation in User Interfaces 
Designed for Decision Support Systems: The Effects of Image 
Abstraction, Transition, and Interactivity on Decision Quality", 
Decision Sciences, Vol. 28, MP. 4, 1997, pp. 793-823. 
[16] C. Gutwin and S. Greenberg, "Design for individuals, desing 
for groups: tradeoffs between power and workspace 
awareness", Proceedings of the 1998 ACM conference on 
Computer supported cooperative work, 1998, pp. 207-216. 
[17] J. Hackmann, "Changing views of motivation in work groups", 
in K. D. Duncan, M. M. Gruneberg, & D. Wallis (Eds.), 
Changes in working life, London: John Wiley & Sons., 1980. 
[18] C. Healey, K. Booth, and J. Enns, "High-speed visual 
estimation using preattentive processing", ACM Trans. 
Comput.-Hum. Interact. Vol. 3, Issue 2, 1996, pp. 107-135. 
[19] G. Horton and J. Goers, "Mining Hidden Profiles in the 
Collaborative Processing of Raw Ideas", 47th Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences, 2014. 
[20] J. Introne, "Supporting group decisions by mediating 
deliberation to improve information pooling", Proceedings of 
the ACM 2009 international conference on Supporting group 
work, 2009, pp. 189-198. 
[21] R. Kann, J. Goers, and G. Horton, "On the Suitability of an 
Optimal Sorting Algorithm for Idea Selection in the Front End 
of Innovation", Technical Report, Computer Science 
Department, University of Magdeburg, Germany, 2011. 
[22] P. Koen, G. Ajamian, S. Boyce, A. Clamen, E. Fisher, S. 
Fountoulakis, A. Johnson, P. Puri, and R. Seibert, "Fuzzy Front 
End: Effective Methods, Tools and Techniques", The PDMA 
toolbook for new product development, John Wiley & Sons, 
Inc., New York, 2002, pp. 5-35. 
[23] L. Ma, "Visualizing preferences on spheres for group decisions 
based on multiplicative preference relations", European 
Journal of Operational Research, Volume 203, Issue 1, 2010, 
pp. 176-184. 
[24] T. McGuire, S. Kiesler, and J. Siegel, "Group and computer-
mediated discussion effects in risk decision making", Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, Vol 52, 1987, pp. 917-
930. 
[25] J. Paasi, T. Luoma, R. Strong, and R. Zhou, "Systematic 
strategic decision support for innovation development", 
European Conference on Management of Technology & 
Innovation, 2008.  
[26] S. Palmisano (IBM), ”Unternehmensführung in einer 
komplexen Welt: Global CEO study 2010”, Report, IBM 
Institute for Business Value, 2010 (in German). 
[27] B. Preim, R. Dachselt: "Interaktive Systeme - Grundlagen, 
Graphical User Interfaces, Informationsvisualisierung", Vol. 1, 
No. 2, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2010 
[28] B. Roy, "Paradigms and Challenges", in [13] 
[29] P. Saraiya, C. Shaffer, D, McCrickard, and C. North, "Effective 
features of algorihtm visualizations", ACM SIGCSE Bulletin, 
Vol. 36, No. 1, 2004, pp. 382-386. 
[30] A. Treisman and J. Souther, "Search asymmetry: A diagnostic 
for preattentive processing of separable features", Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: General, Vol 114 (3), 1985, pp. 285-
310. 
 
 
 
 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

