The Need of a Framework for the Digital Transformation of Industry Ecosystems 
Handling Intercompany Collaborative Workflows 
Marco Peter and Stella Gatziu Grivas 
Institute for Information Systems 
FHNW School of Business 
Olten, Switzerland 
e-mail: marco.peter@fhnw.ch and stella.gatziugrivas@fhnw.ch 
 
 
Abstract—This research paper, describes the specifics of an 
industry ecosystem and its definition, as well as the challenges 
occurring while transforming the ecosystem. The goal is to 
demonstrate the need for further research towards creating a 
systematic approach to solve these challenges. A framework of 
an industry ecosystem and its transformation towards 
digitalization would solve this. 
Keywords-industry ecosystem; digitalization; collaboration; 
framework. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The term ecosystem is usually considered in the literature 
as interconnecting and interacting stakeholders who together 
form a system [2][4]. Industry ecosystems are today in the 
digitalization era in a transformational digital wave, which 
has been put in motion by the technologies enabling 
digitalization like mobile, big data or cloud. As defined in 
[2], digital transformation is “the seamless, end-to-end 
connectivity of all areas of the economy, and as the way in 
which the various players adapt to the new conditions that 
prevail in the digital economy.” 
The strive for automated processes and new ways to 
collaborate is omnipresent with the best example of internet 
of 
everything, 
where 
communication 
of 
things 
is 
omnidirectional and autonomous [7]. New technologies like 
cloud allow for example the central data and document 
storage and enable new ways of collaboration supporting the 
execution of intercompany collaborative workflows, i.e., of 
workflows, which span over several organizations. The main 
benefit out of a digitalized industry ecosystem is the 
improvement in collaborative processes between the different 
actors of the ecosystem. 
Main 
challenges 
for 
ecosystems 
today 
are 
the 
transformation of the industry ecosystem towards a 
digitalized industry ecosystem and the integration and 
maintenance of the ecosystem actors. In [2], we propose 
three levels of transformation at the enterprise IT level (e.g., 
with new roles or governance models) at process level and 
the ecosystem level (e.g., with new business models). 
The literature still has a gap for systematically describing 
the industry ecosystem and its transformation towards 
digitalization and the need for a framework to do so. The 
goal of this research paper is to demonstrate the need for a 
systematic framework to master the challenges during the 
transformation of the industry ecosystem. 
The paper is organized as follows: in Section II, the 
authors’ definition for an industry ecosystem is stated and the 
challenges of ecosystems are elaborated. Section III 
discusses two representative frameworks and a model, which 
describe relevant parts of a business ecosystem. In Section 
IV, the literature gap is pointed out. The last section, Section 
V, evinces the conclusion of this research paper. 
II. 
INDUSTRY ECOSYSTEM 
This section includes a definition for industry ecosystem 
created by the authors and the challenges which industry 
ecosystem usually face, both based on literature findings. 
A. Definition 
The literature does not have analyzed the term industry 
ecosystem thoroughly; still there are some definitions to it. 
Industry ecosystems are complex systems as they consist of a 
large number of actors, which interconnect in a complicated 
way [1]. The term ecosystem can be defined as 
interconnecting and interacting stakeholders who together 
form a system [2]. It is a value adding system to which all 
relevant actors are connected with. An industry ecosystem 
consists of companies and their partners [3]. Such 
ecosystems come along with network-effects: the bigger the 
network gets through adoption of new users, the more 
valuable the ecosystem becomes. 
From these definitions, in combination with the 
definitions of business ecosystem, which are highly related, 
the following main elements, which define an industry 
ecosystem, have been derived: 
The goal for an industry ecosystem is… 
 
to support/allow/enable the exchange of information 
between actors by means of an uniform platform 
through overcoming the company boundaries 
 
to support/allow/enable the collaboration between 
actors through the management of collaborative 
intercompany workflows 
An industry ecosystem is… 
 
a highly complex integrated system to exchange 
information 
 
a platform to increase industry innovation 
 
a system where competition as well as collaboration 
is nurtured 
 
a network of actors, which have a link to the industry 
 
optimally led by the industry association 
The actors within the industry ecosystem are… 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

 
highly integrated to the point where they become an 
integral part of the ecosystem 
 
highly diverse from any size 
 
collaborative industry stakeholders 
 
partners, 
suppliers, 
distributors, 
customers, 
competitors, 
investors, 
government 
agencies, 
research facilities, industry associations 
B. Challenges 
Industry ecosystems have to face challenges, which need 
to be overcome, in order to provide a sustainable ecosystem 
to its involved actors. Fig. 1 illustrates our understanding of 
all relevant dimensions along with the challenges of how 
building and managing ecosystems can be classified. 
 
Figure 1.  Challenges in Industry Ecosystems. 
In the following sub-sections the challenges are explained 
in more detail. 
1) Challenges Regarding Transformation of Ecosystems 
There are four main factors which are challenging 
regarding transformation of ecosystems. 
a) Regulations 
Legal regulations differ from country to country, which 
makes it very challenging for an industry ecosystem to have 
actors involved from different countries [7]. Legal 
regulations as well as policies of the individual actors are 
challenging to handle for the industry ecosystem [10]. 
Therefore, it is important that the industry ecosystem covers 
the industry regulations and policies. For industry 
ecosystems it becomes difficult to handle the regulations, 
since different industries blur into each other [12][9]. 
b) Standards 
Technology standardizations especially for data transfer 
are considered an important conditional factor for a 
successful ecosystem [10]. The electronic data interchange 
needs standardization across all actors [7]. An industry 
ecosystem is challenged by defining standards for naming or 
for industry specific items, such as standards for container 
sizes in the logistics industry [7]. 
c) Digitalization 
The megatrends and enabling technologies cloud, mobile, 
big data, and social are the pillars for a digitalized industry 
[17]. The four technologies are not only deployed by the 
business leaders to gain efficiency or to cut costs. Instead, 
companies use those technologies to create new business 
models and to craft new revenue streams [17]. The future 
customers are going to be fully digitalized and thus, 
industries and its actors need to be digitalized in order to not 
get disrupted. 
d) Innovation 
It is challenging for an industry ecosystem to define its 
direction of innovation, since it has several different actors 
involved. The innovation directions need to be kept close to 
the regulations, otherwise the outcome might bring trouble to 
the involved actors [9]. It is difficult to define innovative 
directions by taking the incentives for the involved industry 
actors into account [4]. Therefore, it is important to define a 
strategic landscape of which the innovation is an essential 
part. Businesses need innovative business models, which 
nowadays need industry members to be innovative and 
sustainable [11]. 
2) Challenges Regarding Actors 
There are four main factors which are challenging 
regarding actors. 
a) Competition 
When industry ecosystems emerge, the power balance in 
the industry might change [4]. Thus, it is an important task 
for the industry association to maintain a certain level of 
competition between the actors, since competition nurtures 
innovation after all, but at the same time keeping the relation 
between the actors in good will [4]. 
b) Incentives 
The association of the industry ecosystem has to find 
incentives for the actors to join the ecosystem as well as 
integrate their businesses into the ecosystem. 
c) Disruption 
New players, mostly entrepreneurs, will disrupt the 
ecosystem of the different industries of today; if the 
industries do not transform their ecosystem into a digitalized 
world through for example cloud computing [5]. The best 
way to avoid disruption of businesses is to predict the future 
[5]. This can be achieved by exchanging information in the 
industry as well as to collaborate for more efficient and 
economical results. 
d) Members 
It is necessary to define a leader over the industry 
ecosystem, who defines the components of the industry 
ecosystem. A company or a small group of companies need 
to be defined to act as the leader [4]. It might be more useful 
to create an industry association, to which not only one or a 
small group is part of, but a greater number of actors can be 
part of it. In addition, it is important to have an overview of 
all involved actors in the industry ecosystem. To do so, first 
the actors, which need to be considered for the industry 
ecosystem, need to be identified [9]. 
3) Challenges Regarding Industry Ecosystem Support 
Activities 
There are four main factors which are challenging 
regarding industry ecosystem support activities. 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

a) Collaboration and Automation 
A transformation requires the intercompany workflows, 
especially the collaborative workflows, to be automated by 
support of cloud services [2]. Furthermore, automation of 
intercompany workflows needs a platform on which not only 
the exchange of information can be done but as well the 
process conducted. Only an industry ecosystem could bring 
all the actors together and provide the required platform to 
perform automated workflows and collaboration workflows. 
b) Integration 
An industry ecosystem has a huge number of actors 
involved. To integrate them is a big effort [7]. The challenge 
is to integrate such heterogeneous actors, which have to 
compete as well as to collaborate with each other within the 
industry ecosystem [4]. 
c) Data exchange 
Information needs to be timely exchanged between 
actors. Thus, an efficient data exchange needs to be 
established within the ecosystem and provided to its actors. 
Data exchange is furthermore needed as a base for digitalized 
collaboration activities within the industry. 
d) Transparency 
Not only the processes of the industry stakeholders are 
heterogeneous, the actors themselves are very heterogeneous 
as well as some of their goals [7]. So it is important for the 
ecosystem to keep it transparent for all the parties. The actors 
within the ecosystem are unlike one from another, which 
leads to a very diverse ecosystem [9]. 
e) Innovation 
Innovation through technology is essential for not only 
businesses but the whole industry, in order to stay 
competitive within the market. Current processes need to be 
revolutionized by innovation and technology to automate 
processes and to stay competitive [7]. A difficult challenge 
for industry ecosystems is to handle an ongoing industry 
innovation [4]. 
III. 
INDUSTRY ECOSYSTEM FRAMEWORKS 
Our literature review about frameworks for describing 
industry ecosystems revealed two frameworks, the 6C and 
the performance framework as well as one model, the 
business ecosystem architecture model, which describe 
relevant parts of business ecosystems. 
A. 6C Framework 
The framework 6C is for describing an Internet of Things 
(IoT) -based business ecosystem [13]. According to the 6C 
framework, the following six dimensions are considered a 
must for a business ecosystem: 
TABLE I.  
COMPONENTS OF THE 6C FRAMEWORK [13] 
Dimension 
Objective 
Context 
To specify the environmental features of the 
ecosystem. 
Cooperation 
To specify the mechanisms, which the actors use for 
interaction to accomplish the common strategies. 
Construct 
To specify the basic structure and auxiliary 
infrastructure of the business ecosystem. 
Dimension 
Objective 
Configuration 
To specify the stakeholder relationships and their 
configuration patterns in the business ecosystem. 
Capability 
To specify the key success features of the business 
ecosystem. 
Change 
To specify the shift of system configuration pattern 
from one lifecycle to the other. 
Table I lists the objective and the description for each of 
the six dimensions. 
B. Performance Framework 
The performance framework is to help organizations 
during the selection process of finding the best matching 
ecosystem [14]. For this goal, the framework has the 
following three key steps:  
1. Assessing the existing ecosystems and current 
capabilities 
2. Assessing the ecosystem options 
3. Continually improve the ecosystem through key 
management practices 
Relevant to mention in detail is the key step three. The 
reason for this step is the fact that most organizations are not 
effectively using the management practices to maximize their 
ecosystem performance [14]. 
TABLE II.  
KEY MANAGEMENT PRACTICES OF ORGANIZATIONS [14] 
Management 
practice 
Explanation 
Loose 
Coupling 
To be flexible and scalable. 
Access 
Management 
Expand the ecosystem by number of actors according 
to the objective and scope of the ecosystem. 
Behavior 
Management 
Increase the potential for productive interactions 
among actors through behavioral norms and enforced 
rules. 
Incentives 
Foster capability building and cumulative learning 
through the use of intrinsic- and extrinsic-based 
incentives. 
Action Points 
Incorporating 
several 
action 
points 
leads 
to 
opportunities for efficient friction, which forces and 
sharpens choices. This can be achieved through 
embedded integration or decision milestones where 
shared outcomes are achieved. 
Interaction 
Archive 
Store rich content information regarding actors’ 
interactions to enable a long-term view of the 
ecosystem’s opportunities. 
There is generally a chance to increase value within 
existing ecosystems just by refining management practices, 
which are shown in Table II. 
C. Business Ecosystem Architecture Model 
The business ecosystem architecture model defines that 
there are three levels of actors involved in a business 
ecosystem [15]. On the first level, the local level, there are 
five actors: the core unit, which is the company for which the 
business ecosystem is designed, the clients, the distribution 
channels, the suppliers, and the standardization bodies. 
Actors of the first level are mainly the actors, which are 
usually part of the supply chain of a business and thus, these 
actors 
cooperate 
closely 
between 
each 
other. 
The 
competitors, governmental agencies, and stakeholders are 
part of the second level, the intermediate level. On the third 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

level, the global level, the actor’s international partners and 
international competitors are placed [15]. 
The actors of the intermediate level, the competitors, the 
governmental agencies, and the stakeholders as well as the 
standardization 
bodies 
of 
the 
local 
level 
are 
the 
environmental elements, which play a main role in the 
development of the core units’ entire model [16]. They are 
important for establishing legal background, for developing 
competitiveness and diversity, and for attracting new 
investments [16]. The actors within a business ecosystem 
collaborate with each other to achieve common goals. 
IV. 
GAP IN THE LITERATURE 
Although there have been some approaches for the 
description of industry ecosystems, there is no systematic 
way. A systematic approach entails an illustrative system for 
industry players usually in form of a framework. A common 
case is the need of intercompany collaborative workflows. 
For such a case it is important to have all relevant factors, 
like all involved actors, within the framework. Otherwise, it 
becomes very complicated to understand the behavior and 
the constellation of the ecosystem. Under such conditions, an 
introduction of an intercompany collaborative workflow 
might be too complex. Furthermore, a systematic approach 
provides transparency for the industry and its actors and thus, 
it is essential and beneficial for the transformation and the 
evolvement of the ecosystems. 
Challenges regarding industry ecosystems and their 
transformation towards digitalization are well defined. But 
the literature gives almost no input on how to approach these 
challenges in order to master them. The industry could make 
sure with the help of a framework that the awareness of the 
challenges is given and therefore, no challenge is overlooked. 
Furthermore, a framework could provide an approach on 
how to solve the challenges to have a successful and 
sustainable industry ecosystem. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This research paper, analyzed the current definitions on 
industry ecosystem. Due to the fact that there is no all 
including definition for it, the following definition has been 
created. An industry ecosystem is a complex system of 
diverse integrated actors, which all interact, exchange 
information 
and/or 
collaborate 
through 
collaborative 
intercompany workflows to common goals, to have an 
overview of all involved actors within an industry. An 
industry ecosystem is led by an association of several 
industry actors, which together define standards and 
boundaries of the industry ecosystem and push the industry 
innovation forward. 
Researchers have mentioned several challenges for 
ecosystems transforming into digitalization. This paper, 
collects these challenges and created a framework for 
illustrating 
the 
challenges 
of 
industry 
ecosystems. 
Intercompany collaborative workflows are a main benefit 
and therefore a main driver for industries to handle the 
challenges of such transformations. 
Two frameworks and a model for describing industry 
ecosystems are explained within this paper. These 
frameworks are required for gaining insights to build a 
framework for tackling the challenges described in this paper 
and thus to help industries in their transformation processes.  
The identified gap in the literature leads to the current 
state of the research team. The current work evolves around 
the design and development of such a framework. In order to 
do so, the relevant dimensions of the framework with focus 
on integration, collaboration, and actor management need to 
be identified and brought together in a systematic way. Such 
a methodical framework would close the literature gap and 
would bring new knowledge into this research topic. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Tsvetkova and M. Gustafsson, “Business models for 
industrial ecosystems: A modular approach,” Journal of 
Cleaner Production, 29-30, pp. 246–254, 2012. 
[2] B. Bloching et al. (2015), The Digital Transformation of 
Industry,http://www.rolandberger.com/media/pdf/Roland_Berg
er_digital_transformation_of_industry_20150315.pdf 
[retrieved: 07, 2016] 
[3] S. Gatziu Grivas, C. Giovanoli, and S. Grand, “Cloud on the 
way to transform whole enterprises : Reasons and the several 
levels of transformation,” Olten, Solothurn, Internal Report, 
2015. 
[4] A. Gawer and M. A. Cusumano, “Industry Platforms and 
Ecosystem Innovation,” Journal of Product Innovation 
Management, 31(3), pp. 417–433, 2013. 
[5] Deloitte Digital and Heads! (2015), Überlebensstrategie 
“Digital Leadership.” Deloitte, https://www2.deloitte.com 
/content/dam/Deloitte/de/Documents/technology/20150414_%
C3%9Cberlebensstrategie 
Digital 
Leadership_final.pdf 
[retrieved: 07, 2016] 
[6] M. Gomez, S. Grand, and S. Gatziu Grivas, “Digitalisation in 
Logistics and the Role of Cloud Computing,” VNL Zeitschrift, 
Logistics, 2015. 
[7] M. Heikkilä and L. Kuivaniemi, “Business Ecosystem under 
Construction,” EBRF Conference (Research Forum to 
Understand Business in Knowledge Society), 2011. 
[8] B. Chew, D. Derosby, E. Kelly, and B. Miracky, “Regulating 
ecosystems,” Deloitte Business Trends, pp. 43–55, 2015. 
[9] J. Guo and H. Bouwman, “An analytical framework for an m-
payment 
ecosystem: 
A 
merchants’ 
perspective,” 
Telecommunications Policy, 40(2-3), pp. 147–167, 2015. 
[10]  J. 
Bruun-Jensen 
and 
J. 
Hagel, 
“Minimum 
viable 
transformation,” Deloitte Business Trends Series, pp. 91–103, 
2015. 
[11]  E. Kelly, “Introduction: Business ecosystems come of age,” 
Deloitte Business Trends Series, pp. 3–16, 2015. 
[12]  K. Rong, J. Wu, Y. Shi, and L. Guo, “Nurturing business 
ecosystems for growth in a foreign market: Incubating, 
identifying 
and 
integrating 
stakeholders,” 
Journal 
of 
International Management, 21(4), pp. 293–308, 2015. 
[13]  J. Hagel, J. S. Brown, and D. Kulasooriya, “Performance 
Ecosystems,” Deloitte University Pres, 2011. 
[14] E. Galateanu and S Avasilcai, “Business Ecosystem 
Architecture,” Annals of the Oradea University, Fascicle of 
Management and Technological Engineering, 22, pp. 79 – 84, 
2013. 
[15]  E. Galateanu and S. Avasilcai, “Business Ecosystem 
“Reliability”,” Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences, 124, 
pp. 312–321, 2014. 
[16]  Harvard Business Review, “The Digital Transformation of 
Business,” Harvard Business Review, 2015. 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

