Lebanese Industrial Center for Assessment and Development 
A Collaboration Platform 
 
Ramy Harik 
Department of Industrial and Mechanical Engineering 
Lebanese American University 
Byblos, Lebanon 
ramy.harik@gmail.com  
Wissam El Hachem 
Department of Industrial and Mechanical Engineering 
Lebanese American University 
Byblos, Lebanon 
elhachemw@gmail.com
Alexandre Durupt 
Département Génie des Systèmes Mécaniques  
Université de technologie de Compiègne 
Compiègne, France 
alexandre.durupt@utc.fr  
Benoit Eynard 
Département Génie des Systèmes Mécaniques  
Université de technologie de Compiègne 
Compiègne, France 
benoit.eynard@utc.fr 
 
 
Abstract— Lebanese manufacturing industries face both severe 
external and internal competitions. External competition from 
low wage production countries and adoption of free market 
strategies force SMEs (Small and Medium Enterprises) to tap 
into productivity enhancement strategies. Internal competition 
comes from the lack of collaboration tools and infrastructure. 
This research aims at establishing a positive collaboration 
platform between industries and enabling them to share 
knowledge to reduce external fierce competition. A first step 
towards this effort would be to establish a relevant framework 
that would assess the current situation of an industry through 
the sustainability diamond matrix. Next stages would include 
grouping industries according to common deficiencies and 
establishing a cooperation framework. 
Keywords-Collaboration; Sustainability; Diamond Index; 
Center 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This paper presents the first step of establishing a center 
of industrial collaboration (LICAD)‎[1]: assessing the current 
industrial 
situation 
through 
a 
balanced 
quantitative 
sustainability approach. A drastic reshaping of how modern 
manufacturing is expanding its capabilities is needed for it to 
become sustainable in the long term. Reduction of emissions, 
control of waste generation and disposal, monitored energy 
consumption and responsible material selection (renewable 
ones) are the main pillars supporting every company wishing 
to be labeled as an environmentally-conscious manufacturing 
firm. 
However, 
for 
manufacturing-environmental 
sustainability to gain momentum of its own it has to be 
socially-economically viable. So, a sustainability framework 
index with 4 main pillars (Manufacturing, Environmental, 
Economical and Societal) will be presented later on, built 
specifically after an extensive literature review for the 
Lebanese manufacturing industry with an initial collection of 
multi-disciplinary indicators. This will serve to classify 
industries based on their primary needs as a first step towards 
the establishment of the collaboration platform. 
Following, we will give a brief topic overview that will 
eventually lead to the identification of sustainability scales. 
In section three, we justify using casual loop diagrams, in 
systems dynamics, to represent the various components of 
our variables. In section four, we will detail the application 
of analytic hierarchy process to aggregate the indicators and 
group deficiencies together. The paper ends with a 
conclusion on the importance of assessing further industries 
to refine the diamond index. 
II. 
TOPIC OVERVIEW 
Sustainability is an elusive concept hard to delimit. We 
will adopt a mixed quantitative/qualitative estimation of 
sustainability. The approach will attempt to integrate 
unrelated indicators. For example, the comparison of water 
consumption [2] with Brand management [3] is tricky, to say 
the least, and to valorize mostly intangible notions is prone 
to subjectivity which might compromise the validity of the 
assessment [4]. However, using the Analytic Hierarchy 
Process introduced in the next section, the need for 
sustainability performance measurement is crucial, and by 
capturing the main indices and inducing the learning process, 
a leap towards local industrial sustainability is the ultimate 
goal. It goes without saying that the sustainability indices 
collected and aggregated are by no means absolute nor 
completely reliable, and they serve as the first step in the 
LICAD initiative to holistically enhance Lebanese industry. 
As it is called Lebanese sustainability diamond index, it is 
natural to deduce that it is an iterative process and it needs to 
be monitored for several years to set the baseline 
expectations and form a clearer picture of trend-indicators to 
periodically update indices. 
Four main scales can be identified into which 
sustainability can be applied [5]: 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-287-5
COLLA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

1-Global systems: global warming, ozone depletion, 
biodiversity, etc. Treaties and joint ventures are most 
effective on this scale. 
2-Bounded systems: urban planning, transportation, etc.  
Economics, law, ecology among others are most effective on 
this scale. 
3-Business systems: through energy efficiency, cleaner 
technology, recycling policies, leaner supply chains, etc. 
business sustainability is possible. 
4-Technological systems: in providing clear economic 
value while operating in a cleaner manner can technology 
sustainability be achieved. 
This section enabled us to situate the complexity behind 
our work: integrating quantitative and qualitative data to 
generate a compilation of indexes.  The following sections 
will explore factors influence on one another and the 
normalization of this influence.  
III. 
SYSTEM DYNAMICS 
Many 
of 
the 
factors 
involved 
in 
sustainable 
manufacturing interact, influencing and depending on each 
other. This is why we propose using system dynamics and, in 
particular, causal loop diagramming in this paper to model 
the different direct depending relationships and, through 
these, the many chains of cascading interactions between 
often very odd groups of variables. In order to integrate a 
multitude of variables and indicators, we will need to 
distribute them into pillars, categories and sub-categories.   
Their representation through a casual loop diagram will 
allow for a better more holistic view of the various 
components of sustainable manufacturing and enable 
decision makers to better assess companies.  Their chain 
reaction (domino) effect will thus be best represented: a 
variable under a certain pillar might as well affect a variable 
theoretically not related. We identify four separate domains 
for analysis, i.e., manufacturing, environmental, financial, 
and social domains. The manufacturing occupies the central 
part of the diagram, and thus it evaluates policies intended to 
promote sustainable manufacturing practices [6]. 
 
IV. 
GENERATING THE SUSTAINABILITY INDEX 
Since a hybrid qualitative/quantitative approach will be 
adopted, a comprehensive index is preferred for the decision 
making purposes. Through numerical aggregation, a single 
index will emerge that‎ will‎ assess‎ the‎ company’s‎
sustainability performance across the several domains [7]. 
There has been numerous methods proposed to compare 
indicators of different nature in a systematic manner, while 
capturing and controlling the inherent judgment subjectivity. 
Among the most adopted methods are AHP (Analytic 
Hierarchy Process) introduced by Saaty [7] and the Multi-
attribute Utility Theory proposed by Keeney [8]. 
In this paper, the AHP method will be adopted with a few 
proven modifications in literature [9]. By now, there are 
many proposed sustainability assessment frameworks with a 
great variety of indicators and units. It is better, yet 
challenging, to conduct comparisons among sectors and 
companies relying on many performance indicators. AHP 
makes it possible to prioritize alternatives based on different 
criteria, thus enabling judging and comparing companies 
based on multi-disciplinary indicators. Criteria are split 
between quantitative and qualitative scales. This makes 
direct integration into a single composite index not possible. 
For example, measuring the percentage of female managers 
is straight forward, while assessing deployed processes 
requires a certain expertise and human judgement. It is the 
prioritization derived by pair-wise comparison that solves the 
multi-scale judgments problem and enables calculation, 
through weighing and adding, of the overall priorities of 
alternatives which mark their impact on the primary goal of 
sustainability. AHP has several clear benefits; it can handle 
in a relatively easy manner data of qualitative and 
quantitative nature, and perhaps one of its most appealing 
feature it that it allows compensatory rules in multi-criteria 
decision making process. What this infers is that by adopting 
the AHP, poor performance of certain criteria can be offset 
by good performance of others, i.e., bad score in the social 
dimension can be offset by a good one in the environmental 
dimension leading to an overall passing performance with 
respect to company sustainability. We will present the 
procedure, based on AHP, of calculating a composite index 
aggregating indicators ranging over environmental, societal, 
economical and manufacturing levels which will permit 
quick and efficient ranking of companies within a sector with 
respect to sustainability performance. 
A. Selection of Indicators 
After extensive literature review [10][11], suitable 
performance 
indicators 
which 
fall 
under 
Societal, 
Economical, Environmental and Manufacturing dimensions 
are selected with the goal of preliminary assessment of a 
company sustainability performance and benchmarking 
industries within a given sector. Indicators, whenever 
possible, ought to be of a quantitative nature for the obvious 
reason of less risk of subjectivity. However, for some 
indicators, a qualitative judgment is more appropriate. An 
important requirement for the continued accuracy of this 
methodology is the periodical review of indicators to track 
any changes in status and possibly add a few if the need 
arises. An indicator needs to have clear unit of measurement 
if quantitative and clear judgment scale if qualitative. 
Let us set the main sustainability dimensions (or group of 
indicators)‎as‎the‎j’s‎(economic‎j‎=1,‎environmental‎‎j = 2, 
and societal j=3, manufacturing  j=4). The manufacturing 
dimension has been separated as a standalone dimension 
since the field of application is restricted to primary and 
secondary industries. The respective indicators serve as an 
initial assessment enablers of how much a company is 
seeking to modernize and achieve the much sought over 
status of sustainable development.  
 
The economic group of indicators serves as an 
overview‎of‎the‎company’s‎economic‎impact‎on‎its‎
stakeholders as well as the local and national 
economic 
system. 
It 
uses 
basic 
economic 
interactions of expenses versus revenues. 
 
The environmental group of indicators serves as an 
overview‎
of‎
the‎
company’s‎
impact‎
on‎
its‎
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-287-5
COLLA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

surroundings (water, atmosphere, land). It uses basic 
environmental indicators such as pollution and 
recycling. 
 
The societal group of indicators serves as an 
overview‎ of‎ the‎ company’s‎ endeavors‎ to‎ properly‎
treat its employees, suppliers, customers. It uses 
basic societal interactions such as employee turnover 
rate and safety. 
 
The manufacturing group of indicators serves as an 
overview‎
of‎
the‎
company’s‎
technological‎
advancement so as to minimize production related 
waste and emissions. It uses basic manufacturing 
indicators such as inventory tracking and machine 
scheduling. 
 
Some of these dimensions will be split into sub-
categories for concentrated judgment (to be explained in the 
next section) and for easier calculation (also to be explained 
in later section, mainly to keep down the number of pair-
wise comparison). The environmental indices are presented 
in table 1 with three different sub-categories (1= atmosphere, 
2= policies, 3= standards) labeled between parentheses from 
13. 
 
B. Judging the Indicators 
The indicators have to be sorted between those who 
positively and negatively influence‎ the‎ company’s‎ goal‎
towards achieving sustainability. So, let us mark the 
indicators‎with‎I’s‎so‎to‎have‎I_ji‎(Indicator‎i‎from‎group‎j)‎
and with + or – signs like I_(ji+) or I_(ji-) so to indicate 
respectively whether or not if they increase in value they 
contribute towards enhancing overall sustainability score. 
For example increased energy consumption per unit of 
output has a negative effect on the overall score. 
C. Weighing the Indicators 
It is a very critical step the weighing of these indicators. 
As with most cases, lack of data hinders absolute certainty 
when judging and placing weights. However, the pair-wise 
comparison technique derives relative weights in a practical 
and highly accurate manner relying on a selected group of 
experts. Pair-wise comparison enables the estimation of 
weights for each indicator i relative to other indicators 
within the same group j and it is done by comparing each 
pair of indicators. By answering the question of which of the 
two indicators i and j is more influential in the overall 
sustainability of the company. By indicating a preference for 
one over the other on a 1-9 (this range was chosen because 
it offers limited yet sensitive judgment enabling distinction) 
scale, the intensity of relevance is detected. For example, if 
indicator i is given a score of 4 when compared to indicator 
j, this means that i is 4 times more important than j in 
determining the overall score of the company.  
After comparing each pair of indicators, a NxN positive 
reciprocal matrix is formed (1) with the reciprocal property 
(if i is 5 times more important than j, then j is 1/5 times 
more important than i). 

    
 
   

Equation 1: Reciprocal property of a reciprocal matrix 
A 3 step approximation of the normalized weights of the 
indicators: 
1- Sum entries each column of the reciprocal matrix 
(2)  

∑
   
 
   


Equation 2: Sum of each column in reciprocal matrix 
2- Divide each entry by the sum of its column to 
obtain the normalized pair-wise comparison N x N 
matrix (3) 

 ̅   
   
∑    

Equation 3: Normalized pair-wise comparison 
3- The criteria weight or priority vector w is obtained 
by averaging the sum of each row (4) 

   
∑  ̅  
 

Equation 4: Priority column vector W 
D. Checking Consistency 
For an N x N matrix, (N-1) comparisons are enough to 
derive weights for the N indicators. However in AHP, N(N-
1)/2 comparisons are made, which is more computationally 
exhaustive for the purpose of rendering the weights less 
sensitive to our inherent inconsistency of judgments and its 
redundancy permits the calculation of a ratio to measure the 
data’s‎degree‎of‎inconsistency‎and‎determine‎the‎validity‎of‎
the results called the consistency ratio. The smaller the ratio 
the better, and, as a general rule of thumb it should be 
ideally less than 0.1, however acceptable up to the limit of 
0.2. A perfectly consistent matrix has a CI=0 as per 
condition listed in the equation (5) below.  

                   

Equation 5: Principal Eigen value for a consistent matrix 
Two people will most definitely differ in their belief, at 
least as for the intensity of the degree of difference between 
two indicators, the same person will most likely report 
inconsistent judgments (i.e., A much more important than B, 
B slightly more important than C and C is slightly less 
important than A), which is part of our nature. The transitive 
property of logic of preference is what determines the 
consistency of the judgments, however too much 
consistency is impossible even undesirable in this case since 
it makes the AHP looses one of its more desired features 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-287-5
COLLA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

which is to systematically combine experts opinions in a 
structured manner without losing their subjectivity enabling 
the determination of real experience weighted indicators. 
The rank of the indicators has to be transitive; however, the 
degree of intensity preference does not. 

              

Equation 6: Relaxed (non-transitive) intensity preference 
 
Three steps are required to compute the consistency ratio: 
1. Compute the principal eigen value which the 
summation of product of summation of each 
column in the reciprocal matrix and the priority 
vector. 
          
             ∑
   
 
   
                  ∑
   
 
   
  
∑
 ̅
 
   
  
 
 ]

Equation 7: Principal Eigen value 
 
2. Compute the consistency index 

CI
           
   


Equation 8: Consistency index 
 
3. Compute the consistency ration CR relying on prof 
Saaty’s‎random‎consistency‎index‎RI 

  
  
  

Equation 9: Consistency ratio 
 
 
If CR<= 0.1, the judgments are said to be consistent 
enough 
 
If CR<=0.2, the judgments are said to be acceptable 
and need to be revisited if possible 
 
If CR>0.2, the judgments are said to be inconsistent 
and a re-evaluation of the alternatives is in order. 
Random consistency index RI is given in the following table 
1: 
TABLE I.  
RI  VALUES 
 
n values 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
RI  
0 
0 
0.5
8 
0.9 
1.1
2 
1.2
4 
1.3
2 
1.4
1 
1.4
5 
1.4
9 
E. Normalizing Indicators 
In order to aggregate different indicators of different 
natures and behaviors from every group j across several 
years t into a single index, normalization is necessary.  The 
fitting time-dependent Min-Max normalization will be used, 
and the normalized indicators will range between 0 and 1. 
The following two equations are used for more is better and 
less is better indicators, respectively. 
 

      
 

    
         
 
       
 
        
 


Equation 10: Min-Max normalization for positive indicators 
This normalization allows for different indicators to 
become compatible and therefore possible to aggregate. 
However, for this normalization to be possible and in order 
to benefit from the more holistic approach of mixed 
quantitative/qualitative 
assessment 
there 
remains 
the 
problem of assessing the qualitative indicators values in such 
a way to still be able to use the more accurate relevant model 
and not having to switch entirely to the rating model. The 
following proposed steps allow valorizing of qualitative 
indicators to fit alongside the quantitative ones in the 
relevant model scoring methodology: 
1. Using the qualitative rating scales used in the rating 
model (for example High, Medium, Low), a pair 
wise comparison will derive values for each of the 
scale components (ex: High=0.5, Medium=0.3, 
Low=0.2). 
2. Now,‎based‎on‎the‎expert’s‎opinions,‎a‎company‎will‎
be deemed to rank on each one of the rating 
components given a certain percentage of certitude 
(ex: 30% high, 60% medium, 10% low). 
3. By multiplying the scale components value with their 
respective probability we get an approximate value 
of the indicator (ex: high=0.5*0.3=0.15, 
medium=0.18, low=0.02) 
4. We idealize these number by dividing each one by 
the largest one (ex: high=0.833, medium=1, 
low=0.111) 
 
F. Calculating Sub-Indices 
Before calculating the global sustainability index, sub-
indexes        for the four domains need to be calculated. 
 

   = ∑
   
 
   
      
 
∑
   
 
   
      
 


Equation 11: Sub-index 
 

∑    
 
  
=1     

44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-287-5
COLLA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

Equation 12: Weight of indicator i in group j 
 is the sustainability sub-index for group j in time t and 
 is the weight of indicator i in group j. 
 
G. Combining sub-indicesinto the global index 
The global sustainability index    is calculated using the 
weighted sum of the sub-indexes (13): 

   ∑
       
 
  


Equation 13: Sustainability index 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper presented the index that will be used to assess 
around 337 local industries. The results will serve to 
categorize companies based on common deficiencies and 
support the collaboration process. The deficiencies will be 
categorized according to the preliminary four categories as 
well as to the sub-categories. Currently, the 337 industries to 
be investigated were selected and a collaboration database is 
being established on [1] .  
Future steps will include data gathering from the selected 
industries and surveys sent for technical managers. 
Following a thorough analysis of the gathered information, 
the selected indicators will be re-investigated and confirmed. 
An online tool will then be made available for industries to 
test their sustainability and to identify which norms they 
need to investigate to enhance their index. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank a NCSR Grant in 
Lebanon that allowed the completion of this work. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] www.licad.net, last access on June 25, 2013 
[2] L. Bettoni and S.‎ Zanoni,‎ “Energy Implications of Production 
Planning 
Decisions,”‎
IFIP 
Advances 
in 
Information 
and 
Communication 
Technology, 
vol. 
384, 
2012, 
pp. 
9-17, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-33980-6_2, last access on 4 July 
2013 
[3] S. Gupta and V.‎ Kumar,‎ “Sustainability‎ as‎ corporate‎ culture‎ of‎ a‎
brand‎for‎superior‎performance,”‎Journal‎of‎World‎Business,‎vol. 48 
(3), 
July 
2013, 
pp. 
311-320, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jwb.2012.07.015, last access on 4 July 
2013 
[4] R. K. Singh, H. R. Murty, S. K. Gupta, and A.K. Dikshit, “An 
overview of sustainability assessment methodologies” Ecological 
Indicators, 
vol. 
9, 
May 
2008, 
pp. 
189-212, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2008.05.011, last access on June 
25, 2013 
[5] S. Sikdar,‎ “Sustainable Development and Sustainability Metrics,” 
Institute of Chemical Engineers Journal, vol. 49 (8), August 2003, pp. 
1928-1932,  http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/aic.690490802, last access on 
June 25, 2013 
[6] S. Jain and D. Kibira,‎“A framework for multi-resolution modeling of 
sustainable manufacturing”,‎ Proceedings of the 2010 Winter 
Simulation Conference, pp. 3423-3434, 5-8 Dec. 2010, Baltimore, 
USA, http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/WSC.2010.5679032, last access on 
June 25, 2013 
[7] T. L. Saaty, “Decision making with the‎analytic‎hierarchy‎process,”, 
International Journal of Services Sciences, vol. 1 (1), 2008,  pp. 83 – 
98, http://dx.doi.org/10.1504/IJSSCI.2008.017590, last access on 
June 25, 2013 
[8] R. L. Keeney, “Multiplicative‎ Utility‎ Functions,” Operations 
Research, 
vol. 
22, 
1974, 
pp. 
22–34, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1287/opre.22.1.22, last access on June 25, 2013 
[9] D. Krajnc and P. Glavic, “How to compare companies on relevant 
dimensions of sustainability,” Ecological Economics, vol. 55 (4), 
2005, pp. 551-563, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2004.12.011, 
last access on June 25, 2013 
[10] J. Uddin, S. Parvin and  L. Rahman,‎“Factors influencing importance 
of country of brand and country of manufacturing in consumer 
product 
evaluation,” 
International 
Journal 
of Business 
and 
Management, 
vol. 
8, 
2013, 
pp. 
65-74, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.5539/ijbm.v8n4p65, last access on June 25, 2013 
[11] C.M. Stracke, “Process-oriented quality management,” Handbook on 
Quality and Standardization in E-Learning, 2006, pp.79-96, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/3-540-32788-6_6, last access on June 25, 
2013 
 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-287-5
COLLA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

