We Built Our Own Worlds - Story Canonicity and Indirect
Collaboration in a Shared Story World
Alan Tapscott1, Joaquim Colás2, Valeria Righi2, Carlos León1 and Josep Blat2
{alan.tapscott,cleon}@ucm.es - joaquim.colas,valeria.righi,josep.blat}@upf.edu
1Facultad de Informática, Universidad Complutense de Madrid
2Grup de Tecnologies Interactives, Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Abstract—In this work, we conducted a longitudinal study to
understand better how authors collaborate when building shared
story worlds. To accomplish this goal we deployed Chronoverse,
a tool speciﬁcally designed for this purpose that provides authors
with a common story timeline and character faction tags. The
study had three distinct phases. In the ﬁrst phase, undergraduate
students (the authors we study) used Chronoverse to develop their
stories in a common context during a lab that lasted four weeks.
In the second phase, a jury rated the authors’ contributions in
terms of coherence and consistency, attempting to measure the
integrity of the shared story world. In the third phase, a larger
crowd of readers rated the stories according to their preferences
and shared their opinion of what stories belong to a common
overarching story. The results suggested that the initial story,
introduced by the researchers, was given priority and considered
more canonical or “ofﬁcial” by the authors, jury and readers.
Author groups did not reference each other’s contributions
directly, but achieved consistent and coherent results indirectly
by adhering to the initial story in terms of plot and tone. The
usage of tags in the design of Chronoverse was positively received
by authors and enhanced the plot and tone consistency perceived
by readers.
Keywords—collaborative story worlds;story canonicity;indirect
collaboration.
I. INTRODUCTION
Collaborative writing is a challenging task. However, the
potential beneﬁts of collaboration are motivating enough to
encourage studies that seek to understand and improve the
co-authoring of all sorts of texts. Writing ﬁction collabora-
tively using a shared story world represents a speciﬁc kind
of challenge. Authors must share their conceptions of the
story world’s contents to write consistently, maintaining the
impression that all media belongs to the same continuity.
For the most part, story worlds do not exist explicitly; they
emerge from the facts established by the author or authors
in the story. Large ﬁction franchises, often involving multiple
authors, solve this through the usage of internal documents
that keep track of the plot developments, documenting the
past, present and even future of the ﬁction, along with relevant
character biographies and other ﬁctional encyclopedic content.
For instance, TV shows often rely on a conﬁdential bible main-
tained and used by all screenwriters as reference to collaborate
consistently. This seeks to avoid alienating the audience with
inconsistencies and incoherences. While this kind of solution
has been successfully used in scenarios with over a dozen
authors, there is a clear challenge in a hypothetical large-scale
online, crowdsourced scenario.
In creative writing, authorial style and artistic vision are
important, as well as the capability to build interesting ﬁctional
worlds, especially for fantastic genres. Facts contained in the
narrated story deviate from our reality up to some degree,
presenting landscapes and characters that only exist in our
imagination. For the current study, we consider the story
world the set of elements (e.g., characters, locations, plots,
motivations, rules) that constitute the world implicitly deﬁned
by a story along with the relationships between each other.
According to Tolkien and his conception of secondary world
[1] (a deﬁnition we believe to be close to our story world),
all the elements (i.e., geography, characters, language and
timeline) are interdependent and require internal consistency
to suspend disbelief, becoming credible to the reader. Schmidt
and Bannon have an extensive publication track that introduces
the Common Information Space [2][3], deﬁned as “...a central
archive of organizational information with some level of
’shared’ agreement as to the meaning of this information
(locally constructed), despite the marked differences con-
cerning the origins and context of these information items.”
We believe that this deﬁnition is conceptually aligned with
our conception of a shared story world in the sense that
it contains relevant data introduced by distinct authors and
despite being potentially different, it must agree or be coherent
to some degree. Bannon and Bødker discuss the dialectical
nature of common information spaces and the challenge of
putting information in common and interpreting it [4]. Despite
presenting distinct scenarios, most of the considerations for
common information spaces are very likely to appear in a
shared story world and must be addressed. Mainly, Bannon
and Bødker insist on the need for a common information
space to be accessible and malleable while providing reliable
information. Most of the relevant literature focuses either on
the technical implementation of concurrent writing systems
or on the narratological study of story worlds. Despite the
emerging relevance of ﬁction transmedia story worlds, both
in commercial and amateur contexts, to our best knowledge
there is no formal study focused on collaborative authoring and
story worlds published. This work aims to understand better
the dynamics of collaborating authors when contributing to
a shared story world, using computer-assisted collaboration
to monitor and measure relevant aspects, such as cross-
referencing, coherence and plot/tone consistency.
The study is structured in the following way. In Section
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

2, we provide a brief discussion of works that deal with
relevant problems. Next, in Section 3, we describe our three
months’ longitudinal study where lab students contributed into
a shared story world using Chronoverse, a prototype tool we
designed and deployed to support the co-authoring of shared
story worlds. Also in Section 3 we describe the jury and
reader evaluation of the results from the longitudinal study. We
present the results of the evaluation in terms of consistency,
coherence and co-existence of an overarching story. Finally,
in Section 4, we discuss the implications of the results and
conclude with the insight learned from the whole study, along
with potential directions for hypothetical subsequent research.
II. RELATED WORK
There have been many works that have studied the usage of
computer-based platforms to support collaboration. ShrEdit by
Olson et al. [5] was a shared collaborative text editor meant to
aid designers in brainstorming ideas. According to the authors,
groups that used the editor produced less ideas ranked as more
creative. This might imply that in a similar context, the usage
of a digital platform for collaboration might prioritize quality
over quantity. Posner and Baecker [6] present a taxonomy
based on interviews that describes joint writing in the fol-
lowing terms: roles played in the collaboration, activities per-
formed in the writing process, document control methods used,
and writing strategies employed. This was later expanded by
Lowry et al. [7] with collaborative writing activities, document
control modes, roles, tools and work modes, a categorization
that could be helpful in designing an adapted user experience.
Google Docs, the popular collaborative word processor, has
been studied in some works from the educational perspective
[8], the longitudinal perspective of a large, diverse organization
[9] and a tool to write educational papers [10] amongst others.
Overall the design of Google Docs seems very appropriate for
collaborative work in a computer platform.
Some other published works deal with similar scenarios
such as Robinson’s exploration of collaboration in authoring
multimedia stories through speciﬁc devices [11]. Krowne
and Bazaz discuss authority and territoriality in a study of
collaborative editing systems [12], this is especially relevant
in collaborative systems that deal with creativity and author-
ing. In the context of a shared story world and multiple
collaborating authors, territoriality could be a very important
factor to take into account. Likarish and Winet attempted
to reproduce the surrealist Exquisite Corpse writing game
on Twitter [13], attempting to “... understand the practical
pitfalls of synchronous community-based authorship and to
recommend methods of avoiding them.” Besides reporting
successful participation, Likarish concludes by acknowledging
the need for “...providing structure via a wiki or suit of tools
to enable authors to track details as well as the importance
of community self-policing...” We share the belief for tools
that introduce structure into the creative process. Thomas and
Mason bravely attempted to write a novel in an open process
[14] using a wiki platform. The wiki proved to be a competent
and useful tool for structuring the narrative thanks to its
familiar and accessible nature. According to the authors inter-
author collaboration dynamics were challenging, citing content
deletions or major restructuring performed by a single author
as the source of conﬂicts. Among the other relevant remarks
from the authors, there seems to be a dichotomy between
contribution order and creativity, highlighting the importance
of contribution sequence and timing when building this kind
of systems.
Relevant works that seek to explore collaboration have
resorted to the usage of timelines to provide adequate user
experiences. Thiry et al. use a timeline in Project Greenwich
[15], a tool meant for people to author their own personal dig-
ital timelines. In their work, Thiry et al. study the usage of the
timeline as a vehicle that helps multiple authors in connecting
past and present contributions. The capability to collaborate
over time seems to be especially desirable in the context of
an evolving shared story world. Some other interesting usages
of a timeline include a programming interface by Cardoso et
al. [16], medical records overviews by Reddy and Dourish
[17], an adaptive timeline interface to personal history data by
Ajanki et al. [18] and as an aid for history learning by Pyshkin
and Bogdanov [19].
III. STUDY
The following section describes the longitudinal study, in-
cluding its motivation, the prototype used and the methodology
and results for each of its phases.
A. Context and motivation
Since the academic course of 2012-2013, Computer Science
and Audiovisual Engineering undergraduates have attended the
Audiovisual Language and Interactive Storytelling subject at
UPF, participating in the lab and creating their own visual
novels. Participants are distributed in groups of three to four
students. Over two months, each of the groups creates a
visual novel, including its design, script and implementation.
The teachers were surprised by the convergence of the plots
and tones of the stories, even though they never encouraged
collaboration. Despite the lack of hard evidence to support
the claim, informal observations suggested some students
were collaborating indirectly, using common elements in their
stories. Social and cultural trends had an impact in the creative
process, as well as the university environment. For instance,
every year featured multiple post-apocalyptic stories (a popular
recurring theme in current popular ﬁction) and roughly half
of the plots happened in the student’s university (UPF).
This observation served as motivation for the deployment of
Chronoverse, a digital collaborative tool meant to reinforce the
collaborative dynamics and the consistency of their collabora-
tions.
B. Chronoverse
Our prototype, Chronovese, was an online tool meant to help
authors in collaborating to produce media based in a shared
story world.
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

Figure 1: Chronoverse interface
Chronoverse allowed authorized users to introduce their own
original scenes. As seen in Fig. 1, every scene contained a title,
a short description, a date, an optional picture and optional
tags describing the involved factions or groups of interest. On
the bottom of the screen users could see a timeline with all
the existing scenes. The usage of a timeline metaphor for the
chronology of all scenes was meant to reinforce, for every
contribution, the sense of belonging to the same continuity.
Since all scenes had a date and were rendered inside the
same timeline, we expected to provide an enhanced sense of
coexistence in the same story world for all scenes. Also, as
seen in the previous section, timelines are useful to connect
past and present resources [15]. We made authors split their
stories into scenes to promote the intertwining of plotlines. By
providing a common canvas for contributions that took place
inside the shared story world, with its content visible to all
users, we expected to promote inter-author story awareness.
This was partially validated by our evaluation.
Chronoverse’s timeline stacked scenes vertically, in up to
three lanes, allowing scenes to be placed close in the horizontal
axis without much overlapping. Also the splitting of the story
into scenes was favorable for the timeline, allowing users to
perceive the story progression over time. The provided initial
scenes in Chronoverse (described more in depth later) included
factions. We chose to use factions as the main actors of the
story instead of characters to avoid the problem of author
territoriality mentioned in the previous section [12], preventing
conﬂicts and promoting indirect collaboration. Contributors
could create their own original characters and integrate them
into the story world more easily via faction membership
without necessarily conﬂicting with other authors and their
characters. Other potential organizations (e.g., nations, clubs,
nobiliary houses) are perfectly valid to achieve the same
results. Users could ﬁlter the timeline to see scenes that only
involve a speciﬁc faction, providing a navigational mechanism
closely linked to the story world. This mechanism helps in
establishing thematic links between scenes created by distinct
authors who are not necessarily collaborating directly. We also
introduced a pop-up that displays the relationship between the
distinct initial factions in a graph.
C. Study structure and settings
As in the previous years, the 2014-2015 Audiovisual Lan-
guage and Interactive Narrative subject lab took place. We
decided to deploy Chronoverse and measure how did it impact
on the results. The following phases were planned:
1) Authoring phase: Conduct the lab with the author stu-
dents, having every group introduce the story plan for
their visual novel into Chronoverse over four weeks.
Conduct a short questionnaire to rank the usage of
Chronoverse, according to its users.
2) Jury evaluation phase: A small jury ranks the contribu-
tions, rating coherence and plot/tone consistency. Com-
parisons include each contribution against each other and
each contribution against the initial story.
3) Reader evaluation phase: A larger crowd reads all the
stories and ranks their preferred ones. In order to validate
the scores from the jury evaluation, they are also guess
what stories belong to a common overarching story.
D. Authoring phase
We provided access to Chronoverse to all student groups
and asked them to introduce the outline of their stories in it.
The goal was to have every group plan their visual novel’s
plot before writing the ﬁnal, extended script, encouraging
collaboration and convergence. Since the platform was hosted
in a public web server, every group could see other groups’
work and potentially reference each other directly or indirectly.
The resulting story plans, described by the scenes introduced
into Chronoverse, would then be adapted into scripts for the
visual novels. Ideally, this would allow authors to develop their
story in a common frame and inﬂuence each other before being
tied to the cumbersome work of developing a whole script.
Chronoverse had six initial story scenes (ISS) created by
the teachers. The scenes told a single post-apocalyptic story
in the university were several factions struggled for power.
The ﬁrst scene explained very vaguely the downfall of civ-
ilization for an unknown reason. Each of the following ﬁve
weeks contained one scene narrating how each of the three
ﬁctional student factions attempted to rule the university until
a tense and unstable peace is reached in the end. The results
section details how the initial story and factions inﬂuenced
author contributions. The story contained some of the most
frequent elements from previous years’ contributions, such
as a post-apocalyptic world, the students’ university, politics
and mysterious factions. This story world was very open and
purposefully vague, providing ﬂexibility to allow the groups
to fully develop their own ideas.
Overall, 22 groups composed by between three and four
undergraduates participated. Each group received a textual
description of a story world or setting in a brief text document
that described the main characters, factions, events and also
included some mysteries and “plot hooks” that could be
freely developed or used at the authors’ discretion. Groups
were asked to create at least three scenes in the timeline
that represented their visual novel’s plot. For every weekly
lab and during three weeks, the teacher told them to add
at least one scene. This was done to provide groups with
enough time to read existing contributions. Reading or even
referencing existing material was always optional. No amount
of contribution or collaboration was enforced. Three months
after the lab sessions ended and each group had produced their
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

Chronoverse scenes along with the ﬁnal visual novel, we asked
the author students to take a short questionnaire aimed to get
some feedback on their user experience. Speciﬁcally, we were
interested in learning about their opinion on the usage of a
default story world and the Chronoverse platform.
E. Authoring phase results
Figure 2: Author group scene and tag amount
Figure 3: Total word count per group
Figure 4: Total scene contributions by date
Table I, Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 show an overview of the results.
Groups contributed an average of 2,8 scenes, 2 tags and 283,7
total words. Half of the groups did not use any tag at all and
there were a couple of signiﬁcant outliers (one groups used
9 tags and another group introduced 7 scenes). Fig. 4 shows
when author groups introduced scenes into Chronoverse. All
contributions were introduced between the 7th and the 22nd of
June. The main contribution peaks are around the lab deadlines
(8th and 14th of June).
F. Author questionnaires results
Due to the optional nature of the questionnaire only 17
of the 84 participating authors submitted answers. Results,
rated from 1 to 5, are summarized in Tables II and III.
Subjects found easy to read and write (¯x=3,87 with σ=0,83
and ¯x=3,59 with σ=1,18 respectively). The provided initial
story world (scenes and deliverable text document) scored as
moderately useful to write ¯x=3,65 with σ=0,70, followed by
images ¯x=3,53 with σ=0,68, and ﬁnally dates ¯x=2,76 with
σ=1,18. Explicit dates are the less useful and less enjoyed
part of the initial story. Some of the open answers provided
corroborate this. Amongst all the results from the questionnaire
we found a few worth mentioning. 88% of the subjects read
some scenes and 12% none. Most of the subjects explicitly
were not bothered by contradictions and state they did not
inﬂuence their writing at all. 94% of the users claimed to have
used the initial scenes provided in Chronoverse as inspiration
for their contribution.
G. Jury evaluation phase
Once the lab was ﬁnished and we gathered all the contri-
butions, we were interested in evaluating the results in terms
of consistency and coherence. These measures were meant
to determine the integrity of the set of stories as a story
world. In order to rate the stories, we created a jury made
of three members. Two were teachers who actively designed
and supervised the labs and the third was a Ph.D. student
who was unfamiliar with the subject or the lab. We were
especially interested in determining the relationship between
each group’s contributions and the initial scenes. Each groups’
Chronoverse scenes (previously described) were joined to
create an author group scene set (AGSS). The initial scenes
created by us were joined into an initial scene set (ISS). The
jury ranked every AGSS after the following measures:
• AGSS unitary coherence (is the scene set contributed by
the author group coherent?)
• AGSS unitary image coherence (are the images used
coherent?)
• AGSS tonal consistency with the ISS (is the author group
scene set tonally consistent with the initial scene set from
Chronoverse?)
• AGSS plot consistency with the ISS (is the author
group scene set consistent with the initial scene set from
Chronoverse in terms of plot?)
• AGSS tonal consistency with other AGSSs (is the author
group scene set tonally consistent with other authors’
scene sets?)
• AGSS plot consistency with other AGSSs (is the author
group scene set consistent with other authors’ scene sets
in terms of plot?)
Coherence of a text referred to the internal logic of its
discourse and image. Consistency referred to the text’s simi-
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

larity, in terms of narrative plot and tone, to another text. To
ensure the jury evaluation criteria was uniﬁed, the measures
were discussed informally and we conducted a pre-evaluation
with some random Chronoverse contributions. We found no
signiﬁcant differences on the evaluations. Despite the fact
that a member of the jury who was not involved in the
lab experiment, the criteria for their ranking apparently was
uniform. For the main jury evaluation, instead of comparing
every AGSS to the rest of the set, each AGSS was compared
to the ISS and 6 random AGSSs more. This cut was necessary
to reduce the cost of the jury evaluation.
H. Jury evaluation phase results
Results, with the factors evaluated in a 1 to 4 scale, are
summarized in Table IV. AGSS unitary plot coherence was
somewhat high (average 3,02) while AGSS images were
considered coherent with the story created by authors (average
3,45). AGSSs were moderately consistent with the ISS in terms
of plot and tone (average 2,55 and 2,89). Inter-AGSS tonal
consistency was also moderate (2,44/4) while inter-AGSS
plot consistency was low (1,86/4). Next, we run a Pearson
correlation analysis on the measures. Speciﬁcally, we wanted
to ﬁnd potential AGSS inter-relationships and between the
22 AGSSs and the ISS. The jury’s measures of consistency
should provide some insight on the collaboration dynamics
of the participating groups. The results can be seen in Table
V. There is not a signiﬁcant correlation between AGSS-ISS
plot consistency and unitary AGSS coherence, suggesting that
adhering to the initial story world elements did not lead to
either more or less coherent stories. AGSS unitary coherence
was usually high, independently of their consistency with the
ISS. There is a signiﬁcant correlation (r(N) = 0.63, ρ(N) =
0.002, r2(N) = 0.4) between AGSS-ISS plot consistency and
inter-AGSS average plot consistency. The same happens with
AGSS-ISS tone consistency and inter-AGSS average tone
consistency (r(N) = 0.62, ρ(N) = 0.002, r2(N) = 0.4). So
groups trying to remain consistent with the initial story world
in terms of plot and tone scored also high tonal and plot
consistency with other author group contributions. It seems
that there is also a strong correlation (r(N) = 0.66, ρ(N) =
0.0008, r2(N) = 0.4) between AGSS-ISS plot consistency
and AGSS-ISS tone consistency. Therefore, according to the
jury, tonal and plot consistency with the ISS seem to imply
each other to some degree. An interesting observation by our
jury suggested that AGSS contributions consistent with other
AGSSs referenced factions, places and events provided by the
ISS, but never elements created by other author groups. AGSSs
were ranked as consistent with each other due to their usage
of initial ISS elements, not new AGSS elements introduced by
other author contributions.
I. Reader evaluation phase
We conducted an evaluation to determine each scene per-
ceived co-existence to the same overarching story and overall
preference, according to external readers. We displayed the
contributions in pairs and asked whether or not each pair
of displayed texts belonged to the same story. We expected
this to reﬂect the integrity of a hypothetical story world
described by the crossover of both stories. Text pairings
marked as belonging to the same story would argue in favor
of the contributing authors collaborating in a shared story
world. 40 volunteers participated in an online questionnaire,
with ages ranging from 18 to 63 and a gender distribution
of 43% females and 57% males. The volunteers were not
author students from the ﬁrst phase or juries from the second
phase. The questionnaire was a simple website we developed
using basic HTML and a Django backend. The questionnaire
presented 10 pairs of texts, displaying only two at a time. To
reduce the cost of the evaluation, pairings included i) the three
AGSS that the jury ranked as more consistent with the initial
story, ii) the three AGSS ranked as the less consistent with
the initial story, and iii) two AGSS set in the middle range.
The initial scene set (ISS) was also added to the questionnaire.
Each volunteer was asked to rank the stories from 1 to 5 on
a Likert scale where 1 meant “I do not like the story” and 5
was “I like the story a lot”. We then asked them if paired texts
belonged to the same story (only yes or no, closed reply). The
simple web questionnaire can be seen in Fig. 5.
Figure 5: Online reader questionnaire
J. Reader evaluation phase results
Table VII shows how what stories were marked by readers
as belonging to a common story. AGSSs marked by readers
as belonging to the same story than the ISS tended to be also
marked as belonging to a common story among each other.
This result seems to be in line with our jury evaluation, where
AGSSs that were consistent with the ISS were also consistent
with each other and once again suggests indirect collaboration.
K. Global results comparison
After conducting the three phases of our study, we
can compare each of the AGSSs metrics to each other.
This should allow us to validate the distinct evaluations
by ﬁnding correlations. Table VII summarizes the whole
study and contains all the relevant comparisons with the
resulting Pearson coefﬁcient. Pearson correlations revealed
a
moderate
correlation
between
the
AGSSs
previously
ranked by the jury as highly consistent (both, in terms
of plot and tone) with the ISS and the tendency to
be marked by readers as belonging to the same story
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

than the ISS (r(N) = 0.52, ρ(N) = 0.01, r2(N) = 0.27
for
both
cases).
This
suggest
the
jury’s
consistency
measures
and
the
reader
similarity
measures
are
relatively aligned. There is also a moderate correlation
between reader score of the AGGs and AGG-ISS plot
consistency and AGG-ISS tone consistency (respectively
r(N)rv−pc = 0.61,ρ(N)rv−pc = 0.002,r2(N)rv−pc = 0.37 and
r(N)rv−tc = 0.47,ρ(N)rv−tc = 0.02,r2(N)rv−tc = 0.22).
Apparently
readers
liked
more
stories
consistent
with
the initial story world in terms of plot and tone. There
is
a
moderate
correlation
between
reader
score
of
the
AGGSs
and
tonal
consistency
with
other
AGGs
(r(N) = 0.53, ρ(N) = 0.01, r2(N) = 0.28). Being tonally
consistent with other author contributions was liked by
readers (according to the provided scores). Unlike the
previous case, this is not extensible to plot consistency. There
is a moderate-high correlation between the usage of tags and
reader score (r(N) = 0.54, ρ(N) = 0.001, r2(N) = 0.29) and
a high correlation between the reader score and the tendency
to be marked by readers as belonging to the same story than
the ISS (r(N) = 0.82, ρ(N) = 3e−6, r2(N) = 0.67).
Also,
AGSSs
that
used
more
tags
revealed
high
correlations with plot consistency and tone consistency
with
other
AGSSs
(respectively
r(N)atpc−apc
=
0.78, ρ(N)atpc−apc
=
3e−5, r2(N)atpc−apc
=
0.6 and
r(N)attc−atc = 0.65, ρ(N)attc−atc = 0.001, r2(N)attc−atc =
0.42)
and
the
ISS
(respectively
r(N)atpc−ipc
=
0.92, ρ(N)atpc−ipc
=
0, r2(N)atpc−ipc
=
0.84
and
r(N)attc−itc = 0.77, ρ(N)attc−itc = 2e−5, r2(N)attc−itc =
0.59). According to the jury, people contributing closer to
other scenes in terms of plot and tone felt more inclined to
label their usage of existing character factions with tags.
IV. DISCUSSION
Our goal was to understand better the dynamics of collab-
orating authors when contributing to a shared story world.
Overall, despite giving freedom to our authors, we believe
there have been two main outcomes. Some author groups
(the majority) have followed and extended the initial story,
while others have ignored completely the initial stories and
their author colleagues. This means that there is collaboration
happening, but it is not the collaboration we were expecting.
Author groups that have followed the initial story collaborate
indirectly with other author groups that have done the same,
creating consistent stories with each other in terms of plot
and tone. According to our readers, consistent contributions
to Chronoverse are enjoyable and belong to a common shared
story. Results have been extensively documented in the previ-
ous sections and annex, however there are a few key aspects
we believe worth discussing in depth.
A. One story canon
Our main ﬁnding implies readers (and perhaps writers) have
one single canonical or “ofﬁcial” version of facts. Most authors
contributed consistently with the initial story and most readers
marked stories consistent to the initial content as belonging
to the same overarching story. Overall, it seems the initial
scenes were considered more “ofﬁcial” or canonical than those
introduced by the contributing author groups. Contributors
seem to embrace the notion of an initial explicit story world
and integrate its plot hooks and elements into their own
creations. Our authors did not read many of the other authors’
contributions and they never explicitly integrated them into
their own contributions. The tone, however, was considered
consistent between all authors’ contributions. Perhaps the ini-
tial content, being written by the teachers, was given a special
consideration. Maybe timing is the key factor, contributing
authors might not feel conﬁdent or comfortable referencing
and intertwining their content with the unﬁnished and ongoing
contributions of other authors. The sequence in which the
contributions occur might be key to determine what parts of the
shared story world are perceived as more central or canonical.
This might explain the problems faced by Thomas and
Mason [14] in their Wikinovel, with authors colliding as they
attempt to impose a main plot structure. When compared to our
own research it seems this phenomenon is similar to previous
results [20] in which authors converged, establishing a main
continuity or central interpretation of the story. The joint
conception of a story world might require some information
hierarchy, providing new contributors some solid narrative
background or baseline from which to start. Information
canonicity should be central in any further study of this
nature, that is, ﬁnding mechanism for authors not only to
contribute to a common story world, but also to ensure those
ideas are well integrated and accessible. This should make
possible that subsequent contributions by other authors are
perceived as consistent, something positive for a shared story
world according to our own results and by other works on
collaborative information spaces [3].
B. Tags and inclusive character groups
The usage of character group or faction tags seems to
increase story world consistency. Stories that included tags
seem to be more consistent with all the rest of stories in
terms of plot and tone. Also stories that used tags have been
ranked better by readers. Overall, tags seem to be a good
explicit mechanism to structure content in a shared story
world. This somewhat implies a beneﬁt in using inclusive
groups or categories with an active role in the story contained
in a story world (such as the ones found in Chronoverse).
Our goal was to avoid author territoriality [12] or the lack of
structure in a collaborative environment described by Likarish
[13]. This kind of collaborative meta-data, often found in
collaborative platforms such as wikis, might be beneﬁcial for
integrating original characters from multiple authors while
enhancing the global consistency.
C. The usage of Chronoverse
The author questionnaire informal results seem to point
towards a positive user experience. The usage of a time-
line seems to be favorable for the construction of a shared
story world, similarly to some related works [21]. Regarding
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

other author contributions, authors did not read many other
group’s contributions before writing and did not care about
contradictions. Coping with other authors’ stories is apparently
not a priority. We believe the authors were fairly motivated
students, but this is not necessarily the average user in a shared
story world-building scenario. We suspect the most common
proﬁle might be one or more professional writers. On one
hand, writers might be more proﬁcient at writing stories and
building story worlds, potentially being more motivated to
contribute more due to the professional background. On the
other hand, students might be more open to novel scenarios,
such as collaborating in an online platform to build a story
world together. Still, we believe replicating the experiment
with a professional audience would be paramount to generalize
the results to a more common scenario, such as a team of
scriptwriters writing a TV show season or a story anthology.
V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
Our main conclusion from this study is that authors who
collaborate in a shared story world are conditioned by the pre-
existing material. Contributions are more likely to reference
and connect to pre-existing content than to ongoing contribu-
tions by other authors. In a shared story world, the sequence of
the contributions seems to be critical in establishing informa-
tion canonicity. Older contributions are more referenced than
newer or unﬁnished ones. Our results and observations also
point towards the aptness of timeline visualizations, scene tags
and inclusive character factions for collaborative story world
building scenarios. There are two main directions for this
research to continue, generalizing its ﬁndings and extending its
applications. On one hand, we are already trying to replicate
these observations in a large-scale real scenario, a successful
online community that builds and maintains a rich story world.
On the other hand, these ﬁndings could be used to build a
cognitive model or architecture of a collaborative story world.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Supported by WHIM (611560) and PROSECCO (600653),
funded by the European Commission, Framework Program
7, the ICT theme, and the Future Emerging Technologies
FET program. This research is partly funded by the Spanish
Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness under RESET
(TIN2014-53199-C3-3-R) and the Maria de Maeztu Units of
Excellence Programme (MDM-2015- 0502). This work would
not have been possible without the invaluable collaboration of
the students from the Audiovisual Language and Interactive
Storytelling lab, the volunteer reader crowd and the Ph.D.
student jury collaborator.
REFERENCES
[1] J. R. R. Tolkien, “Beowulf: The Monsters and the Critics,” Interpreta-
tions of Beowulf: A Critical Anthology, p. 31, 1991.
[2] L. J. Bannon and K. Schmidt, “CSCW: Four characters in search of a
context,” Studies in Computer-Supported Cooperative Work, pp. 3–16,
1991.
[3] K. Schmidt and L. J. Bannon, “Taking CSCW seriously - Supporting
articulation work,” Computer Supported Cooperative Work, vol. 1, no.
1-2, pp. 7–40, 1992.
[4] L. J. Bannon and S. Bødker, “Constructing Common Information
Spaces,” Proceedings of the Fifth European Conference on Computer
Supported Cooperative Work, pp. 81–96, 1997.
[5] J. S. Olson, G. M. Olson, M. Storrøsten, and M. Carter, “Groupwork
close up: a comparison of the group design process with and without a
simple group editor,” ACM Transactions on Information Systems, vol. 11,
no. 4, pp. 321–348, 1993.
[6] I. R. Posner and R. M. Baecker, “How People Write Together,” Pro-
ceedings of the Twenty-ﬁfth Annual Hawaii International Conference on
System Sciences, vol. 4, pp. 127–138, 1992.
[7] P. B. Lowry, A. Curtis, and M. R. Lowry, “Building a taxonomy
and nomenclature of collaborative writing to improve interdisciplinary
research and practice,” Journal of Business Communication, vol. 41,
no. 1, pp. 66–99, 2004.
[8] I. Blau and A. Caspi, “What Type of Collaboration Helps? Psychological
Ownership , Perceived Learning and Outcome Quality of Collaboration
Using Google Docs,” Quality, pp. 48–55, 2009.
[9] Y. Sun, D. Lambert, M. Uchida, and N. Remy, “Collaboration in the
cloud at Google,” Proceedings of the 2014 ACM conference on Web
science - WebSci ’14, pp. 239–240, 2014.
[10] R. Watson, “Extending Google Docs to Collaborate on Research Papers,”
The University of Southern Queensland, Australia, pp. 1–11, 2006.
[11] S. Robinson, M. Jones, E. Vartiainen, and G. Marsden, “PicoTales:
collaborative authoring of animated stories using handheld projectors,”
Proceedings of the ACM 2012 conference on Computer Supported
Cooperative Work - CSCW ’12, p. 671, 2012.
[12] A. Krowne and A. Bazaz, “Authority Models for Collaborative Author-
ing,” Proceedings of the 37th Annual Hawaii International Conference
on System Sciences, vol. 00, pp. 18–24, 2004.
[13] P. Likarish and J. Winet, “Exquisite Corpse 2.0,” Proceedings of the
Designing Interactive Systems Conference, pp. 564–567, 2012.
[14] B. Mason and S. Thomas, “A Million Penguins Research Report,”
Institute of Creative Technologies, De Montfort University, Leicester,
United Kingdom, pp. 1–36, 2008.
[15] E. Thiry, S. Lindley, R. Banks, and T. Regan, “Authoring personal
histories: Exploring the timeline as a framework for meaning making,”
Proceedings of the 2013 SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in
computing systems (CHI 2013), pp. 1619–1628, 2013.
[16] B. Cardoso and T. Romão, “The timeline as a programming interface,”
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 1423–1428,
2014.
[17] M. Reddy and P. Dourish, “A ﬁnger on the pulse: temporal rhythms
and information seeking in medical work,” Proceedings of the ACM
Conference on Computer Supported Collaborative Work CSCW, pp.
344–353, 2002.
[18] A. Ajanki, M. Koskela, J. Laaksonen, and S. Kaski, “Adaptive timeline
interface to personal history data,” Proceedings of the 15th ACM on
International conference on multimodal interaction, pp. 229–236, 2013.
[19] E. Pyshkin and N. Bogdanov, “Learning history with timelines: Use
cases, requirements and design,” Computer Science and Information
Systems (FedCSIS), 2014 Federated Conference on, pp. 273–280, 2014.
[20] A. Tapscott, J. Colás, A. Moghnieh, and J. Blat, “Writing Consistent Sto-
ries based on Structured Multi-Authored Narrative Spaces,” Proceedings
of the 4th Workshop on Computational Models of Narrative, vol. 32, pp.
277–292, 2013.
[21] M. Bohøj, N. G. Borchorst, N. O. Bouvin, S. Bødker, and P.-O.
Zander, “Timeline collaboration,” Proceedings of the 28th international
conference on Human factors in computing systems CHI 10, pp. 523–
532, 2010.
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

APPENDIX
TABLE I: AUTHORING PHASE DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS
Scenes
Tags Used
Total Word Count
Sample Size:
22
22
22
Mean:
2.81
2.09
283.77
Median
3
0
268
Minimum:
1
0
87
Maximum:
7
9
581
TABLE II: AUTHOR QUESTIONNAIRE RANK QUESTION RESULTS
Initial story was
helpful in writing
Dates helped to write
Images helped
in writing
Liked using dates
Liked using images
Reading from
Chronoverse was easy
Contributing to
Chronoverse was easy
AVG
3,65
2,47
3,53
2,76
3,71
3,87
3,59
STDEV
0,7
1,01
0,99
1,03
1,14
0,24
0,06
TABLE III: DETAILED AUTHOR QUESTIONNAIRE PERCENTAGE QUESTION RESULTS
1 to 5 existing scenes
5 to 10 existing scenes
No existing scene
I read. . .
53%
35%
12%
randomly
chronologically
guided by title
guided by images
My reading order was...
33%
27%
33%
7%
before writing
after writing
during the whole experience
I read existing scenes...
33%
53%
13%
fun
inspiring
typical
Initial story was...
25%
31%
38%
were a minor annoyance
I didn’t care
didn’t bothered me at all
I liked them
Contradictions in the story...
24%
35%
29%
12%
made writing difﬁcult
didn’t inﬂuence me
inspired me
Those contradictions...
6%
88%
6%
based on existing story world
from scratch
Wrote our story...
94%
6%
TABLE IV: JURY EVALUATION PHASE RESULTS
Plot coherence
Image coherence
Plot consistency
with other AGSSs
Tone consistency
with other AGSSs
Plot consistency
with ISS
Tone consistency with ISS
AVG
3,02
3,45
1,86
2,44
2,55
2,89
STDEV
0,87
0,69
0,47
0,56
0,95
0,69
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

TABLE V: JURY EVALUATION PHASE RESULTS PEARSON CORRELATION COEFFICIENTS
Plot coherence
Image coherence
Plot consistency
with other AGSSs
Tone consistency
with other AGSSs
Plot consistency
with ISS
Tone consistency
with ISS
Plot coherence
1
0,23
-0,01
-0,01
0,09
0,16
Image coherence
0,23
1
-0,16
0,16
-0,3
-0,18
Plot consistency with other AGSSs
-0,01
-0,16
1
0,23
0,63
0,33
Tone consistency with other AGSSs
-0,01
0,16
0,23
1
0,28
0,62
Plot consistency with ISS
0,09
-0,3
0,63
0,28
1
0,66
Tone consistency with ISS
0,16
-0,18
0,33
0,62
0,66
1
TABLE VI: READER EVALUATION PHASE AGSSs DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS
Reader Score
Same story than ISS?
Sample Size:
8
8
Mean:
3.10625
0.498125
Median:
3.08
0.52
Minimum:
2.75
0.08
Maximum:
3.4
875
TABLE VII: AGSS/ISS AVERAGE SIMILARITY
Same story?
AGSS1
AGSS2
AGSS3
AGSS4
AGSS5
AGSS6
AGSS7
AGSS8
ISS
AGSS1
1
0,4
1
0
0,22
0
0,4
0,42
0,71
AGSS2
0,4
1
0,3
0,29
0
0,14
0
0,33
0,08
AGSS3
1
0,3
1
0,36
0
0
0,67
0,4
0,88
AGSS4
0
0,29
0,36
1
0,38
0,13
0,6
0,2
0,33
AGSS5
0,22
0
0
0,38
1
0,33
0
0
0,14
AGSS6
0
0,14
0
0,13
0,33
1
0
0,14
0,15
AGSS7
0,4
0
0,67
0,6
0
0
1
1
0,83
AGSS8
0,42
0,33
0,4
0,2
0
0,14
1
1
0,88
ISS
0,71
0,08
0,88
0,33
0,14
0,15
0,83
0,88
1
TABLE VIII: GLOBAL PEARSON CORRELATION COEFFICIENTS PER AUTHOR GROUP
Reader evaluation phase
Jury evaluation phase
Authoring phase
Reader
score
Same story
than ISS
Plot
coherence
Image
coherence
Plot
consistency
with other
AGSSs
Tone
consistency
with other
AGSSs
Plot
consistency
with ISS
Tone
consistency
with ISS
Average
word count
Total
word count
Total tags
Reader Score
1
Same story
than ISS
0,27
1
Plot coherence
-0,16
0,19
1
Image Coherence
0,35
0,19
-0,08
1
Plot consistency
with other AGSSs
0,37
0,52
0,62
-0,01
1
Tone consistency
with other AGSSs
0,53
0,52
0,04
0,16
0,74
1
Plot consistency
with ISS
0,61
0,47
-0,05
-0,24
0,66
0,82
1
Tone consistency
with ISS
0,47
0,36
-0,03
-0,04
0,64
-0,33
0,06
1
Average
word count
0,21
-0,45
-0,52
-0,04
-0,33
-0,33
0,06
-0,07
1
Total
word count
0,2
0,77
-0,38
-0,14
-0,28
-0,4
0,07
0,73
0,98
1
Total tags
0,54
0,62
0,14
-0,15
0,78
0,65
0,92
0,77
0,19
0,22
1
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

