Social Context Contribution to Group Recommender Systems
Safey A.Halim
Department of Informatics
Technical University of Munich
Germany
Email: halims@in.tum.de
Georg Groh
Department of Informatics
Technical University of Munich
Germany
Email: grohg@in.tum.de
Abstract—There are several factors that inﬂuence the group
decision making process. The individual’s personality and the
group’s social context play a role in the group’s decision and the
individual’s satisfaction with it. Group recommender systems,
which offer support to group decision making can offer better
results by incorporating such factors. In this paper, we present
a social context-aware group recommendation platform which
takes into consideration several of the social factors between the
group members in the recommendation process. We examined the
effect of multiple social factors independently and collectively on
the recommenders’ outcomes. Our analysis shows the superiority
of social-context aware group recommenders compared to a
collaborative ﬁltering group recommender baseline approach.
Keywords–recommender systems; group recommendation; col-
laborative ﬁltering; social networking; social context; tie strength;
social hierarchy
I.
INTRODUCTION
The need for recommender systems is increasing as they
facilitate decision making processes in multiple domains. They
provide users with individualized recommendations or pre-
dicted ratings based on different factors such as the pref-
erences to users with similar tastes or domain-based con-
textual information. There is a growing interest in group
recommender systems as they additionally help with group
decision making. They provide recommended items to groups
or group predictions taking into consideration the preferences
of each individual group member. In one variety of group
recommenders, recommendations are generated for individual
group members and these recommendations are aggregated to
form recommendations for the whole group. In another variety,
the individual preferences or ratings of the group members are
aggregated into a group model and recommendations are then
generated to the model. In both cases, an aggregation strategy
determines how to aggregate either individual recommenda-
tions or individual preferences [1].
Group recommender systems cover multiple domains. Such
as music [2] [3], movies [4], and travel [5] [6]. As the group
decision making is a complex social exercise, incorporating
social factors in group recommenders became an interesting
research area. Delic et al. [7] show through an empirical study,
how the social relationships between the group members can
be used to predict the members’ satisfaction with the group’s
decision. They conclude that social relationships should be
included in the preference models used in group recommender
systems. Previous research has considered incorporating sev-
eral social factors in group recommenders. One of these social
factors is trust, which was indicated to inﬂuence the group
recommendation results. Quijano-Sanchez et al. [8] describe
a group recommender system based on trust and personality
type, while Wang et al. [9] determine the trust factor from more
than one source and uses it to determine the group predictions.
A trust-based group recommender system is presented in [10],
where a movie ratings dataset was created which also includes
pairwise user trust ratings.
Social inﬂuence is another social factor that has been used
to improve group recommenders’ performance. In [11], social
inﬂuence is determined by identifying the dominators and the
followers in the group. The group predictions are determined
as the average predictions of the group’s dominant members.
In [12], the social inﬂuence metric is introduced to quantify
and measure the member’s contribution to the group decision.
In this paper, we introduce a social context-aware group
recommender for restaurants based on 8 different social factors
in addition to the individuals’ personality types. We examine
the effect of each of the 8 social factors individually on the
group recommender’s results as well as the effect of com-
bining the 8 social factors together forming a representation
of what we call the long-term social context between the
group members. We built a platform for the creation and
the evaluation of social context-based group recommendation
algorithms, and we used our platform to build different group
recommenders based on different social factors and compared
their results with a baseline item-item collaborative ﬁltering
group recommender. Additionally, we built a restaurant rating
and social network platform using which we collected a dataset
that includes individuals’ and groups’ restaurant ratings, and
– using a pairwise user evaluation feature - a social network
that captures the groups’ social contexts.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II
provides a description of the social network and the restaurant
rating platform we used to collect our dataset. Section III de-
scribes our approach to social context-based group recommen-
dation for restaurants and explains our group recommendation
platform and the different recommendation algorithms we built
with it. Section IV outlines the experiment setup we used to
collect the dataset. We present our ﬁndings in Section V.
II.
SOCIAL NETWORK AND RESTAURANT RATING
PLATFORM
”Social context refers to characterizing the social nature of
the situation a user is currently in” [13]. It is represented by
the models of any aspects of social interaction having a relation
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-797-9
COLLA 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

to IT systems. Long term social context can be described, on a
high level, by the dense social network groups the user is part
of, and on a low level, by friendship on a social networking
platform. Examples of the social factors that contribute to
long term social context, which have signiﬁcance over long
durations, are the level of established trust, the duration of the
relationship, and the frequency of the interaction. Short term
social context, on the other hand, is represented on a high level
by social situations whose validity has a temporal scope of
minutes to hours and is characterized by social signals and the
socially relevant emotions resulting during co-activity social
situations. On a low level, the short term social context can
be described by sensor data or signals, for example a set of
identiﬁers of persons in bluetooth range.
The interactions between the users of modern social net-
working platforms either establish or describe long-term social
contexts between them. In this paper, we study the inﬂuence
of long-term social context awareness on the quality of group
recommendation. Therefore, the ﬁrst step is to collect a dataset
of individual and group ratings, which also includes the
groups’ long-term social context information.
Building a real dataset for group recommendation is often
regarded as a challenging task [14]. We built our social network
and restaurant rating platform to collect the aforementioned
dataset. The main requirements for our platform were to:
1)
capture the user’s personality traits, which may in-
ﬂuence how the user may behave during a decision-
making process that involves several participants
2)
store social network and long term social context
information by allowing users to form groups among
themselves and perform pairwise social attributes’
evaluations
3)
elicit the users’ individual preferences in restaurants,
by allowing the users to rate restaurants as individuals
4)
elicit the group preferences in restaurants, by allow-
ing the users to rate restaurants as groups
Our social network and restaurant rating platform is a web
application whose use cases and interactions are explained as
follows:
Personality Test: The Thomas-Kilmann Conﬂict Mode In-
strument (TKI) [15] quantiﬁes the behaviour of an individual
during a conﬂict, by identifying ﬁve different styles of person-
alities: competing, avoiding, accommodating, collaborating,
and compromising. TKI was successfully used in the context
of group recommendation as the personality type was shown
to be a signiﬁcant factor in determining the social inﬂuence
of each of the group members in the decision-making process
[16]. After registration, the user answers the TKI personality
questionnaire which is composed of 30 double statements in
the form of two columns to choose from: A or B. For each
statement, the user has to choose between either column A or
column B depending on which statement of the two columns
she ﬁnds more descriptive of her behaviour or personality.
User Rating: In the next step, the user can choose other
users of the platform and evaluate them according to 8 social
context attributes. The social context attributes are: relation-
ship, social capital, tie strength/trust, social similarity, social
context similarity, social hierarchy, and domain expertise.
Table I describes each of the social context attributes. As
shown in Figure 1, the relationship attribute is a free text
Figure 1. User can rate another user according to eight different social
context attributes.
where the user freely enters a description of the nature of her
relationship with the rated users. For the other social context
attributes, the rating is done using sliders.
Individual Restaurant Rating: In the next step, the user
chooses restaurants that she knows and rates individually. To
facilitate the process to the user, we integrated a Google Maps
widget [17] to our platform. The user can search for restaurants
and pick them from the map, as shown in Figure 2. The user
is invited to rate at least 5 restaurants, but there is no upper
limit to the number of restaurants that a user can rate. When
the user picks the restaurants on the map, some metadata about
the restaurant will appear in a small popup, which also contains
a button to review the restaurant. The restaurant review screen
is shown in Figure 3, which provides the user with 8 metrics
to rate a restaurant: Hipness, price, order, service, food taste,
location, social overlap (which means: to which extent the
user and the user’s friends share the same opinion about this
restaurant and how it suits them as a group), and ﬁnally
enabling the user to write additional comments. We chose to
provide the user with several metrics to rate a restaurant as
opposed to a single rating because it captures more accurate
opinions.
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-797-9
COLLA 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

TABLE I. SOCIAL CONTEXT ATTRIBUTES CAPTURED BY THE
SOCIAL NETWORK AND RESTAURANT RATING PLATFORM.
Social Context Attribute
Description
Relationship
A free text description of the relationship with
the rated user
Social Capital
Identiﬁes to which extent the user will be willing
to help the rated user, which we consider an
accumulation of a social capital built from the
interaction between the two persons over time.
Tie Strength/Trust
Represents how the user sees the strength of
the relationship with the other user. It’s also an
indication of how much the user trusts the rated
user in general.
Social Similarity
Identiﬁes how the two users are socially similar
in terms of interests and lifestyle as perceived
by the rating user.
Social Context Similarity
Social context is deﬁned by the social setting
the users are living in, e.g. sharing the same
workplace, school, course, friends, etc. with a
friend would imply similar social contexts.
Sympathy
indicates the level of sympathy towards the rated
user.
Social Hierarchy
A person who holds a higher position in the
social hierarchy is a person who is held in
greater respect. For example: a parent, an older
person, a person who has some inﬂuence, excels
at something, or regarded as a role model.
Domain Expertise
A rating for the other user’s expertise when it
comes to knowing good restaurants, or that this
person is famous for having a good and trusted
taste in food.
Figure 2. Restaurant picking tool. User/Group can search for any restaurant
to review.
Group Formation: A user can instantiate groups with other
users of the platform. The user who creates the group is called
the group master. The group members should evaluate each
other according to the 8 social context attributes described in
Table I.
Group Restaurant Rating: Similar to individuals, groups
should also rate restaurants. The group restaurant rating is a
collaborative process. The group members have to meet, either
in person or via a communication medium, search for restau-
rants and discuss on how to rate restaurants as a group. The
group master, ﬁnally, executes the group decision and enters
the group ratings to the platform. The pairwise user evaluations
and the instantiated groups data is a representation of a social
network where the nodes are the users and the edges are the
relationships between the users in the groups. The weights of
the edges are identiﬁed by the ratings the users gave each other
according to the eight social context attributes. This social
network also stores information about the users’ personalities
as described by their answers to the TKI questionnaire, as well
as information about their personal preferences in restaurants
represented by their individual restaurant ratings and their
group preferences in restaurants represented by their groups’
restaurant ratings. The data collected by our social network and
restaurant rating platform serve as ground truth data which can
be used to evaluate restaurant group recommenders in general,
but especially our social context-aware group recommender
system.
Figure 3. User/Group rates restaurants according to eight different rating
metrics using sliders
III.
SOCIAL CONTEXT-AWARE GROUP RECOMMENDER
SYSTEM
Deciding what to recommend to a group of individuals is a
challenging task. Not only individuals’ preferences should be
taken into consideration during the recommendation process,
but also how to aggregate those preferences using a model
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-797-9
COLLA 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

that collectively represents the group’s preferences should
be considered. Such an aggregation should reﬂect the group
decision making process, so that the list of recommended items
to the group results in the highest satisfaction to the majority
of the group members. Group decision making is a complex
process that is largely inﬂuenced by the group dynamics
characterized by the individuals’ personalities and the degree
of inﬂuence they may impose on each other either generally or
during the decision making process [18]. The social inﬂuence
is part of the group’s social context, which is in the long
term deﬁned by the history of the members’ relationships
and in the short term resulting from the group formation and
the social dynamics surrounding the decision making process.
In this paper, we introduce a framework to build long-term
social context-aware group recommenders that incorporate
different social context attributes together with the individuals’
personalities to improve the group recommendation results.
The social choice theory which has been studied in many
disciplines such as economics, politics, and sociology covers
the group decision making process or the study of what is best
for a group given the opinions of its members [19]. There are
different strategies to aggregate individual user preferences into
group preferences and presenting a list of recommended items
to the group accordingly. Those strategies which are based
on the social choice theory can generally be classiﬁed into 3
categories [20]:
1)
Majority-based Strategies: strategies that focus on
recommending to the groups the most popular choices
among the individuals. The Plurality Voting Strategy
[19] is a an example of this category.
2)
Consensus-based Strategies: which generally at-
tempts to average the individuals’ preferences into
group preferences. E.g. averaging strategies [19]
3)
Role-based Strategies: where the group preference is
determined based on the preferences of some of its
members, depending on their roles or how inﬂuential
they are in the group. For example, dictatorship
strategies [20]
The group recommendation process consists of three main
steps. The ﬁrst step is to generate predicted ratings to the
individual users (group members) using a single-user recom-
mender system. The second step is, using one of the mentioned
social choice theory-based aggregation strategies, to aggregate
the individuals’ predicted ratings into group predicted ratings.
Finally, the list of recommended items which consists of the
items with the highest predicted rating values is presented to
the group. The choice of the aggregation strategy largely de-
pends on the group recommendation problem and domain. For
our use case, which is group recommendation of restaurants,
we built and evaluated our recommenders based on 4 different
aggregation strategies: Average, Least Misery, Most Pleasure,
and Dictatorship.
For the Average aggregation strategy, the individuals’ pre-
dicted ratings of an item are calculated, and the average is
taken of all predicted ratings of that item for all the group
members. The average value will be the group’s predicted
rating for that item.
For the Least Misery aggregation strategy, the degree of
group satisfaction of an item is be determined by its least
satisﬁed member. For each item, the group predicted rating
for the item will be the smallest predicted rating for that item
among the group members.
For the Most Pleasure (Maximum Satisfaction) aggregation
strategy, the group predicted rating of an item is the highest
rating for that item by any of the group members. Hence, the
group’s predicted rating for the item is dominated by the most
satisﬁed member of the group of that item.
For the Dictatorship (Single User) aggregation strategy, the
group’s predicted rating for an item is the predicted rating of
the group’s dictator. The choice of the dictator can be based
on different factors. For example, the group’s dictator can be
chosen to be the most inﬂuential member, the oldest or the
most respected member of the group, etc..
We built our group recommendation and evaluation frame-
work based on Lenskit [21]. Our framework is largely conﬁg-
urable and highly extensible, which easily allows to add new
recommendation algorithms, aggregation strategies, and eval-
uation methods. Using our group recommendation framework,
we built different group recommender systems for restaurants
based on a dataset that we collected with our social network
and restaurant rating platform.
We built different social context-based group recom-
menders and compared each with a baseline group recom-
mender. The baseline group recommender is based on an
item-item collaborative ﬁltering single user recommender [22]
[23]. For both the baseline recommender and the various
social context recommenders, we applied the 4 aforementioned
aggregation strategies.
The social context-aware recommenders are based on the
8 different social context attributes described in the previous
section. The social context attributes are used either individu-
ally or collectively in the recommendation process. We deﬁne
two types of social context-aware recommenders. The ﬁrst is
the single social context attribute-based group recommender
systems. Those are the recommenders that are based on single
social context attributes such as: trust or social hierarchy. For
this type of group recommenders, we generalize the delegation-
based method [8] which employs both the personality type and
the trust in the recommendation model so that we can weigh
the single user predicted rating by any of the social context
attributes:
predsoc(u, i) =
1
P
v∈G attru,v

X
v∈G∧v̸=u
attru,v · (pred(v, i) + pv)
(1)
where predsoc(u, i) is the social context inﬂuenced predicted
rating of item i for user u. attru,v is the social context
attribute value rated by user u towards user v (e.g. the value
of tie strength or sympathy rated by user u towards user v).
pred(v, i) is the predicted rating of user v for item i. pv is
the personality value of user v. We created 8 recommenders
based on each the 8 social context attributes.
The second type is the full social context recommender,
where the single user predicted ratings are inﬂuenced by all
of the 8 available social context attributes present in the social
network. The single user full social context predicted rating in
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-797-9
COLLA 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

this case is calculated as follows:
predfullsoc(u, i) =
1
P
v∈G(P
attr∈soctxt attru,v)
·
X
v∈G∧v̸=u
"
(
X
attr∈soctxt
attru,v) · (pred(v, i) + pv)
#
(2)
Where soctxt is the set of the 8 social context attributes in the
social network, attr is a social context attribute value rated
by user u to user v. As in the previous equation, pv is the
personality value of user v
For both types of social context-aware recommenders,
group predictions are generated according to the 3 aggregation
strategies: Average, Least Misery, and Most Pleasure. For
the Dictatorship strategy, the social context is not used to
generate single user predictions, instead they are generated,
as for the baseline recommender, using the single-user Item-
item collaborative ﬁltering algorithm. The group prediction is
calculated as the dictator’s predicted rating for the item. The
social context attributes are then used to elect the dictator.
For example: if the Dictatorship recommender is based on the
social context attribute ”domain expertise”, then the dictator
of the group will be elected as the group member with the
highest total domain expertise value as rated by the other group
members.
We used our group recommendation platform to build and
evaluate 38 different group recommender systems. They repre-
sent the combination of recommendation algorithms based on
different social context attributes and aggregation strategies.
They are classiﬁed as follows: The baseline recommender,
8 social context-aware recommenders based 8 different in-
dividual social context attributes, and a full social context
recommender based on the aggregation of the individual social
context attributes. Each of those algorithms is combined with
the 3 different aggregation strategies: Average, Least Misery,
and Most Pleasure. For the Dictatorship aggregation strategy,
only the individual social context recommenders are combined
with it and they are compared with a baseline item-item
collaborative ﬁltering recommender that uses the Average
aggregation strategy.
IV.
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
We set up an experiment using our social networking and
restaurant rating platform with the goal of building a dataset
of restaurant ratings both from individuals and groups and
capturing the participants’ social contexts. The dataset serves
as the ground truth against which we can evaluate our social
context-aware group recommenders.
Our experiment participants are the students of the Social
Computing class offered by the department of Informatics
at the Technical University of Munich [24]. We asked our
students to participate in the experiment as part of the course
activities so that the students could test social computing con-
cepts using their ”own” data. The experiment consisted of the 4
following phases: In Phase 1, the students register to the social
networking and the restaurant rating platform and answer the
TKI personality questionnaire. In Phase 2, we asked the stu-
dents to use the platform’s restaurant search tool to choose and
rate restaurants as individuals. We instructed the students to
balance their selections between restaurants they favoured and
those which they didn’t have good experiences with. In phase
3, we asked the students to form groups among themselves,
and use the platform’s user evaluation tool to evaluate their
co-group members. These evaluations are elements of the
social context as discussed below. During the same phase, we
encouraged the students to invite external participants to the
experiment, e.g. their family members, partners, relatives and
friends. The external participants were also asked to answer the
personality questionnaire, rate restaurants as individuals, and
evaluate other users - normally the members of their inviting
students’ groups- according to the social context attributes. In
phase 4, the students were instructed to create the groups –
they already formed ofﬂine - in the platform. The students
were instructed to sit together, choose and rate restaurants
collaboratively as a group using the restaurant search and rating
tools. The group restaurant ratings are entered into the tool by
the group master, which is a role that any group member can
assume. Students formed groups with the external participants
whom they invited to the experiment, this constellation resulted
in two types of groups and restaurant ratings.
Internal Groups: are the groups that exclusively consist of
students. Since the number of participants in this class is rather
large and the students do not necessarily know each other
very well, these groups are characterized by relatively weaker
social ties or weaker long-term social contexts. The second
type is the External Groups, which are the groups that contain
both class students and external participants. Stronger social
ties between the groups’ members or stronger social contexts
generally characterize this type of groups. We isolated external
groups in our analysis to evaluate the effect of stronger social
contexts on the social context-aware recommenders results.
Each phase of the experiment’s 4 phases lasted for about
one week. The overall number of participants was: 363. 178
participants were students and the rest were externals. 246 of
them were males and 117 females. Participants were from 37
different countries; 235 participants were from Germany (about
64.5%). 356 of the participants submitted their birthdates,
among them, 101 participants were less than 25 years old, 171
participants aged between 25 and 35 years, 4 participants were
between the age of 35 and 45, and 80 participants were older
than 45 years. 340 participants (about. 93.7%) have answered
the TKI personality questionnaire. The participants submitted
1480 individual restaurant ratings. 137 groups were created,
45 of them were students’ groups (internal groups) and the
rest (92) were external groups which contain both students
and the students’ external invitees. The maximum number of
participants per group is 5, the minimum is 3, and the average
group participation is 3.2 participants. The groups submitted
656 restaurant ratings, where 218 ratings were submitted by
internal groups, and 438 ratings by external groups. The
anonymized dataset we gathered from the experiment consisted
of the following:
Personality Data: The participants’ TKI personality test
scores. Each record consists of a user Id and a personality
score with the value between 0 and 1. The smaller values
describe more cooperating personality types while higher val-
ues describe more competing ones. The mapping of the TKI
questionnaire answers single value on the cooperativeness-
competitiveness scale was presented in a previous work [25]
and is implemented according to Recio-Garcia et al. algorithm
[26].
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-797-9
COLLA 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

Social Contexts Data: Captures the participants’ social
context, as it contains the user-to-user ratings values according
the 8 different social context attributes. Each record consists of
two attributes: from (user Id) and to (user Id) which indicate
the rating direction. The values of the social context attributes
are in the range from 0 to 1. As mentioned earlier, the social
context attribute “relationship” is presented as a free text
ﬁeld. We manually mapped the textual descriptions to values
between 0 and 1. To do that, we clustered all the textual
descriptions entered by the users into 8 different categories. We
assigned each category a value between 0 and 1. The higher
the value the more intimate is the relationship. We mapped
each of the user descriptions to one of the 8 categories and
therefore a numerical value. The categories are:
•
Unknown: A person barely known. Value: 0
•
Adversary: A person identiﬁed as a competition by
the rating person. Value: 0
•
Acquaintance: Value: 0.25
•
Strong Acquaintance: A person who is well known
or admired by the rating user, yet is not considered a
friend. Value: 0.5
•
Friend: Value: 0.5
•
Close Friend: Value 0.75
•
Partner: Life partner or spouse. Value: 1.0
•
Family: Family member. Value: 1.0
Individual Ratings: Contains the restaurant ratings by
individual participants. Each record consists of a user Id,
restaurant Id, and a single valued restaurant rating between
0 and 5. The rating value is calculated as the average of
the 7 numerical restaurant rating metrics values described
earlier. Group Ratings: Similar to the individual ratings, but
for groups. Each record consists of a group Id, restaurant Id,
and a single valued restaurant rating. User/Groups: Contains
the membership information of users in the groups. Maps user
Id to a group Id. We ran our group recommender algorithms
both on the full dataset and on the external group ratings
dataset. The next section provides a detailed description of
our experimental results..
V.
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
We compare the results of our social context-based group
recommenders with a baseline item-item collaborative ﬁltering
group recommender. For both types, we experimented with 4
different aggregation strategies: Average, Least Misery, Most
Pleasure (Maximum Satisfaction), and Single-User (Dictator-
ship).
For the social context-based group recommendation, we
built a group recommender based on each of the social context
attributes separately and compared each with the baseline using
the restaurants’ dataset. We built a social context recommender
based on the aggregation of all the social context attributes and
we call it the full social context recommender and compared it
to the baseline. We ran the full social context recommender on
two different datasets: the full dataset and the external groups’
dataset. As explained earlier, the latter dataset is characterized
by stronger social relationships.
Since recommendation is often interpreted as a ranking
problem [27], we chose classiﬁcation metrics and ranking
metrics to compare our recommenders. We used 3 different
evaluation metrics to compare the results: Precision@n, and
Recall@n as classiﬁcation metrics, and the Normalized Dis-
counted Cumulative Gain (NDCG) as a ranking metric. We
deﬁne “n” as the number of the recommended items, and we
ran the recommenders and evaluated the results for 4 different
values of n: 100, 10, 5, and 3.
The NDCG takes into account the order of the item in
the recommendation list so that the items that appear lower in
the recommendation list have less relevance value compared
to those that appear on the top [27]. We used the DCG
implementation in the Lenskit package [21]:
DCG@n(g) =
n
X
i=1
rgi
log2(1 + i)
(3)
Where g represents the group for which the recommendation
list is generated, i is the ith recommended item, n the number
of recommended items, rgi the predicted rating of item i for
the group g. The normalized discounted cumulative gain is cal-
culated by comparing the DCG to the ideal DCG represented
by the ordered list of favourite items by the group according to
the groups actual rating list, which is shown by the following
equation: [27]
NDCG@n(g) = DCG@n(g)
iDCG@n(g)
(4)
The Precision@n is calculated as the ratio between the
number of relevant items in the recommendation list to a group
and the total number of recommended items. It is calculated
as follows [27]:
precision@n(g) = predicted n(g) ∩ relevant (g)
n
(5)
And ﬁnally, the Recall@n is calculated as the ratio between the
number of relevant items in the recommendation list to a group
and the total number of relevant items for that group. The
following equation shows how Recall@n is calculated [27]:
recall@n(g) = |predictedn(g) ∩ relevant(g)|
|relevant(g)|
(6)
For both Precision@n and Recall@n, the set of relevant items
relevant(g) are the items that were actually rated by the
group.
Figure 4 shows the results of comparing individual social
context attributes-based group recommenders to the baseline
using each of the aggregation strategies. The social context-
based recommenders are named after their corresponding so-
cial attributes: domain expertise (domex), social hierarchy (hi-
erch), relationship (rel), social sapital (socap), social similarity
(socsim), social context similarity (soxsim), sympathy (symp),
and trust (trst). The baseline recommender (ii) is named
after item-item collaborative ﬁltering. The social context-based
recommenders outperform the baseline for all the metrics
for all the aggregation strategies except for the Dictatorship
strategy where the performance of the baseline is comparable
to the social context recommenders. At n=10, however, the
social context recommenders still outperform the baseline for
the Dictatorship strategy. While we cannot conclude that there
is one social context attribute that consistently outperforms
all other attributes for all metrics and for all strategies,
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-797-9
COLLA 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

(a) Aggregation strategy: Average
(b) Aggregation strategy: Least Misery
(c) Aggregation strategy: Most Pleasure
(d) Aggregation strategy: Dictatorship
Figure 4. nDCG, precision@n, and recall@n resulting from group recommenders based on the baseline item-item collaborative ﬁltering algorithm and the
prediction algorithms based on 8 social context attributes. Group recommendations are generated based on the aggregation strategies: Average, Least Misery,
Most Pleasure, and Dictatorship
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-797-9
COLLA 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

(a) Aggregation strategy: Average
(b) Aggregation strategy: Least Misery
(c) Aggregation strategy: Most Pleasure
(d) External groups - Aggregation strategy: Average
(e) External groups - Aggregation strategy: Least Misery
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-797-9
COLLA 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

(f) External groups - Aggregation strategy: Most Pleasure
Figure 5. nDCG, precision@n, and recall@n resulting from group recommenders based on the baseline item-item collaborative ﬁltering algorithm and the full
social context prediction algorithm. Group recommendations are generated based on the aggregation strategies: Average, Least Misery, and Most Pleasure.
Sub-ﬁgures a, b, c are the results of the full dataset, and sub-ﬁgures d, e, f are the results of the external groups’ dataset
the noticed trend is that trust and relationship-based social
context recommenders are generally performing better than
the other recommenders. One of them is among the top 3
performing algorithms with respect to the average values of
NDCG, Precision@n, and Recall@n for all values of n and
for all aggregation strategies. The social context similarity-
based recommender has on the average the best values of all
metrics for the Most Pleasure aggregation strategy. And we
notice that for the Dictatorship strategy, the baseline’s average
NDCG value is higher than all that of the social context-based
recommenders and it ranks third for the average Precision@n.
Figure 5 compares the full social context recommender,
which is based on the aggregation of all the social context
attributes, to the baseline recommender. The evaluation is
for both the full data set Figure 5 (a, b, c), and for the
subset of external groups (d, e, f). For both datasets, the
full social context recommender consistently outperforms the
baseline for almost all aggregation strategies at all values of
n. The only exception is for the full dataset with the Most
Pleasure strategy at n=5 where the baseline outperforms the
full social context recommender for all the metrics. For the full
dataset, the full social context recommender with the Average
aggregation strategy performs better than all other strategies
with respect to the average NDCG, precision@n, and recall@n
for all values of n. It is also the most outperforming full social
context recommender compared to the baseline with 57.16%
higher average NDCG, 72.41% higher average precision@n,
and 57.83% higher average recall@n.
For the external groups’ dataset, the full social context
recommender with the Most Pleasure aggregation strategy has
the best metrics values by comparing the average NDCG,
precision@n, and recall@n for all n values. In terms of out-
performing the baseline, the full social context recommender
based on the Average aggregation strategy performs best
with 75.87% higher NDCG, 90.23% higher precision@n, and
66.67% higher recall@n. We notice that the outperforming
percentages of the full social context recommenders for the
external group’s dataset compared to the baseline are signif-
icantly higher than those for the full dataset. This behaviour
is consistent with our hypothesis that for groups characterized
by stronger relationships, the social context inﬂuence on the
results of group recommendation is relatively stronger.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we presented a platform that incorporates
the long-term social context in group recommendations. The
presented platform allows to easily conﬁgure, implement and
evaluate social context-aware recommenders using different
social choice theory aggregation strategies. We also present a
social networking and restaurant rating platform using which
we raised an experimental dataset of individuals and group rat-
ings of restaurants. The dataset also includes the participants’
long-term social contexts by allowing them to evaluate each
other according to different social context attributes.
While previous research shows the inﬂuence of social
factors such as trust and behavioural factors such as the
personality type on group recommendation quality, in our
research we investigated 8 different social context attributes
together with the personality type. We examined the effect of
each attribute alone on the recommendation quality and also
aggregated the 8 attributes together in what we call the full
social context. Our analysis shows the superiority of the social
context-aware recommenders in general over a baseline recom-
mender. This was proven both for the individual social context
attributes-based recommenders and for the full social context-
aware recommender using most of the group recommendation
aggregation strategies. We evaluated the group recommenders
on the full dataset, and on a subset of groups characterized by
more intimate relationships. We prove that for the latter dataset
where the group members have stronger social contexts, the
inﬂuence of the long-term social context on the quality of
group recommendation is even stronger.
As a future work, we intend to continue exploring the
contribution of the social context to group recommendation
by studying the effect of short-term social context. We intend
to build a solution that detects the group members spatial-
temporal social situations before the recommendation act. It
will also allow the system to interactively get users feedback
on the results. Such a setup will enable us to build a larger
and denser ground truth dataset The incorporation of both long-
term and short-term social contexts into group recommenda-
tion as well as the live user feedback will help to build a more
real-life application and will allow for a larger study of the
social context contribution to the group recommendation.
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-797-9
COLLA 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

REFERENCES
[1]
J. Masthoff, “Group recommender systems: Combining individual mod-
els,” in Recommender systems handbook. Springer, 2011, pp. 677–702.
[2]
Q. Li, S. H. Myaeng, and B. M. Kim, “A probabilistic music rec-
ommender considering user opinions and audio features,” Information
processing & management, vol. 43, no. 2, 2007, pp. 473–487.
[3]
J. F. McCarthy and T. D. Anagnost, “Musicfx: an arbiter of group pref-
erences for computer supported collaborative workouts,” in Proceedings
of the 1998 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work,
1998, pp. 363–372.
[4]
M. O’connor, D. Cosley, J. A. Konstan, and J. Riedl, “Polylens: a
recommender system for groups of users,” in ECSCW 2001.
Springer,
2001, pp. 199–218.
[5]
L. Ardissono, A. Goy, G. Petrone, M. Segnan, and P. Torasso, “Intrigue:
personalized recommendation of tourist attractions for desktop and hand
held devices,” Applied artiﬁcial intelligence, vol. 17, no. 8-9, 2003, pp.
687–714.
[6]
T. Mahmood, F. Ricci, A. Venturini, and W. H¨opken, “Adaptive rec-
ommender systems for travel planning,” in ENTER, vol. 8, 2008, pp.
1–11.
[7]
A. Delic, J. Masthoff, J. Neidhardt, and H. Werthner, “How to use
social relationships in group recommenders: empirical evidence,” in
Proceedings of the 26th Conference on User Modeling, Adaptation and
Personalization, 2018, pp. 121–129.
[8]
L. Quijano-S´anchez, J. A. Recio-Garc´ıa, and B. D´ıaz-Agudo, “Group
recommendation methods for social network environments,” in 3rd
workshop on recommender systems and the social web within the 5th
ACM international conference on recommender systems (RecSys’ 11),
2011, pp. 24–31.
[9]
H. Wang, D. Chen, and J. Zhang, “Group recommendation based on
hybrid trust metric,” Automatika, 2020, pp. 1–10.
[10]
G. Fang, L. Su, D. Jiang, and L. Wu, “Group recommendation robotics
based on external social-trust networks,” in 2nd EAI International
Conference on Robotic Sensor Networks.
Springer, 2020, pp. 59–73.
[11]
Y. Zheng, “Identifying dominators and followers in group decision
making based on the personality traits.” in IUI Workshops, 2018.
[12]
Y. et al., “Social inﬂuence-based group representation learning for group
recommendation,” in 2019 IEEE 35th International Conference on Data
Engineering (ICDE).
IEEE, 2019, pp. 566–577.
[13]
G. Groh, “Contextual social networking,” habilitation, Technische Uni-
versit¨at M¨unchen, 2011.
[14]
M. Rijlaarsdam, S. Scholten, and C. C. Liem, “Towards creating a non-
synthetic group recommendation dataset.” in ImpactRS RecSys, 2019.
[15]
K. W. Thomas, “Thomas-kilmann conﬂict mode instrument,” in Tuxedo,
NY XICOM 1974, 1974.
[16]
J. A. Recio-Garcia, G. Jimenez-Diaz, A. A. Sanchez-Ruiz, and B. Diaz-
Agudo, “Personality aware recommendations to groups,” in Proceedings
of the third ACM conference on Recommender systems, 2009, pp. 325–
328.
[17]
Google,
“Google
maps,”
retrieved:
August,
2020,
from
https://www.google.com/maps.
[18]
G. Stasser and J. H. Davis, “Group decision making and social in-
ﬂuence: A social interaction sequence model.” Psychological Review,
vol. 88, no. 6, 1981, p. 523.
[19]
I. Cantador and P. Castells, “Group recommender systems: new per-
spectives in the social web,” in Recommender systems for the social
web.
Springer, 2012, pp. 139–157.
[20]
S. et al., “Analysis of strategies for building group proﬁles,” in Interna-
tional Conference on User Modeling, Adaptation, and Personalization.
Springer, 2010, pp. 40–51.
[21]
M. D. Ekstrand, “The lkpy package for recommender systems
experiments,” Boise State University, Computer Science Faculty
Publications and Presentations 147, Aug 2018, retrieved: August, 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://md.ekstrandom.net/pubs/lkpy
[22]
B. Sarwar, G. Karypis, J. Konstan, and J. Riedl, “Item-based collabo-
rative ﬁltering recommendation algorithms,” in Proceedings of the 10th
international conference on World Wide Web, 2001, pp. 285–295.
[23]
M. Deshpande and G. Karypis, “Item-based top-n recommendation al-
gorithms,” ACM Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS), vol. 22,
no. 1, 2004, pp. 143–177.
[24]
“Tum department of informatics,” retrieved: August, 2020, from
https://www.in.tum.de.
[25]
G. Semmler, “Long Term Social Context in Group Recommender
Systems,” Master’s thesis, Technical University of Munich, Germany,
2017.
[26]
J. A. Recio-Garcia, G. Jimenez-Diaz, A. A. Sanchez-Ruiz, and B. Diaz-
Agudo, “Personality aware recommendations to groups,” in Proceedings
of the third ACM conference on Recommender systems, 2009, pp. 325–
328.
[27]
A. Felfernig, L. Boratto, M. Stettinger, and M. Tkalˇciˇc, “Evaluat-
ing group recommender systems,” in Group Recommender Systems.
Springer, 2018, pp. 59–71.
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-797-9
COLLA 2020 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

