Design of Suitable Meeting Management Model for WebELS Meeting to Meet the 
Business Situations 
 
Sila Chunwijitra 
Department of Informatics 
The Graduate University of Advanced Studies 
Tokyo, Japan 
sila@nii.ac.jp 
 
Arjulie John Berena, Hitoshi Okada, Haruki Ueno 
Faculty of Information Environment Science 
National Institute of Informatics 
Tokyo, Japan 
{berena,okada,ueno}@nii.ac.jp
 
 
Abstract—This paper proposes a meeting management system 
for controlling member groups and contents in the WebELS 
Meeting system to meet suitable meeting controls at reasonable 
cost in business situations. The system is divided into two 
parts: the system management and the conference streaming 
management. This feature has been required for the system in 
implementing software as a service (SaaS) concept. The main 
concept of the system is group-based management of members 
and contents. We designed a new simple group-based structure 
for easier management. Each group holds two password types: 
manager password and guest password. The group manager 
can manage the contents on their group.  The system can limit 
number of content and concurrent access in each group.  
Moreover, the system can control the behavior of logging-in 
members. We proposed the auto-reconnection network for 
booting up the performance of web-based online conference 
system to be used in the unreliable network environment. This 
system can help the administrator for managing and 
controlling the member groups and contents in the meeting 
system. Furthermore, our solution helps the participants who 
use the unreliable network by preserving the quality of online 
conference operation for the best distant meeting. This system 
increases efficiency and performance especially in operating 
WebELS Meeting as SaaS. 
Keywords- meeting management tool; simple group-based 
concept; 
business 
meeting; 
auto-reconnection; 
WebELS 
Meeting; 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
As the Internet-based communication is rapidly growing, 
many kinds of online Internet applications have been 
developed to support new lifestyles, e.g., social networking, 
online businesses and so on. Online video meeting or 
conference technology becomes popular because it can help 
in organizing a meeting comfortably via the Internet. This 
technology is used to link members to join from any place to 
meet in a virtual room. Online video meeting usage is now 
wide-scale in many major areas, i.e., distant e-Learning [1], 
organizational business situation [2], tele-medical cares 
[3][4] and etc. This highly-technological change in business 
communication can reduce operational administrative costs 
and can make stronger business competition [2]. Currently, 
several video meeting systems and products are available in 
business sector. There are many well-known online 
conference systems, such as Skype [5], Polycom [6], Cisco 
WebEx meeting [7], Microsoft Live meeting [8], and Pc 
Video Conference [9]. Each system has different features 
and infrastructures. Most products have been integrated with 
useful services for supporting meeting processes, e.g., chat 
messaging, file sharing and so on.  
Skype is the first to make Voice-over IP (VoIP) a 
massively popular tool [5][10]. It is a form of peer-to-peer 
network. A user who logged in can locate other users on the 
Skype and take part in audio or video call across the Internet. 
The benefit of Skype is the free connection to other Skype 
users. Furthermore, Skype's sound quality keeps the high and 
low tones of sound, whereas telephones and other VoIP 
software/hardware clip out those parts of speech. However, 
while it may be desirable to prevent telephone conversations 
being tapped, users and computer must be able to protect 
themselves. Polycom is a popular TV conference system that 
is used for real-time distant video communication [6]. It is a 
complete conference solution, however it requires special 
and expensive proprietary devices and technologies. It needs 
specially 
designed 
telecommunication 
infrastructures, 
cameras, and related devices. Cisco WebEx meeting, 
Microsoft Live meeting and Pc Video Conference are similar 
systems and technologies that propose for computer-based 
meeting via Internet [7][8][9]. Cisco WebEx meeting and Pc 
Video Conference support the cross platform environment. 
However, Microsoft Live meeting only supports cross 
platform in web access system. All of these systems can use 
the general computer with attached web camera and 
microphone units.  
On the other side, there are some open-source web-based 
conference systems, e.g., OpenMeeting [11], BigBlueButton 
[12], which can be used for real-time meeting. The problem 
in the business point of view on these systems is the privacy 
of contents. In business meeting point of view, security and 
privacy of meeting contents and user information are very 
important. Furthermore, online meeting system should have 
an easy-to-use user interface and configuration that meets the 
technical abilities of non-IT users. Generally, most open-
source web-based conference systems do not meet the 
necessary requirements in business meeting situations. In 
addition, most of the systems have limitation such that it 
requires high bandwidth network for providing better output 
quality in online meeting operations. Moreover, it also 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-008-6
COLLA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

 
Figure 1.  WebELS Meeting System Diagram 
requires intricate proxy or firewall setting to access the 
system, so usability conditions are limited. 
WebELS Meeting is one of the video conference 
applications that congregate several functions for supporting 
online meeting activities. The benefits of this system are: (1) 
online cursor synchronization that requires less bandwidth of 
network compared with the other online meeting systems, 
and (2) the online video conference of the system overcomes 
the network environment that defines strict firewall policy. 
The video stream can access through the firewall rules 
because it uses the general web protocols [13]. Since these 
features were appended in the WebELS Meeting, the 
usefulness and performance of the system has improved and 
its usage is now wide-scale that has eventually opened the 
opportunity for the business sector. 
Several issues were discussed and considered in the 
business point of view to make an online video conference 
product that is credible and suitable for business companies 
[14] i.e., management functions, security issues, privacy of 
content, etc. Both privacy and security of content are 
important issues for business communication, since content 
is an asset of the person who has created the content.  For 
content privacy, each member of the group can only access 
their own group’s content. For content security, the system 
should have functions for protecting the content. i.e., data 
encryption, system firewall and etc [15]. The auto-
reconnection is also required for improved system 
performance. The system should automatically connect the 
video meeting when disconnected from the network  [16]. 
Several video conference systems do not have the function 
for managing this situation. Participants who lost the 
network connection manually re-connect the system by 
themselves. It makes uncomfortable usage for the members. 
Sometimes the unusual attendees occur during meeting. 
Therefore, the system should have some function to break 
the usage from the unusual attendee. i.e., pause any actions 
or eject that attendee out of the meeting.  
 
Figure 2.  Example of using slide presentation  and video conference 
To make more profit for the business companies, any 
cost of resources should be reduced. According to Gartner's 
survey [17], trend of business services moves to use 
Software as a Service (SaaS) model. SaaS is an emerging 
business model that delivers software applications to users 
through Web-based technology. Adopting SaaS applications 
allow companies to save their information technology cost, 
save time for deploying the system, addressing security 
concerns of customers and meeting service level agreements 
[18][19].  
In this paper, we developed a suitable meeting 
management function for the WebELS Meeting system used 
in the business sector. We propose the management tools for 
controlling the member groups and contents. We also 
propose a method for using the video meeting in the unstable 
network environment. In addition, the system is developed 
based on the SaaS system for allowing small companies to 
minimize their operational cost. 
II. 
WEBELS MEETING OVERVIEW 
WebELS Meeting is designed based on online meeting 
via Internet-based technology for supporting a content-
centered E-Learning Platform in Postgraduate Education 
[20][21]. To support the online meeting activities, several 
useful functions were integrated into the WebELS Meeting 
system such as content-authoring, online presentation, video 
conference and so on. This system involves fusion of 
synchronous features with powerful authoring tools for 
Internet meeting [22]. WebELS Meeting is designed as an 
administrator free system for authoring tool, slide 
presentation tool and video meeting window. Every logged-
in user has the same right. By clicking the presenter button a 
user can obtain the presenter right who can change slides, 
point a cursor, annotate drawings, zoom and scroll slides and 
so on. It also has an easy-to-use interface for non-IT users. 
Users can edit their own meeting contents on their personal 
computer and share to the meeting participants. Some main 
features are listed as follows: 
• 
Web-based usage: Easy to use and no need to install 
special programs. It can be used by any web browser 
application. 
• 
Real-time meeting: Simulates the virtual meeting 
room. Anytime, anywhere and anybody concept to 
support a variety of usage. 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-008-6
COLLA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

 
Figure 3.  Comparison of general group-based and simple group-based 
concept 
• 
Synchronous and Asynchronous: Supports slide 
synchronized with video and audio while used in 
online Internet. 
• 
Cross platform solution: Operates on Windows, 
Macintosh and Linux at the same quality. 
WebELS Meeting authoring and presentation tool are 
Java-based server systems. It functions even in a low-speed 
Internet environment [23], because the contents are pre-
downloaded onto every participant computers and only 
control signals and data are synchronize to the server and 
updates by itself. Since WebELS Meeting uses HTTP 
protocol for online presentation and RTMP protocol over 
port number 443 for video conference, WebELS Meeting can 
be used under strong firewall setting rules. Fig. 1 shows the 
system diagram of the WebELS Meeting. The basic design 
of WebELS Meeting was proposed for content-based 
meeting. Each content has its own virtual room that can be 
used for meeting management. Any users who are accessing 
to the same content can share the online presentation and join 
the online video conference at the same time. Fig. 2 shows 
an example using that collaborate between live presentation 
function and live video meeting function. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY AND SYSTEM DESIGN 
In this paper, we proposed an approach in designing the 
business WebELS Meeting system to support business 
applications. We added the management tools for controlling 
the user groups and contents to achieve suitable security 
management functions while keeping easy-to-use concepts 
onto a standard WebELS Meeting. Using shared single 
server system, small companies can share the system at 
lower costs with suitable security management safe guards. 
Each user group can manage separate secure online business 
meeting concurrently. We also invented a network 
connection handle function for the online video meeting to 
utilize in the unreliable network situation. The details are 
explained in the following sections. 
A. Simple Group-based Concept 
The group-based management concept is reasonable and 
popular for managing e-Meeting systems because it is easy 
to control multiple users in one time. One group consists of 
several users and one user can become a member of several 
groups too. Fig. 3 (a) shows a general group-based concept. 
From the business requirement, a disadvantage of this 
concept is very time-consuming while the administrator adds  
 
Figure 4.  System architecture of system management for the business 
meeting 
new members. It is better to use the same user name in each 
group for accessing contents. Therefore, we designed a new 
simple group-based concept that is easier to manage than a 
general group-based concept. Fig. 3 (b) shows a simple 
group-based concept to manage security of contents for the 
business sector. Each group consists of two members, i.e., 
manager member and guest member. Also members in each 
group cannot become a member of other groups. 
B. System Architecture 
In response to the business meeting requirements, we 
have designed and implemented a new managing structure to 
override the existing structure while keeping the same 
technologies for future development, i.e., the old structure of 
the system is being preserved. We divided the system into 
two main parts, .e.g., system management and conference 
streaming management parts. 
1) System Management Part 
The concept of the system is based on our simple user-
group control. The users in the system consist of member 
groups and administrator. The administrator can manage the 
member groups and system, but he/she cannot create and edit 
contents. For the member groups, each group hold two 
passwords i.e., (1) password for group manager, and (2) 
password for guest of the group. The group manager can 
manage the contents in own group and also monitor member 
group activities. Contents in each group cannot be accessed 
by members of other group which is an important policy in 
the business situation. Fig. 4 shows the system design of 
functional structure for supporting the business sector. In the 
design, we separated the system into 3 modules, i.e., (1) 
Member Verification, (2) Roles Controller and (3) 
Administrative modules. The details of modules are 
described as follows: 
a) Member Verification Module 
Member Verification module is used to identify the 
member and separate the member role. Since the system has 
two passwords for one group, we use the group name the  
54
COLLA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-143-4

 
Figure 5.  Example structure of user and group data 
same as the user login name and use two records of user 
table to keep the user data and group role as shown in Fig. 5. 
To strengthen the security technique, every user password is 
encrypted into two steps. First, the plain text password is 
encoded by WebELS key-code. Second, the password is 
encrypted again by MD5 [24]. 
This module consists of two main sections for this 
module, i.e., Role Decision and Limitation Grantor sections. 
Role Decision: Since the group role is dependent on the 
user login name and user password, this section matches 
both user login name and user password. The system uses the 
user class where the record is specific for the group role. 
This value is feed to the Role Controller module 
subsequently. 
Limitation Grantor: This section is introduced for 
checking the special member properties. The block property 
is utilized to allow or deny the usage of members in the 
system. While a member group is blocked, every member 
cannot access the system even if the contents of this group 
have existed in the system. When a member group is 
unblocked, every member can use the system to carry on the 
existing contents of the group. Not only block property is 
available but also the expiry time is utilized for controlling 
the usage limitation time of the system for each group, in the 
case of free trial service for customers. 
b) Roll Controller Module 
Role Controller module consists of two main sections, 
i.e., Content Limitation and Access Limitation sections. 
Content Limitation: This section is utilized for limiting 
the number of contents in each group. While the group 
manager creates a new content, the system checks the 
number of existing contents of their group and compared 
with the limitation value of that group. In case the number of 
existing contents equal or more than the limitation value, the 
permission for creating and any authoring tools will be 
denied. 
Access Limitation: This section is generated for limiting 
the number of users who access to the system at the same 
time in each group (concurrent access). We defined the user 
status if login succeeds and the status will be cleared after 
the logout. The system uses that status for counting the 
number of accessing users. For the logout status, it is 
complicated for implementing because we could not control 
any users for logging-out from the system in a proper 
method, e.g., when someone who has logged-in to the system 
has accidentally shutdown their computer, or someone closes 
the browser without logging out from the system, etc. 
Therefore, the user status is not cleared, and the number of 
logging-in users is incorrect, too. We solved this problem by 
creating a system checker [25] that runs in the background 
mode for clearing the user status automatically. 
 
Figure 6.  System architecture of streaming management for the business 
meeting. 
c) Administrative Tool 
The Administrative tool, a feature for the administrator 
user, is used to manage and control the system.  
Management Tool: This tool is used for adding, editing 
and deleting group members and group roles information. 
For security reason, this tool cannot manage the contents in 
each group. When deleting a group member, this tool 
removes all contents of deleted group from the system, i.e., 
database, virtual room and data in physical storage. 
Unusual Member Controller: This section is used to 
manage meeting participants while the meeting is running. 
There are two actions, i.e., break any actions and eject (kick-
off) from the meeting. The participant who become an 
administrator of meeting can use those functions to control 
an unusual participant who has a behavior to disturbed other 
participants during meeting. 
Monitoring Panels: We designed the monitoring panels 
for helping the administrator and group manager to monitor 
their system. This tool is important instrument for checking-
up the system information. It is separated into two kinds, i.e., 
(1) System Monitor Panel is purposely for the administrator. 
This panel is used for monitoring the overall information of 
the system, such as, Number of contents, Number of users, 
Content size, etc, and (2) Group Monitor Panel is used by 
group managers. The group manager can track the activities 
of each user in their group, such as, Number of logged-in 
user, active and action content of each user, etc. 
2) Meeting Streaming Management Part 
This part is used in the client node for connecting to the 
virtual room of online meeting system. The system is 
automatically downloaded and run on the client computer via 
web browser when the members access to the conference 
web page. Fig. 4 shows the design structure on client side. 
The system consists of two modules as follows;  
a) Connection Control Module 
Connection Controller module is used to manage and 
control the network connection of the client nodes. There are 
two functions included in this module as follows; 
Network Status Monitor: This section is used for 
monitoring the network connection status while the meeting 
session is ongoing. After the member logged-in to the system, 
this function is always check the network connection 
between server and client nodes. When losing connection, 
the reconnection manager function is triggered for handling 
the connection. 
55
COLLA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-143-4

Reconnection Manager: This section is used to keep the 
network connection and waits for the new connection status. 
When the connection signal appears again, then login 
process is automatically done by using the latest meeting 
information. 
b)  Streaming Controller Modules 
Streaming Controller module is used to control the 
streaming input of the client node including two functions. 
Device Manager: This section is used to manage the 
basic input devices, such as microphone and web camera (or 
video camera). It is used for controlling the state of input 
devices such as setting the devices connect/disconnect or 
on/off. It also chooses proper features refer to the input 
devices of the client node. 
Quality Controller: This section is used for controlling 
the quality of streaming data from the input devices. Several 
parameters are used for configuring the conference streaming 
data, i.e., video size, video scale, voice gain, voice silence 
level and etc. 
IV. 
 DISCUSSION 
The new features in the business meeting system were 
designed based on functional standard WebELS Meeting 
version. Several features were developed to support the 
business roles to meet the requirements from the business 
sector while important features of standard version are 
preserved. The administrative tool was developed for 
managing and controlling the group members. The role 
controller was applied for group-based control. We have 
evaluated the system by comparing the new system with the 
standard system and other business conference systems. 
Table I shows the overview comparison of meeting systems. 
There are contrasts in the objective and usage of all systems. 
The standard WebELS Meeting was mainly designed for 
supporting the higher education while the other systems were 
mainly designed to be used in the business sector. Our new 
system has distinctiveness, by introducing the simple group-
based for managing and controlling the contents and system.  
Only our new system has special functions -- contents 
limitation, concurrent access limitation and system limitation 
is managed by simple group-based concept. We used the 
system checker for solving the incompletely logout problem 
and clearing the member status. The usage time limitation is 
one significant matter for restricting the free trial customers 
for the business approach. Furthermore, unusual member 
controller is integrated to be operated the logging-in 
participant who has a behavior to disturbed other participants 
during meeting operation. In the business sector, security of 
content is also important. Any content are protected and 
accessible by the group owner and members who have been 
granted permission only by the owner. Even an administrator 
of the system cannot manage the contents in member groups. 
Moreover, usage time limitation is one significant matter for 
restricting the free trial customers. That function meets the 
reasonable security in business situations. This is a benefit 
for merging the meeting system with SaaS in the business 
model. 
TABLE I.  
SYSTEM OVERVIEW OF  MEETING SYSTEMS 
Criteria  
A 
B 
C 
D 
Objective 
Support the 
e-Learning 
Support the business sector 
Target group 
Higher 
education 
Company / Organization 
Distribute 
Open-source 
Proprietary 
Concept 
Content-base 
Group-base 
Privacy of content 
Open 
By group 
Depend on publisher 
System Limitation 
Unlimited 
By group 
By product 
Note: A = Standard WebELS Meeting, B = Business WebELS Meeting, C = Cisco WebEx  Meeting, 
D = Microsoft Live Meeting 
 
 
Figure 7.  Comparison disconnection and reconnection time of each OS  
 
Figure 8.  Distant meeting of e-CC Seminar using the new WebELS 
meeting for business model system. 
Not only the system management part but also 
conference streaming management was invented. The system 
has a feature to support meeting connection and quality 
while using the system in the unreliable network 
environment. Auto-reconnection is the convenient function 
for participant who lost the network connection during 
meeting operation. The system can keep the meeting session 
and automatic operation with the reconnection technique 
when network connection is restored. This feature is tested 
on many OS environments such as Windows, Linux and Mac 
OSX. In the evaluation, we focus on the effect in two events, 
such as (1) a disconnection time range after losing the 
network connection and (2) a reconnection time range while 
network status is appearing. Fig. 7 shows the approximate 
automatic reconnection time. This feature can work in all OS 
but the time range for automatic reconnection process differs 
and that it depends on the network connection probing of 
each OS. 
56
COLLA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-143-4

This system was proven by several usages from 
companies and communities, such as, Kyosei Systems Inc – 
Japan, etc. Every feature worked well within the business 
situations. The system can limit the number of contents and 
number of concurrent user access in case of content 
limitation or access limitation was defined. The system can 
provide as a TV conferencing system, like Polycom system, 
with high-quality video and audio streaming service. The 
system can be easily used anywhere and anytime without 
firewall and proxy settings. Participants can attend the 
meeting by using their personal computer or laptop that is 
connected to the Internet. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we proposed the suitable meeting 
management tool for the WebELS Meeting module to meet 
the requirements of the business sector. The main function of 
the management tool is to be utilized for controlling user 
members and contents using simple group-based control 
concept. The administrator could manage the whole system. 
The group manager could manage the contents and also 
monitor activities of each user in their group. Member 
Verification and Role Controller methods were described 
using our techniques for controlling users and contents. Our 
management tool helps the administrator manage the system 
easily. We also developed network connection handler for 
online conference system when used in the unreliable 
network environment. To preserve the meeting operation, the 
system can keep the meeting session in operation with the 
reconnection technique when network disconnection occurs 
intermittently. Moreover, we implemented the WebELS 
Meeting system as a SaaS concept to minimize IT 
investment costs of business companies. The usefulness and 
performance of the system have been proven by practical 
uses of the business companies and community sectors. This 
system increases the efficiency and performance of the 
WebELS Meeting module in business sector.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to express sincere thanks to all 
persons who supported the WebELS project of NII Japan, 
especially to Dr. Vuthichai Ampornarambeth, Prof. Nobuo 
Shimamoto and Dr. Pao Sriprasertsuk for contributions in 
designing and implementing the WebELS system. The 
project is funded by Science Research Foundation of Japan, 
The Telecommunications Advancement Foundation, Amada 
Foundation for Metal Work Technology and Japan Science 
and Technology Agency (JST). We express sincere thanks to 
Ohmsha for a collaborative development, and to the e-
Learning project of UNESCO Jakarta office and the Sahara 
Solar Breeder (SSB) project for further collaborations using 
WebELS. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Haruki Ueno, “Internet-Based Distance Learning for Lifelong 
Engineering Education – A Personal View and Issues”, Information 
and Systems in Education, Vol. 1, No. 1, 2002.  
[2] Niki Panteti and Patrick Dawson, “Video conferencing meeting: 
Changing patterns of business communication”, New Technology, 
Work and Employment, pp. 88-98, 2002 
[3] State Initiatives Funded by the Medicare Rural Hospital Flexibility 
Grant Program, 2007 
[4] Stein R Bolle, Frank Larsen, Oddvar Hagen and Mads Gilbert, 
“Video conferencing versus telephone calls for team work across 
hospitals: a qualitative study on simulated emergencies”, BMC 
Emergency Medicine 2009 
[5] Skype, http://www.skype.com, February 2011 
[6] Polycom conference solution, http://www.polycom.com, February 
2011 
[7] Cisco WebEx Meeting, http://www.webex.com, February 2011 
[8] Microsoft 
Live 
Meeting, 
http://office.microsoft.com/en-us/live-
meeting/, February 2011 
[9] Pc Video Conference, http://www.pcvideoconference.com/, February 
2011 
[10] Robin Mason and Frank Rennie, E-Learning and Social Nwetworking 
Handbook: Resources for Higher Education, Routleedge Taylor & 
Francis Group , ISBN 978-0-415-42606-0, pp. 105-109, 2008 
[11] OpenMeeting, http://code.google.com/openmeeting/, February 2011 
[12] BigBlueButton, http://bigbluebutton.org, February 2011 
[13] Pao Sriprasertsuk, Arjulie John Berena, Sila Chunwijitra and Haruki 
Ueno, ”A Study on an Open Source for Distance Real-Time Learning 
Environment”, Technical Report of The Institute of Electronics, 
IEICE, 2009. 
[14] Rob Barrett, Eser Kandogan, Paul P. Maglio, Eben Haber Leila A. 
Takayama and Madhu Prabaker, ”Field Studies of Computer System 
Administrators : Analysis of System Management Tools and 
Practices”, 2004 
[15] Theo Dimitrakos, Brian Matthews and Juan Bicarregui, “Towards 
security and trust management policies on the Web”, 2002 
[16] Sila Chunwijitra, Arjulie John Berena, Pao Sriprasertsuk, Hitoshi 
Okada and Haruki Ueno, ”WebELS Meeting: Multi-Functional 
Online Conference Tool For Higher Education For Low-Speed 
Internet Environment”, Third International Conference on Education 
Technology and Training (ETT 2010), Vol. 2, pp. 24-27, 2010 
[17] Sharon A. Mertz, Chad Eschinger, Yanna Dharmasthira and Chris 
Pang, “User Survey Analysis: Software as a Service, Enterprise 
Application Markets, Worldwide”, Gartner's survey , October 2008 
[18] www.trumba.com, “Five Benefits of Software as a Service “, White 
paper, February 10, 2007  
[19] David C. Chou and Amy Y. Chou, “Software as a Service (SaaS) as 
an Outsourcing Model: An Economic Analysis”, SWDSI Proceedings, 
2008 
[20] Vuthichai Ampornaramveth, Tao Zhang, Ana Hadiana, Nobuo 
Shimamoto and Haruki Ueno, “A Web-based E-Learning Platform 
for Post-Graduate Education”, Proceedings of the fifth IASTED 
Conference WEB-Based Education, January 2006. 
[21] Haruki Ueno, Zheng He and Jingxia Yue, “WebELS: A Content-
Centered E-Learning Platform for Postgraduate Education in 
Engineering”, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol 5613/2009, 
July 2009. 
[22] M.M. Rahman, Zheng He, H. Sato, V. Ampornaramveth, N. 
Shimamoto and H. Ueno, “WebELS E-Learning System: Online and 
Offline Viewing of Audio and Cursor Synchronized slides”, 2007. 
[23] Arjulie John Berena, Zheng He, Pao Sriprasertsuk, Sila Chunwijitra, 
Eiji Okano and Haruki Ueno, “Shared Virtual Presentation Board for 
e-Communication on the WebELS Platform”, Proceedings of the 18th 
International Conference on Computers in Education (ICCE 2010), 
pp. 280-284, 2010 
[24] The 
MD5 
algorithm 
(Message-Digest 
hash 
algorithm 
5), 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MD5, February 2011 
[25] Linux jobs schedule, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cron, February 
2011 
57
COLLA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-143-4

