Web-Based Community for Fire Response Actions 
Scenario and Smart Framework 
 
Alexander Smirnov, Alexey Kashevnik, Tatiana Levashova, Nikolay Shilov 
Laboratory of Computer Aided Integrated Systems 
St. Petersburg Institute for Informatics and Automation of the Russian Academy of Sciences 
SPIIRAS, 39, 14th line, St. Petersburg, 199178, Russia 
{smir, alexey, tatiana.levashova, nick}@iias.spb.su 
 
 
Abstract—The paper addresses organization of a Web-based 
community in a smart space, members of which aim at joint 
fire response actions. A smart framework for integrating 
concepts of smart space, Web-services and Web-based 
communities was developed. In the framework Web-services 
are proposed to represent the resources of the smart space and 
the members of the Web-based community. To coordinate 
Web-service interactions a service-oriented architecture was 
designed. An applicability of the smart framework was tested 
via a scenario-based organization of a Web-based community. 
Keywords—smart space; service-oriented architecture; 
Web-services; Web-based community; emergency response 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Recently, Web-based communities have received much 
attention due to offered advantages of instant information 
exchange that is not possible in real-life communities. 
Availability of operational information [1][2] as well as 
potentialities to instant information exchange [3][4][5] are of 
great importance to success in emergency response 
operations. Usually, in such operations joint efforts of 
independent parties are required. To involve the parties in the 
emergency response actions and to coordinate them, 
operational information about the parties’ facilities, 
availabilities, locations, etc. is needed. In this connection, 
organization of a community of emergency response actors 
as a Web-based community, whose members can exchange 
operational information, seems to be a promising idea. 
It is well known, that emergencies are rapidly changing 
situations characterized by context information. Context 
information is vastly available in a smart space [6]. Any 
smart space is comprised of a large number of various 
sensors, devices and other kinds of resources. It embeds a lot 
of services that are expected to be automatically provided 
according to the particular situation. The resources of the 
smart 
space 
can 
share 
information 
and 
services 
independently on their physical location. 
The smart space technology has suggested an idea of 
exploiting its information sharing facilities and context 
aware service provision for the purpose of organization of 
Web-based communities. Research presented in this paper 
addresses the organization of such a community, members of 
which aim at joint fire response actions.  
To achieve the research purpose a smart framework that 
serves to integrate concepts of smart space, Web-services 
and Web-based communities is proposed. This framework is 
based on the earlier developed hybrid technology supporting 
context aware operational decision support in pervasive 
environments [7]. Although some research has been done 
since the hybrid technology was published, this paper 
presents first extension of this technology with Web-based 
communities. 
Due to Web-services enable seamless information 
exchange between distributed components of a smart space, 
the idea behind the framework is to use Web-services as 
mediators between resources of the smart space and 
members of the Web-based community. This idea is 
implemented via representation of the smart space’s 
resources and the community’s members by sets of Web-
services. As a result of this representation, the Web-based 
community organized for fire response actions comprises 
Web-services representing units taking these actions. 
To coordinate Web-service interactions service-oriented 
architecture is used. Service-oriented architecture facilitates 
the interaction of service components and the integration of 
new ones. The Web-services constituting this architecture 
implement resources’ functionalities, produce model of the 
fire situation, provide fire response services, and represent 
participants of the fire response actions and other people 
somehow involved in the fire situation. 
An applicability of the proposed framework is 
demonstrated via a scenario-based organization of a Web-
based community.  
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section II 
provides a comparative analysis of the presented research 
with related one. In Section III the scenario of fire response 
actions is described. The smart framework is discussed in 
Section IV. Results of scenario execution are given in 
Section V. Main findings are summarized in Conclusion. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
There is no extensive literature on the subject of 
organization of Web-based communities in smart spaces or 
involvement of members of such communities in joint 
actions. An example of coordination of different users doing 
collaborative activities from diverse locations through 
different devices is the use of a hypermedia model to 
46
COLLA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-143-4

describe and support group activities in intelligent 
environments [8]. Another on-going research tries to use 
social networks to form groups of individuals engaged in 
crises management efforts. These groups are suggested 
collaborating in crisis situations [9]. 
Ideas of an integration of emerging technology-driven 
paradigms belong to those aimed at organization of a 
collaborative environment for emergency response using 
potentialities of emerging technologies. Perspectives on the 
integration of paradigms of Web services, Web 2.0, 
pervasive, grids, cloud computing, situated computing, and 
crowd sourcing are considered to be the candidates that can 
support collective resource utilization and multi-parties 
cooperation with mutual interests [10]; integration of 
paradigms of virtual organizations and Semantic Web is 
offered to be used for organization of resources and services 
into a collaborative association to handle different kinds of 
emergency events [11]. 
Emergency response as search for emergency responders, 
their coordination, and calculation of time-efficient or cost-
effective transportation routes for them taking into account 
road states and conditions is a goal of many studies (e.g., 
[12][13], and many others). 
The above approaches address different aspects of 
emergency management. All these approaches integrate 
various emerging technologies to achieve their goals. But no 
one of them investigates both the problems of planning 
response actions and involvement of the participants of these 
actions into Web-based communities jointly. 
The presented research shares the idea of the integration 
of emerging technology-driven paradigms. It integrates the 
paradigms of smart space, Web-based communities, and 
Web-services to organize a community of units to concur in 
fire response actions. Like the approaches considering the 
problem of searching for efficient transportation routes 
within the emergency response problem, the given research 
searches for such routes and uses them as the basis for 
joining independent units from diverse locations in a 
collaborative community. The community members are 
coordinated via Web-based interface. They are provided with 
the ability to exchange operational information and interact 
on-line using different Internet accessible devices. 
III. 
SCENARIO 
Suddenly, in some area inside a smart space a fire has 
started. Resources of the smart space as, e.g., fire sensors 
recognize it and send the appropriate signal to a smart 
space’s service taking the role of the dispatcher. In the 
surroundings of this area available mobile fire brigades and 
emergency teams as well as hospitals with free capacities are 
found. Based on some criteria several of the brigades, teams, 
and hospitals are selected for the joint fire response actions. 
A plan for these actions is proposed to the selected units. It 
offers routes to the fire location for the fire brigades; and a 
transportation plan with routes to the fire place for first aid 
and to hospitals for transportation of the injured people for 
the emergency teams. The plan is displayed on Internet 
accessible devices of the hospital administrators and the 
leaders of the fire brigades and emergency teams. These 
persons are organized in a Web-based community to 
exchange information about their abilities, availabilities, 
surrounding conditions, etc. with the purpose of the joint 
actions coordination. 
Potential victims are evacuated from the fire place using 
the ridesharing technology. A person who needs to be 
evacuated sets the location where he/she would like to be 
conveyed into an application installed in his / her mobile 
device. The application finds a driver able to transport the 
person. The found driver receives an appropriate signal. In 
the mobile devices of the driver and the person the 
ridesharing routes are displayed. 
It is supposed that the scenario takes place in a smart 
space. The main requirement to fulfill the scenario is Internet 
accessibility for the persons involved in it. For the scenario 
implementation a smart framework has been developed. 
IV. 
SMART FRAMEWORK 
Smart Framework is defined here as a framework that is 
intended to coordinate operations of various resources of a 
smart space in context aware way to assist people in 
attaining their objectives. Sensors, databases, applications 
and other kinds of components of the smart space are 
regarded as resources. 
Basically, the framework has been projected to assist in 
management of any emergency response actions. It is 
supported by an application ontology that represents non-
instantiated domain & problem solving knowledge of the 
emergency management domain [14].  
Whenever an emergency event occurs, knowledge and 
information relevant to the current emergency situation are 
extracted from the application ontology and integrated into 
an abstract context. This context is an ontology-based model 
of the current situation. 
The abstract context is instantiated by resources of the 
smart space. An instantiated abstract context is operational 
context. The operational context is the base for organization 
of a community that unites members whose aim is taking 
joint actions on emergency response.  
The framework relies upon the Web-service technology. 
In this framework the resources of the smart space as well as 
the organizations and people involved in an emergency 
situation in any way are represented by Web-services. Each 
of them is characterized by a profile describing its 
capabilities. Due to this representation a community 
purposed to emergency response actions comprises Web-
services representing entities taking these actions. Figure 1 
represents the generic scheme of the smart framework. 
The community is organized by specially developed 
Web-services embedded in the smart space. Input data for 
the community organization are information characterizing 
the current situation, particularly the situation type, and types 
of services relevant to the response actions. The types of 
services are represented in the abstract context. The current 
situation is represented by the operational context. 
The Web-services select possible community members 
and generate a set of feasible plans for actions. The set of 
plans is generated using the constraint satisfaction 
technology. Then, an efficient plan is selected from the set 
47
COLLA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-143-4

and submitted to the possible community members to their 
approval. If the plan is approved by all the members the 
community is considered have been organized. Otherwise, 
another plan is taken up. The option of rejection is provided 
for due to the rapidly changing emergency situations – 
something may happen between the moment when a plan is 
selected and time when the possible community members 
receive this plan. The process of replanning is an iterative 
process repeated till a plan suited all the members is found. 
The approved plan is thought to be the guide to joint actions 
of the community members. 
As practice has shown, emergency response actions, 
besides actions on emergency control and first aid, have to 
foresee opportunities to evacuate potential victims from the 
dangerous areas. In the smart framework this purpose is 
achieved applying the ridesharing technology. 
A. Service-Oriented Architecture 
Web-services comprising service-oriented architecture 
(Figure 2) of the smart framework are as follows: 
• 
registration service registers the Web-services in the 
service register; 
• 
application ontology service provides access to the 
application ontology; 
• 
abstract context service creates, stores, maintains, 
and reuses the abstract contexts; 
• 
operational context service produces operational 
contexts; 
• 
emergency response service integrates information 
provided by different resources about the number of 
injured people, and the location, intensity and 
severity of an emergency event; 
• 
routing service generates a set of feasible plans for 
emergency response actions; 
• 
smart logistics service implements the ridesharing 
technology;  
• 
decision making service selects an efficient plan for 
actions and concerts the actions among the 
participants of the response operation;  
• 
resource 
services 
represent 
properties 
and 
implement functions of the resources (smart ones as 
well); 
• 
acting services represent properties of organizations 
or people and roles played by them in an emergency 
situation. 
To make the Web-services “active” components agent-
based service model is used [15]. 
B. Organization of Web-based Community 
for Fire Response Actions 
In the context of this paper a fire event is considered as 
an emergency. Therefore below, organization of a Web-
based community aimed at fire response actions is described. 
The starting point for community organization is 
receiving by emergency response service of the signal that a 
fire event takes place. Fire-prevention smart sensors had 
recognized some fire and sent this signal. Other kinds of 
smart information resources inform emergency response 
service of the number of injured people, and the location, 
intensity and severity of the fire. 
Based on the information about the fire location, 
emergency response service requests the GeoInformation 
System (GIS) for a map of the fire area and the adjacent 
territory. The map contains some predetermined information 
as locations of the airports, buildings, roads, railway lines, 
water bodies, etc. 
Using knowledge represented in the application ontology 
abstract context service determines what kinds of mobile 
Smart space services 
Fulfill resources’ functions 
and represent members of Web-based community 
 
  
Acting services 
Core services 
Create model of the current situation 
Application 
ontology service
Abstract context 
service 
Operational 
context service 
Emergency response services 
Organize Web-based community 
Emergency 
response 
service 
Routing 
service 
Decision 
making 
service 
Smart 
logistics 
service 
 
Resource services
Registration service 
Registers Web-services in the service register
Interaction bus 
Figure 2. Service-oriented architecture 
Emergency 
situation 
Web-service 
interface 
Application 
ontology 
Abstract 
context 
Operational 
context 
Constraint 
satisfaction 
problem 
solving 
Organization
of Web-based 
community
in smart space
Relationship 
Correspondence 
Reference 
Information flow 
Smart 
space 
Emergency 
response plan 
Services 
Operational units 
and resources 
Profile 
Figure 1. Generic scheme of the framework 
48
COLLA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-143-4

teams and organizations providing response services are 
needed for the fire response actions and kinds of roles of the 
individuals involved in the fire situation. This service 
extracts knowledge related to the listed kinds of concepts 
from the application ontology and integrates it into an 
abstract context. In the case of fire, such kinds of teams are 
fire brigades and emergency teams; kinds of organizations 
are fire departments, emergency services organizations, and 
hospitals; kinds of roles are leader of a team, car driver, 
victim, etc. The referred kinds of concepts represent objects 
to be instantiated in the operational context. Thus, the 
abstract context is represented by the map above and 
knowledge about objects to be instantiated. 
Operational context service instantiates the abstract 
context and produces in that way an operational context. For 
the instantiation operational context service uses information 
provided by the following resources of the smart space: 
• 
GPS-based devices installed on the vehicles of 
mobile emergency teams and fire brigades to fix the 
positions of these teams and brigades and to 
determine what types of vehicles they use; 
• 
databases to find addresses and contact information 
of the fire departments, emergency services 
organizations, and hospitals; 
• 
smart sensors to receive information which routes 
are available (e.g., somewhere traffic jumps can be, 
or some roads can be closed for traffic for some 
reasons); 
• 
hospital administration systems to find out free 
capacities of the hospitals. 
Operational context service passes the operational 
context to routing service. Routing service analyses types of 
routes (roads, waterways, etc.) that the emergency teams and 
fire brigades can follow depending on the vehicles they use. 
Based on the information about the number of injured 
people, the intensity and severity of the fire routing service 
calculates number of emergency teams and fire brigades 
needed to succeed in the response actions. The information 
about the number of injured people, the intensity and 
severity of the fire is received from emergency response 
service. 
Then, routing service selects possible fire brigades, 
emergency teams, and hospitals that can be involved in the 
response operation and generates a set of feasible plans for 
actions. The actions are scheduled taking into account the 
availabilities of fire brigades, emergency teams, and 
hospitals; the types of vehicles that teams and brigades use; 
the routes available for these types; and the hospitals’ free 
capacities. The problem of transportation routes planning 
incorporates the shortest-path problem. 
Decision making service using a set of criteria selects an 
efficient plan from the set of feasible plans. The selected 
plan and the operational context are submitted to the leaders 
of the emergency teams, fire brigades that have been 
included in the plan, and to the hospitals’ administrators. 
They have access to the operational context through any 
Internet browsers (a browser supported by a notebook, PDA, 
mobile phone, etc.). These persons either approve the plan 
pressing “submit” button or decline it pressing “reject” 
button. In the latter case decision making service has to 
adjust the selected plan (so that the potential participant who 
refused to act according to the plan does not appear in the 
adjusted plan) and submit it to approval. As soon as 
representatives of all the emergency teams, fire brigades, and 
hospitals have approved the plan they are in, decision 
making service sends them an appropriate signal that the 
joint actions can be started. 
Persons who need to be evacuated invoke smart logistics 
service that is responsible for the evacuation. Clients of this 
service are supposed to be installed on the mobile devices of 
car drivers and other people involved in the fire situation. 
The persons enter the locations they would like to be 
conveyed. Smart logistics service determines the persons’ 
locations and searches for cars going to or by the same or 
close destinations that the persons would like to be. It 
searches the cars among the vehicles passing the persons’ 
locations. This service reads information about the 
destinations that the car drivers are going to from the 
navigators that the drivers use or from the drivers’ profiles. 
The profiles store periodic routes of the drivers. 
Based 
on 
the 
information 
about 
locations 
and 
destinations of the person and the found cars, routing service 
generates a set of feasible routes for person transportations. 
Decision making service determines efficient ridesharing 
routes. The criteria of the efficiency are minimum evacuation 
time and maximum evacuation capacity. 
Smart logistics service sends appropriate signals to the 
drivers included in the ridesharing routes and displays on the 
drivers’ devices the routes each driver is selected for. The 
points where the driver is expected to pick up the 
passenger(s) is indicated in the routes. The ways the 
passengers have to walk to these points are routed for them 
as well. Besides the routes, the passengers are informed of 
the model, color, and license plate number of the car 
intended for their transportation. 
The view of the routes displayed on the devices of the 
individuals involved in the fire situation depends on the roles 
of these individuals. 
V. 
SCENARIO USE CASE 
The scenario (Section III) execution is demonstrated via 
organizing a Web-based community aimed at joint actions to 
response on a fire event happened in an urban area. It is 
simulated that from the scene of fire 9 injured people have to 
be transported to hospitals.  
The application ontology used to create model of the fire 
situation had been created by experts via integration of parts 
of existing ontologies accessible through the Internet. To 
support the integration and necessary ontology modifications 
an ontology management tool – WebDESO [16] – was used. 
The application ontology has 7 taxonomy levels, contains 
more than 600 classes, 160 class attributes, and 120 
relationships. The abstract context created to represent the 
situation at the abstract level has 3 taxonomy levels, contains 
17 bottom-level classes, 38 class attributes, and around 30 
relationships of different types.  
7 available fire brigades, 8 emergency teams, 5 hospitals 
having free capacities for 4, 4, 2, 3, and 3 patients are found 
49
COLLA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-143-4

in the territory adjacent to the fire place; 6 fire trucks and 
1 fire helicopter are allocated to the fire brigades, 7 
ambulances and 1 rescue helicopter are allocated to the 
emergency teams. 1 fire brigade is calculated to be required 
to extinguish the fire. The plan for actions designed for the 
emergency teams supposes that one vehicle can house one 
injured person.  
A set of feasible plans for actions was generated for 
criteria of minimal time and cost of transportation of all the 
victims to hospitals, and minimal number of mobile teams 
involved in the response actions. The set of feasible plans 
comprised 4 plans. 
An efficient plan (Figure 3) was selected based on the 
key indicator of minimal time of victim transportations. In 
Figure 3 the big dot denotes the fire location; dotted lines 
depict routes to be used for transportations of the emergency 
teams and fire brigades selected for the response actions. The 
plan is approved by all the action participants. As it is seen 
from the figure, Web-based community comprises 1 fire 
brigade going by 1 fire helicopter, 7 emergency teams 
allocated to 1 rescue helicopter and 6 ambulances, and 3 
hospitals having free capacities for 4, 2, and 3 patients. 1 
ambulance (encircled in the figure) and the rescue helicopter 
go from the fire location to hospitals twice. The estimated 
time of the operation of transportations of all the victims to 
hospitals is 1 h. 25 min. Figure 4 shows part of the plan 
displayed on the smart phone of a member of an emergency 
team going by ambulance. 
Results of evacuation of safe people using the ridesharing 
technology are as follows: 26 persons desire to be evacuated 
from the scene of fire; 22 persons have been driven directly 
to the destinations by 16 cars whereas for 4 persons no cars 
have been found. Examples of ways routed for a driver and a 
passenger are given in Figure 5 and Figure 6. The encircled 
car in the figures shows the location where the driver is 
offered to pick up the passenger. 
The Smart-M3 platform [17] has been used for the 
scenario implementation. Tablet PC Nokia N810 (Maemo4 
OS) and smart phone N900 (Maemo5 OS) play role of user 
devices. Personal PCs based on Pentium IV processors and 
running under Ubuntu 10.04 and Windows XP are used for 
hosting other services. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
The problem of integration of the emerging technology-
driven paradigms of smart spaces, Web-services, and Web-
based communities for the fire response purposes was 
investigated. Most probably, judging from the literature, this 
is the first investigation on the integration of the mentioned 
technologies for emergency management aims.  
A smart framework that serves to integrate concepts of 
smart space, Web-services and Web-based communities has 
been proposed. This framework is developed to operate with 
Figure 6. Ridesharing route: passenger’s view 
Figure 3. Plan for actions for fire brigades, emergency teams, and hospitals
Figure 4. Plan for actions for an emergency team 
Figure 5. Ridesharing route: driver’s view 
50
COLLA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-143-4

Web-services representing the physical resources of a smart 
space and parties and individuals involved in a fire situation. 
The parties and individuals that are fire responders form a 
Web-based community. It is shown that they can 
communicate online independently on the devices they use, 
to exchange the operational information or make decisions 
on their readiness to participate in the joint response actions. 
Due to the smart framework is built around the 
application ontology of the emergency management domain, 
this framework can be applied to organization of emergency 
management communities for response to different types of 
emergencies. 
An original feature of the way the fire response actions 
are planned is in the involvement of ridesharing technology. 
Previously, the authors of this paper considered professional 
emergency responders to act on emergency response. In this 
paper, the community of professionals is extended with 
volunteers. Ridesharing serves as an example of the 
technology based on which volunteers can be involved in the 
emergency response actions. 
To coordinate Web-service interactions within the smart 
framework the service-oriented architecture has been 
designed. The architecture contains a set of Web-services 
that is supposed to be sufficient to organize any fire response 
communities independently on types of operational units to 
be involved in response actions. 
The applicability of the smart framework is tested by the 
scenario of planning fire response actions in an urban area. 
The scenario execution has shown that the paradigm of smart 
space provides efficient facilities to successful emergency 
response. Moreover, it can be concluded that ridesharing 
technology can be used for evacuation of potential victims 
from dangerous areas. 
Some limitations of the developed framework are worth 
mentioning. The framework does not take into account cases 
when it is not found enough available acting resources or 
when some resources become disabled at time of the 
response actions. As well, the framework does not address 
the problem of lack of passing cars for evacuation of people 
from the fire area and the problem of searching for a route 
with changes if there are not any cars nearby the fire area 
going directly to the person destination. The listed 
limitations will be subjects for future research. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The presented research was supported partly by projects 
funded by grants 09-07-00436, 09-07-00066, 10-07-00368, 
10-08-90027, 11-07-00045, and 11-07-00058 of the Russian 
Foundation for Basic Research, and project 213 of the 
Russian Academy of Sciences. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
K. Luyten, F. Winters, K. Coninx, D. Naudts, and I. Moerman, “A 
situation-aware mobile system to support fire brigades in emergency 
situations,” in CAMS 2006, the 2nd Intl. Workshop on context-aware 
mobile systems, 2006, pp. 1966–1975. 
[2] 
P. Murphy, A. McGinness, and D. Guinan, Major incident review of 
toodyay fire December 2009, Tech. Rep., Australia, Manuka: Noetic 
Solutions Pty, 2010. 
[3] 
L. Hauenstein, T. Gao, T. W. Sze, D. Crawford, A. Alm, and 
D. White “A cross-functional service-oriented architecture to support 
real-time information exchange in emergency medical response,” in 
IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2006, pp. 6478–6481 [EMBS '06, IEEE 
28th Annual Intl. Conf.], doi: 10.1109/IEMBS.2006.260878. 
[4] 
N. Owens, A. Armstrong, P. Sullivan, C. Mitchell, D. Newton, 
R. Brewster,and T. Trego, Traffic incident management handbook, 
U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration, 
Office of Transportation Operations, 2010. 
[5] 
M. Turoff, M. Chumer, B. Van de Walle, and X. Yao, “The design of 
a dynamic emergency response management information system,” in 
J. Inf. Tech. Theor. Appl., vol. 5, no. 4, 2004, pp. 1–36. 
[6] 
D. Zhang, Z. Yu, and C.-Y. Chin, “Context-aware infrastructure for 
personalized healthcare,” in Personalised health management 
systems, C. D. Nugent et al, Eds. IOS Press, 2005, pp. 154–163. 
[7] 
A. Smirnov, T. Levashova, N. Shilov, and A. Kashevnik, “Hybrid 
technology 
for 
self-organization 
of 
resources 
of 
pervasive 
environment for operational decision support,” in Int. J. Artif. Intel. 
T., vol.  19, no. 2, World Sci. Publ. Co., 2010, pp. 211–229, 
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1142/S0218213010000121. 
[8] 
R. F. Arroyo, M. Gea, J. L. Garrido, P. A. Haya, and R. M. Carro 
“Authoring social-aware tasks on active spaces,” in J. Univers. 
Comput. 
Sci., 
vol. 14, 
no. 17, 
2008, 
pp. 2840–2858, 
doi: 10.3217/jucs-014-17-2840. 
[9] 
A. Krakovsky, “The role of social networks in crisis situations: public 
participation and information exchange,” Proc. 7th Intl. ISCRAM 
Conf., 2010, pp. 52–57. 
[10] N. Bessis, E. Asimakopoulou, T. French, P. Norrington, and F. Xhafa. 
“The big picture, from grids and clouds to crowds: a data collective 
computational intelligence case proposal for managing disasters,” in 
3PGCIC 2010, [Intl. Conf. P2P, Parallel, Grid, Cloud and Internet 
Computing, Japan, 2010], IEEE Comput. Soc., 2010, pp. 351–356, 
doi: 10.1109/3PGCIC.2010.58. 
[11] Z. Kang-kang, Y. Feng, Z. Wen-yu, and L. Pei-guang, “EDVO: a 
“one-station” emergency response service model based on ontology 
and virtual organization,” Proc. 2008 IEEE Intl. Conf. Computer 
Science and Software Engineering, IEEE Comput. Soc., 2008, 
pp. 223–226, doi: 10.1109/CSSE.2008.1519. 
[12] C.W.W. Ng and D.K.W. Chiu, “e-government integration with Web 
services and alerts: a case study on an emergency route advisory 
system in Hong Kong,” Proc. 39th Hawaii Intl. Conf. System 
Sciences (HICSS'06), vol. 4, IEEE Comput. Soc., 2006, pp. 70.2–
70.2, doi: 10.1109/HICSS.2006.135. 
[13] A. Ling, X. Li, W. Fan, N. An, J. Zhan, L. Li, and Y. Sha, “Blue 
arrow: a Web-based spatially-enabled decision support system for 
emergency evacuation planning,” Proc. 2009 IEEE Intl. Conf. 
Business Intelligence and Financial Engineering, IEEE Comput. Soc., 
2009, pp. 575–578, doi: 10.1109/BIFE.2009.135. 
[14] A. Smirnov, 
T. Levashova, 
A. Krizhanovsky, 
N. Shilov, 
and 
A. Kashevnik, “Self-organizing resource network for traffic accident 
response,” in ISCRAM 2009, [6th Intl. Conf. Information Systems for 
Crisis Response and Management, Gothenburg, Sweden, 2009], 
J. Landgren 
and 
S Jul, 
Eds., 
2009, 
URL: http://www.iscram.org/ISCRAM2009/papers/Contributions/ 
177_Self-Organizing%20Resource%20Network%20for%20Traffic_ 
Smirnov2009.pdf (access date: 31.03.2011). 
[15] F. McCabe, 
D. Booth, 
C. Ferris, 
D. Orchard, 
M. Champion, 
E. Newcomer, and H. Haas, “Web services architecture,” Note W3C, 
2004, URL: http://www.w3.org/TR/2004/NOTE-ws-arch-20040211/ 
(access date: 22.12.2010). 
[16] A. Smirnov, M. Pashkin, N. Chilov, and T. Levashova, “KSNet-
approach to knowledge fusion from distributed sources,” in Comput. 
Inform., 2003, vol. 22, pp. 105–142. 
[17] J. Honkola, 
H. Laine, 
R. Brown, 
and 
O. Tyrkko, 
"Smart-M3 
information sharing platform," Proc. IEEE Symp. Computers and 
Communications, IEEE Comput. Soc., 2010, pp. 1041–1046, 
doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/ISCC.2010.5546642. 
51
COLLA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-143-4

