 
Collaborative Multi-Perspective Urban Knowledge and Civic Media 
A Never-Ending Design Challenge 
 
Alessio Antonini, Lucia Lupi, Guido Boella, Stefania Buccoliero, Claudio Schifanella 
Dept. of Computer Science 
University of Turin 
Turin, Italy 
{antonini, lupi, boella, buccolie, schi}@di.unito.it 
 
 
Abstract—Developing a civic social network requires to consider 
users meeting in real life, collaborating on digital entries related 
to real urban entities. This makes necessary to think about 
collaboration tools in a new perspective: ensuring the 
participation of users with different levels and forms of 
legitimacy to represent complex relations among entities, and 
ensuring the accountability of each contributor. We present a 
set of technical solutions allowing the collaboration on complex 
entities, keeping interactions simple, and representing multiple 
perspectives about shared entities. 
Keywords-urban informatics; civic media; collaborative 
network; urban entities; participatory design. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The knowledge about the city can be seen as a coherent 
system of social and geographical information about urban 
entities, ranging from street furniture to buildings, from the 
neighbourhood life to city services systems. Each entity and 
each place is defined by perception and uses of a multitude of 
local players involved in ongoing activities and projects in 
those spaces at the same time. 
Nowadays, new challenges arise from social media and 
map-based applications where the focus is not just on mapping 
a place indicating its position, but on sharing social 
information aimed to support new forms of citizen 
engagement. This kind of information is not only about 
physical components, but also about intangible and un-
representable elements that define the corpus of the urban 
knowledge. In this scenario, spatial attribution of contents is a 
mandatory requirement because digital entities correspond to 
real places, actual events, and active groups. In general, real 
life dynamics occurring in real environments can be 
potentially expressed and documented in a virtual space. 
Finding new intuitive solutions to gather and visualise 
multiple contributions about same urban entities from 
heterogeneous sources and different perspectives is a 
challenging task: it is crucial to represent the operational 
context acting in the city by representing the coexistence of 
networks, flows, initiatives, minimizing conflict situations, 
and without forcing a simplification of reality. 
We are working on designing a Civic Social Network 
(CSN) [2][3][4], intended to address this issue by establishing 
a collaborative framework based on citizenship and public 
engagement at local and urban level. 
In our opinion, a CSN aimed to represent urban and local 
reality avoiding the fragmentation of information should not 
host multiple parallel-unconnected entities, but it should 
rebuild the social context integrating different contributions, 
without discriminating in favour of one of many parties’ 
position. This is the premise to design a collaborative platform 
to promote collaboration in real life among different players 
(with concurrent perspectives and goals) interacting in the 
same physical space. User legitimacy and responsibility over 
contents are the key problems to be addressed in this kind of 
platform. 
During a participatory design process involving 1500 
people in 70 meetings, workshops and living labs, we engaged 
potential users in a first cycle about assessing the requisite for 
collaboration on digital platforms in their real context. 
Considering their inputs, we designed and developed a set of 
solutions [13] oriented to the following goals: 
a) Providing a mechanism to contribute in contents creation 
regardless their initiators, in order to taking into account 
different forms and levels of legitimacy of local players, 
and let various sources coexist without forcing a common 
position or a unilateral perspective; 
b) Providing a mechanism to share the responsibility of 
moderation over contents about the same urban entity; 
c) Ensuring a clear accountability of users even in case of 
multiple contributors, relying on non-anonymity of users, 
and on identification of collective users such as 
organizations, local authorities or businesses. 
The result is a system capable to represent a network of 
digital entities corresponding to real urban and local objects. 
New issues are related to the fact that relationships among 
users in a CSN are based on spatial proximity and on 
collaboration on the same urban entities, both in real world 
and virtual space. The main interaction is about and through 
contents describing places, activities, projects and groups. 
Define clear policies to enhance all contributions and 
preventing abuses is the precondition to create a positive 
virtual work environment for civic engagement. 
In this contribution, we present the extension of this design 
process, proposing the solutions we implemented to answer to 
the following questions: 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

1. Can we define a category system able to classify places 
and other urban entities in an objective way? 
2. Which policies are socially acceptable to extend 
moderation mechanisms over contents on the same entity 
from the first author (initiator) to multiple contributors? 
3. How to support a daily use of a platform and common 
sense interactions? 
The structure of the paper is the following: Section II includes 
a brief analysis about the main approaches used by the most 
successful digital platforms based on users’ collaboration for 
the content production. In Section III, we describe the general 
approach we followed in relation to the issues regarding 
legitimacy and responsibilities. We describe the technical 
solutions we implemented in Section IV. Then, we present 
the evaluation and the open issues. Lastly, we synthesize our 
conclusions and the future developments of our CSN. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
We introduce an emblematic real use case emerged during 
our workshops with potential users in order to compare the 
approaches used in collaborative digital platforms and the 
related outputs for the example.  
We need to map a school in a neighbourhood. Who is 
legitimate to describe the school? The dean, the school board, 
school employees, teachers, students’ parents, former or 
current students? The school board and the dean can describe 
the school in term of educational vision and methods, or 
syllabus and training paths; employees are qualified to write 
about the public services offered by the school; students and 
parents can share their experience lived in the school 
environment. 
What if the school is hosted in an historical building? What 
is more prominent? The historical or the educational aspects? 
Therefore, who is legitimated to describe the historical 
aspects? Historians, architects, local experts, students, 
neighbourhood inhabitants, cultural heritage authorities, or 
local administrations? The local administration can motivate 
the change of destination of a monumental place to a public 
facility in order to revitalize the local area. Historians can 
describe the significance of that building in the city history. 
Architects and local experts can describe stylistic and 
technical characteristics and why the building is worth to be 
preserved. The cultural heritage authority can place the 
building into the local cultural assets. For neighbours, a public 
building as a school is an important focal point in the place 
where they live over time. 
The example can become even more complex. What if the 
school gym is used by sport organizations for their activities? 
What if the school is managed by a religious organization? 
The school is a complex urban entity that lends itself to be 
represented by a multiplicity of descriptions, all fitting a 
specific aspect of the reality, with different forms and levels 
of legitimacy. 
We consider this scenario in order to study the problem of 
defining a suitable category system for complex urban entities 
and the solution implemented so far as moderation 
mechanisms.  
A. Category systems 
A platform category system can be addressed by top down 
or bottom up design approaches.  
An example of a bottom up approach can be found in 
OpenStreetMap (OSM) [17]: the community of users raise 
proposals and decide the category system, which is a 
folksonomy supported by a wiki documentation [18] 
collecting motivations, examples, pictures about the 
interpretation and correct use of categories. In this case, there 
are well-known issues regarding the locality-based semantic 
of categories, the small number of active contributors engaged 
in category definition, and the resulting low quality of data. In 
a bottom-up project such as OSM, the school in our example 
would be flattened into a physical Point of Interest on a map 
defined by shape, name, address and function. Activities, 
social relations and uses of spaces will not be represented.   
Following, GeoKey [19] enables the definition of 
categories at “community level”: each group can setup a 
project with their own data types and features. This bottom-up 
approach presents interoperability issues and hardship in 
interpreting and reasoning with data. On this platform, the 
same urban entity could be included in several different 
community maps with their own categorization, without 
fostering for a mutual exchange of information among groups 
working on the same place.  
On the other hand, the stability given by top-down 
approaches have as counterpart the loss of flexibility in terms 
of representation of heterogeneous point of views. For 
instance, Pinterest as world ideas catalogue defined 34 
categories [20] for all possible ideas; Foursquare provides a 
category tree for all possible places [21]; Twitter defined 
recently ten categories of streams to cluster all tweets, such as 
“music” [22]. In these social network, the school in our 
example would be fragmented in multiple unconnected 
entities and entry points, making impossible to merge several 
contents actually related to the same complex entity. Each 
content, even if related to the same real place or object, would 
fit in one of the categories set by the system.  
 
B. Moderation policies: common goal and owership 
If we consider to use Wikipedia in our scenario, the result 
will be two interlinked pages addressing the school and the 
historical building. Homogenous groups of experts, with the 
supervision on Wikipedia editors [6], will develop each one of 
them [5]. Personal experience will not be allowed and 
contingent activities will not be documented. 
Considering Facebook groups [9], the result will be a 
parents group about sharing personal experiences as students’ 
parents or former students. The dean or other authorities will 
not be included in this kind of group or they may participate 
as individuals and not as in charge of institutional authority. 
In both cases, the problem of plurality is simplified 
involving users in something of very specific where it is 
possible to assume the collaboration of users toward a 
common goal. Indeed, contents in an encyclopaedia page are 
general and acceptable for a large majority of people without 
representing multiple perspectives. In a parents group on 
Facebook, users share a set of characteristics and interests, and 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

their involvement is limited. Potential conflicts about 
attribution and legitimacy are solved addressing the 
compliance of each contribution to the common goal. This 
overall guide is done by editors in the case of Wikipedia, and 
group owners or moderators in Facebook, but in a working 
environment where interactions among users are strictly 
regulated by explicit and implicit rules.  
When expressing the identity is more prominent than other 
goals, the legitimacy issue is solved in an ownership 
assessment. In other words, if the goal is to represent an entity 
in an official way the problem is to identify who has the rights 
on this entity. Collaboration on defining the entity can be 
done, but under the owner’s supervision and permission. In 
some cases, owners may allow contrasting opinions if the 
draw-back of censuring is bigger than the contrast itself, but 
contributors have no rights to demand a fair acknowledgement 
of their positions. This is the approach of Facebook and 
Google+ pages, of Google maps about places and of websites 
integrating 
social 
media 
features. 
The 
collaboration 
mechanisms are meant to mediate the asymmetric relation 
between one owner and many contributors with no rights. 
Considering Facebook applied to our example, the dean 
will open an official Facebook page [8] of the school, giving 
the responsibility of managing contents to an employee that 
will 
publish 
only 
general 
information 
and 
official 
announcements. If the dean wants, the page can collect 
comments, which will be moderated by the same employee, 
or simply ignored. It will result in parents and students 
opening their own groups about specific topics or even fake 
or unofficial pages about the school in order to express other 
positions than the official one. 
Considering Wikipedia, a contrast of opinions will be 
resolved asking for sources such as the official school website 
or the school board documents. The hierarchy of sources leads 
to the users’ hierarchy. 
Anyone can add information on Google maps, but in order 
to claim the ownership of a place [7], a postal card is sent to 
the declared address in order to verify the owner identity. But 
then, once a place is mapped, also anonymous users can 
indiscriminately post comments, ratings and pictures which 
the owner has to keep in check in order to avoid attacks from 
rivals. 
In any case, the perspective is unique and limited by the 
tool. The result is the multiplication of entry points, which is 
not a problem for Google and Facebook but it is for users that 
must know where to search information. In these systems, 
interactions among users are simple and clear but mostly left 
to the good will of the owner, which has actually no 
obligations toward others. The acceptability is very low for 
the excluded users that are the large majority. 
Self-regulating communities such as tech forum are basing 
the moderation system on users’ reputation gained by 
contributing to the system. These approaches have many 
limitations based on the implicit assumption that users are 
experts of the whole domain which can be more or less true in 
domain forums but definitely it is not true on a generalist 
platform. In other words, a user may spend his/her reputation 
outside their expertise field. Furthermore, voting system leads 
to a result which can be right or wrong, more or less favourite 
by the community, but in general a result which is quite 
difficult to overrule in the future. This is not a problem in tech 
forums because a new question can always be open (in 
particular regarding a new version of a problem) but in our 
scenario the goal is to keep an entity dynamic and alive 
preventing the definitive establishment of a position. 
 
III. 
GENERAL APPROACH 
In this Section, we address the issues we identified as key 
points in building the civic platform as a trustworthy 
environment.   
A. Legitimacy 
The evaluation of legitimacy is left to users that can make 
their own evaluation about the relevance of the contribution 
shared on the platform w.r.t. to their authors, their context and 
their area or theme of interest. On the platform, users can be 
registered as single citizen or as collective bodies like 
organizations, associations, institutions, local authorities, 
business, etc. Non-anonymity is one of the principle assumed 
as prerequisite to model and design interactions and 
functionalities. 
While a citizen could be not entitled to provide an official 
representation of an urban entity, his/her experience could be 
valuable for other users. Following our running example, the 
experience expressed by former students may be much more 
relevant than a dean statement about how the school 
experience will be for your children. 
On the contrary, the level of accountability of information 
shared by local administrative offices about services or public 
programmes is stronger than a general contribution shared by 
citizens. 
In real life, people perform this kind of evaluation all the 
time making assumptions based on their goal and perspective, 
and on the official role and competences of other subjects they 
interact with. In our platform, we let users decide the 
relevance of contents in relation to their experience without 
relying on recommendation systems based on popularity or 
user profile, since a CSN is oriented only to the public 
dimension and exclude any form of user profiling [13]. 
B. Sharing responsibilities over contents 
Non-anonymity is the first step to take responsibility about 
contents. The relation between the platform and shared urban 
spaces, or the connection between virtual space and real space, 
reinforces the awareness of consequences related to personal 
actions and statement in the public sphere, containing 
incorrect and uncooperative behaviours. Experimental 
evidences we collected during our participatory workshops 
confirmed that associating identity and actions at local scale 
discourage inappropriate conduct.  
In addition, the responsibility over contents should be 
shared among the interested parties in order to ensure plurality 
and cooperation on building common urban entities. We can 
define users investing enough energy as those recognized 
worth 
of 
responsibility 
as 
proactive 
contributors. 
Proactiveness is not related to the production of digital 
contents in general, but is related to the documentation of real 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

actions having an effect at local level using the platform 
functionalities to enhance processes and outcomes. On the 
contrary, sharing opinions does not mean be proactive, 
because not necessarily an opinion is related to an active 
involvement in local initiatives and projects. 
We decided to structure entities (places, events, groups, 
insights, news) as complex objects. Each of them have a single 
evident entry point giving access to all point of views and sub 
entities, rather than multiplying the entity for each point of 
view. Structuring entities can still enable the chance of having 
different responsible groups for different purposes. In other 
terms, we propose content driven solutions to represent shared 
responsibilities among players acting on the same places. 
IV. 
TECHNICAL SOLUTIONS 
In this Section, we introduce the solutions we developed 
to build entities as shared workplace for heterogeneous local 
actors. 
A. First-order Entities and Second-order Entities 
Our platform has a map-based main interface. In other 
words, we separate the mapping activity from the 
interpretation of a place and the documentation of activities 
and project carried out from users, because we are interested 
in collecting social information rather than geographical 
entities. 
Technically speaking, we make a distinction between 
entity properties and description properties: we have first 
order entities working as shared entry points and second order 
entities. We define a shared set of primary properties 
belonging to the entity and that must be defined in the creation 
process (sandbox [15]): title, valid time interval, categories, 
tags, external URL, coordinates (latitude and longitude). Each 
primary entity may have specific primary properties, for 
instance: events have door time, duration, organizer, attendees 
and performer (The entity properties are mostly inspired to 
entities of schema.org specifications [16]). Primary properties 
should be more or less objective in order to avoid the 
proliferation of homonymous entities. Following the example, 
we want to avoid many parallel entries about the same school 
letting the first one defining a “place” school without having 
the concern of making a general or official description. 
Then, we defined a set of second order entities describing 
a primary entity. The second order entities are available for 
any primary order entity as its complement and to any user, 
except into groups where the content creation is reserved only 
to the group members. The second order entities are meant to 
be fast to create. As today, we implemented: descriptions 
requiring a title and a text (Figure 1 (b)), comments requiring 
just text and images. 
Light-weighted entities enriched with secondary-order 
entities as properties result in sharable entry points for 
collecting different perspectives by different users, as second-
order entities Figure 1 (c). 
 
      
      
 
                                        (a)                                                                                  (b)                                                                           (c) 
Figure 1. A place containing an event (a). The description for (b), and a description added to a place created by a different author (c). 
B. Relations Among Entities 
Managing typed single entry points is not enough to catch 
the complexity of real life entities. In general, we consider part 
of relations among entities of the same type: 
1. A place can contain sub-places, such as office rooms 
2. An event can be composed by several sub events  
3. Articles can have sub-topics 
4. Groups can be spliced in operative or thematic sub-
groups. 
Moreover, we introduced additional relations: 
1. “location”, from an event to a place 
2. “news of” from news to an entity that is not a news 
“group of” from a group toward an entity 
3. “group from” an entity to a group 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

Adding relations among entities results in enabling the 
possibility to build complex structures from a single entry 
point from different users’ contributions. 
For instance, following the running example, the “place” 
school can host events, organized in many sub-events, and 
groups, structured around a class or a type of activity. An 
event organized by a sport organization can be independent 
from the school context, but it can be hosted in the school and 
the same for the news related to this event (registration, 
updates, etc.) 
       
 
                   (a)                                                      (b) 
Figure 2. A place two sub places and an event in FirstLife wall (a). A map view with the first version of the timeline (b). 
C. Relations Among Authors, Moderators and Contributors 
An entry point is the result of one user action but one user, 
even if legitimate, cannot cover all points of view about an 
urban entity. Moreover, one user should not have the 
monopoly of an entity for many reasons: 
1. Lack of perspective, as we just stated he/she cannot 
pretend to express everything can be said about an entity; 
2. Dynamic 
reality: things change and so users’ 
commitments toward taking care of a piece of 
information can change; 
3. Excess of responsibility: the burden is too heavy from the 
user perspective, and the risk of missing an important and 
vital piece of the puzzle is too high from the community 
perspective; 
4. Coproduction of social reality: nothing social is made by 
one person but everything requires others, and thus their 
representation. 
We do not recognize the role of owner, but the greatest 
importance is referred to contributors. Each first level entity 
has one initiator (the first contributor) and a set of 
contributors. Starting from an entry point, in parallel with the 
graph of entities, we defined a network of collaborations 
replacing the standard friendship/following-relations of 
social networks. Users are connected through contents and so 
they share the responsibility of taking care of contents, by 
acting at content level. 
The initiators still play an important role at the beginning, 
but on the contrary of other web 2.0 and social network 
mechanisms, the burden is released as the entities becomes 
more complex relying on collective moderation. Contributors 
are engaged in self moderating themselves, being notified 
about activities and comments added to the entity they 
contribute to create, and they can comment, report abuses or 
eventually delete a contribution. 
A user can always be identified by playing the contributor 
or the moderator role resulting in exposing yourself and your 
own reputation. Contributor and moderators conduct must be 
compliant with the guidelines included in the ethical code of 
the platform. Moreover, they can always report abuses to the 
platform administrators. 
V. 
EVALUATION AND OPEN ISSUES 
In this section we present results of the first design- phase 
where we tested the considering scenario. In particular, we 
held a specific series of workshops involving local 
stakeholders such as organised citizens, organisations, local 
authorities, local institutions, universities, schools, traders 
associations, etc. (about 70 meetings with a total of 1500 
participants) to collect and testing scenarios, which where 
formalized as object diagrams and user stories. Moreover, we 
involved a full class of prospective geographers from the 
University of Turin in order to test the mechanisms we 
designed and implemented from a domain-expert point of 
view. 
As result, some open issues have arisen: 
1. Categorization fallacy: the first user still has a huge 
impact in defining an entity category; 
2. Events stickiness: events and other timed entities tend to 
stick together; the timeline is not used in its extend 
3. Unused comments: comments at entity level are not used 
as expected, on the other hand comments can be used to 
notify issues at description level. The right level of 
comments is too bounded to the type of entity but, in 
general, enabling comments for second level entities is a 
need 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

4. Balancing moderator power: the problem in finding a 
suitable policy to extend the moderator role from author 
to contributors is due the power of moderator itself. In 
order to establish a policy, we need to balance the 
moderator power with a double check from the crowd. 
In the following, we analyse those four open issues using user 
stories and use cases in order to revise the solutions we 
implemented. 
A. Categorization Fallacy 
Extracting descriptions from entities was a solution to 
limit the authors’ responsibility in defining entities and make 
the creation process faster. In particular, we decided to open 
entities to different contributors and to enable the creation of 
multi-facet entities. Considering the categorization fallacy, we 
did not accomplish the latter objective completely. 
Considering the lesson learned from experimentations with 
university students, we found that the categorization task is 
strongly influenced by the current user goal, even when there 
is no room for misunderstandings. 
An 
emblematic 
example 
is 
the 
supermarket 
categorization. Since university students do not go to 
supermarkets for common shopping like anyone else, but for 
lunch, we found many grocery stores categorized as 
“restaurants” rather than “market”. 
This issue can be addressed through many strategies, but 
we may revise the constraints collected so far: 
1. We want to avoid conflicts 
2. We wish to avoid multiple categorization, without a 
proper justification 
3. We do not want to take sides 
The solution we came to require to relax a “wish to have” 
constraint, or in other words, we need multiple categories to 
be defined by different users. On the other hand, losing a crisp 
classification of entities may result in a foggy definition of 
entities, it would be nice to bind categories to proper 
justifications. 
For this reason, we decided to split categories in functional 
categories and properties. We found that the most objective 
categories can be considered as entity properties (i.e. the event 
cost). Moreover, we also moved functional categories to 
second-order entities in order to bound a categorization to a 
visual or textual context. 
Revising the previous example: now a student can classify 
a grocery store as supermarket because connecting the 
category to a description about having lunch there. 
B. Events stickiness 
In a first prototype, we introduced a timeline as time 
filtering control and as an exploration tool for timed entities 
[14]. The timeline was continuous ranging from centuries to 
seconds, giving to users total control in defining the period of 
interest. What we did not realize was that most of daily 
activities take place at the same time. For instance, we sleep 
1/3 of day hours and the work activities are mostly condensed 
from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m. The result was having few spots of the 
timeline condensed with events and most of the timeline 
useless. 
Furthermore, the “freedom” of the previous timeline 
resulted in scaring users: they did not get what they were 
doing and which was the connection between map and 
timeline. 
Since the timeline goal was to give an idea of the presence 
or not of timed entities on the map, we decided to rebuild the 
timeline from scratch following few principles: 
1. It is not possible to access to entity through the timeline 
2. The timeline need to provide a qualitative (entity type) 
and qualitative (ratio) evaluation of what is currently 
visualized on the map; 
3. The timeline should be support human interpretation. 
In order to support user interpretation, we first split the 
timeline in time steps: months, weeks, days, night, morning, 
afternoon and evening. Each step was enriched with a 
qualitative and quantitative bar displaying the ratio of timed 
entities for each entity type, avoiding any direct reference to 
the single entities (Figure 3 , Figure 2 (b)). 
 
 
Figure 3. The timeline is slit in steps easy making it easier to read for users, 
i.e. weeks in a month. Each step shows the ratio of timed entity types. 
With this new setup, users can consider much more 
intuitive the interaction with the time-line clicking on a step 
to zoom in and focus the map on the timeframe they wanted. 
C. Unused comments 
The general platform setup should engage users in be 
useful to others leaving the “guts” to other social networks. It 
worked so well that users ignored the comment feature 
completely. We thought deep about providing or not 
comments but in the end, we integrated comments because we 
knew we were missing a method to ask questions or pointing 
errors. The transformation of description and pictures from 
simple properties to second-order entities had the drawback of 
making comments mostly unused. 
Starting from the original goal, we extended comments to 
pictures and descriptions, restoring their original purpose. 
D. Balancing moderator power 
We spent a large amount of time trying to define a policy 
to extend moderator privileges from authors to moderators. 
Despite our effort, we did not come up to any general solution, 
which can consider different lifecycles of entities. The 
problem lies on the definition of “contributor”: what a user 
should do and how long we need to wait until promoting a 
user from the role of contributor to the moderator level? 
Each policy required an assumption about the original 
author will to check contributors in an objective way, or 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

having contributes being checked by the crowd fast enough to 
rise eventual complains in time. Are those strategies general 
enough? 
We found plenty of counterexamples based on different 
lifecycles of information. For instance, there are entities, 
which are mostly used in very short time and others that are 
not used much. In this second case, how long should we wait? 
Furthermore, an author can leave FirstLife without checking 
contribution or prevent any contribution at all deleting 
systematically everything. This is a wicked problem [24]. 
After evaluating social and technical constraints, we 
decided to bind content moderation in a double check 
mechanism: a moderator can delete or modify a content if 
there is a “report” from a different user. This solution reduces 
the impact of the policy we are trying to define, lowering 
users’ expectations and concerns about it. 
We found the moderation mechanism be the main 
problem. The common pattern gives the power to delete or 
modify contents without control or justification. This is not 
compatible 
with 
the 
multi 
perspective 
collaborative 
environment we are trying to build. Moreover, it was forcing 
the introduction of a mechanism to require the intervention of 
an external editor, which is something we really wish to avoid. 
We still need to define in detail a suitable policy, but 
nevertheless we reduced expectations and make the impact of 
this policy less critical since we expect the policy definition 
process a never-ending challenge. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS 
Designing a collaborative civic social network is a huge 
challenge itself, stressing common solutions in scenario where 
users are engaged both online and offline, and in which 
different point of view need to coexist. In this contribution, we 
revised the solutions we developed during one year of 
participatory design. In particular, we focused on three 
specific aspects related to the construction of a model: 
1. Supporting interactions on shared use of entities, 
2. Supporting common sense interpretation about urban 
entities, 
3. Defining a mechanism to share responsibilities over 
contents among multiple contributors. 
Categorization was one of the few top-down features we had 
in order to support the map-based visualization system. 
Moving the category attribution from first order to second 
order entities, we managed to build a richer description 
system avoiding the introduction of moderation mechanisms. 
Finally, we enabled comments for second order entities, in 
order to support users’ self-moderation and self-aid in 
maintaining entities correctness. 
Having a shared environment with contributions of 
different types and for different purposes makes the CSN quite 
complex. We found very important to simplify the 
mechanisms where possible, and in particular we designed a 
hybrid timeline based on the classical calendar views: year, 
month, week, day. 
The most challenging task was to tackle an impossible 
problem such as making contributors trust each other on a web 
platform sharing the moderator role. Studying the problem, 
we found that we needed a less powerful role of “moderator”. 
A light moderation requiring a double check from a second 
user resulted to be much more acceptable and easy to 
understand rather than sophisticate policies based on time 
intervals and users’ visualizations. 
As partial conclusion, this process did not end yet and it 
will most likely not end because, as society changes, 
technology needs to follow and be updated,  in particular in 
term of addressing new needs and facing new requirements 
and expectations. 
Currently, we are developing a new set of features for 
supporting group coordination and process patterns. The new 
solutions will be tested in the next months in three trial sites 
within the H2020 project “WeGovNow!” [23]. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
A. Ray. Reviewing the Author-Function in the Age of Wikipedia Amit 
Ray and Erhardt Graeff. Originality, imitation, and plagiarism: 
teaching writing in the digital age, 39, 2008. 
[2] 
A. M. Kaplan, and M. Haenlein. Users of the world, unite! The 
challenges and opportunities of Social Media. Business horizons 53.1, 
59-68, 2010. 
[3] 
J. H. Kietzmann, K. Hermkens, I. P. McCarthy, and B. S. Silvestre. 
Social media? Get serious! Understanding the functional building 
blocks of social media. Business horizons, 54(3), 241-251, 2011. 
[4] 
E. Gordon, and P. Mihailidis. Civic Media: Technology, Design, 
Practice. MIT Press, 2016. 
[5] 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Reviewing [retrieved June 
2016] 
[6] 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Editorial_oversight_and_con
trol [retrieved June 2016] 
[7] 
https://support.google.com/business/#topic=4539639 [retrieved June 
2016] 
[8] 
https://www.facebook.com/page_guidelines.php [retrieved June 2016] 
[9] 
https://www.facebook.com/help/162866443847527/ [retrieved June 
2016] 
[10] J. Pasek, E. More, and D. Romer. Realizing the social Internet? Online 
social networking meets offline civic engagement." Journal of 
Information Technology & Politics 6.3-4, 197-215, 2009. 
[11] http://wegovnow.firstlife.di.unito.it [retrieved June 2016] 
[12] http://schema.org [retrieved June 2016] 
[13] A. Antonini, G. Boella, L. Lupi, C. Schifanella. Civic social network: 
a challenge for co- production of contents about common urban 
entities. CollabTech 2016, accepted paper. 
[14] https://almende.github.io/chap-links-library/timeline.html 
[retrieved 
June 2016] 
[15] http://test.firstlife.di.unito.it/ [retrieved June 2016] 
[16] http://schema.org/ [retrieved June 2016] 
[17] http://www.openstreetmap.org/ [retrieved October 2016] 
[18] https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/ [retrieved October 2016] 
[19] http://geokey.org.uk/ [retrieved October 2016] 
[20] https://pinterest.com/categories/ [retrieved October 2016] 
[21] https://developer.foursquare.com/categorytree 
[retrieved 
October 
2016] 
[22] https://twitter.com/i/streams/category/687094907350036504 
[retrieved October 2016] 
[23] http://wegovnow.eu [retrieved October 2016] 
[24] B. Richard. Wicked problems in design thinking. Design issues 8.2 
(1992): 5-2
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

