Mobilty Services – Does Individual Optimization Scale Out? 
 
Thomas Schuster 
Faculty for Economy and Law 
Pforzheim University of Applied Sciences  
Pforzheim, Germany 
e-mail: thomas.schuster@hs-pforzheim.de 
Maik Herfurth 
Global Information Technology 
Hilti Befestigungstechnik AG 
Buchs SG, Switzerland 
e-mail: maik.herfurth@hilti.com 
 
 
 
Abstract— Mobility in industrialized nations is characterized by 
individual transport. Especially since the 50`s of the last cen-
tury, individual mobility is based on automobility. The age of 
automobility still influences and shapes the infrastructure de-
velopment of our cities. While the model of a car-friendly city 
has evolved a lot, it does not seem to be capable to generate effi-
cient means of transportation. This becomes worse in emerging 
metropolitan areas with large growth rates. Besides congestion, 
pollution is a main issue, especially in fast growing metropolitan 
areas. Nowadays, a lot of new mobility services are offered 
through the internet. Besides mobility based on cars, these ser-
vices incorporate intermodal mobility, as well as third domain 
offers, which may reduce our individual mobility. In this article, 
we will provide an overview of such services and derive insights 
about their possible impact. 
Keywords - Mobility; intermodal mobility; sharing economy; 
e-services 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Growth of population and increased traffic because of 
both individual mobility as well as cargo logistics lead to con-
gestion and pollution [1]–[3]. Metropolitan areas, especially, 
suffer from those effects. A large amount of these issues are 
caused by automobility. During the 20th century the model 
of a car-friendly city has been developed and evolved. Espe-
cially in industrialized countries, cars dominate infrastructure 
development. Areas with more than 800.000 inhabitants suf-
fer from congestion peaks as the TomTom Traffic Index [4] 
indicates. The congestion level (CL) is measured as the in-
crease in overall travel time compared to an uncongested sit-
uation. In general, the congestion level (CL) is considerably 
high, however, the evening peaks (EP) are typically the worst 
time to commute using a car (compare Tab. 1). Hence, traffic 
planning and management is usually focused on road plan-
ning and construction. 
The public sector seeks to implement and promote alter-
native modes of transport. Public transport for instance is 
usually subsidized at community, regional or national level. 
In some countries, e.g., United Kingdom, public-private-part-
nerships are concluded to operate public transport. Some-
times regulations are made to support alternative transport 
modes. One famous and successful example is the London 
congestion charge [5]. It is observed that the charge reduces 
traffic, which is caused by cars by 14% and congestion, is 
reduced by 30% [5]. 
Another example of support for other modes of transport 
is the regulations that we put in place. In late 1950's, for in-
stance, the ministry of transport in Germany tried to support 
rail based cargo by reducing maximum size of trucks and 
trailers. This turned out to be ineffective since manufacturers 
developed a new type of truck – a smaller driving cab allowed 
to enlarge loading. Unquestionably, there are a lot of exam-
ples where the public sector tried to or successfully influ-
enced the choice of transportation mode of people. On the 
other hand, looking at individual mobility, costs associated 
with buying and operating a car decreased, compared to av-
erage wage and hence promoted ownership and usage of cars. 
In this article logistics represent an import part of traffic and 
we will focus on individual mobility. The remainder of this 
article is structured as follows: in section 2 we will present 
some statistics with focus on usage and change on transport 
modes. Furthermore, we will discuss related work on reduc-
tion of traffic congestion. Challenges which arise from these 
observations will be discussed in section 3. Section 4 deals 
with services that promise further shift in transport utilization 
and hence, might be able to improve the overall situation. Fi-
nally, section 5 of this article concludes with findings and an 
outlook on future work. 
II. RELATED WORK 
In this section we will analyse statistical traffic data and 
discuss related work. The next subsection contains statistical 
data about traffic development and mobility behavior of peo-
ple. Especially, mono modal car utilization and increased in-
termodal travel behavior. The second sub sections will pre-
sent typical approaches to reduce congestion levels. 
A. A statistical view on traffic 
Areas with high economic growth rates, often in develop-
ing countries, suffer most of the traffic congestion (see Tab. 
1 and [1]). Typically, this is related to a significant increase 
in passenger car use (e.g., as recorded in Turkey). In contrast, 
the relative importance of the passenger car as main mode of 
transport in passenger traffic decreased in 13 member states 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

of the EU. This trend is led by Italy (in the period from 2002 
to 2012 passenger car share fell by 4.4 percentage points) fol-
lowed by Luxembourg (2.7 points) and the United Kingdom 
(2.4 points) and can also be observed in three of the largest 
EU Member States - Germany, Spain and France. Average 
numbers of the ten best EU countries are shown in Fig. 1 (also 
see [6]).  
In contrast to some decades ago, people are less attracted 
by a single mode of transport. While cars are still dominant 
we observe changes, and growth in alternative modes of 
transport (e.g., rail and bicycle). Both changes are often re-
lated to sharing concepts and internet based mobility services. 
As shown in Fig. 2, especially young people are increasingly 
utilizing all modes of transportation [7]. They reveal multi-
modal travel behavior. Multimodal travel behavior is re-
vealed when people switch their main mode of transport for 
longer trips (e.g., different trips in the course of one week). 
Similarly, intermodal travel behavior is becoming more fa-
mous. An intermodal trip can be defined as a combination of 
several transportation modes during a single trip, e.g., a trip 
with public transport in combination with bicycle or car. Fur-
thermore, different modes of transport seem to be adopted in 
respect to specific situations (context of travel and personal 
preferences). 
TABLE 1: CONGESTION LEVEL (CL) - TOP 15 CITIES [4] 
 
Looking at statistical data available for Europe, it seems 
that reduction of mono modal car utilization and increased 
intermodal travel behavior is also related to age and internet 
affinity. According to Eurostat [6], internet based services 
also experience higher growth rates in countries which are 
successful in promoting alternative modes of transport. This, 
especially, is interesting regarding forecasts of overall modal 
development. At this time, we know that younger people are 
more likely to become intermodal travelers. While there is a 
correlation to adoption of sharing concepts and internet us-
age. Nevertheless, today it is still not clear if there is also a 
causal connection. Thus, an open question is, if these people 
change their behavior once they become older or if they keep 
their attitude as it is – another possible causal connection 
might be the level of income or other personal preferences 
which change with age. 
 
Figure 1: Modal split - Top 10 EU countries in train growth [6] 
 
Figure 2: Share of people with multimodal transport behavior 
B. Approaches taken to improve traffic flow 
Different approaches have been taken to reduce traffic 
congestion. This incorporates basically three distinct ideas: 
(1) reducing congestion by upgrading infrastructure, (2) 
avoiding congestion based on intelligent routing and (3) re-
ducing congestion through alternative services. The latter in-
cludes the idea of utilizing different transportation modes and 
the concept of services to reduce the need for individual mo-
bility. 
In this case, changes in infrastructure belong to the field 
of urban or regional traffic planning and management. Within 
the last decades a lot of research based on predictive analytics 
and methods of operations research has been conducted to 
Rank City
CL
+/-
MP
EP
1
Mexico City (MEX)
59%
4% 97%
94%
2
Bangkok (THA)
57%
0% 85% 114%
3
Łódź (PL)
54% -2% 72%
98%
4
Istanbul (TUR)
50% -8% 62%
94%
5
Rio de Janeiro (BRA) 47% -4% 66%
79%
6
Moscow (RUS)
44% -6% 71%
91%
7
Bucharest (ROU)
43%
2% 83%
87%
8
Salvador (BRA)
43% -3% 67%
74%
9
Recife (BRA)
43% -2% 72%
75%
10
Chengdu (CHN)
41%
5% 73%
81%
11
Palermo (ITA)
41% -1% 62%
66%
12
Los Angeles (USA)
41%
2% 60%
81%
13
Saint Petersburg (RUS)40% -4% 64%
88%
14
Belfast (GBR)
40%
1% 82%
86%
15
Dublin (IRL)
40%
2% 85%
81%
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

improve traffic planning. Traffic models to support infra-
structure planning characteristically recognize individual be-
havior (including when, where and why a user will travel). In 
a second step individual behavior is aggregated to an overall 
network behavior which can provide information for sound 
decisions concerning management, control, and improve-
ment of traffic infrastructure [8], [9]. On behalf of the society, 
these calculations are utilized to make decisions for public 
investments. Hence, traffic planning is typically based on a 
hierarchical process [8], [10], where decisions made by the 
public sector seek improvements of the overall performance 
of the traffic network. Since many people travel by car, a lot 
of these efforts lead to road construction. 
Since people tend to make their choice with regards to ac-
tivity, route, travel mode, origin and destination of their travel 
and of course personal preferences, a lot of research has been 
conducted about route optimization [8]. This area of optimi-
zation research does not focus on individual mobility, but ra-
ther on cargo transport. For cargo and larger fleets, route op-
timization can save time and cost for carriers. Of course, if 
routes are optimal in terms of fuel consumption, the  carbon 
dioxide emission is also reduced. Intelligent routing has been 
under research since almost 50 years. It includes the idea of 
re-routing based on the current traffic situation and pre-trip 
planning based on traffic prediction. The presumption for 
route guidance based on real-time traffic information is that 
traffic congestion can be reduced by intelligent routing [11]. 
A lot of different algorithms and types of presentation  have 
been tested during the last decades [12]. This development 
was initiated by large metropolitan areas during 60's and 
early 70's, which began to develop and test technologies for 
traffic surveillance and real-time information dissemination. 
Nowadays the transportation development is driven by infor-
mation based on Wi-Fi networks, smartphones and other GPS 
devices (e.g., car integrated systems) which are utilized by 
modern information systems and their operators – here navi-
gation, e.g., TomTom or Google just to name a few of them 
[13]–[15]. It has been agreed that there is a saturation effect 
once information is used by a certain amount of users [16]. 
Therefore, routing algorithms have also been extended with 
parking models [17], [18] and ad-hoc mode switches [19]–
[22]. Alongside several approaches have been suggested in 
logistics, including routing, as well as alternative transporta-
tion modes [20], [23]–[25]. 
Information can cause drivers to change departure times 
in such a way that influences congestion. Besides intelligent 
routing and information systems, there is another psycholog-
ical aspect. Users tend to adopt suggestions once their prefer-
ences are met. This includes the design of user interface, 
transportation mode (in case of ad-hoc switch), cost, approx-
imate delay, and driver comfort [12]. 
III. CHALLENGES AND MOTIVATION 
On one hand, in many metropolitan areas people seem to 
accept that they have to deal with congestion during their 
daily routine. Nevertheless, with high growth rates this situa-
tion even turns worse. On the other hand, looking at current 
growth rates of metropolitan areas and reports on traffic con-
gestion as discussed above, it seems obvious that new solu-
tions are needed to improve the overall mobility situation. A 
couple of different challenges can be derived from these is-
sues, which apply for regions all over the globe. Amongst 
others, four important challenges to overcome the current 
problems are: 
1. Service offerings to reduce mobility demand 
2. Congestion level reduction 
3. Options of traffic mode enlargement 
4. Carbon dioxide emission reduction 
If services reduce the need to travel, this would be proba-
bly the easiest solution to reduce congestion and pollution. 
Surrounded by current discussions on industry 4.0 and digi-
talization, services could transform work and life in ways 
which reduce travel activities because of meetings or even 
prevent daily commuting. Some services might just reverse 
current principles, so that users receive goods instead of ac-
tively obtaining them [20], [26]. Others, e.g., video confer-
encing or telework, promise to reduce mobility in general. 
The latter seems promising, but despite further development 
in technology, the effects in recent years where considerably 
low. Hence, and even in car-characterized metropolitan areas, 
new and alternative mobility services can be observed cur-
rently. These services are often related to sharing concepts 
where people either share their own goods (in this case, usu-
ally a car) with others or a commercial provider offers goods 
to share. This idea gains an increasing popularity in recent 
years. 
IV. MOBILITY SERVICES 
Looking at the service level, it can be observed that mo-
bility services are offered for various kinds of purposes. 
Within this article, we intend to have a closer look at one very 
promising kind, the so called mobility services (mobility-as-
a-service or MaaS) which have been proposed and promoted 
as approach to achieve more sustainable transportation [27]. 
We strive to shed light in the current market situation, espe-
cially reachability and possible impacts are part of our explo-
ration. MaaS are typically associated with a shift away from 
personally owned towards mobility solutions consumed as a 
service. To enact MaaS, services are currently offered by 
public and private transportation providers often employing 
a unified gateway that creates and manages trips. Opposed to 
subscriptions (e.g., a monthly fee), users can often pay per 
use, e.g., per trip based on time and distance. MaaS is offered 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

for both people and goods. For individual mobility it often 
encompasses individual preferences which are considered in 
offers and planning of trips. Currently, mobility service offers 
are quite diversified and often related to sharing economy, 
examples are ridesharing, car sharing, carpooling, bike shar-
ing, as well as on-demand pop-up bus services. In this article, 
mobility services of the following categories are further ana-
lyzed: car sharing, ridesharing, carpooling and multimodal 
trip planning. We will provide a definition for all of these ser-
vice categories.  
Carsharing is an umbrella term that covers multiple types 
of sharing. Carsharing (US) or car clubs (UK) is a model of 
car rental where people rent cars for short periods of time, 
often by the hour. They are attractive to customers who only 
occasional use a vehicle, as well as those who like to have 
occasional access to vehicles of a different type than they use 
day-to-day. The provider renting the vehicle may be a com-
mercial business or the users may be organized as a company, 
public agency, cooperative, or ad hoc grouping. In conse-
quence, car sharing includes B2B, B2C and C2C offerings 
including informal peer-to-peer (P2P) arrangements. Cars 
may be available at fixed stations (dedicated parking spots) 
or on a free-floating basis, which allows users to drop their 
vehicle at any legal spot within a defined zone. Currently, car 
sharing is taking hold in large urban areas. The global usage 
of car sharing is rapidly growing in recent years. As measured 
by number of vehicles, the growth rate was over 800% over 
a period of eight years (2006 to 2014). As measured in num-
ber of users, the growth was even 1400% in the same period 
[28]. More recent press releases seem to confirm this devel-
opment. The largest markets currently are the Asia-Pacific 
region (including Australia, China, Hong Kong, Japan, Ma-
laysia, New Zealand, Singapore, South Korea, and Taiwan), 
Europe (including Turkey and Russia) and North America 
(including Canada and the United States). Besides classic 
combustion engines, more and more electrically powered 
cars are being operated by carsharing providers. 
Ridesharing, as second type of service, involves being 
driven rather than driving, and has existed on an informal ba-
sis for as long as there have been cars. Ridesharing has 
evolved into organized taxi services and more recently, into 
new models such as offered by companies like Uber or Lyft. 
Carpooling is the best way of reducing costs by sharing a car, 
which are divided among the occupants, and also reducing 
the number of vehicles on the road, with the corresponding 
reduction in pollution, consumption, accidents and parking 
problems [18], [29]. Multimodal trip planning services are 
smart travel assistance tools which provide pre- and on-trip 
travel planning. Information provided to the customer is usu-
ally planning data of public transport often enriched with 
real-time traffic information. The services offer information 
such as road network and traffic conditions. Data is typically 
collected from various mobility providers and often is pro-
vided with real-time precision [30]. 
We analyzed 51 mobility services within these categories. 
We included those services which have emerged in the last 
five years and could sustain on the mobility market. It is no-
table that most services somehow incorporate sharing con-
cepts. We are classifying these mobility services into the fol-
lowing groups: 
 Peer-to-peer sharing services (P2P): private peer-to-
peer arrangements to rent private owned vehicles. Typ-
ically, a mobility provider offers a marketplace. 
 Sharing service providers (B2C): professional mobil-
ity providers offer (rental) vehicles in station-based or 
free-floating models. 
 Ridesharing services (B2C): professional mobility 
providers act as a broker to provide driving services 
with private and business cars. 
 Carpooling services (P2P): Individuals are sharing a 
car together. Mobility providers offer a marketplace. 
 Multimodal trip planning services (B2C): Mobility 
providers are providing trip planning by offering mul-
timodal mobility. 
The analyzed mobility services are characterized by dif-
ferent types of services (see Tab. 1). A huge potential is given 
by business car rental services (32% of analyzed services). 
Bike and car sharing services experience huge growth rate 
followed by private car rental services (18%) and private car 
lifts (13%). Most of these mobility services can be requested 
instantly (55%) and are also provided as planned request 
(45%). 80% of the offered mobility services are single trans-
portation mode, 20% are multi transportation mode.  
Currently, the majority of multimodal services are infor-
mation only services. This means they provide information 
but booking is not an option. Looking at geography, most of 
the mobility services we analyzed are provided in Germany 
only (25%), followed by global services and in Europe oper-
ating services (20%) and those offered in US (14%).  
V. CONCLUSION 
Recently, it is noteworthy that a lot of mobility services 
have been placed on the market. It is also expected that this 
market will be consolidated and may reach saturation. This 
also depends on viable or publicly subsidized (e.g., bike shar-
ing in Germany) business models. Looking at the identified 
categories, various peer-to-peer sharing services with similar 
mobility service offerings which include acting as agency for 
private cars, providing a marketplace, assurance services and 
personal user reviews can be observed. 
 
 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

TABLE 2: MOBILITY SERVICES 
 
 
Mobility service
Service Type
Belongs to
Service range Distance Information
getaround
private car sharing
US
s,m,l
200.000 users
turo
private car sharing
US
s,m,l
drivy
private car sharing
Europe
s,m,l
38.000 cars
tamyca
private car sharing
Germany
s,m,l
carunity
private car sharing
Opel (operated by tamyca)
Germany
s,m,l
SnappCar
private car sharing
Europe
s,m,l
Ryde
private car sharing
Asia
s,m,l
Mavendrive
car sharing
US
s,m,l
Autolib
e-car sharing
France
s,m,l
3.000 electric cars, 6.600 charging stations
Orix
car sharing
Japan
s,m,l
Park24
car sharing
Japan
s,m,l
eCar
car sharing
Citroen
Germany
s,m,l
250 e-cars
EVCARD
e-car sharing
China
s,m,l
1.500 e-cars
Car2Go
car & e-car sharing
Daimler
Global
s,m,l
14.500 cars, 1.600 e-cars, 1.900.000 users
mobility
car sharing
Switzerland
s,m,l
finkster
car sharing
Deutsche Bahn
Europe
s,m,l
6.000 cars, 300.000 users
stadtmobil
car & e-car sharing
Germany
s,m,l
4.000 cars, 52.000 users
zipcar
car sharing
AVIS
Global
s,m,l
DriveNow
car & e-car sharing
BMW, SIXT
Europe
s,m,l
4.700 cars, 500.000 users
ReachNow
car & e-car sharing
BMW
US
s,m,l
cambio carsharing
car & e-car sharing
Europe
s,m,l
4.600 cars, 79.600 users
eMio
e-scooter
Germany
s,m
COUP
e-scooter
Germany
s,m
Yugo
scooter
Spain
s,m
motit
scooter
Europe
s,m
scoo.me
scooter
Germany
s,m
scoot
scooter
US
s,m
nextbike
bicycle
Germany
s
Call a Bike
bicycle
Deutsche Bahn
Germany
s
MeinRad
bicycle
Germany
s
MVG Rad
bicycle
Germany
s
1.200 bikes
bikesurf
bicycle
Global
s
BbikeMi
bicycle
Italy
s
Bycyklen
bicycle
Danemark
s
uber
marketplace
Global
s,m,(l)
160.000 drivers
taxi magic / curb
cab marketplace
US
s,m,(l)
50.000 taxis, 100.000 drivers, 65 cities
mytaxi
cab marketplace
Daimler
Germany
s,m,(l)
45.000 taxis
GroundLink
limousine marketplace
Global
s,m,(l)
45.000 cars
lyft
car pool marketplace
Global
m,l
collecting Starbucks points
bla bla car
car pool marketplace
Europe
m,l
karzoo
car pool marketplace
Europe
m,l
mitfahren
car pool marketplace
Europe
m,l
e-carpooling
car pool marketplace
Switzerland
m,l
drive2day
car & train pool marketplace
Europe
m,l
shared train rides
via
car pool marketplace
US
m,l
Ridescout / Moovel mobility information platform Daimler
Global
s,m,l
SBB Trip Planner
mobility information platform SBB
Switzerland
m,l
TripIt
mobility information platform SAP
Global
l
110 countries
TripCase
mobility information platform
Global
l
30 Mio trips, 40 airlines
WorldMate
mobility information platform
Global
l
Qixxit
mobility information platform Deutsche Bahn
Germany
s,m,l
meta service, partial ticket booking
Sharing service providers
Ridesharing 
services
Carpooling services
Multimodal 
services
Peer-to-Peer car 
sharing services
Car 
Scooter
Bike
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

Sharing service providers usually offer a single transport 
mode and thus, differ into bike, scooter and car sharing. While 
a lot of services offer the same concept, the saturation of the 
consumer demand is not reached yet. Additionally, and still in 
growth stage with rising demand, car sharing services are also 
provided or supported by major car manufacturers, e.g., 
Daimler (Car2Go) or BMW (DriveNow, ReachNow). An-
other car sharing service, flinkster, is even operated by 
Deutsche Bahn (German railroad provider). The traditional 
sharing business model (B2C) is difficult to scale geograph-
ically, especially to neighborhoods with lower population 
densities. Operators must accept fixed costs for purchase or 
lease of vehicles in the fleet. In contrast to that, peer-to-peer 
(P2P) sharing allows to rent pre-existing vehicles on a short-
term basis. Most privately owned vehicles sit idle more than 
90% of the day. Thus, P2P carsharing alleviates upfront costs 
and is more economically consistent with lower-density 
neighborhoods than traditional sharing. Currently carsharing 
services are a niche transportation option for certain demo-
graphic groups. Today, typical participants live in urban 
neighborhoods with medium to high household densities [31]. 
As a result, P2P carsharing provides greater potential for car 
accessibility than traditional carsharing does [32]. 
Unquestionable, the congestion-relief potential of sharing 
rises with the number of services and users. While currently 
bike sharing possesses even higher growth rates, carsharing 
has the potential to reduce the number of cars on the road sig-
nificantly [31]. Carsharing business models have evolved to 
include both point-to-point and round-trip systems, while 
parking options have expanded to include both on-street and 
dedicated spaces in an increasing number of new develop-
ments so carsharing networks become denser and more ubiq-
uitous. The shift in consumer preferences will further broaden 
the appeal of sharing. 
Looking at customer level, multimodal trip planning ser-
vices hold a great potential, but currently they suffer from 
missing booking opportunities and thus, do not unfold their 
full potential [22]. These services are capable to integrate all 
other service types. To reach this they need to be more than 
just information services. An interesting and promising devel-
opment are multimodal mobility services supported by public 
transportation providers (e.g. Deutsche Bahn and SBB) in ex-
tension to their traditional business model. In summary, we 
identified four aspects that influence mobility services: 
(1) The mobility behavior of users is changing 
(2) The offer of mobility services is increasing 
(3) Catalyzer effect – traditional mobility providers are 
joining the services market 
(4) Products and services are converging 
The demand for mobility services is growing since pro-
gressively, more users are using the advantage of new service 
types for flexible mobility instead of using individual private 
or public transportation modes. The amount of mobility pro-
viders is still increasing and many providers are on the market 
offering the same services. So far and due to market growth, 
this competition did not lead to a consolidation of providers 
yet. To participate in growth rates traditional public transpor-
tation providers and car manufacturers also enter the market 
for new mobility services. Instead of just selling products, cars 
are evolving to product service systems. 
VI. OUTLOOK 
A lot of research and experimentation has been conducted 
to reduce traffic congestion. Nevertheless congestion is still a 
big issue around the globe. In consequence, numerous tech-
niques have been applied to tackle this problem. A very prom-
ising one is coming up with combined ubiquity of internet 
connection and mobility e-services. As discussed these ser-
vices include pre- and on-trip planning, real-time information, 
ticketing, mode-switch, and unquestionably re-routing. Cur-
rently services which enact intermodal mobility and just in 
time ticketing experience high growth rates. 
While today a lot of different services are present we ex-
pect a future market consolidation. We could already observe 
consolidation in the long distance bus market, as well as in 
carsharing services. More recent service types, such as electric 
recharging stations or multimodal information and ticketing 
services, are still uprising and plenty of new providers urge to 
market. As next steps, we plan to collect more data on ser-
vices. We intend to look into two different aspects: usage (in-
dividual behavior and preferences) and markets. Regarding 
market development, we plan to broaden our services analy-
sis, especially with an extended analysis of the Asian market. 
This will provide insights on success factors of services, as 
well as on people’s behavior. Furthermore, we plan to observe 
the development of intermodal behavior and services market 
development over a longer period of time. Therefore, we in-
tend to establish an open database to store and to provide in-
formation on mobility services. Besides individual mobility, 
which is our main interest, we consider to broaden this to lo-
gistic services. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
A. T. H. Chin, ‘Containing air pollution and traffic congestion: 
Transport policy and the environment in Singapore’, Atmos. Envi-
ron., vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 787–801, Mar. 1996. 
[2] 
K. Zhang and S. Batterman, ‘Air pollution and health risks due to 
vehicle traffic’, Sci. Total Environ., vol. 450–451, pp. 307–316, Apr. 
2013. 
[3] 
J. Beaudoin, Y. H. Farzin, and C.-Y. C. Lin Lawell, ‘Public transit 
investment and sustainable transportation: A review of studies of 
transit’s impact on traffic congestion and air quality’, Res. Transp. 
Econ., vol. 52, pp. 15–22, Oct. 2015. 
[4] 
‘TomTom 
Traffic 
Index’. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.tomtom.com/en_gb/trafficindex/list. 
[Accessed: 
18-
Sep-2016]. 
[5] 
‘Central London Congestion Charging - Impacts Monitoring, Sixth 
Annual Report, July 2008. 
[6] 
‘Passenger transport statistics - Statistics Explained’. [Online]. 
Available: 
http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/in-
dex.php/Passenger_transport_statistics. [Accessed: 27-Sep-2016]. 
[7] 
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Institute for Transport 
Studies, ‘Results of the German Mobility Panel (MOP)’. Sep. 2016. 
[8] 
A. Migdalas, ‘Bilevel programming in traffic planning: Models, 
methods and challenge’, J. Glob. Optim., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 381–405, 
May 1995. 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

[9] 
P. T. Harker and T. L. Friesz, ‘Bounding the solution of the contin-
uous equilibrium network design problem’, Proc. Ninth Int. Symp. 
Transp. Traffic Theory Delft, 1984. 
[10] 
S. de Luca, ‘Public engagement in strategic transportation planning: 
An analytic hierarchy process based approach’, Transp. Policy, vol. 
33, pp. 110–124, May 2014. 
[11] 
R. Arnott, A. de Palma, and R. Lindsey, ‘Does providing information 
to drivers reduce traffic congestion?’, Transp. Res. Part Gen., vol. 
25, no. 5, pp. 309–318, Sep. 1991. 
[12] 
J. L. Adler and V. J. Blue, ‘Toward the design of intelligent traveler 
information systems’, Transp. Res. Part C Emerg. Technol., vol. 6, 
no. 3, pp. 157–172, Jun. 1998. 
[13] 
L. De Cicco, G. Carlucci, and S. Mascolo, ‘Experimental Investiga-
tion of the Google Congestion Control for Real-time Flows’, in Pro-
ceedings of the 2013 ACM SIGCOMM Workshop on Future Hu-
man-centric Multimedia Networking, New York, NY, USA, pp. 21–
26, 2013. 
[14] 
G. Carlucci, L. De Cicco, S. Holmer, and S. Mascolo, ‘Analysis and 
Design of the Google Congestion Control for Web Real-time Com-
munication (WebRTC)’, in Proceedings of the 7th International Con-
ference on Multimedia Systems, New York, NY, USA, p. 13, 2016. 
[15] 
R.-P. Schafer, et al., ‘A Study of TomTom’s Probe Vehicle Data with 
Three-phase Traffic Theory’, Traffic Eng. Control, vol. 52, no. 5, 
2011. 
[16] 
H. S. Mahmassani and P. S.-T. Chen, ‘Comparative assessment of 
origin-based and en-route real-time information under alternative 
user behavior rules’, Transp. Res. Rec., no. 1306, pp. 69-81, 1991. 
[17] 
R. Arnott and E. Inci, ‘An integrated model of downtown parking 
and traffic congestion’, J. Urban Econ., vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 418–442, 
Nov. 2006. 
[18] 
M. Fosgerau and A. de Palma, ‘The dynamics of urban traffic con-
gestion and the price of parking’, J. Public Econ., vol. 105, pp. 106–
115, Sep. 2013. 
[19] 
K. F. Abdelghany and H. S. Mahmassani, ‘Dynamic trip assignment-
simulation model for intermodal transportation networks’, Transp. 
Res. Rec. J. Transp. Res. Board, vol. 1771, no. 1, pp. 52–60, 2001. 
[20] 
V. Giannikas and D. McFarlane, ‘Product Intelligence in Intermodal 
Transportation: The Dynamic Routing Problem’, in Dynamics in Lo-
gistics, H.-J. Kreowski, B. Scholz-Reiter, and K.-D. Thoben, Eds. 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 59–69,2013. 
[21] 
A. Caris, C. Macharis, and G. K. Janssens, ‘Decision support in in-
termodal transport: A new research agenda’, Comput. Ind., vol. 64, 
no. 2, pp. 105–112, Feb. 2013. 
[22] 
E. Eryilmaz, M. Kagerbauer, T. Schuster, and O. Wolf, ‘Collabora-
tive Management of Intermodal Mobility’, in Collaborative Systems 
for Smart Networked Environments, pp. 713–721, Oct. 2014. 
[23] 
T. G. Crainic, N. Ricciardi, and G. Storchi, ‘Models for Evaluating 
and Planning City Logistics Systems’, Transp. Sci., vol. 43, no. 4, 
pp. 432–454, Nov. 2009. 
[24] 
U. Kohler, ‘An innovating concept for city-logistics’, in Mobility for 
Everyone. 4th World Congress On Intelligent Transport Systems, 
21-24 October 1997, Berlin, 1997. 
[25] 
E. Taniguchi and R. G. Thompson, City Logistics: Mapping The Fu-
ture, 1st ed. CRC Press, 2014. 
[26] 
A. L. Osório, L. M. Camarinha-Matos, and H. Afsarmanesh, ‘Enter-
prise collaboration network for transport and logistics services’, in 
Working Conference on Virtual Enterprises, pp. 267–278, 2013. 
[27] 
J. Sochor, I. C. Karlsson, and H. Strömberg, ‘Trying out mobility as 
a service: Experiences from a field trial and implications for under-
standing demand’, in Transportation Research Board 95th Annual 
Meeting, 2016. 
[28] 
‘Carsharing - Statista-Dossier’, Statista. [Online]. Available: 
https://de.statista.com/statistik/studie/id/9904/dokument/carsharing-
statista-dossier/. [Accessed: 26-Sep-2016]. 
[29] 
N. T. Fellows and D. E. Pitfield, ‘An economic and operational eval-
uation of urban car-sharing’, Transp. Res. Part Transp. Environ., 
vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 1–10, Jan. 2000. 
[30] 
N. Borole, D. Rout, N. Goel, P. Vedagiri, and T. V. Mathew, ‘Mul-
timodal Public Transit Trip Planner with Real-time Transit Data’, 
Procedia - Soc. Behav. Sci., vol. 104, pp. 775–784, Dec. 2013. 
[31] 
E. Martin and S. Shaheen, ‘The impact of carsharing on household 
vehicle ownership’, ACCESS Mag., vol. 1, no. 38, 2011. 
[32] 
R. Hampshire and C. Gaites, ‘Peer-to-peer carsharing: Market anal-
ysis and potential growth’, Transp. Res. Rec. J. Transp. Res. Board, 
no. 2217, pp. 119–126, 2011. 
 
 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

