Teamwork Behavior in Smart and Sustainable Cities Ecosystems
Panos Fitsilis 
Dept. of Business Administration 
University of Applied Sciences of Thessaly 
Larissa, Greece 
e-mail: pfitsilis@gmail.com 
Leonidas Anthopoulos 
Dept. of Business Administration 
University of Applied Sciences of Thessaly 
Larissa, Greece 
e-mail: lanthopo@gmail.com 
Paraskevi Tsoutsa 
Dep. of Mathematics 
 University of Patras 
Patras, Greece 
e-mail: tsoutsa@teilar.gr 
Omiros Ragos 
Dep. of Mathematics 
University of Patras 
Patras, Greece 
e-mail: ragos@math.upatras.gr 
 
Abstract— According to market research, the number of smart 
cities is increasing rapidly. Information and Communication 
Technologies provide the smart infrastructure that is the 
foundation for all of the key themes related to a smart city, 
such as smart economy, smart people, smart governance, 
smart mobility, smart health, smart buildings, smart water, 
etc.  As such, a smart city is constituted of various 
infrastructure components that form a complex system of 
systems, which is essential to collaborate effectively. Services 
play a central role in this vision of smart cities, as they are used 
as building blocks for effective collaboration, i.e., to achieve 
interoperability between heterogeneous parties of a business 
process and independence from the underlying infrastructure. 
In order to cope with the problem of complexity and the 
scalability in smart cities’ systems, a solution is to provide 
autonomous, collaborating services that have situation 
awareness and they are able to adapt dynamically to the 
changing needs of the environment. In this research, we 
propose to model smart cities’ services collaboration by using 
the role modeling approach enhanced by the introduction of 
service teamwork roles. The teamwork roles definition is 
inspired both by human and agent team working models. We 
contribute by determining the dominant teamwork roles that 
prevail during service group cooperation where the main goal 
of each role is to intervene during collaboration and “act as a 
connector” in order to keep the team of component services 
together and consistent with the goal of the group–team. The 
teamwork functionality is applied through the introduction of 
a new layer in the architecture of smart cities and is exploited 
to overcome some of the aforementioned problems. 
Keywords- Services; Smart Cities; Service Choreography; 
Role Modeling; Teamworking. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
According to market research, the number of smart cities 
is increasing rapidly. This growth is expected to continue for 
the next years, since the market of cities with population 
over 150,000 people is already 5,000 [1].  
While there is no universal definition for the smart city, 
an often used definition is that of International Telecommu-
nication Union (ITU) report in 2014, which is the following: 
“A smart sustainable city is an innovative city that uses 
Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) and 
other means to improve quality of life, efficiency of urban 
operation and competitiveness of services, while ensuring 
that it meets the needs of present and future generations with 
respect to economic, social and environmental aspects.” [2]. 
ICT provides the smart infrastructure that is the 
foundation for all of the key themes related to a smart city, 
such as smart economy, smart people, smart governance, 
smart mobility, smart health, smart buildings, smart water, 
etc.  As such, a city is constituted of various infrastructure 
components that form a system of systems [3]. 
According to Mayk and Madni [4], a System of Systems 
(SoS) is a collection of systems that were originally designed 
as separate systems for specific and different purposes but 
they have been brought together within the SoS umbrella, in 
our case a smart city umbrella, for creating new capabilities 
required for the mission of a smart city. A smart city as a 
system, is usually designed to accommodate various and 
diverse services, though not all services and their capabilities 
are defined precisely at least at the time of the initial 
deployment and, consequently, they are not included in the 
initial design. Further, since a smart city evolves 
dynamically, it could incorporate new enhanced and 
innovative services. This evolution includes continuous 
deployment of new services, reorganization of existing 
services and automatic development of novel more 
competitive services.  Commonly, a smart city is 
characterized using terms, such as interoperable, synergistic, 
distributed, adaptable, inter-domain, reconfigurable, and 
heterogeneous. Actually, it is an ecosystem that evolves over 
its lifetime.  
Furthermore, the key characteristics of SoS [5][6], which 
in our case are focused to a smart city should be a) 
operational independence of elements, b) managerial 
independence of elements c) evolutionary development, d) 
emergent behavior and geographic distribution. Although the 
above are quite important, however, another characteristic 
should be included, that of efficient collaboration, since the 
electronic habitants of smart cities are increasing rapidly 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-645-3
COLLA 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

with the massive introduction of Internet of Things (IoT) 
technologies. 
Collaboration of smart infrastructure will provide the 
cognitive framework that smart cities subsystems need in 
order to have the ability to cooperate transparently and 
autonomously for offering composite, complex and more 
efficient services. However, developing this collaborative 
cognitive framework is not straightforward, since according 
to Vlacheas et al. [7], while a wide set of predefined services 
and applications is available for employment in smart cities, 
there are technological barriers among objects when they are 
used across application domains. 
Services are commonly considered for performing 
complex tasks, thus research has focused on the problem of 
the automatic service composition. An automatic and 
dynamic web service composition is a highly complex 
process and the proposed standards of related technology do 
not answer holistically the problems of web services 
discovery and composition yet [8]-[10]. Further, service 
composition and collaboration is limited to approaches that 
groups of services follow a plan for the composition taking 
into account only their functional behavior, and this cannot 
be characterized as collaboration. In many cases, services 
need to work together as a group to achieve common 
objectives, 
implying 
teamwork 
abilities, 
which 
are 
commonly used in case of groups of humans, agents or 
autonomous 
vehicles. 
Developing 
autonomously 
collaborative services capable of exhibiting teamwork 
behavior that would have situation awareness and adapt in 
the environment of a smart city is a challenge for our 
research. A service capable of exhibiting teamwork behavior 
is one that can effectively cooperate with multiple potential 
teammates on a set of collaborative tasks and that is able to 
intervene and catch errors or prevent emergent behaviors that 
will put in danger the overall team goal, i.e., the overall 
execution of a composite service.  
Teamwork has become an important research field and 
its contribution to organizational performance has attracted 
attention of various research groups from several disciplines. 
In recent years, many scientists studied why humans succeed 
or fail in joint activities and a variety of models have been 
developed that follow social - psychological approaches for 
human team formation. Apart from human team working, 
another area where similar problems have been studied and 
such theories have been applied, relevant with this research, 
is the area of autonomous software agents and robots. As 
with humans, a group of autonomous software agents must 
accomplish given tasks by organizing themselves according 
to their individual characteristics and their teamwork 
behavior within the overall system. 
Towards this direction, the problem we address in this 
paper is to exploit the existing architectures and augment 
them with a teamwork layer that may introduce the notion of 
teamwork collaboration within a set of services, agents and 
other systems that “live” in a smart city. More analytically, 
we present (i) the teamwork behaviors needed, and (ii) a 
teamwork software layer. 
In order to do so, we exploit the role modeling approach 
and the definition of behaviors to create roles that, except 
their functional behavior, will also have teamwork behavior. 
Services that exist in a smart city could be modeled using 
this approach that directs the team of services, which are  
called to cooperate to reach a goal. The focus is on 
architecting cooperative teams of services that form 
composite services, where cooperative teams is meant in a 
stronger sense than composite services where it usually 
simply implies a set of bound services. This teamwork 
hypostasis of cooperation in services makes the concept of 
collaboration stronger. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes the background and related work in teamworking, 
in Section III we present a layer in the reference architecture 
for smart and sustainable cities, in Section IV we describe 
the proposed teamwork software layer, while the last section 
presents conclusion and ongoing work. 
II. 
TEAMWORK THEORY  
In many cases, smart cities’ environment is so complex 
that work is done in teams composed of members that are 
either humans, IoT devices, autonomous software agents 
where each of them is specialized in specific tasks. For 
example, teams of humans, vehicles and software services 
need to cooperate in various transportation scenarios [11], 
while humans, together with various smart cities cooperative 
agents offered by various providers implementing different 
protocols, need to collaborate. The success of a smart city 
use case depends on the team rather than the individual effort 
of each team member. In other words, a smart city is an 
ecosystem 
where, 
organization, 
businesses, 
human’s 
operators, users, IoT services and Cyber Physical Systems 
(CPS) are effortlessly connected while exhibiting teaming 
behavioral attitudes. In order for these entities to be 
effectively connected and collaborate as a team, models 
based on human team working literature were investigated 
and exploited. 
Team working has been thoroughly studied by 
psychologists and human resource experts over the last 
decades. In early studies, some researchers have proposed 
models focused on specific characteristics that team 
members should have such as personality, functional 
expertise, competencies, goal orientations, etc. [12][13]. As 
the team research matured, research moved firmly from 
dealing with single characteristics that members should have 
to a variety of behaviors that members should expose 
[14][15]. Ultimately, in current research, member’s tasks and 
behaviors are often clustered into distinct roles within the 
system that are aligned with the expertise of each team 
member [16]. Increasingly, researchers propose that 
teammates, along with the operational tasks that they 
perform in a team, they have also to play some other 
teamwork role, such that of coordinator, contributor, idea 
generator, etc. Indeed, as it is witnessed by empirical studies, 
these approaches are effective in a variety of contexts, tasks 
and domains. 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-645-3
COLLA 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

There were many attempts to classify roles and behaviors 
in the context of human team working. Among them, the 
most prominent models are: (i) Belbin’s work in team roles 
[17], (ii) Parker' set of team player styles [18] and (iii) 
Margerison and McCann model, which defines eight 
different roles namely: (a) explorer–promoter, (b) assessor–
developer, (c) thruster–organizer, (d) concluder–producer, 
(e) checker–inspector, (f) upholder–maintainer, (g) reporter–
advisor, and (h) creator–innovator [19]. Each role is linked to 
predefined behavior and tasks. For example, “Creator–
innovator” role is linked with forward thinking, new ideas 
and new ways of doing things. People playing this role in a 
team, come up with new strategies and different approaches 
to tasks, creating and experimenting with new ideas in order 
to handle various situations and challenges.  
The various agent-based frameworks of team behavior 
proposed in the literature were also investigated to identify 
and analyze the different agent teamwork factors among 
various types of teams in related areas. Generally, agent 
based teamwork factors address different collaboration 
attributes, such as (i) how the team is organizing itself, e.g., 
by creating rules for collaboration and communication, (ii) 
how the team is forming its strategy for future direction, e.g., 
by planning and decision making and (iii) how the team 
work together to achieve synergy, e.g., by following rules of 
trust and engagement. Fifteen primary factors revealed from 
agent based models in the literature, which merit particular 
attention across different team tasks and group sizes. In the 
following, we present the three dimensions and how the 
teamwork factors are clustered [20] 
a) Organizing factors, such as Collaboration (COL), 
Communication (COM) and Coordination (COO). 
b)  Strategy related factors, such as Planning (PLN), 
Learning (LRN), Decision making (DM), Evaluation (EVL), 
Teamwork policies (POL). 
c)  Synergy related factors, such as Ad hoc team 
setting (ADH), Autonomy (AUT), Delegation (DLG), Joint-
intention (INT), Knowledge of teammates’ capabilities 
(KCT), Knowledge sharing (KNL) and Trust (TRS). 
The framework for the goals of this research paper is 
partially based on existing approaches in service modeling 
and teamwork behavior. However, according to our point of 
view, the primary objective for smart cities is to not only 
provide services coming from different smart systems and 
combine 
them 
through 
basic 
communication 
and 
collaboration. According to our opinion, the benefit comes 
through the ability to bind them in novel services that include 
the abilities of the composed services or systems and could 
implement the collective intelligence they have gained from 
the domain during their execution. 
III. 
SMART AND SUSTAINABLE CITIES ARCHITECTURES  
Smart cities are distributed-computing environments 
composed of a large number of software services. This 
architecture enables the continuous evolution of smart cities 
ecosystems. Therefore, a key quality of a smart city 
architecture is its ability to accommodate new services by 
automatically composing and executing as novel software 
services. This service composition process is critical, since in 
many cases there are interrelationship between city’s core 
systems, given that these systems cannot work in isolation. 
On the contrary, it is quite common to operate in close 
collaboration, e.g., smart transport network relies on traffic 
management. Interconnecting these systems obviously 
improve their efficiency and intelligence. Numerous 
examples of such synergies exist e.g., smart water - smart 
energy, smart energy – smart buildings, etc.  
Service composition in most cases is based on service 
orchestration, which is a basic concept of Service Oriented 
Architectures (SOA). Service orchestration is a centralized 
approach for composing services out of existing atomic 
software services. However, service orchestration is better 
suited on static environments, when there exists a 
coordinator, and plans are known in advance while minimal 
changes happen during the execution. Nevertheless, this is 
not the case in smart cities ecosystems, where changes are 
introduced frequently and the number and the type of offered 
services are not upfront defined. For such cases, service 
choreography is a preferred solution, since composition of 
services is done on a peer-to-peer fashion, leading to 
autonomously operating services. This need was early 
identified, thus choreographies were included in Business 
Process Model and Notation (BPMN 2.0) specifications 
[21].  
As already mentioned, in the smart city case myriads of 
heterogeneous services operate independently. This trend 
will grow even more in the near future since smart services 
are transformed to sustainable cities that need to exhibit even 
richer behavior and functionality. According to ITU 
Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU-T) [22], the 
overall smart city architecture should provide support for 
Transportation services, E-government services, E-business 
services, Safety and emergency services, Smart health 
services, Tourism services, Education services, Smart 
buildings, Waste management services, Smart energy 
services, and Smart water services. 
The only way to keep control of such complex systems is 
by developing services that are able to act and interact 
independently and on a demand basis.  The development of 
smart cities’ systems and applications demands software 
development environments that are able to support a number 
of 
functional 
and 
non-functional 
requirements. 
The 
functional requirements that need to be satisfied by a 
development environment, as they described in [23], are:  
 
Data management, which includes collection, 
storage, analysis, and visualization of city data. 
 
Applications Run-time support for facilitating 
deployment 
and integration 
of 
smart cities’ 
applications. 
 
Sensor network data management and control. 
 
Data analytics functionality for analyzing massive 
volumes of data produces by a smart city. 
 
Service management according to SOA or other 
service management standards. 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-645-3
COLLA 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

 
Tools for conceptually defining smart cities models, 
organizations, etc.  
Furthermore, a number of non-functional requirements 
need to be introduced to enrich the existing list, related 
mainly but not exclusively to the quality characteristics of 
the provided services. More specifically, some of the existing 
non-functional requirements are: interoperability, scalability, 
security, privacy, configurability, etc.  
According to ITU-T [22], as shown in Figure 1, the 
Smart and Sustainable City (SSC) architecture should be 
layered and it consists of a) the sensing layer b) the network 
layer, c) the application layer and d) the Operation, 
Administration, Maintenance and Provisioning, and Security 
(OAM & P & Security). Many such frameworks have been 
presented in the literature, focusing on different architectural 
aspects. For example, in the work of Gaur, Scotney, Parr, 
and McClean a software framework is presented that 
includes a semantic layer, which enables exploitation of 
domain specific data based on the concepts and relationships 
between these concepts [24].  
Anthopoulos and Fitsilis [25] explored various smart 
cities around the world and concluded that the architecture 
that is preferred by well-managed cases is the multi-tier 
architecture, which is applied in new, existing and smart 
planting cases, while it addresses both soft and hard 
infrastructure, and it considers natural environment and the 
evolving Internet-of-Things (IoT) in terms of sensor 
installation. 
Obviously, architectures that in many cases were 
operational in the near past seem to be inadequate for the 
future and have deficiencies. For example, they are tuned for 
static service provisioning but not for dynamic service 
composition,    they are controlled in most cases centrally 
and they do not allow ad-hoc collaboration between services 
(service choreographies) while smart city subsystems are 
interconnected and integrated but they do not exhibit 
intelligent behavior (situation awareness, adaptive behavior), 
etc. In order to overcome these deficiencies, in the sequel, 
we present the introduction of a new layer, which will 
provide teamwork functionality and could be utilized to 
solve some of the above-mentioned problems.  
IV. 
TEAMWORK LAYER 
In this paper, we do not present a complete architecture 
since specific functional requirements do not exist; they are 
generic and not analytical for a particular smart city 
implementation. What we discuss here, is best described as a 
conceptual application architecture layer, capturing the most 
prominent requirements for exhibiting an intelligent 
teamwork-collaborative 
behavior 
to 
smart 
cities’ 
applications. However, this conceptual teamwork layer could 
be modified and transformed as necessary, to address all 
specific functional and quality requirements for specific 
smart city frameworks or projects. This teamwork layer, 
ideally, could be used with the role based modelling 
approach, for presenting the services/components that 
cooperates within the smart city ecosystem. According to 
this approach, for each smart city/domain a set of roles is 
defined. Each role is a set of behaviors. A role model of the 
domain contains all roles and their defined behaviors. The set 
of roles that each service acquires implies paths for the 
collaboration of the service with other services of the 
domain. By defining services as set of roles, it allows an 
abstraction and helps to capture other entities that might exist 
and cooperate in the domain to form heterogeneous teams, 
e.g., teams of services, agents and robots. This is also 
necessary since, although some services may have the same 
functional requirements, not all services can exhibit the same 
behavior concerning nonfunctional requirements. The role 
model and its application to model composite services is 
defined in [26].  
Even though the role model is an abstraction that 
describes the patterns of interactions among a set of entities, 
our intention is to introduce in this paper specialized team 
work roles that intervene when particular behaviors 
extracted, for infusing team working behavior within smart 
and sustainable city services. By researching the related 
bibliography in human and agent team working, the
 
Figure 1.  Smart and Sustainable City Architecture ITU-T [22]  
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-645-3
COLLA 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Smart and sustainable city service teamworking 
following fundamental roles have emerged. The description 
of each role is minimal in the sense of reflecting solely the 
most 
substantial 
aspects 
of 
teamwork 
during 
the 
collaboration. Additional aspects occur in specific cases; 
these may be addressed by modifying the role and adapt it to 
the detailed behaviors. 
Planner role. Complex smart city services need to be 
executed according to an overall plan. This role should be 
assigned to services having central function within different 
smart cities subsystems. For example, we should have one 
planner role for each different type of transportation service. 
Organizer role is a role needed for organizing and 
monitoring the execution of different plans. It is possible that 
different services are assigned both the roles of planner and 
organizer, however these services should be strongly coupled 
(planners and organizers). 
Similarly, the inspector role is the role that monitors the 
execution of the plan within the domain of a smart city. It is 
responsible to keep track of the progress, to inform organizer 
for possible delays and to trigger the planner when a new 
plan re-scheduling is required. 
The promoter role is a role that enables interacting with 
different domains, e.g., by promoting services offered 
outside the domain of specific smart cities. A service having 
this role should be aware of the capabilities of all services of 
the domain. This is done with the aim to expand the offered 
services of a smart city or for looking about potential new 
services that are in demand. 
Producer is a generic role that is assigned to all software 
services offering added value services to the citizens within 
the domain of a smart city. 
Advisor role is needed for exploring new alternatives to 
develop the offered services within the domain of a smart 
city. Through history execution of services in the domain, it 
can reason and evaluate a set of services that will make the 
team formation. In a more advanced form, the advisor is 
based on semantic constructs such as domain ontologies in 
order to offer better reasoning using knowledge retrieval 
algorithms and provide recommendations of better quality.  
Maintainer role. The main goal of the maintainer is to 
ensure that standards and processes of the domain are upheld 
and to maintain team functionality. It check for new updates 
for the system and keeps the configuration of the system. 
Innovator role could be assigned to all experimental 
services of the domain, or to services running at a test system 
e.g., a landscape that have not been deployed yet. 
As it is already mentioned, this team working model 
could be executed within a smart city domain to improve the 
collaboration of the composed systems. Services executed 
within the same domain will be aware of this fact, and will 
be able to share knowledge artifacts of the domain existing in 
various forms and formats. Further, through the role of the 
advisor, services are informed about other services that have 
similar behavior, their capacity, which of them are trusted, 
their functioning within the system in relation to the smart 
city’s semantic model (e.g., smart city ontology) and the 
geospatial information of each service (e.g., which smart 
building is in the proximity of a smart vehicle). The 
satisfaction of these requirements would lead to the 
implementation of important operations within a team such 
as delegation, common intention and knowledge sharing 
behavior.  
The implementation of team working services essentially 
follows the three-step implementation, which are: a) Service 
design phase, b) Service composition phase and c) Service 
execution phase. During the service design phase, a 
choreography could be designed using a business process 
modelling language, such as BPMN 2.0. The design is done 
after capturing the service requirements in collaboration with 
domain experts and users. Service composition could be 
done using BPMN 2.0 and after discovering the appropriate 
service instances needed. At this phase, after the planer 
provides a plan for the composition, the advisor role is 
needed in order to identify and evaluate the services 
published by providers within the domain. For describing the 
service plan, the behavior, the interactions, and messages 
exchanges need to be specified. This is implemented in the 
context of the planner role. The result of service composition 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-645-3
COLLA 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

is the description of services to be executed and in this 
context the inspector role need to be activated. Meanwhile, 
service innovator is in collaboration with service promoter 
and according to the availability of services in service 
registry, they either promote existing services to be used or 
search for new available services that could be found from 
other providers through the internet. The inspector role in 
collaboration with the organizer role are the necessary 
components 
for 
running 
and 
monitoring 
the 
final 
choreography. This scenario is presented in Figure 2. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Collaborative processes performed by teams of services 
in a smart city environment require teamwork abilities. In 
this paper, we outline the principles for service teamwork 
roles, which are a fundamental building block for our 
proposed model of service teamworking in the context of a 
smart city. More analytically, we habilitate these roles with 
indicative teamwork behavior that services need as 
participants of an optimal team in order to underlie the 
required teamwork abilities and go beyond other approaches, 
by providing teamwork grounded service abstractions. 
Clearly, this is not sufficient and the analytical primitive 
behaviors should be designed that would be extracted from 
each team role according to the proposed role descriptions 
and the application domain. This is a step towards the 
definition of the architectural design and for creating a 
sophisticated smart city scenario where all defined roles will 
intervene and contribute, using real data from a smart city 
ecosystem. The benefits of applying this approach is that as 
smart cities are becoming even more complex systems we 
need to introduce concepts of intelligent collaboration and 
autonomous behavior that will allow such systems to evolve 
and to be managed easier.  
REFERENCES 
[1] T. Maddox, “Smart city technology market set to reach $775 
billion 
by 
2021,” 
[Online]. 
Available 
from 
https://www.techrepublic.com/article/smart-city-technology-
market-set-to-reach-775-billion-by-2021/ June 2018. 
[2] S. Kondepudi, et al., “Smart sustainable cities analysis of 
definitions,” The ITU-T Focus Group for Smart Sustainable 
Cities, 2014. 
[3] L. Anthopoulos, “Understanding Smart Cities: A Tool for 
Smart Government or an Industrial Trick?,” vol. 22,  
Springer, 2017. 
[4] I. Mayk and A. M. Madni, “The role of ontology in system-
of-systems acquisition,” Tech. Rep., Santa Monica, CA: 
Intelligent Systems Technology, 2006. 
[5] M. W. Maier, “Architecting principles for systems-of-
systems,” Systems Engineering: The Journal of the 
International Council on Systems Engineering, vol. 1, no. 4, 
pp. 267–284, 1998. 
[6] A. P. Sage and C. D. Cuppan, “On the systems engineering 
and management of systems of systems and federations of 
systems,” Information knowledge systems management, vol. 
2, no. 4, pp. 325–345, 2001. 
[7] P. Vlacheas, et al., “Enabling smart cities through a cognitive 
management framework for the internet of things,” IEEE 
communications magazine, vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 102–111, 2013. 
[8] Q. Z. Sheng, et al., “Web services composition A decade’s 
overview,” Information Sci., vol. 280, pp. 218–238, 2014.  
[9] A. Jula, E. Sundararajan, and Z. Othman, “Cloud computing 
service composition: A systematic review,” Expert Systems 
with Applications, vol. 41, no. 8, pp. 3809– 3824, 2014. 
[10] D. Tosi and S. Morasca, “Supporting the semi-automatic 
semantic annotation of web services: a systematic literature 
review,” Information and Software Technology, vol. 61, pp. 
16–32, 2015. 
[11] T. Schwartz, et al., “Hybrid teams of humans, robots, and 
virtual agents in a production setting,” in Intelligent 
Environments (IE), 2016 12th International Conference on, 
pp. 234–237, IEEE, 2016. 
[12] V. Rousseau, C. Aubé, and A. Savoie, “Teamwork behaviors: 
A review and an integration of frameworks,” Small group 
research, vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 540–570, 2006.   
[13] E. Salas, N. J. Cooke, and M. A. Rosen, “On teams, 
teamwork, 
and 
team 
performance: 
Discoveries 
and 
developments,” Human factors, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 540–547, 
2008. 
[14] S. W. Kozlowski, J. A. Grand, S. K. Baard, and M. Pearce, 
“Teams, teamwork, and team effectiveness: Implications for 
human systems integration,” APA handbook of human 
systems integration, pp. 555–571, 2015. 
[15] J. M. Berlin, E. D. Carlström, and H. S. Sandberg, “Models of 
teamwork: ideal or not? a critical study of theoretical team 
models,” Team Performance Management: An International 
Journal, vol. 18, no. 5/6, pp. 328–340, 2012. 
[16] J. E. Mathieu, S. I. Tannenbaum, M. R. Kukenberger, J. S. 
Donsbach, and G. M. Alliger, “Team role experience and 
orientation: A measure and tests of construct validity,” Group 
and Organization Management, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 6–34, 2015. 
[17] R. M. Belbin, “Team roles at work: A strategy for human 
resource 
management,” 
zitiert 
in: 
Teamarbeit 
und 
Teamentwicklung, p. 321, 1993. 
[18] G. M. Parker, Team players and teamwork. Jossey-Bass San 
Francisco, CA, 2008. 
[19] C. J. Margerison and D. McCann, Team management: 
Practical new approaches. Mercury Books, 1990. 
[20] P. Tsoutsa, P. Fitsilis, and O. Ragos, “Teamwork Behavior: A 
Review to Interconnect Industry 4.0 Entities,” Handbook of 
Research on Emerging Developments in Industry 4.0, (in 
press), IGI Global 2017. 
[21] T. Allweyer, BPMN 2.0: Introduction to the Standard for 
Business Process Modeling. BoD Books on Demand, 2016. 
[22] ITU-T, “Setting the framework for an ICT architecture of a 
smart 
sustainable 
city,” 
Focus 
Group 
Technical 
Specifications, 2015. 
[23] E. F. Z. Santana, A. P. Chaves, M. A. Gerosa, F. Kon, and D. 
S. Milojicic, “Software platforms for smart cities: Concepts, 
requirements, 
challenges, 
and 
a 
unified 
reference 
architecture,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 50, no. 
6, p. 78, 2017. 
[24] A. Gaur, B. Scotney, G. Parr, and S. McClean, “Smart city 
architecture and its applications based on IoT," Procedia 
computer science, vol. 52, pp. 1089-1094, 2015. 
[25] L. Anthopoulos and P. Fitsilis, “Exploring architectural and 
organizational features in smart cities," in Advanced 
Communication 
Technology 
(ICACT), 
2014 
16th 
International Conference on, pp. 190-195, IEEE, 2014. 
[26] P. Tsoutsa, P. Fitsilis, and O. Ragos, “Role modeling of IoT 
services in industry domains," in Proceedings of the 2017 
International Conference on Management Engineering, 
Software Engineering and Service Sciences, pp. 290-295, 
ACM, 2017. 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-645-3
COLLA 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

