Timeaxis Design of an Email System for Sustaining and Deepening “KIZUNA” 
 
 
Kei Matsuoka 
Graduate School of System Design and Management 
Keio University 
Yokohama, Japan 
mkk0317@gmail.com 
Shuntaro Matsui 
Graduate School of Science and Technology 
Keio University 
Yokohama, Japan 
bbmatsui@a5.keio.jp
Koichiro Sato 
Keio Advanced Research Centers 
Keio University 
Yokohama, Japan 
Koichiro_Sato@a3.keio.jp 
Yoshiyuki Matsuoka 
Graduate School of Science and Technology 
Keio University 
Yokohama, Japan 
matsuoka@mech.keio.ac.jp 
Tetsuro Ogi 
Graduate School of System Design and Management 
Keio University 
Yokohama, Japan 
ogi@sdm.keio.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract—In this research, we developed an email system 
designed to sustain and deepen “KIZUNA,” by which we mean 
the precious bonds that exist between individuals and human 
relationships as one element of spiritual richness, based on a 
design concept of a KIZUNA Visualizer, intended to satisfy the 
user’s need for spiritual richness, in response to the growing 
importance placed on KIZUNA by contemporary values. In 
the design process, we introduced a timeaxis design approach 
based on multi-time scale and a value growth process, as the 
design viewpoint to deal with the changes undergone by 
KIZUNA over time. We also introduced into the email system 
a self-organizing form-generation system based on bio-inspired 
design, which is one of the methodologies of timeaxis design. 
These design developments resulted in us determining to 
visualize KIZUNA through self-organizing, transforming icons 
as a design concept. We therefore created 6 functions to show 
changes in the state of KIZUNA through changes in the shape 
and color of icons made in correspondence to the exchange of 
emails. In addition to the proposal of the KIZUNA Visualizer, 
a new email system that visualizes KIZUNA, which resulted 
from this design process, we also produced a prototype of the 
KIZUNA Visualizer. After considering the effects of the system 
and its prototype from the viewpoint of value growth process, 
the potential of this system in maintaining and deepening 
KIZUNA was indicated. 
Keywords-Email; Timeaxis Design; Multi-time scale; Bio-
inspired Design; Self-organizing 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The development of science and technology in recent 
years has made mass production and mass consumption 
possible; it has brought material affluence to our lives. 
However, it has been pointed out that increasing satisfaction 
with our material wealth has been accompanied by a shift 
from values that emphasize convenience and efficiency to 
those that place greater importance on spiritual richness [1]. 
Specifically, the pursuit of the individuality, including 
individual lifestyle choices, tastes, and interests, and pursuit 
of human relationships, such as placing priority on the time 
spent with family, have come to be more valued [2]. In this 
context, media content and products that can satisfy this 
enhanced need for spiritual richness are increasingly in 
demand. 
We focused on the pursuit of human relationships as one 
element of spiritual richness, in particular, we focused on 
KIZUNA, namely precious relationships—bonds—between 
people. Japan experienced the Great East Japan Earthquake 
in March 2011, and in the same year the Japanese character 
for KIZUNA was chosen by public vote as the character 
most represents the events of the year; this suggests a 
growing consciousness of the importance of personal 
relationships. We developed a tool to aid the continuance and 
deepening of KIZUNA, which is so cherished in modern 
values. 
In this research, we focused on the goal of satisfying 
modern human need for spiritual richness, working with the 
design concept of a KIZUNA Visualizer, a system to 
visualize human relationships. This KIZUMA Visualizer is a 
key to the development of an email system that enables users 
to sustain and deepen KIZUNA, by facilitating the 
visualization of the invisible bonds of KIZUNA. We aimed 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

at encouraging users to notice changes in KIZUNA over time, 
and thereby, encourage and promote better communication. 
To realize this design concept, we needed to develop our 
design in a way that considered the relationship between the 
state of KIZUNA, changeable over time, and the email 
system. Therefore, timeaxis design [3], which incorporates a 
temporal axis into the design process, was integrated into the 
study as its central approach to design development. 
II. 
SELF-ORGANIZING SYSTEM 
This section describes the self-organizing email system 
based on Bio-inspired design. 
A. Introduction of Bio-inspired Design 
In this paper, we introduce the timeaxis design approach 
to design, based on the incorporation into design of a 
temporal axis. One of methodologies that can be used to 
actualize timeaxis design is bio-inspired design [4][5]. Bio-
inspired design is a methodology that is able not only to 
mimic the structure of life forms but also to adapt to the 
changing diverse environments of life. By using this 
methodology, the target of the design is able to change the 
system itself, making it possible to accommodate changes in 
the values and usage environments of the user experienced 
over time. In this study, therefore, we modeled the 
developmental processes of life using cellular automata, 
thereby introducing a bio-inspired self-organizing system to 
generate a variety of forms as the technological seed of the 
proposed email system. This form generation system makes 
possible the production of an icon that can transform as it 
matures into a variety of shapes, as if it were artificial life. 
The maturation of this icon is linked to the communication 
conducted over email, and therefore can be considered as a 
method to achieve the visualization of our design concept of 
KIZUNA. In addition, in this study we conducted design 
development that took into consideration the relationship 
between the changes seen in KIZUNA in accordance with 
the development of the icon, directly linked to the email 
system, and the passing of time. The theory of timeaxis 
design [6][7] is incorporated in the design approach we 
chose.  
B. Bio-inspired Self-organizing Systems 
In this section, we discuss the form generation system 
used to generate the icons to visualize the state of KIZUNA. 
The form generation system used cellular automata (CA), 
as shown in Fig. 1 [8][9], to generate various forms through 
self-organization. The CA is expressed as 
 
 
 
where, Si is the state of the cell, C[t] the cell state at time step 
t, and N[t] the status of neighboring cells at time step t, and f 
the transition function. 
This system uses voxels to represent CA elements. 
Apical dominance and induction, observable as features in 
the developmental processes of organisms, were introduced 
as the state transition rules for CA [10]. Induction is the 
influence of one cell onto its neighboring cells, resulting in 
those neighboring cells changing to display specific traits. 
Such induction was modeled as a neighborhood information 
vector vn Fig. 2(a) around the noticed element, and the 
equation is set as 
 
 
 
where, i is the number of the 26 neighboring elements 
adjacent to the noticed element, bi is the existence of 
elements taking a value of 0 or 1, wi is the integer, from 0 to 
8, expressing the size of the recorded effect in the one-
dimensional array created randomly for each form generation 
trial, ei is the unit vector moving in the direction of the 
noticed element away from the neighboring elements. Apical 
dominance is the quality where the dominant element, 
known as the apex and in control of ontogeny, produces an 
effect on morphogenesis. This apical dominance was 
modeled as a locative information vector vn Fig. 2(b) 
influencing the noticed element from the apex, and the 
equation is set as 
 
 
 
where, dmax is the distance between the apex and the cell that 
is furthest from the apex, d is the distance between the apex 
and the element, and ed represents the unit vector pointing 
the direction of the element from the apex. This means that 
the closer an element is to the apex, the greater the impact of 
(3) 
(
)
d
p
e
v
d
d
−
=
max
(2) 
i
n
e
v
i
i
∑biw
=
=
26
1
(1) 
(a)  Induction 
(b) Apical dominance 
Figure 2. Input vectors 
1
2
3
6
7
4
5
8
9
w6e6
w1e1
vn
1
2
3
6
7
4
5
8
9
w6e6
w1e1
vn
Figure 1. Cellular automaton 
セル
要素
頂部
 
 v p 
Apex 
Form generation space 
Cell 
Element 
Apex 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

the apex on that element. Next, the CA input vector vin is set 
as 
 
 
 
where, k is defined as a form operative parameter expressing 
ratio where two vectors are bonded. It is possible to adjust 
the rate of synthesis—the effect of induction and apical 
dominance—through the value of k. Fig. 3 shows the 
changes thus generated through form operation parameters of 
form feature. In equation (4), the closer the value of k is to 0, 
the stronger the apical dominance, meaning a constant, 
same-direction effect from the apex; this results in a 
tendency toward the generation of rod- and plate-like forms. 
On the other hand, the closer the value of k to 1 in equation 
(4), the stronger the influence of induction, meaning that 
multi-directional influences will be exerted by the elements 
surrounding the noticed element, resulting in the generation 
of clump-like forms [10]. The features of this system may 
therefore be useful in allowing us to impart meaning to the 
shape of icons representing registered users in our email 
system. 
III. 
DESIGN DEVELOPMENT FOCUSED ON MULTI-TIME 
SCALE 
In this section, we describe the design development 
process actually undertaken, based on a multi-time scale 
using a timeaxis design approach. We also dicuss each stage 
of the process. 
A. Extraction of Design Elements 
In this process, the design elements required to realize 
our design concept of the visualization of the state of 
KIZUNA were extracted. Elements describing state, such as 
the number ofemails sent and received, and the frequency of 
communication, and meaning elements, namely the visual 
changes in the icon representing registered users, were 
extracted. For the icon generation through bio-inspired self-
organizing systems, we worked on the indivdiualization of 
each icon, and the extraction of meaning element, namely the 
offer of the enjoyment of not being able to predict growth. 
1) Extraction of Time-related Design Elements: Design 
elements were extracted based on our design concept of the 
visualization of the state of KIZUNA; this allowed us to 
connect the meaning element of visual changes in the icon 
and state elements such as the number of emails sent and 
received and the frequency at which they were sent and 
received. These connections allowed us to construct a 
relationship between KIZUNA and our email system.  
B. Element Classification and System Design 
In this process, value elements required for the 
maintenance and deepening of KIZUNA and seminatic 
elements required for the visualization of the changing state 
of KIZUNA are classified. In addition, those design elements 
that were missing were extracted. The following outlines the 
specific details of the process. In this study, first, value 
growth process was introduced, and the processes of 
maintenance and deepening were divided into five phases, 
with existing value elements ordered within those phases, 
and the missing elements for each phase is extracted. The 
classification and extraction of value elements according to 
this value design process facilitated the clarification of the 
processes by which KIZUNA is deepened via this email 
system. Next, the multi-time scale and the value growth 
process were introduced, in order to classify meaning 
elements. We extracted additional meaning elements 
required in the context of our awareness of their relationships 
with the various value elements. This allowed us to build a 
KIZUNA visualization system using changing icons. This 
system uses icons that change according to information 
received from the email system of which they are part in 
order to visualize KIZUNA. The parameters that define the 
icons are threefold: element number, representing the depth 
of KIZUNA; transparency, representing the deepening phase 
of KIZUNA; and the element form features, representing the 
growth phase of the KIZUNA. Element number will vary 
according to the number of emails sent and received in short 
time. Transparency will vary according to the frequency at 
which email is sent and received in medium time. Element 
form feature will vary according to the number of emails sent 
and received and the frequency at which they are sent and 
received over long time. 
1) Effects of Introducing the Multi-time Scale: Simply 
organizing meaning elements is not sufficient to understand 
their relationship over time, and further it is difficult to build 
a specific system. However, by dividing meaning space into 
p
n
in
v
v
v
)
1(
k
k
−
+
=
(
)1
0
≤ k ≤
(4) 
Figure 3. Changes in the features of generated forms 
0 
1 
k 
誘導の作用大 
頂部支配の作用大 
頂部支配 
誘導 
直線状の形状 
塊状の形状 
Form operation parameter k 
k = 0.2 
k = 0.4 
k = 0.6 
k = 0.8 
Straight forms 
Clump-like forms 
Effect of induction 
Effect of apical dominance 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

short time, medium time, and long time using a multi-time 
scale, and by clarifying the relationships that exist therein, it 
becomes possible to clearly order meaning elements in 
terms of their relationship in time. Specifically, we were 
able to organize elements in terms of their relationship with 
units of time; icon growth—according to the number of 
emails sent and received—is a meaning element in short 
time (seconds or minutes), transparency 
changes—
corresponding to the frequency of emails sent and 
received—is a meaning element in medium time (hours or 
weeks); form feature change—determined by the number 
ofemails sent and received and the frequency at which they 
were sent and received—is a meaning element in long time 
(months or years). By organizing elements in conjunction 
with units of time, we were able to clarify the relationship 
between time scales and elements. 
2) The Effects of Introducing the Value Growth Process: 
If aiming for artifice design that will increase in value over 
time, it is vital that the processes by which value can grow 
are clarified The introduction of the five-phase-value growth 
process in value space has the effect of helping to clarify the 
process of value growth, as well as to facilitate 
understanding of the values required at each phase. 
Specifically, we defined these values as: user expectation 
toward the new email system at the value discovery phase; 
user surprise at icon transformation at the value realization 
phase; joy at deepening KIZUNA at the value growth phase; 
satisfaction at the creation of precious KIZUNA at the value 
establishment phase; and a sense of security at leaving a 
record of their communication history at the value as 
tradition phase. By clarifying these processes, it becomes 
easier to envisage the scenes in which the email system 
might be used and the functionality required in those 
scenario. In this process, then, we introduced a five-phase 
value growth process, thereby making it possible to have a 
greater awareness of the relationship between scenanio and 
functionality and the growth of value. 
C. Structuring Design Elements and System Refinement 
In this process, in order to refine the system concept 
gleaned from the previous process, we structured the various 
design elements. The structurization of these elements 
focused on the relationship between the meaning elements 
that make up the KIZUNA visualization system that is at the 
core of our email system and state elements that are used in 
the expression of KIZUNA. In particular, we gave specifical 
numerical values to the changes in value in our three 
parameters of element number, transparency, and element 
form feature, as resulting from the meaning elements in our 
system. In addition to the extraction of the specific meaning 
elements that comprise convenience and aesthetics in GUI 
email systems, we also sought to extract as state elements the 
material properties required to realize those meaning 
elements. This process enabled us to refine the details of the 
design. 
1) Parameter Settings to Express KIZUNA State: When 
structuring design elements, we integrated the meaning 
elements with physical state elements of the KIZUNA 
visualization system, and simultaneously set specific 
numerical values to express changes in physical state 
elements brought about by semanic elements. As an 
example, if the functional expression of the depth of 
KIZUNA in terms of the level ofemail sent and received, 
meets the pre-set condition of ‘send or receivemail’, the 
element number parameter is set to increase from 1 to 10 
according to the volume of email. This method of parameter 
setting means that actual change can be described as 
numerical value change in parameter, thereby making 
changes previously difficult to anticipate from meaning 
elements alone readily understandable, as well as available 
to share. It also become possible to understand ongoing 
changes in parameters in accordance with the value growth 
process and multi-time scales; this can be considered as 
increasing the efficiency of actually building a system using 
a program. 
2) Visual Configuation of the GUI: The visual 
appearance of the GUI is an important factor in determining 
the overall impression of any email system. Having 
described the maintenance and deepening of KIZUNA as 
the clear and specific goals of the system, it allows us to 
establish a visual concept for the GUI that reflected our 
design concept. Specific examples here include the 
positioning of icons in a circle, to recall the way that human 
relationships spread out like in circles and the use of a 
bird's-eye view perspective enabling the user to determine 
the status of all icons. 
IV. 
KIZUNA VISUALIZER PROPOSAL 
In this section, we describe the email system, entitled 
KIZUNA Visualizer, developed via the design development 
processes discussed in Section 3, as well as details of the six 
specific functions of the visualization system. 
A. KIZUNA Visualizer: System Overview 
Fig. 4 shows an overview of this email system. The 
system uses self-organising self-transforming icons to 
sustain and deepen KIZUNA, based on a core design 
concept of the visualization of KIZUNA. Changes in the 
state of the invisible interpersonal bonds between users are 
expressed through icons, thereby alerting the user  to 
KIZUNA changes and promoting communication. The icons 
used to express KIZUNA visually are governed by three 
parameters: element number, transparency, and element 
form features. These three parameters vary according to the 
six functions indicated in Fig. 4, facilitating the 
visualization of KIZUNA as a result. 
 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

 
B. KIZUNA Visualizer: System Details 
Fig. 5 shows the six functional algorithms used in our 
system for the visualization of KIZUNA. Here, we will give 
an outline of each time scale and an explanation of each of 
the six functions in the context of short, medium and long 
time scale. 
1) 
Short-Time Scale: The short-time scale functions to 
increase the element number according to user action, in this 
case the sending and receiving of emails in units of minute. 
When sending or receivingemail, where element number 
of the icon is less than the maximum element number 150, 
the bio-inspired self-organizing system will perform a 
calculation and the number element for the relevant icon 
will be increased by one generation. 
2) 
Medium-Time Scale: In the medium-time scale, the 
increase in element number per day is calculated, and the 
transparency of the icon will change accordingly. The 
medium-time scale also functions to decrease the element 
number according to transparency, and to generate new 
icons.  
a) Transparency Changes: Icon transparency takes a 
value between 0 and 255. Where the value is closer to 0, the 
level of transparency increases, where it is closer to 255, the 
icons become more opaque. The rules governing such 
change are set out below. When the number of emails sent 
and received in a single day is 10 or more, and the 
transparency value is less than 240, transparency (α) will  
Figure 4. Six functional algorithms used in our system for the visualization of KIZUNA 
Email sending or
receipt frequency
High
Low
(b) Transparency change expressing 
the depth of KIZUNA
Allows the user to be aware of the deepening or weakening of
KIZUNA, and promotes user consciousness of the significance
of deepeningcommunication
Be able to recognize the deepening and weakening of the bond,
the consciousness which deepens the bondis made to promote
(e) New icon generation expressing 
the expansion of KIZUNA
The expansion of the circle of KIZUNA indicates the wideningof
human relationships and offers the user a visualization of the
pleasureof wideningKIZUNA
Square form
Slightly roundedform
Completely
spherical form
Element number
Many
Few
(f) Icon form feature changes expressing 
the growth stage of KIZUNA
Once stabilized, KIZUNA continues to transform, allowing the
user to be aware of its growth, offering the user satisfaction as
deep KIZUNAis built
When the transparency value for the icon becomes 0, the element
number decreases and makes the user aware of the weakening of
KIZUNA
Time lapse
(c) Shrinkage of the icon expressing 
the  weakening of KIZUNA
Element number decreases
When icon size reaches a certain level, it becomes clump-like
in form, givingthe impressionthat KIZUNAhas stabilized
Element number
Many
Few
(d) Icon growth trend changes expressing 
the stability of KIZUNA
Clump-like
Cylindrical
Expresses the deepening of KIZUNA, and offers a visualization of the
pleasureof engagingin communication
Email sending or 
receipt
Element 
number 
increases
Email sending or
receipt
Element 
number 
increases
(a) Icon growth expressing 
the depth of KIZUNA
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

 
 
Figure 5. Detailed breakdown of KIZUNA Visualization system 
en
:Element number
enmax :Maximum element number
gn
:Generation number
gnmax :Maximum generation
α :Transparency
k :Form operation parameter
sd :Spherical polygon resolution of elements
R :Size of diameter on which
icons are distributed
mn
:Number of emails sent and received
mn/day :Number of emails sent and received 
each day
An:Icon number
es :Element size
Start
Long-Time Scale
End
40 > en >=20
sd = 2
es = 15
sd = 3
es = 15
100 > en >=40
sd = 4
es = 15
No
Yes
Yes
No
■Form feature changes in 
elements
60 > α >= 0
No
Yes
150 > α >= 60
No
Yes
sd = 5
es = 20
sd = 6
es = 20
sd = 7
es = 20
60 > α >= 0
No
Yes
150 > α >= 60
No
Yes
Yes
sd = 8
es = 30
sd = 12
es = 30
sd = 20
es = 30
60 > α >= 0
No
150 > α >= 60
No
Yes
1 month later
No
Yes
Short-Time Scale
mn++
en < enmax
Calculation of 
element generation 
Yes
End
gn++
No
Start
■Increase in Element 
Count
email
sent or recieved 
No
Yes
en == enmax
No
Yes
Run drawing algorithm 
mn/day >= 10
α +=
15
Yes
End
No
α ‐=
15
α ＜＝ 240
α ＞= 15
Yes
Yes
No
No
Start
α ==  0
Yes
No
■Transparency 
changes
Start
An++，R++
End
load txt file
■Addition of new 
icons
Medium-Time Scale
en >= 20 
k = 0.9
Yes
N
o
k = 0.1
Start
End
■Changes in form operation 
parameter
24 hours later
en‐‐
Yes
No
End
en == 1
Yes
No
■Decrease in element 
count
α ==  255
Yes
No
Impact on growth 
and image of icon
Impact of 
transparency 
change in icon
Impact on 
form feature 
count
Impact on icon 
image
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

increase by 15 points. Similarly, when the number ofemails 
sent or received in a single day is less than 10, and the 
transparency value is 15 or more, transparency (α) will 
decrease by 15 points. 
b) Element Number Reduction: For every 24-hour 
period during which the transparency value remains 
consistent at 0, elements will be deleted one after another, 
starting with the more recent generation, to reduce the 
element number. Once element number reaches 1, the 
default position, the element will not be deleted even when 
the transparency value is 0.  
c) Form Operation Parameter Changers: Changes in 
the form operation parameter k alter the growth trend of the 
icon. Specifically, where the element number is less than 20, 
the form operation parameter k is set to 0.1, the tendancy is 
for the icon to grow into a narrow, rod-like shape. Should 
element number increase to 20 or more, the form operation 
parameter k is altered to 0.9, resulting in a larger, clump-like 
shape. 
d) Adding a New Icon: New icons can be generated by 
uploading a .txt file containing the name andemail address 
of themail correspondent to be newly registered. When a 
new icon is generated, the circle around which the icons are 
arranged expands to incorporate the new icon. 
3) 
Long-Time Scale: In the long-time scale, the number 
element (increased in the short term) and the transparency 
(affected in the medium term) impact and alter the form 
features of the elements that comprise the icon. 
After one month has passed, the resolution of spherical 
elements and the size of elements will change according to 
element number and transparency. The lower the element 
number and the closer the transparency value is to 0, the 
more the elements will appear rough and angular; the higher 
the element number and the closer the transparency value is 
to 255, the more the elements will appear large, smooth, and 
round. 
Figure 6. The deepening of KIZUNA through the KIZUNA Visualizer 
! 
Value as 
tradition phase 
KIZUNA is 
passed on 
Value establishment phase 
KIZUNA is established 
Value growth phase 
KIZUNA grows 
Value realization phase 
Directly experiencing KIZUNA 
Value discovery 
phase 
Discovering 
 
Create cellular 
automaton 
toward the growing 
icon 
User feels pleasure in 
deepening of KIZUNA via the 
growing icon 
User experiences deepening 
KIZUNA in real time 
User feels a sense of 
of security by 
being able to keep 
records of KIZUNA 
User is able to experience the 
preciousness of KIZUNA built 
up over time 
 
System displays small icons 
that have just begun to grow 
System displays more icons; 
there is a mix of large and 
transparent icons 
System displays icons that have 
grown to be large with bold 
colors 
Promote the 
growing icon as 
an appeal point 
Data is 
transferred to 
the next device 
KIZUNA depth 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

V. 
DISCUSSION OF THE KIZUNA VISUALIZER 
Fig. 6 shows a conceptual diagram of the deepening of 
KIZUNA through the KIZUNA Visualizer. Here, we 
discuss the processes involved in the Visualizer through the 
value growth process. 
• 
In the value discovery phase, it is necessary to create 
expectation toward the product in the user. During 
this phase, product demo videos should be shown in 
stores and on the web, encouraging users to discover 
the new conceptualization of interpersonal bonds 
being offered to them through the product, namely 
an expression of KIZUNA through transforming 
icons. This sort of activity should make it possible to 
increase user expectations. 
• 
In the value realization phase, the user needs to use 
the actual product and realize its value directly. At 
this early stage, the icon is still small, and it 
therefore possible to inspire user expectation as to 
how the icon will grow and transform. It is also 
possible to create excitement in the user as the icon 
responds to the transformation of icons asemails are 
sent and received, and this allows the user to enjoy 
the deepening of KIZUNA. 
• 
In the value growth phase, it is necessary that the 
user senses that the value of the product is increasing 
with prolonged use. By this stage, some icons will 
have grown large or very opaque due to frequent 
communication, allowing the user to gain a direct 
sense 
of 
the 
maturation of 
KIZUNA, 
and 
encouraging 
them 
to 
become 
increasingly 
emotionally attached to the email system. 
• 
In the value establishment phase, the user needs to 
become familiarized with using the product, and to 
feel a sense of stability. In this period, more icons 
will have become larger and developed clearly 
discernable colors, and the user should come to feel 
a sense of accomplishment and satisfaction at having 
successfully built up stable KIZUNA with family 
and friends. 
• 
In the value as tradition phase, it is necessary to 
inspire a sense of security in the user, that the user 
can continue to use the product to which he or she 
has become attached. In this stage, information on 
icons that have been nurtured in the product can be 
transferred to other devices, allowing the user to gain 
a sense of sescurity that human relationships can be 
sustained. 
As the discussion above shows, the KIZUNA Visualizer 
encourages user communication, and makes possible the 
continuance and deepening of KIZUNA.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
In this study, we developed an email system, the 
KIZUNA Visualizer, designed to sustain and deepen 
KIZUNA—namely the precious bonds that exist between 
people—in response to the increasing value placed on such 
bonds. During design development, we adopted the multi-
time scale based on timaxis design, as well as bio-inspired 
self-organizing systems in order to adequately consider the 
changes undergone by KIZUNA over time. The results of 
our \study are shown below. 
• 
We proposed the KIZUNA Visualizer, an email 
system that enables the visualization of the state of 
KIZUNA through icon changes corresponding to the 
number and frequency ofemails sent and received. 
• 
We set up six functional algorithms related to icon 
changes, and used those to construct an email system 
that also takes into account the relationship of icon 
elements with each time scale. We then constructed 
a workable prototype of the system. 
• 
We considered the usefulness of the KIZUNA 
Visualizer from the perspective of the value growth 
process. 
The 
functionality 
of 
the 
KIZUNA 
Visualizer is capable of expressing the state of icons, 
which correponds to those values required over the 
KIZUNA deepening process. The results of our 
study imply that this system can indeed function to 
maintain and deepen KIZUNA. 
Going forward, we will need to use the prototype we 
have developed to conduct evaluation testing with multiple 
users, in order to validate the effectiveness of the KIZUNA 
Visualizer and make further improvements. This will allow 
us to continue our work in the maintenance and deepening of 
KIZUNA. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Public Opinion Survey on the Lite of the Peaple, October, 
2011, http://www8.cao.go.jp/survey/h23/h23-life/index.html, 
02.12.2012 
[2] M. Tachikawa, “Understanding of Peaple’s Needs to 
Information Technology in Spiritual Affluence Age”, IEICE 
Technical Report, July 2009. 
[3] Y. Matsuoka and K. Sato, “New Design Paradigm : Timeaxis 
Design”, 4th Conference of Transdisciplinary Federation of 
Science and Technology, Nov. 2011. 
[4] K. Yoshida, “System Design: Paradaigm Shift from 
Intelligence to Life”, Tokyo: Colona Publishing Co. Ltd., 
2008. 
[5] Y. Matsuoka, “Another Type of Design”, Tokyo: Kyoritsu 
Syuppan Co. Ltd., 2008. 
[6] Y. Matsuoka, Design Science –Six Viewpoints for Future 
Creation, Tokyo: Maruzen, 2010. 
[7] T. Asanuma, Y. Ujiie, K. Sato, and Y. Matsuoka, “Proposal of 
Design Method Based on Multispace Design Model and Its 
Application”, The Science of Design, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 1-10 
[8] S. Wolfram, “Theory and Application of Cellular Automata”, 
World Scientific, Singapore, 1986. 
[9] M. Delorme, “An Introduction to Cellular Automata”, Kulwer 
Academic Press, Boston, 1999. 
[10] K. Sato and Y. Matsuoka, “Application to a Car Body Frame 
Based on Parameter Guidelines for Deriving Diverse 
Solutions Using Emergent Design System”, 18th International 
Conference on Engineering Design, Aug. 2011, published by 
USB 
 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

