Towards an Agent-supported Online Assembly: Prototyping a Collaborative
Decision-Making Tool
Antonio Tenorio-Forn´es and Samer Hassan
GRASIA group
Universidad Complutense de Madrid
Email: antoniotenorio@ucm.es, samer@fdi.ucm.es
Abstract—The promise of online assemblies has been present
for years already, and a diversity of tools have attempted to
fulﬁll it. This work aims to reapproach the issue from a novel
standpoint that relies on a federated architecture, a real-time
collaborative environment, goal-oriented software agents and
a consensus-based methodology. Consensuall is a prototype of
consensual decision-making collaborative webtool that allows the
elaboration, rating and commenting proposals in order to build
consensus among a group. The webtool design follows the Agent-
Oriented Software Engineering paradigm. Thus, it proposes the
use of software agents as complementary automatic participants
fulﬁlling speciﬁc roles, as a way to address decision-making
common issues. The article presents Consensuall, a prototype
of an agent-based collaborative decision-making webtool within
the distributed real-time collaborative platform Apache Wave,
providing a proof-of-concept of the adopted approach.
Keywords–Collaborative Decision-making; Apache Wave; Con-
sensus; Agent-Oriented Software Engineering; Multi-Agent System.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Post-industrial social movements (also coined “new so-
cial movements”) emerged since the 1960’s in the Western
societies [1], and, nowadays, have reached a global impact.
These movements are increasingly embracing different forms
of consensus decision-making as an organizational princi-
ple [2]. This is guided by the belief that this model has the
potential to empower participants, acknowledge their great
internal diversity, and commit to the ideals of participation,
democracy and decentralization [3].
Consensus decision-making covers a broad spectrum of
implementations [4], and generally it is not understood as a
synonym for unanimity, but as aiming to collaboratively reach
an acceptable resolution for all the group members. Consensus-
driven group assemblies may have multiple lacks and issues,
and multiple methodologies have been proposed to address
them, successfully doing so for most of them [5]. Still, it
is frequently considered that online tools should boost this
model, facilitating both scaling up and speed, while not losing
its legitimacy and user participation.
The promise of “online assemblies” has been present for
years already, and a diversity of tools have attempted to
fulﬁll it. Besides, the emerging Commons-based peer produc-
tion online communities do not follow traditional hierarchical
organizations, and frequently adopt modiﬁed forms of con-
sensus decision-making [6]. Popular examples may be found
in free/libre/open source software (FLOSS) [7] or Wikipedia
[8]. Still, the forms of achieving consensus through online
means still have multiple issues and in some cases are rather
rudimentary (such as a mailing lists with “+1” in Apache or a
simple Discussion page in Wikipedia).
Multiple online group decision-making tools have been
built in order to fulﬁll this gap (see Section II). This work
aims to reapproach the issue from a novel standpoint that relies
on a federated architecture, a real-time collaborative environ-
ment, software agents and a consensus-based methodology.
CONSENSUALL is a prototype of consensual decision-making
webtool that allows the elaboration, rating and commenting
proposals in order to build consensus among a group. This
webtool is developed from an Agent-Oriented Software Engi-
neering (AOSE) approach [9], and proposes the use of software
agents as complementary automatic participants. Such agents
are inspired by the formal (or informal) roles found in ofﬂine
assemblies, and aim to facilitate the debate and solve certain
ﬂaws of the consensus decision-making process.
This work is structured as follows. Section II introduces
different decision-making methods and software tools, with
a special focus on consensual decision-making processes and
applications. Afterwards, Section III explains the adopted
methodology, including the concepts of software agent and
AOSE and the technologies used. The prototype design is
presented in Section IV, where the concept of the tool, its
functionality and the behavior of the designed agents are intro-
duced. Section V presents the developed prototype, showing
the use of the tool through an example, and illustrating the
agents’ behavior with a sequence of their interactions. Finally,
Section VI summarizes the contributions and presents future
work.
II.
REVIEWING CONSENSUS DECISION-MAKING
This section explores different group decision-making
methodologies and software tools that intend to boost par-
ticipation and agreement in democratic decision-making and
compares them with CONSENSUALL proposal.
A. Group Decision-Making Methods
1) Consensual decision-making: In general, a group deci-
sion is a consensual decision if all members of the group are
willing to commit to a proposal [10]. Consensus building or
consensual decision-making is the collaborative process where
a group aims to ﬁnd a consensual decision. This process may
be formal [11][12][4] or informal [13].
As discussed in Section I, forms of consensus decision-
making are the preferred by different groups, including FLOSS
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

projects [13][8], social movements [14], groups of unrelated
experts [11], or many other communities [15]. These groups
tend to see the consensual decision-making process as a
method to obtain synergistic output, not achievable by single
participants [16] and as an extremely democratic and partici-
patory technique [3].
2) Other group decision-making methods: There are other
group decision-making methods that attempt to boost partici-
pation and agreement further than traditional majority voting.
Some relevant examples follow.
•
Liquid Democracy also referred as Delegated Democ-
racy or Proxy voting is a decision-making method
that enables both direct democracy and revocable,
topic-based, transitive delegation [17]. This method
has been adopted by some political parties [18] and
other groups and communities [19] and has been
implemented in several online applications [17][20].
•
Dotmocracy is a participatory large group decision-
making method. Participants can write ideas in
paper “dotmocracy sheets” and rate these ideas
with the values {“Strong Agreement”, “Agreement”,
“Neutral”, “Disagreement”, “Strong Disagreement”,
“Confusion”}, together with some qualitative com-
ments [12].
•
Dynamically Distributed Democracy is a method to
approximate a group opinion when not all members
of the group participate. It uses a social network
of the transitive relations of trust within the group
to calculate the opinion of non participants by the
opinion of their trusted participants [21].
B. Group Decision-Making Software Applications
There are different online group decision-making tools.
These software tools differ in the target groups and group
sizes, the methods they implement (see Section II-A), the
collaboration degree, the required level of agreement, or might
have a wider or more concrete scope of application. These
and other dimensions are considered in the comparison among
some of the most important decision-making tools or resources
and the CONSENSUALL proposal.
1) E-voting & Polls: There are plenty of software tools
implementing majority voting and polls. These tools are used
by different kinds of groups for democratic decision-making.
Generally, e-voting and polls do not allow a high degree
of collaboration, they usually lack discussion support and
proposal modiﬁcation/addition. Among these tools there are
voting platforms [22][23] and poll extensions integrated in
software platforms such as forums, social networks (e.g.,
Facebook) or collaborative environments (e.g., Apache Wave).
There are also domain-speciﬁc voting tools, such as “Date
matchers” (e.g., Doodle [24]), software systems to collectively
decide appointment dates.
2) Adhocracy: is a participatory platform for democratic
decision-making. It targets communities, organizations and
citizens [20]. Users can make proposals, add an alternative
proposal to an established proposal, comment proposals, and
vote proposals with either +1 or -1 vote. The tool implements
liquid democracy (see Section II-A), allowing users to delegate
their votes for speciﬁc topics to a trusted user.
3) LiquidFeedback:
is a liquid democracy (see Sec-
tion II-A) decision-making tool for communities and citi-
zens [17][19]. As in Adhocracy, a user can propose, make
an alternative proposal, rate, and comment. It uses preferential
voting (i.e., Schulze method [25]) to boost collaboration and
avoid rival competitive voting.
4) Delphi: is a formal consensual decision-making method
consisting of an iterative process of elaboration and response of
questionnaires [11]. This method is commonly used to obtain
expert opinions and forecasting, although it can be applied for
other purposes [11].
5) Loomio: is an online consensus decision-making tool for
communities [15]. It allows users to create topics, to propose
and rate proposals with the values {“Agree”, “Abstention”,
“Disagree”, “Block”}; comments are allowed during the topic
main discussion, the proposal discussion and the rating of
proposals, which enhance collaboration to achieve consensus.
Lommio is the most similar to this paper’s proposal.
However, there are several differences: CONSENSUALL uses
software agents interacting within the tool as a way of improv-
ing consensus decision-making process. It takes advantage of
a real-time environment, together with a federated architecture
(see Section III-B); besides, CONSENSUALL enables the par-
allel discussion and rating of more than one proposal while
Loomio only allows the rating and discussion of a proposal at
a time, which mimics ofﬂine assemblies behavior.
Other general purpose tools are also used for decision-
making (e.g., mindmapping, videoconference, collaborative
writing). However, those fall out of the scope of this paper.
C. Multi-Agent Systems for decision-making
MAS have been applied to assist decision-making. In
decision support systems, some MAS provide information
aiding to choose a decision [26]. In the negotiation process,
MAS may help to obtain favorable deals [27]. However, these
systems focus on decision-making scenarios such as business
negotiations and domain-speciﬁc decisions. Moreover, within
these negotiation systems (as in market environments) parties
are usually considered competitive, rational and self-interested
(i.e., following Rational Choice Theory (RCT) [28]). CON-
SENSUALL is a general-purpose decision-making tool, and
designed for a collaborative context with group aims and
emotional links among members, far from a RCT approach.
III.
METHODOLOGICAL APPROACH
This section introduces the methodological approach of the
proposal. Explaining its AOSE perspective and technologies.
A. Agent-Oriented Perspective
The software has been designed and developed with an
AOSE perspective [9].
Software Agents are software systems that possess: auton-
omy, social ability, reactivity and pro-activeness [29].
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

AOSE is devoted to the development of Multi-Agent Sys-
tems (MAS). AOSE uses software agents and their interaction
as the basis for the speciﬁcation of its systems. It is frequent
in AOSE works to follow a Model-Driven Engineering (MDE)
methodology [30], which implies the use of intermediate lan-
guages between the conceptualization and the implementation
of models, facilitating the model description and replicability.
The introduction of agents in order to extend the decision-
making tool is one of the main contributions of CONSEN-
SUALL. In ofﬂine consensual decision-making, many issues
are addressed by speciﬁc participants that play a formal (or
informal) role, through interventions in the assembly [4].
This inspires the conception of automatic participants (agents)
addressing speciﬁc roles within the system.
On top of the use of agents, the use of Agent-Oriented
design has been a useful tool to conceive the prototype. Objects
as agents (also used as Actors in the prototype design), roles,
goals and actions, have been helpful abstractions for the design
purposes.
B. Technologies
The INGENIAS [31] methodology, a software development
methodology for MAS, have been used for the design of the
tool. It adopts a MDE approach with two basic components: a
modeling language and software tools. A metamodel speciﬁes
the INGENIAS modeling language. It deﬁnes the available
concepts and relationships, together with their properties and
constraints. Within this framework, an agent is mainly char-
acterized in terms of its goals and the capabilities it has to
accomplish them. Besides, agents participate in interactions
with other agents to achieve global goals.
Thus, CONSENSUALL follows an Agent-Oriented perspec-
tive, using the metamodels provided by the INGENIAS tool,
i.e., an intermediate graphical language to design the tool.
The webtool CONSENSUALL has been conceived as an app
running on top of a FLOSS federated real-time collaborative
platform, being Apache Wave [32] or Kune [33]. Wave is a
technology that was initially developed by Google (and known
as Google Wave [34]), and later transferred to the Apache
Foundation and released as FLOSS. The Wave Federation
Protocol [35] is the ﬁrst protocol for full federation of contents
in multiple servers with real-time transparent synchronization
among them. Kune is a Wave-based federated collaborative
platform which integrates social-networking features, and is
under the umbrella of the Comunes Nonproﬁt [36].
The Wave technology allows the development of Gadgets
or applications embedded into conversations [37] and Robots
or automatic participants [38] that can perceive changes in
gadgets and conversations and participate in them. CONSEN-
SUALL takes full beneﬁts of the potentials of this technology:
the decision-making space where users and agents interact by
building, rating and commenting proposals is implemented as
a Gadget. Finally, agents are implemented as Wave Robots.
Gadgets and Robots have been developed using Java and
the Google Web Toolkit (GWT) [39], which allows the auto-
matic generation of JavaScript code from Java code.
IV.
THE WEBTOOL DESIGN
The proposed prototype has been designed using the AOSE
methodology INGENIAS [31]. This section explains such de-
sign using the INGENIAS “Agents”, “Interactions” and “Goals
and Tasks” viewpoints, illustrated with INGENIAS metamodel
diagrams in Figures 1, 2 and 3.
A. Concept
CONSENSUALL is a prototype of a collaborative consensus
decision-making tool. It is inspired in ofﬂine consensual as-
semblies but takes advantage of online real-time collaboration
provided by its technology (see Section III-B). The decision-
making webtool, developed as a Wave Gadget [37], can be in-
troduced in any part of a wave document or wave conversation
and is conceived as a generic tool for any Wave [32]/Kune [33]
community.
The proposal introduces software agents (see Section III-A)
as a way of extending the decision-making webtool. These
agents, automatic participants in wave conversations [38],
interact with the user and the webtool as other participants:
posting comments, adding or rating proposals. This feature
is inspired by the roles and interactions in ofﬂine assemblies
to solve some of the most common issues in the consensus
seeking process. Two agents have been developed to prove
the appropriateness of this approach: a “consensus seeker”
agent and a “participation seeker” agent; the deﬁnition of these
agents (Section IV-E) and an example of their interaction with
the users and the tool (Section V-A) are detailed below.
B. User and Agent Participants
The introduction of
software agents as an extension of
the decision-making webtool is one of CONSENSUALL’s main
contributions. This inclusion of agents in the tool provides a
modular solution to address a variety of issues in decision-
making processes (see Section VI-B for other interesting new
agents). Thus, each group may invite the agents they ﬁnd useful
and could develop new agents to solve their problems without
modifying the decision-making tool.
Both software agents and users have been considered to
play the role of Participants of the tool (see Figure 1). These
participants are able to perform different actions, described
below.
Figure 1.
INGENIAS diagram of the Agent viewpoint in Consensuall
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

C. Actions
Consensus decision-making is a process that involves de-
liberation, to make proposals, rate these proposals and refor-
mulate or make new proposals [10]. In CONSENSUALL, each
participant, (either user or agent) can post a general comment,
make a proposal, comment proposals and rate proposals.
These interactions are depicted as the actions “Comment”,
“CommentProposal”, “Rate”, “Propose” in Figure 1. These
actions facilitate the deliberation (performed through messages
and comments in the real-time collaborative environment) and
allow the easy creation and rating of proposals.
The diagram in Figure 2 shows the design of the inter-
action triggered by one of these actions (“Proposal”) in an
INGENIAS “Interaction” viewpoint. That ﬁgure shows that a
proposal interaction contains an initiator participant and many
participants that collaborates in the interaction, meaning that
a speciﬁc participant (either user or agent) makes a proposal
and the others receive it and interact within this conversation
(“ProposalConv”).
Figure 2.
INGENIAS diagram of the “Interaction” viewpoint within a
Proposal interaction.
The mentioned action Rate deserves special attention, and
thus it is discussed in the following subsection.
D. Proposal rating
The possible ratings users can give to proposals have been
chosen to facilitate consensus building. Similar to the options
provided in Loomio [15] or dotmocracy [12], CONSENSUALL
provides 5 rating options: “Agree”, “Do not care”, “Do not
agree”, “Block” and “Not decided yet”. This set of options
allows users to express their opinion about an speciﬁc proposal
better than with a binary rating used by other tools. Among the
rating options, distinguishing the block or veto [4] (different
than “Do not agree”) is a desirable feature in consensus build-
ing, since without it, a user cannot express that consensus has
not been obtained yet. That is, a proposal is considered blocked
just if one or more participants select the “Block” rating. A
proposal with no Blocks is considered a valid resolution even if
it contains “Do not agree” ratings, as by default consensus does
not require unanimity. It should be noted that, as consensus is
a collaborative process where opinions change, the ratings can
be modiﬁed at any moment.
E. Proposed Agents
Two agent prototypes have been implemented to illustrate
the interest of this resource in decision-making tools. One
of the agents pursues the achievement of consensus while
the other aims to encourage participation and good manners
(Figure 1). The development of other interesting agents is
discussed as future work (Section VI-B).
1) Consensus seeker: The “consensus seeker” agent (Mod-
eradorImpaciente in Figure 1) aims to obtain consensus. To
improve the odds of obtaining its goal, this agent writes
a generic comment to participants blocking a proposal (see
Section IV-D), in the case that such participant is the only
one blocking the proposal. The design of this behavior can be
observed in Figure 3.
2) Participation seeker: The “participation seeker” agent
(ModeradorParticipacion in Figure 1) aims to boost partici-
pation in the decision-making process and to keep a polite
discussion. In order to increase participation, it makes generic
comments encouraging users that have not participated yet to
vote and comment. In order to keep a polite discussion, it
blocks proposals which have either rude words or orthographic
mistakes, explaining in a proposal comment its reasons for
blocking. When the “participation seeker” agent is asked to
unblock a proposal by the “consensus seeker” agent, the former
may tolerate orthographic mistakes (and thus it will unblock
if requested) but will not tolerate rude words (and thus it will
remain blocking until they are removed). See Figure 3 for a
design diagram representing this behavior.
Figure 3.
Part of the INGENIAS diagram of the “Goals/Tasks” viewpoint.
F. Agents and Webtool integration
Both Wave Robots (agents) and Wave Gadgets (decision-
making webtool) are aware and react to changes in Gadgets
state. Considering this, the integration among the agents and
the decision-making tool is done through a shared data model
of the state of the consensus decision-making process. Being
aware of the data model and being able to perceive and
create changes in the state, robots can, for instance, interpret
a new proposal when it is inserted, or insert a proposal by
themselves. Similarly, the webtool can also perceive when
an agent performs an action and it may refresh its displayed
information.
V.
THE PROTOTYPE AT WORK
The presented design (see Section IV) has been imple-
mented in an available working prototype [40]. This section
presents the prototype, showing an example where the users
and agents (Section III-A) interactions are explained.
A. Example of use
This section explores the users and agents interactions with
the decision-making tool.
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

1) Starting:
To start a decision-making process using
CONSENSUALL, the prototype has to be included in a wave
document/conversation as a gadget. In order to do so, its
URL [40] has to be inserted in the Gadget Selector pop-up of
any wave document/conversation. Participants of the wave can
then invite agents as if she was inviting any other user (these
agents must be previously registered with their own username
in any Wave server).
2) Proposing: To insert a proposal, participants should
provide a title of the proposal and a description. Once a
proposal is done, participant can rate it as discussed below.
The proposal insertion dialog is located in the upper part of
the GUI (see Figure 4).
Figure 4.
CONSENSUALL User Interface of a new proposal
3) Rating and commenting a proposal: Participants can
rate and comment a proposal. Participants should select their
rating to the proposal and may insert an optional comment.
Figures 6 and 7 show ratings and opinions by one of the agents.
4) General comments: Comments can be added in the wave
conversation as it is usual in waves. Figure 5 shows a comment
done by “Consensus seeker” agent reacting to previous user
interactions in Figure 4.
Figure 5.
“Consensus seeker” agent asking a user not to block a proposal.
B. Agents interaction
This section presents an example of a non-trivial agent in-
teraction and is illustrated by image captures of the prototype.
A description of the behavior of the developed agents can be
found in Section IV-E. Both “consensus seeker” and “partici-
pation seeker” agents are used in this interaction example.
The interaction starts when a participant makes a proposal
with orthographic mistakes. This triggers the following se-
quence of agent interactions:
1)
“Participation seeker” agent, in order to achieve the
goal “politeness”(see Figure 1), blocks the proposal,
writing a comment in the proposal requesting to
rewrite it.
2)
“Consensus seeker” writes a comment (analogous to
comment of Figure 5) asking “participation seeker”
not to block the proposal (as it is the only participant
blocking it).
3)
“Participation seeker” agent unblocks the proposal af-
ter “consensus seeker” agent’s message and changes
its comment to the proposal (see Figure 7).
Figure 6.
“Participation seeker” agent blocking a proposal.
Figure 7.
“Participation seeker” agent rating a proposal.
Direct communication among agents, such as the shown
message asking other agent to unblock the proposal, could
be enhanced by the deﬁnition of an agent communication
language for the proposal domain. This feature is considered
as future work (Section VI-A).
VI.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
A. Conclusion
The article presented CONSENSUALL, a prototype of a co-
llaborative consensual decision-making webtool. CONSENSU-
ALL provides a decision-making environment where users can
elaborate, rate and comment proposals. Additionally, the appli-
cation allows the introduction of software agents as automatic
participants to address common consensus decision-making
issues, inspired by the roles adopted in ofﬂine assemblies.
The webtool has been designed with an AOSE [9] perspec-
tive and software tools (INGENIAS). The use of such tools
and methodology have facilitated the development, providing
useful concepts and abstractions for the design and conception
of the application.
The technology used ﬁts the needs of CONSENSUALL
approach. Apache Wave [32] provides a real-time collaborative
environment that favors collaboration, needed in a deliberative
decision-making process. Wave Gadgets [37] facilitate the
development of webtools that may be inserted in wave conver-
sations and shared among participants, and thus it is suitable to
build the decision-making prototype. Wave Robots [38] allow
the development of software agents as participants, as the
article shows with two examples. Their easy development and
insertion in the environment makes them a valuable option for
a modular improvement of the application.
The results state the feasibility of the proposal, constituting
a proof of concept for the future development and research
identiﬁed in the next subsection.
B. Future Work
The most obvious future research lines point towards
scaling consensual decision-making [8][41] and exploring the
implementation of different forms of consensus [4] or even
other decision-making methods (see Section II-A).
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

As proposed above, the tool may be extended by the devel-
opment of new agents, that can be identiﬁed in collaboration
with users and communities. Examples of some other agents
may be: elaborated versions of the two proposed agents; an
“egalitarian participation moderator” that points out unbalances
in participation (i.e., low participation of female participants
or minorities) and encourage the group to solve this issue.
The development of an Agent Communication Language (for
instance, compliant with the FIPA ACL standard [42]), as
proposed in Section V-B, would allow interesting interactions
among agents.
Some additional improvements, such as its GUI or wave
integration or the use of visualization tools, may transform this
prototype in a usable webtool for standard users, allowing to
make experimentation in real communities. Thus, this would
allow further exploration of the potentials of the CONSEN-
SUALL consensus decision-making webtool and its associated
software agents, allowing to asset the adequacy of the tool
and agents to improve the desired characteristics of consensus
decision-making such as democracy, diversity, quality of the
decision or required time.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was partially supported by the Framework
programme FP7-ICT-2013-10 of the European Commission
through project P2Pvalue (grant no.: 610961).
REFERENCES
[1]
S. M. Buechler, “New social movement theories,” The Sociological
Quarterly, vol. 36, no. 3, 1995, pp. 441–464.
[2]
D. Della Porta, “Consensus in movements,” Democracy in social
movements, 2009, pp. 73–99.
[3]
P. G. Coy, Consensus Decision Making, Northern Ireland and Indige-
nous Movements.
Elsevier, 2003, vol. 24.
[4]
C. L. Butler and A. Rothstein, On conﬂict and consensus, 3rd ed. Food
Not Bombs, 2007.
[5]
A. Mindell, Sitting in the ﬁre: Large group transformation using conﬂict
and diversity.
Lao Tse Press Portland, OR, 1995.
[6]
Y. Benkler, The wealth of networks: How social production transforms
markets and freedom.
Yale University Press, 2006.
[7]
S. O’Mahony and F. Ferraro, “The emergence of governance in an open
source community,” Academy of Management Journal, vol. 50, no. 5,
2007, pp. 1079–1106.
[8]
A. Forte and A. Bruckman, “Scaling consensus: Increasing decentral-
ization in wikipedia governance,” in in Proc. of the 41st Hawaii Int.
Conf. on System Sciences, 2008, pp. 157–157.
[9]
B. Henderson-Sellers and P. Giorgini, Agent-oriented methodologies.
IGI Global, 2005.
[10]
R. O. Briggs, G. L. Kolfschoten, and G.-J. de Vreede, “Toward a
theoretical model of consensus building.” in Proceedings of AMCIS,
2005, p. 12.
[11]
H. A. Linstone and M. Turoff, “Delphi method: techniques and appli-
cations.”
Addison-Wesley, 1975.
[12]
J. Diceman, “Dotmocracy,” http://dotmocracy.org/, acc.: 2014-05-05.
[13]
R. Zilouchian Moghaddam, “The structure of consensus building in
online design discussions,” University of Illinois, Tech. Rep., 2011.
[14]
M. Maeckelbergh, “Learning from conﬂict: Innovative approaches to
democratic decision making in the alterglobalization movement,” Trans-
forming Anthropology, vol. 21, no. 1, 2013, pp. 27–40.
[15]
Loomio Co-operative Limited, “Loomio,” http://www.loomio.org, acc.:
2014-04-24.
[16]
L. K. Michaelsen, W. E. Watson, and R. H. Black, “A realistic test of
individual versus group consensus decision making.” Journal of Applied
Psychology, vol. 74, no. 5, 1989, p. 834.
[17]
J. Behrens, A. Kistner, A. Nitsche, and B. Swierczek, The Principles
of LiquidFeedback.
Berlin: Interaktive Demokratie e. V., 2014.
[18]
A. Litvinenko, “Social media and perspectives of liquid democracy: the
example of political communication in the pirate party in germany,” in
Proc. 12th European Conference on e-Government, Barcelona, 2012,
pp. 14–15.
[19]
F. De Cindio and S. Stortone, “Experimenting liquidfeedback for online
deliberation in civic contexts,” in Electronic Participation.
Springer,
2013, pp. 147–158.
[20]
Liquid Democracy e.V., “Adhocracy,” http://adhocracy.de/, acc.: 2014-
04-24.
[21]
M. Rodriguez et al., “Smartocracy: Social networks for collective
decision making,” in System Sciences, 2007. HICSS 2007. 40th Annual
Hawaii International Conference, 2007, pp. 90–90.
[22]
15-M Movement and aLabs, “Propongo,” http://propongo.tomalaplaza.
net/, acc.: 2014-05-04.
[23]
J. Gonz´alez Gonz´alez, “Virtualpol,” http://www.virtualpol.com, acc.:
2014-05-05.
[24]
Doodle Team, “Doodle,” http://doodle.com/, acc.: 2014-05-10.
[25]
M. Schulze, “A new monotonic, clone-independent, reversal symmetric,
and condorcet-consistent single-winner election method,” Social Choice
and Welfare, vol. 36, no. 2, 2011, pp. 267–303.
[26]
J. Jord´an, S. Heras, S. Valero, and V. Juli´an, “An argumentation
framework for supporting agreements in agent societies applied to
customer support,” in Hybrid Artiﬁcial Intelligent Systems.
Springer,
2011, pp. 396–403.
[27]
G. E. Kersten and G. Lo, “Negotiation support systems and software
agents in e-business negotiations,” in The ﬁrst international conference
on electronic business, Hong Kong, 2001, pp. 19–21.
[28]
VV.AA., Rational choice theory, J. S. Coleman and T. J. Fararo, Eds.
Sage Publ., 1993.
[29]
M. Wooldridge and N. R. Jennings, “Intelligent agents: Theory and
practice,” Knowledge Engineering Review, vol. 10, 1995, pp. 115–152.
[30]
R. France and B. Rumpe, “Model-driven development of complex
software: A research roadmap,” in Future of Software Engineering.
IEEE Computer Society, 2007, pp. 37–54.
[31]
J. Pav´on, J. J. G´omez-Sanz, and R. Fuentes, “The ingenias methodology
and tools,” Agent-oriented methodologies, vol. 9, 2005, pp. 236–276.
[32]
A. S. Foundation, “Apache wave,” http://incubator.apache.org/wave/,
acc.: 2014-05-05.
[33]
C. nonproﬁt, “Kune,” http://kune.ourproject.org, acc.: 2014-05-05.
[34]
G. Trapani and A. Pash, The complete guide to Google Wave.
3ones
Inc, 2010.
[35]
A. Baxter et al. Google wave federation protocol over xmpp. https:
//wave-protocol.googlecode.com/hg/spec/federation/wavespec.html.
Acc.: 2014-05-05. (2009)
[36]
“Comunes nonproﬁt,” http://comunes.org, acc.: 2014-05-05.
[37]
Google, “Google Wave Gadgets API,” http://www.waveprotocol.org/
wave-apis/google-wave-gadgets-api, acc.: 2014-05-06.
[38]
——,
“Google
Wave
Robot
API,”
http://www.waveprotocol.org/
wave-apis/google-wave-robots-api-overview, acc,: 2014-05-06.
[39]
B. W. Perry, Google web toolkit for ajax.
O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2007.
[40]
Consensuall
development
team,
“Consensuall
Gadget,”
http:
//consensuall.ourproject.org/consensuallGadgetDeploy/org.ourproject.
consensuall.gadgetdeploy.client.ConsensuallGadget.gadget.xml,
acc.:
2014-04-24.
[41]
M. Rodriguez and D. Steinbock, “A social network for societal-scale
decision-making systems,” North American Association for Computa-
tional Social and Organizational Science Conference Proceedings 2004,
2004.
[42]
P. O’Brien and R. Nicol, “Fipa — towards a standard for software
agents,” BT Technology Journal, vol. 16, no. 3, 1998, pp. 51–59.
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

