Lookie - A Case Study of a Location Based Collaborative Application
Elina Yaakobovich, Rami Puzis
Department of Information Systems Engineering and Telekom Innovation Laboratories at Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
Email: {elinash, puzis}@bgu.ac.il
Abstract—In the age of smartphones, increased online social
connectivity, and advanced technological capabilities, collabo-
rative applications often take advantage of crowd resources in
an effort to enhance the welfare of the community. Lookie is
a collaborative application where users can ask other users
to share up to date footage regarding their whereabouts. This
paper presents the results of a ﬁeld trial performed with Lookie,
focusing on aspects of user experience, privacy, and participation.
Analysis of system logs and questionnaires answered by the ﬁeld
trial participants produced the following key results: (1) users’
perceived participation is biased toward their own active deeds,
(2) appropriate timing of requests and personalized meaningful
request messages improve user experience, (3) most users do not
mind helping strangers by taking pictures or answering requests
but many refrain from disclosing their location, and ﬁnally, (4)
users that indicate privacy concerns and feel reluctant to reply
to requests, have the same average response ratio as the rest of
the community, although, they initiate less interactions.
Keywords–sharing; location based services; mobile application.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Collaborative systems enlist the cooperation of their users
to share knowledge and information. Some well known ex-
amples of such systems (or applications) include Wikipedia,
Yahoo! Answers, Amazon Mechanical Turk, peer-to-peer ﬁle
sharing platforms and Facebook. Despite the fact that these
platforms have their own unique characteristics, they hold a
common goal of utilizing the knowledge of their participants
and sharing it among community members.
Such applications were thoroughly studied and classiﬁed
according to nine major dimensions by Doan et al. [1]. The
three most important dimensions are:
The contributions of users can manifest in different ways ac-
cording to the nature of different collaborative applications. For
example, in Wikipedia, a contributing user is one who creates
and edits Wikipedia pages. On Facebook, a contributing user
is one who shares their own information such as photographs,
videos and text (i.e. status).
Effort can be distributed among users and owners of the
collaborative systems. A recommender system requires some
participation of its users (a rank, an opinion), while most of
the effort is imposed on the system owner itself (providing
recommendations). Wikipedia users are responsible for writ-
ing, reviewing and merging all pages, and no effort is required
from the system owners.
Roles refer to the type of contribution and how can it be
achieved. A contribution can be a thought or perspective, self-
generated content or a part of a collaborative artifact. A single
user can play multiple roles in each collaborative system.
There are various reasons for users to cooperate. In some
cases, cooperation might be beneﬁcial for a user in the future.
For example, a user sharing a ﬁle fragment in a peer-to-peer
system relies on other users to share ﬁles with one another,
based on their previous sharing history [2]. This consideration
of beneﬁt (also, referred to as utility) is the foundation behind
incentive mechanisms that consider their users to behave
rationally, i.e., motivated by maximizing their beneﬁt [3]–[6].
However, human participants rarely act rationally. One Nobel
Prize winning paper [7] introduced a behavior different from
the expected (when considering utility) behavior in decision
making under risk and uncertainty.
Incentives, social ties, and privacy are only a few of the
factors that affect user cooperation in collaborative systems.
Privacy is known to be a major concern of users, especially
in services that include location tracking [8]. Incentives often
have contradictory effects when presented to different types
of participants. In some cases, monetary reward were found
effective for recommender systems [9] and crowd sourcing
websites [10]. In other cases, extrinsic rewards, were shown
to decrease motivation when performing tasks based on good
will [11]–[13]. Intrinsic rewards, such as social ties, within
the cooperation community or environment increased workers’
performance [14]–[17]. In general, people with a pro-self value
orientation tend to respond better to extrinsic incentives, while
people with pro-social value orientation tend to better respond
to trust and social ties [18]. In order to devise an appropriate
incentive scheme for a collaborative application, one must
study the user population and apply incentives that facilitate
cooperation and discourage free-riding.
In this paper, we study user collaboration through data
collected from a two week ﬁeld trial of a real time collab-
orative mobile application called Lookie [19]. Analysis of
system logs and questionnaires, answered by the ﬁeld trial
participants, indicates that participants recall their own active
deeds within the application and tend to disregard requests
that they had no opportunity to answer. We can see that
personalized meaningful request messages can be regarded as
intrinsic incentives improving the experience of responders,
while blank or meaningless requests, as well as inappropriate
timing, greatly annoy the users. Finally, the study results
indicate that users are more sensitive regarding sharing their
location than answering queries received from strangers. How-
ever, users that feel reluctant to reply to requests have the same
average response ratio as the rest of the community, although
they initiate fewer interactions. The last result is consistent
with other studies that show that privacy concerns have little
inﬂuence on activity in social networking services [20].
The remainder of the paper is structures as follows: The
Lookie application is described in Section II. Section III
includes the ﬁeld trial settings, description of questionnaires,
the collected data, and analysis of the results. Findings are
discussed in Section IV as well as conclusions and future work.
II.
THE LOOKIE PLATFORM
Lookie [19] is a location based Android application. It
enables its users to share images from their location upon de-
mand of other users. The application can be easily downloaded
and installed through Google Play. Lookie users can request
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

Figure 1.
Users’ interactions in Lookie
images from other Lookie users. We denote requesting users
as requesters and responding users as repliers, even though
each user can play both roles. In this section, we will describe
Lookie usage scenarios and the architecture of the application.
A. Interactions
An interaction begins when a requester wishes to see a real
time image from a location of interest (e.g., a crowded restau-
rant). Opening the Lookie application brings the requester to
a screen that contains a map showing other online users in
their respective (different) locations. For convenience, users
that appear on the map are arranged in groups according to
their location and zoom level.
Tapping on a group near the location of interest will display
a list of users in the group. These users are close enough to the
location to serve as potential repliers. The requester can choose
one or more user and send a personal text message, ideally
mentioning the intention of the desired photo (e.g., “Show me
how crowded the restaurant is.”). If the request is answered,
the user will receive a pop-up message with the photo taken
by the replier.
The request that was sent to the potential repliers pops
up on each of the replier’s phone screens containing the text
message. The pop-up contains three options: to accept the
message and send an image back to the requester; to decline
the request; or to postpone it to another time.
Accepting the request triggers the mobile device’s camera.
The replier may take a few pictures until she is satisﬁed with
the result. Afterwards, the replier can choose to add personal
design details that are supported by the application. She may
also add a personal message and set a mood barometer to better
represent the atmosphere of the photographed location.
The interactions between application users do not entitle
them to any extrinsic reward or compensation. The application
is socially oriented in the form of location sharing, community
building, and personal touch both in terms of requests and
replies. Since requests are sent in real time, and replies are
relevant for only a short time period, there is an expectation
that users cooperate and serve as repliers in order to ensure
that the majority of requests are responded. Without the
cooperation of repliers, the Lookie application cannot exist.
B. Architecture
The Lookie application is composed of two main compo-
nents: the client application installed on the mobile phone of
the users and a server mediating all interaction between clients.
The client has two main responsibilities: to report and display
the geolocation of users and to handle requests and replies.
Figure 2.
Lookie architectural design
To support the ﬁrst, the client uses the smartphone’s GPS and
WiFi connection to determine its location, and sends its own
location reports to the server. In parallel, the client is able to
poll the server for the updated location of other users in a
speciﬁc area on the map, which enables the application user
to select a potential responder in a location of interest. Second,
the client handles incoming and outgoing requests and replies.
All outgoing requests and replies generated by the client are
forwarded to the server which navigates them to the recipients.
Incoming requests and replies generated by other users are
transferred from the server.
The server application is the mediator between all Lookie
clients. It accepts location reports from clients and updates
them on the whereabouts of other users upon demand. In
addition, the server manages the navigation of requests and
replies between the client applications. This results in all com-
munication being transferred through one main machine which
allows us to record all inter-client communication (requests
and replies), as well as client-server communication (location
updates). The system logs are maintained in a database and
are used to analyze users behavior in the performed trials.
A graphic description of these components is available in
Figure 2. In addition, Figure 1 illustrates an interaction be-
tween a requesting user and potential repliers. The illustration
presents a user sending a request (1) to three users in a desired
location. The request is forwarded to the central server from
which it is distributed to the users (2.1-2.3). Two of the users
who received the request take a photo and send it back to the
central server (3.1-3.2), which returns the photos to the original
requester (4).
III.
USER STUDY
A. Lookie Field Trial
The ﬁeld trial was conducted from March 13, 2011 through
March 26, 2011 with 26 participants. The participants were
recruited via advertisements around the university campus and
on designated student web forums. In parallel, the Lookie
application was published on Google Play.
Recruited participants were students at Ben-Gurion Univer-
sity of the Negev, Israel. Field trial held no preconditions for
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

TABLE I.
PARTICIPANTS IN FIELD TRIAL
Demographic
Description
Gender
23 male, 3 female
Age
21 – 29
Occupation
All students, 8 with jobs
Marital status
20 single, 3 married
Total
26 participants
TABLE II.
SERVER RECORDED MEASUREMENTS
Name
Description
q out
total number of queries a user sent.
r out
total number of replies a user sent.
time online
total number of location reports a user reported.
q in
total number of incoming queries a user received.
r in
total number of incoming replies a user received.
r out neg
total number of requests a user did not reply to.
r out percent
percentage of replies a user sent.
participation because Android phones were not very popular
among students at the time of the trial, and Android users were
difﬁcult to ﬁnd. Table I describes the demographic information
of participants. We see an imbalance in gender and in marital
status. The limited pool of Android users is reﬂected in the
small number of participants, as well as the lack of participa-
tion by females (the lack of female participants is attributed
to the lack of females who owned Android smartphones at the
time of the trial).
The experiment was scheduled as follows: on December
13, 2011, participants were asked to attend the laboratories,
where they received guidance on application installation and
basic usage scenarios. At that time, participants completed an
initial questionnaire. No requirements were made during the
trial regarding the desired number of requests or responses in
order to minimize bias in communication resulting from the
ﬁeld trial setup. However, participants were instructed to keep
the application online for at least 50% of the ﬁeld trial period
in order to receive the participation fee of 15 EUR. At the end
of the trial period, participants were asked to ﬁll out a second
questionnaire regarding their experience with the application,
and, at that time, they received the payment. Further discussion
regarding the questionnaires can be found in Section III-B.
B. Measured Parameters
Because all communication went through a central server,
the Lookie server had the ability to save logs accurately
representing an anonymized history of past location traces and
user interactions, in the form of request-response pairs with
time stamps, for analysis purposes. We list the measurements
extracted from the server logs and aliases in Table II. All server
side measurements are calculated on a per-user basis an are
accumulated throughout the ﬁeld trial period.
Outgoing queries (q out) represents the total number of
queries (i.e., requests) a speciﬁc user sent during the ﬁeld trial
period. We count a request as a single query sent to the system
even if it speciﬁes several potential recipients. We deﬁne a
request as answered if it received at least one positive reply.
Incoming replies (r in) represents the total number of replies a
user received to distinct requests, i.e., the number of answered
requests. R in accounts only for positive replies and does not
account for replies that were declined. R in is always less than
or equal to q out.
Incoming queries (q in) represents the total number of
queries (i.e., requests) a user received during the ﬁeld trial.
Outgoing replies (r out) represents the total number of replies
a user sent an image to. R out does not include declined
or ignored requests. Negative outgoing replies (r out neg)
represents the total number of requests a user did not positively
reply to (i.e., did not send an image). In this measurement we
count all declined requests as well as requests the user ignored.
The sum of r out and r out neg is always equal to q in.
R out percent represents the percentage of requests a user
replied to from the ones she received. We calculate this
parameter by dividing the number of replies a user sent by
the number of requests she received: r out percent = r out
q in .
Time online represents the total time a user was connected
to the Lookie server. We estimate this time using the total
number of location reports the client application sent to the
server while it was online. Location reports are sent with a
constant frequency while the client application is used or runs
in background.
1) Questionnaires: During the Lookie ﬁeld trial partici-
pants were requested ﬁll out two questionnaires. The ﬁrst
questionnaire was handed out on the ﬁrst day of the trial, and
the second one was distributed when the trial ended.
The ﬁrst questionnaire primarily addressed demographic
information. This paper does not contain an analysis of the
different segments of the population within the ﬁeld trial but
rather presents a general description of the relevant population
(see Section III-A). In the ﬁrst questionnaire the participants
were also asked to state their acquaintance with other ﬁeld trial
participants. The speciﬁc question is presented in Table III.
We will refer to the number of acquaintances a participant had
within the test group as friends. Lastly, participants were asked
to state their preferred hours to receive requests. Users could
check one or more of the following blocks of time: 08:00-
12:00, 12:00-16:00, 16:00-20:00, 20:00-24:00. The late night
and early morning hours (00:00-08:00) were assumed to be a
resting period. The speciﬁc question is presented in Table III
and is referred to as good q time.
We distinguish between four sets of questions in Table
III. First are the number of friends (friends) and the desired
hours to receive requests (good q time) which are part of the
ﬁrst questionnaire. The remainder of the questions were part
of the second questionnaire which was distributed after the
ﬁeld trial. The second group of questions (no res strangers,
res acq, and loc share) is related to users’ privacy concerns.
Participants were asked to rank their agreement with the
presented statements on a scale from 1 to 5, where 1 cor-
responds to “strongly agree” and 5 corresponds to “strongly
disagree”. The third set of questions relates to the user’s expe-
rience. The participants were asked to rank their agreement
with the statements: ﬁlter req, keep use, use as requester,
req meaningless, tnk snd, and tnk rcv on the 1–5 scale. The
participants were also asked to rank their experience while
taking pictures and editing them before sending the responses
(fourth group, question edit experience). In this question, a
ranking of 1 indicated that a user had a bad experience, and
a ranking of 5 indicated a good experience. We omit other
questions that are not relevant to current analysis.
Some measurements can be extracted from the system logs
(objective source) and from the questioners (subjective user
responses). We consider both objective and subjective data in
order to distinguish between actual usage and the perception of
users about their usage. We extend the discussion about the two
in the following sections. The following sections present the
ﬁeld trial analysis and refer to users’ activities, characteristics,
and experience.
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

TABLE III.
QUESTIONNAIRES
Label
Question
1
friends
How many of the other participants are you familiar with?
good q time
During which blocks of time would you prefer to receive
requests?
2
no res strangers
In the future I would not like to reply to people I’m not
familiar with.
res acq
In the future I would like to send requests only to people
I’m familiar with.
loc share
I don’t mind sharing my location.
3
ﬁlter req
I didn’t feel like responding to some requests.
keep use
I would like to keep using the application.
use as requester
I would be happy to use the application only to send
requests.
req meaningless
Most of the requests I received were meaningless.
tnk snd
I received many requests.
tnk rcv
I sent many requests.
4
edit experience
How would you rank the editing photo experience?
C. User Participation
As common sense suggests, the number of replies one
sends or receives should be strongly correlated to the number
of requests she receives or sends respectively. Indeed, we
observe a signiﬁcant correlation between q in and r out, as
well as between q out and r in, both at the level of 0.01.
No signiﬁcant correlation was found between r out and q out
measurements or between r in and q in.
1) Users’ perceptions of their own activities: We asked
the participants to estimate the number of requests they sent
and the number of requests they received using the tnk snd
and the tnk rcv questions. Checking whether the reports of
users correspond to the actual application usage produced
asymmetric results. We found a signiﬁcant correlation at the
level of 0.01 between the q out and the tnk snd measurements,
suggesting that participants have rather similar perspectives
on the number of requests they sent. However, we found no
signiﬁcant correlation between q in and tnk rcv.
Surprisingly, a correlation between the tnk rcv and the
two measurements r out and r out percent was found to be
signiﬁcant at the levels of 0.05 and 0.01 respectively. This
correlation implies that users do not perceive the actual number
of incoming requests as the overall number of requests they
received, but rather the overall number of requests they have
received and replied to. The more requests the users replied
to (out of the requests they received), the more requests they
believe to have received.
2) Social ties: Next, we examine the effect of the number
of acquaintances a participant had within the test group on
the actual usage. We expect that users of pseudonymous
applications such as Lookie, would refrain from denying a
request that comes from a friend. Therefore, we expect a
higher response ratio for users that reported a higher number
of acquaintances. In contrast to r in vs. r out, here causality
is apparent as prior acquaintances precede the ﬁeld trial.
The setup of the trial did not allow us to compare the actual
response ratio of participants to requests sent by friends and
requests sent by strangers. Instead, we compare the responses
sent by participants with at least one acquaintance within the
test group to responses sent by participants with no reported
acquaintances within the test group. We conducted a t-test
(independent sample, α = 0.05) to determine whether the
means of r out signiﬁcantly differ for two groups of users, one
having friends = 0 and the other having friends > 0. We
found signiﬁcant differences in the means of r out. Users who
have at least one acquaintance in the application community,
reply more than users who have none.
TABLE IV.
FREE RIDERS IN THE LOOKIE FIELD TRIAL
1
2
3
4
5
use as requester
14
6
6
0
0
3) Free riders: Users who do not contribute to the appli-
cation community, and use its resources are commonly referred
to as a free riders (as opposed to good Samaritans who enjoy
mainly serving as contributors). For most applications it is
important to quantify the expected (or existing) number of
free riders and good Samaritans in order to design appropriate
incentives. The Lookie ﬁeld trial community included six free-
riders out of 26 participants (23%) as will be explained shortly.
We employ use as requester, r out, and r out percent to
quantify the number of free riders and good Samaritans in the
trial population. Table IV summarizes the answers participants
gave to the use as requester question. Is it easy to see that
non of the participants reported a number higher than 3. Next
we will take a closer look at the three groups of replies
(participants who answered 1, 2 and 3 to the question). Out
of the six participants who answered 3 to that question,ﬁve
have a reply ratio below 0.15, and on average, the reply
ratio is 0.14. If we omit the only participating user (with
r out percent = 0.7), the average reply ratio drops to 0.03.
Moreover, four of those six participants did not reply to any
request they received.
Out of the six participants who answered 2, two did
not reply to a single request they received. The mean of
r out percent in this group stands at 0.23 (s.d. 0.18).
It appears as though we found our free riders. However,
they do not seem to be aware of it, or more likely did not
admit it in the questionnaire. Finally, the last group of users
who answered 1, contains no free-riders, and the mean of
r out percent for this group is 0.48 (s.d. 0.19).
We compared the means of r out percent and r out be-
tween the group of users who answered 1 and the groups
of users to answered 2 or 3. T-test (independent sample,
α = 0.05) results show a signiﬁcant difference between the
groups in both measurements. In addition, use as requester
negatively correlates to both r out and r out percent with
the signiﬁcance level of 0.05 and 0.01 correspondingly.
T-test (independent sample, α = 0.05) results on the means
of the q out measurement between the group of free riders
(who answered 2 or 3 to use as requester question) and the
group of all other users (who answered 1) show no signif-
icant difference between the means of the two groups. This
demonstrates that free riders’ expected participation patterns of
sending requests are no different than the patterns of sending
request measured in non-free riders. However, free riders reply
signiﬁcantly less.
D. User Experience
1) Timing of requests: 27% of participants indicated that
they didn’t feel like answering some questions (filter req ≥
4). Next we try to ﬁnd a possible explanation for this negative
experience. Accurate understanding of the reasons for a nega-
tive experience can help developers of request-response based
collaborative applications design systems in a way that will
limit negative experience as much as possible. For example,
this could be done by implementing a heuristic responder
selection mechanism that forwards requests to participants that
would not mind or might enjoy answering it.
We found a correlation at the signiﬁcance level of 0.05
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

between the time online measurement and the ﬁlter req values
reported by the participants. This correlation could be at-
tributed to the number of received requests: the more time users
spend online, the more requests they receive. Similarly, abun-
dant requests reduce the desire to respond with the required
effort and may increase the likelihood of a user receiving an
annoying request. We expected that the more requests a user
receives, the more requests she would report as unwanted.
However, we did not observe a signiﬁcant correlation between
ﬁlter req and q in, suggesting that there should be a different
explanation to the correlation between the time spent online
and the likelihood of receiving an unwanted request.
We hypothesize that the desire to ignore some requests is
caused by an inappropriate timing of the requests. Since partic-
ipants aimed to achieve the 50% online time, this would link
the correlation to the time online measurement: Participants
turned on the application even if the time was not suitable for
replying, thus receiving requests they would rather ignore.
In order to determine what time is considered ”inappro-
priate“ we looked into users’ reports on desired time for
requests, referenced as good q time in Table III. Once we
knew desirable times, we checked the number of requests
each user received during a ”bad time“. We will refer to the
total number of requests at an inappropriate time as bad q.
The ratio of unwanted requests (bad q ratio) is deﬁned by
bad q ratio = bad q
q in .
Next we calculated the PCC between ﬁlter req and bad q
as well as between ﬁlter req and bad q ratio. Both correla-
tions were signiﬁcant at the level of 0.01. According to these
results, the timing of requests is an important user experience
factor in applications such as Lookie. We will further discuss
the consequences of this observation in Section IV.
2) Responders’ user experiences: Keeping the users satis-
ﬁed with the tasks they are requested to perform is important
for the sustainability of collaborative systems. Our results show
that unwanted requests reduce the willingness of users to keep
using the Lookie application. We found a negative correlation
(at the signiﬁcance level of 0.05) between the ﬁlter req and
the keep use measurements. However, it appears that unwanted
requests do not necessarily translate into reduced response
ratio. We found no signiﬁcant correlation between the ﬁlter req
measurement and the r out neg measurement; nor did we
ﬁnd a correlation between ﬁlter req and r out percent.These
results suggest that even though a system should refrain from
forwarding unwanted requests to potential responders, it may
still do, provided there is appropriate compensation (in our
case, compensation was likely the ﬁeld trial payment).
Another interesting result involves the user experience
during photo capturing and editing. The personal editing
experience was a major user interface design consideration
targeted at increasing the fun of replying to requests. We
found a negative correlation between the req meaningless and
the edit experience measurements at the signiﬁcance level of
0.01. This implies that users enjoyed the personal editing
experience as long as the requests were meaningful. No other
correlations were found between those two measurements and
other measurements collected. Aside from the well known fact
that personalized requests get answered more often, we observe
here that they also improve the responder experience.
TABLE V.
PARTICIPANTS REPLIES TO PRIVACY RELATED QUESTIONS
1
2
3
4
5
no res strangers
15
3
2
5
1
res acq
14
5
5
1
1
loc share
6
5
4
7
4
TABLE VI.
PCC BETWEEN PRIVACY MEASUREMENTS
no res stranger
res acq
loc share
no res strangers
–
.921**
-.471*
res acq
.921**
–
-.379
loc share
-.471*
-.379
–
* signiﬁcance level of 0.05
** signiﬁcance level of 0.01
E. Privacy Concerns
One of our goals was to understand how privacy concerns
affect the participation and user experience within the Lookie
application. Table V summarizes the distribution of partici-
pants’ replies to the privacy related questions (Explained in
Section III-B1).
The ﬁrst two questions relate to communication within the
Lookie application. Due to the nature of Lookie, it is important
to understand whether users are fond of the idea of sending
photos to strangers within the community. The table shows
that ≈ 69% of participants in the trial were willing to reply to
strangers and not limit their replies only to acquaintances.
The third question relates to user’s location sharing. While
we have a majority of participants not concerned with replying
to strangers, here the population divides to ≈ 42% of users who
do not mind sharing their location and ≈ 42% who do. It is
therefore important to design location based services in such
a way that users could be contacted based on their location,
but locations of speciﬁc users could not be determined by
strangers.
Table VI presents the PCC between privacy measurements.
Most correlations were statistically signiﬁcant. The only excep-
tion is the correlation between res acq and loc share with
a signiﬁcance of 0.56. This signiﬁcance of the correlation is
almost at the 0.05 level. The cause of this might lay in an
unexplored factor that is affected by environmental sources.
Next, we examine the effect of privacy related concerns
on participation. We expect users who are more concerned
with their privacy to participate less. Three t-tests (independent
sample, α = 0.05) were conducted to determine whether
privacy concerned users issue less requests (q out) on average
than users who are not concerned with privacy. The ﬁrst two
groups include participants that responded 1−2 and 3−5 to the
loc share question. T-test results showed signiﬁcant difference
between the means of the two groups, implying that users
who don’t mind sharing their location send on average more
requests than users who do not like sharing their location.
Similar
groups
were
created
according
to
the
no res strangers and res acq questions. Note the scale
of these two questions is opposite to the scale of loc share.
Here, users that replied 4 − 5 were in one group and users
who replied 1 − 3 were in the other. Both t-tests showed
signiﬁcant differences between the mean values of q out of
the respective groups. Our results support the hypothesis that
privacy concerned participants send less requests on average
than participants who are less concerned with privacy.
The two measurements, no res strangers and res acq,
negatively correlate with q out at the signiﬁcance of 0.05 and
0.01 levels respectively. This negative correlation implies, that
the more users are concerned with privacy, the fewer requests
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

they send. We believe that these users would abandon the
application outside of a ﬁeld trial. Correspondingly, there is a
signiﬁcant correlation at the 0.05 level between the loc share
and the q out measurements. This strengthens our claim that
the more privacy preserving a user is, the less requests she will
initiate.
Next, we examine the relationship between privacy con-
cerns and replying to requests. We found a signiﬁcant correla-
tion at the 0.05 level between the ﬁlter req measurement and
the no res strangers and res acq measurements. We deduce
that the more participants wish to avoid interactions with
strangers, the more likely they are to be annoyed by requests.
However, previously we noted that higher values of ﬁlter req
do not necessarily translate into lower r out.
We check the effect of privacy concerns by conducting
two t-tests. Again, we divide our population into two groups
for every test. The ﬁrst group consists of users that replied
4 − 5 to no res strangers and the second group consists of
users that replied 1 − 3. Similarly, two groups were created
for the res acq measurement. Two t-tests (independent sample,
α = 0.05) on the two sets of groups show no signiﬁcant
difference in group means of r out values. We infer that the
actual replying pattern of privacy concerned users is not sig-
niﬁcantly different from the replying pattern of users that are
less concerned about their privacy. Though their satisfaction
from replying may be lower, their response rates are still high
enough on average. For system developers this result would
imply that if a low cost incentive exists that may keep these
users in the community they can still be a valuable resource.
IV.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
In order to understand the forces driving user participation
in collaborative location based applications similar to Lookie,
we conducted a two week ﬁeld trial whose results are presented
in this paper. In Section III-C, we presented the analysis of user
interactions and perception thereof. Our results conﬁrm that
previous acquaintance increases the level of participation in
collaborative applications such as Lookie. The implication of
these results is twofold. First, in applications such as Lookie,
existing social ties should be supported via integration to
social networking services. Second, initial deployment of these
applications should closely cover socially and geographically
contained communities such as schools, colleges, etc.
It is important to determine the intended usage of the
application by the members of the target community before
deployment, for example, via bus-study questioners. However,
asking users about their intended usage may also bring up
controversial results as indicated in Section III-C3. None of
the free-riders in the Lookie ﬁeld trial admitted intended usage
solely as a requester.
Furthermore, our results indicate that users’ perceptions of
their interactions de facto within the application is biased as
well. Users have rather similar perspectives on the number
of requests they sent. However, they perceive the number of
incoming requests as a fraction of the requests they actively
replied to.
From the perspective of user privacy concerns we see that
the vast majority of the ﬁeld trial participants do not mind
responding to requests from strangers. On the one hand, system
logs indicate that users who do not like responding to strangers
send fewer requests. On the other hand, these users have the
same reply ratio as the rest of the community. There are a
few possible explanations for this bias. For example, these
users could feel obligated to answer an incoming request,
similar to other users. Alternatively, their attitude toward
requests from strangers may depend on the context. Unkind
or even distasteful requests, for example, can easily damage
user experience. However, we did not observe a signiﬁcant
difference in the attitude toward Lookie between users with
privacy concerns and those without.
While only a small fraction of users feel reluctant to
communicate with strangers, a larger number of ﬁeld trial
participants expressed concerns about constant location shar-
ing. A design emphasizing on anonymity could contribute to
crowding in those types of users.
In order to mitigate inappropriate timing of requests, we
propose an automatic do not disturb status should be available
for potential responders.
Finally, the results of the ﬁeld trial indicate that including
a meaningful personal message in the request improves the
responder user experience. It is easy to understand why helping
others, by replying to a request, would be favorable if the
requester truly needs help. Therefore, applications such as
Lookie should encourage requesters to send more personal
requests and avoid using a default request form.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Doan, R. Ramakrishnan, and A. Y. Halevy, “Crowdsourcing systems
on the world-wide web,” Commun. ACM, vol. 54, no. 4, Apr. 2011,
pp. 86–96.
[2]
B. Cohen, “Incentives build robustness in bittorrent,” in Workshop on
Economics of Peer-to-Peer systems, vol. 6, 2003, pp. 68–72.
[3]
C. Buragohain, D. Agrawal, and S. Suri, “A game theoretic framework
for incentives in p2p systems,” in Peer-to-Peer Computing, 2003.(P2P
2003). Proceedings. Third International Conference on.
IEEE, 2003,
pp. 48–56.
[4]
S. Jun and M. Ahamad, “Incentives in bittorrent induce free riding,” in
Proceedings of the 2005 ACM SIGCOMM workshop on Economics of
peer-to-peer systems.
ACM, 2005, pp. 116–121.
[5]
K. Anagnostakis and M. Greenwald, “Exchange-based incentive mecha-
nisms for peer-to-peer ﬁle sharing,” in Distributed Computing Systems,
2004. Proceedings. 24th International Conference on.
IEEE, 2004, pp.
524–533.
[6]
K. Tamilmani, V. Pai, and A. Mohr, “Swift: A system with incentives
for trading,” in P2P Econ, 2004.
[7]
D. Kahneman and A. Tversky, “Prospect theory: An analysis of decision
under risk,” Econometrica, vol. 47, no. 2, 1979, pp. 263–292.
[8]
L. Barkhuus and A. K. Dey, “Location-based services for mobile
telephony: a study of users’ privacy concerns.” in INTERACT, vol. 3.
Citeseer, 2003, pp. 702–712.
[9]
D. Melamed, B. Shapira, and Y. Elovici, “Marcol: A market-based
recommender system,” Intelligent Systems, IEEE, vol. 22, no. 3, 2007,
pp. 74–78.
[10]
W. Mason and D. Watts, “Financial incentives and the performance of
crowds,” ACM SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter, vol. 11, no. 2, 2010,
pp. 100–108.
[11]
B. Frey and L. Goette, “Does pay motivate volunteers,” Unpublished
Manuscript. Institute for Empirical Economic Research. University of
Zurich, 1999.
[12]
J. Carpenter and C. Myers, “Why volunteer? evidence on the role of
altruism, image, and incentives,” Journal of Public Economics, vol. 94,
no. 11-12, 2010, pp. 911–920.
[13]
N. Lacetera and M. Macis, “Do all material incentives for pro-social
activities backﬁre? the response to cash and non-cash incentives for
blood donations,” Journal of Economic Psychology, vol. 31, no. 4, 2010,
pp. 738–748.
[14]
E. Fehr and S. Gaechter, “Do incentive contracts crowd out voluntary
cooperation?” Institute for Empirical Research in Economics - Univer-
sity of Zurich, IEW - Working Papers 034, 2001.
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

[15]
O. Bandiera, I. Barankay, and I. Rasul, “Social incentives in the
workplace,” Review of economic studies, vol. 77, no. 2, 2010, pp. 417–
458.
[16]
S. Huck, D. K¨ubler, and J. Weibull, “Social norms and economic
incentives in ﬁrms,” CiteSeerX - Scientiﬁc Literature Digital Library
and Search Engine United States, 2010.
[17]
M. Fritsch and M. Kauffeld-Monz, “The impact of network structure
on knowledge transfer: an application of social network analysis in
the context of regional innovation networks,” The Annals of Regional
Science, vol. 44, no. 1, 2010, pp. 21–38.
[18]
C. Boone, C. Declerck, and T. Kiyonari, “Inducing cooperative behavior
among proselfs versus prosocials: The moderating role of incentives and
trust,” Journal of Conﬂict Resolution, vol. 54, no. 5, 2010, pp. 799–824.
[19]
T. Porat, I. Rief, R. Puzis, and Y. Elovici, “Lookie-it feels like being
there,” in Proceedings of the 2011 annual conference extended abstracts
on Human factors in computing systems. ACM, 2011, pp. 1873–1878.
[20]
C. Dwyer, S. R. Hiltz, and K. Passerini, “Trust and privacy concern
within social networking sites: A comparison of facebook and mys-
pace.” in AMCIS, 2007, p. 339.
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

