Participatory Approach for a "Collaborative Heritage Observatory"in Tunisia 
A (re)appropriation of Tangible Cultural Heritage with and for the citizen 
 
Samia Ben Rajeb 
BATir - University of Brussels  
Brussels, Belgium 
e-mail: samia.ben.rajeb@ulb.ac.be 
Hatem Béjar 
Edifices & Mémoires Association  
Tunis, Tunisia 
e-mail: hatembejar@gmail.com
 
 
Abstract— This article presents an application of a 
participatory approach that involves the "citizen-participant" 
for a new appropriation of heritage. It is part of the project " 
Collaborative Heritage Observatory " funded by the European 
Union, in collaboration with UNESCO. Via this participatory 
research approach, we will show 1) how the citizen can support 
the production of scientific knowledge and 2) how this 
approach contributes to the construction of a common 
reference via a shared web platform. The objective is to realign 
theoretical and technical knowledge with practical and field 
knowledge. We will examine the complementarity between 
these two knowledge (theoretical and practical) for the 
production of new knowledge about the heritage and for a 
better appropriation of it. We will also dwell on a number of 
ethical issues imposed by citizen approaches and the limits they 
face to better apprehend them.  
Keywords- participatory research; heritage; shared database; 
citizen science; collaborative action research. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
How to value the richness of the tangible cultural 
heritage and bring it closer to its citizen? Two opposing 
visions emerge, faced to this wealth of Tunisian heritage. 
The first vision is that of the citizen who would judge the 
value of his heritage in function of its usefulness, its 
potential of use or its property value, or according to a 
personal link of the kind "my ancestor lived here ". This 
first vision, more often than not, generates purely functional 
and sometimes even destructive solutions. The second 
vision would be that of the experts (such as architect, 
researcher, curator, etc.) who would judge the value of the 
heritage according to a list of national and / or international 
predetermined criteria. This second vision of heritage, even 
in the state-of-the-art restoration of buildings, in most cases 
results in solutions of "museumification" that freeze, isolate 
and, sooner or later, destroy the heritage through lack of 
means, maintenance and distancing solutions from the 
interests of the citizen. 
With this "symmetry of non-dialogue", the process of 
bringing these two visions could be achieved through the 
definition of a participatory approach that tends to take into 
account these different points of view and thus gives as 
much room for the citizen as that granted to the expert for 
the safeguarding and re-appropriation of built heritage. This 
article reports feedback on the application of such an 
approach in the context of a census project, giving rise to a 
web sharing platform fed by co-reflection between the 
citizen and the expert.  
The contributions of this work consists in setting up a 
research’s methodology called collaborative for 1) allowing 
an adaptive, self-evolving and controlled approach; 2) 
aligning the theoretical and practical knowledge for the 
construction of a common frame of reference, 3) facing 
ethical questions, 4) perpetuating citizen action to encourage 
better appropriation of the heritage and to assist and manage 
the change.  
All these points mentioned above are demonstrated in 
the article. Indeed, it presents, first, the background and the 
problematic of research that put this research into a context, 
set its goals and the questions that will be answered within 
the article. After having identified the epistemological 
foundations of a participative approach, this article then 
explains the different stages of the methodology adopted to 
involve the citizen in the process, while ensuring the 
validity and reliability of the data relating to the heritage 
identified. Thirdly, the article shows the results of this 
approach leading to the development of an online 
participatory platform that lists several Tunisian buildings 
of heritage value.  
II. 
RESEARCH BACKGROUND 
The subject of this article is part of the project 
"Collaborative Heritage Observatory" funded by the 
European Union within the NET-MED YOUTH program, 
"Cultural Heritage and Civic Engagement of Youth", in 
collaboration with the UNESCO. The aim of this project is 
the training of a group of citizens / observers spread all over 
the Tunisian territory in order to initiate an inventory of 
fixtures of the architectural heritage, for a duration of two 
months. The missions of this group were as follows: 
• 
Identify heritage buildings in their respective 
regions according to pre-defined criteria et inform 
about the wealth of the existing heritage through 
publications on the web and in the field; 
• 
Warn about overruns on heritage buildings (total or 
partial demolition, change of appearance, etc.) 
The scientific innovation of this project is on a massive 
census carried out by non-expert citizens, while involving 
expert researchers. The aim is to maintain links of dialogue 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-722-1
COLLA 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

and relevant reflections without hierarchical distinction 
between theoretical knowledge and practical knowledge.  
To do this, this research over nine months has brought 
together three groups: 
Edifices & Mémoires (E & M): coordinator and at the 
initiative of this project, it is an association that works 
for the re-appropriation and enhancement of the local 
architectural heritage.  
PAE3C - University of Carthage: representing the 
experts / researchers in this project, this research 
laboratory brings together several researchers and PhD 
students specialized in Tunisian architectural and 
environmental heritage. As part of this project, they have 
the mission to validate the data collected before 
distributing it on the web platform. 
BATir - University of Brussels: research laboratory 
specialized in participatory approaches. Its task is to 
define and implement the participative approach. This 
article presents this approach, its contributions, its limits 
and the perspectives recommended to perpetuate this 
collaboration to support the re-appropriation of the 
heritage by the citizen. 
III. 
RESEARCH PROBLEM 
"To regenerate to not degenerate" is the line that the 
entire consortium has sought to follow for this project. 
Today, the aim is to bring the citizen closer to his little- 
known and often unrecognized heritage by establishing a 
real mediation between [Table 1]:  
• 
Two perceptions of the heritage often in 
opposition: that of the researchers perceiving the 
heritage as a testimony of the history, which is 
necessary to preserve the memory of the past versus 
that of the citizen perceiving the inheritance as 
buildings / territories to re-appropriate according to 
living arrangements today. 
• 
Two types of actions in relation to built heritage: 
that of the researcher whom 1) identifies, 2) 
diagnoses, 3) classifies, then 4) rehabilitates versus 
that of the civil society that would instead seek 1) to 
identify what could be value-added, 2) to make 
others aware of this not always measurable value, 3) 
to repair or transform with the means granted to 
them, 4) to appropriate these new territories 
according to the needs of the community.  
To ensure this mediation, we sought to guarantee a 
minimum of participative framework allowing these 2 
perceptions and actions to converse [1]. 
The advantages in this context are various to:  
• Reduce the boundaries between the researcher and the 
citizen by confronting the theory with the specificity of 
each context via the various data collected; 
• Go beyond this reductive definition of the trainer / 
scientist vs. learner / novice and transform rapport to 
knowledge "learning to learn" by: 
Thus, the citizen goes from an actor/learner to 
actor/trainer who will be responsible for transmitting this 
knowledge to his immediate entourage. 
TABLE I.  
PARTICIPATORY APPROACH                                                                 
AS A BRIDGE BETWEEN THEORETICAL KNOWLEDGE AND PRACTICAL 
KNOWLEDGE 
Participatory approach 
for the safeguarding and the valorization 
Type of 
Knowledge 
Theoretical knowledge 
Expert actions 
Practical Knowledge 
Citizen actions 
Actions based on  
State of the art  
Memory 
History and historical facts 
Experience 
Mastery of theories, 
research and studies 
conducted around and on 
Tunisian heritage with a 
global vision 
Increased knowledge of the 
field with a local vision 
 
Easy access to documents 
and privileged links with 
the legislature 
Privileged links with local 
people 
 
Need for reliability & completeness of information 
Focus 
- Documented History 
- Architectural styles 
- Conservation techniques 
- Urban value 
- Historical value 
- Remarkable heritage 
- Classified heritage 
- Known value ... 
- Oral Tradition & Legends 
- Incorporated know-how  
-Collective memory 
- Personal values 
- Personal story (s) 
- Noticed heritage  
- Living heritage 
- Recognized value... 
Nevertheless, the difficulties of such an approach lie in 
to constantly negotiate the discrepancy and certain 
contradictions between:  
• 
The needs for framing, standards to be imposed 
and evaluation practices via committees (defined in 
terms of the knowledge needed for research) to 
ensure the scientific of the approach and the 
reliability of the data collected and; 
• 
A more comprehensive approach that adapts itself 
to the reality and non-expert knowledge of the 
citizen and takes into account the implementation 
of such a scientific framework in the field [2]. 
The scientific innovation of this research project resides, 
therefore, in the implementation of a participatory 
methodology able to align these two perceptions while 
meeting the limits mentioned above. That is why we will 
seek to answer various questions: How to conduct 
participatory research? How to apply it to the Tunisian 
context and under what conditions? Which results can be 
expected for each of the project actors: researcher (as an 
expert in heritage) / association (as representative of civil 
society) / citizen (as an observer of this heritage)? What 
methods of collaboration and transmission of knowledge 
will be observed? However, before answering all these 
questions, it is necessary to specify our epistemological 
foundations. 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-722-1
COLLA 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

IV. 
METHODOLOGY 
The participatory approach is often presented as a link 
between the citizen and the experts. But, it seems essential 
to us to identify the specificities of these approaches in 
order to adopt the most appropriate one in this type of 
project around the theme of built heritage, keeping in mind 
the following questions (as recommended by J. Y. Antoine 
and al.  [3]).  
• 
Which approach to follow? Is it adapted to the 
concerned 
actor 
(both 
researcher/expert 
and 
citizen/novice), but also his social universe (both the 
Tunisian context in overall and the communal 
context)? 
In 
this 
article, 
we 
explain 
our 
methodological framework for the definition of an 
adaptive, self-evolving approach while being 
controlled to ensure the scientificity of the data 
identified [see Section V. A]. 
• 
But why ? What is the aim of this type of 
approach? We show how this approach contributed 
to the construction of a shared repository; the aim is 
to realign technical and scientific knowledge with 
practical and field knowledge [see Section V. B]. 
• 
How far ? While the citizen is being trained, it is 
difficult for him, in a short time, to apprehend 
science that is more and more complex and 
specialized. 
It 
is 
necessary 
to 
specify 
the 
participatory intervention framework of the citizen 
by posing a certain number of ethical questions 
imposed by the citizen processes and the limits 
which they face.. We, therefore, pause on these 
points to understand the approach with hindsight 
and in all its complexity [see Section V. C]. 
A. Epistemological foundations 
Several conceptions/re-conversions/rehabilitations are 
today used without real concern for future users/inhabitants. 
The current approaches focus mainly on buildings to be 
retained in terms of "protection / cost / time / structural and 
functional quality / safety" [4]. In this type of procedure, 
three postures are most often considered [5]: 1) observant 
posture and case study, 2) research and development posture 
and 3) participatory stances. The three positions meet in the 
will to produce knowledge but are differentiated mainly 
their finality and in their methodology. The first seeks to 
know how things happen by observing, analyzing and 
evaluating a phenomenon or aspects of this phenomenon 
[6]. The stakes of research are then nomothetic for the 
development and specification of theoretical knowledge. 
The second seeks to develop tools, action models and 
pedagogical or practical theories by analyzing and 
improving a production process [7]. The challenge here 
would be pragmatic via the functional resolution of 
problems. The third participates in the development of 
reflexivity relative to a practical situation through social 
commitment and user involvement [8]. The stakes would be 
political or ontogenetic. As part of this project, we are 
clearly aligned with this third so-called participatory stance. 
With a better understanding of the experience of these 
inhabitants, their experiences, their (bad) understanding and 
knowledge about the notion of heritage, their needs, their 
complex environment that is in perpetual mutation and their 
interactions with their communities and institutions, it is 
easier to encourage innovation and accept change [9]. 
Today, several participatory approaches, the objective of 
which are to integrate the citizen in an upstream reflection 
for an intervention at the scale of a building or a district in 
the design, are defined and put in place in various frames. 
We will talk about co-design [10], but also collaborative 
approaches [11], or action-research or intervention-research 
[12]. In this so-called participatory research, two large 
families emerge [13]. For one, it is about producing 
knowledge in order to facilitate a dynamic of change [11] 
[14]. For the other, it is as much a matter of producing 
knowledge as of training, thus refusing any hierarchy 
between "learned knowledge" and "action" [8][15]. In the 
case of this project, we opted for the second trend especially 
since training is at the heart of our problem. Since the 
project tends to collect data with the help of the citizen, we 
focused on the notion of "Citizen Science".  
Citizen science relies on the possibility of building 
science with the participation of the citizen [16]. This 
approach is generally developed in the field of nature to 
collect a maximum of data in a limited time. It brings 
together three types of actors: the one who needs the data 
(the institution), the one who gathers the data (the citizen) 
and the one who facilitates the exchange between the two. 
"Citizen Science" can be divided into three categories 
according to the actor who is at the origin of the initiative 
[17]. In the case of our study, the initiative was initially 
citizen. Contrary to what one might think, this initiative did 
not come from scientists although they clearly state their 
need to collect a large amount of data of Tangible Cultural 
Heritage scattered throughout the Tunisian territory. This is 
the originality of our research compared to what was 
previously done in other contexts of implementation of 
participatory approaches [3]. A question was quickly asked 
of us: how is it possible to maintain the action and the 
motivation to guarantee the commitment of each one 
(Citizen - Researcher) in a sustainable way in the study, and 
thus better accompany the change? That is why it was 
necessary to leave this framework "Applicant (Researcher) 
vs Executor (Citizen)" and push towards a "co-construction" 
of the objective and the approach to be implemented, 
between scientists and citizens. The aim is to accentuate the 
complementarities of the actions and the interests of each 
one. To do this, the objective of the study has gone beyond 
the simple data-gathering framework (crowdfunding / 
crowdsourcing) towards a real collaboration between 
Citizen & Researcher (co-design). As defined by J. Y. 
Antoine and al. [3], the co-design in research implies the 
"co-construction of the scientific question to be tackled, 
operate a mediation / training that allows all actors to 
understand the issues involved and think about governance 
". Therefore, we focused on a citizen position in which the 
citizen / non-expert becomes an actor in the research who 
does not feel excluded from the management of the project. 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-722-1
COLLA 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

B. Targetted objectives 
With the expert researchers (PAE3C) and members of 
the association (E & M), we defined the objectives of this 
project, while trying to involve the citizen in the process: 
• 
To collect and record a massive amount of data in a 
large territory thanks to and with the citizen ; 
• 
To systematically document each of these data 
according to a predefined methodology taking into 
account the specificity of each context ; 
• 
To ensure the reliability of data through regular and 
online support via a scientific committee and a 
technical committee ; 
• 
To archive, reveal and disseminate the results via an 
online platform open to any public ; 
• 
To gradually co-build a shared repository of 
knowledge and concerns of shared valorization ; 
• 
To bring communities together (scientists vs civil 
society) and reconcile present and past. 
Starting from these objectives, we present here the 
various gradations of citizen involvement, envisaged for the 
definition of the methodological process implemented. 
Indeed, our role was initially pedagogical, in addition to 
managing the transition between the different partners.  
 
To allow this gradation during this methodological 
process, we have increased the contribution of the citizen by 
gradually passing from "observer status for the census 
project" to the status of "an actor in the valorization 
project". 
C. Choice of phases of the process 
The phases of the participative methodology have been 
specified to ensure the monitoring of a scientifically valid 
data and the reliability of the information. Each of these 
phases was presented to observers-citizens. Elements had 
been prepared and put at their disposal according to the 
objectives of each phase. Tools were had also been 
developed and tested and updated with and by these citizen-
observers for a better appropriation of the methodology that 
was imposed on them. By involving them in the validation 
and improvement of the elements provided, we seek to 
empower them and to involve them as much as possible in 
the project for more sustainable and effective change 
management. Table II details each phase (first column) by 
specifying the different elements that have been given and 
prepared (second column) according to the objectives 
targeted by our participative methodology (third column). 
The results obtained at the end of each phase were also 
detailed in Table II.  
 
TABLE II.  
MAIN STEPS OF THE PROCESS 
 
 
Phases 
Prepared / Given Elements 
Objectives Targeted 
Results 
1) 
Choice of 
observers 
1.1) Launch of the 
invitation 
Intensive publication on the web and 
social networks 
Spread the invitation and explain 
the conditions of participation 
239 applications throughout the 
Tunisian territory 
1.2) Pre-selection 
by file  
First evaluation according to selection 
criteria: (availability, residence, 
historical interest for its region) 
To reach the widest fringes of 
society and thus form a 
multidisciplinary team. 
40th of candidatures  
(2 to 3 candidates per region) 
1.3) Definitive 
selection  
 
Second evaluation according to 
selection criteria: (degree of 
involvement: in the social actions and 
in local activities in their region) 
Objectively identify the 
applications taking into account 
each social and regional 
environment. 
15 observers located in the 
different regions of the Tunisian 
territory 
 
1.4) Dissemination 
of results 
Intensive publishing on the web and 
social networks 
Explain and "legitimize" their 
action in their regions 
Make direct contact with local 
associations 
2)  
Training 
> 3 days of co-located training  
> 5 proposed themes:  
1) Historical landmarks and legal framework,  
2) Concrete realities of cities and municipal interventions,  
3) Diversity of points of view on Tunisian heritage, 
4) Methodology of collection and encoding of data  
5) "Patrimonialization" & Heritage Value Creation)  
> Development of a WEB application for information 
encoding and 1st field test 
> Encourage formal and informal 
moments of exchange, by mixing 
citizens with scientists, 
professionals from the field and 
members of other associations  
> Train the observers and 
federate the group for the project  
> Allow better appropriation of 
the method by the observers 
> Creation of a collective 
dynamic 
> Construction of a common 
reference on Tunisian heritage 
> Immediate update of the web 
application according to the first 
feedback given by the post-test 
observers. 
 
3) 
Deployment 
Authorizations given by local authorities 
> Allowance payment per month 
> Shared web platform with a grid of criteria to be filled in by 
the citizen observer, guaranteeing: 
1 - the ergonomics of the interface, ease of understanding, 
feeding and use by observers; 
2 - possibility of verifying the veracity of the information 
and its source; 
3- automatic processing of these data, so that they are easily 
communicable for verification and publication. 
> Visit and capture officially and 
legitimately the data on the site  
> Cover travel and 
communication expenses during 
the mission  
> Facilitate the census task, re-
enforce communication, 
harmonize data, ensure reliability 
and maintain a rigorous and 
repeatable methodology  
520 sites identified in 2 months 
indicating various information:  
- General information  
 - Justification of the relevance 
of the choice of this building 
(architectural value, historical, 
symbolic, potential use, social, 
urban, landscape, etc.)  
- Stories of the place 
 - List of information collected 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-722-1
COLLA 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

4- possibility to declare "I do not know", to not be tempted 
to fill in some data without control of the content. 
> Web page for sharing useful documents, communication 
and feedback 
> Ensure regular and repeated 
monitoring between the different 
monitoring committees and the 
citizen observers, etc. 
(bibliographic sources, 
webography, documents, 
photos, videos, statements, 
testimonials, etc.) 
4) 
Validation 
and 
publication 
of data 
> Specification of a validation method of the data in 3 steps: 
1- Validation in principle by the technical committee on: 
the handling of the grid (have all the data been encoded?) + 
Correct spelling and comprehensible sentences + relevance 
of the chosen building 
2- Validation of the content by expert readers via a criterion 
grid 
3- Final validation by the technical committee which 
verifies the availability of all the resources and takes into 
account the remarks of the scientific committee 
> Publication of data in a geo-located web platform with: 
- "No mention" if validation stopped in step 1 of this phase 
- Mention "Peer Review" if the validation passed through the 
3 stages of this phase 
> Achieve a publishable and 
useful verifiable result for future 
analyzes, diagnostics and 
research  
> Indicate the degree of 
reliability of the encoded data  
> Guarantee a massive and 
reliable census of geo-located 
data 
> 487 (/ 520) have been 
identified on the web platform 
accessible to all public 
> 124 (/ 487) are marked "Peer 
review" 
 
V. 
FROM PARTIPATORY RESEARCH ( CITIZEN SCIENCE) 
TO PARTICIPATORY ACTION RESEARCH (CO-RESEARCH) 
The success of the project lies in two aspects. The first is 
the massive census capacity that has been realized. The web 
interface [18], which has been online for more than a year 
and roughly summarized 160 sites, reveals today more than 
520 sites, in two months of the project, with a detailed 
description and the scientific validation of approximately a 
quarter of them. The second concerns the process itself. By 
involving the citizen and bringing together these two types 
of perceptions (which may seem opposite - cf. Table 1), the 
approach presented here has allowed to create a dynamic 
within the group, to involve joint interactions, a reflection 
on oneself, a mutual adjustment, the co-construction of 
negotiated meaning and knowledge about how current 
heritage might be appropriate. This is what we will show by 
developing our results in this article. 
A. Ensure a dynamic, adaptive, self-evolving and 
controlled approach 
The participatory approach applied here aims at being 
dynamic, considering the citizen as a partner in research, 
who must jointly assume the credibility of the data 
collected. As the project develops, we notice that observers 
also become responsible for disseminating and valuing the 
data they have collected.  
By asking questions to people in their community, 
residents see themselves as mediators between themselves 
and the administrators of this heritage that they mix with 
daily. Their actions with their respective communities 
become concrete through an educational and empowering 
process. It is in this that the approach goes beyond the 
framework of traditional research in social sciences because 
there is not explicitly a clear separation between the expert 
and the novice, between the one who does research and the 
one who lives in the studied situation. These citizens-
observers will also seek, little by little, an emancipatory 
perspective where they claim their will to change the 
situation after becoming aware of the state of disrepair in 
which they find their heritage. This awareness grew as the 
census exercise evolved. 
Even if the methodology set up, via the grid and the 
predefined phases, could seem fixed, the approach adopted 
here has gone beyond the "citizen science" framework 
where the citizen becomes an actor only at the level of data 
collection. It is adaptive and self-evolving in the framework 
of a process that encourages reflexivity: by empowering 
citizens/observers, ensuring feedback between the different 
committees (scientific and technical), encouraging co-
analysis where it is demanded. These citizens/observers are 
asked to present the data they collected themselves and, as 
far as possible, to be co-authors with the committees. This 
equivalence relationship between expert/researcher and 
observer/citizen is an essential condition to ensure the 
success of the process [19].  
It should be noted that the explanation of the objectives, 
the phases of the process (what? How? Why?) and the joint 
identification of the working hypotheses confronted with the 
reality of the field, participated in a better appropriation of 
the "citizen science" approach, to move little by little 
towards co-research. This new approach has allowed more 
space for the expression of opinions and positions where 
theoretical knowledge and practical knowledge complement 
each other, opening the possibility for complementary and 
mutual interactions. Nevertheless, even if the approach is 
citizen and self-evolving it must be structured and responds 
to a real need for reliability of the data entered. It is 
therefore essential not to forget that this approach must also 
guarantee a scientific approach that introduces certain 
conditions, such as objectivity, the specification of a framed 
method, the possibility of controlling these data, peer 
verification and reproducibility of the operation. This is why 
the approach proposed here follows very specific steps 
defined above with the establishment of various committees 
managing the various aspects of research with feedback 
from the field. 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-722-1
COLLA 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

B. Building a common reference framework between 
theoretical knowledge and practical knowledge 
As part of the project "Collaborative Heritage 
Observatory” the 15 applications that were selected came 
from various fields of specialization, with an age range 
varying between 20 and 40 years. Not all of them required 
extensive knowledge of heritage. Nevertheless, the approach 
taken here allowed the construction of a group culture 
through a learning process that arose from the interaction of 
knowledge between scientific theories and historical facts to 
the knowledge of the field, and the workings of the 
environment hosting this building. This interaction not only 
contributed to the construction of a common feeling, but we 
notice that new negotiated knowledge emerges by taking 
into account the knowledge and the aims of each one. These 
activities of co-construction of knowledge constitute a 
means 1) of development of expertise relating to the 
heritage and 2) of self-reflection from the point of view that 
each one brings as well as on the way of reacting faced with 
this heritage, which tends to being degraded and/or being 
demolished without real awareness of its potentialities and 
values. It is thus a question of creating dynamics of 
adjustment between the interests, the stakes and the logics 
of the two communities (between researchers and citizen, 
between experts and novices). Through the interviews 
conducted during the project, we were able to observe that 
this awareness and this process of self-reflection and 
adjustment 
concerns 
the 
observers/citizens 
and 
the 
experts/researchers involved in the training and the 
scientific committee. The project's stakeholders were thus 
positively influenced to support learning and cross-
reflections. The driving force behind this project was the 
ability of the observers 1) to reflect on their census task, the 
influence it could have on their entourage and knowledge of 
the heritage, and 2) to act according to their understanding 
that they have of the context of their actions (social, 
economic, urban and political). The interviews conduced 
show the contribution of such an approach in the 
construction of a common reference system connecting 
technical and scientific knowledge and practical and field 
knowledge. This realignment of knowledge is the 
cornerstone for better understanding and appropriation of 
built heritage through these material and immaterial data. 
C. Solving ethical issues 
Adopting a citizen approach requires us to ask ourselves 
a certain number of ethical questions, such as remuneration, 
the limits of a lack of expertise, the mastery of a specific 
scientific language and technical terms, copyrights or 
legitimacy of negotiated knowledge. 
Remuneration. Many authors raise the question of the 
remuneration of collected data in the framework of citizen 
research [20]. For the definition of our approach, we took 
the position relative to the economic and social context of 
the country. Indeed, we have chosen to grant compensation 
because certain areas of the territory remain inaccessible via 
public transport. Most observers/citizens have to rent a car 
to access isolated and little-known buildings. It should be 
noted that it is thanks to this difficult access that many of 
these buildings have been preserved from any unauthorized 
transformation 
and/or 
destruction. 
In 
addition, 
this 
allowance also played the role of some recognition for the 
work done by these citizens and the time spent on the 
census, which helps to maintain their motivation. 
Nevertheless, we were able to observe that the involvement 
of observers/citizens in the census project was such that they 
asked not to close their access to the census platform so that 
they could continue this work on their own merits despite 
the end of the project. 
Lack of expertise. It is essential to maintain motivation 
shared by the experts and observers involved in the project. 
This motivation is allowed through the involvement and 
accountability of all stakeholders in the joint definition of 
the approach to be implemented and in the collection and 
reliability of the data. From this implication emerges a set of 
difficulties relating to 1) the appropriation of knowledge and 
2) the capacity of actors to negotiate the difficulties that 
emerge during the process and the means implemented to 
mitigate them. This is why it was essential that the approach 
be adaptive, not depending on the observer's ability to 
correctly follow the phases of the defined methodology but 
on the "real appropriation of the knowledge mobilized in 
order to modify their social practices, their understanding 
and their environment ", as underlined by C. Gonzalez-
Laporte [13]. Nevertheless, it is difficult to gauge the ability 
of observers to appropriate this knowledge. Thus, we 
equipped them by putting them in direct contact with local 
experts that they can call on in case of doubt. We also 
imposed them to put the listing of all the sources used by the 
observers to give information relative to the listed building. 
This list is crucial for scientific validation, reliability and 
cross-referencing of the data. It should be noted that all 
these sources have imposed the opening of a server in which 
all collected data (video, audios, documents, pictures, etc.) 
are deposited and collected before closing a file on a 
building. 
Legitimacy of negotiated knowledge. We must be fully 
aware that it is difficult to envisage, through this type of 
participatory approach, the total accuracy of these collected 
data and the universality of the knowledge that is produced 
there. It is the knowledge that can be progressively and 
collectively enriched by the feedback allowed by the 
platform. Any expert consulting the web page of the map 
project " Collaborative Heritage Observatory "can make a 
comment, supplement the information given or contradict it 
if it demonstrates the source. In this sense, the experience of 
the citizen and the reality of the environment in which he 
evolves are as essential to the success of the project as the 
theoretical and technical knowledge of experts in historic 
buildings. It is, therefore, a democratic first step in which 
the advancement of knowledge is discussed and promotes 
debate by identifying problems and proposing possible 
solutions adapted to the context in question. But we still 
notice that it is necessary to guarantee a minimum of critical 
detachment on both the practical reality and the theoretical 
conceptualization of a deteriorating heritage. 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-722-1
COLLA 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

Copyright. Collective analysis and the production of 
negotiated knowledge automatically raise the issue of 
copyright. Whom does this data belong to? Who could 
exploit them and for which purpose and for which 
framework? Initially, this problem was circumvented by 
having all observers/citizens a signed contract in which they 
assign the right to the association on all data collected in the 
context of this project. Nevertheless, it was decided, 
following a real desire expressed by the entire consortium to 
integrate a co-research approach, for each data published on 
the web platform to be indicated the name of the observer 
who harvested as well all of his resources. This new 
positioning 
has 
contributed 
to 
strengthening 
the 
accountability and commitment of the various actors in the 
project. 
D. Ensure the sustainability of the “Collaborative Heritage 
Observatory” 
In the association's response to UNESCO's call for 
proposals, it was proposed to involve "Lamda" citizens 
whose specialization and/or profession does not have a 
direct relationship with heritage. Nevertheless, by jointly 
identifying the citizen approach to be adopted, it was 
decided that this first generation of 15 observers should be 
selected, not with their specialty, but according to their 
degree of involvement in associative actions that could 
directly or indirectly concern the heritage. The reasons for 
this choice are many. 
 The first reason being the limited duration of the 
training, it is difficult to 1) initiate a person to the scientific 
approach, the variety and the complexity of this heritage, 
but also 2) bring it closer to the problematic of architectural 
heritage and debates surrounding it. The second reason is 
the proximity and involvement of the citizen in the activities 
and issues of his community. We started from the 
hypothesis that it is thanks to his level of implication and 
knowledge of the region that he will be able to open a 
maximum of doors, to count more easily the buildings 
challenging to access and to speak directly with the 
inhabitants about their issues and expectations for the 
heritage buildings around them. Thus, we also record their 
visions on this architectural heritage.  
The third reason, the most essential, is the durability of 
the Collaborative Heritage Observatory project. Indeed, 
thanks to the project, it has been possible to train a group of 
citizens spread over the entire Tunisian territory. The next 
objective is to go in each of these regions to directly from 
the premises where our main interlocutors will be the first 
observers/citizens. The latter will themselves become 
trainers and will progressively evolve towards a status of 
regional heritage referents. Cultural visits to heritage 
buildings could be organized by observers in their 
respective regions, with the support of the association in 
order to continue the observation mission. It is through this 
strategy that we want to perpetuate the project through 
knowledge negotiated for the transmission, re-appropriation 
and conduct of social change to and for the heritage of its 
citizen and with the support of experts. 
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
The whole participatory process defined here aims to 
lead a collective action for a (re)appropriation of Tangible 
Cultural Heritage with and for the citizen. In just a few 
months, the number of buildings surveyed has been 
multiplied by 3. As a result of the project and despite the 
fact that the observers are no longer paid, more than 50% of 
them continued to enrich the content of the platform. Today, 
the page is visited by 12568 people with an attendance rate 
of an average of 40 a day. This attendance rate has, among 
other things, helped the E&M association to federate others 
observers distributed throughout the Tunisian territory. 
They gradually shifted from 15 "remunerated" heritage 
observers to 23 "volunteer" heritage observers, 8 of whom 
were paid observers in the past who now continue to do so 
on a voluntary basis. The context was a determining 
variable that conditioned the explanation of this approach so 
that it could be dynamic, adaptive and self-evolving while 
being controlled. That is why the whole participatory 
process was defined here to lead a collective action for 
change, even to change it from the "Citizen science" (that is, 
from a simple census carried out by the citizen) to a "Co-
research" that involves the citizen in the different stages of 
the project, so that the process evolves with and thanks to 
him. To do this, we were guided by the principle that it 
should be to ensure to 1) making knowledge equivalent, and 
2) clarification of representations that the citizen-observers 
and experts-researchers make of the social reality will 
encourage "a process of education, development of 
consciousness and mobilization for action" [13]. This 
principle is confirmed. Indeed, 73% of observers continue, 
till today, to warn local authorities and associations when 
overruns that tend to destroy the Tangible Cultural Heritage 
of their region are noted. As a result of the project, more 
than a quarter of them were either 1) involved in associative 
actions within their locality (as project managers), or 2) 
registered in third cycle on topics of research about Tunisian 
heritage and its valorization (3 Phd in Architecture et 1 Phd 
in Human Sciences). As a result, citizen observers are now 
privileged partners who also help to raise awareness in their 
regions. This research work then tends to logic of "learning 
to learn" and not only "learning for learning". The objective 
of this project is to open a perspective towards a new 
(re)appropriation of heritage for and with the citizen. This 
change is reflected in the way that the citizen/participant 
looks today at the richness of his heritage and in his 
relationship with the experts in the field. The observers, who 
are basically scattered around the various Tunisian regions, 
have, on their own initiative, created a community of 
observers and experts, setting up their own web page, for 
the communication and the experience sharing. This web 
page has become in fact the new place for various debates 
around the notion of heritage value and possible future 
actions. In one year, approximately 3110 interactions 
between different observers and experts were recorded; 
about 10 exchanges per day on average related to Tangible 
Cultural Heritage. Thus, Reflections and debates concerning 
heritage are no longer reserved for a certain elite. Through 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-722-1
COLLA 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

this framework, the citizen is given the means to also expose 
his point of view on the question of buildings with heritage 
value for a better appropriation of these.   
One of the main limitations of this project is the lack of 
availability of the Scientific and Technical Committees for 
the scientific validation of encoded data. Despite their 
increased investment in the exchanges, only a quarter of this 
data was validated in Peer review by the experts. In order 
not to block the planned publication of the recorded data, it 
was decided that all data that has been validated by the 
technical committee could be visible on the web platform 
but without displaying the "Peer Review". Thus, users of the 
platform can gauge the degree of reliability of the data 
recorded and published.  
We also hope for a transformation at the level of inter-
societal relations, for example, to see in the social structures 
but it is impossible, at this stage of the project, to gauge this 
parameter. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
Contributions. This article has made it possible to 
highlight the contribution of a citizen-centred approach in a 
context in particular for the production of knowledge and 
the 
appropriation 
of 
heritage, 
under 
the 
scholarly 
supervision of the experts. Also, all the data collected have 
been published on a unique web platform that is now being 
consulted and nurtured by experts as well as other citizens 
(excluding project observers). This platform has made it 
possible to create a shared repository via a clustered and 
shared broadcast interface. To date, several proposals for 
co-research and exploitation of this unique and online 
database are made within the framework of various projects 
for tourism, heritage research, urban planning, new citizen 
actions, etc.  
Prospects. A crucial phase is to be expected as a result 
of this project, which consists of analyzing and linking the 
information collected by the observers. This analysis work 
will form a basis for global reflection on the heritage that 
the association wishes to initiate. The next step is to 
consolidate the already formed group, to encourage the 
continuation and to accentuate decentralization. A project of 
a cycle of conferences has already been planned at the end 
of this research project in different Tunisian sites, under the 
supervision of observers from the regions concerned. 
REFERENCES 
[1] N. Descamps-Bednarz, S. Desgagné, J. F. Maheux, and  L. 
Savoie-Zajc,   “The update of a reflexive contract as a 
regulator of participatory research approaches: the case of an 
research-action  and a collaborative research.” In Educational 
research, 14, pp. 129-152, 2012.  
[2] J. Morrissette and W. Tessaro, “Contribution of collaborative 
research on the professional development of teachers and 
trainers in evaluation,” In Evaluer. International Journal of 
Research in Education and Training, 1(2), pp. 9-14, 2015. 
[3] J. Y. Antoine and A. Lefeuvre-Halftermeyer, “Participatory 
sciences and TALN: how far? how? Why?.” In TALN’2017, 
2017. 
[4] S. Cartier and K. El Assad, “Stakes and procedures of seismic 
protection of the historical heritage: The rehabilitation of the 
former Galeries de France in Museum of Modern Art of 
Algiers,” In The Annals of Urban Research, pp. 166-175, 
2010. 
[5] J. M. Van der Maren, “Research Methods for Education,” 2nd 
Ed. Bruxelles : Editions De Boeck University, 2004. 
[6] T. Karsenti and S. Demers, “The case study”. In T. Karsenti et 
L. Savoie-Zajc (dir.), Educational research: steps and 
approaches, Sherbrooke, QC: Éditions du CRP, pp. 209-233, 
2004. 
[7] J. Loiselle and S. Harvey, “Research development in 
education: 
foundations, 
contributions 
and 
limits.” 
In 
Qualitative research, 27(1), pp. 40-59, 2007. 
[8] S. Desgagné, “The challenge of co-producing knowledge in 
collaborative research: around a process of reconstruction and 
analysis of stories of teaching practice,” In M. Anadon (dir.), 
Participatory research: many perspectives, Quebec: Presses of 
University of Québec, pp. 89-121, 2007. 
[9] L. M. Aquino Shluzas and L. J. Leifer, “The insight-value-
perception (iVP) model for user-centered design,” In 
Technovation, 34(11), pp. 649–662, 2014. 
[10] M. Anadón, “Participatory research: multiple looks,” Quebec: 
Presses of the University of Quebec, 2007. 
[11] P. Reason and H., Bradbury, “Handbook of Action Research : 
Participative Inquiry and Practice,” 2nd édition. London : 
Sage, 2008. 
[12] A. David,  “Research-intervention, general framework for 
management research” (Eds.) Albert David, A., Hatchuel, A. 
et Laufer, R., The new foundations of management sciences, 
Paris : Vuibert, 2008. 
[13] C. 
Gonzalez-Laporte, 
“Participatory 
action 
research, 
collaborative, intervention ... What explanations?” In 
[Research report] <hal-01022115>. Labex ITEM. 2014. 
[14] J. Robertson, “The three Rs of action research methodology : 
reciprocity, 
reflexivity 
and 
reflection-on-reality,” 
In 
Educational Action Research, 8(2), pp. 307-326, 2014. 
[15] M. Anadón, “Participatory research: multiple looks,” Quebec: 
Presses of the University of Quebec, 2007. 
[16] J. Morrissette, “Towards a framework of interactionist 
analysis of professional practices,” In Recherches qualitatives, 
30(1), 2011. 
[17] T. Burger-Helmchen and J. Pénin,  “Crowdsourcing: 
definition, issues, typology. “In Management & Future, 1(41), 
pp. 254-269, 2011. 
[18] www.edifices-et-memoires.com 
[19] G. Bœuf, Y. M. Allain, and M. Bouvier, “The contribution of 
participatory sciences in the knowledge of biodiversity.” 
Report submitted to the Minister of Ecology, 2012. 
[20] H. 
Coenen, 
“Research-action: 
relationships 
between 
researchers 
and 
actors.” 
In 
International 
Journal 
of 
Psychosociology 
and 
Management 
of 
Organizational 
Behavior, 7(16), pp. 19-32, 2001. 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-722-1
COLLA 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

