SVM Methods in Image Segmentation 
 
Tian Chi Zhang 
College of computer science and technology 
Harbin Engineering University 
Harbin, China 
e-mail: zhangtianchi@hrbeu.edu.cn 
Jian Pei Zhang 
College of computer science and technology 
Harbin Engineering University 
Harbin, China 
e-mail: zhangjianpei@hrbeu.edu.cn 
Jing Yang  
College of computer science and technology 
Harbin Engineering University 
Harbin, China 
e-mail: yangjing@hrbeu.edu.cn 
Jing Zhang  
College of computer science and technology 
Harbin Engineering University 
Harbin, China 
e-mail: zhangjing@hrbeu.edu.cn
Abstract—Support Vector Machine (SVM) is playing an 
increasingly important role in image segmentation methods, 
especially, in the medical image processing. There are many 
modified methods based on SVM. In this paper, SVM methods, 
including 
modified 
SVM 
methods 
in 
medical 
image 
segmentation within the last five years are reviewed. A 
comparison and analysis among the papers is presented, and 
conclusions and future research framework are suggested with 
the aim of helping researchers to determine their own research 
framework, method and content. 
Keywords- visualization technique; image segmentation; 
SVM 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Among visualization techniques, no matter in which 
research area, such as sea or wave image visualization, 
medical image visualization etc., image segmentation is the 
key and basic technique to achieve an exact and clear object 
contour of the key features in the frame. That is, image 
segmentation aims at dividing an image into different sub-
images with different characteristics and extracts some 
interesting objects [1]. The most essential and important 
content of research on segmentation is to cluster the nodes 
set. It is a key technique because the quality of cluster results 
affects the quality of image object segmentation and 
recognition. 
The 
main 
application 
field 
of 
image 
segmentation is medical image [2]. Medical images 
themselves are very uncertain and inaccurate. But the 
accurate and certain segmentation of objects in medical 
image is important for object recognition [3]. In recent years, 
some experts made efforts to apply all kinds of clustering or 
classification methods in image segmentation, especially for 
Support Vector Machines (SVM). SVM algorithm shows 
excellent segmentation performance, which has been 
successfully extended from basic task of classification [4]. 
Unlike other methods, which minimize the empirical training 
error, SVM makes use of the structure risk minimization and 
can be combined with other methods to obtain a good 
performance in image segmentation.  
In the following section, we firstly review the researches 
and methods of SVM in image segmentation within the last 
five years. Secondly, the comparison between SVM and 
other artificial intelligence methods is proposed. Finally, 
conclusions and a suggested framework for future research 
are presented.  
II. 
RESEARCHES AND METHODS  
This section is composed of two subsections in order to 
make it more comprehensible for the reader. In the first 
subsection, modified SVM methods in general image 
analysis within the last five years are reviewed. In the 
second part, modified SVM methods in medical image 
segmentation are analysed. Papers in both parts are 
structured in a historical and technical sequence.   
A.  SVM Image Segmentation 
In recent years, with new theories and new methods 
appearing constantly, more and more modified SVM 
methods have achieved good effect in image segmentation 
[5]. We are going to review the modified SVM methods 
from the last five years, in a chronological sequence. Yang [6] 
presented an effective colour image segmentation approach 
based on pixel classification with least squares support 
vector machine (LS-SVM). Both pixel-level colour feature 
and texture feature were used as input of LS-SVM model 
(classifier), and the LS-SVM model (classifier) was trained 
by selecting the training samples with Arimoto entropy 
thresholding. Zheng [7] proposed a novel algorithm for blind 
watermarking by applying singular value decomposition and 
LS-SVM into watermark embedding and detection. Both of 
them proposed or utilize the method of LS-SVM. Zhang [8] 
studied genetic algorithm-support vector machine (GA-SVM) 
and used K-fold Cross Validation (K-CV) method to 
determine the hyper-parameters (c, g) of SVM. He studied a 
method of GA-SVM. Bai [9] proposed a novel visual 
saliency based SVM approach for automatic training data 
selection and object segmentation, namely, Saliency-SVM. 
Cheng [10] inspired by the idea of divide-and-conquer 
approach and discriminatively trained SVM model for object 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

detection introduced a method of training with a mixture of 
weighted SVM models and Expectation Maximization (EM) 
algorithms. The weighted SVM with logistic function 
converts prediction score into pseudo-probability. Turker [11] 
mixed the image pixel’s texture features, Maximum local 
energy, Maximum gradient and Maximum second moment 
matrix to segment colour images based on the trained LS-
SVM model (classifier). Both abovementioned works 
modified SVM by Maximum feature in image. He et al. [12] 
presented an integrated approach which was the integration 
of SVM classification, Hough transformation and perceptual 
grouping for the automatic extraction of rectangular-shape 
and circular-shape buildings from high-resolution optical 
space borne images. That is, integrated method can be 
successfully used in modified SVM. 
To summarise, there are studies about the modified 
methods of singular value decomposition and least squares 
support vector machine, GA-SVM, training mixture of 
weighted SVM models and EM algorithm, Saliency-SVM, 
LS-SVM, Maximum local energy adding Maximum gradient 
and Maximum second moment matrix of LS-SVM, Hough 
transformation and perceptual grouping for the automatic 
extraction feature with SVM. All the methods above can be 
grouped into two types; one of the groups is formed by SVM 
methods mixed with other artificial methods, such as GA-
SVM. The other group modifies parameters or function in 
SVM, such as LS-SVM method, which modifies function in 
SVM. These modified SVM methods aim at obtaining 
effective image segmentation, searching for parameters to 
determine hyper-parameters (c, g) of SVM in order to 
achieve automatic training data selection and automatic 
feature extraction. In a word, researchers seek automatic and 
effective image segmentation. However, for medical image 
segmentation, the most important thing is not effectiveness 
or automatic segmentation, but accuracy [13]-[20]. Methods 
for medical image segmentation that aim at offering accurate 
results are described in the following paragraphs. 
B. Medical Image Segmentation 
For medical image segmentation, Wu [21] introduced an 
automated method, which was called prior feature Support 
Vector Machine-Markov Random Field (pSVMRF) to 
segment three-dimensional mouse brain Magnetic Resonance 
Microscopy (MRM) images. In her study, pSVMRF reduced 
training and testing time for SVM while boosting 
segmentation performance. Segmentation accuracy for new 
strains is 80% for hippocampus and caudate putamen, 
indicating that pSVMRF is a promising and exact approach 
for phenotyping mouse models of human brain disorders. 
Alajlan [22] used an ensemble of linear support vector 
machine classifiers (SVMs) for classifying a subject as either 
patient or normal control. Image voxels were first ranked 
based on the voxel wise t-statistics between the voxel 
intensity values and class labels. Then voxel subsets were 
selected based on the rank value using a forward feature 
selection scheme. Finally, an SVM classifier was trained on 
each subset of image voxels. The class label of a test subject 
was calculated by combining individual decisions of the 
SVM classifiers using a voting mechanism. Varol [23] 
presented a class of nonlinear kernel SVMs admits 
approximate 
classifiers 
with 
runtime 
and 
memory 
complexity that was independent of the number of support 
vectors. The class of kernels, which they referred to as 
additive kernels, included being widely used kernels for 
histogram-based image comparison, such as intersection and 
chi-squared kernels. Additive kernel SVMs can offer 
significant improvements in accuracy over linear SVMs on a 
wide variety of tasks while having the same runtime, making 
them practical for largescale recognition or real-time 
detection tasks. Shao [24] proposed method essentially 
generates new synthetic support vectors (SVs) from the 
obtained by training a standard SVM with the available label 
samples. Then, original and transformed SVs were used for 
training the virtual SVM. They incorporated invariances to 
rotations and reflections of image patches for improving 
contextual classification. Then, added an invariance to object 
scale in patch-based classification. They also focused on the 
challenging problem of including illumination invariances to 
deal with shadows in the images. Very good results were 
obtained when few label samples were available for 
classification. The obtained classifiers revealed enhanced 
sparsity and robustness. Interestingly, the methodology can 
be applied to any maximum-margin method, thus 
constituting a new research opportunity. Maji [25] has 
presented an improved SVM method, which combined the 
SVM with the canny algorithm, the morphological algorithm 
and the fixed circle method to obtain a better segmentation 
result. In addition, the initial image was pre-processed by 
using the image contrast enhancement and median filtering. 
L [26] developed an improved support vector machine (SVM) 
framework to segment hepatic tumour from CT data. By this 
method, the one-class SVM (OSVM) and two classes SVM 
(TSVM) were connected seamlessly by a boosting tool, to 
tackle the tumour segmentation via both offline and online 
learning. An initial tumour region was first presented by an 
OSVM classifier. Then the boosting tool was employed to 
automatically generate the negative (non-tumour) samples, 
according to certain criteria.  
As a summary, these are the most common modified 
SVM methods: prior feature Support Vector Machine-
Markov Random Field (pSVMRF), SVM adding canny 
algorithm, morphological algorithm and the fixed circle 
method, additive kernels in SVM, new SVs in SVM, 
aggregate the obtained set of spectro-spatial maps used in 
SVM and boosting tool adding SVM. We divide the methods 
above into two groups: the first group is an improved method 
by adding medical image features, such as method of 
pSVMRF; the second group is a modified method and then 
applied to medical image segmentation, such as additive 
kernels in SVM. All the modified SVM methods aim at 
offering the results of accurate, fast clinical and automatic 
segmentation. 
III. COMPARISON AND ANALYSIS 
In this section, we firstly make a comparison between 
SVM and other typical artificial intelligence methods in 
image segmentation, such as, GA, K-means clustering and 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

neural networks (NN), finally, the analysis of modified SVM 
methods is presented. 
There are many image segmentation methods, which 
are based on difference theories and principles. This work 
will review the methods of Genetic algorithm (GA), K-
means and NN to compare with SVM.  GA [27] is a 
metaheuristic algorithm inspired by the process of natural 
selection that belongs to the larger class of evolutionary 
algorithms (EA). The principles of genetic algorithms are 
that they use the operators such as mutation, crossover and 
selection to achieve optimization. It is commonly used to 
generate high-quality solutions to optimization and search 
problems. Actually it combines with other methods to 
segment images. K-means [28] is a kind of cluster method; 
it segments images by the theory of grouping or dividing 
pixels in an image into a set. The principle of this method is 
that it partitions n pixels into k clusters in which each pixels 
belongs to the cluster with the nearest mean. K-means is a 
cluster method, not good at classification. Neural network 
[29] is the theory of self-studying and fault-to-learnt, it 
utilizes the training and learning method to segment images. 
Its principle is that it has the capacity of parallel computing, 
distributed saving and nonlinear function approximating. 
Before applying NN to segmentation, it requests large 
samples to be learned, so it has the limitation of the need of 
training techniques. 
Compared with the above mentioned methods of 
optimization, clustering and learning, SVM [30] is a 
classification method. It classifies pixels into one-class, two 
or many classes. The aim of image segmentation is to 
classify an image into one, two or more classes. So from the 
point of theory and principle, the advantages of SVM are 
that it is more suitable to segment images. The disadvantage 
of SVM is that it is not sensitive to noise that leads to the 
inexact segmentation. The advantages or disadvantages of 
them are analyzed in Table I. 
TABLE I. COMPARISON AMONG SEGMENTATION METHODS 
 
SVM 
GA 
K-means 
NN 
Advanta-
ges 
Fit 
to 
classify and 
segment 
Can 
optimizate 
Suit 
to 
group 
Can 
Train and 
learn 
Disadva-
ntages 
Not  exact 
Not  accurate 
Not  
accurate 
Learn 
ahead 
Result 
Good 
Limited 
Limited 
Limited 
 
The typical modified SVM methods in this paper are: 
GA-SVM and LS-SVM in general image segmentation; 
pSVMRF 
and 
additive 
kernels 
in 
medical 
image 
segmentation. GA-SVM represents the type of two method 
combination; it is composed of GA mixed with SVM method. 
The method of two method combination improves the 
principle and theory of SVM. Its disadvantage is that it is not 
sensitive to noise leading to that it cannot segment images 
accurately.  LS-SVM represents the method that improves 
SVM by modifying its parameters or function. It does not 
change the principle and theory of SVM. It can improve the 
accuracy of segmentation. However, the disadvantage of this 
method is that it still cannot achieve exact segmentation.  
In medical image segmentation, there are modified 
methods of pSVMRF and additive kernels SVM. On one 
hand, pSVMRF method represents the type of adding 
medical image features to modified SVM methods. It does 
not change the principle and theory of SVM. As the focus of 
this method is medical image features, such as medical 
image noise, it can achieve better performance in 
segmentation. On the other hand, additive kernels represent 
the type that it firstly improves the method of SVM, and 
then applies it to medical image segmentation. This means 
that the additive kernels not only can be utilized in medical 
image, but also in other research areas. The result of 
comparing and analysing the explained techniques is that 
the method of adding some features of medical images to 
modify SVM is superior to other method. Thus, the future 
research frame of modified SVM in medical image 
segmentation is suggested to combine medical feature with 
SVM method.   
The advantages or disadvantages of modified SVM are 
analyzed in Table II. 
TABLE II. COMPARISON AMONG MODIFIED SVM  
 
GA-SVM 
LS-SVM 
Additive 
kernels 
SVM 
pSVMRF 
Advantages 
modified 
by 
other 
method 
Modified 
SVM 
theory 
Modified 
SVM 
principle 
modified 
by medical 
feature 
Disadvantages 
Not exact 
Not exact 
Not 
exact 
Exact 
Result 
Good 
Good 
Good 
Better 
 
GA-SVM is modified SVM method based on 
combination with GA method. This type of SVM method is 
modified by other methods. LS-SVM is SVM method 
modified by changing the theory of SVM. SVM of additive 
kernels is a method obtained by changing the principle of 
SVM. pSVMRF is a method modified by adding medical 
feature. All four types of methods above represent four 
different 
modified 
SVM. 
As 
for 
medical 
image 
segmentation, 
pSVMRF 
modified 
SVM 
has 
better 
performance than the other three methods. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION  
In this paper, many modified SVM methods within the 
last five years have been reviewed, especially modified SVM 
in medical image segmentation. A comparison and analysis 
among modified SVM methods both in general image and 
medical image are presented. Future research frameworks 
are suggested.  
In future research of medical image segmentation, there 
are two research tendencies and frameworks: on one hand 
researchers improve methods and then apply them to medical 
image segmentation; on the other hand, they modify the 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

SVM method by adding the medical image features and then 
apply it to medical image segmentation. Both of the research 
frameworks above are feasible. As future research, we are 
planning to add medical image features to modified SVM 
combination with artificial intelligence algorithm to improve 
SVM method for medical image segmentation.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is supported by: (1) 2017-2020 The 
National Natural Science Fund of China (Project No. 
51679058). (2) 2013-2016 China Higher Specialized 
Research Fund (PhD supervisor category) (Project No. 
20132304110018). 
REFERENCES 
[1] B. H. Menze, A. Jakab, S. Bauer, J. Kalpathy-Cramer and K. Farahani,  
"The Multimodal Brain Tumor Image Segmentation Benchmark 
(BRATS)," IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 99(10):1.vol.34,  
pp. 1993–2024, 2014  
[2] S. Saha, A. K. Alok, and A. Ekbal, "Brain image segmentation using 
semi-supervised clustering," Expert Systems with Applications, 
vol. 52, pp. 50–63, 2016. 
[3] Wang. Y. , T. Z. Huang, and H. Wang, "Region-based active contours 
with cosine fitting energy for image segmentation,"  Journal of the 
Optical Society of America A Optics Image Science & Vision, 
vol. 32, pp. 2237–46, 2015. 
[4] Ravikumar, S. "Image segmentation and classification of white blood 
cells with the extreme learning machine and the fast relevance vector 
machine," Artificial Cells, pp. 985–989, 2015. 
[5] Rajalakshmi, Natarajan, and V. L. Prabha, "MRI brain image 
classification—a hybrid approach," International Journal of Imaging 
Systems & Technology, vol. 25, pp. 226–244, 2015. 
[6] H. Y. Yang, X. Y. Wang, Q. Y. Wang and X. J. Zhang, "LS-SVM 
based 
image 
segmentation 
using 
color 
and 
texture 
information," 
 Journal of Visual Communication & 
Image 
Representation, vol. 23, pp. 1095–1112, 2012. 
[7] P. P. Zhang, J. Feng, Z. Li and M. Q. Zhou, "A novel SVD and LS-
SVM 
combination 
algorithm 
for 
blind 
watermarking,"  Neurocomputing, vol. 142, pp. 520–528, 2014. 
[8] Z. Zhang, J. Yang, Y. Wang, D. Dou and W. Xia, "Ash content 
prediction of coarse coal by image analysis and GA-SVM," Powder 
Technology, vol. 268, pp. 429–435, 2014. 
[9] X. Bai and W. Wang, "Saliency-SVM: An automatic approach for 
image segmentation,"  Neurocomputing, vol. 136, pp. 243–255, 2014. 
[10] D. Cheng, J. Wang, X. Wei and Y. Gong, "Training mixture of 
weighted SVM for object detection using EM algorithm,"  
Neurocomputing, vol. 149.PB, pp. 473–482, 2015. 
[11] Turker, Mustafa, and D. Koc-San, "Building extraction from high-
resolution optical spaceborne images using the integration of support 
vector machine (SVM) classification," Hough transformation and 
perceptual 
grouping. International 
Journal 
of 
Applied 
Earth 
Observation & Geoinformation, vol. 34, pp. 58–69, 2015. 
[12] M. He, T. Wu, A. Silva, D. Y. Zhao and W. Qian, "Augmenting cost-
SVM with gaussian mixture models for imbalanced classification", 
vol. 4, air.v4.n2.p93, 2015. 
[13] Sidibé, Désiré, I. Sadek, and F. Mériaudeau, "Discrimination of 
retinal images containing bright lesions using sparse coded features 
and SVM," Computers in Biology & Medicine, vol. 62, pp. 175–184, 
2015. 
[14] S. R. Prasad, K. S. Jhaveri, S. Saini, P. F. Hahn and E. F. Halpern, 
"CT tumor measurement for therapeutic response assessment: 
comparison of unidimensional," bidimensional, and volumetric 
techniques initial observations.  Radiology, vol. 225, pp. 416–9, 2002. 
[15] X. Zhang, J. Tian, D. Xiang, X. Li and K. Deng, "Interactive liver 
tumor segmentation from ct scans using support vector classification 
with watershed," Conference : International Conference of the IEEE 
Engineering in Medicine & Biology Society IEEE Engineering in 
Medicine & Biology Society ConferenceConf Proc IEEE Eng Med 
Biol Soc, pp. 6005–8, 2011. 
[16] M. A. Khan, and M. N. A. Syed, "Image processing techniques for 
automatic detection of tumor in human brain using SVM," 
International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer and 
Communication Engineering, vol. 4, pp. 541–544, 2015. 
[17] M. Freiman, O, Cooper, D. Lischinski and L. Joskowicz, "Liver 
tumors segmentation from CTA images using voxels classification 
and affinity constraint propagation." International Journal of 
Computer Assisted Radiology & Surgery, vol. 6, pp. 247–255, 2011. 
[18] A. Sharma, Gulista, "Performance Comparison of Kmeans & Canny 
Edge Detection Algorithm On MRI Images," International Journal of 
Mobile Network Communications & Telematics (IJMNCT) Vo1.l, pp. 
1–12, September 2011. 
[19] J. Zhou, W. Xiong, Q. Tian, Y. Qi and J. Liu, "Semi-automatic 
Segmentation of 3D Liver Tumors from CT Scans Using Voxel 
Classification and Propagational Learning. 2008." 
[20] S. R. Prasad, K. S. Jhaveri, S. Saini, P. F. Hahn and E. F. Halpem, " 
CT tumor measurement for therapeutic response assessment: 
comparison of unidimensional," bidimensional, and volumetric 
techniques initial observations.  Radiology, vol. 225, pp. 416–9, 2002. 
[21] T. Wu, "A prior feature SVM-MRF based method for mouse brain 
segmentation",Neuroimage, vol. 59, pp. 2298-306, 2012. 
[22] N. Alajlan, Y. Bazi, F. Melgani and R. R. Yager, "Fusion of 
supervised and unsupervised learning for improved classification of 
hyperspectral images," Information Sciences, vol.217, pp. 39–55, 
2012. 
[23] E. Varol, B. Gaonkar, G. Erus and R. Schulrz, "Feature ranking based 
nested support vector machine ensemble for medical image 
classification,"  Proceedings, pp. 146–149, 2012. 
[24] G. Shao, T. Wang, W. Hong and Z. Chen, "An improved SVM 
method for cDNA microarray image segmentation. International 
Conference on Computer Science & Education IEEE," pp. 391–395, 
2013. 
[25] S. Maji, A. C. Berg, and J. Malik, "Efficient Classification for 
Additive Kernel SVMs," IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis & 
Machine Intelligence, vol. 35, pp. 66–77, 2013. 
[26] L. Lei-Lei, H. X. Wang, J. Y. Huang, P. Ling and J. Sheng-Guo, 
"Segmentation of hepatic tumor from abdominal CT data using an 
improved 
support 
vector 
machine 
framework," 
Conference: 
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine & 
Biology Society IEEE Engineering in Medicine & Biology Society 
Conference Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc, pp.3347–3350, 2013. 
[27] Akbari, Ziarati,  "A multilevel evolutionary algorithm for optimizing 
numerical functions" IJIEC,vol. 2, pp. 419–430, 2011.  
[28] Y. Zhou, H. B. SHI, "Adaptive K-means clustering for Color Image 
Segmentation," Advances in Information Sciences & Service 
Sciences. Vol. 3, pp.216–223, 2011. 
[29] L. J.  Zhang, X. C. Deng, " The Research of Image Segmentation 
based on Improved NeuralNetwork algorithm,"Sixth International 
Conference on Semantics, Knowledge and Grids, pp. 395–397, 2010. 
[30] G. F. Shao,T. Wang, W. P. Hong, Z. G. Chen, " An Improved SVM 
Method for eDNA Mieroarray Image Segmentation," The 8th 
Intemational Conference on Computer Science & Education, pp. 391–
395, 2013. 
 
 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

