Using “Liminal Spaces” for Web-Based Collaboration and Enhancing Learning  
 
Katya Toneva 
International Community School 
London, United Kingdom 
e-mail: katya147@yahoo.com 
John Cuthell 
Mirandanet Academy 
London, United Kingdom 
e-mail: john.cuthell@mirandanet.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract—The informal dynamic knowledge creation in 
collaborative contexts occurs as participants move from textual 
communication in a conventional mailing list to blogging, wikis 
contributions, 
online 
video 
conferencing 
and 
other 
collaborative web environments. Web 2.0 collaborative 
technology can be seen as creating a “liminal space” – a 
passage, in which a person moves from one state of being to 
another. Participants in this liminal space are transformed by 
acquiring new knowledge, a new status and a new identity in 
the community. This change is of critical importance if 
learning is to be successful. This paper aims to extend 
understanding of liminal spaces and their contribution to the 
learning process. Evidence from participants (students and 
teachers) from the International Community School, London, 
UK and other schools across the world is used to estimate the 
value of liminal web-spaces (within the global collaborative 
Flat Classroom Project). 
 
    Keywords–liminal 
spaces; 
Bricolage; 
Flat 
Classroom 
Project; social constructivism; collaborative learning; informal 
and formal learning 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In the Autumn term 2011, the International Community 
School (ICS), London, took part in the global collaborative 
Flat Classroom Project [1]. The Flat Classroom Project 
(FCP) is featured in Thomas Friedman's book “The World is 
Flat” [2].  
The general goal of the project outlined in [1] is: “to 
'flatten' or lower the classroom walls so that instead of each 
class working isolated and alone, two or more classes are 
joined virtually to become one large classroom. The project 
is designed to develop cultural understanding, skills with 
Web 2.0 and other software, experience in global 
collaboration and online learning, awareness of what it 
means to live and work in a flat world, while researching 
and discussing the ideas developed in Friedman's book.”  
ICS took part in the global Flatclassroom on the specific 
topic: “How ICT could improve people’s lives”. This was 
linked to the English curriculum. The idea was that students 
could develop their English language proficiency and 
academic language skills via the FCP activities. The final 
product, published at the FCP web-site, was in the form of a 
video storyboard. 
The students used a range of web technologies to 
complete their project: an educational online network, ning 
web-site, blogs, photo and video uploading, and a wiki, to 
create their profile and build a web page on their topic. In 
addition, they used Elluminate web-conferencing software 
to showcase their learning. 
These collaborative technologies create a liminal space – 
a term drawn from anthropology that describes a rite of 
passage, in which a person moves from one state of being to 
another. In the virtual Flatclassroom participants are 
observed to be transformed in this liminal space by 
acquiring new knowledge, a new status and a new identity 
in the community. If learning is to be successful, this change 
is of critical importance. Whilst remote and informal 
learning is largely what has been understood about mobile 
learning, the concept can now be extended to include these 
informal spaces in which learning takes place – the liminal 
spaces that those who push the boundaries of digital 
possibilities now inhabit intellectually [3] & [4]. 
This paper aims to extend understanding of liminal 
spaces and their contribution to collaborative learning 
process. The processes can be described as a form of 
Bricolage [5], in which people build new knowledge from 
what is at hand. We will share our experience within a four 
month Flat Classroom Project to illustrate these processes. 
We hope that our case study and analysis will contribute to 
understanding of the concept of developing and using 
liminal spaces for learning.  
The structure of this study is as follows: Section 2 briefly 
depicts 
the 
context 
of 
the 
project 
and 
technical 
requirements. Sections 3 and 4 outline the project 
framework  and identify some constraints and conflicts. 
Section 5 provides teachers’ and students’ feedback in the 
context of using Flatclassroom approach for collaborative 
learning. Section 6 outlines the concept of “Bricolage” in 
the context of knowledge creation. Section 7 clarifies the 
meaning of formal and informal learning. Section 8 suggests 
ways for using liminal spaces for enhancing informal 
learning.  The last section draws  five 21st Century Learning 
Themes and summarises possible ways for relevant 
developments with emphasis on approaches identified in the 
Flat Classroom Project.  
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

II. 
BACKGROUND AND TECHNICAL 
REQUIREMENTS 
     The theory and practice underlying the Flatclassroom 
Project described as social constructivism brings teachers 
and students to international collaborative activities. Social 
constructivism emphasises collaboration and exchange of 
ideas [6]. Flatclassroom online learning environment is 
based on Web 2.0 technologies (wikis, blogs, ning, online 
conferencing Elluminate tools) that support collaborative 
forms of learning that can encourage publications, multiple 
literacy and inquiry.  
     As suggested by Williams and Jacobs [6], Web 2.0 tools 
allow learners to develop new ideas, and transform their 
own understanding through reflection by publishing and 
sharing their work to a wide audience. Constructivism gives 
people ownership of their learning, since they are engaged 
through questions, explorations, and designing assessments 
[7].  
     The term ‘digital technologies’ also encompasses the 
mobile technologies movement that aims to chart the new 
conceptual space that Pachler et al. call the ‘Mobile 
Complex’ [8]. 
     Our understanding of mobile learning is based on social 
constructivist approaches to learning. Constructivism 
creates a collaborative learning environment. 
     A learner-centred approach is the main focus in our 
school ICT strategy for using netbooks and Web 2.0 
technologies. We have adopted the slogan “IT’s not about 
the technology, it is about the learning” [7]. 
     We have a Google Apps school domain. Google Apps 
have been used as a school online learning environment 
since September 2010. During 2011/12 academic year, we 
extended the school environment using a new Google App 
called "Course Director".  
     Teachers and students are confident using Google Apps 
(Google email system and Google docs). We have started 
pilot projects supported by other Web 2.0 technologies, such 
as Glogster, YouTube and blogs. For example, we had 
already used a blog for the E-safety Project management [9] 
and embedded video storyboards created by the students – 
this was a good initial teacher and student preparation for a 
web-based collaboration.  
The Flat Classroom Project™ [1] has four mandatory 
components for students: 
 
An audio or video introduction posted as a blog 
post on the educational network (Ning); 
 
A written collaborative report using a wiki - 
Students will edit the wiki and discuss the topic on 
the discussion tab of the page in teams; 
 
A 
personal 
multimedia 
response 
(digital 
story/video) - Topic as assigned on the project 
matrix; 
 
A post project reflection - Students will post their 
reflection on the process to the project Ning. 
     The school has not invested in expensive and “flashy” 
technology to participate in the Flatclassroom activities. Our 
focus is not the technology itself, but how we use the 
technology to enhance teaching and learning. 
Since September 2010, the school has provided netbooks 
for all students and staff with Internet connectivity via the 
wireless network. Students have used netbooks with Wi-Fi 
connectivity and free Web 2.0 technologies to complete 
their project tasks. 
III. 
PROJECT FRAMEWORK 
There were 16 schools and 347 students taking part in the 
Flat Classroom Project across the world (USA, Australia, 
Canada, UK, Germany, Korea, Japan and China). 
We involved a DPP EFL group of six students (Diploma 
Preparation Programme - English Language for Learning) in 
the global Flat Classroom project topic "Mobile and 
Ubiquitous (M&U)".  
The school core curriculum objectives were linked 
directly to our specific Flat Classroom topic “How ICT 
could improve people’s lives”. Explicitly, our English 
curriculum goal was: “Developing English language 
proficiency skills and academic language skills including: 
 
Researching/reading/speaking/writing skills; 
 
Collecting, analysing, evaluating, reporting and 
presenting information. 
In addition, our project objectives included developing 
key skills such as communication skills, team working 
skills, 
using 
ICT 
tools 
for 
presentations, 
online 
collaboration and networking which also fit very well with 
the Flat Classroom Project approaches. 
IV. 
CONSTRAINTS AND CONFLICTS  
 At the beginning of the Flat Classroom Project, there 
were inherent conflicts between the fluid, chaotic and 
inchoate nature of the Liminal Space of the ICS’ Flat 
Classroom Project and the technical demands imposed by 
the need to produce high-quality resources that will be 
uploaded 
into 
a 
virtual 
web 
space 
to 
be 
used 
asynchronously. This is particularly critical when the 
resources are to be used by other projects (by participants 
from other schools). The synchronous is inhibited by the 
needs of the asynchronous. These constraints needed to be 
recognised by all participants. The Flatclassroom processes, 
however, are ones that are constantly evolving, both as 
available technologies change, and as participants become 
more adept at acting within and across the zones of liminal 
space. 
 For example, the students needed to contribute to wiki 
spaces to introduce themselves and to plan their projects. 
They needed to use Flatclassroom Ning space to share 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

examples, to communicate with other Flatclassroom 
students across the world and to provide peer support and 
feedback. The students needed to understand the principles 
of working online and to adopt new skills and behaviours, 
including: understanding security and copyright issues and 
developing skills for online communication, collaboration 
and networking. The students have found these demands 
much more challenging than the actual development of the 
final project product (video storyboards presenting their 
topics). 
V. 
LEARNING: HOW; WHY; WHERE  
     The conventional ecosystem of learning is based on the 
separation of home, the school, neighbourhood, work: all of 
these are bound into a system. This system operates the 
constraints of age, class, money and expectations, all of 
which act as gatekeepers for the system. 
     We share mutual understanding that in educational 
projects the learning process is more valuable than the final 
product. 
     It was a project requirement for the students to create a 
video storyboard on their Flatclassroom topic as a final 
product. The technical skills to develop a video clip have 
been achieved easily by all participants. In the context of 
enhancing students’ learning skills, it was more important to 
help students to achieve the curriculum objectives and also 
life skills, like communication, presentation skills and 
global awareness. 
    As part of our qualitative evaluation of the project 
outcomes we share both teachers’ and students’ reflections 
on the process of project development and learning [10].  
     For example, the ICS leading teacher has identified a 
range of positive project outcomes such as increasing 
students’ confidence in communication, enriching English 
language vocabulary, enhancing skills for research, 
selecting, analysing and presenting information, global 
awareness, skills for providing peer feedback and support 
online, reflective skills and a range of technical skills. 
     One of the collaborating teachers (Korea) commented: 
“With regards to the four students that I brought to 
participate, the change in them around school is palpable. 
They are more sure of themselves, sure of their ideas, and 
confident that their ideas merit respect and consideration.  
    They are empowered to speak up, volunteer, and give 
suggestions within a small or large group. In essence, it's as 
if working with students from other cultures to come up 
with real-world solutions to real world problems has made 
these four female students see that what they do every day 
can contribute to something bigger” [11].                                                            
    Another leading teacher (USA) shared: “I watched as 
these dynamic youth obliterated racial, ethnic, religious, and 
cultural barriers to build innovative collaborative projects … 
projects, that when realized will address some of our 
worlds’ most pressing social issues” [11]. 
     The students appreciated the opportunity to communicate 
with peers across the world, to exchange educational and 
cultural ideas and values and the feeling of being part of a 
global competition for developing a challenging project 
product. 
     A teacher from Japan commented: “As a teacher, I can 
definitely see the value in a well-organized project that 
allows us to make the students more aware of things like 
online behavior and safety. The added benefits, of course, 
are also quite substantial. Since this is a global project, our 
kids remain motivated to complete their tasks on time 
because they are out to prove themselves to the world as 
opposed to their teacher or classmates. In addition, the 
online computer skills that they acquire throughout the 
process will last them a lifetime” [11]. 
     The students from ICS were excited about the 
opportunity to establish their identity on the Flatclassroom 
liminal spaces (wiki and ning), to provide and receive 
support from their peers online and were proud to share 
their final video storyboards at the FCP web-environment  
and to participate in the final awards for completion of the 
project [12]. 
VI. 
THE KNOWLEDGE CREATION PROCESS AS 
BRICOLAGE 
     Participants in the liminal space apply the instructions 
they have to the task in hand, and try to learn the routines as 
they go along. The use of the tool becomes shaped by the 
outcome, and the skills develop through use, because the 
intentional outcome is to develop new knowledge. The 
practice becomes one of “do-it-yourself”, analogous to one 
in which items are taken “off the shelf” and used in 
whatever way the participant sees fit. 
     The French term for this is “bricolage” – whether for a 
do-it-yourself store, a builders’ merchant or the act of 
constructing new knowledge and understanding in this way. 
      In “The Savage Mind” [5], Levi Strauss used the term 
“Bricolage” to describe the way in which the non-literate, 
non-technical mind of “primitive” man responds to the 
world around him, as someone who works with his hands 
and uses devious means compared to those of a craftsman, 
and who has nothing else at (his) disposal. Levi Strauss 
describes the bricoleur as adept at performing a large 
number of diverse tasks, with the rules of his game, always 
to make do with “whatever is at hand” [5]. Whereas an 
engineer works with concepts, Levi Strauss describes the 
bricoleur as working with signs, the very concrete objects 
with which meaning is constructed [5]. 
The process involves a “science of the concrete”, which 
is carefully and precisely ordered, classified and structured 
by means of its own logic. The structures are “made up”, and 
are ad-hoc responses to an environment. They establish 
homologies and analogies between the ordering of nature 
and that of society, and “explain” the world and make it able 
to be lived in. The bricoleur constructs the “messages” 
whereby “nature” and “culture” are caused to mirror each 
other. Levi Strauss saw bricolage as a way in which pre-
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

scientific societies construct a belief system which explained 
their world [5]. 
Papert [13] used the concept of bricolage in relation to 
the concept of “chunking” [14], a process in which 
knowledge is broken into “mind-size bites”, which enables 
new knowledge and understanding to be constructed from it. 
His thesis was that the use of previously learned strategies 
could be used as a tool in concept formation. 
Levi Strauss’ explanation of bricolage and the bricoleur 
offers an insight that is, perhaps, applicable to Flatclassroom 
participants: “… a bricoleur is someone who works with his 
hands and uses devious means compared to those of a 
craftsman … (he) has nothing else at (his) disposal. … The 
bricoleur is adept at performing a large number of diverse 
tasks … the rules of his game are always to make do with 
‘whatever is at hand” [5]. 
The process, then, is one of working from the specific 
(the task that must be completed) to the general (learning 
from that experience to apply to future experiences). The 
signs by which they work are those of the Graphical User 
Interface, with its buttons, toolbars and the ability to undo 
errors. The “devious means” that they use utilise a range of 
Web 2.0 technologies, making do with “whatever is at 
hand” [5]. Their work gives an account of their lives in a 
world where allusion, reference and quotation seem the only 
possibility. 
The synthesis must be that learning is seen as 
experiential, observational and a semiotic experience.  
Web 2.0 applications and social software have significantly 
changed the way of using computers from consumption to 
creation. A series of studies including our Flatclassroom 
project have provided rich evidence of the ways young 
people are using technology and the Internet for socialising, 
communicating and for learning. 
Within the Flatclassroom online learning environment, 
many web pages and wikis and blogs contributions bring 
together ideas, own images and videos or links and 
materials from other sources, almost like a remediation of 
the original source material. Using these, students create 
their own online identity through their own tastes and 
interests. In the same time, students enjoy being a part of an 
online team or community. 
VII. LEARNING: INFORMAL OR FORMAL  
Pachler and al. [8] suggest that the key defining aspect of 
informal learning is one of agency: that is who determines 
the learning goals. They view informal learning as a natural 
activity by a self-motivated learner. This could be in a 
group, without a tutor being aware of such activity; it could 
be either intentional or tacit learning, in response to some 
stimulus; it could be what they term “serendipitous”, 
without the learner necessarily being aware of what is being 
learnt. 
So, who determines the trajectory and outcomes of 
learning – the institution, or the learner? Should learning 
only be intentional, or is incidental learning equally valid? 
Formal learning provides the structure, signposts, and 
scaffolding for a beginning learner. Informal learning, on 
the other hand, builds on the foundation of existing 
knowledge, and a sense of context that provides the 
framework for understanding. 
Some working definitions for formal, informal and non-
formal learning have been provided by The European 
Commission on Education and Training [15]. The question 
of whether these are seen as a blueprint for further work, or 
as a way of recognising the needs and progress of the 
individual, rather than those of the organisation, is yet to be 
resolved. What is of further concern is that these definitions 
(and embedded assumptions) are predicated on both a 
utilitarian basis (recognised in the labour market and by 
society in general) and are restricted to adults. 
“Learning that takes place in formal education and 
training systems is traditionally the most visible and 
recognised in the labour market and by society in general. In 
recent years, however, there has been a growing 
appreciation of the importance of learning in non-formal 
and informal settings. New approaches are needed to 
identify and validate these ‘invisible’ learning experiences” 
[15]. 
VIII. LIMINALITY   
As the Flatclassroom participants have expanded and 
developed the range of technologies and affordances used in 
the project, so the concept of social constructivism has 
accommodated these and expanded into the liminal spaces 
that are no longer constrained by temporal or physical 
boundaries, and are therefore truly mobile. 
The extension of social constructivism theory builds on 
evidence that the praxis of those participants in the liminal 
space of the Flatclassroom is one that constructs knowledge: 
“the working heuristic of discovery” [16]. They take for 
granted the constraints and difficulties within which they 
work. What they produce is a result of their discovery of the 
ways in which the information given, created and found, 
with the tools in their hands and the time available – all 
transmuted into their knowledge creation.  
The existential reality of learning is very different from 
the functionalist expectations of learning yet - so much 
policy is predicated on limited functionalist outcomes. 
In this context, many young people’s transformational 
learning experiences outside school are now significantly 
different from the traditional routes practiced in school.  
    They build credible identities in social networking sites 
that are important to them, but their experience in this field 
rarely takes them into deeper learning stages. Is this perhaps 
the right time for teachers to consider the potential of Web 
2.0 to create a simulating environment for informal learning 
through the new ways of obtaining, creating, sharing, and 
organising information, communicating and participating, 
and to take students’ social networking into a more 
challenging collaborative learning realm? 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

    The following Table I presents a comparison produced by 
HELIOS about e-learning 2000 (e-L 2000) and innovative 
e-learning 2010 (i-e-L 2010) projects [17]. Furthermore, to 
illustrate the Flatclassroom practices, we outlined Web 2.0 
liminal spaces we used to support innovative e-learning 
(both collaborative and personalised learning) - the third 
column in Table I. 
TABLE I.     FROM e-LEARNING 2000 TO 
INNOVATIVE e-LEARNING 2010 [17] AND OWN 
ADAPTATION BASED ON FCP 
e-L 2000 
i-e-L 2010 
E-learning within 
Flatclassroom 
liminal spaces 
Distributes 
consolidated 
knowledge 
Generates new 
knowledge 
Building 
collaborative 
knowledge via class 
wiki and ning 
spaces, YouTube, 
Wikipedia, 
Flickr.   
Is still e-
teaching 
Is owned by 
the learner 
Personalised 
learning  achieved 
via wiki spaces; 
sense of ownership 
of project 
outcomes.  
 
Is delivered by a 
single 
provider/institut
ion 
 
Is the result of 
and a tool to 
support 
partnership 
 
Collaborative 
learning as a result 
of email and online 
forum 
communications, 
blogs, ning, wikis).  
Ignores the 
learner’s context 
and previous 
achievements 
 
Builds on the 
learner’s 
contexts and 
previous 
achievements 
 
Learning based on 
examples stored in  
archives of previous 
projects, tagging, 
linking, restoring.  
 
Depresses the 
learner’s 
creativity 
through 
transmissive 
logics 
 
Stimulates the 
learner’s 
creativity by 
enhancing the 
spontaneous 
and playful 
dimension of 
learning  
 
Encouraged 
creativity via 
edutainment (FCP 
video storyboards,  
online presentations 
via Elluminate web-
conferencing 
software). 
 
Restricts the 
role of teachers 
and learning 
facilitators 
 
Enriches the 
role of 
teachers and 
learning 
facilitators 
Enhanced students’ 
peer-to-peer 
feedback and 
teachers’ 
facilitation role via 
email, discussion 
groups, and 
Elluminate video 
conferences 
Focuses on 
technology and 
contents 
  
 
Focuses on 
quality, 
processes and 
learning 
context 
 
Enhanced life skills 
for communication, 
collaboration and 
global awareness  
(via wikis, ning, 
blogs). 
 
Substitutes 
classroom 
sessions 
Is embedded 
in 
organisational 
and social 
processes of 
transformation 
 
Embedded 
Flatclassroom 
learning activities in 
English curriculum 
(facilitated by FCP 
web-spaces). 
 
Privileges those 
who already 
learn 
 
Reaches and 
motivates 
those who 
were not 
learning 
 
Ubiquitous access 
to Flatclassroom 
environment, the 
accessibility, 
flexibility and 
ongoing support 
stimulate all 
learners. 
 
 
IX. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
A. 21st Century Learning Themes 
    There are five substantive themes that emerge from much 
of the work on 21st Century Skills. They are Collaboration, 
Creativity, Assessment, both of and for Learning, 
Knowledge Management (what we often understand as 
personal productivity), and the use and management of 
Personal Learning Networks. If these themes are to be fully 
realised (and deployed) by education they need to be 
contextualised [18], [19] & [20]. The Liminal Spaces for 
learning identified in this paper need to be incorporated in 
the building of spaces, the building of contexts and 
collaboration for learning. 
B. Building spaces for learning 
     Create a ‘community of learning’ orientation to 
classroom, school and university cultures. This community 
approach should enhance links between learners, teachers, 
parents and the wider community. These liminal spaces for 
learning incorporate the spatial, the temporal, the social and 
the technological. Learners should be supported and 
involved in creating their own learning spaces: this is 
critical in contexts where social inequalities impact on the 
ability of learners to undertake homework. Our Flat 
Classroom Project case study highlighted how to build an 
awareness of globalisation, demographics, the capacity of 
technology, collaboration and personalisation into learning 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

contexts. These can expand learners’ conceptual learning 
spaces. 
C.  Building contexts for learning 
   One vital element is the creation of quality learning time: 
the ways in which social inequalities constrain learning 
opportunities. Consideration must be given to the ways in 
which learning takes place – and the fact that repetitive 
exercises do not necessarily provide quality learning time or 
opportunities. Our Flatclassroom experience provides an 
example of how to redefine learning for a technology rich, 
diverse, 21st Century Global Environment. Teachers should 
be supported to learn about, and then generate expertise in, 
multiple pedagogies. We should also champion the use of 
multiple authentic measures of accountability for student 
learning. 
D. Collaborating for learning 
     Incorporate a learner centred, knowledge-building 
conception of the learning process. Provide learners, 
teachers, schools and communities with opportunities to 
collaborate in the development of partnerships in the 
learning process. This can be within schools, localities, 
countries or internationally, and could be enhanced through 
online communities of practice [21]. The Flatclassroom 
school liminal spaces and project activities provide specific 
examples of how such collaboration could be achieved.  
    Traditional exams and testing regimes militate against 
collaboration, but current innovations in all fields are 
brought about by collaboration. 
    The 
21st 
Century 
Learning 
Themes 
identify 
an 
appropriate way to frame this exploration of learning, and 
the three umbrella headings: the re-conceptualisation of the 
role of the teacher; the re-definition of the learning and 
assessment process and learning spaces and learning 
opportunities are, in reality, cross-integrated with the 
Collaboration, Creativity, Assessment, both of and for 
Learning, Knowledge Management (what we often 
understand as personal productivity), and the use and 
management of Personal Learning Networks [20]. 
    We hope that by analysing our experience within the Flat 
Classroom Project in the context of using liminal web 
spaces for enhancing collaborative learning, we have 
enlightened the above themes. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
 
    Thanks to the English teacher Sarwat Siddiqui who 
organised and led a student group in the International 
Community School, London, in taking part in the global 
collaborative Flat Classroom Project. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Flat Classroom Project web-site: 
http://www.flatclassroomproject.net/about.html (Accessed 
22/02/2012). 
[2] T. Friedman – The World is Flat book, 3rd edition, 
Chapter 13, “If it's not happening it's because you're not 
doing it”, pp. 501-503, 2011. 
[3] J. Cuthell, C. Preston, L.Cych and T. Keuchel -  
iGatherings: From professional theory and practice to praxis 
in work based teaching and learning WLE Centre, Institute 
of Education, University of London, 2009, Available: 
http://www.wlecentre.ac.uk/cms/index.php?option=com_co
ntent&task=view&id=343&Itemid=85 (Accessed: 
22/02/2012).                                                                                   
[4] J. Cuthell, L.Cych and C. Preston - Learning in Liminal 
Spaces, In Proc. Mobile learning: Crossing Boundaries in 
Convergent Environments, Bremen, pp 51-52,  2011, 
Available: http://www.virtuallearning.org.uk/ (Accessed: 
22/02/2012).                                                                                        
[5] L. Strauss – The Savage Mind, Oxford, Oxford 
University Press, 1962, p.17.                                                                         
[6] J.B. Williams and J. Jacobs – Exploring the use of blogs 
as learning spaces in the higher education sector‖, 
AustralasianJournal of Educational Technology, vol. 20 (2), 
pp. 232-247, 2004. 
[7] K. Toneva – Using netbooks and Web 2.0 technologies 
to facilitate mobile learning, Proc. 10th World Conference 
on Mobile and Contextual Learning (MLearn 2011), Beijing 
Normal University Press, Beijing, China, 18-21 October, 
2011, pp. 511-515 
[8] N. Pachler, B. Bachmair and J. Cook – Mobile Learning: 
Structures, Agency, Practices, New York: Springer, 2009 
[9] International Community School, London – “Liminal 
Space” on an E-safety project blog: 
http://ict4teachers.blogspot.com/2011/05/welcome-to-my-
blog.html, (Accessed 22/02/2012). 
[10] International Community School, London – “Liminal 
Space” on the Flatclassroom Ning: 
http://flatclassroomproject.ning.com/group/ics-london-dppz, 
(Accessed 22/02/2012). 
[11] Flatclassroom web-site – Teachers’ feedback: 
http://www.flatclassroomproject.net/testimonials.html, 
(Accessed 22/02/2012). 
[12] Flat Classroom Project 2011-3 Awards:  
http://fcp11-3.flatclassroomproject.org/Awards, (Accessed 
22/02/2012). 
[13] S. Papert – Mindstorms Children, Computers and 
Powerful Ideas. Brighton, The Harvester Press, 1980. 
[14] G.A. Miller – The Magical Number Seven, Plus or 
Minus Two: Some Limits on our Capacity for Processing 
Information. Psychological Review, 63, 81-97, 1956. 
[15] European Commission Education and Training – 
Lifelong Learning Policy, Validation of non-formal and 
informal learning. http://ec.europa.eu/education/lifelong-
learning-policy/doc52_en.htm, (Accessed: 22/02/2012). 
[16] J. Bruner – Beyond the information given. London, 
Allen & Unwin, 1974. 
[17] HELIOS – From e-Learning 2000 to Innovative e-
Learning 2010, 2007, Available at: 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

http://www.menon.org/publications/HELIOS%20thematic%
20report-%20Access.pdf (Accessed: 22/02/2012). 
[18] ISTE - Maximizing the Impact:  The pivotal role of 
technology in a 21st century education system, 2007, 
available at: Partnership for 21st Century Skills Web site: 
http://www.setda.org/web/guest/maximizingimpactreport 
(Accessed: 23/02/2012). 
[19] B. Trilling - Toward Learning Societies and the Global 
Challenges for Learning-With-ICT, 2005, Available at: 
Tech & Learning Web site: 
http://news.techlearning.com/techlearning/pdf/events/techfo
rum/ny05/Toward_Learning_Societies.pdf (Accessed at 
23/02/2012). 
[20] J. Cuthell - Thinking Things Through - Collaborative 
Online Professional Development. In: Lindberg, J. O & 
Olofsson, A. D. Online Learning Communities and Teacher 
Professional Development: Methods for Improved 
Education Delivery. Hershey, IGI Global, 2009 
[21] K. Toneva, K. Doncaster and D. Bravenboer – Using 
Virtual Spaces for Learning Communities to Facilitate 
Project Development and Collaborative Learning, Proc. in 
Press The Fourth International Conference on Mobile, 
Hybrid, and On-line Learning eL&mL 2012,  January 30 - 
February 4, 2012 - Valencia, Spain, Programme available at: 
http://www.iaria.org/conferences2012/ProgrameLmL12.htm
l (Accessed: 22/02/2012). 
 
 
 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

