Review on Living Labs 
Their predecessors, their principles and the diversity of their applications. 
 
Chatzimichailidou Maria Mikela 
Department of Production and Management 
Engineering 
Democritus University of Thrace 
Xanthi, Greece 
marichat3@pme.duth.gr 
Dusko Lukac 
Department of Mechatronics 
Rheinische Fachhochschule 
University of Applied Sciences 
Cologne, Germany 
lukac@rzmail.rfh-koeln.de 
 
 
Abstract— In this paper, we are going to present the Living 
Lab concept. Through the last few years, many researchers 
have been arguing about this controversial term. Thus, there is 
a plethora of definitions been given to them and many case 
studies have been conducted, so as to conclude to a generally 
accepted explanation of this marketing phenomenon. The 
Living Lab (LL) theory is based on an Open Innovation 
ground and it co-exists with other marketing and production 
strategies such as Mass Customization, Open Source, Open 
Evaluation, Lean Production and so on, aiming to cover 
customers desires as much as possible. More and more 
organizations are confronted with highly dynamic external 
ecosystems. This notion is not an optional activity, but it stems 
from the fact that consumers seem to be more sophisticated 
and demanding about what fits their needs better. Colossal 
companies apply or even, are willing to adapt, these new ways 
of thinking. Moreover, European countries have already 
detected the emerging needs leading to the establishment the 
European Network of Living Labs (ENoLL). In periods of 
economic recession, innovation prevails and companies need to 
change their minds and be more “open” and conciliatory. The 
purpose of this shift is to utilize the majority of information 
deriving from all kinds of users. Till now, Marketing 
departments emphasize in approaching only the lead-users. 
Due to the fact that neither personalization nor customization 
was discerned, a vast amount of customers were unsatisfied. To 
conclude, users should have a dual action: they should be both 
innovators and developers. This will assist products and 
services to become more adaptive in real markets. 
Keywords-Living Labs; Open Innovation; openness; Mass 
Customization 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Innovation is a new way of accomplishing our visions. It 
may refer to the enrichment of the evolution of a new 
product or a service. Luecke & Katz (2009) presented one of 
the many definitions available concerning “Innovation”: 
Innovation…is generally understood as the successful 
introduction of a new thing or method… Furthermore, it 
represents the embodiment, combination, or synthesis of 
knowledge in original, relevant, valued new products, 
processes, or services. It typically involves creativity, but is 
not identical to it: innovation incorporates acting on the 
creative ideas to make some specific and tangible difference 
in the domain in which the innovation occurs. For example, 
Amabile et al. (1996) propose: "All innovation begins with 
creative ideas... We define innovation as the successful 
implementation of creative ideas within an organization. In 
this view, creativity by individuals and teams is a starting 
point for innovation; the first is necessary but not sufficient 
condition for the second". 
Innovation is a key-factor of business success [1], but in 
“many organizations, especially those with a traditional 
approach, innovation is often only seen as valid when it is 
completely ‘homemade’. This conventional view of thinking, 
usually referred as “Closed Innovation”, completely 
disregards the growth market of demand-driven innovation” 
[2] or Open Innovation (Fig. 1). 
 
 
Figure 1.  The Innovation Continuum [3] 
 
For innovation to happen, we need something more than 
the generation of a new idea or an insight. There is a high 
need of tools, rules and disciplines. Towards this end, 
emphasis is put on a more general process of creation, 
progressive thought and action. 
Innovation may represent: 
• 
A totally new product, unknown to the customers, 
produced from scratch 
• 
A new production method 
• 
A new target group 
• 
A new supplier 
• 
The preserve in the field of commerce 
As 
Werner 
Sombart 
said 
[4], 
Innovation 
and 
Entrepreneurship are the core of "creative destruction". Once 
you destroy something, something new is going to emerge. 
At the same time, innovation has a dual action. Its first 
stream is Closed Innovation and the second is Open 
28
COLLA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-143-4

Innovation, where the latter supersede the former, due to 
practical reasons. 
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: In 
subsection I.A we present Closed Innovation concept, whilst 
in subsection I.B we discuss the Democratized Open 
Innovation. In Section 2, we briefly discuss what LL 
represents, with a view to the reader’s introduction to the 
field of innovation theory and the correlation between Mass 
Customization and Open Innovation. In section 3, we 
attempt to approximate the notion of a LL by presenting the 
tools needed. Furthermore, previous work, in all over the 
world and Greece, on LL and open environments is noted. 
When all is said and done, in the last section we recapitulate 
the facts and we gravitate to the contribution they have in 
new life circumstances. 
A. Closed Innovation 
The first form of innovation that appeared was Closed 
Innovation. Its key component is control. To begin with, 
every single industry has to manage the ideas, the 
production, the marketing, the distributions, the financing 
and generally every obligation needed. This type of 
innovation, dominated during the 20th century and it is 
attributed to the total absence of Universities and 
governmental interest in the field of exploiting science [5]. 
This, in turn, had a domino effect, while industries were 
organizing their R&D systems with the absence of any 
assistance. The lack of time and the imposition, in order to 
cooperate with external factors, caused to the companies 
autarky and unsociability. Company’s boundaries were 
sealed and impenetrable (Fig. 2) [5]. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Closed Innovation 
 
Gradually, a plethora of factors caused the erosion of 
Closed Innovation. Some of those factors are mentioned 
below: 
• 
Workers’ mobility 
• 
Market extension 
• 
Unused external ideas 
• 
Capability for external suppliers 
Those 
mentioned were the vital 
factors which 
contributed, in order to build a new knowledge market. 
Knowledge and information, is not any more company’s 
monopoly, instead it belong to employees, suppliers, 
customers, competitor and universities. Thus, during these 
processes Closed Innovation changed into Open Innovation. 
B. Open Innovation 
More and more organizations are confronted with highly 
dynamic 
external 
organizational 
environments. 
MIT 
professor, Eric Von Hippel introduced the “Democratizing 
Innovation” concept [6]. In his book, he insists on innovation 
communities and their significant role towards the openness 
of innovation. In particular, it is clear that users have no 
more reservations in revealing their innovative thoughts and 
actions. 
In a world where free speech and knowledge liberty take 
place, companies can no longer afford the financial weight of 
research and this is why they prefer to buy or even rent ideas 
and innovation from external stakeholders. This happens 
with the purpose of supplementing their internal innovative 
functions. Of course, it is apparent that Open Innovation is 
no longer a linear procedure, while innovation is distributed 
to more than one stakeholder. All in all, the conclusion is 
that, a company acting under the umbrella of Open 
Innovation has penetrable bounds, as illustrated in Fig. 3 [5], 
so as to serve external knowledge relations between 
innovation networks. 
According to R. Freund [2], “Open innovation works 
from external ideas and knowledge in conjunction with the 
internal 
research 
and 
development 
activities. 
This 
bidirectional relationship offers new ways to create value. 
The existence of many “smart” people outside a company is 
not a regrettable problem for the prosperity of the company, 
it indicates also an opportunity for the company”. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Open Innovation 
 
II. 
WHAT’S UNDER THE UMBRELLA OF OPEN 
INNOVATION? 
Before starting to elaborate on Open Innovation 
extensions, lets first focus on the themes found in the 
existing literature on Open Innovation [2], based on research 
activities. R. Freund [2] mentions that: “Research activities 
has been focused on the notion of Open Innovation, business 
models, organizational design and boundaries of the firm, 
leadership and culture, tools and technologies, IP, patenting 
and appropriation, industrial dynamics and manufacturing”. 
Successful Open Innovation depends on the open character 
of the business model and on network-like interactions 
between multiple parties in the process of innovation. The 
foregoing themes and their inspirers are concisely presented 
in the following Table I, as been presented by R. Freund [2]: 
29
COLLA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-143-4

 
TABLE I.  
THE THEMES FOUND IN THE EXISTING LITERATURE ON 
OPEN INNOVATION 
 
 
A. Mass Customization and Open Innovation 
As a consequence, after Open Innovation, new strategies 
emerged. One of them was Mass Customization. Concisely, 
Mass Customization meets two converse principles at once. 
On the one hand there is the price and on the other hand is 
the personalization of the product. Price, quality, flexibility 
and velocity must be taken into account. 
The notion of Mass Customization was born by Stan 
Davis in 1987 [7], who supported that, the more you 
personalize a product, the more competitiveness you gain. 
Through years, Mass Customization has been described as 
the opposite of Mass Production and it uses agile processes, 
which aim to produce a variety of differentiated and 
personalized products or services. 
Trying to integrate consumer in an Open Innovation 
environment, a new type of consumer, the “procumer” 
(producer + consumer) [8], emerges. By this we mean that 
consumers are also able to configure and shape their own 
products. According to Kondylis, under this contemporary 
philosophy, people are independent and equal beings, with 
separated roles and rights without facing any social 
discrimination. In fact, the acceptance of uniqueness boosted 
Mass Customization, from a social point of view. Kondylis 
referred to “Mass Democracy”, but he was subconsciously 
referring to Mass Customization [9]. 
B. Living Labs and Open Innovation 
A LL represents Open Innovation environments where 
real life conditions do exist. User-driven innovation is totally 
adapted to co-creation processes and Open Innovation 
Functional Region consists of SMEs Collaborative Networks 
and Virtual Professional Communities in a Public, Private, 
People Partnership. 
In the previous sub-section, we discussed about Mass 
Customization phenomenon and this because it is the tie 
binding Open Innovation and LL. As we have already 
mentioned, their common characteristic is “openness” [10]. 
Another reason why we correlate these marketing strategies 
is the attention paid on the subjective and individual user 
needs [11]. 
III. 
ANALYZING THE LIVING LAB CONCEPT 
In the next subsections we are going to present some key 
issues about LL, so as to make its meaning, function and use 
clearer. 
A. General Information about LL 
With the purpose of covering new needs in a meta-
capitalist society, new practices are indispensable. In LL 
approach, users act as co-creators and constitute the core of 
the laboratory. Enterprises focus on user’s deeper thoughts 
and needs. Furthermore, this is the biggest gain for an 
enterprise, while all the previous years, companies were 
struggling so as to have access to this fount of knowledge. 
For one thing, historically the LL idea appeared during 
the 90’s aiming to grasp new technologies in people’s own 
habitat [12]. The sheer fact is that, LL was established in 
order to empower coordination in the European area and 
build a more anthropocentric profile. During the years, LL 
has been characterized as environments, methodologies or 
systems. 
Undoubtedly, 
they 
can 
be 
used 
as 
an 
anthropocentric research and development area, where 
everything is co-designed, controlled and evaluated under 
open and co-operative real world’s circumstances. 
In Europe, LL represents a very forceful tool in R&D 
processes. Thus, there is the ENoLL [13] which is a 
European User Driven Movement. At the moment there are 
129 websites correlated with LL, with different scopes of 
interest. The 129 LL network represent an impressive 
partnership of: 
• 
Public bodies 
• 
Companies 
• 
Final users 
 
30
COLLA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-143-4

 
Figure 4.  Some Commpanies that Use LL Concept 
 
TABLE II.  
LIVING LABS IN GREECE 
NAME 
REGION 
PURPOSE 
CONTACT 
Thessaly Living 
Lab 
Thessaly 
- 
Volos 
Quality of Life 
[13][14] 
Lever 
– 
Thessaloniki 
Lever for Open 
Innovation 
Macedonia 
- 
Salonica 
Innovative ICT 
Products 
and 
Services 
[13][15] 
LIFENET 
– 
UTH 
Thessaly 
- 
Volos 
e-Participation, 
Social 
Care, 
Emergency 
Network, SMEs 
Involvement, e-
Transportation 
[13][16][17] 
Chania LL – 
TUC 
Crete - Chania 
Smart Cities 
[18] 
Xanthi 
LL 
– 
DUTH 
Thrace - Xanthi 
Connecting 
Industries 
to 
University 
[19] 
 
Another familiar strategy to LL is Open Evaluation. 
Selection and Evaluation of innovative ideas or concepts are 
typical activities of the company itself. “The benefit of Open 
Innovation is a much larger base of ideas and technologies” 
[26]. Open Innovation tools e.g., lead user method, toolkits, 
communities or innovation contests, allow external partners 
too to evaluate and select. Internal and external (IT-) 
evaluation of ideas is called Open Evaluation [27]. To handle 
the huge amount of ideas created by online communities 
isn’t that easy. A good example is Google’s Project 10100 
where thousands of people from more than 170 countries 
submitted more than 150.000 ideas, from general investment 
suggestions to specific implementation proposals. These 
ideas were evaluated by 3.000 Google employees [28] and 
not by the crowd (community). 
B. Definition of LL 
What’s a living Lab? There is a great amount of 
definition about LL and that’s because it is a really new field 
of experimentation. Folstad presented three classes for a LL 
[10]: 
• 
Those for experience and experimentation in 
software, bears resemblance to open source 
practices. 
• 
Those witch function as Open Innovation platforms. 
• 
Those where users interact with products and 
services in order to better develop and shape them. 
Indeed, all three classes consider human to be the only 
source of innovation. 
In addition, LL has been defined as “experimentation 
environments in which technology is given shape in real life 
contexts and in which (end) users are considered ‘co-
producers” [23]. This definition differs slightly from the 
previous, but emphasizes in experimentation and not on 
research. 
Needless to say, users are not “guinea pigs” but 
innovators. They aren’t also employees, but an interesting 
and interested group which contributes to productive 
processes. A Living Lab environment should include the 
following 
stakeholders: 
users, 
academia, 
emerging 
technology, firms and public. 
The utmost partnership is the University-Enterprise-
Government one. But here is the problem: “European private 
enterprises usually assume that their responsibility in the 
education process should start when the university system 
ends: once the (new) graduated engineers are recruited. 
Then, their responsibility is limited to (re)train new 
employees for specific job positions. Industry pressure to 
universities looks for including in university curricula the 
technical content capable of reducing cost and time to getting 
full usefulness of the recent graduates at the minimum time” 
[14]. 
Thus we conclude that there is no good collaboration 
between the components. And this explains why a LL 
approach is difficult to be applied, under the existing 
mentality. 
C. Three Tools to Exploit Living Labs 
We distinguish three kinds of “tools” to exploit a LL: 
• 
Ethnographic research: it is hardly used any 
technology at all, but only ordinary human 
observation 
by 
other 
humans, 
while 
‘living 
together’. 
• 
Observation tools and technology: Such as cameras, 
microphones, etc. 
• 
Cultural probes: Such as diaries, disposable cameras, 
voice recorders, etc. which make use of participants’ 
own observations and self-reporting. E.g., give 
people a camera and ask them to photograph each 
relevant occurrence or incident on the subject you 
are studying, have them return the camera, 
develop/print the pictures and interview the 
participant about what he/she has recorded. 
The first two are synchronous observation (which could 
entail a lot of un-useful information), the third is 
asynchronous. 
D. Some Examples of Living Labs 
The Place Lab [25]: Stands for a consortium of the MIT 
House_n and TIAX, LLC. They have developed an 
31
COLLA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-143-4

apartment-scale 
shared 
research 
facility 
where 
new 
technologies and design concepts could be tested and 
evaluated in the context of everyday living. The Place Lab 
was constructed by TIAX and operated by both TIAX and 
MIT. It was completed in 2004 and this 1000 square-foot 
facility is located on the ground floor of a new full-service 
condominium building between Harvard and MIT buildings. 
The home is rapidly becoming a center for proactive 
health care, distributed energy, learning, communication, 
commerce, entertainment, and work. This creates exciting 
opportunities and daunting challenges for companies 
developing related products and services. Consumers are 
reaching a limit to the number of stand-alone technologies 
that they will accept into their lives, and products and 
services developed and tested in laboratories often fail 
because designers often make erroneous assumptions about 
the effectiveness and use patterns in complex natural settings 
such as homes. The interaction of people with other human 
beings and with devices leads to unexpected behavior that is 
difficult to anticipate with focus groups, surveys, and other 
standard product development and marketing inquiry 
methods. 
On the other hand, the Visible Living Lab [26] represents 
a Space Management and Real Time Occupancy Tool 
developed by Johnson Controls company. It is a unique web-
based wireless application, which monitors and analyzes, in 
real time, the position and movement of occupants within a 
workplace 
– 
recording 
working 
behaviors, 
tracking 
movement and space utilization. The objective is to deliver, 
through active technology, an intelligent, analytical graphical 
assessment of the efficiency and effectiveness of the layout, 
occupancy and utilization of the workplace. 
This technology was designed to help corporations 
identify space occupancy and utilization improvements to 
increase productivity and reduce the total cost of ownership 
(save 20-30% of occupancy cost). 
The GALILEO project [27]: It is a Living Lab for 
location-based services that took place that took place in 
Holland having the assistance of the University of Leiden. 
Location-Based Services (LBS) are based on the 
principle information be made available at any time and 
place. In the GALILEO project, the European Union is 
launching 30 new satellites in order to produce a very 
accurate signal as a basis for this. The current state of 
technology already offers multiple modular technologies, 
such as content management, maps, navigation systems like 
GPS and hardware like PDA’s However, with the coming of 
GALILEO and the advances of hardware, software and 
connectivity, a new dimension of location-based services 
will become possible. 
The position signal alone, however, is not yet a location 
based service. Applications need to relate the position to data 
e.g., maps, traffic jams, weather forecasts, or even medical 
records. And in order to deliver this data to the devices, 
network connectivity is needed – for instance by glass-fiber 
for stable locations, or even more importantly, wireless 
networks for mobile devices. 
“The living Lab Location-based services is a perfect 
opportunity for examining whether applications of Satellite-
Navigation Technology might have a larger impact upon the 
region than the life sciences do” [28]. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
When all is said, not only are LL applicable, but they 
could have a great impact on our daily life. Emphasis should 
be placed on application domains such as culture and 
tourism, health and care, mobility and work. Incentives are 
necessary to enable this development, aimed at cluster-
innovation management. We should also highlight LL 
extensions to Marketing. In this way customers’ interest 
could be easily captured by involving them directly in design 
and development processes. 
Future work is going to focus on the different ways of 
networking that can be applied in a Living Lab, so as to 
serve its purpose in the best way. Some tools that suit the 
purpose are mathematical, algorithmical and technological. 
The challenge is to combine them. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
S. Kyffin and P. Gardien, “Navigating the Innovation Matrix: An 
Approach to Design-led Innovation”, International Journal of Design, 
vol. 3, 2009, pp. 57-69. 
[2] 
T. Fredberg, M. Elquimst, and S. Ollila, “Managing Open Innovation. 
Present Findings and Future Directions”, VINNOVA Report VR 
2008:02. 
[3] 
H. Schroer, “Innovation as a Factor in Business Success”, Kaufmann 
Symposium, 2007. 
[4] 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Werner_Sombart [09.04.2011] 
[5] 
H. Chesbrough, “Open Innovation: The New Imperative for Creating 
and Profiting from Technology”, Harvard Business School Press, 
Boston, 2003. 
[6] 
E. Von Hippel, “Democratizing Innovation”, MIT Press, Cambridge, 
2005. 
[7] 
S. Davis, “Future Perfect”, Addison Wesley, Massachusetts, 1987. 
[8] 
A. Tsigkas, “The Factory in the Post-industrial Era, Variety Instead of 
Flexibility: Mass Customization: the Production System of the 
Future”, MCP CE, Poland, 2006. 
[9] 
P. Kondylis, “From the 20th to the 21th Century, Intersections in the 
Politics of the Planet”, Themelio, Greece, 2000. 
[10] CoreLabs, Living Labs Roadmap 2007-2010, “Recommendations on 
Networked Systems for Open User-Driven Research”, Development 
and Innovation, in Open Document. 2007, Lulea University of 
Technology, Centrum for Distance Spanning Technology: Lulea, 1-
61. 
[11] M. M. Chatzimichailidou, C. Chatzopoulos, and A. Tsigkas, 
“Involving Mass Customization and Living Labs in Product Design 
and Development Processes”, MCP CE, Serbia, 2010 
[12] P. Markopoulos and G. W. M. Rauterberg, “Living Lab: A White 
Paper”, IPO Annual Progress Report, 2000, pp. 53-65. 
[13] European Network of Living Labs, http://www.openlivinglabs.eu/ 
[05.01.2011]. 
[14] http://www.cereteth.gr/ [05.01.2011] 
[15] http://www.technopolis.gr/ [05.01.2011] 
[16] http://nitlab.inf.uth.gr/lifenet/ [05.01.2011] 
[17] http://www.uth.gr/ [05.01.2011] 
[18] http://en.tuc.gr/ [05.01.2011] 
[19] http://www.pme.duth.gr/ [05.01.2011] 
[20] R. Freund, “Open Innovation, Open Evaluation and Crowdfunding”, 
MCP CE, Sebia, 2010. 
32
COLLA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-143-4

[21] K. M. Moesline, J. B. A. Haller, and A. C. Bullinger, “Open 
Evaluation: Ein IT-basierter Ansatz fuer die Bewertung Innovativer 
Konzepte”, HMD Sonderheft: IT-basiertes Innovationsmanagement, 
273, 2010, pp. 21-34. 
[22] Google (2010): Google Project 10 to 100, 
www.project10tothe100.com [28.12.2010] 
[23] P. Ballon, J. Pierson, and S. Delaere, “Open Innovation Platforms for 
Broadband Services: Benchmarking European Practices”. 16th 
European Regional Conference,Portugal, 2005, pp. 4-6. 
[24] L. Gonzalo, „Public-private Memberships in ICT Education from the 
Open Innovation Perspective”, ICICT, Egypt, 2008. 
[25] The 
PlaceLab, 
http://architecture.mit.edu/house_n/placelab.html 
[05.01.2011] 
[26] The Visible Lab, 
http://www.johnsoncontrols.com/publish/us/en/products/building_effi
ciency/gws/gwi/projects_workplace_innovation/technology_innovati
on/real_time_tracking_workplace_innovation.html [05.01.2011] 
[27]  The GALILEO project, http://www.gsa.europa.eu [05.01.2011] 
[28] http://ejov.org/projects/343/Documents%20concerning%20Living%2
0Lab/Rapport%20SatNav%20final.pdf [09/04.2011] 
 
 
33
COLLA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-143-4

