Online Learning Community Software to Support Success in Project Teams
Brian Thoms 
Department of Computer Science and Information 
Technology 
California State University, Channel Islands 
California, United States 
Brian.Thoms@CSUCI.edu 
Evren Eryilmaz 
Department of Business Education and Information and 
Technology Management 
Bloomsburg University 
Pennsylvania, United States 
EEryilma@BLOOMU.edu
 
 
Abstract—In this research we explore aspects of social 
interaction and community as they relate to success in project-
based courses. Using specialized online community software 
consisting of social networking technologies and project-based 
wikis, project teams are able to collaborate and interact as they 
progress towards project milestones. Our study underscores 
the importance of sustained engagement as a means for 
fostering high levels of community and how these levels relate 
to project motivation and, ultimately, project success. Guided 
by a theoretical model that explains how individuals 
collaborate within online communities, we measure member 
perceptions of the software before and after our intervention. 
Survey results found that online learning community (OLC) 
software can successfully support learning and social 
interaction. These results are supported by a social network 
analysis (SNA), which shows high levels of individual 
engagement across the project lifecycle. 
Keywords—Social 
Networking; 
Online 
Learning 
Community; Wiki; Project Management; Capstone Project 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
It is easy to take the World Wide Web for granted, which 
turned 25 in March of 2014. And it is easy to forget that, for 
most of the 21st century, electronic peer-to-peer (P2P) 
communication occurred through postal mail and land-based 
telephones. This was true for the average person as well as 
individuals pursuing advanced education. Today, while these 
forms of communication are pervasive as ever, they are no 
longer the primary means of P2P for certain demographics, 
such as digital natives, or those individuals having grown up 
with internet technologies.  
It is estimated that 86% of digital natives participate in 
some form of online social networking (OSN), with some 
estimates as high as 98% [1] [2] [3] [4].  
In this research, we leverage this population’s technical 
prowess for social media to implement online learning 
community (OLC) software, which increases interaction, 
enhances levels of community and supports learning. More 
specifically, we implement OLC software in senior-level 
information technology (IT) capstone courses, which require 
students to work in project teams and construct a final IT 
artifact. We measure our interventions through survey 
research and a social network analysis (SNA) to discover 
how 
OLC 
software, 
comprised 
primarily 
of 
OSN 
technologies, provides students with an enhanced project 
space; one that fosters higher levels of interaction and 
learning and strengthens course community. 
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. In Section 
II we establish the conceptual background for academic 
communities emphasizing the role online community 
software plays within project-based course communities. 
Section III provides a theoretical framework that bridges 
constructivism, engagement theory and social presence 
theory. Section IV focuses on the design of the OLC 
software. Section V highlights the research methodology. 
Section VI describes the results of this research. Section VII 
provides comprehensive discussion and analysis of our 
results section. Section VIII identifies the limitations of this 
study. Section IX is the conclusion section followed by 
references in Section X. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
A. Academic Communities 
When individuals enter college, they join the college 
conversation, and intrinsically become a part of the academic 
community. Academic communities can be classified as one 
subset of what Lave and Wenger [5] have coined 
communities of practice. In such communities, individuals 
work together towards common goals, collaborate on 
common problems, share best practices, support one another 
and share in a common identity. Thus, successful academic 
communities, as suggested by Adams and Freeman [6], help 
to sustain engagement and collaboration among individuals 
whereby knowledge building becomes an intrinsic function 
of the community itself.  
B. Project-based Course Community 
Courses can be considered a more specialized form of 
academic communities [7]. In this research, we focus our 
attention on specific types of courses, capstone courses and, 
in our case, team-based project courses.  
Within the IT industry, team-based projects are 
recognized as a core component of effective undergraduate 
education [8] [9]. The inclusion of team-based projects into 
the undergraduate experience is largely influenced by 
industry expectations that graduates exhibit high-levels of 
problem solving, oral and written communication, teamwork 
and project management skills [10] [11].  
One way for students to prepare to meet these 
expectations is through capstone projects. Capstone projects-
based courses are valuable ways for students to prepare for 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-436-7
COLLA 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

careers in their respective industries. While there are many 
approaches to this type of experiential learning, one 
approach considers individuals working within project 
teams, which allows individuals to build critical team-based 
skills and learn how cooperation and group dynamics plays-
out as they work towards the completion project milestones. 
This notion is supported in Lainez et al. [12], who state that 
capstone projects in IT should deliver important skills such 
as 1) a basic understanding of business processes, 2) a 
product development with high-quality concerns, 3) know-
how to conceive, design, implement and operate medium-
size 
complexity 
systems 
and 
4) 
communicative, 
initiative/leadership teamwork, analytical and problem 
solving and personal abilities. Furthermore, Ayas and Zeniuk 
[13] state that learning within project teams can be 
instrumental 
in 
building 
communities 
of 
reflective 
practitioners. 
And these experiences are well received by students. 
Dunlap [14] discovered that engaging students in learning 
and problem-solving activities reflects the true nature and 
requirements of workplace communities and help students 
feel better prepared to work effectively in their profession, a 
viewpoint is supported by students [11]. Furthermore, Clarke 
[15] identified that industry-aligned projects increased 
student confidence and allowed students to explore areas of 
IT not covered in the curriculum. 
Ultimately, within IT capstone courses, students are 
presented opportunities to consolidate their understandings 
of “systems analysis, software development lifecycles, 
specific software design support tools, entity relationship 
modelling, entity life histories, database design, web site 
design, or web server programming” [16]. Furthermore, 
when students engage in experiential learning, they become 
active participants in the learning process, constructing their 
own internal knowledge through both personal and 
environmental experiences [16] [17]. Lynch et al. [19] found 
that capstone projects provide students the opportunity to 
build, not only technical skills of the discipline, but the social 
aspects of systems development as well. 
As a means to facilitate project communities and senior 
capstone courses, we incorporate an online learning 
community that allows students to participate across multiple 
dimensions of the project lifecycle, while also working 
towards project milestones. 
C. Online Learning Community Software 
Thoms et al. [7] [19] [20] argue that OLC software, 
constructed from underlying OSN technologies, offers 
benefits over traditional learning management software 
(LMS) within higher education. As touched upon earlier, 
project-based courses can be seen as niche types of 
communities. In such communities, individuals take equal 
ownership in content production and work towards 
developing a unique voice.  
OSN technologies include a large array of Web 2.0 
technologies such as asynchronous online discussion boards, 
blogs and wikis along with peer-to-peer networking and file 
sharing to name a few. These tools empower individuals to 
take ownership of their content while also making it easier to 
communicate and interact with other members of the 
community. Thus, constructing an OLC that more closely 
resembles OSN environments makes sense, since the 
overwhelming majority of individuals within higher 
education (i.e. digital natives) are already competent with 
these technologies. With roots firmly planted in OSN 
technologies, OLC software offers the greatest potential for 
facilitating a communal space, while also facilitating 
knowledge construction and learning in a higher education 
setting [7] [19] [20]. 
III. 
THEORY 
To help guide the design and construction of an OLC to 
support our project-based needs, we follow a holistic 
theoretical model represented in Figure 1. The model 
considers, at its core, 1) the individual, 2) how individuals 
engage in online media through technology and 3) the 
overall sense of online community that results from active 
participants. 
 
Figure 1.  Theoretical Model for Online Learning Communities 
A. Individuals (Constructivism) 
Prior research has traced the roots of online communities 
to constructivism [21] [22] [23]. Consequently, at the center 
of our model we place the individual. Constructivism states 
that learning stems from the interactions and experiences of 
the learner [24] [25]. We believe that these interactions and 
experiences can be directly influenced by a user’s 
engagement with OSN technologies. OSN technologies can 
be configured to facilitate many different types of 
participants. Largely linked to the work of Piaget [25], who 
first theorized that learning can be based on the interaction 
and experiences of the learner within a specific context, 
constructivism provides a holistic view of individual learning 
and how individuals interact within larger groups. Hagstrom 
and Wertsch [24] state that constructivism encourages, 
utilizes, and rewards the unique and multidimensional 
characteristics of the individual throughout the learning 
process. Additionally, Squires [26] states that constructivism 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-436-7
COLLA 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

focuses on individual control, with individuals making 
decisions that match their own needs. While constructivism 
began as a theory of learning, it has progressively been used 
as a theory of education, of the origin of ideas, and of both 
personal knowledge and scientific knowledge [27]. Specific 
to this research, our OLC is comprised of individuals, who 
occupy a shared space, whereby she or he is influenced 
heavily by interactions with technology and others. 
Consequently, it is not unlikely that individuals will 
experience the community in different fashions. 
B. Technology (Engagement Theory) 
Research has linked student engagement to grades and 
motivation [28]. Thus, getting participants engaged in course 
project objectives early on can be tantamount to the project’s 
success. Engagement theory states that individuals must be 
meaningfully 
engaged 
in 
project 
activities 
through 
interaction with others, which can be facilitated and enabled 
through specialized technologies [29]. Dalsgaard [30], whose 
research is supported in Waycott et al. [31], argues that 
social software can be used to support the constructivist 
approach set forth in the previous section. Social software 
engenders a cooperative approach to learning and work 
towards the establishment of a cohesive community. In this 
respect, social software can refer to any loosely connected 
application where individuals are able to communicate with 
one another, and track discussions across the internet [32]. 
Consequently, the development of OLC software must 
consider the individual’s point of view in such a manner that 
they are provided with a certain level of control and 
autonomy within the community. Once again, social 
software supports these philosophies and makes participants 
the locus of control within a self-governing environment.   
C. Community (Social Presence) 
We introduce Social Presence Theory to understand the 
manifestation of our OLC as a dynamic and vibrant 
collaborative project space. Social Presence Theory looks at 
the degree to which an individual’s perception of the online 
community, affects his or her participation [33] [34]. When 
an individual believes that others are interacting and 
exchanging information, that individual may be more 
inclined to engage themselves. As discussed in Garrison et 
al. [35], alternative methods for enhancing social presence 
must be explored to help substitute for the lack of visual cues 
individuals receive in face-to-face settings. Research by 
Richardson and Swan [36] identified that a student’s 
perceived level of social presence directly relates to their 
perceived learning. This suggests that increasing levels of 
community can yield higher levels of learning. OSN 
technologies work well in this regard and have successfully 
helped enhance social presence through peer feedback [37] 
and individual profiles and avatars [38], both of which are 
implemented within the OLC designs we investigated. 
Additionally, Thoms [39] discovered that OSN technologies 
can foster higher levels of course learning through openness 
and collaboration and can align very well with course 
learning objectives.  
Together, these three theories provide a holistic model 
that considers course community, individual learning styles 
and how each can be influenced and enhanced with 
technology. 
IV. 
COMMUNITY SOFTWARE DESIGN 
Just prior to the Web 2.0 revolution, Preece [40] stated 
that OSN developers can control the design of OSN 
software, but it remains difficult to control social interaction 
across the software. This statement implies that not all social 
technologies will yield the desired level of interaction 
intended by their design. After the Web 2.0 explosion, an 
influx of new social software presented software developers 
with 
a 
treasure-trove 
of 
open-source 
plug-and-play 
technologies, which have now become staples of popular 
OSNs. These technologies include filesharing, blogging, 
status updates, tagging, social bookmarking, and individual 
and community profile building.  
Elgg is an OSN engine and is currently used as the 
primary engine across numerous online communities. The 
software provides a wealth of social technologies and has an 
easy-to-use and customizable interface, which can mirror the 
look and feel of any organization. A default installation of 
Elgg provides features such as discussion boards, blogs, file 
galleries and peer-to-peer (P2P) networking capabilities. 
Elgg also offers the ability to create sub-communities, a 
crucial feature that allows academic instructors to implement 
multiple communities within a single Elgg installation. Sub-
communities allow instructors to separate courses, while 
allowing students to interact with peers outside their 
respective course community. Additionally, Elgg allows 
restrictions across multiple levels, including individual-level, 
community-level 
and 
logged-in-user-level 
restrictions, 
making it a choice system for project-based communities, 
who may wish to limit the availability of project information 
to the larger course community.  
Illustrated in Figure 2 is the user landing page for a 
typical Elgg community, in this case, the community is the 
capstone course homepage. Within this environment, 
members are also able to add customizable modules to the 
homepage that presents them with real-time community 
activity. By default, users are presented with active content 
from across the site, which can be filtered by user or date. 
Rather than be reactive, our OLC is proactive, and a greater 
emphasis 
is 
placed 
on 
content 
creation, 
content 
dissemination and user-interaction. 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-436-7
COLLA 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

 
Figure 2.  OLC Landing Page 
A. Collaborative Writing Software 
The primary artifact within a project-based OLC centers 
on the analysis and design of project objectives. As a shared 
artifact, collaborative writing software functions as a 
mechanism to support information sharing and group 
knowledge construction. As one subset of collaborative 
writing, wiki software utilizes Internet-based technologies to 
facilitate the collaborative writing process by keeping track 
of page creation and page edits. Not only are wikis an 
effective 
mechanism 
for 
obtaining 
information 
and 
knowledge, such as with Wikipedia, the world’s largest 
encyclopedia, they are also an effective technology for 
facilitating virtual collaboration. Wikis provide a shared 
dialogue and centralize information among collaborators in 
group projects. Additionally, wikis allow members to engage 
in group learning and share in knowledge construction 
within a virtual community [41]. These notions are 
paramount for project teams working collaboratively towards 
shared goals and shared understandings. Additionally, a wiki 
can provide project teams with a level of coordination and 
synchronization not afforded by other means. 
 
Figure 3.  OLC Wiki Page 
Wiki technology was developed prior to the Web 2.0 
explosion and, thus, limited collaborative writing to early 
HTML-style markup [42]. Today, wiki-technologies allow 
collaborators to breathe life into wiki-documents through 
multi-media and allow editors to embed files. Illustrated in 
Figure 3, today’s wikis are no longer syntax-based, with 
difficult HTML-style markup notation. Current wikis embed 
rich-text editors, which allow novice web users to 
participate, a notion that is particularly important for student 
groups, many of whom have limited experience with wiki-
technology. Recent research by Xu [43] implemented wiki-
technology in project-based computer science courses, 
highlighting how wiki technology helped tcentralize and 
capture all project activities through wiki pages created by 
both the instructor and students. Additionally, Popescu [44] 
discovered that wikis also helped students to find interesting 
information; by reading other teams' wiki pages, students 
could check their progress, see how they compare with 
others teams, look for inspiration and models and discover 
different ideas and approaches. A limitation identified in He 
and Yang [45] is that a wiki should not be a tool that aims to 
supplant communication channels and works best when 
additional modes exist. This limitation is accounted for in 
our OLC since the wiki comprises only one component. 
V. 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
To measure how OLC software supports levels of project 
community and leads to project success we targeted capstone 
courses at our university, a small public university in the 
United States. Our research can be categorized as a proof-of-
concept case study, where we look to measure the effects of 
a specific intervention on existing populations of university 
students taking a required capstone group project-oriented 
course. The IT capstone course consisted of six project teams 
whose seventeen-week endeavor focused on constructing a 
fully-functional information technology (IT) artifact. Project 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-436-7
COLLA 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

teams consisted of three to four students and were 
formulated by the instructor prior to the start of the semester.  
The final IT artifact consisted of 40% of an individual’s 
course grade. An additional 30% included project 
documentation and collaborative activities relating to project 
analysis, design and construction. Additionally, each project 
team was assigned a wiki space with pre-defined templates 
for project development phases. Groups were encouraged to 
communicate both synchronously during weekly in-class 
meetings and asynchronously 
through 
each 
groups’ 
designated project space. Each group was required to present 
and defend their final IT artifact at the end of the semester. 
Data was captured over the six-month intervention and 
include both pretest and posttest survey data in addition to a 
social network analysis (SNA). 
As exploratory research, we are largely concerned with 
discovering mitigating factors surrounding learning, social 
interaction, course community and project success within 
OLC software. Our theoretical model asserts that, when 
members are presented with tools to support interaction and 
community, higher levels of social presence and course 
community will exist. At a high level, we ask what 
affordances and constraints OLC software provides in 
facilitating project collaboration and project success? 
Specifically, we ask the following research questions: 
R1: Will an OLC enhance levels of course community? 
R2: Will wiki software enhance levels of project 
management and collaboration?  
R3: If R1 and R2, will an OLC facilitate project success? 
To explore these questions, we measure the impact of our 
customized OLC software within our IT capstone course. 
The course is experiential in nature and students are required 
to produce results for use by real individuals and are 
evaluated both on process and product. While individuals 
were encouraged to use the OLC to discuss all project-
related material, it was not required for project milestones. 
VI. 
RESULTS 
To explore how specialized OLC software can support 
project-based courses and enhance classroom learning, we 
collected data from multiple sources. Our first point of data 
collection is through survey research, which measures 
perceived levels of learning, community and interaction. To 
support survey findings, we perform a social network 
analysis and look at in-bound and out-bound interactions 
among OLC participants.   
A. Demographics 
Demographic information was captured through a pretest 
survey. Including the instructor, our total user population 
was 25. 25% of participants were female and 75% were 
male. 48% of participants were aged 18 to 25, 36% were 
aged 26 to 35, 12% were aged 36-50 and 4% were aged 50 
and above. All interventions occurred using a capstone IT 
project-based course, a required upper-division IT course. 
B. Survey Data Analysis 
Closed-ended survey pretest and posttest questions were 
distributed to all participants resulting in 25 completed 
pretests and 23 completed posttest surveys, or a 100% 
response rate for both sets. To ensure confidentiality, no 
personally identifiable information was collected, thus 
linking survey data and SNA data was not achievable.  
1) Instrument Reliability 
Cronbach Alpha scores for our survey constructs related 
to items associated with the OLC scored .83 indicating that 
survey items maintain an adequate level of internal 
consistency.  
2) OLC Perceptions on Interaction (Pretest) 
Illustrated in Figure 4, on factors relating to OLC 
interaction, pretest results identified that individuals agreed 
(52%) or strongly agreed (32%) that interaction through an 
OLC would be important, with 40% agreeing and 40% 
strongly agreeing that the OLC will increase interaction.  
 
Figure 4.  OLC (Pretest) 
3) OLC Perceptions on Interaction (Posttest) 
Illustrated in Figure 5, on factors relating to OLC 
interaction, posttest results show higher levels of agreement 
across these constructs. Individuals agreed (39%) or strongly 
agreed (56%) that interaction through the OLC was 
important, with 44% agreeing and 44% strongly agreeing 
that the OLC increased interaction.  
 
Figure 5.  OLC (Postest) 
4) Wiki Perceptions on Interaction (Pretest) 
Illustrated in Figure 6, on factors relating to wiki 
interaction, pretest results identified that individuals agreed 
(48%) or strongly agreed (32%) that a wiki would facilitate 
group cohesion. Additionally, individuals agreed (40%) or 
strongly agreed (32%) that a wiki would facilitate group 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-436-7
COLLA 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

collaboration. Individuals also agreed (40%) or strongly 
agreed (32%) that a wiki would facilitate group interaction. 
 
Figure 6.  Wiki on Interaction (Pretest) 
5) Wiki Perceptions on Interaction (Posttest) 
Illustrated in Figure 7, on factors relating to wiki 
interaction, posttest results show higher levels of agreement 
across these constructs. Individuals agreed (61%) or strongly 
agreed (28%) that the OLC wiki facilitated group cohesion. 
Additionally, individuals agreed (50%) or strongly agreed 
(39%) that the OLC wiki facilitated group collaboration. 
Individuals also agreed (56%) or strongly agreed (33%) that 
the OLC wiki facilitated group interaction. 
 
Figure 7.  Wiki on Interaction (Posttest) 
6) Wiki Perceptions on Project Management (Pretest) 
Illustrated in Figure 8, on factors relating to project 
management, pretest results identified that individuals agreed 
(52%) or strongly agreed (28%) that a wiki would project 
management. Additionally, individuals agreed (40%) or 
strongly agreed (36%) that a wiki would facilitate content 
creation. Individuals also agreed (44%) or strongly agreed 
(36%) that a wiki would facilitate the organization of project 
content.   
 
 
Figure 8.  Wiki on Project Management (Pretest) 
7) Wiki Perceptions on Project Management (Postest) 
Illustrated in Figure 9, on factors relating to project 
management, posttest results show that individuals agreed 
(50%) or strongly agreed (39%) that the OLC wiki facilitated 
project management. Additionally, individuals agreed (50%) 
or strongly agreed (39%) that the OLC wiki facilitated 
content creation. Individuals also agreed (44%) or strongly 
agreed (50%) that the OLC wiki facilitated organization of 
project content.   
 
 
Figure 9.  Wiki on Project Management (Posttest) 
C. Social Network Analysis 
1) SNA Background 
A social network analysis (SNA) is often used to identify 
interactions that take place within a community. Specifically, 
SNAs can provide a visual analysis of the social network and 
allow for a better understanding of all participants in the 
process 
of 
learning 
and 
interaction 
across 
online 
environments [46]. The ability to view social graph structure 
and community evolution is crucial to successful facilitation 
of a learning design and can serve as an early indicator of its 
success [47].  
2) SNA Design 
We constructed our SNA graphs using the 2014 NodeXL 
Template for Microsoft Excel. NodeXL is a free and open 
source extension that provides a range of basic network 
analysis and visualization features [48]. Utilizing the 
Fruchterman-Reingold Algorithm to generate a force-
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-436-7
COLLA 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

directed layout, we are able to position team members (aka, 
nodes) in our graph so that all edges are of more or less equal 
length and there are as few crossing edges as possible. 
Additionally, each arrow represents a weighted interaction, 
where larger arrows indicate a greater number of interactions 
between participants. Furthermore, bi-directional arrows 
occur when there is interactivity between students, measured 
in-degree / out-degree values. A high average value for in-
degree / out-degree indicates those students more frequently 
interacting with one another. 
3) OLC Sociogram 
Illustrated in Figure 10 is the sociogram for our capstone 
course. Project team members are identified by the group 
letter and group project grade. For example, B2(92) was the 
second member of Group B, whose final project grade was 
92 out of 100. Overall, the course experienced high levels of 
interaction with 1299 total aggregate interactions. Average 
in-degree and out-degree was also high at 8.1 meaning. In 
other words, on average, each student communicated with 8 
other individuals. Additionally, the total number of unique 
edges, or communications between any two nodes was 186.  
 
Figure 10.  OLC Sociogram 
VII. DISCUSSION 
A. OLC Supports Community (R1) 
Our first research question, R1, asked if OLC software 
could enhance levels of course community. To answer this 
question we look at a couple of factors. Community can be 
measured in terms of social capital, or the common social 
resource that facilitates information exchange, knowledge 
sharing, and knowledge construction through continuous 
interaction [49]. Furthermore, Social Presence Theory looks 
at the degree to which an individual’s perception of an online 
community, in its entirety, affects his or her participation in 
that community. Therefore, our first point of reference 
focuses our attention on survey responses relating to the 
OLC software’s ability to enhance interaction and 
community. Encouraging pretest results showed that 
individuals were positive from the start that an OLC could be 
important (84%). These perceptions continued throughout 
the lifecycle of the intervention and it was more encouraging 
to discover higher levels of agreement that the OLC was, in 
fact, an important factor for facilitating interaction (95%). 
Similarly, pretest results showed that individuals were 
positive that an OLC could be an excellent tool for building 
community (80%). And, again, posttest results supported 
these perceptions, revealing even higher levels of agreement 
(89%). The fact that the OLC is an open environment 
allowed team members to review the progress of their 
classmates and pose questions and receive responses in an 
open dialogue. 
Our second factor for measuring community focuses on 
the SNA sociogram. Illustrated in Figure 10, it is evident that 
the OLC was an active and engaging community. In fact, the 
average in-degree/out-degree was 8, which indicates that a 
third of all participants interacted with other members of the 
OLC. An additional factor considers the large number of 
unique peer-to-peer interactions (186), which means that 
many members were communicating with many other 
members. This factor reinforces the notion that OLC 
software provides a high affordance for individuals to 
discover and connect with other members of the community 
in addition to those members from within their respective 
project teams. As this community building was exactly the 
goal of our OLC software, the presented results confirm that 
the developed OLC software provided affordances for 
students to cultivate their collaboration skills in team-based 
IT projects. These findings are particularly important as 
employers increasingly ask their employees to work in 
virtual teams [50]. Furthermore, we interpret these important 
results as a sign that the team-based IT project employed in 
this study was industry-aligned.  
B. OLC Wiki Supports Project Management (R2) 
Our second research question, R2, asserted that the OLC 
project wiki would enhance levels of interaction and 
facilitate team collaboration. To answer this question we 
consider a couple of factors. First, we focus our attention on 
survey responses relating to the OLC wiki’s ability to 
enhance group cohesion, collaboration and interaction. 
Similar to R1 results, it was encouraging to find that the 
majority of individuals believed that the wiki could facilitate 
cohesion (72%), collaboration (72%) and interaction (72%). 
More so, however, it was very encouraging to discover the 
higher levels of agreement in the posttest that the wiki 
actually contributed to higher levels of cohesion (89%), 
collaboration (89%) and interaction (89%). Engagement 
theory is concerned with meaningful engagement. This 
amounts to finding the right tools for the right projects. Wiki 
software is geared towards collaboration and interaction 
where individuals bear witness to the evolution of a project’s 
analysis and design. Wiki software also reinforces the notion 
that projects can be both user-centric and group-oriented, 
thus facilitating individual ownership and motivation. 
Referring back to the sociogram in Figure 10, the 
proximity of nodes reflects that these nodes interacted with 
one another more frequently. In other words, the closer a set 
of nodes are to one another, the more cohesive that group of 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-436-7
COLLA 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

nodes are as a unit. As one would expect of our capstone 
project teams, with the exception of Group F, all groups 
exhibited high levels of team cohesion. This outcome was 
largely to be expected since individuals, while functioning as 
part of the larger course community, were still responsible 
for working within their own respective project teams in 
order to accomplish project milestones. Taken together, the 
quantitative results at hand indicate that students utilized 
OLC 
to 
set 
achievable 
project 
goals, 
resolve 
misunderstandings about design decisions, and negotiate 
deliverables, similar to the way team-based IT projects 
function in the real world. In this way, collaborating students 
used one another as a resource for learning, while also 
working to complete their project milestones.   
 
C. OLC and Wiki Supports Project Success (R3) 
Our third research question, R3, asserted that based on 
the successful adoption of the OLC as a mechanism for 
fostering interaction and supporting community along with 
the successful adoption of the wiki to support project 
collaboration, the OLC would attribute to project success. 
Our results indicate that this concept is also well supported.  
An important measure of project success stems from a 
group’s ability to establish the parameters of success through 
analysis of business requirements and the design and 
construction of the IT artifact. It was clear that the OLC 
helped to contribute to this success as identified in both 
survey responses and in each project team’s final product. 
From the pretest survey responses gathered, it was 
encouraging to discover that the majority of individuals 
believed that the OLC wiki would facilitate project 
management (80%), information organization (76%) content 
organization (80%) and content creation (72%). More so, 
however, it was encouraging to discover higher levels of 
agreement in posttest responses, where individuals perceived 
that the OLC wiki did, in fact, contribute to higher levels of 
project management (89%), information organization (95%) 
content organization (94%) and content creation (89%). Each 
of these factors is an important dimension of project 
management that promotes a shared understanding of 
technical requirements, which helps to mitigate expensive 
and time consuming rework. This concept applies to both 
short-term and long-term IT projects.  
Consequently, the combination of 1) an OLC, which 
facilitated member interaction and course community and 2) 
wiki software, which allowed individuals to collaborate 
towards 
project 
milestones, 
allowed 
each 
team 
to 
successfully meet capstone project expectations and deliver a 
final IT artifact that represents understanding of business 
processes.  
D. OLC Supports Technical Learning  
Finally, an important consideration should be discussed 
surrounding the introduction of social software within an 
academic setting for learning purposes. While the merits of 
the OLC as a mechanism for project success and/or 
enhancing levels of academic community may be debated, 
the introduction of specialized social software, such as an 
OLC, into team capstone courses provides a number of 
tangible and intangible benefits not measured completely in 
this research.  
In today’s dynamic business world, social software is 
pervasive across the IT sector. Additionally, capstone 
courses are one of, if not, the final course for students 
majoring and graduating with IT diplomas. Consequently, 
introducing students to how communities of practice engage 
in information sharing and knowledge construction using 
such technologies identified in this study may go a long way 
in preparing those students for similar communication and 
interaction in the IT industry.  
VIII. LIMITATIONS 
We acknowledge that a number of limitations exist in this 
research. One limitation considers using an academic setting 
as an environment to measure the impact OLC software has 
on project-based teams. While we acknowledge that this 
does limit the generalizability of the study, it should be noted 
that there are numerous similarities between computer 
supported learning and working teams that make knowledge 
gained in one setting applicable to another setting [51]. 
Another limitation considers the relatively small sample 
size analyzed in this study. While we acknowledge this fact, 
our primary goal is to showcase OLC software as a proof-of-
concept for enhancing collaboration among project-based 
teams, which we believe we succeed in doing on a number of 
levels. 
IX. 
CONCLUSION  
In this research we leverage the technical prowess of 
todays’ digital natives and measure the impact of specialized 
OLC software on project success within teams participating 
in IT capstone courses. Our software allowed individuals to 
function within close-knit project teams, while also 
participating within a larger academic community of 
practice. Through the analysis of survey data and supported 
through a social network analysis, we discovered the 
powerful and positive impact OLC software has on 
supporting project success by facilitating peer-to-peer 
interaction and enhancing levels of collaboration. 
X. 
REFERENCES 
[1] StatisticBrain. (2012). Social networking statistics, Retrieved July 29, 
2013, from: www.statisticbrain.com/social-networking-statistics. 
[2] Jenks, J. (2011). “The digital world of millennials,” eMarketer. 
[3] Williamson, D. (2007). “Social network marketing: ad spending and 
usage, social network marketing,” eMarketer. Retrieved June 02, 
2008, from 
http://www.emarketer.com/Report.aspx?code=emarketer_2000478. 
[4] Oblinger, D. and Oblinger, D. (2005). “Is it age or IT: first steps 
toward understanding the Net Generation,” EDUCAUSE. 
[5] Lave, J. and Wenger, E. (1991). Situated Learning: Legitimate 
Peripheral Participation, Cambridge University Press. 
[6] Adams, EC and Freeman, C. (2000). “Communities of practice: 
bridging technology and knowledge,” Journal of Knowledge 
Management, 4(1), pp. 38-44. 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-436-7
COLLA 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

[7] Thoms B., Garrett, N. and Ryan T. (2009). “Online learning 
communities in the New ‘U’. Intl. Journal of Networking and Virtual 
Organisations, 6(5). 
[8] Shaw M., Tomayko JE. (1991) "Models for undergraduate project 
courses in software engineering," Software Engineering Education in 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science 536(1), pp 33-71. 
[9] Fincher, S., Petre, M., & Clark, M. (2001). Computer science project 
work: principles and pragmatics. London: Springer-Verlag. 
[10] Goold, A.; Horan, P., (2002). "Foundation software engineering 
practices for capstone projects and beyond," Proceedings. 15th 
Conference on Software Engineering Education and Training, 
pp.140,146,  
[11] Lynch, K., Goold, A., & Blain, J. (2004). “Students’ pedagogical 
preferences in the delivery of IT capstone courses.” Issues in 
Informing Science and Information Technology, 1, 431-442. 
[12] Lainez, M., Deville, Y., Dessy, A., Dejemeppe, C., Mairy, J., & Van 
Cauwelaert, S. (2014). “A project-based introduction to agile 
software development.” In L. Alves, P. Ribeiro, & R. Machado, 
Project-Based Learning: An Environment to Prepare IT Students for 
an Industry Career (pp. 230-249). IGI Global. 
[13] Ayas K. and Zeniuk, N. (2001). “Project-based learning: building 
communities of reflective practitioners,” Management Learning, 
32(1). 
[14] Dunlap JC, (2005). "Problem-based learning and self-efficacy: how a 
capstone course prepares students for a profession,” Educational 
Technology Research and Development, 53(1), pp. 65-85 
[15] Clarke, N. (2005) “Evaluating student teams developing unique 
industry projects.” Proceedings of the 7th Australian Conference on 
Computing Education (ACE2005) (pp. 21-30). Newcastle, Australia. 
CRPIT, 42. ACS 
[16] Newman, I., Daniels, M., & Faulkner, X. (2003). “Open ended group 
projects: a 'tool' for more effective teaching.” Proceedings of the Fifth 
Australasian Conference on Computing Education, Adelaide, 
Australia, 95-103. 
[17] Kolb, D. (1984). Experiential learning - experience as the source of 
learning and development. New York: Prentice Hall. 
[18] Lynch, K., Heinze, A., & Scott, E. (2007). “Information technology 
team projects in higher education: an international viewpoint,” 
Journal of Information Technology Education, 6, 181-198. 
[19] Thoms B., Garrett B., Soffer M. and Ryan T. (2007), “Resurrecting 
graduate conversation through an online learning community,” IADIS 
Multi Conference on Computer Science and Information Systems, 
Lisbon, Portugal. 
[20] Thoms B., Eryilmaz, E. (2014). “How media choice affects learner 
interactions in distance learning classes,” Computers & Education, 
v75. 
[21] Johnson, C. (2001). “A survey of current research on online 
communities of practice,” Internet and Higher Education, 4(1), 45-
60. 
[22] Palloff, R. and Pratt, K. (1999). Building learning communities in 
cyberspace: effective strategies for the online classroom, San 
Francisco, California: Jossey-Bass. 
[23] Savery, J. and Duffy, T. (1996). “Problem based learning: an 
instructional model and its constructivist framework,” In B. Wilson, 
Constructivist Learning Environments: Case Studies in Instructional 
Design. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Educational Technology Publications. 
[24] Hagstrom, F. and Wertsch, J. (2004). “Grounding social identity for 
professional practice,” Topics in Language Disorders, 3(24), 162-
173. 
[25] Piaget, J. (1952). The Origins of Intelligence in Children, New York, 
NY: Intl. University Press. 
[26] Squires, D. (1999). “Educational software and learning: subversive 
use and volatile design,” Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Hawaii 
international Conference on System Sciences, IEEE. 
[27] Matthews, M. (2002). “Constructivism and science education: a 
further appraisal,” Journal of Science Education and Technology, 
11(2). 
[28] Kuh, G., Cruce, T., Shoup, R., Kinzie, J. and Gonyea, R. (2008). 
“Unmasking the effects of student engagement on college grades and 
persistence,” Journal of Higher Education, 79(1), 540-563. 
[29] Kearsley, G. and Schneiderman, B. (1999). “Engagement theory: a 
framework for technology-based learning and teaching,” Retrieved 
June 26, 2013, from http://home.sprynet.com/~gkearsley/engage.htm 
[30] Dalsgaard, C. (n.d.). “Social software: e-learning beyond learning 
management systems,” Retrieved 6 26, 2013, from 
http://www.eurodl.org/materials/contrib/2006/Christian_Dalsgaard.ht
m 
[31] Waycott, J., Sheard, J. Thompson, and C. Clerehan, R. (2013). 
“Making students' work visible on the social web: a blessing or a 
curse?,” Computers & Education, 68(1), 86-95. 
[32] Teeper, M. (2003). The rise of social software. netWorker, 7(1), 18–
23. 
[33] Tu, C. and McIsaac, M. (2002). “The relationship of social presence 
and interaction in online classes,” The American Journal of Distance 
Education, 16(1). 
[34] Short, JA, Williams, E. and Christie, B., (1976). The Social 
Psychology of Telecommunications. John Wiley & Sons. 
[35] Garrison, R., Anderson, T., and Archer, W. (1999). “Critical inquiry 
in a text-based environment: computer conferencing in higher 
education,” The Internet and Higher Education, 2(3), 87-105. 
[36] Richardson, JC and Swan, K. (2003). “Examining social presence in 
online courses in relation to student’s perceived learning and 
satisfaction,” Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks, 7(1), 68-
88.  
[37] Ma, A. (2008). “Computer supported collaborative learning and 
social creativity: a case study of fashion design,” Journal of 
Information, Information Technology, and Organizations, 3(1), 17-
39. 
[38] Vasileiou, V. N. and Paraskeva, F. (2010). “Teaching role-playing 
instruction in Second Life: an exploratory study,” Journal of 
Information, Information Technology, and Organizations, 5(1). 
[39] Thoms, B. (2011) “A dynamic social feedback system to support 
learning and social interaction in higher education,” IEEE 
Transactions on Learning Technologies, Issue: 99.  
[40] Preece, J. (2001). “Sociability and usability in online communities: 
determining and measuring success,” Behavior and Information 
Technology, 20(5), 347-356. 
[41] Boulos, M., Maramba, I., & Wheeler, S. (2006). Wikis, blogs and 
podcasts: a new generation of web-based tools for virtual 
collaborative clinical practice and education. BMC Medical 
Education, 6(41), 1472–1480. 
[42] Leuf, B., & Cunningham, W. (2001). The Wiki Way: Quick 
Collaboration on the Web. Boston: Addison-Wesley Longman 
Publishing Co. 
[43] Xu, L. (2007). “Project the wiki way: using wiki for computer science 
course project management,” Journal of Computing Sciences in 
Colleges, 22(6), 109-116. 
[44] Popescu, E. (2014). “Using wikis to support project-based learning: a 
case study,” Proceedings of the 14th IEEE International Conference 
on Advanced Learning Technologies, Athens, Greece. 
[45] He W. and Yang L. (2015). "Is wiki a good tool facilitating team 
collaboration in undergraduate education?" Proceedings of the 19th 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-436-7
COLLA 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems (PACIS 2015), 
Marina Bay Sands, Singapore. 
[46] Freeman, L. (2004). The development of social network analysis. 
Vancouver: Empirical Press. 
[47] Bakharia, A., Heathcote, E., & Dawson, S. (2009). “Social networks 
adapting pedagogical practice: SNAPP,” Proceedings of ASCILITE 
Auckland 2009, (pp. 49-51), Auckland, New Zealand. 
[48] Hansen, D., Shneiderman, B., & Smith, M. (2011). Analyzing Social 
Media Networks with NodeXL: Insights from a Connected World. 
Burlington: Morgan Kaufmann. 
[49] Daniel, B., Schwier, R., & McCalla, G. (2003). “Social capital in 
virtual learning communities and distributed communities of 
practice,” Canadian Journal of Learning and Technology, 29(3), 
113–139. 
[50] Majchrzak, A., Malhotra, A., and John, R. (2005) “Perceived 
individual collaboration know-how development through information 
technology–enabled contextualization: evidence from distributed 
teams,” Information Systems Research 16(1), pp. 9-27. 
[51] Kirschner, P. A. and Erkens, G. (2013) “Toward a framework for 
CSCL research,” Educational Psychologist, 48(1), pp. 1-8. 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-436-7
COLLA 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

