Collaborative Decision Constructing Supported by Cross-Pollination Space 
Anastasiya Yurchyshyna 
CUI, University of Geneva 
Battelle - Batiment A 
7, Route de Drize 
CH - 1227 Carouge 
+41 22 379 02 59 
Anastasiya.Yurchyshyna@unige.ch 
Wanda Opprecht 
CUI, University of Geneva 
Battelle - Batiment A 
7, Route de Drize 
CH - 1227 Carouge 
+41 22 379 02 29 
Wanda.Opprecht@unige.ch 
Michel Léonard 
CUI, University of Geneva 
Battelle - Batiment A 
7, Route de Drize 
CH - 1227 Carouge 
+41 22 379 77 77 
Michel.Leonard@unige.ch 
 
Abstract—This paper studies the problem of collaborative 
decision constructing in the context of services society. 
Starting by identifying the characteristics of services society 
and new challenges it should face, we present the problem of 
collaborative decision making and discuss creativity aspects of 
multi-domain collaboration. We analyze the main risks related 
to collaborative decision making and propose their initial 
classification. By having identified the related gaps in science 
and business practices, not addressed by classical techniques 
on collaboration modeling, we introduce our approach for 
supporting collaborative decision processes that replaces the 
traditional viewpoint of decision-making by a dynamic 
participative process of decision constructing. This approach is 
based on ontological modelling to represent the knowledge 
necessary for discussions, and on services to enable 
collaborative decision-making. We show how the proposed 
conceptual approach allows actors to achieve a richer 
understanding of discussed topics thanks to ontologies without 
changing their own working practices, and thanks to services 
that encourage actors’ initiatives in decision constructing and 
facilitate their collaboration. Our approach is concretized by 
the development of the platform for collaborative decision 
constructing, Cross-Pollination Space, which conceptual 
architecture we briefly describe. A case study on possible 
implementation of this conceptual approach for service 
innovation in Long-life exploration is finally discussed.  
Keywords – decision constructing; service innovation; 
information 
kernel; 
collaborative 
environment; 
creative 
collaboration. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
During the last decades, the complex problem of 
decision making has been in the centre of interest of both 
academicians and business entrepreneurs. Its importance 
has been increased in the context of services society that 
allows creating services in trans-disciplinary domains, 
where people not only use their static bases of knowledge, 
but also turn out to be active participants in the process of 
services creation. Naturally, in services society, services 
constitute a major component of the enterprise development 
and they become much more efficient when they are 
supported by ICT. Besides, ICT, in particular Internet 
technologies, set off a huge field of new services to be 
immersed in any enterprise process and to become relevant 
conceptual instruments for production, development and 
management, especially when they result the decision-
making processes based on collaboration of different 
experts from various domains and disciplines. 
Indeed, it is one of the requirements of the services 
society when the actors of collaboration are both providers 
and consumers of different types of knowledge and 
services, even if they keep their own languages, ways of 
thinking and/or working and are not obliged to change their 
daily working practices. From a different point of view, the 
complexity of current business and academic processes also 
requires a more powerful approach for supporting its 
semantics – the multi-disciplinary knowledge used, 
retrieved and created as the result of decision-making 
processes should be modeled and maintained in a more 
expressive way that would allow not only its better 
representation, but also organization and reasoning, not 
only decision-making, but dynamic decision-constructing 
leading to the creation of new domain services.  
We make here a distinction between domain services 
and information system services. Domain services are part 
of the business activities, such as, for example, electricity 
provision, medical consultation or car rental. On their side, 
information system services are autonomous coherent and 
interoperable components of an information system which 
we specify by a static, a dynamic, a rules and a 
responsibility space. Domain services are supported by one 
or more information system service(s). 
It thus becomes crucial to offer an approach aiming to 
support the process of decision constructing by integrating 
the services-oriented approach and ontologies. Our research 
is in the middle of the complimentary domains of meta-
modeling, economics of the enterprise, management 
sciences, knowledge engineering, collaborative decision-
making, services science (SS) and artificial intelligence 
(AI). It reflects the new sustainability requirement for 
information systems and services: the ability to dynamically 
adapt to ever-changing environments; and offers an answer 
of an integrated approach, which is (i) generic enough to be 
implemented in different fields of business and research, 
and (ii) scalable and interoperable to be easily concretized 
for a applied use case (e.g., developing an enriched base of 
conformity construction rules).  
By justifying the necessity of a new complex approach 
for collaborative decision constructing and by identifying 
missing meta-models, knowledge bases, tools supporting 
1
COLLA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-143-4

existing 
working 
practices 
throughout 
different 
collaborative environments and/or working groups, in this 
paper we introduce our approach and discuss the conceptual 
schema of the corresponding practical tool.  
In the next section, we present the current state of the art 
related to collaborative decision making. In Section 3, we 
identify the main underlying risks and propose their first 
classification. Section 4 introduces our services-oriented 
approach for supporting decision-constructing processes 
and underlines the role of ontologies that enable to 
generalize a traditionally defined problem of decision-
making by a semantically richer problem of decision 
constructing. A practical tool implementing this approach, 
the Cross-Pollination Space is introduced in Section 5 and 
its conceptual framework is presented. Finally, conclusions 
and perspectives of this research are argued in Section 6.   
II. 
RESEARCH ON COLLABORATIVE DECISION-
MAKING 
The problem of the collaborative decision making has 
been in the centre of interest of both academicians and 
business entrepreneurs during the last decades. Its 
importance has only increased in the context of the 
knowledge- and services-oriented society and especially, 
thanks to the development of the information and 
communication technologies, social networks and thematic 
clouds, which facilitate decision making processes and 
remove their geographical boundaries. 
While speaking about process modeling, in general, and 
modeling of the collaborative decision making, in 
particular, one should underline the growing role of 
services-oriented approaches [10]. Service orientation 
allows studying modeling principles that rely on the 
interactive exchange and functioning of interoperable 
services. In its complexity, such service orientation is 
introduced at different levels of services science [22]: 
services are incorporated into the core of all economic 
processes, and in addition to this, they are widely used in 
paradigms 
of 
conceptual 
modeling 
and 
technical 
implementation.  
Indeed, the multitude and variety of complementary 
activities in an enterprise has recently proved to be an 
important challenge: the traditional approaches seem to be 
no longer appropriate (and/or corresponding) to the 
heterogeneous business environments. The level of 
complexity of enterprise ontologies and/or knowledge 
bases, the new working situations the enterprise should 
face, as well as the active participation of actors in decision 
making and creation processes require new ways for 
managing enterprise activities. 
 This trans-domain research primarily focuses on several 
aspects of science: the artificial intelligence, the intelligent 
automation, the idea management, the knowledge discovery 
and capitalization, the services science, the collaboration 
psychology and the process modeling, to mention but a few. 
The business aspects of it, especially those characterizing 
the collaboration in innovation, are also taken into 
consideration. Multiple works aiming various aspects of 
this situation [8], [16] were successfully conducted. 
However, the complexity of the domain offers greater 
opportunities for more profound studies. 
Another aspect of the current economic and business 
development is the fact that services society is also based 
on the knowledge that becomes the main source for value 
creation. Such a knowledge society becomes rapidly self-
sustaining [12], as it reflects the current needs and the 
corresponding ICT infrastructure, which can meet these 
needs, as well as the role of actionable knowledge [3] in its 
evolution for different contexts.  
Among other challenges our society faces today, a 
particular importance should be given to diversity, since it 
concerns a large amount of human activities, the multitude 
of actors, both experts in specific domains and non-
professionals that are involved in creating, consuming and 
transforming information and knowledge (in social 
networks, for example), the trans-disciplinarity of topics 
and situations of innovation, the cultural diversity and the 
independence of geographical boundaries, etc. Thus, it 
becomes a current practice to have a team of international 
experts, each of them a professional in her highly specified 
domain and has a very specific knowledge, that 
collaboratively work on a complex problem requiring 
processing and transforming of information and knowledge.  
The general discussion on the possibility to support 
collaborative creation can thus be characterized as trans-
disciplinary: from the management-oriented vision of [19], 
which perceives creation as a dynamic process in which an 
organization creates, maintains and exploits different kinds 
of knowledge, to models of collaboration discussed in [7]. 
The complexity of the phenomenon of creativity offers wide 
possibility for its modeling: from defining conflicts of 
interdisciplinary collaboration [20] to the development of 
creativity support tools [1]. 
As it is generally admitted, collaboration between 
different actors requires a certain level of collective 
intelligence, which working definition is described in [18] 
by the following aspects. It is viewed as the ability to learn, 
understand and reason and is exercised by a group of 
individuals doing things collectively that seem intelligent. 
In most cases, the collective intelligence is aimed to address 
new or trying situations and specifically applies knowledge 
to adapt to a changing environment.  
Based on knowledge as a key value-added instrument 
lead to the increasing importance for knowledge modeling 
and management, the problem of supporting decision 
constructing can also benefit from applying the methods 
and technologies of the artificial intelligence (AI), 
particularly aimed to increase the semantics of the 
described knowledge. Indeed, in this case, knowledge 
provides a complex static-dynamic contribution to value 
creation: statically, by stocking the knowledge and 
managing information and knowledge flows [13], and 
dynamically, by capitalizing the practices of usage of this 
knowledge for the target applied task, as well as for 
complementary trans-disciplinary purposes. 
2
COLLA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-143-4

In the field of collaborative engineering, [6] identifies 
seven layers of collaboration which aim at supporting the 
designers: goals, products, activities, patterns, techniques, 
tools and scripts. They represent an organizing scheme for 
the collaboration science which may represent a theoretical 
ground for the next generation of collaboration support 
systems. In the patterns layer, the group activities are 
classified under: generate, reduce, clarify, organize, 
evaluate and build commitment. 
Another area of investigation is thus semantics and 
context modeling in collaboration processes. Different 
ontology-based approaches [27] and context-oriented 
models [23] have recently proved the effectiveness of 
ontological modeling, which is also one of the key points of 
our approach.  
III. 
RISKS AND RESEARCH GAPS 
The analysis of the current state of the art highlights a 
number of risks of the currently used approaches for 
supporting collaborative decision making, which we 
schematically organized in nine groups. 
A. Decision making as limited choice 
Traditionally, decision making processes are seen as a 
choice between several already identified and (partially) 
formalized alternatives. In other words, collaborative 
discussions are focused around choosing a (partially) pre-
defined solution, but not really constructing a new solution.  
In this case, decision making risks being rather limited 
and not using advantages of multi-disciplinarity of the 
knowledge bases of involved actors. It is thus necessary to 
restructure decision making processes in the way that they 
would allow constructing a decision during – and not before 
– discussions. 
B. Risks of group thinking 
Generally speaking, groupthink can be seen as any type 
of thought within a deeply cohesive in-group whose 
members try to minimize conflict and reach consensus 
without critically testing, analyzing, and evaluating ideas. 
This kind of conformism might be the result of different 
reasons [14], [21]: (i) illusions of invulnerability 
encouraging risk taking and/or unquestioned belief in the 
morality of the group encouraging member to ignore the 
consequences of their decisions; (ii) direct pressure and 
excessive warning that might challenge the group’s 
assumptions; (iii) stereotyping of the importance and roles 
of different members: from underestimating certain points 
of view to excessive presence of mind guards, as well as 
self censorship of ideas that deviate from the apparent 
group consensus; (iv) eliciting individual views; (v) 
conformism of participants due to their anonymity; and (vi) 
lack of motivation for participating in decision making 
when passiveness (or silence) is viewed as agreement. As 
the result, groupthink might lead to defective decision 
making and disables almost any types of decision 
constructing. 
C. Influence of propaganda on collaborative decision 
Another important source of influence on collaborative 
decision could be found in the phenomena of propaganda 
and spamming, which are typical for Web environments 
and online communities. Indeed, the practice of introducing 
additional information and its emotional evaluation by some 
actors of communities might lead to propagating the 
unreliable information and to increasing the general distrust 
in collaborative decision making processes, as well as to 
questioning the trustworthiness of the process in general, 
and its members in particular (as sources of unreliable 
information). Several successful researches [11], [26], [17] 
have been carried out recently that have demonstrated some 
techniques for preventing spamming in Web environments, 
and as such for increasing the quality of the exchanged 
information. However, the risks of semantic noise in 
collaborative decision constructing due to spamming, 
society (or environment) distrust or personal direct 
influence of certain actors are still among the main causes 
of its possible untrustworthiness. 
D. Risks related to cognitive and professional security 
It is also one of the particularities of processes of human 
collaboration that people prefer to keep their traditional 
ways of acting and are sometimes resistant and/or not 
willing to change them even for the reasons of efficiency 
and quality. This phenomenon might be explained by the 
fact that innovations are sometimes associated with the risk 
of losing the clear vision of the work to be implemented and 
even with the risk of losing (or not possessing) the 
necessary skills for this work. In this context, it becomes 
obvious that any approaches aiming to support multi-
domain collaboration should take into account the 
established common practices and domain requirements 
[15] and is very likely to fail if for its implementation it 
requires important (or even partial) change of “know-how” 
knowledge of decision-making actors.  
E. Conservation of traditional roles of providers and 
consumers of information 
A different type of risk, which has emerged in the 
context of services society, concerns the conservation of 
traditional roles of providers and consumers and projecting 
these roles to actors of collaborative decision making. It 
should thus be taken into consideration that the new 
approaches for supporting decision constructing view all 
actors as both providers and consumers that could 
simultaneously exercise different types of information 
exchange, dissemination and integration.  
F. Ontological modeling: formalization, maintenance and 
search for the unique solution 
Current decision-making practices are characterized by 
the multitude and complexity of the involved knowledge, 
which in many cases is non-formalized, tacit and even non-
identified. This requires implementing powerful approaches 
that are able to support the semantics of this knowledge and 
to make it (partially) formalized, for example, ontological 
3
COLLA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-143-4

modeling. It is important to underline, however, that 
ontological modeling is not aiming at giving the only 
unique and absolute approach for knowledge formalization, 
and neither could it provide a definite answer applicable in 
all domains and contexts. Ontology-enabled modeling could 
be effective only thanks to the constant dynamic integration 
of new knowledge related to specific domains, usage-based 
practices and feedback from implementation in different 
contexts [27]. Furthermore, there should always be found a 
compromise between the expressiveness of the modeled 
knowledge and the effectiveness of its maintenance and 
possibility to use for different tasks: e.g., reasoning.  
G. Private and public data in the context of open 
environments 
Open environments that motivate their members to 
create, link and share knowledge face the dilemma of public 
and private data, available for large communities or 
protected for the specified usage. In its ultimo form, this is 
characteristic for open governments that optimize the usual 
trade-off between the expense and difficulty of getting wide 
agreement, and the practicality of working in a smaller 
community [5]. The essential concern is the privacy of data 
which contains personally identifiable information. Despite 
an important research in this domain and a variety of 
proposed approaches – by defining for example so called 
platforms of liberation and platforms of control (depending 
on how they support or tend to limit creativity and 
innovation) [24], by introducing self-regulating mechanisms 
within environments where its members define themselves 
which information should be protected or public, by 
identifying the necessary balance levels between public and 
private knowledge [9], to mention but a few – the question 
of developing an open environment by guaranteeing the 
security of private data still remains open.  
H. Limitations of a chosen collaboration model  
The 
selection 
of 
different 
models 
supporting 
collaboration, in general, and collaborative decision-
making, in particular, is rather wide. It is obvious that all of 
them have some limitations in application and usage, some 
are more efficient and some require more strict conditions 
to be implemented. The group of risks relating to a choice 
of one particular collaboration model combines thus a 
number of risks [21]: (i) low model acceptance by members 
of collaboration; (ii) necessity to verify a model – or 
prototyping with the vast interaction with participants; (iii) 
limited model comprehension when, from one hand, 
participants have problems in acting in the model’s 
boundaries, 
and 
from 
the 
other 
hand, 
they 
feel 
misunderstood due to the bad translation of their 
perceptions into the model language; (iii) low technical 
model quality; (iv) low perceived model quality – when the 
model itself is developed by not taking in consideration the 
context of collaboration and/or without allowing integrating 
evolving changes of the environment; (v) difficulties in 
traceability and eventual storage of rejected ideas (in case 
some ideas are decided to be useless for a particular 
decision-making process, but are considered as important 
for further processes of decision constructing). 
I. 
Paradoxes of innovation in collaboration 
This group unites different risks that characterize the 
dualistic nature of innovation and reflect, to some extent, 
the controversial nature of collaborative creativity [25]. It is 
the point of finding a balance between polar aspects of 
collaborative decision making: from its innovative (or even 
creative) side to organizing and scheduling decision-making 
activities. In its complexity, the risk is to identify an 
approach that would (i) unite goal-oriented and exploratory 
idea constructing; (ii) establish a connection between 
universally accepted common sense and specific domain 
knowledge; (iii) allow a structured approach for a priori 
unstructured innovative ideas; and (iv) offer participants 
personal motivation to benefit from the results of 
collaborative decision constructing [2]. This schematic 
classification of risks was taken into consideration in our 
analysis for supporting collaborative decision constructing. 
In our approach, we envisage them as the main challenges 
to be addressed and to offer an approach that aims to reduce 
the corresponding research gaps in supportive collaborative 
decision processes, as well as to involve participants 
directly into constructing the process of collaboration. 
IV. 
OUR SERVICES-ORIENTED APPROACH 
Our 
services 
oriented 
approach 
for 
supporting 
collaborative decision constructing tends to answer the 
main challenges identified in the previous section 
A. 
General presentation 
Generally, the process of decision constructing can be 
schematized at Figure 1. It allows managing business and 
science 
knowledge 
(structured 
and non structured, 
formalized and non formalized, etc.), provides semantic 
techniques and tools for its representing and reasoning, and 
offers an approach for managing collaborative processes 
related to decision constructing. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Collaborative information kernel . 
The key elements of this approach are: Participants, 
Groups of participants, Concepts, Targets and Documents. 
4
COLLA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-143-4

The participants are the individuals taking part in the 
decision constructing. In this collaborative process, the 
participants are directly involved. The groups of 
participants 
are 
unions 
of 
people 
which 
gather 
spontaneously around a target. A group arises after the 
initiative (or target) of one participant. 
The targets are the objects of the decision constructing. 
They can take several forms: “request for discussion” (tacit 
need and not yet defined problem, such as an intuition), 
“request for solution” (defined problem without a proposed 
solution) or “direct proposition of action” (problem with a 
possible solution to be discussed and validated). 
The concepts are general and abstract representations of 
an object (or group of objects). In our context, they 
originate either from the participants knowledge bases or 
from 
the 
participants 
collaborative 
knowledge 
co-
construction. Interrelated to form ontologies, concepts are 
to be carefully handled. As a matter of fact, they carry a 
consensus (sometimes tacit, partial or yet to be assessed) on 
a knowledge serving a group’s target. The usage of 
knowledge bases serves multiple purposes: knowledge 
sharing among trans-disciplinary group members, linkage 
with necessary, permanent and unquestionable concepts 
(such as legal concepts), domain of expertise expression, 
positioning decisions and usage validation for the most 
important. Either internally or externally produced, 
documents are, for example, deliverable, memorial, white 
paper, report, proceedings or minutes. They serve the 
decision construction. 
The participation in the decision constructing is 
characterized as follows: it is an outside-in and a bottom-up 
approach. Indeed, for the creation of domain services, we 
take our inspiration from open innovation experiences [4] 
where boundaries are blurred: the users/customers as well 
as the employees are empowered.  
B. From risks and challenges to answers 
In order to demonstrate how the proposed conceptual 
approach 
allows 
the 
actors 
to 
achieve 
a 
richer 
understanding of the discussed subject without changing 
their own working practices and domain terminologies, we 
analyse it from the point of view of the identified risks of 
collaborative decision making (cf. Section 3). We 
underline, however, that we do not claim the uniqueness of 
the proposed solution, but show its contributions to the 
complex problem of supporting collaborative decision 
constructing. 
• 
Decision 
constructing 
aimed 
to 
overcome 
the 
limitations of decision making. 
We have identified the limitations of the decision-
making process that concludes with a choice of one of 
(partially) defined solutions (cf. Figure 2).  
Thanks to the process of knowledge actionalizing and 
dynamic constructing of the information kernel, which are 
the key core of our approach, it is now possible to support 
the process of constructing the collective decision, while 
taking into consideration the environment of collaboration 
as well as the usage and practices. Thus the identification of 
possible choices of decision is done in parallel with 
discussions: predefined solutions are enriched with new 
ideas expressed during the discussions. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  From decision making to decision constructing 
• 
Risks of group thinking 
The variety of risks caused by group thinking 
complicates the task of reducing them, especially by 
admitting the fact that the majority of them sources in social 
and psychological aspects of collaboration. In our 
approach, we do not particularly address these issues; 
however, we propose a number of solutions to be 
implemented in the corresponding framework, which 
combination will positively influence on group thinking.  
First, supporting decision constructing with the help of 
information systems and services provides a certain level of 
anonymity of online societies, which weakens the direct 
pressure to certain members of real-time offline decision 
processes. Second, we offer a system of roles that 
encourages the participation in discussions and/or access to 
protected knowledge bases. Third, our approach is based on 
personal motivation to collaborate, which can be shown in 
results of decision constructing. For example, actors could 
be declared as authors in white papers, joint publications, 
new trans-disciplinary connections exceeding this current 
task are likely to be established, to mention but a few. 
Fourth, the ontological background of our approach 
provides the technical solutions necessary for actors to be 
understood without changing their terminology, and as such 
the knowledge is disseminated easier and can be used more 
effectively. 
• 
Influence of propaganda and spam on collaborative 
decision 
While having identified this risk, our ongoing work is 
currently not focused on it. Nevertheless, the task of 
reducing the influence of propaganda and spam in decision 
constructing within collaborative communities is one of the 
main perspectives of our future research. 
• 
Risks of cognitive and professional security 
Our previous work on capitalizing domain knowledge 
[27] has demonstrated the resistance of domain experts in 
changing their work routine: they could integrate new 
5
COLLA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-143-4

knowledge and ways of doing in their current work only if 
they were described in their own terminology and did not 
require an effort from their part. For this reason, one of the 
starting points for this research is to develop an approach 
allowing such a simplicity – that we have proposed with the 
help of ontological knowledge modeling, from one side, 
and services enabling collaboration, from the other side. 
The process of decision constructing is naturally 
characterized by the risks of cognitive and professional 
security: new ideas proposed by some domain professionals 
can be hardly understood by experts from different domains 
and as such, the corresponding innovations might face some 
cognitive resistance of decision-making actors. However, 
by emphasizing the importance of allowing “domain” 
terminologies and by supporting them by ontologies, we 
allow jargon-free discussion around new ideas, which are 
constructed in multi-domain collaboration.  
• 
Conservation of traditional roles of providers and 
consumers of information 
Following the spirit of services society, it is crucial to 
allow the actors of collaboration to be both providers and 
consumers of different types of knowledge and services. By 
putting our prior attention to this requirement, our approach 
is designed as services-oriented. Indeed, we promote the 
initiator’s role taking and, more generally, the stakeholders’ 
empowerment by supporting the initiative taking. The main 
roles engaged in the collaborative decision constructing are: 
the initiator, the facilitator, the domain expert. 
• 
Ontological modeling for the unique solution 
In our general model, we do not particularly address the 
problems of formalization, maintenance and optimization of 
the related ontologies. Currently, this aspect is set to be 
issued in the implementation level, according to the 
concrete use case. 
• 
Private and public data for open environments 
The dilemma on the balance between private and public 
data in open environments (social networks, clouds, etc.) 
has recently been in the centre of research and practical 
interest. Without primarily focusing on this problem in the 
context of our model, we however offer a solution of 
balance between public and private data thanks to the roles 
of actors of decision constructing. It means that the access 
to data is defined in the scope of different roles, and the 
coherence and non-contradiction of the exchanged and 
created knowledge are maintained with the help of 
ontologies related to the process of decision constructing. A 
more profound study of this risk and its reducing are also 
one of our research perspectives. 
• 
Limitations of a chosen collaboration model  
It is obvious that it is not possible to completely 
overcome all the limitations of any collaboration models. In 
our research, we show that its level of acceptance could be 
increased thanks to the following reasons: (i) it is based on 
services aiming to dynamically take into consideration the 
changing environment; (ii) the knowledge bases are 
described by ontologies that allow integrating the results of 
the usage of the model; (iii) the model aims at supporting 
existing collaboration processes, but not to force new 
working practices and ways of collaboration. Improving the 
model also constitutes a perspective of this research, 
including implementing techniques for evaluating idea 
effectiveness and traceability of innovative ideas. 
• 
Paradoxes of innovation in collaboration 
The complexity of the paradoxes between innovation 
and collaboration leaves a vast field for research, which are 
our ongoing and future work. More precisely, we focus on 
the approach for self-motivation of actors taking part in 
collaboration, as well as developing a framework for 
organizing, disseminating and capitalizing repositories and 
knowledge bases related to decision constructing. 
V. 
CROSS-POLLINATION SPACE 
The cross-pollination space (CPS) is a platform for 
enabling the creation of new domain services. CPS 
represents a collaborative space that brings together experts 
and non professional users from different domains working 
together on the co-creation process. As the result, it 
supports a group of participants in their collaborative 
decision-making and guides them in constructing the future, 
by conceptually creating innovative services. 
CPS is thus an intermediate tool that allows a group of 
various participants to conceptualise, share and explicit 
ideas that will be used for creating new services, as well as 
to contribute to the development of the ontology-enabled 
knowledge base by capitalising the mutual understanding of 
the knowledge expressed and shared by participants in the 
process of CPS functioning.  
A. 
CPS Boundary model 
While developing the CPS framework [28], a particular 
attention is given to identifying roles of CPS participants 
and the main boundaries of CPS (cf. Figure 3). 
Schematically, CPS is based on three main components: (i) 
end-user services; (ii) data; and (iii) administration services.  
 
Figure 3.  CPS boundary model 
End-user services include but are not limited to account 
and group management, target launch, processing and 
management, social networking, CPS animation and 
documents management.  
The main use cases identified in the boundary model 
allow us to identify services that the CPS has to provide to 
the end-users: (i) CPS user; (ii) group participant; (iii) 
6
COLLA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-143-4

group animator; (iv) ontology administrator; and (v) system 
administrator.  
The CPS user (guest) is the most general type of a CPS 
actor, has access to discussed topics and public shared 
documents, and creates a new theme for discussion (group). 
The group participant is a CPS user, who is a member of 
one or many groups, takes part in CPS discussions, offers a 
target, joins a group, invites another participant to join the 
group, votes, etc. The group animator (self-declared or 
chosen by a group) is a CPS group participant who 
facilitates the process of CPS decision constructing within a 
group: s/he synthesizes the discussed problems/solutions, 
moderates the process of discussion, and initiates events: to 
vote, to sum up, to open deeper discussion, etc. The 
ontology administrator manages the ontologies, their 
concepts and relationships involved into CPS functioning. 
The system administrator manages different technical 
aspects of the CPS platform: accounts, CPS-produced 
documents, technical issues of the CPS platform, etc.  
The data related to CPS consist of two main knowledge 
bases: (i) operations repository that comprises the data 
concerning the information on current CPS operations (e.g., 
user profiles, history of negotiation, group description, 
etc.); and (ii) ontologies repository that contains formally 
represented concepts and ontologies related to the discussed 
target(s). The knowledge bases and data are supported by 
administration 
services 
that 
allow 
the 
ontology 
administrator to maintain both the ontologies and 
operations repositories. 
B. Usage scenario: constructing CPS for the system of 
Long-life exploration  
In order to demonstrate how our approach can be 
applicable for practical issues, we chose an example of 
creating a CPS platform that enables the collaborative 
decision-constructing around Long-life exploration.  
First, we note that the notion of Long-life exploration 
origins in traditional e-Learning. However, it will be a 
mistake to envisage it as only an extended e-Learning from 
a “provider-consumer” point of view. Long-life exploration 
represents a complex dynamic process which actors are 
involved in collaborative processes of discovering, sharing, 
acquiring new knowledge without any division on teachers 
and students, on knowledge producers and consumers. In 
this case, we de not divide the exploration process on units, 
but insist on the exploration environment that gives the 
necessary tools for knowledge discovery and motivates 
collaboration in decision constructing.  
In this case, the CPS platform can largely facilitate the 
construction of a system, which supports Long-life 
exploration, but is not this system itself. CPS offers an 
environment for multiple actors that would like to 
participate in dynamic defining Long-life exploration 
scenarios, but is not limited for only this concrete purpose 
and context.     
For example, a collaborative decision construction 
usage scenario can be drawn in the context of decision 
constructing around the idea to allow a university “student” 
(or an actor in terms of Long-life exploration) to gather on 
his/her own platform space a personalized toolset made of 
direct access to his/her exam results, to various news feeds, 
to the library catalog search tool, to his/her social network 
pages and to video lectures by example. For such a decision 
constructing, the stakeholders are: students, teachers, 
librarians, administrative staff, jurists, IT division staff. As 
knowledge bases, there are the university laws/regulations 
and platform exchange protocols among others. 
However, by simply launching a collaborative platform 
and defining these roles, we often support the “producer-
consumer” model: e.g., a student “consumes” the “know-
what” knowledge “produced” by a teacher; a librarian 
“consumes” the “know-how” knowledge on disseminating 
academic literature, which was “produced” (i.e., formalized 
by internal rules) by a rector and other decision-makers. As 
a result, different users have the possibility only to make the 
decision, but not to take part in its constructing. A 
collaborative platform itself only supports the existing way 
of collaboration between stakeholders, but does not provide 
the environment for its dynamic development. 
In contrast to this, our approach envisages the 
“knowledge creation and dissemination” vision. The actors 
are seen not as producers and consumers, but as partners 
who participate in exploring, discovering and creation of 
new knowledge, in exchange that leads to sharing and 
constructing new knowledge during the process of their 
collaboration. It means, for example, that students are 
participating in defining the scope of their courses, 
librarians are introducing their current practices to be 
capitalized as “know-how” knowledge of the establishment 
and the corresponding knowledge bases are updated as the 
result of such collaboration. 
Obviously, a tradition notion of e-Learning is replaced 
by the approach for Long-life exploration for all actors of 
such a decision-constructing process. The CPS platform 
thus is designed not only for facilitating the exchange, but 
mostly as an environment that creates the necessary 
conditions for creativity in this exchange and assists the 
decision-constructing process. 
Let us consider this example scenario from the point of 
view of practical implementation. In this scenario, a group 
of the IT division staff launches an initiative proposing a 
CPS platform building for Long-life exploration. It is a 
direct proposition for action. Then, different stakeholders 
join the initiative. They define the initiative objects, extract 
its main concepts and identify a set of shared concepts. It 
follows then with active debates with proposals/counter-
proposals, questions/answers, arguments/counter-arguments 
which requires discussion and validation. When participants 
feel they are ready to vote, the initiative validation is put to 
vote. Once the decision is positively validated (and it is 
already updated by various knowledge from multiple 
stakeholders that was acquired during such decision 
constructing), the specification activities of a new system 
around Long-life exploration can start. 
7
COLLA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-143-4

VI. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we discussed the issue of collaborative 
decision constructing in the context of the services society 
and defined some risks and challenges it faces today. In 
order to answer these challenges, we introduced our 
approach for supporting collaborative decision constructing 
and described the collaborative platform for facilitating this 
process: the cross-pollination space (CPS). We furthermore 
showed how CPS allowed overcoming certain risks and 
defined the axes for our future research. 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. Adamczyk, K. Hamilton, M. Twidale, and B. Bailey.  “Tools in 
support of creative collaboration”, Proc. 6th ACM SIGCHI 
conference on Creativity & Cognition, (Washington DC, USA, June 
13-15, 2007). pp.273 – 274. 
[2] M. Ahonen, M. Antikainen, and M. Mäkipää, “Supporting 
Collective Creativity within Open Innovation”. Proc. EURAM 
Conference. (Paris, France, May 16-19, 2007), accessed online. 
[3] C. Argyris, “Actionable knowledge: Design causality in the service 
of consequential theory”. Applied behavioral science, 1996, vol. 32, 
no 4 (114 p.), pp. 390-406 
[4] B. Bergvall-Kareborn, M. Hoist, and A. Stahlbrost, “Concept Design 
with a Living Lab Approach”. Proc. HICSS '09, (Waikoloa Village, 
Hawaii, January 5-8, 2009), pp. 1–10 
[5] T. Berners-Lee, “Putting Government Data Online”. Available at 
http://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/GovData, last accessed 19/10/2010 
[6] R. Briggs, G. Kolfschoten, G.-J. de Vreede, C. Albrecht, D. Dean, 
and S. Lukosch, “A Seven-Layer Model of Collaboration: Separation 
of Concerns for Designers of Collaboration Systems”. Proc. ICIS 
2009 (Phoenix, Arizona, USA, December 15-18, 2009), accessed 
online.  
[7] P. Brna, “Models of Collaboration”. Proc. Workshop on Informatics 
in Education, XVIII Congresso Nacional da Sociedade Brasileira de 
Computação Rumoa Sociedade do Conhecimento, (Belo Horizone, 
Brazil, August 3-7, 1998), accessed online. 
[8] K. Church, and R. Smith, “An Ontology-Based Enterprise Model for 
Managerial Planning and Control”. Proc. REA-25 (Newark, 
Delaware, USA, June 13-15, 2007), accessed online. 
[9] J. Clippinger, L. Garrison, D. Attwood, and H. Ward, “Is it Possible 
to Share and Protect Sensitive Information?” In: video Proc. Gov 2.0 
summit (Washington, DC, USA, Sept 7-8, 2010), accessed online. 
[10] H. Demirkan, R. Kauffman, J. Vayghan, H. Fill, D. Karagiannis, and 
P. 
Maglio, 
“Service-oriented 
technology 
and 
management: 
Perspectives on research and practice for the coming decade”. 
Electronic Commerce Research and Applications 7(4): pp. 356-376, 
2008  
[11] R. Guha, R. Kumar, P. Raghavan, and A. Tomkins, “Propagation of 
trust and distrust”. Proc.13th International conference on World 
Wide Web, (New York City, NY, USA, May 17-22, 2004), accessed 
online. 
[12] C. Harrison, “Enabling ICT Adoption in Developing Knowledge 
Societies”. Education and the Knowledge Society, Springer Boston, 
DOI 10.1007/b100734, 2005, accessed online 10/12/2009 
[13] D. Hensler, and F. Huq, “Value creation: knowledge flow, direction, 
and adaptation”. Intl Journal of Learning and Intellectual Capital 
2005 - Vol. 2, No.3  pp. 278 – 287 
[14] I.L. Janis, “Victims of groupthink”. Boston, Houghton Mifflin, 
accessed online. 
[15] N. Maiden, “Acquiring requirements: a domain-specific approach”. 
Domain Knowledge for Interactive System Design, Chapman & Hall 
for IFIP, 1996, pp. 90-101  
[16] B. Makni, K. Khelif, R. Dieng-Kuntz, and H. Cherfi, “Semi-
automatic Creation of an Ontology and of Semantic Annotations 
from a Discussion Forum of a Community of Practice”. Proc. 
EKAW 2008, (Acitrezza, Catania, Italy, 29 Sept-3 Oct 2008), 
accessed online. 
[17] P. Metaxas, “Using Propagation of Distrust to Find Untrustworthy 
Web Neighborhoods”. Proc. ICIW '09 (Venice/Mestre, Italy, May 
24-28, 2009), pp. 516 - 521 
[18] MIT Center for Collective Intelligence. 2010. Handbook of 
Collective 
Intelligence, 
available 
online 
at  
http://scripts.mit.edu/~cci/HCI/index.php?title=What_is_collective_
intelligence%3F last accessed 07/06/2010 
[19] I. Nonaka, R. Toyama, and N. Konno, “SECI, Ba and Leadership: a 
Unified Model of Dynamic Knowledge Creation”. Long Range 
Planning, vol. 33, pp. 5-34  
[20] J. Prophet, and M. d'Inverno, “Creative conflict in interdisciplinary 
collaboration: interpretation, scale and emergence”. Edmonds, 
Ernest and Gibson, Ross, (eds.) Interaction: systems, theory and 
practice. Creativity and Cognition Studios, pp. 251-270. 
[21] P. Rittgen, “Collaborative Business and Information Systems 
Design”, Intl Journal of eCollaboration, 5(4), 2009, pp. 1-15  
[22] J. Spohrer, P. Maglio, J. Bailey, and D. Gruhl, “Steps Toward a 
Science of Service Systems”, IBM Almaden Research Center, IEEE 
Computer 40(1): pp. 71-77 (2007)  
[23] A. Sheth, C. Ramakrishnan, and C. Thomas, “Semantics for the 
Semantic Web: The Implicit, the Formal and the Powerful”. Intl 
Journal on Semantic Web & Information Systems, 1(1), 1-18, Jan-
March 2005, accessed online. 
[24] N. Vitalari, “Collaborative platforms and open data as keys to the 
new public-private ecosystem”. Wikinomics, september 2009, 
accessed online. 
[25] T. Ward, S. Smith, and R. Finke, “Creative cognition”. R. Sternberg 
(Ed.) Handbook of Creativity, New York: NY, Cambridge 
University Press, 1999, accessed online. 
[26] B. Wu, and B. Davison, “Detecting semantic cloaking on the web”. 
Proc. 15th WWW (Edinburgh, Scotland, UK, May 23-26, 2006). pp. 
819-828, 2006. 
[27] A. Yurchyshyna and A. Zarli,. “An Ontology-based Approach for 
Formalisation 
and 
Semantic 
Organisation 
of 
Conformance 
Requirements in Construction”. Automation in Construction, 
Volume 18, Issue 8, December 2009, pp. 1084-1098 
[28] A. Yurchyshyna, and W. Opprecht, “Towards an Ontology-based 
Approach for Creating Sustainable Services”. Proc. IESS 1.0, vol. 
53 (2010), pp. 136-149, 17-19 February 2010, Geneva, Switzerland
 
8
COLLA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-143-4

