Time, Occurence and Switching 
Appropriation of two tools in collaborative design  
Point of view of aspectualization
 
Samia Ben Rajeb 
Shima Shirkhodaei 
Pierre Leclercq 
 
Université Libre de Bruxelles 
University of Liege  
University of Liege 
 
Brussels, Belgium 
Liege, Belgium 
Liege, Belgium 
 email: samia.ben.rajeb@ulb.ac.be 
shima.shirkhodaei@ulg.ac.be  
pierre.leclercq@ulg.ac.be 
 
 
Abstract— This article focuses on the modes of implementation 
of an innovative device, associating two tools to instrument 
distant and synchronic collaborative design. The paper 
presents results about the modes of implementation of an 
innovative device, which combines two tools, in order to 
instrument distant and synchronous collaborative design. On 
account of the fact that these tools differ essentially in terms of 
immersive and non-immersive work space, this research 
focuses initially on modes of switching, which are used in an 
immersive work space to a non-immersive work space. Our 
work questions the appropriation of the two tools by users, 
relying on looks, designs, but also the collective operations 
involved in the design process. 
 
Keywords- 
computer 
supported 
cooperative 
work; 
methodology of multi-modal user interfaces analysis; semiotics; 
cognitive ergonomics; case study of collaborative synchronic 
design platforms. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The rapid evolution of operating technologies in the field 
of collaborative design raises not only the question of the 
singular use of each tool, but also the influence of their 
association in this activity and during the action. In this 
context, we present here an analysis of the modes of 
appropriation of an innovative device, associating two tools 
to instrument distant and synchronic collaborative design : 
the Hybrid Ideation Space (HIS), developed at the 
Hybridlab, a laboratory of University of Montreal [1][2], and 
the Sketch Sharing system (SketSha), developed at LUCID, 
a laboratory of University of Liege [3][4]. Both are based on 
the notation of graphic artifacts in real time. One (HIS) 
allows immersion in the interior of a virtual representation of 
a conceived space, the other (SketSha) makes it possible to 
share and act on 2D documents. In the experiment, these two 
tools were associated to allow two groups of student 
designers from University de Liege and School of 
Architecture of Nancy to collaborate, under the direction of 
the HybridLab team. Two questions emerge from this 
original experimental situation: the first concerns the 
singular implementation of each tool and the second 
concerns the degree of programmatic compatibility in the use 
of a device, which integrates various tools for exchange and 
synchronic collaboration. To answer these questions, Section 
II first describes the experimental protocol implemented in 
the simultaneous usage of these two tools. In Sections III and 
IV, we present the methodology of data analysis based on the 
notion 
of 
aspectuality 
(punctual, 
iterative, 
durative, 
inchoative and terminative), well known in the field of 
Greimasian Semiotics. This notion guides us to the definition 
of determining categories to explain the switching from one 
tool to the other during the collaborative activity.  
Our approach focuses on the methodological aspect to 
enable the analysis of complex collective activities involving 
new technologies. This is why our state of art only concerns 
the methods and shows why we have resorted to aspectuality 
to address this kind of problem (see Section III). 
Based on quantitative and qualitative analyses, Section V 
will show that the degree of familiarization of users with the 
new technologies is a determining factor to characterize the 
issues and the limits of this superposition of tools. Finally, 
we will also detail to what extent these two complementary 
devices can be articulated in order to support preliminary 
phases of architectural design. 
II. 
 FRAMEWORK AND RESEARCH QUESTIONS 
This research is part of collaboration between the LUCID 
laboratory at the University of Liège and Hybridlab at the 
University of Montreal. Both HIS and SketSha devices, 
developed in in the universities of Liege (Belgium) and 
Montreal (Canada), were enabled to instrument collaborative 
design. 
SketSha software enables real-time sharing of drawings 
and annotations, via a digital tablet horizontally placed in 
front of the designer, drawn by using an electronic pen 
during a remote meeting. Images, PDF, DXF drawings or 
other documents can be imported and made available to all 
partners of the project. These documents are shared on the 
basis of a stack of semi-transparent tracing paper that users 
can annotate, store, superimpose or manipulate in real time.  
HIS is a device based on an immersive system for 
placing 
various 
remote 
users 
within 
their 
graphic 
representation, their sketched freehand drawings and three- 
dimensional models "on which they interact by manual and 
digital actions". This complex device mainly consists of two 
parts: (1) a digital tablet placed horizontally showing a 2D 
image of the project. The image is chosen by the designer 
and depicts the localization of the project intervention. This 
image allows drawing and annotation via an electronic pen; 
(2) a piece of canvas that is hung vertically to close the work 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-575-3
COLLA 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

space in which the designers act. The same image that is pre-
treated to provide users with a 360 ° view of the inside the 
project can be projected on its surface. This projection helps 
designers immerse themselves in real time in their sketches 
while drawings appear on the tablet in front of them.  
An experiment involving these two devices to design a 
project was set up. Two groups of designer (students of 
University of Liege and the School of Architecture of 
Nancy), who were geographically distant, worked for about 
3 hours. The synchronous use of HIS and SketSha at this 
collaborative meeting involved two virtual work spaces that 
share a resembling feature, namely the sharing of graphic 
documents in real time on the digital table between the users 
taking part in the meeting from two geographically distant 
offices. However, these two devices are distinguished by the 
HIS-device’s immersive dimension. Therefore, our first 
research question relates to the activity of actors in each 
work space called (Work HIS and Work SketSha). 
Thus, we will study the "duration" and "occurrence" of 
the two main activities of actors were studied, namely 
designing and being able to look in both work spaces. Our 
second research question concerns the modes of switching 
from one work space to another. Our hypothesis is based on 
the existence of two types of switching used by the actors: 
(1) switching between Work HIS and Work SketSha, (2) 
switching between 2D and 3D.  
It should be noted that although the HIS requires physical 
precedence of some immersive space throughout the 
meeting, the mode of the presence of the immersive space 
for the meeting depended primarily on the activities of users 
and how they made this immersive space (from 2D to 3D) 
real. On the other hand, it was necessary to compare these 
remarks with collective operations involved in this 
collaborative architectural design. This parallelism enabled 
us to notice the specific particularity of time used for each 
tool during a collaborative session. Once we determined the 
decisive moments of the two types of switching, we noticed 
the specificity of these changeovers and then analyzed them 
from the point of view of the aspectualization defined in the 
field of linguistics and semiotics.  
III. 
METHODOLOGICAL POSITION 
The question that we pose is: how can the ideas related to 
the notion of aspectuality help us describe the complex 
collective activities and enable us to specify the methods of 
changing from one immersive work space to another work 
space? In fact, other scientific fields have taken an interest in 
the analysis of collective activities. For example, in 
sociology, the question has been asked in terms of the 
organization of actors’ roles in a team [5], or in terms of 
recognition, personal satisfaction and confidence among the 
different members of a team [6]. In cognitive ergonomics, 
the questions are centered on the interactions between 
partners, on the synchronization of the collective activity of 
design and on the cognitive aspects [7]. When the activities 
involve new technologies, one finds oneself in the scientific 
fields of CSCW (computer supported cooperative work). 
Moreover there are different points of view to analyze this 
kind of complex activity [8][9][10] : 
1) The point of view of the physical aspects of the work: 
this point of view is only interested in the ergonomic and 
physical aspect of the space in which the designer works. We 
speak of the physical space with its acoustic and thermal 
properties, gestuality, movements, postures, etc. 
2) The point of view of the affect is concerned with the 
psychological or emotional aspects of the designers. This 
aspect measures the subjective feelings of the designers in 
relation to their surroundings and their collaborator. Thus, it 
deals with hierarchical relations and feelings of confidence 
that unite the different members of a team ; 
 3) The cognitive point of view looks at the cognitive 
aspects of the design process that are linked to the situation, 
the actors and the subject in question. In this case, the 
conscience of the group, the intermediary objects and the 
shared reference are parameters to be considered to study 
these situations ;  
4) The organizational point of view’s objective is to 
define the modalities of assistance to the situations of group 
work or to help inmanaging group-design documents. 
Our paper proposes another point of view which tackles 
the collaborative design activity involving new technologies: 
semiotics. The reference to the notion of aspectuality in 
linguistics and in Greimasian semiotics [11][12] helps us to 
address the question of the appropriation of the two tools 
SketSha and HIS, considering time, occurrence and 
switching. The definition of Holt 13], p. 6, is one of the first 
attempts to define aspect. According to Holt, aspect concerns 
"different ways of conceiving the flow of process". The 
nucleus of this definition remains unchanged. The notion of 
aspect is currently used in linguistics as a grammatical 
category that expresses the subject representation of a 
process denoted by a verb [14] p. 53. Thus, a verb, an 
adjective or a noun can be analyzed in terms of 
aspectualization. For example negotiation or decision-
making are aspectualized substantives, insofar as the first is 
considered as an unfinished act and the second as an act 
already completed. For Bertrand [15], "aspect modulates the 
semantic content of the predicate, whether it is in past, 
present or future". Via this notion of aspectuality it is 
possible, for example, to address the issue of the progress of 
a process otherwise than by time. For example, if the aspect 
is taken in terms of time, it is called "punctual" or "durative". 
The aspect can be described as "terminative" when it is 
approached from the point of view of its completion and 
"inchoate" when it is intended to be the beginning. Here, the 
process is not only related to time but also concerning the 
state of its switching (see Section V Results).  
This specification in the synchronous use of two tools, 
supporting collaborative design in an architectural design 
project, led to the issue of proportion via the aspectuality 
relative to time, occurrence and switching.  
Our methodology is therefore based on this concept of 
aspectuality with the aim of analyzing quantitatively and 
qualitatively complementary data from this experiment. A 
coding scheme was defined for the transcription of a user's 
activities before the semiotic analysis of the processed data.  
In concrete terms, it is a matter of leaning of the three 
fundamental to elements of aspectuality (time, occurrence, 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-575-3
COLLA 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

and switching) to analyze the method of appropriation of the 
system and to evaluate more precisely the stakes, the limits 
and the perspectives of each single modality (“drawing” and 
“looking”) and complex (“collective operations of design) 
during the use of these two tools. Thus an adjustment 
practice was put forward including speech, drawings and 
looks. The manners in which the two tools were specified 
have been appropriated by the different participants / 
designers. 
Before going directly to the presentation of the results, 
we propose to clarify the context and the protocol of this 
experiment. Protocol description: the technical device and 
information processing of experiment. Our protocol is part of 
a framework defined by different factors: diversity of 
participants in the experiment, problematic addressed during 
the design exercise and graphical elements, which were 
available and shared between the actors.  
IV. 
PROTOCOL DESCRIPTION: THE TECHNICAL DEVICE 
AND INFORMATION PROCESSING OF EXPERIMENT 
Our protocol was part of a framework defined by 
different factors: the diversity of the participants in the 
experiment, the problematic addressed during the design 
exercise and graphical elements, which were available to and 
shared between the actors.  
A. User List (A1, A2, A3, B1, B2, B3, B4, C) 
and problematic addressed 
Three user groups participated in the collaborative 
session that was analyzed. In Liege, an architecture teacher 
and two students enrolled in Master Engineer Architecture 
took part in the project (A1, A2, and A3). In Metz, an 
architecture teacher, a Psycho-Ergo teacher and two Master 
students of Architecture from Nancy were connected (B1, 
B2, B3, B4). The third group, namely the observer team and 
moderator of the session, communicated from Montreal and 
represented the client for the project (C). The presence of 
this group was reassuring from the perspective between the 
organization of the experiment. An incident caused by a 
problem of incompatibility between two versions of Skype 
delayed the launch of the session because of the lack of 
sound. The fast and effective intervention of the third group 
succeeded in solving the problem (SketSha was able to 
communicate by graphic tracks to explain the dysfunction of 
the sound). All groups shared real-time graphical annotations 
and exchanged information orally via videoconference.  
The problem set for the two teams consisted of 
reorganizing an existing library. The participants were 
invited to think about possible and future uses of the existing 
spaces of the library in order to suggest a reorganization 
better adapted to contemporary uses and new TIC 
technologies. They spontaneously focused on a windowed 
space at the back of the library that offers a view of the 
surrounding wooded landscape.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Context of experiment 
B. Graphical elements shared on the HIS and SketSha 
Students' work focuses on graphical documents existing 
on SketSha and pictures taken inside the library and prepared 
to be displayed on the HIS. On SketSha, 3 documents were 
shared: (1) a floor plan of the existing building with 
furniture; (2) a floor plan of the existing building without 
furniture; (3) a view of the property and the insertion of 
building onto the site. On HIS, different views in human 
scale were projected in the immersive, manipulated, and 
annotated space (see Figure 1).  
C. Data processing and coding scheme 
• 
SketSha Replay, software designed and developed 
by LUCID to code a recorded video from a 
collaborative session according to exclusive criteria. 
In our case, these criteria were defined according to 
the three activities (draw, watch, and work together") 
with the aim of identifying the actions of users in 
both immersive and non-immersive workspaces. 
• 
List of criteria for coding, criteria that were selected 
emerged from two types of categories: simple and 
complex. The first took into account the individual 
intervention of users in the shared graphic space; the 
second was derived from the collective activity of 
each of these two groups.  
D. Sequencing coding 
Two types of sequencing coding were used that 
correspond to 1) sequencing at different times that made up 
the design process (Sequences 1-5); 2) sequencing according 
to the used tool (Work HIS, SketSha Work, Logistics or 
Bug).  
E. Sequencing of process 
• 
Seq. 1 – the request: the business analyst (c) exposed 
here his (her) request and all the other actors 
attempted to understand the objective aimed at by 
this new project; 
• 
Seq.2 – the state of affairs: different teams 
exchanged several images of the existing library to 
understand how the current spaces were experienced 
and perceived; 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-575-3
COLLA 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

• 
Seq.3 – the challenge of the existing library: after 
several discussions, two teams of designers decided 
to increase the space dedicated to reading, 
considering that this was the first priority for the 
development of the future library; 
• 
Seq.4 – ICT adapted to the library: designers tried to 
incorporate new technologies that would be more 
appropriate for the future library; 
• 
Seq.5 – challenging: the designers brought all 
current library programs into question and tried to 
answer this question: "What function to give to 
future library "? 
F.  Sequencing according to the used tool 
This coding was done according to the work spaces used 
by actors during the process. We followed verbalization and 
the intention expressed by actors as they were asked 
explicitly to change the work space to validate a point of 
view. (Ex. "Can we switch to the HIS"). We proposed this 
coding for the entire duration of the collaborative meeting 
with the aim of realizing all switching from one tool to 
another during the experiment, and this was perfectly 
consistent with the initial objectives. 
• 
 "HIS" work space: Here, actors used the HIS device 
(by drawing in 2D on the digital tablet placed in 
front of them and by looking at their interventions 
projected on the canvas with 3D printing) for the 
synchronous sharing of documents, discussion and 
evaluation of their proposals.  
• 
"SkeSha" work space: Here, the actors used SketSha 
software (by drawing in 2D on the digital tablet 
placed in front of them) during the meeting.  
• 
"Logistics": All the moments when the actors 
communicated to adjust logistic problems were 
coded as moments that belong to the logistics. 
• 
"Bug": It is about technical and computing problems, 
which caused the interruption of the exchanges in 
communication between the actors. 
G. Selecting a sequence (Targeted Coding) 
To collect our quantitative data, we opted at first for 
coding that targeted a particular segment: that of the third 
sequence of collaborative activity between users. This 
segment, which lasted approximately 10 minutes had the 
characteristics to mark several switches between the two 
devices. To ensure the accuracy of the coding of this 
sequence and thereby reduce the errors of interpretation, we 
included in this segment the end of the sequence, which 
preceded it and the end of the one which followed it. Thus, 
on the temporal axis of the observed meeting, the segment 
handled according to our coding scheme starts at 0:52:10 and 
ends at 01:12 00. Nevertheless, in this paper only the data 
relating to the sequence 3 (from 0:52:10 to 1:12:00) were 
quantitatively analyzed to prevent interruption of the special 
results of switching made during this sequence.  
H. Simple Category: drawing and watching 
Drawing. This category involves three criteria: 
• 
Drawing SketSha: actors draw on SketSha.  
• 
Drawing HIS: either actors draw on the tablet (2D) 
or they draw on the immersive space (canvas gives a 
3D effect). 
• 
 Not drawing: the players do not draw. 
Looking. This category involves six criteria: 
• 
Looking SketSha: actors look at and follow the 
documents on SketSha.  
• 
Looking HIS 2D: actors look at documents on HIS 
2D.  
• 
Looking HIS 3D: actors look at the documents on 
the HIS in the immersive space.  
• 
Looking Visio: the actors make contact with their 
partners 
in 
inter-teams 
by 
looking 
at 
the 
videoconference.  
• 
Looking at the other in situ: actors see their partners 
in the same team.  
• 
Unidentified looking: looks are not identified (e.g., 
out of sight for observer). 
 
Figure 2.  Timeline of Operation – All sequences – All actors 
I. Category complex: collective operations of design 
Processing of this category is to detect the different 
operations carried out by each of the actors working together. 
To do this, the analyses were based on the plots and words 
exchanged between the designers (see Figure 2). We have 
identified nine types of action [16]: 
• 
Listening: this operation involves taking information 
from a program or other participants.  
• 
Informing / sharing: This operation enables the 
designer to inform others and / or share their 
references, details of program or context.  
• 
Declaring intentions or choices / raising a question: 
for this, the designer suggests and / or declares a new 
intention or question without trying to represent or to 
formalize it.  
• 
Taking action on a subject: by this action, the 
designer formalizes his/her intention or ideas by 
graphic representation.  
• 
Discussing / evaluating / questioning: this operation 
is reflected in the fact that an actor checks and/or 
discusses the proposals of another.  
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-575-3
COLLA 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

• 
Validating/ collective decision-making: it is to 
confirm or exclude an entire proposal related to the 
designed object.  
• 
Isolating: This process occurs when a group is 
isolated from the other group, either by choice or by 
the bugs, and cuts the Internet.  
• 
Coordinating / constructing the strategies of group: 
for this operation, the group is organized and / or 
sets up the meeting and / or tasks in order to work 
together, to validate group work strategies and / or to 
resolve disagreements between designers.  
• 
Intent break: this operation is involved when one 
actor interrupts the discussion to say something, for 
example, to tell a joke. 
V. 
RESULTS 
The results presented in this paper only relate to the 
sequence 3 (increasing the space dedicated to reading), 
which was divided into sub-sequences considering the work 
space used, with the aim to observe more precisely and 
separately the appropriation of each tool (SketSha / HIS), 
and also to observe the changeover from one to another (1 
SketSha / 2 HIS / SketSha 3). We relied on an index 
according to the verbalization in order to divide this sub-
division into two moments of switching; A2: "could we 
switch to HIS?" B1: "Could we shift to SketSha?" (see 
Figure 3).  
 
Figure 3.  Progress of design according sequencing  
Each Each of these sub-sequences was analyzed by using 
the proposed categories ("looking", "drawing" and "working 
together") with respect to the concept of "aspectuality." This 
concept allows a more accurate assessment of the issues, 
limitations and perspectives of each mode during the use of 
these two tools. 
The time enables the measurement of duration of the act 
of looking, drawing and working together for each actor in 
his/her workspace. For example, depending on the relative 
length of the action, we distinguish two categories. The first 
is called “Punctual” when the designers decide to go from 
one tool to another. The second is related to actions that last 
such as when the designers discuss a problem related to the 
project being designed. This action is thus called “Durative”. 
The occurrence allows us to measure how often an action 
took place during the design process. In reference to 
semiotics, if an action is repeated (in relation to another) in a 
rhythmic manner and more or less orderly in a specific 
workspace (Sketsha or HIS), the aspectuality of this action is 
qualified as “Repetitive”. For example, if each time an actor 
draws on the Sketsha tablet, the other actors look at the HIS 
canvas, there is repetition. If this repetition does not seem to 
correspond to a rule or logic, it will be qualified as being 
“iterative”. For example, it is not systematic if an actor picks 
up his pen and draws to discuss an idea or to suggest a 
solution. 
There were also cases in which the action happens only 
once in a specific workspace. This occurrence that denotes 
"single" seems significant because it can highlight the 
manner that a user, with regard to the tools, can appropriate 
his/ her work environment. 
Finally, switching enabled the analysis of the data 
qualitatively according to the time of passage from one 
workspace to another (SketSha > HIS / HIS > SketSha). 
With reference to semiotics, aspectuality of the action is 
described as "Inchoate" if the action is at the beginning of a 
workspace. But, the action is called "Terminative" if it takes 
place around the end of the workspace.  
So, we rely on the three elements (time, occurrence and 
switching) to analyze the mode of appropriation of these 
tools. 
A. Appropriation of "duplicate" and "distinctive" practices 
according to the time and occurrence  
 In this part, we distinguish duplicate practices from 
distinctive practices in the concept of appropriation. 
According to a common functionality permitted by SketSha 
as well as by HIS (synchronous sharing and remote graphical 
annotations via a tablet), actors can work together by passing 
from a 2D representation to an immersive representation in 
order to collectively design the architectural project. 
The duplicate practice corresponds to the use of this 
common functionality between two tools. But, the distinctive 
practice is the use of an additional functionality. For 
example, the HIS also allows the use of immersive space via 
the 360° projector on the canvas surrounding the actors. But 
this immersion function is not permitted via Sketsha.  
The appropriation of the use of a device combining these 
two systems presupposes an adjustive practice, which is 
halfway between duplicate practice and distinctive practice. 
To better understand the implications of this adjustive 
practice, our concern extends to the drawings, looks and 
words, as well as to collective operations involved in the 
context of architectural design activity. It must be 
remembered that in this experiment the actors are all invited 
to design a futuristic library where the need of improvement 
and increase of space is raised.  
B. Word exchanging, drawing and looking 
Since there is only one pen for each team, actors in the 
same team cannot draw at the same time on the same 
workspace. However, the partner who does not have a pen 
can "show" items on the shared tablet, he/she can "look" and 
comment on the projected images on immersive space and 
can "discuss" with all the others. As the action of "drawing" 
can be combined with other actions such as "looking", 
"showing" and "discussing", it cannot be involved except (1) 
in the HIS work space, (2) in the Sketsha work space. The 
actors can never draw simultaneously in both HIS and 
Sketsha workspaces. From the perspective of occurrence, the 
act of drawing is considered single in a workspace. But it is 
important to note that throughout the process, the act of 
drawing in Sketsha (about 10 %) is double compared to that 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-575-3
COLLA 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

performed on the HIS (about 5 %). The rest (85%) of the 
actions, which are considered as "not drawing", 1/6 of the 
design process in this sequence is dedicated to words and 
discussions between participants that are not represented 
graphically. Nevertheless, it becomes iterative at the end of 
process because when more designers advance in their 
choices, the percentage that is dedicated to drawing increases 
too. 
From the point of view of time, drawing in a punctual 
manner corresponds to the plans' zoning. This enables actors 
to show zones that relate to the discussion about the project. 
By this action, they focus their discussions on shared 
graphics and make sure that all participants share the same 
"common ground" [17]. The act of drawing is durational 
when it comes to act on the subject or to discuss and evaluate 
potential opportunities and eventual choices for the project. 
By sharing this chart, they shape their discussions and 
synchronize cognitively the proposals of each other [18]. 
Therefore, drawing is done by punctual actions as well as by 
durative actions in both HIS and Sketsha workspaces. The 
punctual drawings play a demonstrative role while durative 
designs play an explanatory and / or argumentative role.  
On the other hand, in the sequence studied, an adjustive 
practice specific to words, drawing and looking drew our 
attention. Certainly, realization of ideas happens mainly 
through statement and discussion between the actors because 
the words are meaningful, insofar as they provide elements 
to specify how actors contribute to the progress of the 
collective design. However, by comparing the action of 
"speaking" with "drawing", considering the time, "drawing" 
becomes 
a 
punctual 
adjustive 
practice 
during 
the 
conversations in order to clarify and explain an idea. 
Furthermore, aspectuality of action (durative for speaking 
and punctual for drawing) could be significant when 
combined with the activity and the space in which it 
operates. Indeed, it is necessary to understand how the use of 
a functionality of a specific tool seems relevant or not at a 
specific time of collective design. The proof is the example 
of a designer who asked first to switch from SketSha to HIS 
(immersive space) because of a disagreement about the 
quality of light on shelves. This was then followed by a new 
switching when another designer requested to switch back to 
SketSha in order to graphically show a point that needed to 
be developed. 
"Looking" is considered as punctual action in some cases 
and durative in other ones. In both work spaces, watching 
videoconference and looking the other participants in situ are 
relatively punctual actions (considering the time) but also 
repetitive (considering the occurrence). In HIS, we found 
fewer 
effects 
of 
going 
back 
and 
forth 
between 
videoconferencing and the image projected on the canvas 
(3D) or the one that is produced on HIS 2D tablet.  
It seems that actors focus more on their annotations and 
graphical elements shared and produced on tablet rather than 
expressions of their remote partners in video conferencing or 
in immersive space. In occurrence, more than 3/4 of looks 
are directed to the workspace for the annotation in 2D. For 
example, "watching a videoconference" only makes 
participants sure about the presence of the other or about the 
interest of the others in conversation or the reactions of 
others to what has been proposed. In this case "looking at the 
other one who is in situ" is significant. The actors look at the 
others in a punctual manner (in time) but repetitive (in 
occurrence). " When I look at the other one, it puts my mind 
at rest and then I go back to my job," said one participant.  
Furthermore, the action of "looking" becomes durative 
when one of the designers acts on the subject by using the 
system of SketSha for annotation. In this case, all 
participants look continually in the direction of the tablet. 
Some also look at the picture projected on the canvas. 
However, when actors use only the HIS system, the one who 
is drawing looks rarely at the canvas (HIS 3D). He/she 
focuses mostly on the tablet (HIS 2D). At the same time, 
other users look only at the canvas on which the produced 
sketch is projected in 360 degrees. 
 "Looking at the immersive space" is involved in a 
punctual manner (when it comes to check punctually the 
validity of a choice of 2D in 3D space) and in a durative 
manner (when it comes to test a choice in 3D space). In 
terms of occurrence, this involvement is nevertheless 
iterative and non-repetitive as designers look at the 
immersive space according to their needs and the project's 
progress without any apparent or pre-decided logic. 
C. Specificity of collective design 
"Evaluating", "validating", "informing" and "declaring" 
appear to be punctually involved in the process, while other 
operations (such as "listening", "discussing" and "acting on 
the subject") are rather durative. Furthermore, it is important 
to note that the actors never tried to isolate themselves 
deliberately. Sometimes punctual and sometimes durative, 
this operation is more related to bugs caused by a network 
outage or disconnection of videoconferencing. However, 
almost all of these bugs were consistently tracked by re-
questioning (via the "discussing" operation). Sometimes, 
they caused conflict, which, according to the users, would 
not have existed if the communication had been continued. 
Indeed, the actor interrupted by a bug is obliged to re-state 
what has been said before, and this sometimes causes 
tensions between groups.  
"Isolating", "pausing" and "coordinating" operations are 
durative (considering the time) and iterative (considering the 
occurrence). They are involved here as part of the group's 
organization and work on several subjects for designing.  
"Informing" is a punctual action whose occurrence is 
single in the third division in workspace (3. SketSha) while it 
operates iteratively in the first two divisions (1. SketSha and 
2.HIS). This may be related to the project development and 
the mastery of problem by designers when the need for 
information sharing becomes less and less necessary but the 
action on the subject gains more importance at the end of 
process.  
"Acting on the subject" is not only a durative operation, 
but also iterative because it does not follow any rule and can 
occur several times during the discussion. 
 "Validating" is punctual and repetitive because it is 
preceded every time by a discussion.  
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-575-3
COLLA 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

"Discussing" is a durative operation (by time) and 
iterative (by occurrence). If the operation involves a 
disagreement, it usually induces the request for switching 
from a workspace to another. 
D. Appropriation relative to the time and the occurrence of 
the process 
Based on quantitative data from codings, we correlated, 
in entire process, the specificity of time and occurrence of 
three categories: "looking" (in Figure 4), "drawing" (in 
Figure 5) and "working together" (in Figure 6). These three 
schemes summarize the correlations for the whole process. 
This correlation can chart the actions and operations using 
both types of aspectuality; one relating to the time and the 
other to the occurrence. 
 
Figure 4.  Correlation time/occurrence for " looking " (%). 
 
Figure 5.  Correlation time/occurrence for " drawing " (%). 
Returning to the aspectuality of actions of each of the 
three sub- sequences in each workspace (see Appropriation 
of a "duplicate" and "distinctive" practice according to the 
time and occurrence) we deduced identical results.  
 
 
Figure 6.  Correlation time/occurrence 
for " Collective operation for design " (%). 
The parallelism between these results and those put 
forward by charts shows that the actors appropriately 
duplicate practice in the same way in HIS and SketSha. 
However, this parallelism is not easy concerning the 
distinctive practice. Indeed, we note that aspectuality is not 
the same from one workspace to another. If the actors refer 
in a punctual manner to the immersive space when they act 
in SketSha, they look for a long time at immersive space 
when switching their work to HIS.  
This contrast can be explained by the degree of 
conformity between the functions basically provided by each 
tool (during their development) and uses that designers make 
(after combination of two tools in this experiment). The 
actors seem to adopt an adjustive practice (a practice 
between duplicate and distinctive) that seems to be in 
accordance with the potential of the tool and the manner it is 
set up by the user. 
E. Appropriation of a collective practice of switching from 
one tool to another 
To better understand the modes of switching from one 
workspace to another, we refer to the aspectuality called 
inchoate or terminative in this context (see Figure 3).  
Qualitative analysis shows that the terminative aspect is 
related here to the discussion. In fact whenever there is: (1) 
Either a disagreement between actors about a proposal by 
one of them (2) Or uncertain understanding of participants 
about a new choice announced, designers suggest switching 
to another work space (from SketSha to HIS and HIS to 
SketSha). In this experimental context, the terminative 
element is imprecision and disagreement. As long as 
switching from HIS to SketSha is a way to check what was 
decided in the immersive space, actors have the opportunity 
to look at the same time at the canvas where annotations 
previously made in 3D by HIS are projected and at the tablet 
exposing documents and new annotations made on SketSha. 
Looking the other in situ!
(1.59, 9.13)!
Visio!
(4.11, 14.44)!
HIS 3D!
(7.86, 13.38)!
HIS 2D!
(13.08, 17.83)!
SketSha!
(30.07, 26.75)!
Iterative!
Ponctual!
 !
Durative!
 !
Duration (%)!
Occurrence  (%)!
OK!
Iterative!
Ponctual!
 !
Durative!
 !
Duration (%)!
Occurrence  (%)!
OK!
SketSha!
(9.71, 19.69)!
HIS!
(5.22, 22.05)!
Iterative!
Ponctual!
 !
Durative!
 !
Duration (%)!
Occurrence  (%)!
OK!
Validating 
(0.66, 3.29)!
Declaring 
(1.75, 5.26)!
Coordinating!
(4.16, 9.87)!
Tacking 
action on 
subject!
(5.25, 7.24)!
Intent break 
(5.31, 7.89) !
 !
Discussing!
(6.66, 7.24)!
 !
Listening!
(65.61, 42.76)!
 !
Isolating!
(9.21, 11.18) !
 !
Informing 
(1.39, 5,26)!
Validating
Informing
Declaring
Coordi-
nating
Taking 
action
Intent 
break
Discussing
Isolating
Listening
% Duration
0,66
1,39
1,75
4,16
5,25
5,3
6,66
9,21
65,61
% Occurence
3,29
5,26
5,26
9,87
7,24
7,89
7,24
11,18
42,76
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-575-3
COLLA 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

So, actors can easily compare their choices for workspace. In 
this case, the designers are in a distinctive practice. The 
converse is not correct because during the switching from 
SketSha to HIS, the workspace for the first one disappears 
from the display on the tablet, and leaves the interface to the 
HIS workspace. The designer draws on the tablet (HIS 2D) 
while the other participants look at the annotation performed 
in the immersive space of the canvas (HIS 3D). In this 
second switching, designers are in a duplicate practice.  
Considering therefore the operations of "challenging" the 
actions performed on the object and "statement" of new 
proposals as terminative elements in the process of switching 
from one work space to another, the validation becomes an 
inchoate element in the process. This element marks the 
beginning of each switching in the use of a tool. This 
operation is then followed by several operations that enable 
the users to act on the object to be designed.  
An iterative process between questioning, validation and 
acting on the object continues throughout the work of 
designers while the use of a particular tool plays a 
predominant role in making decisions. Indeed, even if two 
systems originally offer the same function for real-time and 
remote sharing of graphical annotations, their specificity 
(immersive space / non-immersive space) suggest another 
perspective on the object to be designed. This specificity 
provides a new workspace, negotiation and consensus- 
building between participants and allows them to test and 
validate their choices. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION	  
Contribution. Our research concerned the modes of 
appropriation of an innovative collaborative platform, to 
instrument distant and synchronic design by associating two 
tools, which support artifact annotation in real time.  
This work allowed us to develop an analytical method 
that uses concepts related to semiotics in order to observe 
systemically the collective activity of design using various 
tools at the same time. In fact, through our data analysis and 
by using this method at the border of the fields of cognitive 
ergonomics and semiotics, we could clearly identify the use 
of 2D, the use of 3D and switching from one to another. In 
other words, what makes an actor switch from one to 
another? The observation of this practice that is at once 
"duplicate" and "distinctive" showed that look, drawing, and 
word (representing "working together") play an important 
role. 
It is obviously possible to draw in a tool and look 
simultaneously at another workspace, and this was observed 
during the use of SketSha (2D plans on tablet produced 
parallel to the interior image of library, which was projected 
in the immersive space. In this case, it was not a switching 
from one tool to the other but an oversizing of the 
workspace. The activity was not just in 2D or 3D, but it was 
oversized to offer two different perspectives simultaneously 
for a single area of the designed object. Even when actors 
worked in space dedicated to SketSha, they occasionally 
referred to the immersive space. However, in the context of 
use of the HIS device, the interface of HIS 2D appearing on 
the tablet involves systematically the disappearance of the 
SketSha workspace. A definite switching from one activity 
on a tool to a new activity on another tool is marked.  
Moreover, aspectuality related to switching of certain 
collective operations shows the effectiveness of the 
combination of two tools in order to validate the collective 
choice in the collective and remote design of a project. In 
both cases of switching (1) from SketSha to the HIS and (2) 
from HIS to SketSha, appropriation of a tool's specific 
functionality allows designers to better understand the ideas 
expressed, to build a common ground and to move forward 
together in a preliminary design phase. Nevertheless, the 
recurrent problem of bugs and sound dropping during the 
videoconferencing due to network disconnection did not help 
to build awareness among participants. This even caused 
some conflict between them. Both findings highlight the 
notions of completion and accomplishment throughout a 
permanent evaluation of ideas in the process. If all the 
operations that we have emphasized are essential in these 
early stages, it would still be considered a privileged place 
for punctual operations such as "informing", "declaring" or 
"validating together" which require good functionality of the 
tool.  
Limitations. Focusing on the modes of simultaneous 
appropriation of these two tools for collaborative design, this 
research is certainly not intended to be generalizable to other 
cases of tool and device combination. Nevertheless, the 
method implemented for processing and analysis of this type 
of combination is still interesting because it combines 
quantitative and qualitative data in a systematic, repeatable 
and disciplined approach. To further this approach and prove 
its validity, it is necessary to confront other contexts of using 
combined tools by exploiting the concepts from the field of 
semiotics.  
In addition, semi-structured interviews were conducted as 
part of this experiment, but these data were only used 
partially in our analysis.  
The in-depth processing of designers' feedback will 
enable the issue of aspectuality to be addressed in greater 
detail from the users’ perspective by reference to how they 
describe their experiences of appropriation of combined 
tools.  
Prospects. We plan to apply our approach (1) on one 
hand in longitudinal observations to analyze the evolution of 
this appropriation process in time and (2) on the other hand, 
to observe new collective activities such as participative 
production of a same artwork from distance. 
REFERENCES 
[1] T. Dorta, Y. Kalay, A. Lesage, and P. Pérez, "Design 
conversations in the interconnected HIS", in Carrara G., 
Fioravanti A., Trento A. (eds.), Connecting Brains Shaping 
the World : Collaborative Design Spaces, EuropIA 13, Rome, 
pp. 83-94, 2011. 
[2] http://www.hybridlab.umontreal.ca/his.php?l=fr, last access in 
April 2017. 
[3] S. Ben Rajeb and P. Leclercq, "Using Spatial Augmented 
Reality in Synchronous Collaborative Design", Yuhua Luo 
éd., In Lecture Notes in Computer Sciences, Springer, vol 
8091, pp. 1-10, 2013. 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-575-3
COLLA 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

[4] http://www.sketsha.be/F11_Innovation.html, last access in 
May 2017. 
[5] J. G. Breslin, "Social Semantic Information Spaces", in 
Semantic Digital Libraries, pp. 55-70, 2008. 
[6] M. Lourel, S. Abdellaoui, S. Chevaleyre, M. Paltrier, and K. 
Gana. "Relationships between psychological job demands, job 
control and burnout among Firefighters", in North American 
Journal of Psychology, 10(3), 489-496, 2008.  
[7] F. Darses, M. Wolff. "How do designers represent to 
themselves the users' needs?", in Applied Ergonomics, 37 (6), 
pp. 757-764, 2006.  
[8] J. F. Boujut, P. Laureillard, "A co-operation framework for 
product process integration in engineering design", in Design 
Studies, 23 (5), pp. 497-513, 2002. 
[9] P. Carlile, "Transferring, translating and transforming: an 
integrative framework for managing knowledge across 
boundaries", in Organization Science, 15, pp. 555-568, 2004. 
[10] J. M. Carroll, D. C. Neale, P. L. Isenhour, M. B. Rosson, and 
D. 
S. 
McCrickard, 
"Notification 
and 
awareness: 
synchronizing 
task-oriented 
collaborative 
activity", 
in 
International Journal Of Human-Computer Studies, 58, pp. 
605-632, 2003. 
[11] A. J. Greimas and J. Courtés, Sémiotique. Dictionnaire 
raisonné de la théorie du langage, (translated by "Semiotic. 
Dictionary of the Language Theory"), Paris, Hachette, 1993. 
[12] J. Fontanille, Le discours aspectualisé, PULIM, Limoges, 
1991. 
[13] J. Holt, Etude d’aspect. (translated by "Aspect studies"), Acte 
Julandicia. 15 : 2 Copenhague, 1942.  
[14] J. Dubois and al., Grand Dictionnaire de linguistique et des 
sciences du langage, (translated by "Dictionary of Linguistics 
and Language Science"), Paris, Larousse, 2007. 
[15] D. Bertrand, Précis de sémiotique littéraire (translated by 
"Literary semiotics"), Paris, HER, 2000. 
[16] S. Ben Rajeb S., "Conception collaborative distante : étude 
architecturologique pour la caractérisation des opérations 
cognitives" (translated by "Remote collaborative design : 
architecturology analysis to specify cognitives design 
operations"), V. Angenot, S. Safin, M.G. Dondero & P. 
Leclercq éd., In Interfaces numériques : Collaborer à distance, 
enjeux et impacts des interfaces numériques dans les pratiques 
collaboratives synchrone, Lavoisier, 2 – n°3, pp. 509-530, 
2013. 
[17] J. Beers Pieter, H. P. Boshuizen, P. A. Kirschner, and W. H. 
Gijselaers, "The analysis of negotiation of common ground in 
CSCL ". Learning and instruction , vol. 17, n°4, p. 427-435, 
2007. 
[18] F. Darses, A. Mayeur, C. Elsen, C., and P. Leclercq, "Is there 
anything to expect from 3D views in sketching support 
tools?". Gero, J., Goel, A. (eds.) Design Computing and 
Cognition 2008: Proceedings of the Third International 
Conference on Design Computing and Cognition , Atlanta, 
USA, pp. 283–302. Springer, 2008. 
 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-575-3
COLLA 2017 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

