Static and Semantic Social Networks Analysis:
Towards a Multidimensional Convergent Model.
Christophe Thovex and Francky Trichet
LINA, University of Nantes
Laboratoire d’Informatique de Nantes Atlantique (UMR-CNRS 6241)
2 rue de la Houssiniere, BP 92208 - 44322 Nantes cedex 03, France.
Email: (christophe.thovex)(francky.trichet)@univ-nantes.fr
Abstract—Social networks of the Web 2.0 have become global
(e.g., FaceBook, etc). In 1977, FREEMAN published generic
metrics for Social Networks Analysis (SNA), mainly based on
graph-mining models. The objective of our work is to extend
these static analysis models by taking the conceptual aspects
of enterprises and institutions social graph into account. These
conceptual aspects are embedded in trades-oriented ontologies
extracted from the endogenous information, connate to the
studied social networks. The originality of our multidisciplinary
work is to deﬁne new multidimensional measures in SNA for
new decision-making functions in Human Resource Management
(HRM). This paper introduces three new contributions: (1) a
metric of tension of a social network, (2), an extension of the
FREEMAN’s betweenness measure named semantic betweenness
and (3) a notion of reactance of a social network used for the
evaluation of the individual stress.
Keywords-social, networks, analysis, ontologies, semantic, be-
tweenness.
I. INTRODUCTION
Current trends and needs of communication permanently
require new functions and applications of social networking,
as demonstrated by the constant eruption of new socialisation
modes (e.g., Twitter, Facebook Diigo). In comparison with the
real spaces of exchange, these virtual spaces facilitate the static
analysis and the emergence of metrics and methods dedicated
to Social Networks Analysis (SNA). The measures of central-
ity introduced by FREEMAN are the basic foundation in SNA
[1]. Naturally, SNA is gradually extended to enterprises, in
order to provide new management tools dedicated to work or-
ganisation, workforce and human resource management tools.
The culture of collaborative work is more and more paired to
”Web 2.0” tools, characterising a form of enterprise ”2.0”,
aware of human and social capital management. A social
network can be formalised with a (not) directed, labelled and
weighted graph. From such a structure, two kinds of SNA can
be differentiated: static SNA and semantic SNA.
Static SNA studies the state S of social graphs at a time t. It
is grounded on models and measures dedicated to structures
- such as deﬁned in [1], [2], [3] -, or ﬂow-based models [4],
[5]. The graphs can be random graphs [6], pseudo-random
graphs [7], scale-free graphs [8] or hybrid graphs. Static SNA
enables the classiﬁcation of individuals groups or communities
and the discovery of implicit relationships between individuals
involved into the social graph, by computing degrees, con-
nectivities, distances and ﬂows. Basically, the count of edges
connected to a vertex v is the degree of v. The count of other
vertices accessible from v is the connectivity of v. The distance
between two vertices is the minimal count of edges between
them. An elemental ﬂow is characterised by a count of units
circulating between two vertices - cf., electrical or hydraulic
networks, road networks.
Semantic SNA studies the conceptual aspects of social
graphs. It is based on the principles underlying conceptual
graphs theory and semantic networks theory [9]. Semantic
SNA refers to the Semantic Web standards (i.e., W3C lan-
guages and micro-formats, such as RDF, OWL or FOAF), On-
tology Engineering [10] and logical inferences, in correlation
with cognitive sciences [11], [12]. With the exponential growth
of social networks and information ﬂows, semantic SNA
becomes crucial for knowledge discovery and knowledge man-
agement, from the enterprise content to the large communities
of the Web. Semantic SNA can notably bring real advantages
in the areas related to social and human capital management
or optimisation of work-groups and working methods, within
professional organisations (societies, institutions).
Currently, not many works try to integrate the differentiated
forms of analysis. The purpose of our work consists in ﬁlling
this gap by deﬁning a new convergent system based on both
static and semantic analysis of Enterprises and Institutions
Social Networks (EISN). Our approach is multidisciplinary,
since it is based on physics and cognitive sciences. It leads
to the deﬁnition of a multidimensional model enabling the
development of new decisional tools for the optimisation of
work and well-fare at work and for the social and human
capital management. In its current version, this model includes
three new contributions: (1) a metric of tension of a social
network, (2) an extension of the L.C. FREEMAN’s between-
ness measure, named semantic betweenness, and (3) a notion
of reactance used for the evaluation of the individual stress
within a professional social networks.
Our work is funded by the French State Secretariat for
prospective and development of the digital economy, in the
context of the SOCIOPRISE project [13]. It is developed in
collaboration with a French IT service and software engineer-
ing company which provides industry-leading software and
implementation services dedicated to human capital manage-
ment.
58
COLLA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-143-4

The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section 1
introduces, in a synthetic way, the principles and methods
respectively used for static SNA and semantic SNA. Section
2 presents in details the approach we advocate to integrate
static and semantic SNA. Our contributions are based on
(1) a bridge-building between knowledge engineering and the
measures of static analysis and (2) a bridge-building between
the semantic SNA introduced in (1) and electric principles.
Our work is dedicated to Enterprises and Institutions Social
Networks Analysis - EISNA.
II. UNIDIMENSIONAL APPROACHES
A. Static Analysis
Static SNA studies the state S of a social graph at a time
t, S being deﬁned by the structures and/or the ﬂows of the
studied graphs. The ﬁrst notions of SNA were focused on
the leadership in communities [14]. These notions have been
enriched with measures of centrality and betweenness [1],
which characterise properties of social networks in terms of
power, prestige, proximity and conﬁdence.
The centrality measures are based on the comparison of a
vertex degree or ﬂows, to those of the graphs, neighbours or
distant ones. A vertex connected to a large count of vertices
in the graph (directly or not) holds an important centrality
of power ratio. A vertex connected with the vertices of the
social graphs bearing the strongest degrees holds an important
centrality of prestige ratio. A vertex connected with a large
count of close or neighbour vertices owns a high centrality
of proximity. By induction, an important centrality of prestige
and proximity can reveal a signiﬁcant trust coefﬁcient.
A measure of betweenness deﬁnes how an individual is
important to interconnect his neighbourhood. According to [1]
and [15], we formalise it as follows:
∀i ̸= u ̸= j, σ(i, u, j) > 0, Iu =
X
(ı,)
σ(i, u, j)
σ(i, j)
(1)
where σ(i, j) is the count of shortest chains between i and j,
σ(i, u, j) is the count of shortest chains between the vertices
i and j crossing u. The ratio σ(i, u, j) by σ(i, j) is cumulated
for the (i, j) where σ(i, u, j) > 0. The sum can be restricted to
the couples (i, j) for which σ(i, u, j) > 0, in order to deﬁne an
approximative measure adapted to large social graphs analysis.
1) Structural Analysis:
Classiﬁcation (graph-clustering)
and characterisation of graphs are the basic foundations of
static SNA. Structural properties are deﬁned for the main types
of social graphs and they provide some elements of static
SNA. In the context of random graphs [6], the degree of the
n vertices of the graph is determined by a probability p(n)
with p 7→ [0; 1]. With pseudo-random graphs, the degree of n
vertices is distributed according to an uniform distribution law
(e.g., law of Laplace-Gauss) where G(V, E) owns a probability
p =| E | ÷( |V |
2 ), with V a set of vertices and E a set of edges.
With scale-free graphs [8], the most connected nodes increase
their connection degree following a power law (”richers get
richer”). By deﬁning speciﬁc behaviours for each type of
networks and sub-graphs, these structural static properties also
provide elements for dynamic analysis of social graphs.
2) Flows Analysis: Several works of graph theory (e.g.,
the maximal ﬂow problem) are applicable to static analysis
of ﬂows within social networks. It is particularly the case
of the small world study in which V. LATORA et M. MAR-
CHIORI have introduced the notion of efﬁciency, deﬁned as
a measure of communication weighted inversely proportional
to the shortest path between two vertices i and j [4]. The
work of J. LESKOVEC and E. HORVITZ about large social
graphs (MSN - 179 millions of vertices), updates the ”six
degrees of separation” hypothesis, a small world characteristic.
In [16], the MILGRAM hypothesis, advocating the ability to
reach 100% of the vertices of a graph in 6 hops [17], is
dropped down to only 48% of vertices reached. Following a
long-tail curve, the distribution reaches 78% of vertices within
7 hops and for 90% of vertices, the measured mean is 7,8 hops,
with a maximal shortest path of 19 hops between two vertices
(measured on a sample set of 1000 vertices).
Some physics models are also treated with help of graphs for
the understanding and discovery of theoretical principles. In
the electricity area, the KIRCHHOFF’s law of nodes and law of
meshes are the most well-known illustration of this trend. The
work of [5] about resistance and currents of ﬁnite networks,
demonstrating the unity and continuity of ﬂows within large
graphs, brings a new hypothesis to be validated in SNA.
To sum up, static SNA provides a large set of mathematical,
sociological and even physics models. These models are
mainly based on the graph theory and and they can be used to
discover explicit or implicit knowledge within social graphs.
Some of these models are also extended to dynamic SNA [18],
an aspect out of scope for this paper.
B. Semantic SNA
Semantic SNA studies the conceptual aspects of social
graphs. It is founded on conceptual graphs and ontologies cou-
pled with SNA principles [12]. Currently, to our knowledge,
no signiﬁcant work has been published in the domain, but the
attractiveness of the subject is visible.
We deﬁne an ontology as a formal and explicit speciﬁ-
cation of a shared conceptualisation [10]. J. JUNG AND J.
EUZENAT comment the description of a three-dimensional
view of semantic SNA, putting together social graphs, annota-
tions and ontologies ERgraphs - Entities/Relationships graphs,
[19]. Their proposal overlays and makes the three dimensions
coincide in order to build ”consensual” ontologies, where
annotations are linked to the social graph. ALEMAN-MEZA
AND AL. introduce a semantic application for interest conﬂicts
detection within social networks of scientiﬁc publications [20].
Based on the research of syntactico-semantic patterns, the
application measures the semantic similarity between authors
corpus, in order to detect possible redundancies or concurren-
cies within subjects shared or divided across teams. The work
of [21] about semantic SNA paves the way of semantic and
statistic analysis. It makes the outline of SNA operational, by
59
COLLA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-143-4

integrating it to the models and languages of the Semantic
Web (i.e., OWL, RIF, FOAF, SIOC, MOAT, POWDER).
Rules and inferences systems, in correlation with cognitive
sciences, bring a main line of SNA developments towards
a semantic dimension. These developments are submitted to
vertices and edges annotations, by automatic means such
as statistic learning and natural language processing, or hu-
man treatments such as social tagging. Reciprocal evaluation
between members of a social network shows how human
interaction produces a valuation on which a reliable degree of
conﬁdence can be computed. We talk of favours network when
the graph structure depends on peer-to-peer evaluations. Even-
tually, the integration of cognitive sciences such as linguistics,
psychology or neurosciences, produces interesting results as
demonstrated by ontology personalisation [11]. The hypothesis
of derived methods speciﬁcally adapted to semantic SNA can
be considered.
T. GRUBER cheers on initiatives which tend to integrate
semantic web principles and languages, to social networks
for the development of Collective Intelligence and Collective
Knowledge Systems [12]. From the large Web communities
to the enterprises social networks, semantic SNA can bring
real progresses in different domains, such as global marketing
linked to globalisation, social and human capital management
or work-groups and work-methods optimisation within profes-
sional organisations, the domain in which we are interested.
III. MULTIDIMENSIONAL SYNERGIES IN EISNA
The main objective of our work is to exhibit multidimen-
sional synergies between the static and semantic aspects in En-
terprises and Institutions Social Networks Analysis - EISNA.
The speciﬁcities of EISNA are: (1) social graphs composed of
up to 100 000 nodes, (2) endogenous data restricted to a few
speciﬁc and connate domains and (3) intensive collaborative
work with trade-oriented information sharing.
The methodology we have adopted respects the segmenta-
tion of the problematics:
• Static SNA is integrated without any change. Our con-
tribution mainly consists in providing relevant bridge-
building of known methods and identiﬁed models, orig-
inally from physics or cognitive sciences. The results
we provide concern new ﬂows metrics of social graphs.
Devoted to EISNA for the prevention of social risk, they
consist in the deﬁnition of 2 metrics. The ﬁrst metric
is dedicated to evaluate a new notion named tension of
a social network (cf. section III-A1). The second metric
extends the L.C. FREEMAN’s measure of betweenness
(cf. section III-A2) which becomes semantic - semantic
betweenness.
• Semantic SNA is developed by integrating social graphs,
conceptual graph, ontologies and inferences rules. The
contributions we provide can only be applied to EISNA
and they are specially devoted to work organisation and
social/human capital management. Currently, our third
contribution consists in deﬁning a new notion of reac-
tance, which aims at the evaluation of individual stress
(cf. section III-B).
The results we provide are jointly afforded to converge in
a multidimensional model, leading to the development of
decision-making tools for enterprises and institutions social
networks.
A. Static EISNA, Physical Models and Cognition
Our model adopts FREEMAN’s centrality and betweenness
measures, starting with non-directed graphs. For instance with
directed graphs, Page-Rank provides a score easily assimilated
to a measure of prestige [22], and an extrapolation integrating
an authority coefﬁcient (author reputation), Trust-Rank, gives
a conﬁdence/trust score, also adaptable to non-directed graphs
as a complement of other measures [23].
1) Static EISNA, Flows and Physical Models: To introduce
some new ﬂows measures, we test assimilation of the graph
edges to conductors transporting electrical ﬂows. Our method
consists in quantifying and qualifying ﬂows embedded in
social networks with semantic ratios. These ratios are deﬁned
according to percentages of read, written or shared in common
documents (e.g., ofﬁce, mails, instantaneous messages), ex-
changed data packets (ToIp, VoIp) and other numerical marks
able to characterise conceptual links between individuals.
Some electrical principles are adapted to static analysis of
ﬂows around a vertex, among which the KIRCHHOFF’s laws
of nodes and meshes. Figure 1 illustrates the Law of nodes,
with I intensity of electrical charges for an output quantity Q
by time unit t.
Fig. 1.
Law of nodes, P Iinput = P Ioutput, i2 + i3 = i1 + i4
The originality of our work consists in introducing the
concept of tension in a social network related to the notions
of crossing ﬂow intensity and vertex resistance. A vertex s
directly connected with two other vertices r and t can be
likened to a dipole which resistance is noted R. We use OHM’s
laws:
Urt = Rs.Irt and Ps = Rs.Irt.Irt2 = Urt.Irt2/Rs =
Urt.Irt,
where Urt represents the electrical tension depending on Rs
and Irt, and Ps represents the delivered power by a vertex
of which maximal admissible power is noted Pmax, with
Umax =
√
R.Pmax and Imax =
p
Pmax/R.
By applying OHM’s law upon a social graph, it is possible
to compute a charge-capacity ratio of the enterprise social
network, by analogy with Ps, Pmax. The purpose is to
introduce a stress measure of individuals and communities.
This measure uses the Joule effect to estimate the enterprise
60
COLLA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-143-4

social network components warm-up and to prevent risks of
performances degradation, instability or breakdown (socio-
psychological trouble). The warm-up T depends on dissipated
energy and material resistivity ρ. Since the value of ρ varies
according to diversity of molecular structures, its computation
gets out of the scope of this paper. So, it must be considered
that the social material is a priori abstracted as a constant by
initialising algorithms with ρ = 1, let T.ρ = W = R.I2.∆t.
Next, ρ should be reﬁned by ρ 7→ [0; 1], according to a deﬁned
determinant used to induce recursive interaction between T
and R encountered in physics, where ρ is varying according
to T.
2) Static EISNA and cognition: Manual resources tagging
requires cognitive processes. In the context of EISNA, this
method can lead to psychological rejects mainly caused by
political and ethical aspects. To be more ethically acceptable,
manual tagging should be limited to non-human resources
(documents, textual corpus, databases). The characterisation of
individuals and groups must be based on criterias respecting
persons and privacy.
By associating terms used to annotate trades-oriented re-
sources with of concepts of an ontology, the semantisation of
annotation process facilitates the discovery of communities of
practice by the means of implicit relationships between anno-
tated resources. According to this standpoint, we use trades-
oriented ontologies to qualify numerical analysis of social
graphs. Technically, this is done by correlating statistic results
obtained on ﬂows and structures to ontological conceptual
graphs.
From the equation (1), we deﬁne a new measure of se-
mantic betweenness weighted by endogenous resources (i.e.,
mainly annotated documents with help of terms) where (1)
each annotation is associated to at least one individual of
the considered social network and where (2) the sum of
annotation occurrences calibrates favourably the measure for
the individuals who share resources associated to the majority
annotations.
This new measure is deﬁned in the following context.
Explicit relationships between the set of human resources Rh,
the set of resources Rsi extracted from the information system
and the set of content annotations Esi are used to enrich
EISNA and discover some implicit relationships.
We introduce the sets Rh, Rsi, Esi and the relationships
R, R′ and avoid to compute wastefulness reﬂexive relation-
ships (e.g., relationships in RsiXRsi, EsiXEsi).
We deﬁne a relationship R(D, D′) where:
D = Rh or D = Rsi, D′ = Rh or D′ = Rsi or D′ = Esi.
We deﬁne a new set of measures by introducing a weighting
ratio Cp, based on the cardinality of R. When the SNA metric
to which we apply our semantic extension method gives a
result superior to 0, for a vertex u within a social graph, we
modify the metric by integrating the Cp factor. The factor
increases the value of the SNA measure for the vertices sharing
the same knowledge. Cp uses the cardinality of the relationship
R, relationship between the graph represented by pD, and the
endogenous content or its indexation, represented by pD′. pD
and pD′ are respectively restricted by the arguments eD, eD′,
where eD represents an element of pD (e.g., u) and eD′
represents one or several elements of the content or the index,
given by pD′ (e.g., some keywords). Cp is formalised as
follows:
SNA metric > 0 ∧ Cp = |R(pD, pD′, eD, eD′)|
(2)
We have simulated the behaviour of a betweenness centrality
incorporating the Cp factor. The simulation is combining some
one-decimal values ranged from 0, 1 to 1.0 for the centrality,
and some values from 1 to 10 for the Cp factor. It aims at
the estimation of three alternatives of the use of Cp. These
alternatives are formalised as follows, with V the vertices
of G(V, E), semindex a semantic index of the endogenous
content, u a vertex in V and knowledge, a knowledge set
related to seized keywords:
BCp(u) =
X
ı
σ(i, u, j)
σ(i, j)
× |R(V, semindex, u, knowledge)|
(3)
BCp(u) =
 X
ı
σ(i, u, j)
σ(i, j)
!2
×|R(V, semindex, u, knowledge)|
(4)
BCp(u) =
X
ı
σ(i, u, j)
σ(i, j) ×
p
|R(V, semindex, u, knowledge)|
(5)
The ﬁgure 2 illustrates the behaviour of the equation (3)
in green, of the equation (4) in blue and of the equation
(5) in red (i.e., the lowest curve). The output values are
presented vertically and the samples used for the simulation
are numbered horizontally.
Fig. 2.
Simulation of the Cp integration with the betweennes centrality.
Cp can reach a value superior to 1000 in the context of the
Socioprise project. Therefore, we choose to weak its inﬂuence,
using equation (5). When Cp > 0, the equation (1) is modiﬁed
as follows:
BCp(u) =
X
ı
σ(i, u, j)
σ(i, j) ×
p
|R(V, semindex, u, knowledge)|
(6)
61
COLLA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-143-4

Equation (6) introduces a new measure of semantic between-
ness, based on [1]. This measure takes a qualitative dimension
into account by integrating endogenous information contained
in Rsi and Esi, to the calculus of betweenness centrality.
Cp is quantiﬁed and qualiﬁed by eD, eD′ through ontologies
enabling semantic association of elements in Rsi and Esi.
The discovered knowledge in these conceptual associations is
the strong point of this new “smart” measure.
B. A use case of semantic EISNA
Sections III-A1 and III-A2 have introduced an analogy
between ﬂows and structures analysis within social networks,
and some principles close to radio-electricity which seem
to be relevant. We have put forward notions of resistance,
charge, capacity, warm-up and powers. This context is used to
characterise implicit or explicit relationships Rs(i, j) between
the vertices of a social graph. Our goal is to cross these rela-
tionships with semantic properties (object or data properties)
represented by one or more domain ontologies to conceptualise
interactions within the social graph.
The notion of reactance already exists in electrodynamic
and social psychology. In electrodynamic, the reactance (in
Ohms) describes the energy opposed to an alternative current.
WANG uses reactance as a parameter of a neuron network,
to control the defects of an electrical network, depending on
the kind of element crossed [24]. In psychology, the reactance
characterises ”a state of negative motivation following a men-
ace (supposed to be real) of individual freedom restriction that
is translated into a inﬂuence resistance“ [25].
In our work, we propose to use the reactance Ψ as a notion
of individual stress. From the metric of tension deﬁned in
section III-A, we draw up the following assertions :
Let a graph G(V, E) where vertices of V are connected by
the edges of E, respecting the following properties:
- Each element v of V
intrinsically holds coefﬁcients
resulting from classical measures of social networks (cf.
Freeman) or possible reﬁnements.
- ∀(u, v) ∈ V connected by e ∈ E, u, v intrinsically holds
analogical values of resistance, charge, capacity, warm-
up, powers depending on V, E.
- ∀e ∈ E assimilated to an uncharacterised ﬂow ϖ,
owning a quantiﬁable value ϕϖ ̸= 0, e is intrinsically de-
scribed by values of resistance, charge, capacity, warm-
up and powers. For e, ⃗ϖ or ϕϖ are measured as a pseudo-
tension Te or pseudo-intensity Ie.
From these assertions and the results of experiments man-
aged in the context of the SOCIOPRISE project (i.e., a project
dedicated to human and social capital management) within
trade-oriented organisations, we offer a ﬁrst set of knowledge
dedicated to the identiﬁcation of individual stress. This set
of knowledge can be represented by the following rules and
axioms:
* rule 1:
If CCu =
chargeu
capacityu increases and CCu < 80%,
then Ψu increases.
By analogy with electronic power networks, we integrate
the notions of minimal charge threshold under which the
performance collapses.
* rule 2:
if Pu = resistanceu.intensity2
u
P maxu
increases and Pu ⩽ 1,
then Ψu and warm−upu increases (Pu represents a used
power).
* rule 2 bis (inference learning on rule 2):
if warm − upu increases,
then Ψu increases.
* rule 3:
if Pu increases and Pu > 1,
then Ψu decreases, Pmaxu decreases and warm − upu
quickly increases (Pu has exceeded Pmaxu).
* rule 3 bis (inference learning on rule 3 and experts
supervision):
if Ψu decreases and warm − upu increases,
then quick decreasing of Pmaxu and destruction risk.
* axiom 1 (inference supervised learning on rule 1):
if CCu ⩽ 0.8,
then risk to lose socio-professional performances.
* axiom 2 (inference learning on rule 3 and 3 bis):
if Pu > 1,
then risk of socio-professional troubles.
* axiom 3 (inference supervised learning on axioms 1 +
2 and their premisses):
performance optimisation is equivalent to CCu > 0.8 and
Pu ⩽ 1.
* axiom 4 (learning from symmetry on axiom 3 and his
premisses):
risk of socio-professional troubles is equivalent to risk of
loss of socio-professional performances.
From the equations system underlying these rules and ax-
ioms, we are currently formalising an innovative scalar metric
of reactance Ψu. From the multidisciplinary model we deﬁne,
we plan to get an innovative tools-set for decisional appli-
cations dedicated to social capital management. These tools
combining SNA metrics, knowledge engineering, ontologies
and sociology, applied to enterprise content and to enterprise
or institutions social networks (e.g., LDAP Directories or
other structures), will enable an innovative approach of human
capital management and human risk management.
IV. CONCLUSION
The purpose of our work is to deﬁne a model of enterprises
and institutions social networks analysis (EISNA). The main
originality of this model is to integrate the static and the
semantic dimension of EISNA. Our current proposal is based
on 3 contributions, deﬁned in the context of a multidisciplinary
approach. These new contribution are respectively dedicated to
the evaluation of tension, semantic betweenness and reactance,
for professional social networks analysis.
Our introduction of semantics in the FREEMAN’s mea-
sures enables to qualify some collaborative and quantiﬁed
exchanges, while establishing new centrality degrees for a
62
COLLA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-143-4

semantic identiﬁcation of knowledge communities within en-
terprises and institutions social networks. The possible new
measures extended by our approach correlate statistic and
conceptual dimensions through endogenous resources and
scientiﬁc multidisciplinarity.
This work is a baseline for the development of new decision-
making functions and tools applied in social and human capital
management of enterprises and institutions. Compared to some
usual methods of sociometry such as internal surveys, our
model ought to signiﬁcantly reduce the bias, while answering
to the problems of socio-professional troubles risk prevention,
performances loss risk prevention and social risk prevention.
From an applicative standpoint, our proposal is currently
evaluated in the context of an experiment related to the
SOCIOPRISE project. From a theoretical standpoint, this work
is currently in progress towards the integration of dynamic
aspects of EISNA. We plan to use AMPERE’s laws and
MAXWELL’s laws of electrodynamic, in order to advocate a
predictive analysis of social networks structural evolution.
The main applicative perspective of this approach is to
assist the optimisation of work-groups and performance in an
enlarged context, such as a pool of enterprises and institutions.
The main theoretical perspective is to formalise a complex
and multidimensional model (static, dynamic and semantic)
dedicated to professional social network analysis.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Freeman, “A set of measures of centrality based on betweenness.”
Sociometry, vol. 40, pp. 35–41, 1977.
[2] R. Burt, The Social Capital of Structural Holes.
New York: Russell
Sage Foundation, 2002, ch. 7, pp. 148–90.
[3] E. Lazega, The Collegial Phenomenon : The Social Mechanisms of
Cooperation Among Peers in a Corporate Law Partnership, O. U. Press,
Ed.
Oxford, 2001.
[4] V. Latora and M. Marchiori, “Efﬁcient behavior of small-world net-
works,” Physical Review Letters, vol. 87, no. 19, 2001.
[5] C. Thomassen, “Resistances and currents in inﬁnite electrical networks,”
J. Comb. Theory Ser. B, vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 87–102, 1990.
[6] P. Erd˜os and A. R´enyi, “On random graphs,” Publicationes Mathemat-
icae, vol. 6, pp. 290–297, 1959.
[7] M. Krivelevich and B. Sudakov, “Sparse pseudo-random graphs are
hamiltonian,” 2002.
[8] A.-L. Barabasi and R. Albert, “Emergence of scaling in random net-
works,” Science Magazine, vol. Vol. 286, no. no. 5439, pp. pp. 509 –
512, 1999.
[9] J. Sowa, Knowledge Representation: Logical, Philosophical, and Com-
putational Foundations, C. Paciﬁc Grove, Ed.
Brooks Cole Publishing
Co., 2000.
[10] T. Gruber, “Toward principles for the design of ontologies used for
knowledge sharing,” International Journal of Human Computer Studies,
vol. 43, no. 5/6, pp. 907–928, 1995.
[11] X. Aim´e, F. Furst, P. Kuntz, and F. Trichet, “Ontology personalization:
an approach based on conceptual prototypicality,” in Advances in Web
and Network Technologies and Information Management, Lecture Notes
in Computer Science (LNCS).
Springer, 2009, vol. 5731, pp. 200–210.
[12] R. T. Gruber, “Collective knowledge systems: Where the social web
meets the semantic web,” Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents
on the World Wide Web, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 4–13, February 2008.
[13] “The
socioprise
project.”
06
2011.
[Online].
Avail-
able:
http://web.polytech.univ-nantes.fr/78566252/0/ﬁche
pagelibre/
&RH=1286187824541
[14] L. Freeman, W. Bloomberg, S. Koff, M. Sunshine, and T. Fararo, Local
Community Leadership, S. U. College, Ed.
Syracuse, 1960.
[15] M. Newman, “A measure of betweenness centrality based on random
walks,” Social Networks, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 39 – 54, 2005.
[16] J. Leskovec and E. Horvitz, “Planetary-scale views on a large instant-
messaging network,” in WWW 2008, April 21-25, 2008, Beijing, China,
2008.
[17] J. Travers and S. Milgram, “An experimental study of the small world
problem,” Sociometry, vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 425–443, 1969.
[18] N. Zekri and J.-P. Clerc, “Statistical and dynamical study of disease
propagation in a small world network,” Phys. Rev. E, vol. 64, no. 5, p.
056115, Oct 2001.
[19] J. Jung and J. Euzenat, “Towards semantic social networks,” in ESWC
07: Proceedings of the 4th European conference on The Semantic Web.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2007, pp. 267–280.
[20] B. Aleman-Meza, M. Nagarajan, C. Ramakrishnan, L. Ding, P. Kolari,
A. Sheth, I. B. Arpinar, A. Joshi, and T. Finin, “Semantic analytics on
social networks: experiences in addressing the problem of conﬂict of
interest detection,” in WWW ’06: Proceedings of the 15th international
conference on World Wide Web.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2006,
pp. 407–416.
[21] G. Er´et´eo, F. Gandon, M. Buffa, and O. Corby, “Semantic social network
analysis,” in Proceedings of the WebSci’09: Society On-Line, 18-20
March 2009, Athens, Greece, 2009.
[22] L. Page, S. Brin, R. Motwani, and T. Winograd, “The pagerank citation
ranking: Bringing order to the web.” Stanford InfoLab, Technical Report
1999-66, November 1999, previous number: SIDL-WP-1999-0120.
[23] Z. Gyongyi, H. Garcia-Molina, and J. Pedersen, “Combating web spam
with trustrank,” in 30th International Conference on Very Large Data
Bases (VLDB 2004), August 2004.
[24] Q. Wang, “Artiﬁcial neural network and hidden space svm for fault
detection in power system,” in ISNN 2009: Proceedings of the 6th
International Symposium on Neural Networks.
Springer Verlag, 2009.
[25] J. Brehm, A Theory of Psychological Reactance, Oxford, Ed.
New
York Academic Press, 1966.
63
COLLA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-143-4

