Towards a Collaborative Sessions’ Management Tool for WSNs 
 
Laura M. Rodríguez Peralta, Lina M. P. L. Brito, and João F. F. Santos 
Exact Sciences and Engineering Centre (CCCEE)  
University of Madeira (UMa) 
Centro de Ciências Matemáticas (CCM) 
Madeira, Portugal 
{lmrodrig; lina}@uma.pt; joao_santos87@hotmail.com  
 
 
Abstract - In Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs), the sensor 
nodes are typically resource limited. This fact forces nodes to 
collaborate in order to implement their tasks. In this paper, 
we propose and implement a model that represents the 
various types of collaboration relationships that can be 
established in a WSN. This involves identifying and 
analyzing the different types of collaboration that may occur 
in any WSN. As a result, we propose a hierarchy composed 
by different types and levels of collaboration, and we 
propose a collaborative session management tool, called 
WISE-MANager. This tool allows bringing these concepts 
into practice, more precisely to the establishment of 
collaborative sessions. WISE-MANager optimizes the WSN 
operation and increases the user control on the network 
monitoring. 
Keywords: 
Wireless 
Sensor 
Networks; 
Modeling; 
Collaboration Hierarch; CSCW; ZigBee. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In WSNs, sensor nodes are resource restricted; i.e., 
they have limited memory and processing capabilities, 
short 
transmission 
range 
(thus, 
nodes 
can 
only 
communicate with local neighbors [1]. As a result, nodes 
need to collaborate to be able to accomplish their tasks: 
sensing, computing, routing, localization, etc. Therefore, 
WSNs are, inherently, collaborative networks [2]. 
In this paper, we provide an enhancement of the 
CWSN model by proposing a hierarchy of collaboration 
for WSNs. Another contribution is bringing the main 
CSCW (Computer Supported Cooperative Work) concepts 
into the area of WSNs, which includes identifying and 
describing the different types and levels of collaboration, 
as well as the collaborators that can exist within a WSN  
By collaboration we refer to any interactions that may 
be established between two components of a WSN. These 
interactions can simply refer to: i) data transmission, or ii) 
collaboration between sensor nodes to carry out a specific 
task, or iii) the transmission of control information and 
commands necessary for essential procedures, such as 
configuration/reconfiguration of nodes, clusters, or the 
network itself.  
Aiming to bring these concepts into practice, we have 
implemented a tool that allows creating and manipulating 
collaborative sessions in a real WSN. 
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 briefly 
describes the related work. In section 3, the different types 
of collaboration are identified and described, and a 
hierarchy of collaboration is proposed. Then, a definition 
of session and its classification is proposed. Section 4 
describes the WISE-MANager tool and its implementation. 
Section 
5 
provides 
some 
conclusions 
and 
some 
perspectives of future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
We have observed that the great majority of works on 
WSNs’ modeling focus on modeling connectivity or 
mobility problems, or even both problems. Nevertheless, 
we have identified other modeling concerns, such as: 
communication, interference, data aggregation, coverage, 
and signal processing. On the contrary, the CWSN model 
intends to model a whole WSN, i.e., it tries to consider the 
most complete set possible of entities that can exist in a 
WSN, and their respective attributes. 
Regarding the works focusing collaboration in WSNs, 
the great majority of them covers a specific type of 
collaboration, 
which 
is 
associated 
with 
the 
accomplishment of a certain task, such as: signal 
processing [4], sensing [5], computing [6], routing [7], 
localization [8], security [9], task scheduling [10], 
heuristics [11], calibration [12], resource allocation [13], 
time synchronization [14], transmission [15], etc., and also 
works concerning collaboration between wireless sensor 
nodes and other kind of devices (heterogeneous groupware 
collaboration) [16] to support some specific applications 
(for example, collaboration between sensor nodes and 
PDAs, in a fire fighting scenario).  
According to the literature available, the only work that 
presents a model for collaborative work in sensor networks 
has been proposed by Liu et al. [18]. It is the SNSCW 
(Sensor Networks Supported Cooperative Work) model, a 
hierarchical model that essentially divides cooperation in 
sensor networks in two layers; the first one relates to 
cooperation between humans and sensor nodes; the second 
one relates to cooperation between the sensor nodes. This 
model was designed for sensor networks.  
However, the SNSCW model only allows the modeling 
of collaboration itself. On the contrary, the CWSN model, 
which has been presented in [3], is a formal model that was 
created specifically to describe WSNs. However, the 
CWSN model allows not only the modeling of 
collaborative work (based in CSCW concepts), but also the 
modeling, formalization and graphical representation of 
the entities that can constitute a WSN (different types of 
nodes, clusters, relationships, sessions, obstacles, etc.), as 
9
COLLA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-143-4

well as its attributes. Moreover, it allows the representation 
of the WSN’s hierarchy and the network evolution. 
III. 
COLLABORATION HIERARCHY IN WSNS  
In this paper, we present a new approach that brings 
some of the fundamental CSCW concepts into the world of 
WSNs. The CWSN model is, then, improved in order to 
represent not only the entities that can compose a WSN 
and its attributes, but also to represent collaboration in a 
WSN. So, on one hand, we enrich the CWSN model with 
the most important CSCW concepts, such as: participants, 
relationships, roles, tasks, sessions and groups. On the 
other hand, we identify several levels of collaboration, 
going beyond the two levels defined by the SNSCW model 
[17]. Thus, we extend the CWSN model with a 
hierarchical collaboration representation. As a result, the 
CWSN model evolves into a hierarchical model of 
collaboration.  
By collaboration we denote any interactions that may 
be established between any two entities of a WSN. It may 
refer to collaboration involved in transmission of data 
between any two entities of the network, or to the 
collaboration required so that nodes can perform the 
majority of their tasks, which is a consequence of their 
severe resource limitations. However, the types of 
collaboration are determined by the types of nodes that 
exist in a WSN, since each type of node has its specific 
tasks. Consequently, the different types of collaboration 
that exist in a WSN are a natural result of its inherent 
hierarchy. For example, only the sink node can send data 
to the user; consequently, all the other nodes have to 
forward data towards the sink node; therefore, the sink 
node is naturally on the higher levels of the WSN 
hierarchy. 
In a WSN, each participant in collaboration plays its 
own role. We define the possible roles that the participants 
can play in a WSN, as: user, sensor node, anchor node, 
cluster head, or sink node. A sensor node, for example, can 
simply play the role of a sensor node, or it can play the role 
of an anchor node or of a cluster head. 
A. Tasks of the Participants 
The tasks of each participant depend on its type, that is 
to say that it strongly depends on its role, and also on the 
characteristics of the intended application. Thus, most 
tasks are application-specific. However, in a WSN, tasks 
of the participants can be generally classified in two 
categories: 
• 
Supporting tasks: these are tasks usually related to 
management, communication and maintenance 
functions (typically associated with the protocols 
in use). 
• 
Information processing tasks: Data collected by 
sensor nodes can be processed depending on the 
application (data may have to be compressed, 
correlated, ciphered, etc.) and/or depending on the 
tasks 
of 
each 
node 
in 
the 
collaboration 
relationships established. 
B. Sessions 
In this work, we propose a definition of session as the 
essential unit of a collaborative activity in WSNs. 
Basically, this means that each time the user has a new 
objective (new type of phenomenon to monitor, new 
geographical area to monitor, new monitoring period, etc.) 
he can create a new session   
In the context of WSNs and considering CSCW 
definitions, sessions are composed by participants, the 
collaboration relationships and data flows established 
among them, and the tasks of each participant. In a session, 
different types of collaboration relationships can exist; 
therefore, several different collaborative groups can be 
established inside a session.  
Concerning the state of the nodes that constitute a 
session (regardless them being organized into groups or 
not), a session can be classified in one of four states:  
• 
Created – The session has been created but not 
initiated; that is, the session is not in the open state 
yet. This is the first state of a session. 
• 
Open – While the objective of the session is not 
fulfilled and some nodes are active, the session 
maintains its activity. 
• 
Close – A session can become inactive due to one 
of two possible motives: 1) when all the nodes go 
into sleep mode; or 2) when all nodes are damaged 
or fail (for example, due to battery depletion); or 
3) when there is a temporary interruption in the 
session (i.e., the session stops for a certain time 
interval that is settled by the user). 
• 
End - A session ends due to one of three possible 
causes: 1) when the objective of the session is 
fulfilled; 2) when the predefined lifetime of a 
session comes to an end; or 3) when the session is 
aborted by the user (through the transmission of 
some command). 
• 
Deleted – This state occurs when the user deletes 
the session and its respective data.  
These session states and session evolution are 
represented in Fig. 1.  
Depending on the WSN specific application, sessions 
can 
be 
classified 
according 
to 
their 
temporal 
characteristics: sessions can take place in parallel or in 
sequence; and they can be synchronous or asynchronous. 
• 
Parallel sessions – Sessions that occur at the same 
time. 
• 
Sequential sessions – A particular session starts 
only after the end of another session. 
• 
Synchronous sessions – The occurrence of these 
sessions is planned by the network manager. 
Parallel and sequential sessions can also be 
classified as synchronous sessions. 
• 
Asynchronous sessions – The occurrence of these 
sessions is not planned by the network manager. 
Rather, they can be started by some action (user 
10
COLLA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-143-4

initiated or node initiated), by the detection of an 
unexpected change in a particular phenomenon, 
etc. 
Thus, in a certain moment, there may be several 
collaborative sessions in a WSN.  
Defining a collaborative session with all its possible 
states, and different temporal relationships between 
collaborative sessions is important to allow users and 
managers to manipulate and control the operation of a 
WSN, in an optimized manner. These concepts can also 
help researchers to develop management tools that 
optimize the network management and that can make it 
more flexible, as will be demonstrated in section IV. 
C. Types of Collaboration 
Analyzing collaboration in WSNs from the point of 
view of relationships and interactions established among 
collaborators (or participants), we can identify essentially 
two main types of collaboration [17]: 1) collaboration 
between the user and the WSN, and 2) collaboration 
among nodes. 
1) 
Collaboration between the user and the WSN: The 
user is the entity that interacts with the WSN, defining the 
application, querying the network, visualizing data, 
customizing the work of the sensor nodes, etc. However, 
depending on the application, nodes can also initiate 
collaboration. For instance, after analyzing some changes 
on the environment, nodes can notify and alert the user, 
and actively query the user about his needs. 
So, this type of collaboration can be either initiated by 
the user or by the sensor nodes. From the user point of 
view, this collaboration can be carried out through a 
computer, a PDA, etc. From the WSN point of view, the 
collaboration is established via the sink node. 
The sink node is the only node that can send data to the 
user; so, it controls the data transmission towards the user. 
Therefore, we can conclude that this collaboration 
established between the sink node and the user verifies the 
flow control property: it controls the flow of data. This 
CSCW property states that only one of the elements 
involved in a collaboration process can transmit data. 
,
(
,
,
)
D
k prod
cons
E
S
Da User
=
 
Where Da  is the set of data that is shared by the Sk , 
the data producer, and the user, which is the consumer of 
data. 
2) 
Collaboration among nodes: We consider that 
collaboration among nodes can be classified into several 
different subtypes: 
• 
Collaboration among the same type of nodes (i.e., 
among sensor nodes, among anchor nodes, among 
cluster heads, etc.); 
• 
Collaboration between sensor nodes and anchor 
nodes; 
• 
Collaboration between sensor nodes and the sink 
node. 
• 
Collaboration between sensor nodes and other type 
of wireless devices. 
• 
Collaboration between other type of wireless 
devices and the sink node. 
In relation to collaboration between sensor nodes and 
anchor nodes1 it only makes sense in the case of an ad-hoc 
deployment, since in a manual deployment the localization 
of sensor nodes is known a priori. Since the application 
scenario that will be presented in section 4 involves 
manual deployment, this type of collaboration will not be 
covered in detail in this paper. The other types of 
collaboration will be described in detail further on. 
In the case of heterogeneous WSNs, i.e., WSNs that are 
composed not only by sensor nodes, anchor nodes, cluster 
heads and sink nodes, but also by other types of wireless 
devices, like Bluetooth devices, Wi-Fi devices, PDAs, etc., 
more types of collaboration can occur: 
• 
Collaboration between sensor nodes and other 
wireless devices. 
• 
Collaboration between other wireless devices and 
the cluster heads. 
• 
Collaboration between other wireless devices and 
the sink node. 
In this case, wireless devices usually make use of these 
types of collaboration to ensure data transmission. 
Fig. 2 proposes a collaboration hierarchy for WSNs 
that considers different collaboration levels and represents 
the different types of collaboration just described. The 
bidirectional arrows (horizontal and vertical) represent 
collaboration among the different participants that 
compose the WSN. This hierarchy can represent different 
types of collaboration; however, a type of collaboration 
that clearly verifies this hierarchy is data transmission, 
since it respects the hierarchy usually inherent to the 
participants of a WSN.  
Analyzing this figure, it is rather intuitive to conclude 
that 
WSNs 
present 
a 
hierarchy 
of 
collaboration 
relationships. This hierarchy can be composed by different 
levels of collaboration, as represented in Fig. 2: the node 
level; the cluster level; the session level; the network level; 
and the user level. Besides, according to the types of 
collaboration presented above, collaboration can occur 
either within a certain level (horizontal collaboration) or 
between 
each 
two 
consecutive 
levels 
(vertical 
collaboration). However, this collaboration hierarchy 
intends to describe collaboration in a generic way. 
Therefore, this hierarchy needs to be modified and adapted 
in order to describe the collaboration relationships that 
occur in a WSN in particular. 
                                                           
1 If localization of sensor nodes is unknown, it may be necessary to 
deploy some special nodes (anchor nodes) that will help the other nodes 
in the process of determining their own localization. 
11
COLLA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-143-4

Created
Open
End
Deleted
Create session (start_date, start_hour,  type_session, nodes)
Start session (start_date, start_hour, type_session, nodes)
or user starts session
WSN monitoring and
save session data
Stop temporarily (time_interval)  or
time_interval ends or
user press start button
Stop session (end_date, end_hour)
Maintain session
data in database ()
Delete session
data ()
Stop session (end_date, end_hour)
until start_date
and start_hour
until time_interval or
user press start
Stop temporarily (until_user_press_stop)
Closed
 
Figure 1.  
State transition diagram of a session. 
For example, there might be the case of a WSN with 
heterogeneous devices, where these other wireless devices 
cannot communicate, and consequently, cannot collaborate 
with ordinary sensor nodes; they might be forced to 
collaborate only with the cluster heads or with the sink 
node. In this example, this other type of wireless devices is 
represented in the node level (they may even collect data 
like sensor nodes), but the horizontal arrows that represent 
collaboration between sensor nodes and these wireless 
devices will not exist; since they do not represent reality. 
Only the vertical collaboration arrows will be represented. 
As mentioned before, the execution of most tasks in 
WSNs involves collaboration. Having a collaboration 
hierarchy as a framework that describes all the possible 
collaboration relationships that may occur in a WSN is a 
major advantage to researchers since they can use and 
adapt this framework to describe the collaboration 
activities of their own WSN.  
a)  Collaboration among the same type of nodes: As 
to cooperation among the same type of nodes, their 
relationships are uncertain, depending on the WSN’s 
application. Nevertheless, it is possible to identify three 
fundamental collaboration subtypes:  
• 
Peer collaboration [17] - The collaborators have 
the same roles and functions in collaboration. Peer 
collaboration can occur between nodes that are 
neighbors (so, it depends on the location of nodes), 
between a group of nodes in the active state, or 
between a group of nodes that is monitoring a 
common phenomenon. For example, this is the 
case of collaboration among ordinary wireless 
sensor nodes or among cluster heads.  
• 
Master-slave collaboration [17] - In the process of 
collaboration, 
the 
“master” 
node 
mainly 
coordinates the work of the “slave” nodes, and 
maintains some sharing information relative to the 
collaboration. The slave nodes are responsible for 
executing specific operations. In the case of 
clustering 
being 
applied, 
master-slave 
collaboration is established between the cluster 
head and the sensor nodes that belong to the 
cluster.  
b) Collaboration between sensor nodes and the sink 
node: All sensor nodes have to send collected data to the 
sink node. The sink node, in turn, can send queries or 
commands to the sensor nodes. Therefore, there is always 
collaboration between the sensor nodes and the sink node, 
unless a clustering algorithm has been implemented. 
c)  Collaboration between sensor nodes and the 
cluster head: If clustering is applied, one of the members 
of each cluster becomes the cluster head; the cluster head 
may be elected by the sensors in a cluster, or it may also 
be one of the nodes of the cluster that is richer is 
resources, or even pre-assigned by the network designer. 
Thereafter, all nodes in the cluster have to send collected 
data to the cluster head.  
So, this type of collaboration involves:  
• 
The sensor nodes send data to the cluster head. 
• 
The cluster head receives queries and commands 
that the user poses to the WSN, and forwards them 
to the sensor nodes. 
• 
The cluster heads can analyze received data to 
evaluate some parameters and take actions 
accordingly, sending commands to the sensor 
nodes; in this case, the cluster head acts as a sink 
node. 
• 
Sensor nodes and cluster heads have to exchange 
information so that the cluster head is able to 
update which nodes belong to the cluster (nodes 
can run out of battery, or be damaged, mobile 
nodes can move to other clusters, etc.). 
The cluster head also verifies the flow control property, 
since it is the only node that can transmit the set of data 
produced by all nodes that belong to the cluster towards 
the sink node. In this case, this property can be formally 
described as: 
,
(
,
,
)
D
prod
k cons
E
CH
Da S
=
,  
where Da  is the set of data that is shared by the CH 
and the Sk (or other cluster head), which are the producer 
and the consumer of data, respectively. 
12
COLLA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-143-4

d)  Collaboration between the cluster head and the 
sink node: If clustering is applied, the cluster head is 
responsible for aggregating data collected by all the nodes 
in the cluster and sending it to the sink node. The sink 
node, in turn, can send user queries or commands to the 
cluster heads, or it can analyze received data to evaluate 
some parameters and take actions accordingly, sending 
commands to the cluster heads. 
3) 
Collaboration between sessions: Collaboration 
between sessions occurs when some information has to be 
passed between sessions; it can happen, for example, in 
the case of sequential sessions, since in this particular case 
one session starts only after another session ends; this type 
of collaboration can also take place if, for example, a 
session is programmed to be initiated in the case a certain 
phenomenon is detected in another session, or in the case 
an unexpected change in a particular phenomenon occurs. 
IV. 
WISE-MANAGER 
In order to implement and validate the CWSN model, 
we 
have 
implemented 
a 
collaborative 
sessions’ 
management tool, called WISE-MANager (WIreless 
SEnsor networks MANager for collaborative sessions). 
The WISE-MANager tool allows creating, monitoring and 
managing collaborative sessions. The purpose of using 
collaborative sessions is to provide a better interaction 
between the user and the WSN, since the user can 
customize the type of monitoring to be carried out (sensor 
node, phenomenon, or time interval of monitoring), and 
query the network and its components. This way, the 
WISE-MANager tool increases the flexibility of the WSN.  
It is important to note that the proposed tool was 
developed in the context of the WISE-MUSE project [18]. 
The nodes used in this project implement the ZigBee 
protocol; therefore, the WISE-MANager was tested using 
these nodes. Nevertheless, the WISE-MANager is not 
ZigBee-oriented; this tool can be used to manage 
collaborative sessions in WSNs composed by nodes that 
use any other communication protocol. 
Also note that the ZigBee protocol defines three types 
of devices: end devices, routers and coordinators. End 
devices correspond to sensor nodes with sensing 
capabilities, routers are sensor nodes can also sense data 
but they are essentially responsible for routing data 
collected by the end devices in the their WPAN to the 
coordinator, and, finally, the coordinator corresponds to 
the sink node. 
The WISE-MANager tool was implemented in Java 
and it is ZigBee-compliant. It is composed of two main 
modules: (i) Collaborative Sessions’ Management; and (ii) 
WSN Management.  
The first module, collaborative sessions’ management, 
allows creating and managing collaborative sessions inside 
a WSN. Users can configure the session’s parameters (id, 
description, etc.), the sensor nodes that will make part of 
that session, the monitoring period, and the phenomena to 
be monitored (Fig. 3). 
After creating the session, the user can visualize and 
change the session’s parameters. Moreover, he can also 
start and stop the session’s monitoring at any moment, 
monitor the sessions that are in an “open” state, and delete 
them. Thus, sessions can be opened manually by the user 
or automatically according to the session’s monitoring 
schedule. 
Moreover, the user can export the session’s data to a MS 
Word document, choosing the session and the monitoring 
time interval. The document will contain the session’s 
parameters as well as the data received during the session.  
In the second module, named WSN Management, the 
user can choose a serial port where the WSN’s coordinator 
is connected. Using this module, the user can see the WSN 
information, like the PAN ID, the network channel, and the 
network components (routers, end devices, coordinator, 
etc.) and its parameters. Moreover, the user can modify the 
device’s identifier (Fig. 4). 
A. Case Study 
In order to validate the WISE-MANager tool, we have 
applied it to a heterogeneous network, which is composed 
of sensor nodes and other wireless devices that detect the 
state of the emergency doors at the Whale Museum 
situated in Madeira Island, Portugal.  
Several experiments were carried out to validate the 
proposed tool. One experiment conducted at the museum 
was made to test the emergency door device inside the 
WSN. Thus, we created two sessions inside the WSN: (i) 
session 3 composed of node 3; and (ii) session 4 composed 
of node 2 and node 6. Fig. 5 illustrates physical location of 
the WSN inside the museum. In this figure, the whole 
WSN is represented using the CWSN model. 
 
Figure 2.  
Multi-level collaboration hierarchy within a WSN. 
13
COLLA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-143-4

 
Figure 3.  
Creating collaborative sessions using the WISE-
MANager tool. 
In this experiment, both sessions were executed in 
parallel, monitoring two different exhibition rooms. Session 
3 monitored temperature and humidity, while session 4 
monitored temperature, humidity, light, and the emergency 
door state changes (emergency, open or close) from node 6, 
which was installed inside the emergency door’s blocker. 
Data collected in this experiment is depicted in Fig. 6.  
To evaluate the performance of the tool, a test was 
performed during 9 hours in order to check if the tool was 
receiving the correct packets for each session. This test was 
also used to analyze packet loss. It was verified that all data 
sent by the sessions was collected by the tool without any 
packet loss. After these experiments, we verified that the 
WISE-MANager tool was able to create, start, close, end and 
delete sessions.  
B. Advantages and disadvantages 
Analyzing Table 1, we can verify that in terms of 
querying the WSN, most of the tools are able to do it. On the 
other hand, none of these tools can create or use 
collaborative sessions to manage the WSN. The WISE-
MANager tool allows customizing the monitoring activity 
and defining the session’s parameters.  
Moreover, the WISE-MANager tool, allows the user to 
control the network and inquire the WSN, getting 
information like communication channel, network ID, PAN 
ID, etc. It is also possible to detect the network’s devices and 
change their identifiers. 
Through collaborative sessions, the WISE-MANager tool 
enhances collaboration between the user and the network. 
Thus, the network is more flexible since the user can 
customize the collaboration, choosing different nodes to 
monitor different phenomena, and the monitoring time 
interval. Therefore, the network topology can be dynamic, 
since nodes can be active or inactive, according to the 
collaborative session’s state. Additionally, this feature allows 
the energy saving of the network nodes. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we have proposed a hierarchical model of 
collaboration that brings the CSCW concepts and properties 
to WSNs. We have described the roles and tasks of the 
collaboration participants in a WSN. 
Another main contribution of this paper is the proposal of 
the concept of session as the main unit of a collaborative 
activity in a WSN. A classification of sessions regarding 
their timing characteristics was also presented. Moreover, we 
described the main requirements for creating collaboration 
groups in WSNs, as well as its advantages. Thus, we have 
enhanced the CWSN model [3] by proposing a hierarchy of 
collaboration that identifies the different types and levels of 
collaboration that might exist within a WSN.  
This work allowed us to conclude that the collaboration 
hierarchy, which is composed by distinct collaboration 
levels, is a result of the distinct roles that the different 
entities play in a WSN. A major advantage of the 
hierarchical modelling of collaboration is that it can be used 
by other researchers as a framework to describe the 
collaboration relationships established in any WSN, despite 
its particular application.  
Finally, we presented the WISE-MANager tool, which 
was created to manage collaborative sessions. This tool 
allows increasing collaboration between the user and the 
WSN. The user gains more flexibility in customizing, 
manipulating, and controlling the WSN. As for future work, 
we intend to implement an interface that facilitates the 
programming of the nodes and of the network from the user 
point of view.  
 
Figure 4.  
Detecting WSN devices. 
 
Figure 5.  
WSN devices for the second experiment conducted 
in the Madeira Whale Museum  
14
COLLA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-143-4

 
Figure 6.  
Data collected by Session 4. 
Table 1.  
COMPARING WISE-MANAGER WITH RELATED SOLUTIONS 
 
Query 
WSN 
WSN 
Managemen
t 
Create 
Sessions 
View 
Session
s 
Monitor 
Sessions 
Tiny DB 
[19] 
No 
No 
No 
No 
No 
MonSense 
[20] 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
No 
No 
Mote-View 
[21] 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
No 
No 
MANNA 
[22] 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
No 
No 
BOSS [23] 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
No 
No 
WISE-
MANager 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
REFERENCES 
[1] Akyildiz, I., Su, W., Sankarasubramaniam, Y., and Cayirci, E.: A 
Survey on Sensor Networks. IEEE Communications Magazine. 38 
(4), pp. 393-422 (2002). 
[2] Römer, K. and Mattern, F. 2004. The Design Space of Wireless 
Sensor Networks. IEEE Wireless Communications. 11 (6), pp. 54-
61(2004). 
[3] Brito, L. and Rodríguez, L.: A Collaborative Model for Representing 
Wireless Sensor Networks’ Entities and Properties. In: 3rd ACM Int. 
Workshop on Performance Monitoring, Measurement and Evaluation 
Heterogeneous Wireless and Wired Networks (PM2HW2N’08), pp. 
104-111, Vancouver, Canada (2008). 
[4] Ramanathan, P., Saluja, K., and Hu, Y.: Collaborative Sensor Signal 
Processing for Target Detection, Localization and Tracking. 
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of 
Wisconsin-Madison, 
Madison, 
USA, 
http://www.ece.wisc.edu/~sensit/publications/army02.pdf (2002). 
[5] Wang, K.-C. and Ramanathan, P.: Collaborative Sensing Using 
Sensors of Uncoordinated Mobility. Int. Conference on Distributed 
Computing in Sensor Systems, LNCS, vol. 3560, pp. 293-306. 
Springer, Marina del Rey, USA (2005). 
[6] Iftode, L., Borcea, C., and Kang, P.: Cooperative Computing in 
Sensor Networks, Handbook of Sensor Networks: Compact Wireless 
and Wired Sensing Systems. Mohammad Ilyas (ed.), CRC Press 
(2004). 
[7] Chen, G., Guo, T.-D., Yang, W.-G., and Zhao, T.: An improved ant-
based routing protocol in Wireless Sensor Networks. In: Int. 
Conference on Collaborative Computing: Networking, Applications 
and Worksharing (CollaborateCom 2006), pp. 1-7. Atlanta, USA 
(2006). 
[8] Dardari, D. and Conti, A.: A Sub-Optimal Hierarchical Maximum 
Likelihood Algorithm for Collaborative Localization in Ad-Hoc 
Networks. In: IEEE Communications Society Conference on Sensor 
and Ad Hoc Communications and Networks (SECON 2004), pp. 425-
429. Santa Clara, USA (2004). 
[9] Chadha, A., Liu, Y., and Das, S.: Group Key Distribution via Local 
Collaboration 
in 
Wireless 
Sensor 
Networks. 
In: 
IEEE 
Communications Society Conference on Sensor and Ad Hoc 
Communications and Networks (SECON 2005), pp. 46-54. Santa 
Clara, USA (2005). 
[10] Sanli, H., Poornachandran, R., and Cam, H.: Collaborative Two-
Level Task Scheduling for Wireless Sensor Nodes with Multiple 
Sensing Units. In: IEEE Communications Society Conference on 
Sensor and Ad Hoc Communications and Networks (SECON 2005), 
pp. 350-361. Santa Clara, USA (2005). 
[11] Reghelin, R. and Fröhlich, A.: A Decentralized Location System for 
Sensor Networks Using Cooperative Calibration and Heuristics. In: 
9th ACM Int. Symposium on Modeling Analysis and Simulation of 
Wireless 
and Mobile 
Systems 
(MSWiM’06), 
pp. 139-146. 
Torremolinos, Spain (2006). 
[12] Bychkovskiy, V., Megerian, S., Estrin, D., and Potkonjak, M.: A 
Collaborative Approach to In-Place Sensor Calibration. In: 2nd Int. 
Workshop on Information Processing in Sensor Networks (IPSN’03), 
pp. 301-316. Palo Alto, USA (2003). 
[13] Giannecchini, S., Caccamo, M., and Shih, C.-S.: Collaborative 
resource allocation in wireless sensor networks. In: 16th Euromicro 
Conference on Real-Time Systems (ECRTS’04), pp.35-44. Catania, 
Italy (2004). 
[14] Hu, A. and Servetto, S.: Algorithmic Aspects of the Time 
Synchronization Problem in Large-Scale Sensor Networks. Mobile 
Networks and Applications, vol. 10, pp. 491-503, Springer Science + 
Business Media Inc. (2005). 
[15] Krohn, A., Beigl, M., Decker, C., Riedel, T., Zimmer, T., and Varona, 
D.: Increasing Connectivity in Wireless Sensor Network using 
Cooperative Transmission. 3rd Int. Conference on Networked 
Sensing Systems (INSS). Chicago, USA, (2006). 
[16] Cheng, L., Lian, T., Zhang, Y., and Ye, Q. Monitoring Wireless 
Sensor Networks by Heterogeneous Collaborative Groupware. In: 
Sensors for Industry Conference (Sicon/04). New Orleans, USA, pp. 
130-134,  (2004). 
[17] Liu, L., Ma, H., Tao, D., and Zhang, D.: A Hierarchical Cooperation 
Model for Sensor Networks Supported Cooperative Work. In 10th 
Int. Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work in Design 
(CSCWD’06), pp. 1-6 (2006). 
[18] Peralta, L.M.R, Brito, L.M.P.L., and Gouveia, B.A.T. The WISE-
MUSE Project: Environmental Monitoring and Controlling of 
Museums based on Wireless Sensors Networks. EJSE – Electronic 
Journal of Structural Engineering, Special Issue on Sensor Network 
for Building Monitoring: From Theory to Real Application, 2009, pp. 
46-57, ISSN 1443-9255. 
[19] Madden S, Franklin, M.J., and Hellerstein, J.M. and Hong, W., 
“TinyDB: An Acquisitional Query Processing System for Sensor 
Networks”, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA, 2005. 
[20] Pinto, J., Sousa, A., Lebres, P., Gonçalves, G.M., and Sousa, J., 
“MonSense-Application for Deployment, Monitoring and Control of 
Wireless 
Sensor 
Networks”, 
Faculdade 
de 
Engenharia 
da 
Universidade do Porto, Portugal. 
[21] Winnie, L.L., Datta, A., and Cardell-Oliver, R., “Network 
Management in Wireless Sensor Networks”, School of Computer 
Science & Software Engineering, The University of Western 
Australia”, Australia. 
[22] Ruiz, L.B., Nogueira, J.M., and Loureiro, A.A.F. MANNA: A 
Management Architecture for Wireless Sensor Networks. IEEE 
Communications Magazine, pp. 116-125 (2003). 
[23] Song, H., Kim, D., Lee, K., and Sung, J., “Upnp-Based Sensor 
Network Management Architecture,”, Proc. 2nd Int. Conference on 
Mobile Computing and Ubiquitous Networking, pp. 85-92 (2005).  
Tools 
15
COLLA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-143-4

