Experiments in Collaborative Cloud-based Distance Learning  
Aleksandar Karadimce, Danco Davcev 
Faculty of Computer Science and Engineering, University Ss Cyril and Methodius 
Skopje, R. Macedonia 
akaradimce@ieee.org, danco.davcev@finki.ukim.mk 
 
 
Abstract—Mobile devices have revolutionary changed the 
process of multimedia consumption in distance learning 
systems and provide flexible user-oriented experience. M-
learning 
systems 
typically 
include 
different 
kinds 
of 
multimedia resources helping learners to be more interactive 
and interested in collaboration. The proposed multi-tenancy 
group collaboration within the cloud-based learning platform 
(as a main contribution of this paper) provides easy and simple 
access to the cloud-based Platform as a Service (PaaS) model 
and delivers improved interactive tools for distance learning. 
This collaborative and interactive cloud-based learning 
environment that students are using to develop and deploy 
intelligent multimedia content resources has been subjected to 
quality 
of 
experience 
(QoE) 
estimation. 
Using 
the 
Questionnaire for User Interaction Satisfaction (QUIS) as 
estimation tool, the system has provided an effective 
collaboration environment between the students and the 
professor, by continuous interaction in the multi-tenant cloud 
environment.  
Keywords - distance learning; cloud computing; quality of 
experience; collaborative group learning. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Traditional university applied teaching requires the 
professor to be present in the classroom to provide 
scaffolding and collaboration with students aimed to 
complete all assigned tasks that they are facing. The process 
of dissemination of the multimedia content in distance 
learning systems is a challenging task and requires more than 
just simple static HTML-based websites. With the 
introduction of the Web 2.0 technologies in distance learning 
context, we are facing a new era in the practice of e-learning 
[1]. L. Wan [1] has proposed a framework that consists of 
Web 2.0 tools, e-learning 2.0 application and e-learning 2.0 
learning modes. Recent distance learning systems are 
directed to provide on-line collaborative tools, which are 
using Web-based e-learning architecture [1].  
The multimedia material that is used in collaborative 
distance learning environment should be adjusted according 
to the mobile device capabilities, student domain knowledge 
level, interaction style and skills [2]. There have been several 
distance learning systems, like in [3], that propose a 
decentralized and distributed adaptive architecture, which 
would bring the possibility to support collaborative activities 
for sharing resources between students with their mobile 
devices in constantly changing conditions. Challenges in 
distance learning systems exist in the process of delivering 
individualized content according to student’s particular 
learning needs, by using several technologies to ensure 
maximum collaborative learning tasks [4]. Taking into 
consideration the results from research by I. Jung [4], we 
have concluded that interaction is an important dimension in 
evaluating the quality of e-learning. 
Mobile devices provide an interactive and user friendly 
interface that was investigated in mobile video retargeting 
and location-based systems [5], as well as in mobile health 
care applications [6]. Especially interesting is mobile 
multimedia computing because it is a computationally 
intensive task on mobile devices limited by battery and 
computing power [5]. Modern m-learning [7] applications 
are complex because they deliver learning content usually as 
multimedia material, which combines texts, pictures and 
video/audio files. Because of the limited mobile resources, 
algorithms designed for mobile multimedia systems need to 
be lightweight or when Internet access is available, part of 
the computing tasks to be offloaded in the cloud where more 
resources (such as computing, memory, and relevant data) 
are available. The existing research by C. Ciurea and P. 
Pocatilu [7], proposes m-learning applications and mobile 
learning processes inside a virtual university campus that 
have the great potential to enable innovative and effective 
distance learning techniques. Some of the positive benefits of 
using cloud computing architectures in distance learning 
systems development for m-learning systems are presented 
in [7], [8] and [9]. M. S. Fathi et al. [9] presented and 
developed the concepts and potential of innovative 
collaborative 
tools, 
such 
as 
Context-Aware 
Cloud 
Computing Information Systems, in order to ensure the 
delivery of applicable and reliable information to enhance 
the collaboration of the parties within the construction supply 
chain and project stakeholders. 
The main contribution of this paper is the advantage of 
using the multi-tenancy group collaboration in cloud-based 
learning platform (CCLP) during distance learning processes 
in order to provide increased quality of e-learning. It will be 
estimated by the quality of experience (QoE) analysis 
conducted with a group of university students. We propose 
our collaborative cloud-based learning platform to provide 
easy and simple access to the cloud-based Platform as a 
Service (PaaS) model, in order to provide improved 
interactive tools for distance learning application.  
This paper is organized as follows: Section II presents 
our proposed architecture of collaborative cloud-based 
architecture. Section III presents a case study for distance m-
learning of a database course. Section IV gives overview on 
the results from the QoE estimation model. Finally, Section 
V concludes the paper. 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-287-5
COLLA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

II. 
COLLABORATIVE CLOUD-BASED ARCHITECTURE 
M-learning systems typically include different kinds of 
multimedia resources helping learners to be more interactive 
and interested in collaboration. The proposed collaborative 
cloud-based architecture for distance learning system uses 
Platform as a Service (PaaS) [11] cloud model that comes 
with integrated developer tools, database management 
system and Web server. This platform provides multi-tenant 
environment where users can work on different operating 
systems from mobile devices, and that way students and 
professors 
can 
access 
the 
cloud-based 
platform 
simultaneously from any location, at any time. The proposed 
collaborative cloud-based architecture is given in Figure 1, 
where different layered components in distance learning 
environment are illustrated.  
Collaborative cloud-based architecture consists of three 
main parts: user interface layer, network layer and cloud-
based multimedia delivery system. Mobile clients (smart 
phone, tablet and laptop) are members of the user interface 
layer that provide various access points for accessing our 
cloud-based system. The network layer is responsible for 
daily operation of the platform and monitoring Quality of 
Service (QoS). Networks are the main means to deliver the 
multimedia content through a variety of protocols (LTE, 
WiMax, WiFi, GSM, EDGE, etc.). The third component of 
this architecture is based on the cloud computing model and 
is 
composed 
of 
hardware 
(infrastructure) 
layer, 
virtualization layer, platform layer and multimedia service. 
The cloud management server uses the request broker agent 
that collects the users’ requests for multimedia content and, 
depending on the estimated user profile and context-aware 
conditions, the adaptation agent is delivering the appropriate 
multimedia content to the user. The proposed cloud-based 
technologies provide high interactive environment (on a 
single or a group of users’ level) as a basis for delivery of 
personalized and adapted multimedia content. 
Using this cloud-based architecture, the student can work 
on their application independently and efficiently without 
additional 
problems 
with 
software 
installation 
and 
compatibility issues.  
 
Figure 1.  Collaborative cloud-based architecture. 
The cloud provides ease of transfer of multimedia 
content between the students, using mobile devices, and the 
university distance learning portal. Students have the main 
developer role, they are creating database objects, and they 
write SQL request queries and develop Web-based 
applications. The professor has a supervision role, but also 
very important interactive possibilities based on PaaS cloud 
model. The learning process starts when mobile users enroll 
to the Web 2.0 university distance learning portal, then 
locate the link to PaaS cloud model learning platform. This 
way, the student has direct access from his personal mobile 
device to the remote Database Management System (DBMS) 
and he/she is able to send the SQL query to the cloud and 
receive results on his mobile device. Using the proposed 
cloud-based architecture, professors can monitor the 
students’ progress and can provide scaffolding and propose 
more efficient solutions or can interactively support the error 
debugging in the application development progress.  
III. 
CASE STUDY – DISTANCE M-LEARNING OF A 
DATABASE COURSE 
The 
proposed 
collaborative 
cloud-based 
learning 
platform has been demonstrated to the students using the 
Web 2.0 university distance learning portal, see Figure 2. We 
have created a distance learning course for learning the 
database course by using the ORACLE database. The course 
covers the Entity Relations (ER) – real world modeling 
techniques that provide basic knowledge for designing 
relational database systems, see Figure 3. Our case study 
provides interactive communication with real database 
problems that students need to handle.  
In order to conduct QoE estimation in our case study 
using the university distance learning system, the students 
were split into two teams: control and experimental groups. 
The first control group was subjected to regular distance 
learning course for SQL query data manipulation, and on the 
other hand, the second experimental group of students has 
been provided with collaborative cloud-based learning 
platform - APEX.  
 
 
 
Figure 2.  University Web 2.0 distance learning portal. 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-287-5
COLLA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

 
Figure 3.  List of lessons for the course Database systems. 
For the purpose of this case study, both lessons where 
available for learning on the Web 2.0 university distance 
learning portal under the database course in the section 
Lessons, see Figure 3. 
A. Control group of students 
The control group consisted of 15 students who have 
been offered a guided instructors’ video and audio course 
that is explaining the process of constructing correct SQL 
data manipulation queries, see Figure 4. This course 
presented an existing database to the control group of 
students, where using video and audio guidance have been 
given scaffolding for SQL query development process. For 
this part of the research we have used only multimedia 
streaming services, without any help from cloud computing 
technology in order to deliver the instructions to the control 
group of students that were using mobile devices. 
 
Figure 4.  Course presented to the control group of students. 
B. Experimental group of students 
Using the proposed collaborative cloud-based learning 
platform, we have delivered customized interactive learning 
course for the experimental group of 15 students. Oracle 
APEX [10] is a collaborative learning environment for 
processing Web-based SQL requests, and offers a platform 
for fast, reliable development and running Web applications. 
Oracle Application Express (APEX) is a rapid Web 
application development tool for the Oracle database, which 
relies on Web browser in order to gain hardware 
independence. Using mobile devices to access this platform, 
students are able to learn how to build SQL queries and 
incorporate different types of items and shared components 
in the Web-based application [10]. Their learning effort was 
completed with developing a Web-based application "UIST 
accommodation office" (see the mobile screenshot in Figure 
5) that was created from the proposed cloud-based platform. 
This system has provided an effective collaboration 
environment between students and professor, by continuous 
interaction in the multi-tenant cloud environment.  
The database Web application was developed for the 
needs of the University Accommodation Office. It contains 
information about students, accommodation room types, 
lease agreement types, invoices and student flats inspections. 
Using this Web-based application, all the users can easily see 
their status of acceptance in the University Accommodation 
Campus. To estimate the benefits of this innovative 
collaborative cloud-based PaaS model for distance learning, 
we conducted a quality of experience (QoE) analysis for both 
university student groups. 
IV. 
RESULTS FROM THE QOE ESTIMATION MODEL  
Mobile devices have revolutionary changed the process 
of multimedia consumption in distance learning systems and 
provide flexible user-oriented experience. Today, there is a 
growing trend to estimate the user satisfaction of video, 
audio and interaction level with the collaborative distance 
learning systems. These collaborative and interactive 
environments that students are using to develop and deploy 
intelligent multimedia content resources have to be subjected 
to estimation using a QoE model. The QoE estimation, 
according to the International Telecommunications Union 
(ITU) has been defined as “the overall acceptability of an 
application or service, as perceived subjectively by the end-
user” [12]. This requires subjective perception of the end-
users and indicates the importance of the context in which a 
system is being used, as well as the expectations that users 
have about the system [12].  
 
Figure 5.  Course presented to the experimental group of students.  
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-287-5
COLLA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

In our case study, of distance M-learning of database 
course, we have used rating scale for subjective evaluation of 
the student’s opinion, as required. The aim of Questionnaire 
for User Interaction Satisfaction (QUIS) is to measure users’ 
satisfaction with the human-computer interface and involves 
users’ satisfaction to examine the relationship with the users’ 
knowledge [13]. Students from both groups, control and 
experimental, were therefore required to respond to 22 
questions, using a 9-point response rating scale. Scores were 
recorded so that a high score denoted a factor which was 
highly satisfactory, and a low score indicated a more 
negative response. This questionnaire provided a qualitative 
approach of the QoE that is applied to obtain the details of 
the participants’ interaction with mobile device interface 
based on the individual experience. The QUIS questionnaire 
presented observations from the students overall reaction to 
the software, mobile screen, software terminology and 
system information, process of learning and system 
capabilities [13].  
We have conducted our survey for QoE evaluation model 
in order to measure the quality of achieved learning. 
Distance learning systems should be supported with 
increased interaction using multi-tenant mobile cloud 
computing environment. The QUIS survey questions were 
answered by both of the groups consisted of 15 students, 
control and experimental groups, which participated in the 
database course. 
The results from the control group of students that 
participated in regular distance learning course for SQL 
query data manipulation are given in Figure 6. We can 
conclude that control group of students have demonstrated 
better results from 12% to 14% percentage response for the 
values 6-7 on the 9-point rating scale. 
 
Figure 6.  Results from the control group of students. 
On the other hand, the experimental group of students 
participated in the course with collaborative cloud-based 
learning platform and created the mobile application UIST 
Accommodation Office. The analysis of the QUIS 
questionnaire completed by the students that participated in 
this group is given in Figure 7. From that chart we 
concluded that experimental group of students have 
demonstrated better results from 15% to 20% percentage 
response for the value of 8 on the 9-point rating scale.  
 
Figure 7.  Results from the experimental group of students. 
This research examines individuals’ performance with 
mobile device interface according to QoE estimation model 
in order to confirm the consistency of this research. 
Comparison of the results from the QUIS survey completed 
by the two groups of students has allowed us to conclude 
that the group of students that was using collaborative 
cloud-based learning platform had increased overall 
attention and provided educational benefit in the process of 
learning. It is obvious that the cloud-based learning 
platform, 
using 
the 
benefit 
of 
the 
multi-tenancy 
collaboration, had provided higher interaction between 
professor and students.  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 
The proposed collaborative cloud-based architecture 
enhances the importance and the benefits of collaborative 
and interactive knowledge in distance learning systems. 
This proposed system is based on the PaaS cloud model, 
which comes with integrated developer tools, database 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-287-5
COLLA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

management system and Web server. That way, students 
and professors can access the cloud-based multi-tenant 
platform simultaneously from any location in any time. We 
have understood the advantage of using multi-tenancy group 
collaboration in cloud-based learning platform through the 
quality of experience (QoE) analysis conducted with a 
group of university students. The QoE model for evaluation 
was done using the QUIS in order to measure users’ 
satisfaction with the human-computer interface and 
student’s satisfaction that leads to improved distance 
learning. 
In addition to the benefits from the proposed cloud- 
based collaborative environment, in our future work, we 
plan to provide an intelligent decision rules algorithm for 
adaptation of the multimedia content based on the user 
request, profile and context. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] L. Wan, "Application of Web 2.0 Technologies in E-Iearning 
Context," Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on 
Networking and Digital Society (ICNDS) 2010. 30-31 May 
2010.Wenzhou. 
vol.1. 
pp. 
437-440, 
DOI: 
10.1109/ICNDS.2010.5479229. 
[2] V. Glavinic, S. Ljubic, and M. Kukec, "A Holistic Approach 
to Enhance Universal Usability in m-Learning," Proceedings 
of the 2008 Second International Conference on Mobile 
Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies 
(UBICOMM '08). 29 Sept.- 4 Oct. 2008. Valencia, pp. 305-
310, DOI:10.1109/UBICOMM.2008.54. 
[3] D. Gil, J. Andersson, M. Milrad, and H. Sollervall, "Towards 
a Decentralized and Self-Adaptive System for M-Learning 
Applications," in Proc. 2012 Seventh IEEE International 
Conference on Wireless, Mobile and Ubiquitous Technology 
in Education (WMUTE 2012), pp. 162-166. 
[4] I. Jung, "The dimensions of e-learning quality: from the 
learner’s perspective," Educational Technology Research and 
Development, Aug 2011, vol.59, n4, pp. 445-464, ISSN-
1042-1629. 
[5] W. Zeng, "Mobile Media in Action: Remote Target 
Localization and Tracking," Multimedia, IEEE. Vol.19, Issue: 
3 
July 
- 
Sept. 
2012, 
pp. 
74-80, 
DOI:ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/MMUL.2012.37. 
[6] S. Sultan and P. Mohan, "Designing a Peer-Facilitated Self-
Management 
Mobile 
Application: 
A 
User-Centred 
Approach," Proceedings of the 6th International Conference 
on Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare 
(PervasiveHealth), 2012. 21-24 May 2012. San Diego, pp. 
228-231, DOI:org/10.4108/icst.pervasivehealth.2012.248707. 
[7] C. 
Ciurea 
and P. Pocatilu, 
"Designing 
M-Learning 
Applications 
for 
Collaborative 
Virtual 
Environments", 
International 
Journal 
of 
Education 
and 
Information 
Technologies, Issue 1, vol. 6, 2012, pp. 150-156. ISSN 2074-
1316. 
[8] P. Pocatilu, F. Alecu, and M. Vetrici, “Using Cloud 
Computing for e-Learning Systems,” in Recent Advances on 
Data Neworks, Communications, Computers, Academy of 
Economic Studies, Bucharest, Romania, pp. 54 -59. 
[9] M. S. Fathi, M. Abedi, S. Rambat, S. Rawai, and M. Z. 
Zakiyudin, "Context-aware cloud computing for construction 
collaboration," Journal of Cloud Computing, 2012, pp. 1-11, 
ISSN 2330-7889. 
[10] D. Baker and T. Jennings, Oracle Database 2 Day + 
Application Express Developer's Guide, Release 4.0. E15516-
04. 
Oracle, 
2010. 
http://docs.oracle.com/cd/E17556_01/doc/appdev.40/e15516.
pdf  [retrieved: 29/12/2012] 
[11] M. Wang and J. W.P. Ng, “Intelligent Mobile Cloud 
Education. Smart anytime-anywhere learning for the next 
generation campus environment," In proceedings of Eighth 
International Conference on Intelligent Environments, 2012, 
pp. 149-156, DOI: 10.1109/IE.2012.8.  
[12] D. Geerts, et al., "Linking an integrated framework with 
appropriate methods for measuring QoE," In Quality of 
Multimedia Experience (QoMEX), 2010 Second International 
Workshop on Quality of Multimedia Experience, pp. 158-163. 
[13] QUIS website, [Online] Available at: http://lap.umd.edu/quis 
[retrieved: 18/01/2013]  
 
 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-287-5
COLLA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

