Does the Acquaintance Relation Close up the
Administrator Community of Polish Wikipedia?
Analysing Polish Wikipedia Administrator Community with use of Multidimensional Behavioural Social
Network
Justyna Spychała
Faculty of Polish Studies
University of Warsaw
Warsaw, Poland
Email: jspychala@gmail.com
Mateusz Adamczyk
Faculty of Mathematics, Informatics and Mechanics
University of Warsaw
Warsaw, Poland
Email: adamczyk@mimuw.edu.pl
Piotr Turek
independent
Warsaw, Poland
Email: piotrt@gmail.com
Abstract—The aim of this paper is to answer a question if
a group of administrators of Polish-language Wikipedia is closing
up because of relation of acquaintance. The administrators
are usually nominated by the community and then elected by
voting. This research is an attempt to ﬁnd out whether the
community is not becoming less open to new users and new
potential administrators, because of their lack of chances to gain
reputation. The key here is the understanding of social aspects
driving the process of Request for Adminship (RfA) votings.
Based on our previous work focused on social networks induced
from collective activity of wikipedians, this paper extends it
by the annual analysis of obtained statistics and examination
of clustering coefﬁcient as an approximation of social capital.
We present the dynamics of relationships between voters and
candidates across several years of Polish Wikipedia development.
Keywords—Multidimensional
Behavioral
Social
Network;
Wikipedia; Request for Adminship; Clustering Coefﬁcient.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Administrators (or sysops) are very dedicated and trust-
worthy participants of the Wikipedia projects in all language
versions. Thanks to community decision, they have received
special privileges and—due to their entitlements they are
able to use administrative tools—they exercise preventing and
policing functions. Administrators have the right to edit all
the Wikipedia articles as well as many other privileges—
understood rather as duties. These powers are not to suggest
editorial control over the project, but rather provide men-
toring and technical assistance in other wikipedians’ work.
Administrators also serve by helping, especially to newcomers,
in editing of Wikipedia—all newly registered users get their
guides—the administrators to whom they can always turn for
help and be sure they will receive it as soon as possible.
Due to increasing amount of management
work at
Wikipedia, such as content quality control, coordination, main-
tenance, that are caused by the increasing popularity and
amount of content in Wikipedia [1], the importance of ad-
ministrators is increasing. This creates a potential risk that
administrators may become overwhelmed by the amount of
work and their response time become longer.
However, the Polish community of Administrators is grow-
ing slower than expected; hence, the question whether and
why this community closes up. Currently, there are 149
administrators on Polish Wikipedia—for comparison, 1,147
administrators work currently on the English version. Of
course, the English version is much more developed, but sheer
number of people with administrative privileges is impressive.
Administrators are elected during a special procedure the
rules of which are clearly deﬁned. This procedure is called
Request for Adminship (RfA). As it was already mentioned,
the privileges for administrators are granted by Wikipedia
community. They are granted by voting of the Wikipedia users
who are well-known and respected members of the community
and know and respect the established rules on the website.
Wikipedians who candidate for the administrator must “have
a minimum of 1,000 not deleted edits, ﬁrst of which has
to be made at least 3 months prior to the date of ﬁling
the candidacy”. Nominations for administrator candidates are
adopted by a special form on the web page that also contains
the regulations and the list of candidates. New administrators
are elected during a voting that lasts a week (168 hours).
Wikipedians who are allowed to vote must be registered for at
least one month and must have a minimum of 500 not deleted
edits.
Interestingly, in case of English version of Wikipedia, no
formal conditions are required in order to declare a candidacy
for an administrator. The only conditions are possession of
an account and trust among other users. Despite this, the page
with the declaration forms contains the information that in case
of self-nominating, it is recommended to have at least 2,000
edits for a minimum period of 3 months. Another important
difference is that in the case of English version of Wikipedia,
new administrators are elected not by voting, but by discussion.
Moreover, “the consensus in RFA is not achieved by exceeding
a threshold, but by the strength of the justiﬁcation of the
candidacy”.
This paper is a reﬁnement of work done by Turek et al. [2].
It covers the range of years 2005-2011 and its aim is to answer
the question if the reason for decreasing in successful RfA
votings in Polish Wikipedia is choosing Administrators based
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-287-5
COLLA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

on acquaintance. We argue that it is not the case. Probably, it
is due to growing expectations about new candidates.
The rest of this work is divided as follows: in Section II,
the related work is presented. Section III contains base statis-
tics, which show that growth of Polish-language Wikipedia
Administrators group has slowed down. Data presented there
are extended by year 2011, in comparison to [3]. In Section
IV, Multidimensional Behavioural Social Network is used
to analyse historical voting data. This analysis is the main
contribution of this paper. Section IV also contains answer
to question stated above. Section V presents conclusions and
suggestions for future work.
II.
RELATED WORK
The problem of evaluation and recommendation of users
requesting for adminship in Wikipedia has been addressed in
several papers. In one of them, Burke et al. [4] try to indicate
the features and qualities determinative for the user selection to
the position of administrator. On the basis of publicly available
tips for candidates [5], a set of attributes, that a future admin-
istrator should have has been developed. Behavioural data and
comments, not page text, were used to evaluate candidates.
Authors counted each candidate’s edits in various namespaces
(article, article talk, Wikipedia, Wikipedia talk, wiki projects,
etc.) to calculate total contribution as well as contribution
diversity. They also measured user interaction, mainly activity
on talk pages, but also participation on arbitration or mediation
committee pages and a few others. There are also several
other statistics, but the ones mentioned seemed to be the most
relevant to the candidate’s success. Especially successful were
candidates with strong edit diversity, mere edits in Wikipedia
articles didn’t add much more chance of success. In user
interactions, article talk page edits were the best predictor
of success, with other authors talk page edits being rather
poor. Burke et al. also conﬁrmed Kittur’s [6] results that the
percentage of indirect work (coordination, discussion, etc.)
grows over time, the share of articles in all Wikipedia edits
is decreasing.
It is noteworthy that in [4] only qualities of each user were
evaluated. Leskovec et al. [7] have shown that the outcome
of the voting depends on the candidate and his or her place
in the community. They found out that the probability of one
person’s vote to be positive is correlated with the basic relative
ﬁgures such as: who—voter or candidate has more edits, who
has more barnstars (awards given by other Wikipedia users),
the extent of collaboration of the two, etc. Authors strongly
noted that the vote value (positive or negative) is not just a
function of candidate, but both voter and candidate.
In [8], the impact of the similarity of users on their
mutual assessment has been analysed. The examined data were
collected from three websites: Wikipedia, Stack Overﬂow,
and Epinions. The important feature of those websites is the
possibility of mutual evaluation between their users. In case
of Wikipedia it is the RfA voting. Two users were considered
similar, when they have performed similar actions, which in
case of Wikipedia were edits of articles. The authors concluded
that, in case of Wikipedia, the possibility of casting a vote for a
candidate increases with the increase of the similarity between
the candidate and the voter. The voters, who are similar to
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
 100
 2005
 2006
 2007
 2008
 2009
 2010
 2011
Fig. 1.
Number of votings in each year
the candidate, are less driven by the objective qualities (status
in the community), such as experience in development of
Wikipedia. Candidate’s status determines casting a vote for
that candidate when the voter and candidate are only slightly
similar.
An interesting observation is that during voting, there are
much more voters similar to the candidate in a group with
higher status than in a group with relatively lower status. This
may suggest that during RfA the voters do not constitute
a representative sample of community. This allows for the
outcome of the election to be predicted when proﬁles and
similarity of a few ﬁrst voters and the candidate are known. To
effectively predict the result of the voting one does not even
need to know the votes given by the ﬁrst voters.
The quality of Wikipedia articles depends on the level of
cooperation of the editors. Rad et al. [9] decided to examine
the history of article edits, and on that basis determine the
mutual attitude of the editors and how controversial is the
given article. Casting a vote during new administrator election
was adopted as an indicator of relation between two users.
If the voter has a positive attitude toward the candidate, the
vote will be positive. In case of a negative attitude, the vote
will be negative. The authors decided that the co-edit of the
article is a pair of changes of the same section of the article,
which were set apart in time by less than a ﬁxed number of
revisions. A social network with nodes labelled with users’
proﬁles and directed edges labelled with users’ co-edits, was
also considered. This graph was used to induce a decision
system and train a classiﬁer, which was highly effective in
predicting votes. What is important, is that this approach is
complementary to the ones described earlier. It is based on the
analysis of Wikipedia articles and their edit history and not on
the aggregated statistics of the community. What is interesting,
it turned out that it is relatively easy to predict positive votes.
It seems that they are inﬂuenced by the most recent history of
cooperation. On the other hand, the high quality of prediction
of the negative votes required appropriately bigger and richer
history of cooperation. The authors risked the statement that
the users can remember disagreements for a long time and
during a voting they can be guided by hidden qualities, like
for example, the votes already cast in a given voting.
III.
STATISTICS FOR REQUEST FOR ADMINSHIP
PROCEDURE
As of December 31, 2011 the Polish-language Wikipedia
had 171 administrators. Since 2005, there were 307 votings
on RfA. 177 of those ended with granting the administrator
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-287-5
COLLA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 2005
 2006
 2007
 2008
 2009
 2010
 2011
Fig. 2.
The percentage of accepted RfA in each year
 0
 5000
 10000
 15000
 20000
 25000
 2006
 2007
 2008
 2009
 2010
 2011
Fig. 3.
The average number of edits made by user at the moment of receiving
administrative privileges
 0
 200
 400
 600
 800
 1000
 1200
 1400
 2006
 2007
 2008
 2009
 2010
 2011
Fig. 4.
The average number of days since creating an account at the moment
of receiving administrative privileges
privileges to a candidate, in 110 of those, the candidates were
rejected and in about 40 votings, the candidates resigned before
the end of the voting and about 30 votings were cancelled
(due to statutory requirements or lack of acceptance of the
nomination by the candidate). About 38 administrators were
chosen before the introduction of RfA procedures in March
2005. The data on RfAs do not sum up for several reasons.
Among them are: veriﬁcation votings and losing privileges by
administrator either by giving them up or being revoked by
the Arbitration Committee.
In the current version, the procedure states that a candidate
for an administrator must have an account for at least three
months and at least one thousand not deleted edits. In order
to participate in the voting, user must have an account for
at least 2 weeks and at least 500 article edits. Voting begins
at the moment when the candidates conﬁrm that they are
willing to take the administrator position, as users can apply by
themselves or be nominated by other users. In order to receive
administrator privileges, the candidate need to receive at least
20 votes “for” and it must constitute of at least 80% of the
sum of the votes “for” and “against”. If the candidate does
not receive the required number of positive votes or do not
meet the formal requirements, he or she can apply again after
at least 60 days since the end of last voting. A similar rule
applies to the administrators who resigned from their position
but would like to receive the privileges again.
Figure 1 is presenting the number of votings in each year;
the peak can be observed in the year 2006, when that number
reaches 95, while a year before it reached only 34. One year
after the peak, the number of votings dropped to 60. With the
exception of the years 2006-2007, the number of votings never
exceeded 38. In the years 2010-2011 that number declined
below 34. The number of RfAs between year 2006 and 2011
decreased by nearly three quarters (form 95 to 26).
The percentage of the accepted nominations in each year
(see Figure 2) can be divided into three periods. The ﬁrst one
consists of the years 2005-2008, when the percentage of the
accepted candidates ranged from 57 to 70. The second period
are the years 2009-2010, with the percentage below 50 (47%
and 42% respectively). Between the years 2008 and 2010 the
percentage of the positive RfAs fell by almost a half (from
70% to 42%). The third period, which accounts for the year
2011, is characterized by the relatively high number of positive
RfAs. However, it should be noted that the number of the
votings performed at that time was signiﬁcantly lower than in
the previous years.
The next study, related to the experience of candidates prior
to granting them administrator privileges, has been conducted
on 97 users, who recently received them. In case of those
elected before, the gathering of data was impossible because
of gaps in the logs of Polish Wikipedia.
One of the factors causing the most discussion during the
voting is the number of edits performed by the candidate.
RfA rules contain the following sentence: “Users who want
to candidate for adminship (...) must have at least 1000 not
deleted edits”. Often, however, this number is considered by
the voters to be too small. Basing on the analysis of the number
of edits, it can be seen (Figure 3) that the minimum falls on
the ﬁrst half of 2006 with an average of 1,957 edits. This value
then grows up to 2011 when it slightly exceeds 20,000 edits.
This indicates that year by year, candidates needed to have
greater experience in order to be accepted as administrators.
The difference between the level of experience required by the
regulations and the level widely accepted has been increasing
as well. A similar phenomenon can be observed in the German
Wikipedia, where—according to the voters—in the second half
of 2010, candidates were accepted only if they had over 10,000
edits.
Another factor that stirs up emotions at the time of voting
is the seniority (understood as time since the ﬁrst not deleted
edit) on Wikipedia. The terms of voting set the following
requirements: “Users who want to candidate for adminship
(...) must have at least 1000 not deleted edits, the ﬁrst of
which took place at least 3 months before the date of candidacy
proposition”. The seniority (in days) of candidates, before the
date of registration and acquiring the administrator rights, had
been analysed (see ﬁgure 4). This, however, is not exactly the
same value as the required by the regulations. The measured
seniority in the ﬁrst half of the year 2006 was 173 days. This
value has been gradually increasing: from 463 days in the
second half of 2007, to 788 days in the ﬁrst half of 2009, with
a slight decline in the second half of 2009 (739 days). In the
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-287-5
COLLA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

second half of 2010 the value reached 1310 days. This result,
however, may be unreliable due to the fact that during that
period only two votings took place. In the second half of 2011
the measured value reached 1374 days. The overall analysis of
the chart shows that in the year 2006 candidates had less than
a year of seniority, however, since mid-2008 the seniority is
at least two years. The last two candidates who had less than
one year of experience were selected in February 2009 and
November 2008.
Both Figure 1 and Figure 2 show the downward trend in
the total number of appointed administrators between 2006
and 2011. This decrease gives reason for serious concern as
the amount of administrative work on Wikipedia is constantly
growing. This phenomenon may have several possible ex-
planations. The ﬁrst explanation is the declining number of
candidates who accept their nominations for administrators
(that would explain the decreasing number of RfA votings),
but the conﬁrmation of this hypothesis is beyond the scope
of this paper. Nevertheless, related works have shown that in
recent years Wikipedia has experienced a downtrend in the
amount of user contributions, which reﬂects the general decline
in motivation [10].
The second explanation states that the number of positive
nominations decreases due to the changing criteria for selecting
and accepting candidates. Those criteria can vary in many
ways; however, our research shows that they are connected
to the candidate’s experience. This experience can be initially
estimated on the basis of the edits performed, but the more
accurate measurement (presented in [4]) represents the number
of article edits in a speciﬁc category.
The more damaging prospect is the fact that the adminis-
trator community is chosen on the basis acquaintance between
current administrators and candidates. The next section dis-
cusses, if that is the case.
IV.
ACQUAINTANCE IN THE ADMINISTRATORS SOCIETY
A. Data description
Data and multidimensional behavioural social network used
for this paper were gathered, aggregated and made available
by the team led by dr. Adam Wierzbicki. Methodology, data
and networks are described in greater detail in [3]. Examined
period encompasses the years 2005-2011.
Basically, the network consists of four dimensions:
•
Co-edits,
•
Reverts,
•
Discussion,
•
Topics.
Weights in co-edits dimension are based on number of
words written by one author next to the text written by some
other one in the text of articles. The authorship information
for a particular fragment of text was obtained by analysing its
ﬁrst occurrence in the whole edit history of examined page.
Edge strength in reverts dimension is based on the number
of edits made by one author and reverted by other. It was
obtained by searching identical revisions before the examined
one. If it was found, each pair of examined revision and
revisions after the other identical one was used to calculate
number of reverts.
Similar to co-edits, edge strengths in discussion network
were stated as number of words written by one author next to
text created by other one. But in this dimension, the talk pages
were considered.
The last dimension, topics, was a little different to other
ones. It was a bipartite graph connecting authors with cate-
gories in which they have edited at least one article. The edge
weight was exactly the number of article edits made by given
author in the particular category.
One of the most important observations made in [3], is
that discussion network can be interpreted as social relation
of acquaintance. Jankowski-Lorek et al. conducted [3] another
research, a survey among Polish Wikipedia users. However,
interpretations of other dimensions have not been conﬁrmed.
The data contained two more graphs: positive votes net-
work and negative ones. If, during RfA procedure, user has
cast positive vote for candidate, then an edge in the positive
votes network has been created. Its weight was equal to number
of positive votes cast by the user for the candidate. Weights of
more than one were possible only if the user was a candidate
more than once. Network of negative votes has been created
in an analogous manner, but taking the negative votes instead.
In [2], [3], each dimension has been intersected with posi-
tive and negative votes networks, in order to examine correla-
tion between social network dimensions and RfA votings. Both
graphs were analysed separately and features distinguishing
them have been found.
Research presented in this paper studies only on the discus-
sion dimension. The reason for such decision is that discussion
network can be interpreted as a real relation—acquaintance.
For each year, graph of discussion network has been intersected
with positive and negative votes networks. Some authors
suggest using one, signed network [11], especially, when there
is a strong correlation between both networks as shown in [12].
Two separate graphs were used for two reasons:
•
To maintain consistency with analysis presented in [2],
[3],
•
To separately check positive and negative impact on
RfA procedure of acquaintance relation.
B. Base statistics
In order to compare graphs resulting from intersecting the
discussion dimension graph and votes nets for each year, base
statistics were obtained for edges’ weights. The used measures
were: minimum, maximum, arithmetic mean, median, ﬁrst and
third quartile.
For each graph: discussion network, discussion intersected
with positive and discussion intersected with negative votes
in each year, empirical distribution functions were calculated.
Distribution graphs for selected years are presented in Figure
5. Values of x-axis are logarithms of edge strengths. Since
2007, the distribution of data is analogous to that described in
the article. Both arithmetic mean and median are signiﬁcantly
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-287-5
COLLA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

2005
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
Entire network
Positive votes
Negative votes
2011
 0
 0.2
 0.4
 0.6
 0.8
 1
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
Entire network
Positive votes
Negative votes
Fig. 5.
Distributions of discussion network edge strengths
Positive
 0
 0.1
 0.2
 0.3
 0.4
 0.5
 0.6
 2005
 2006
 2007
 2008
 2009
 2010
 2011
arithmetic mean
geometric mean
maximum
minimum
Negative
 0
 0.02
 0.04
 0.06
 0.08
 0.1
 0.12
 0.14
 0.16
 2005
 2006
 2007
 2008
 2009
 2010
 2011
arithmetic mean
geometric mean
maximum
minimum
Fig. 6.
Clustering coefﬁcients
higher for positive votes. As a result, it can be concluded that
the Wikipedia user community is developing steadily.
The stability of the development of the Wikipedia adminis-
trator community is also reﬂected by the empirical cumulative
distribution charts. The shapes of the curves are similar, so it
can be concluded that the probability distributions describing
different parts of the Wikipedia user community originate in
the same distribution family. This means that the behaviour
of the voters is not subject to sudden changes, but at most it
undergoes a calm evolution.
C. Clustering coefﬁcients
Clustering coefﬁcient is a measure of degree to which
nodes in a graph tend to be clustered together. The global
version, which is used in this article, was designed to give an
overall indication of the clustering in the network. Basically,
for undirected graphs, it is a ratio between number of closed
triplets (three nodes connected by two links) to number of all
triplets (three nodes connected by either two or three links).
For directed, weighted graphs a generalization was pro-
posed, it is described in detail in [13]. Opsahl et al. proposed
four measures to calculate triplet value:
•
Minimum of edges’ weights (mi),
•
Maximum of edges’ weights (ma),
•
Arithmetic mean of edges’ weights (am), and
•
Geometric mean of edges’ weights (gm).
The intuition is as follows: the minimum version is used
to ﬁnd the weakest group in graph, the maximum to ﬁnd the
strongest. Both means give an indication of the strength of
ordinary clusters. Opsahl et al. [13] and [14] also created tnet
library [15] for R software [16].
For each year from 2005 to 2011, the clustering coefﬁcients
were obtained for intersections of acquaintance networks with
graphs of positive and negative votes. Those coefﬁcients are
presented in Figure 6. There are four values (calculated for
each of the measures mentioned before) for both graphs.
A few facts can be observed. The ﬁrst is that there are
no very weak or strong groups in Polish Wikipedia society.
There is no “elite”, which governs RfA procedure or has taken
over the administrator society and has power to rule Polish
Wikipedia.
The second fact is that clustering coefﬁcients are relatively
low and their growth rate is low and negligible. We argue,
that decrease in successful administrator elections is not a
result of a building up acquaintance relation. Voters do not
cast positive votes for their acquaintances or cast negative
votes for strangers. The anomaly in year 2005, that clustering
coefﬁcients have abnormal values, is most likely caused by the
fact, that data for year 2005 were not complete.
V.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
This paper presented the analysis of the development
dynamics of the community of administrators of Polish
Wikipedia. We have used multidimensional behavioural social
networks as a tool to model relationships between wikipedians.
The aforementioned analysis included examination of the
community in each year from 2005 to 2011 as well as the
analysis of the social network corresponding to the ﬁnal state
of the community. The analysis was based on the data from
public Wikipedia data dumps.
The fundamental question which we sought the answer to
was: “Is the administrator community of the Polish Wikipedia
closing up?” It turns out that the answer is not straightforward
and it depends on what aspects of the problem one put the
greater emphasis, or how to deﬁne the “closing up” society.
The conducted analysis of the social network allows us
to draw conclusions about the impact of the social system
on the nominations of the new administrators. The results
of this analysis clearly show that this phenomenon does not
exist in the Polish Wikipedia. This is one of the arguments
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-287-5
COLLA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

for the statement that the community of the administrators is
not closing up. The administrator community is open to new
members in the same way as it was in the beginning of the
Polish-language Wikipedia.
However, the pace of growth of the administrator commu-
nity is lower than it could be expected in case of a young and
dynamically growing society. In the early years of development
the number of votings was much higher than in the recent years
and the number of new administrator appointments strongly
declined. That could indicate, however, that the community is
closing up after all.
Slower pace of growth and acceptance of new members can
be caused by various factors. One such factor may be higher
entrance requirements for candidates. Both administrators and
regular editors of Wikipedia continue to develop and gain
experience in new areas. At the same time, the history of
their activity is freely available. For that reason, new users
may have trouble with showing equally high achievements
and contribution to Wikipedia development. This can be inter-
preted as closing up of the community by making prohibitive
requirements for the new candidates, or as a kind of profes-
sionalization aiming to increase the substantive level of the
Polish Wikipedia.
Our conclusion is that it cannot be claimed with certainty
that the Polish Wikipedia community is closing up. We believe
that the increase in the requirements of the current administra-
tor community and users entitled to speak during RfA process
toward administrator candidates stems from the community’s
desire to raise the quality and ensure maximum involvement
of all the administrators in the development of Wikipedia.
The results presented in this study describe the community
of Polish Wikipedia administrators only partially. Further re-
search should focus on the detection of new relations between
the users and social networks associated with them. It is
important to ﬁnd methods that will allow the development
of community to be automatically analysed on the basis of
widely available data. The multidimensional behavioural social
networks seem to be an ideal tool for this purpose. Richer
description of the community could help predict the direction
of its development, which may result in the early identiﬁcation
of threats. This will give the opportunity to counteract those
threats and ensure the correct development of Wikipedia.
User community of Polish Wikipedia—in contrast to other
language versions—is relatively little known and researched,
although, it is an ideal subject for researchers dealing with
social informatics. It can be an interesting subject for two types
of research: new research, previously not conducted on such
a social group, and repeated research, taken from a different
version of Wikipedia and performed on the Polish version
in order to compare the results and draw conclusions on the
development of the latter in comparison to other versions.
Tools used to create multidimensional behavioural social
networks for Polish Wikipedia were unable to create such
graph for larger instances, e.g., English one. In order to
conduct comparative research, scalability problems should
be addressed. There is also possibility, that more scalable
algorithms can be made on-line. This can allow development
of on-line recommendation algorithm for RfA votings.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Authors
of
this
paper
thank
the
team
led
by
dr.
Adam
Wierzbicki
from
Polish-Japanese
Institute
of
Information Technology in Warsaw for sharing processed
Polish Wikipedia data and multidimensional behavioural
social network of Wikipedia users.
The second author was supported by the Polish National
Science Centre grant 2011/01/B/ST6/03867.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Kittur, B. A. Pendleton, B. Suh, and T. Mytkowicz, “Power of the
few vs. wisdom of the crowd: Wikipedia and the rise of the bourgeoisie,”
World Wide Web, vol. 1, no. 2, p. 19, 2007.
[2]
P. Turek, J. Spychała, A. Wierzbicki, and P. Gackowski, “Social
mechanism of granting trust basing on polish wikipedia requests for ad-
minship,” in SocInfo, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, A. Datta,
S. W. Shulman, B. Zheng, S.-D. Lin, A. Sun, and E.-P. Lim, Eds., vol.
6984.
Springer, 2011, pp. 212–225.
[3]
M. Jankowski-Lorek, L. Ostrowski, P. Turek, and A. Wierzbicki,
“Modeling
wikipedia
admin
elections
using
multidimensional
behavioral social networks,” Social Network Analysis and Mining, pp.
1–15, 2013. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s13278-012-
0092-6 [Accessed: 15.05.2013]
[4]
M. Burke and R. Kraut, “Taking up the mop: identifying future
wikipedia administrators,” in CHI Extended Abstracts, M. Czerwinski,
A. M. Lund, and D. S. Tan, Eds.
ACM, 2008, pp. 3441–3446.
[5]
(2013,
05)
Wikipedia:
Guide
to
re-
quests
for
adminship.
[Online].
Available:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Guide to requests for adminship
[Accessed: 15.05.2013]
[6]
A. Kittur, B. Suh, B. A. Pendleton, and E. H. Chi, “He says, she says:
conﬂict and coordination in wikipedia,” in CHI, M. B. Rosson and D. J.
Gilmore, Eds.
ACM, 2007, pp. 453–462.
[7]
J. Leskovec, D. P. Huttenlocher, and J. M. Kleinberg, “Governance in
social media: A case study of the wikipedia promotion process,” in
ICWSM, W. W. Cohen and S. Gosling, Eds.
The AAAI Press, 2010.
[8]
A. Anderson, D. P. Huttenlocher, J. M. Kleinberg, and J. Leskovec,
“Effects of user similarity in social media,” in WSDM, E. Adar,
J. Teevan, E. Agichtein, and Y. Maarek, Eds. ACM, 2012, pp. 703–712.
[9]
H. S. Rad, A. Makazhanov, D. Raﬁei, and D. Barbosa, “Leveraging
editor collaboration patterns in wikipedia,” in HT, E. V. Munson and
M. Strohmaier, Eds.
ACM, 2012, pp. 13–22.
[10]
B. Suh, G. Convertino, E. H. Chi, and P. Pirolli, “The singularity is not
near: slowing growth of wikipedia,” in Int. Sym. Wikis, D. Riehle and
A. Bruckman, Eds.
ACM, 2009.
[11]
S. Maniu, B. Cautis, and T. Abdessalem, “Building a signed network
from interactions in wikipedia,” in DBSocial, D. Barbosa, G. Miklau,
and C. Yu, Eds.
ACM, 2011, pp. 19–24.
[12]
J. Leskovec, D. P. Huttenlocher, and J. M. Kleinberg, “Signed networks
in social media,” in CHI, E. D. Mynatt, D. Schoner, G. Fitzpatrick, S. E.
Hudson, W. K. Edwards, and T. Rodden, Eds.
ACM, 2010, pp. 1361–
1370.
[13]
T. Opsahl and P. Panzarasa, “Clustering in weighted networks,” Social
Networks, vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 155–163, May 2009. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.socnet.2009.02.002 [Accessed: 15.05.2013]
[14]
T. Opsahl, Structure and Evolution of Weighted Networks. University of
London (Queen Mary College), London, UK, 2009. [Online]. Available:
http://toreopsahl.com/publications/thesis/ [Accessed: 15.05.2013]
[15]
(2013, 05) tnet: Analysis of weighted, two mode, and longitudinal
networks. [Online]. Available: http://toreopsahl.com/tnet/ [Accessed:
15.05.2013]
[16]
R
Development
Core
Team,
R:
A
Language
and
Environment
for Statistical Computing, R Foundation for Statistical Computing,
Vienna, Austria, 2008, ISBN 3-900051-07-0. [Online]. Available:
http://www.R-project.org [Accessed: 15.05.2013]
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-287-5
COLLA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

