Context-Aware Content-Centric
Collaborative Workﬂow Management
for Mobile Devices
Anna Kocurova, Samia Oussena, Peter Komisarczuk
School of Computing and Technology
University of West London
London, UK
Anna.Kocurova,Samia.Oussena,Peter.Komisarczuk@uwl.ac.uk
Tony Clark
School of Engineering and Information Sciences
Middlesex University
London, UK
Email: T.N.Clark@mdx.ac.uk
Abstract—The paper examines mobile context-aware content-
centric workﬂows. With the proliferation of mobile devices,
distributed collaborative teams can communicate, share content
and remain productive while working out of the ofﬁce. The col-
laboration process can be enhanced, more dynamic and efﬁcient
by using a workﬂow management technology that responds to
collaborators’ requirements, supports coordination of a team-
work and is adapted for context-aware content manipulation.
This paper discusses context awareness and proposes to extend
the existing collaborative workﬂow approach by a context-aware
content lifecycle in order to make workﬂow processes more
adaptive to collaboration needs.
Index Terms—mobile; peer-to-peer; context-aware; content;
workﬂows.
I. INTRODUCTION
Collaborators use mobile computing in everyday life and
expect to have the same or better services as traditionally
available in desktop computing. In contrast to traditional
computing, systems targeting mobile devices face a number
of constraints in terms of location variability, context changes,
network data connectivity and resource sharing [1]. Mobile
devices reside in extremely dynamic contexts and mobile
systems with the ability to react to frequent context changes
can be more ﬂexible and adapted to user needs.
Collaborative workﬂow management is a technology that
supports coordination of geographically distributed collabora-
tors and content manipulation, and can be used in a mobile
setting. In order to utilise workﬂows in ubiquitous environ-
ments, adaptability and context-awareness are the features that
should be included in the workﬂow mechanism [2]. Context
awareness might have a number of meanings based on the
domain to which it is applied. In this work, context is related
to two workﬂow concepts: context-aware content and context
driven workﬂow execution.
A. Context-Aware Content
Context information can semantically enrich a piece of
mobile content. Content such as a picture, document or audio
ﬁle is usually user-generated or adapted for use on mobile
devices. For example, context-aware content can be a picture
associated with information about the physical location, the
time when it was taken or a certain user preference. From
creation to disposal, content pass through various stages of
its lifecycle. Context information can be added or changed in
any stage of its lifecycle. So sharing of context-aware content
between workﬂow participants and managing its lifecycle over
a number of devices is challenging, especially if one task can
be completed by a number of collaborators. Existing process-
centric workﬂow approaches provide only a limited support
for the recognition of a context-aware content lifecycle.
B. Context-Driven Workﬂow Execution
A context change can control start and termination of
tasks or drive the overall workﬂow execution. How context
is integrated in workﬂows depends also on an underlying
management topology. In case of a centralised management
topology, only light-weight workﬂow process support is pro-
vided on mobile devices. Decisions made by one or more
servers with deployed workﬂow management system do not
consider contexts in which the collaborating devices currently
reside. Moreover, this topology is impractical for small-scaled
workﬂows, especially in situations in which servers are not
available or in business meetings when colleagues want to
share private information. The need for mobile device work-
ﬂow centric process operating in a completely distributed
manner has been recognised [3]. Only in a peer-to-peer (P2P)
management topology, management decisions can be based on
the device’s local, context-related information and workﬂows
can become more context-oriented processes adapted for cur-
rent collaborators needs.
This paper shows a work in progress and describes a
research idea for integrating a context-aware content-centric
perspective and context awareness into mobile collaborative
P2P workﬂow management. The combination of the concepts
offers promising opportunities which can enhance mobile
collaboration. The presented idea is accumulated through an
experimental construction of the following artefacts: a meta-
model for workﬂow deﬁnition and software prototypes. The
structure of the paper is as follows. Related work is discussed
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

in Section 2. Section 3 describes a case study. Section 4
discusses domain analysis. The research idea is outlined in
Section 5. The ﬁnal section 6 summarises the work in progress.
II. RELATED WORK
This section describes work related to workﬂow contextu-
alisation and artifact-centric workﬂow approaches. Workﬂow
meta-models should support context modelling and its use in
workﬂows [4]. Various frameworks for context modelling and
management have been designed [5][6]. A number of works
address workﬂow contextualisation [7][8]. These works rather
offer general approaches for a wide spectrum of workﬂows.
From our perspective, context awareness should be adapted
for the problem it is applied to. Although no new context-
related concept is introduced in this work, different approaches
to context management and workﬂow contextualisation are
proposed.
Focus on key business-relevant objects, their lifecycles and
how services invoke on them has emerged [9]. However object-
awareness in process-centric workﬂows is still very limited
[10]. Entity such as content or business artefact is incorporated
in an activity-based workﬂows as an input or output of an
activity and the effects of how performed activities inﬂuence
entity’s behaviour are not visible [11]. Our goal is to integrate
a context-aware content-centric perspective into workﬂows.
So, in summary, there is no existing mobile workﬂow man-
agement approach that would support context-aware content
management, have a context-aware content lifecycle integrated
and operate in a P2P context driven manner.
III. CASE STUDY
The concept introduced in this paper is illustrated by using
the following case study. A team of ten designers work on
interior design of buildings. Designers often work out in
the ﬁeld using smart phones to communicate and directly
share pictures. Although each design project is assigned to
a particular designer, design decisions are never done by a
single person. The following work pattern is used to complete
projects. Based on client’s requirements, a designer redesigns
the room interior and takes a picture of the new room’s look.
The designer sends the picture to his fellow team workers
in order to obtain at least two reviews within a short period
of time. Often no more than few colleagues are at work at
that particular moment and moreover, only some of them are
able to review the picture within the required time. Ideally,
the picture should be sent only to those colleagues who can
review it. When two reviews are obtained, the designer is able
to assess their comments and send the picture for ﬁnal approval
to client.
In addition, a simple rating system is used to aid in
processing the pictures. Designers can add rating to the picture
in a range between 1 as ’satisfactory’ and 5 as ’not sure’. A
designer can set up a preference specifying that only pictures
with rating greater than 2 need to be sent for review. Other
pictures do not need to be reviewed at the time. However, the
preference can be changed anytime.
IV. DOMAIN ANALYSIS
In this section, domain characteristics are discussed.
A. Peer-to-peer workﬂow management
Without a centralised management unit, there are many
challenges introduced. First of all, efﬁcient resource sharing
might be an issue. Secondly, each participating device needs
to be aware of the workﬂow process deﬁnitions and also all
multiple workﬂow process instances the device participates
in. Each device executes only an allocated partition of the
workﬂow and no single device has a complete view of the
global workﬂow state. Finally, no ﬁxed network infrastructure
imposes challenges in identity and communication manage-
ment.
B. Context Deﬁnition
Context describes the current situation of a user, a device
or an environment regarding a speciﬁc purpose. User context
can be a user preference, current activity or interest. Device’s
context might be its connectivity or battery level. Examples
of environmental context might be the current time, the actual
location or surrounding devices. Social context awareness, a
core context to establish cooperative effort, relies on knowing
the work context of fellow collaborators, such as their avail-
ability, current activity and location [13].
Workﬂow related context information can be categorised as
case independent, case dependent with a priori knowledge and
case dependent with no a priori knowledge [14]. In this work,
only ﬁrst two types of context information are considered. An
example of case independent contextual information is con-
nectivity. Information about connectivity is important anytime
when a device needs to send a task, content or information
to another device and is relevant to all collaborative workﬂow
cases. On the other hand, user preferences or work context are
information that are workﬂow case dependent with a priori
knowledge. Each workﬂow case needs to have a predeﬁned
set of contexts which inﬂuence its execution. In addition,
context deﬁnition is role-speciﬁc, therefore, speciﬁed for all
roles involved in workﬂow cases.
C. Context Acquisition and Aggregation Mechanism
Context information that inﬂuences workﬂow execution may
depend on a number of other contexts. All context information
needs to be gathered and composed beforehand, see Figure 1.
For example, Connectivity context depends on the current
Fig. 1.
Context Aggregation Example - Connectivity and Work Context
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

state of Bluetooth, WiFi or 3G. If a context value of any of
these contexts is ON, then data or content can be transferred.
Sending content might be time consuming so it should be
ensured that the device’s Battery level is not LOW. The context
value of the Connectivity is set to YES if DataSync is ON and
Battery is either MEDIUM or HIGH.
Another example can be work context. Workﬂow execution
is inﬂuenced only by the context value of reviewer’s availabil-
ity: YES or NO. Whether reviewer is available can depend on
reviewer’s work status, work preference or current availability.
If the reviewer is at work, the picture theme belongs to his
work preference and the status is set to AVAILABLE, the
context information for Availability is set to YES.
Clearly, context acquisition and aggregation are concepts
independent from workﬂow execution. The workﬂow manage-
ment system does not need to know all context values because
only the aggregated, ﬁnal context information inﬂuences work-
ﬂow execution. Therefore, context acquisition and aggregation
can be separated and handled by a generic standalone context
engine which is used to monitor, manage, aggregate and
disseminate contextual information to the distributed mobile
workﬂow management system as already presented in our
previous work [15].
D. Context Adaptation
A context adaptation mechanism need to be integrated
within the workﬂow management system. Both synchronous
and asynchronous communications must be supported. An
asynchronous communication mechanism is needed in order
to receive all context information broadcasted by the context
engine. Consequently all workﬂow instances which execution
depends on that particular information are informed. In case
when the context engine needs to be queried, a synchronous
communication mechanism is used.
E. Content Sharing
Content sharing between devices might be a time consuming
and costly operation, especially when one collaborative task
may be accomplished by a number of actors with the same
role but only few of them might be able to perform the task.
Sending the piece of content to all of them would be inefﬁcient
in terms of transfer cost, device’s resource usage and user’s
time consumption. A workﬂow management system running
on each device would need to cope with the incoming content,
store it and trigger an according action. Every participant
would be informed about the task despite the fact that he might
not be able to accomplish it within the required time.
F. Context-Aware Content and Lifecycle
A workﬂow process includes tasks that require interaction
with content. At any given instant of time, content is in a
speciﬁc state that is deﬁned by values of ordinary metadata and
context information. For example, after a picture is reviewed,
it can be labelled as Reviewed. Collaborators often directly
retrieve all pictures that are stored on mobile devices and
would like to know in which content state the picture currently
is. Content lifecycle can be described by a set of states and
transitions between the states. Transitions between content
states can be associated with context driven conditions. These
conditions can inﬂuence content’s behaviour and workﬂow
execution. For instance, a designer decides to increase rating
for a particular picture. Designer’s preference determines that
only pictures with rating higher than 3 can be proceed further
in workﬂow and be sent to fellow participants. So this context
change inﬂuences the execution of workﬂow at runtime. In
order to sufﬁciently cope with the events at run-time, the
context deﬁnition and its association with process deﬁnition
must be expressed at build time. Moreover, there are two types
of context information: workﬂow active and workﬂow passive.
The workﬂow active context has an inﬂuence on the workﬂow
execution whereas the passive context does not. The changes
of context values might trigger certain actions.
V. CONTEXT-AWARE CONTENT-CENTRIC
COLLABORATIVE WORKFLOWS FOR MOBILE DEVICES
A simpliﬁed example of the proposed adaptation of col-
laborative workﬂow for mobile devices is outlined in Figure
2. The collaborative work pattern presented in the case study
can be abstracted into the workﬂow process presented in the
middle and carried out by a distributed workﬂow management
system deployed on mobile devices. A picture lifecycle can
be integrated with the collaborative workﬂow process. Each
activity that interacts with the picture is associated with a
particular content state. Context driven conditions are placed
on transitions between two content states. For example, the
picture can go to the Reviewed state only if the value of added
rating is larger than current User Rating Preference. Or the
picture can go to the Assessed state only if the number of
obtained reviews is more than the current User Preference for
Number of Reviews. It is also depicted that the aggregated
context values such as Connectivity and Reviewer’s Availabil-
ity can inﬂuence communication activities. Our assumption
is that context driven conditions in the content lifecycle and
coordinated social context-dependent workﬂow activities can
effectively mediate the constraints of content sharing between
workﬂow participants.
Currently, experiments have been conducted and a solution
is under construction. The aim is to express the workﬂow
deﬁnition at a metamodel level. A metamodel represents a
language independent workﬂow ontology. An existing work-
ﬂow process metamodel will be extended by three parts:
context deﬁnition, context adaptation, and context-aware con-
tent lifecycle. A context deﬁnition deﬁnes the contexts, their
aggregations and possible context values which inﬂuence the
workﬂow execution. The context-aware content lifecycle part
deﬁnes context information, states, transitions and context
driven conditions for content handled in workﬂow. The context
adaptation part expresses the adaptation itself. The knowledge
is also mapped to an XML schema. Each context-aware
content-centric collaborative workﬂow process deﬁnition can
be described by an XML document that conforms to the XML
schema and serves as a software input.
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

Fig. 2.
Context-Aware Content-Centric Collaborative Workﬂow for Mobile Devices
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The research aim is to adapt the collaborative workﬂow
technology to mobile platforms with the objectives to achieve
better mobile collaborative workﬂow management capable
of processing contextual events and context-aware content
manipulation. The proposed adapted workﬂow is a technology-
based solution for mobile P2P collaboration and should have
a positive impact for developers of certain classes of mobile
applications.
A formal workﬂow model for context-aware content-centric
collaborative workﬂow deﬁnition, management and execution
is built. The model contains all necessary information about
the adapted workﬂow process deﬁnition, management and
execution. Prototypes of a context engine and a distributed
mobile workﬂow management system capable of executing
such workﬂows are under development on the Android plat-
form. The context engine has been released as an open source
software [16]. Future work includes ﬁnalising and evaluating
of the workﬂow model and software prototypes.
REFERENCES
[1] Q. H. Mahmoud, Middleware for Communications. John Wiley and Son,
2004.
[2] S. Smanchat, S.Ling and M. Indrawan, ”A survey on context-aware
workﬂow adaptations,” in Proceedings of the 6th International Confer-
ence on Advances in Mobile Computing and Multimedia, 2008, pp.
414-417.
[3] L. Pajunen and S. Chande, ”Developing workﬂow engine for mobile
devices,” in Enterprise Distributed Object Computing Conference, 2007.
[4] M. Wieland, O. Kopp, D. Nicklas, and F. Leymann, ”Towards Context-
aware Workﬂows,” in CAISE 07 Proceedings of the workshops and
doctoral consortium, 2007, pp.11–15.
[5] R. Reichle, M. Wagner, M. Khan, K. Geihs, J. Lorenzo, M. Valla, C. Fra,
N. Paspallis, and G. Papadopoulos, ”A comprehensive context modeling
framework for pervasive computing systems,” in Distributed applications
and interoperable systems, 2008, pp. 281–295.
[6] J. Bardram, ”The Java Context Awareness Framework (JCAF)a service
infrastructure and programming framework for context-aware applica-
tions,” Pervasive Computing, 2005, pp.98–115.
[7] M. Rosemann, J. Recker and C. Flender, ”Contextualisation of business
processes,” in International Journal of Business Process Integration and
Management 3(1), 2008, pp. 47–60.
[8] O. Saidani and S. Nurcan, ”Context-awareness for adequate business
process modelling,” in Third International Conference on Research
Challenges in Information Science, RCIS 2009, IEEE, 2009, pp. 177–
186.
[9] R. Hull, ”Artifact-centric business process models: Brief survey of
research results and challenges,” On the Move to Meaningful Internet
Systems: OTM 2008, pp.1152–1163.
[10] V. K¨unzle and M. Reichert, ”PHILharmonicFlows: towards a framework
for object-aware process management” in Journal of Software Mainte-
nance and Evolution: Research and Practice, 2011.
[11] K. Bhattacharya, R. Hull and J. Su, ”A data-centric design methodology
for business processes” in Handbook of Research on Business Process
Management, 2009, pp. 503–531.
[12] I. Vanderfeesten, H. Reijers and W. van der Aalst, ”Product based work-
ﬂow support: dynamic workﬂow execution” in Advanced Information
Systems Engineering, 2008, pp.571–574.
[13] J.E. Bardram and T. R. Hansen, ”The AWARE Architecture: Supporting
Context-mediated Social Awareness in Mobile Cooperation,” in Proceed-
ings of the 2004 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative
Work, Chicago, Illinois, USA, 2004, pp. 192-201.
[14] M. Adams, A. Ter Hofstede, N. Russell, N. and W. van der Aalst, ”Dy-
namic and context-aware process adaptation” in Handbook of research
on complex dynamic process management: techniques for adaptability
in turbulent environments/Ed. MM Wang, Z. Sun, 2009.
[15] D. Kramer, A. Kocurova, S. Oussena, T. Clark and P. Komisarczuk, ”An
Extensible, Self Contained, Layered Approach to Context Acquisition”
in Proceedings of the Third International Workshop on Middleware
for Pervasive Mobile and Embedded Computing at Middleware 2011,
Lisbon, Portugal, 2011.
[16] https://github.com/deankramer/ContextEngine, 11.04.2012
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

