The role of Social Capital and Collaborative Knowledge Creation in 
Achieving E-business Innovation:  
An Empirical Study 
 
Khaled Saleh Al Omoush 
Associate Professor 
Al-Zaytoonah University of Jordan 
Amman-Jordan 
email: k.Alomoush@zuj.edu.jo 
 
 
 
Abstract—The present study aims to examine empirically 
the interrelationship and impact of social capital and 
collaborative 
knowledge 
creation 
on 
e-business 
innovation. A questionnaire was developed to collect data 
from manufacturing firms with a sample of 112 
respondents. The results reveal a significant impact of 
social capital on collaborative knowledge creation and 
achieving e-business innovation. The findings also reveal 
a direct impact of collaborative knowledge creation on e-
business innovations. The present empirical study 
contributes to a better understanding of the influencing 
factors of e-business innovations in today’s business 
organizations. This study also provides insights into the 
interrelationship among social capital, collaborative 
knowledge creation, and e business adoption and use. 
Keywords-social capital; collaborative knowledge creation; 
e-business innovation 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
More than ever before, innovation is considered as a 
necessity for all firms in the new economy due to the ever- 
growing and fiercely competitive environment [1][2]. With 
the advent of the knowledge economy, intangible  assets  
have become the main source of competitive advantage. At 
the same time, advances in e-business technologies are 
presenting new opportunities to business organizations and 
entrepreneurs to innovatively rethink and reshape their 
business strategy. The intangible assets represent the main 
origin of knowledge, which comes from workforce  and  
firm’s relationship with stakeholders [3]. 
A major part of intangible assets is embodied in the 
intellectual capital. Prior research conceptualizes intellectual 
capital as the sum of all knowledge and knowing  capabilities 
that can be utilized to give a company competitive advantage 
[3]-[5]. The scholars have increasingly focused on the 
importance of social capital as a major dimension of 
intellectual capital and an important topic in knowledge 
management [6]. Social capital, as an approach to understand 
how people interact with their environment, is increasingly 
regarded as a vital predictor of innovation. Many previous 
studies [7]-[12] confirmed the association between social 
capital and e-business applications.  
Social capital is considered as the new approach, which 
explains the success of innovation [13]. The previous 
research [14]-[17] emphasized that the organizations are not 
an isolated entity, but is embedded in a social context, where 
organizations consistently use their social environment 
networks to get ideas and gather information and learn to 
support the process of recognition and develop new 
entrepreneurial innovations. The previous studies confirmed 
that social capital plays a pivotal role in the way in which e-
business models are perceived, implemented and evaluated. 
Social capital has been defined as resources embedded in 
social relationships and networks among individuals, 
communities, or society, which can be mobilized when an 
actor wishes to increase likelihood of success in a purposive 
action [3]. 
Business attained the perception in which, intangible 
assets have been recognized as the most important sources of 
innovation and entrepreneurship [10][14]. The intangible 
assets are the main origin of knowledge which comes from 
workforce and firm’s relationship with stakeholders [18]. 
Whilst social capital and  collaborative  knowledge creation 
are 
accepted 
as 
significant 
contributors 
to 
sustain 
competitive advantage, there is limited empirical evidence, 
investigating the interactive relationship between these 
constructs and e-business innovation. Furthermore, while the 
strategic values of knowledge creation practices are clear, 
most firms are not able to comprehend how these elements 
can be integrated to enhance their e-business innovation [5]. 
These social and collaborative capabilities are interesting 
concepts to  perceive how they are related and contribute to 
establishing e-business innovation. Therefore, the present 
study aims to examine empirically the interrelationship and 
impact of social capital and collaborative knowledge creation 
on e-business innovation. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
reviews related literature. Then, we propose the research 
model and hypotheses in Section III. Section IV reports 
instrument development and data collection and presents the  
results followed by a discussion of these  results,  conclusion, 
limitations and future work of research in section V. 
 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-722-1
COLLA 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

II. LITERATURE REVIEW 
Social capital can be defined as resources embedded in 
social relationships and networks among individuals, 
communities, or society, which can be mobilized when an 
actor wishes to increase likelihood of success in a purposive 
action [8]. Another definition of social  capital introduces it  
as the combined value of the relationship with customers, 
suppliers, industry association and other business partners, 
representing the potential an organization possesses as  a 
result of external intangibles [12]. Léger [9] confirmed that 
social capital represents the portion of a company’s market 
value that is attributable to its portfolios of business 
relationships. 
Ghane and Akhavan [11] showed how certain values 
collectively held in a society can be a kind of social capital 
that benefits the society as a whole, even in the absence of 
specific links between individual members of that society. 
Common values and 
a 
shared vision, the major 
manifestations of the cognitive dimension of social capital, 
may 
also 
encourage 
the 
development 
of 
trusting 
relationships [8]. A trusting relationship between two parties 
implies that common goals and values have brought and 
kept them together [11]. 
Although individual causal relationships are relatively 
easier to understand, studies indicate that humans have 
considerable difficulty in deducing the collective impact of 
multiple interrelated causal relationships [10]. Nahapiet and 
Ghoshal [18] use the term intellectual capital to refer to the 
knowledge and knowing capability of a social collective, 
such as an organization. It is reflected by the collective 
abilities of the firm in producing a better solution based on 
the knowledge possessed by the employees [19]. Social 
capital ensures that all the collaborating firms trust each 
other and their collective commitment toward customer 
satisfaction [20]; therefore, individual firms devote their 
resources toward their specific competence and expertise in 
the order fulfillment process. Among the individuals and the 
formalized organizational structure of a firm, social capital 
can be defined as the knowledge embedded within, available 
through, and utilized by interactions among individuals, 
working groups, and their networks of relationships in a 
collective way, but without the formality and rigidity of 
organizational capital [18]. In fact, innovation has also been 
defined as the most knowledge-intensive organizational 
process that depends on a firm's individual members and 
collective knowledge [21]. 
In general, innovation refers to the generation,  acceptance 
and implementation of new ideas, processes, products or 
services [2]. According to Rogers [15], innovation is an idea, 
practice, or object that is perceived as new by the unit of 
adoption. In the context of business, Scheepers et al. [2] 
describe innovativeness as the creation  of new products, 
services 
and 
technologies. 
Advances 
in 
e-business 
applications are presenting new opportunities to business 
organizations to innovatively rethink and reshape their 
business strategy [1][21]. E-business innovation capabilities 
can be described as a  firm’s ability to enhance  its 
technological innovativeness and create new business value 
propositions by acquiring, utilizing, and using new valuable 
e-business applications [1]. 
The literature [9]-[12] has widely investigated the 
association 
between 
social 
capital 
and 
e-business 
applications. For example, Liu et al. [12] concluded that 
social capital is a critical driver  of  substantive performance 
improvement in the context of e-business. Sambamurthy et 
al. [22] advocate that, in contemporary firms, e-business 
innovation results from the collaborative and collective 
actions of IS and business executives. In the context of social 
capital, Ghane and Akhavan [11] also suggest that e-business 
requires a strong intimacy and collaboration among business 
partners. A considerable stream of research [16][17][23] 
affirmed that e-business adoption is subject to the values, 
standards, and expectations shared among business partners 
and other members of social networks, such as professional 
and trade associations and accreditation agencies, to attain 
effective coordination and collaboration and to meet the 
requirements of professionalization. 
A primary factor of productivity and competitiveness in 
the current economic paradigm includes the capacity of 
individuals and organizations to create, process and  
transform knowledge into economic assets [24]. Many 
previous studies [3][10][12] advocate that, social capital 
represents the knowledge embedded within, available 
through, and utilized by interactions among individuals, 
working groups, and their networks of relationships. Social 
networks have long been described as effective mechanisms 
for the transfer and exchange explicit and tacit knowledge 
[8][10]. They are used not only for information and 
knowledge exchange, but as a mechanism for identifying 
who knows what within the network context. Such networks 
can promote collective and distributed cognition among  
organizational  participants [25]. In this context, Borgatti and 
Cross [26] asserted that organizational social capital is 
realized through members’ levels of collective goal 
orientation, which create new knowledge by facilitating 
successful collective actions. Faccin and Balestrin [27] 
claimed that one challenge facing today's organization is that 
knowledge increasingly extends beyond the boundaries of 
the organization, and the ability to build external 
collaboration is an important source of new ideas and 
information that leads to technology and innovations that 
promote business performance. 
The previous studies [1][13][27] confirmed that the 
characteristics of the processes by  which  firms  search for 
creating new knowledge strongly effect innovation and can 
shape the impact of the origins of knowledge on innovation 
outcomes. Recently, the focus has shifted from knowledge 
creation within a firm to inter-firm collaborations, towards 
networks and Communities of  Practice (CoPs), and toward 
knowledge creation in human interactions [8]. The theory of 
inter-firm collaboration has explained why firms collaborate 
and how knowledge is created in these collaborative 
relationships of firms. Knowledge creation often occurs 
spontaneously 
as 
a 
result 
of 
communication 
and 
collaboration among individuals or task groups where 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-722-1
COLLA 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

persons 
with 
a 
variety 
of 
specializations discover 
opportunities for practical innovation concealed within a 
project [14][28]. However, a considerable body of research 
[3][29][30] has investigated the impact of knowledge 
creation on different issues concerning e-business adoption 
and implementation. 
III. RESEARCH MODEL AND HYPOTHESES 
The research model proposes that social capital has a  
direct impact on e-business innovation. It also proposes that 
collaborative knowledge creation has a direct impact on e-
business innovation. Finally, the research model proposes 
that collaborative knowledge creation  moderates the impact  
of social capital on e-business innovation. 
Below each dimension of the research model is discussed 
in more details, followed by the related hypotheses. 
A. The impact of social capital 
Many previous studies [10][14][31] affirmed that social 
capital can contribute to the development of innovation 
capability in organizations. The innovation diffusion theory 
[15] has described the process by which an innovation is 
transferred through certain channels between the members of 
a social system. Organizational social networks have been 
identified as being significant resources that can lead to 
innovation [10]). They serve as a conduit where fragments of 
information and knowledge can be rapidly transmitted and 
assimilated [10][26]. Subramaniam and Youndt [32] 
examined how social capital influences incremental and 
radical innovative capabilities  in companies. According to 
Petti and Zhang [31], the literature of social capital focuses 
on internal and external network characteristics that might be 
more conducive to business’s innovation capabilities. Many 
previous studies [9]-[12] confirmed the impact of social 
capital influence, directly or indirectly, on the way in which 
e-business models are perceived, developed, implemented 
and evaluated. 
B. 
The impact of collaborative knowledge creation 
Knowledge creation can be seen as the starting point of 
both KM and innovation [14]. Knowledge management 
involves a range of strategies, processes and  practices 
utilized by a firm to identify, capture, structure, share and 
apply an individual or organizational knowledge to attain 
competitive advantage and create sources for new 
innovations [27]. New knowledge is frequently engendered 
by innovative concepts or urgent needs, either arising within 
the company itself or emanating from external market 
pressures. The previous studies [1][14][27]) emphasized that 
to strengthen their innovation potential, organizations need to 
increase the efforts of collaborative knowledge creation and 
innovation, so they can build new products, services, or 
procedures. Significant research has been conducted in this 
context, emphasizing the connection between knowledge 
creation and accumulation on one hand, and novel business 
ideas and practices on the other.  
The previous studies [3][29][30] confirmed the existence 
of a positive impact of organizational learning and creating 
new knowledge on successful e-business innovation. 
Cegarra-Navarro et al. [29] investigated how knowledge 
creation contributes to the employees’ productivity and the 
development of the necessary capabilities for success in the 
new e-business environment. According to Khamis et al. [5], 
the ability of e-business companies to be flexible and 
correspond 
to 
the 
continuously 
changing 
electronic 
environment depends largely on creating new knowledge. 
Cegarra-Navarro et al. [29] explained how an organization 
that enhances organizational knowledge application is more 
likely to implement e-business successfully. Knowledge 
creation is claimed to produce intelligence and innovation 
and, thus, positively affects the trading success of e-
businesses [22]. Maditinos et al. [30] confirmed that 
interaction and knowledge sharing among e-business 
partners is a very important asset for every firm. Drawing 
upon the previous discussion, the present study hypothesizes 
the following: 
H3: Collaborative knowledge creation has a direct 
positive impact on e-business innovation. 
C. The mediating role of collaborative knowledge creation 
Social networks have long been described as effective 
mechanisms for the transfer and exchange the explicit and 
tacit knowledge [8]. Previous studies [9][10][32] advocate 
that organizations with high levels of social capital have 
more knowledge-management capabilities than other 
organizations with low levels of social capital. At the same 
time, the literature [1][22][27] has widely examined  the 
impact of knowledge creation on the firms’ innovation 
capability.  
According to Nonaka and Takeuchi [28], the innovative 
capability of a certain firm depends very closely on the 
intellectual assets and the knowledge that it possesses,  as 
well as on its ability to deploy them, viewing the 
innovation process as an intensive knowledge management 
process. Social capital, as a major element in these assets 
allows an organization to obtain new knowledge, which is 
the most important source of innovation [33]. Borgatti and 
Cross [26] also investigated the importance of social 
relationships for longer term innovation, since they 
contribute to enrich knowledge and information exchange. 
This capital is interrelated with knowledge management 
practice, as the collaborative learning through social 
networks is required for the firm to possess new knowledge 
and develop new technological innovations. 
Tallon [34] asserted that social capital determines a 
firm's capacity for IT-based innovation as a result of its 
ability to create new knowledge and convert it into strategic 
applications. Social integration can lower the barriers to 
information sharing and increasing the  absorptive  capacity 
of the firm and, thus, enhancing the opportunity of creating 
new innovative knowledge. The literature  confirms  the 
direct impact of collaborative knowledge creation on e-
business innovation. At the same time, the previous 
discussion suggests that social capital has a direct impact 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-722-1
COLLA 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

on creating new knowledge that can leverage an 
organization's capability to adopt and use new IT-based 
innovations. Therefore, the present study proposes the 
following hypothesis: 
H4: Collaborative knowledge creation has a mediating 
impact on the role of social capital in achieving e-business 
innovation. 
IV.  RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
This section provides the research methodology, which 
includes measures and instrument development, sampling 
and questionnaire distribution, data analysis and results and 
finally, assessing the structural model and testing the 
research hypotheses. 
A. 
Measures and instrument development 
The present study adopted the measures used to 
operationalize the constructs of the research model from 
related previous studies. The scale of social capital was used 
from Hayton [8] and Zheng [13]. Items for measuring 
collaborative knowledge creation were derived  from  the 
four dimensions of the knowledge creation process, focusing 
on the extent of collaboration in achieving these dimensions. 
These four dimensions are socialization, externalization, 
combination, and internalization [24], [27][28]. The 
measurements of e-business innovation were derived from 
Hull et al. [1] and Al Omoush et al. [21]. 
Empirical data for this study were gathered via a self 
administered questionnaire. As shown in Table I, the 
questionnaire includes 22 questions (see APPENDIX I) that 
represent the research model constructs. All items were 
measured  using a five-point Likert-type scale, ranging  from 
1=strongly disagree to 5=strongly agree). 
TABLE I. MEASURES OF RESEARCH CONSTRUCTS 
 
Construct 
Code 
No. of 
Items References 
Social capital 
SC 
5 
[8] [13] 
Collaborative knowledge creation 
CKC 
12 
[24] [27] 
E-business innovation 
INNOV 
5 
[1] [21] 
B.   Sampling and questionnaire distribution 
The manufacturing sector is one of the most competitive 
and innovatively diverse industries with multidimensional 
and reciprocal relationships, comprising a wide range of 
business partners [21]. Therefore, this sector is highly 
attractive for empirical researchers interested in studying e-
business adoption and use. The study was conducted on a 
sample drawn from Jordanian firms. Currently, there are 
four active industrial parks in Jordan that accommodate 
more 
than 
400 
local, 
regional 
and 
international 
manufacturing firms, in addition to other industrial clusters. 
The targeted respondents were selected from top-level 
executives, including individuals in such roles as Chief 
Executive Officer, Vice President, Chief Information  
Officer, Chief Financial Officer, and Chief Operating 
Officer. Furthermore, the sample included the  directors  of 
IT, sales and marketing, research and development, 
manufacturing, 
procurement/purchasing, 
supply 
chain 
directors, and customer service. However, a total of 178  
paper 
questionnaires 
were 
distributed 
among 
the 
participants and a total of 120 questionnaires were collected. 
The researchers received 112 usable responses resulting in a 
62.9% response rate. 
C. 
Data analysis and results 
Smart Partial Least Squares (PLS), version 2.0, was used 
for data analysis. According to Fornell and Larcker [36], 
PLS is  robust in that it does not need a large sample or 
normally distributed multivariate data. Further, a PLS path 
model consists of two elements. These are measurement 
model (Inner model) to provide the results related to 
reliability and validity of the scales and the structural model 
(outer  model)  to represent the relationships (paths) between 
the research constructs. 
The measurement model was examined for internal 
consistency and convergent and discriminant validity. As 
suggested by Hair et al. [37], the factor loadings, composite 
reliability and the average variance extracted were used to 
assess convergent validity. Factor loadings analysis was 
applied to purify scales with the goal of improving their 
measurement. The results indicate that the factor loadings of 
some items are less than 0.50 on their own constructs and 
must be removed from the scale. Specifically, two items  
were removed from the construct of collaborative knowledge 
creation (CKC3, CKC8), and one from the e-business 
innovation scale (INNOV4) due in all cases to low item 
loading at level (α = 0.05). Internal consistency reliability 
was measured using Cronbach’s alpha, rho_A, and 
Composite Reliability (CR). Tables II lists the measurement 
model results, including information about Cronbach’s 
alpha, rho_A, and CR. As shown in Table II, all constructs 
exhibited acceptably high scores exceeding the 0.70 
threshold. Furthermore, an Average Variance Extracted 
(AVE) value of 0.50 or higher indicates that the construct 
explains more than half of the variance of its indicators. 
Table II shows that  all  values of AVE are larger than 0.5, 
which suggest a convergent validity. 
TABLE II. VALIDITY AND RELIABILITY OF RESEARCH 
CONSTRUCTS 
 
Construct 
alpha rho_A 
CR 
AVE 
Social capital 
0.834 
0.838 
0.882 
0.600 
Collaborative knowledge creation 
0.897 
0.899 
0.915 
0.520 
E-business innovation 
0.841 
0.841 
0.894 
0.678 
One popular approach to assess the discriminant validity 
followed in the current research was through examining the 
cross-loading 
comparisons 
between 
constructs [36]. 
Specifically, the AVE of each latent construct should be 
higher than the construct’s highest squared correlation with 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-722-1
COLLA 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

any other latent construct. As shown in Table III, all 
constructs in the research model achieved this criterion 
because none of the off-diagonal elements exceeded the 
respective diagonal element. Thus, discriminant validity 
was demonstrated. 
TABLE III. DISCRIMINANT VALIDITY 
 
No. Constructs 
1 
2 
3 
1 
Social capital 
0.774  
 
2 
Collaborative knowledge creation 
0.697 
0.721  
3 
E-business innovation 
0.659 
0.651 
0.824 
D. Assessing the structural model and testing the research 
hypotheses 
The results of the structural modeling analysis are 
illustrated in Figure 1. Path analysis was conducted to 
provide a graphic of the links between the groups of factors. 
The path coefficient (β) analysis and the t-value test serve as 
the basis of evaluation of the hypotheses. 
 
 
Figure1. Path coefficient analysis 
It is recommended that the t-value should be larger than 
2. The strength of the hypothesized paths and whether the 
path significant is evaluated by the standardized path 
coefficient. Standardized or (β) coefficients are the 
estimates resulting from an analysis performed on variables 
that have been standardized so that they have variances of 
1. Table IV presents the results of testing research 
hypotheses. 
TABLE IV. THE RESULTS OF TESTING RESEARCH 
HYPOTHESES. 
 
H 
β 
T value 
Sig. 
The results 
1 
0.399 
4.452 
0.000 Supported 
2 
0.697 
14.083 
0.000 Supported 
3 
0.373 
3.563 
0.000 Supported 
To evaluate the mediating role of collaborative 
knowledge creation in the impact of social capital on e-
business innovation was analyzed using the Sobel Test [38]. 
 
TABLE V. THE RESULTS OF SOBEL TEST 
 
H 
z-value 
P value 
The results 
4 
3.481 
0.001 
Supported 
The results in Table V reveal that the mediating role of 
organizational learning in the impact of top management 
support on e-business entrepreneurship (H4) is significant 
(z- value=18.413, (p< 0.000). 
V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
The present study aimed to investigate empirically the 
interrelationship 
and 
impact 
of 
social 
capital 
and 
collaborative knowledge creation on e-business innovation. 
The results reveal that social capital plays an important role 
in achieving e-business innovation. These results are 
consistent with previous studies [7][9]-[12], which confirm 
the pivotal role of social capital in creating an innovative 
business environment to develop new ideas and initiatives 
concerning adoption and use of e-business innovations. The 
findings of the present study also indicate a significant 
positive impact of social capital on e-business innovation. 
The prior studies [4][5][8][33] clarified that collaborative 
knowledge creation is a direct outcome of social capital. 
Tallon [34] explained that social integration can help firms to 
lower the barriers to information sharing, increasing the 
absorptive capacity of the firm and, thus, enhancing the 
effectiveness and efficiency of knowledge creation. 
The results reveal that collaborative knowledge creation 
has a direct positive impact on e-business innovation. These 
findings are in line with many previous studies [3][29][30] 
that confirmed the positive impact of organizational learning 
and creating new knowledge on successful e-business 
innovation. Maditinos et al. [30] affirmed that knowledge 
sharing among e-business partners  is a very important asset 
for every firm. According to Cegarra-Navarro et al. [29], 
knowledge creation produces intelligence and innovation 
and, thus, positively affects the success of e-businesses. 
Finally, the results indicate that collaborative knowledge 
creation has a mediating impact on the role of social capital 
in achieving e-business innovation. These findings are also 
in agreement with previous studies [8][33][34] that have 
investigated the impact of social capital on creating new 
innovative knowledge. According to Nonaka and Takeuchi 
[28], the innovative capability of a certain firm depends very 
closely on the intellectual assets and the knowledge that it 
possesses, as well as on its ability to deploy them, viewing 
the innovation process as an intensive 
knowledge 
management process. 
The results of the study highlight the pivotal role of  social 
capital in preparing an organizational environment to support 
the efforts of knowledge creation and establish e-business 
innovation. The results also emphasize that to strengthen 
their e-business innovation potential, organizations need to 
increase the efforts of collaborative knowledge creation. The 
results reveal that the combination of social capital and 
collaborative knowledge creation is a crucial element to the 
success of e-business adoption and supports competitiveness 
and sustainability. 
The findings of this study contribute to a better 
understanding of the impact of social capital on e-business 
innovation. This study also improves our understanding of 
the pivotal role of collaborative knowledge creation in 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-722-1
COLLA 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

establishing e-business innovation. The findings are 
important for future research investigating the influencing 
role of social and collaborative capabilities as factors to 
consider when studying firms that conduct any e-business 
innovation activities. For executives, this study provides 
guidance for senior management in developing successful e-
business initiatives. It also provides top managers with 
dimensions to be used for assessing the firm’s attitudes 
toward e-business innovation. An understanding of the 
impact of social capital and collaborative knowledge creation 
will provide the managers with better  knowledge on how to 
manage 
opportunities 
of 
e-business 
innovation. 
Organizations must scan and employ their social networks 
consistently to obtain ideas and gather information to support 
the process of recognition and develop new e-business 
innovations based on the continuing advances of e-business 
applications. 
Despite its contributions, there are some limitations, 
which can serve as directions for future research. Although 
the design of the research model builds on the theoretical 
insights of intellectual capital, the study did not consider all 
of its theoretical dimensions, including human capital and 
organizational capital. In addition, the study did not  reflect 
all of the theoretical factors that can impact on achieving e-
business innovation, such as organization's characteristics, 
competitive pressures, and top-management support. Finally, 
knowledge creation often occurs as a result of individual and 
organizational learning. The present study did not investigate 
the impact of organizational learning on collaborative 
knowledge creation and e-business innovation and its 
interrelationship social capital. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] C. E. Hull, Y. T. Hung, N. Hair, V. Perotti, and R. DeMartino, 
"Taking advantage of digital opportunities: a typology of digital 
entrepreneurship," Int J Netw Virtual Org, 4(3), 2007, pp. 290–303. 
[2] M. J. Scheepers, J. Hough, and J. Z. Bloom,"Entrepreneurial 
intensity: A comparative analysis of established companies in 
South Africa," South African Journal of Economic and 
Management Sciences, 10(2), 2007, pp. 238-255. 
[3] C. Gowthorpe,"Wider still and wider? A critical discussion of 
intellectual capital recognition, measurement and control in a 
boundary theoretical context," Critical perspectives on accounting, 
20(7), 2009, pp. 823-834. 
[4] E. Eren, and E. B. Kocapinar, "Is Intellectual Capital Antecedent 
of Entrepreneurship Orientation," Journal of Global Strategic 
Management, 6(2), 2009, pp. 121-135. 
[5] N. Khamis, A. Sulaiman, and S. Mohezar,"Achieving e-Business 
Excellence through Knowledge Management and Organizational 
Learning Capabilities: A Malaysian Perspective," International 
Journal of Economics & Management, 8(2), 2014, pp. 343 - 364. 
[6] M. Mellat-Parast,"Supply chain quality management: An inter- 
organizational learning perspective," International Journal of 
Quality & Reliability Management, 30(5), 2013, pp. 511-529. 
[7] A. Pouloudi, X. Ziouvelou, and K. Vassilopoulou, K.,"A Societral 
perspective on e-business adoption," Journal of Information, 
Communication and Ethics in Society, 1(3), 2003, pp. 149-166. 
[8] J. C. Hayton,"Competing in the new economy: the effect of 
intellectual 
capital 
on 
corporate 
entrepreneurship 
in 
high‐technology new ventures," R&D Management, 35(2), 2005, 
pp.137-155. 
[9] P. M. Léger,"Interorganizational IT investments and the value 
upstream relational capital," Journal of Intellectual Capital, 11(3), 
2010, pp. 406-428. 
[10] S. A. Vannoy and B. D. Medlin, "Investigating social computing 
in competitive dynamics, " In 2012 45th Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences (pp. 5112-5121). IEEE. 
[11] S. Ghane and P. Akhavan, "A framework for determining and 
prioritizing relational capitals: The case of Iran e-business," 
International Journal of Commerce and Management, 24(2), pp. 
119- 133. 
[12] H. Liu, W. Ke, K. Wei, and Y. Lu, "The effects of social capital 
on firm substantive and symbolic performance: In the context of 
E-business," Journal of Global Information Management (JGIM), 
24(1), 2016, pp. 61-85. 
[13] W. Zheng, "A social capital perspective of innovation from 
individuals to nations: where is empirical literature directing us?," 
International Journal of Management Reviews, 12(2), 2010, pp. 
151- 183. 
[14] E. Grimsdottir and I. Edvardsson, "Knowledge Management, 
Knowledge Creation, and Open Innovation in Icelandic SMEs," 
SAG Open, 8(4), 2018, pp. 1-13. 
[15] E. Rogers, "Diffusion of Innovations," 4th ed., The Free Press of 
Glencoe, New York, 1995. 
[16] T. S. Teo, C. Ranganathan, and J. Dhaliwal, "Key dimensions of 
inhibitors for the deployment of web-based business-to-business 
electronic commerce," IEEE Transactions on engineering 
Management, 53(3), 2006, pp. 395-411. 
[17] J. Y. Son and I. Benbasat, "Organizational buyers’ adoption and 
use of B2B electronic marketplaces: efficiency-and legitimacy-
oriented perspectives," J Manag Inf syst, 24(1), 2007, pp. 55–99. 
[18] J. Nahapiet and Ghoshal S., "Social Capital, Intellectual Capital, and 
the Organizational Advantage," Academy of Management Review, 
23, 1998, pp. 242-266. 
[19] J. Magretta, "The power of virtual integration: An interview with Dell 
Computer’s Michael Dell," Harvard Business Review, 76(2), 1998, 
pp. 72-85. 
[20]  E.D. Adamides and N. Karacapilidis, "Information Technology 
Support for the Knowledge and Social Process of Innovation 
Management," Technovation, 26 (1), 2006, pp. 50-59. 
[21] K. Al Omoush, R. Al-Qirem M. Al Hawatmah, "The degree of e- 
business entrepreneurship and long-term sustainability: an 
institutional perspective," Information Systems and e-Business 
Management, 16(1), 2018, pp. 29-56. 
[22] V. Sambamurthy, A. Bharadwaj, and V. Grover, "Shaping agility 
through digital options: Reconceptualizing the role of information 
technology in contemporary firms," MIS quarterly, 2003, pp. 237-
263. 
[23] K-H. Lai, C. Wong, and T. Cheng, "Institutional isomorphism and 
the adoption of information technology for supply chain 
management," Comput Ind, 57(1), 2006, pp. 93–98. 
[24] I. Nonaka, G. Von Krogh, and S. Voelpel, "Organizational 
knowledge creation theory: Evolutionary paths and future 
advances," Organization studies, 27(8), 2006, pp. 1179-1208. 
[25] D. Croasdell, "IT's role in organizational memory and learning," 
Information Systems Management, 18(1), 2001, pp 8-11. 
[26] S. Borgatti and R. Cross, "A relational view of information 
seeking and learning in social networks," Management science, 
49(4), 2003, pp. 432-445. 
[27] K. Faccin and A. Balestrin, "The dynamics of collaborative 
practices for knowledge creation in joint R&D projects," Journal 
of Engineering and Technology Management, 48, 2018, pp. 28-43. 
[28] I. Nonaka and H. Takeuchi, "The knowledge-creating company," 
New York, NY, USA: Oxford University Press. 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-722-1
COLLA 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

[29] J. Cegarra-Navarro, D. and E. MartíNez-Conesa, " Implementing 
e-business 
through 
organizational 
learning: 
An 
empirical 
investigation in SMEs," International Journal of Information 
Management, 27(3), 2007, pp. 173-186. 
[30] D. Maditinos, D. Chatzoudes, and L. Sarigiannidis, "Factors 
affecting e-business successful implementation," International 
Journal of Commerce and Management, 24(4), 2014, pp. 300-320. 
[31] C. Petti and S. Zhang, "Factors influencing technological 
entrepreneurship capabilities: Towards an integrated research 
framework for Chinese enterprises," Journal of Technology 
Management in China, 6(1), 2011, pp. 7-25. 
[32] M. Subramaniam and M Youndt, "The influence of intellectual 
capital on the types of innovative capabilities," The Academy of 
Management Journal, 48(3), 2005, pp. 450-463. 
[33] Y. Li, H. Chen, Y. Liu and M. Peng, "Managerial ties, 
organizational learning, and opportunity capture: A social capital 
perspective," Asia Pacific Journal of Management, 31(1), 2014, 
pp. 271-291. 
[34] P. Tallon, "Inside the adaptive enterprise: an information 
technology capabilities perspective on business process agility," 
Information technology and management, 9(1), 2008, pp. 21-36. 
[35] I. Nonaka, "A dynamic theory of organizational knowledge 
creation," Organization science, 5(1), 1994, pp.14-37. 
[36] C. Fornell and D. Larcker, "Evaluating structural equation models 
with unobservable variables and measurement error," Journal of 
Marketing Research, 18(1), 1981, pp. 39-50. 
[37] J. Hair, W. Black, B. Babin, and R. Anderson, "Multivariate data 
analysis," New Jersey: Prentice Hall, 2010. 
[38] http://quantpsy.org/sobel/sobel.htm. 
 
 
APPENDIX I. Questionnair items 
 
Construct 
Code 
Measurement Items 
Social capital 
SC1 
Membership and networking with industrial 
associations are very important for my firm to 
acquire innovative ideas. 
SC2 
My firm has adequate access to external 
sources for knowledge, technical, management, 
and business-related expertise. 
SC3 
My firm encourages employees to share their 
knowledge, experience, ideas, and skills with 
colleagues from other departments. 
SC4 
Our firm and its external stakeholders 
frequently collaborate to solve problems. 
SC5 
The social network of firm has a great impact 
on improving our products, services and 
processes. 
Collaborative knowledge creation 
Socialization 
CKC1 
My firm stresses sharing experience with 
suppliers and customers and engaging in 
dialogue with competitors. 
CKC2 
My firm stresses getting ideas for firm 
strategy from daily social life, interaction 
with external experts, and informal meeting 
with competitors. 
CKC3 
My 
firm 
stresses 
creating 
a 
work 
environment that allows peers to understand 
the craftsmanship and expertise. 
Externalization CKC4 
My firm stresses the use of deductive and 
inductive thinking. 
CKC5 
My firm stresses creative and essential 
dialogues. 
CKC6 
My firm stresses exchanging various ideas 
and dialogues. 
Combination 
CKC7 
My firm stresses planning strategies by using 
published literature, computer simulation 
and forecasting 
CKC8 
My firm stresses creating manuals and 
databases on products and services 
CKC9 
My firm stresses transmitting newly created 
concept. 
Internalization CKC10 
My firm stresses enactive liaising activities 
with 
functional 
department 
by 
cross-
functional development teams 
CKC11 
My firm stresses searching and sharing new 
values and thoughts. 
CKC12 
My firm stresses sharing and trying to 
understand management visions through 
communications with fellows 
E-business innovation 
 
 
INNOV1 
My firm invests heavily on new e-business 
systems. 
INNOV2 
Employees are encouraged to come up with 
new ideas concerning the adoption of new e-
business applications. 
INNOV3 
The firm placed emphasis on introducing 
new e-business applications into business 
processes and activities. 
INNOV4 
The firm emphasizes continuously on 
introducing unique e-business processes and 
activities. 
 
 
 
 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-722-1
COLLA 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

