Agile Knowledge Networking 
A novel approach to research collaboration between industry and academia 
 
Bjørn Erik Munkvold 
Department of Information Systems 
University of Agder 
Kristiansand, Norway 
e-mail: bjorn.e.munkvold@uia.no
 
 
Abstract—The paper presents a novel approach to interaction 
between industry and academia, in the form of a knowledge 
networking program as implemented by a telecommunications 
company. Compared to traditional in-house R&D, this 
program represents an agile and “lightweight” approach to 
getting 
access 
to 
scientific 
knowledge 
supporting 
the 
company’s quest for disruptive innovations. Supported by a 
team of student trainees, the program facilitates interaction 
with a large number of top academic scholars worldwide. The 
paper reports experiences and lessons learned from the 
program so far, and discusses areas of further improvement in 
terms of managing the collaborative R&D process and 
cultivating the networking capability of the company. 
Keywords-knowledge 
networking; 
industry-academic 
collaboration; networking capability; collaboration capability. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The innovation capabilities of an organization are closely 
related to knowledge creation [1][2]. According to the open 
innovation concept, rather than developing new products and 
services through internal R&D processes, the knowledge 
needed for innovation increasingly resides outside the 
corporate boundaries [3]. This again places increasing 
emphasis on the organization’s capability for managing 
external relations and partnerships, often referred to as 
networking capability [4] or collaboration capability [5]. 
Collaboration between industry and researchers in academia 
is an important source for disruptive innovations [6], but 
managing collaborative R&D projects between industry and 
academia also implies potential challenges related to cultural 
differences and goal incongruence [7]. 
Since the concept of knowledge networking (KN) was 
suggested in the late 1990s [8], organizations have 
experimented with different knowledge creation and transfer 
processes based on network interaction. Still, there is a need 
for more empirical studies that can contribute to identifying 
guidelines for innovation through knowledge networking and 
R&D collaboration.  
In this paper, we present an example of an innovative and 
agile form of knowledge networking undertaken by the Elisa 
Corporation, a Finnish telecommunications company. 
Through Elisa Knowledge Networks, interaction with a 
broad set of leading scholars is facilitated for identifying and 
supporting disruptive innovations in the company. The 
concept of agility in this context refers to “a business-wide 
capability 
that 
embraces 
organizational 
structures, 
information systems, logistics processes and, in particular, 
mindsets” [9, p. 37], with flexibility as a key characteristic. 
We report on the experiences and lessons learned from the 
KN initiative so far, and discuss possible areas of 
improvement including the role of technology support. 
The remaining paper is structured as follows. Section II 
gives a brief overview of related research, and Section III 
introduces the Elisa Knowledge Networks program. Section 
IV presents the methodological approach for this study, and 
Section V presents the key findings in the form of 
experiences and lessons learned. The findings are discussed 
in Section VI and Section VII presents conclusions and 
implications. 
II. 
RELATED RESEARCH 
A. Key Definitions 
In this section, we present definitions of some key terms 
that are used in the discussion of the findings from our case 
study. 
Mitegra et al. [4] define networking capability as “the set 
of activities and organizational routines which are 
implemented at the organizational level of the focal company 
to initiate, develop, and terminate business relationships for 
the benefit of the company” (p. 741). They further detail the 
concepts into three components referring to the initiation, 
development and termination of the relationships.  
Blomqvist and Levy [5] present the somewhat broader 
term of collaboration capability for conceptualizing 
knowledge creation and collaborative innovation in 
networks. They define the term as “The actor’s capability to 
build and manage network relationships based on mutual 
trust, communication and commitment” [5, p. 31]. This is 
presented as a concept for analyzing relational interaction on 
different 
levels, 
including 
individual, 
team, 
intra-
organizational, and inter-organizational. Similar, the Global 
Collaboration Index Model presented by Frost and Sullivan 
[10] includes collaboration capability as “a forward-looking 
construct that represents an organization’s orientation and 
infrastructure to collaborate”. The organization’s culture and 
structure and its application of collaborative technologies are 
defined 
as 
components 
of 
collaboration 
capability. 
Collaboration capability in itself facilitates the updating of 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-436-7
COLLA 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

old capabilities, and the internal or external development of 
new ones. It could thus be seen as part of the firm’s 
transformational capacity, i.e., its capacity to continually 
redefine its product portfolio on the basis of the 
technological opportunities created within it [5][11]. 
B. Managing R&D Innovation Processes 
Several studies have focused on challenges in managing 
innovation 
processes 
and 
research 
collaboration 
[3][6][7][12]. Among the key challenges identified is 
providing adequate follow-through of the innovation process 
so that the mindset of open innovation is also implemented 
in the existing work routines and daily operations [3][6]. 
Also, for industry-university collaboration, several potential 
conflicts have been identified in terms of cultural 
differences, conflicts over IP rights, and different priorities 
and time horizons [7]. 
Almeida and Soares [13] also point to the challenges 
related to information and knowledge management in 
project-based 
R&D 
institutions, 
involving 
different 
disciplines, cultures and ways of working. They outline 
recommendations for a digital enterprise information 
management 
(EIM) 
infrastructure, 
combining 
Wikis, 
communication tools (e-mail, Skype) and a central content 
management system for preserving the project results. In a 
similar vein, a case study of knowledge networking practices 
in a large, multinational corporation [3] shows how the 
implementation of a collaboration platform integrating 
various social networking tools has been important for 
supporting the open innovation strategy and knowledge-
sharing capabilities of the company. 
In terms of suggested solutions for meeting the different 
challenges, Barnes et al. [7] present an extensive framework 
for managing collaborative R&D projects. Among the most 
important factors in this framework is the existence of a 
collaboration champion, defined as “an individual with great 
enthusiasm for and commitment to the venture, who is also 
influential and well-placed within the partner organization” 
[7, p. 399]. Also, a method of partner evaluation to ensure 
genuine interest and commitment, ensuring mutual benefit in 
terms of appropriate balance between academic objectives 
and industrial priorities, and continuity of personnel, have 
been identified as critical success factors [12]. 
III. 
ELISA KNOWLEDGE NETWORKS 
Elisa is a telecommunications, ICT and online service 
company serving 2.3 million consumer, corporate and public 
administration organization customers. The company is the 
market leader in Finland in mobile subscriptions, and in 
2014 it employed 4100 persons with a revenue of 1.54 
billion euros [14]. 
The Knowledge Networks program was initiated in 2011, 
as an initiative by the company’s Vice President of Business 
Development. The company earlier had an internal R&D unit 
of 14 employees, but the research activity was not seen to be 
sufficiently targeted towards the needs of the business units. 
The Research Collaboration objective of the KN program 
is stated as to “identify novel disruptive innovations in the 
scientific community based on selected focus areas”. A 
disruptive innovation is here defined as “A new technology, 
product, service or business model that will either disrupt the 
company’s existing business or create a new business 
opportunity by introducing a new domain of offerings that 
will dwarf some of the existing offerings or totally replace 
them”. The disruptive innovations may be related to four 
domains: business model, services, products and technology. 
The current list of disruptive innovations identified by Elisa 
Knowledge Networks through interviews with academic 
scholars 
includes: 
computer-assisted 
communication, 
healthcare co-creation, privacy control, industrial internet, 
software defined networks, smart device interconnections, 
and brain-machine interfacing. 
The Knowledge Networks team is led by the Vice 
President of Business Development who has 20 % of his 
position allocated for this, and a team of 2-3 trainees who are 
master students recently graduated or in the final stage of 
their studies. In addition, the program has a steering group of 
four top level managers in the different business areas of the 
company, who meet once a month for status updates and 
approval of new academic contacts identified by the KN 
team. As all costs related to the initiated collaborative R&D 
projects are covered by the business units, the costs of the 
KN team operations only represent a small fraction of the 
costs for the former R&D unit in the company which 
amounted to more than 1.5 million euros. 
The KN activities are organized in a ‘funneling process’ 
where candidate academic scholars are first identified 
through scouting by the trainees or from internal or external 
hints. The selected scholars are then invited for an online 
meeting, and in the case of mutual interest for further 
collaboration the scholars are suggested to the steering group 
for initiating collaboration with the business units. The 
criteria applied in the scouting process are that the scholar 
should be a world class scientist doing research in one or 
more of the company’s focus areas, having a track record of 
industry collaboration, and being affiliated with a highly 
distinguished university or research centre. Further, although 
as a low priority criterion, the scholar should be well funded. 
This again is due to the “lightweight” nature of the KN 
program, where most of the research projects initiated are not 
funded by the company other than for covering expenses 
related to travel and data collection, etc. 
The KN team develops regular performance reports for 
the Elisa executive board. In the period from 2011-2014, 743 
academic scholars were contacted, of which 142 were 
approved for further collaboration. Of these, 85 were from 
institutions outside Finland. In the same period, more than 20 
research collaboration projects were initiated. 
The KN team uses a Microsoft Sharepoint database and 
Excel spreadsheets for storing information on the contact 
with scholars and the projects initiated. Employees in the 
company can get access to this information by request, but it 
is so far not made openly available. For online meetings with 
the scholars, they use the company’s desktop video 
conferencing system. The KN network arranges internal 
seminars that can be accessed online, and that are also 
recorded for later view. 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-436-7
COLLA 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

IV. 
METHOD 
Data for this study was collected through interviews with 
different stakeholders involved in the knowledge networking 
activities in Elisa, and analysis of different documents from 
the KN network. 
A total of twelve semi-structured interviews with sixteen 
informants were conducted in the period from May to 
September 2014. These included: 
 
Individual interviews with four members of the KN 
steering committee (including one online interview) 
 
Group interview with three trainees in the KN team 
 
Individual interviews with four representatives from 
the company’s business units (including two online 
interviews) 
 
Online interviews with five academic scholars in the 
KN network (including a group interview with three 
scholars) 
Eight of the informants were interviewed at the Elisa 
headquarters in Helsinki during a one day visit, while the 
remaining interviews were conducted using the company’s 
desktop conferencing system for the internal employees and 
Skype for the academic scholars. 
All interviews were taped and transcribed in full. The 
interview transcripts were annotated, and then analyzed for 
experiences and lessons learned from the KN activities till 
date. 
A preliminary report of the results were also discussed 
and validated with the KN coordinator and two KN trainees 
in a meeting in March 2015, then also providing an update 
on current actions in the KN team. 
V. 
KEY FINDINGS 
In this section, we present key findings from our study in 
terms of experiences and lessons learned from the KN 
program so far, and possible areas of improvement. As 
presented in Section IV, data for this study was collected 
through interviews with different stakeholders involved in 
the knowledge networking activities, and analysis of 
different documents from the KN network. The reported 
experiences and suggestions thus represent the perspectives 
from different stakeholder groups. 
A. Experienced Benefits from the KN Program 
Overall, the company representatives interviewed report 
positive experiences from the KN program. They regard this 
way of getting access to cutting edge research as more 
effective than through the former in-house R&D department, 
and delivering more benefit to the business units. 
While the company does not currently have metrics in 
place for analyzing the outcomes of the research projects 
initiated, the informants point to several examples of 
successful interactions with academia that have led to 
important input to the company’s strategy development in 
terms of areas to be focused. Several of the informants also 
point to that even if most contacts with the academic scholars 
do not lead to any further collaboration it is still valuable to 
read about and learn from their research work, and that the 
research articles often give more insight than superficial 
consulting reports. Also, several of the informants state that 
it is to be expected that not all contact initiatives give results: 
“In venture capital operation there is the golden rule that 
based on ten ideas or ten investments there will be one 
successful and nine failures, and that is very ok. And I think 
very much this kind of knowledge network operation is like 
an internal venture capital operation, they are ventures, 
there is a high risk because they are future-oriented.” 
(Member of KN steering group) 
They also point to that the KN initiative in the company 
can be seen as part of transforming the company to become a 
more agile and international organization. 
The academic scholars interviewed also state that being 
invited to research collaboration by an industrial company is 
exceptional, as it is normally the other way round. The initial 
invitation email is also well prepared in that it refers 
explicitly to some of the researcher’s work, thus managing to 
make the candidate scholar curious (and perhaps also 
flattered) and therefore (s)he does not discard this as spam. 
The willingness of the company to share their data (from 
surveys, etc.) with researchers and students for further 
analysis is also emphasized as positive. As an example, the 
company is currently inviting scholars to conduct big data 
research on raw data from selected base stations in their 
mobile network. 
The trainee program is also emphasized as a success, 
with the trainees being praised by both the company 
informants and the scholars as premium students who are 
effective in their approach. However, some suggestions were 
made regarding the length and format of the trainee period, 
which will be reported in the next section. 
B. Challenges and Areas of Improvement 
Overall, the informants point to that the KN program is 
still in an early, ramp-up phase, and that some initial 
challenges thus can be expected. 
The key challenge reported by both the members of the 
steering group and the business unit representatives concerns 
the hand-over of academic contacts from the KN team to the 
business units. It is here considered crucial to create 
sufficient ownership of the research projects from the 
business. If not, with the hectic work pace, handling the 
introduction of the research contact may simply be regarded 
as extra work from the business persons. As reflected by a 
business representative on how the hand-over process could 
sometimes be perceived by the business unit:  
“[…] “this is a good researcher, catch!” (laughter) “Ah, 
what do I do with this guy? Now I need to use five hours a 
week to keep it going”. And that is often reason enough to 
say no”. 
One of the informants also pointed to the “not invented 
here” syndrome as a barrier towards taking on the 
responsibility for new research projects that they have not 
themselves initiated. 
Some argued that the trainees could take on a stronger 
coordinating function for the research collaboration projects, 
and thus support the business units in this process. But a 
challenge to this is the relatively short duration of the trainee 
program, typically lasting 3-4 months. Several informants 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-436-7
COLLA 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

thus expressed concern that during this relatively short 
period of time, the trainees did not get the possibility to take 
on more challenging tasks beyond administering the contact 
with the scholars. However, based on his experience, one 
business representative also pointed out that one should be 
careful about delegating too challenging tasks to the trainees, 
such as negotiating contracts. It should here be noted that 
since the time of this interview study, the length of the 
trainee period has been somewhat extended, to four months 
as KN trainee followed by four months as a trainee in one of 
the business units.  
The turnover of trainees was also raised as a challenge by 
the academic scholars interviewed. As projects could 
typically span 1-2 years, this would imply contact with 4-5 
trainees during the course of the project. While the trainees 
were generally perceived to be well prepared, this was seen 
to result in a lack of continuity and to cause some confusion 
about who was the current point of contact in the company. 
The scholars also expressed some frustration with the 
process of establishing the project agreement taking too long, 
resulting in delay in the project schedule which again could 
lead to conflicts with other commitments and deadlines for 
the academics. This is also supported by one of the company 
representatives, who expressed concern that the company 
could lose face towards the scholars. 
The fact that most of the projects were unfunded was also 
stated to affect the scholars’ priority and commitment: 
“Because they are not a client, they are more like a 
beneficiary, so I think then it changes a little bit the power 
structures. Because we don’t really owe them too much. I 
mean, of course we want to help them, but obviously they are 
not paying, and we are doing the work, so…”. 
This was seen in contrast to the rather strict liability 
clause enforced by the company in the project agreement, 
involving a penalty of 50.000 euros in the case of any 
confidentiality breaches. 
Also, some of the informants in the company stated that 
unfunded projects did not tend to receive the same focus and 
expectations as funded projects: 
“When you pay for something the quality is usually a bit 
better, and you get committed a lot more than to something 
which is for free”. 
However, the KN coordinator still argues in favor of non-
funded projects as the norm, in line with the lightweight 
nature of the program and regarding the contact with the 
scholars as the main focus rather than the projects as such. 
The general impression among the informants is that the 
KN program is not yet very visible in the company. This is 
despite 
regular 
online 
presentations 
and 
workshops 
conducted. However, the KN team is currently working on 
improving this, through establishing a dedicated site on the 
company intranet and also running monthly online seminars. 
A challenge regarding intranet presence was stated to be that 
the company has too many sites, thus making it difficult to 
get an overview. 
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
Through their Knowledge Networks program, Elisa has 
transformed their R&D activities from an internal, resource-
demanding operation not perceived to fully meet the 
demands of the business units, to a lightweight and agile 
operation facilitating flexible interactions with a large 
number of world-leading researchers in different domains. 
As pointed to by the informants, this can be seen as part of 
an overall transformation towards a more internationally 
oriented company. 
While it is still early to measure the output of the KN 
program, the accounts provided by the informants of projects 
and ideas initiated through the contact with the research 
scholars indicate that the program fulfils the overall intention 
of this partnership, i.e., to engage in research collaborations 
that could not otherwise be justified in-house [11]. Also, the 
Elisa employees interviewed were generally positive about 
the KN program, characterizing it as a “valuable asset” for 
the company. The scholars were somewhat more mixed in 
their feedback, pointing out some challenges related to 
contractual arrangements and project management. Still, they 
were also positive towards the partnership program. 
In comparison with the guidelines for managing R&D 
collaboration suggested in the literature [7], several of the 
critical success factors are in place in the KN program. The 
KN coordinator definitely serves the role of collaboration 
champion, in terms of commitment to the program. And as a 
Vice President, he also meets the definitional criteria of 
being influential and well-placed within the company [7]. 
The only potential challenge related to this role is the high 
dependency on one person, making it somewhat vulnerable. 
In effect of this, the company has now decided to dedicate 
one more person to the KN team, to assist the coordinator 
with some of his tasks. 
Further, the process for scouting and selecting scholars 
works well, and the KN team has succeeded in engaging a 
large number of researchers who bring expert knowledge on 
focus areas related to potential disruptive innovations. 
However, as pointed out by the informants, timing is a 
critical issue, as even though a scholar may possess relevant 
knowledge for the company there may not be sufficient basis 
to initiate a project at this exact time. While the informants 
still regard the academic contact to be of possible value 
regardless of this, for the trainees in the KN team this 
represents more of a challenge in ‘rejecting’ a scholar after 
the initial contact. This also makes it difficult to contact this 
scholar again later. 
According to the conceptualization of networking 
capability by Mitegra et al. [4], the Elisa Knowledge 
Networks program can be seen to demonstrate good 
relationship initiation capability in terms of attracting 
valuable partners. But in terms of relationship development 
capability, the program still experiences some of the 
challenges frequently mentioned related to establishing 
effective R&D partnerships. The main challenge here is 
related to the hand-over of the academic contact from the KN 
team to the internal business unit, and ensuring ownership in 
this. If sufficient follow-through is not provided, time 
pressure and the “not invented here” syndrome may act as 
barriers towards the further engagement of the business 
units. As the internal visibility of the KN program was still 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-436-7
COLLA 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

considered low, this also represents a challenge in creating 
buy-in for the research collaboration initiatives. 
Also in managing the relationship with the scholars, 
some concerns were raised by both the scholars and 
company employees about the process of initiating the 
projects taking too long, and the company not being 
‘professional’ enough in their handling of the scholars. The 
turnover of trainees was also pointed to by the academics as 
a challenge in maintaining a focal point of contact in the 
company. Given that most of the research projects are not 
funded by the company, these challenges could easily lead to 
some demotivation among the researchers or at least to a lack 
of prioritization. 
As documented in previous studies, an ICT collaboration 
infrastructure is regarded an important element for 
supporting knowledge networking and open innovation [3, 
13]. The KN team also uses several tools in for managing 
information and communicating with scholars, e.g., 
SharePoint databases and desktop videoconferencing. 
However, a recommendation would be to make the database 
of scholars and projects searchable for all employees. Even if 
this may not be considered useful for all, marketing this 
opportunity can still contribute to the internal awareness of 
the KN program and to facilitating an open innovation 
mindset among the business units [3]. Further, there is a 
potential for increasing use of social networking tools, 
facilitating knowledge exchange among the Elisa employees. 
Integrating this in an enterprise information management 
infrastructure can facilitate organizational learning through 
sharing results and best practices across the research projects 
[13]. 
With reference to the collaboration capability construct, 
the KN program in Elisa can be considered strong in its 
orientation 
and 
organizational 
infrastructure 
for 
collaboration, while the application of collaboration 
technologies is still at an early stage. 
Finally, it should be reminded that the KN program is 
still in an early stage of development, and that it is yet too 
early to document extensive output measures. Also, several 
of the issues raised here are currently being addressed by the 
company, such as routines for project initiation and follow-
through, more systematic assessment of completed and 
disbanded projects, extended trainee period, stronger 
presence on the company intranet, and use of social media 
(Twitter) for informing about projects. 
In terms of further development of the KN program, a 
possibility could be to extend the current dyadic relationships 
between Elisa and each academic scholar to a real network, 
by connecting scholars with similar or complimentary 
research interests and skills to form research teams focusing 
on joint topics. This could then even further support an open 
innovation strategy for the company. However, this would 
also entail additional coordination challenges, and is so far 
not part of the company’s further plans. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATIONS 
The case study presented in this paper illustrates an agile 
approach to knowledge networking that has demonstrated 
several benefits over the former in-house R&D organization. 
The cost effective and flexible KN operation has facilitated 
contact with a large number of leading academic researchers, 
resulting in important insights for the company and over 20 
collaborative research projects initiated so far. In addition, 
the KN operation includes a trainee program that gives 
valuable experience for master student graduates, also 
resulting in further employment in the company for several 
candidates. 
The study has also pointed out several challenges in the 
management of the collaborative R&D process, especially 
regarding the hand-over of the academic contact from the 
KN team to the business unit to create internal ownership of 
the 
projects. 
Further, 
effective 
follow-through 
and 
coordination of the research partnership is important for 
ensuring continued commitment from the partners. 
The study supports the findings from previous research 
on the importance of a collaboration champion, and 
balancing industry and academic objectives. 
With reference to the concept of networking capability, 
the 
Elisa 
Knowledge 
Networks 
demonstrate 
strong 
relationship initiation capability but can still improve further 
its relationship development capability. In terms of 
collaboration capability, the KN program scores high on 
orientation towards collaboration but does have a potential 
for further utilization of collaboration technology and social 
software to support the knowledge networking. It is also 
recommended that the company provides shared access to 
their KN database, to facilitate extended knowledge sharing 
in the company. 
The findings reported in this paper can serve as 
inspiration and benchmark for other companies seeking to 
develop 
their 
knowledge 
networking 
capability 
in 
partnership with academia. However, as a caveat it should be 
noted that this form of collaborative R&D partnership 
requires that influential persons in the company take a 
genuine interest in the potential contribution of academic 
research, as is the case with the Elisa KN coordinator and the 
members of the steering group. Further, the industry partner 
should be willing and interested in sharing their experiences 
and data to support the research activities, of which this 
article represents an example. 
Further research should conduct more systematic 
assessment of the results from the R&D collaboration for 
both the company and the academic partners, and contribute 
to develop suitable metrics for this. Also, in-depth studies of 
how different collaboration technologies can support 
knowledge networking activities are needed to develop this 
practice further. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
I am grateful to the Elisa Knowledge Networks 
coordinator Kimmo Pentikäinen and his team for facilitating 
and participating in the study, and to the Elisa employees and 
the academic scholars interviewed for sharing their insight 
and experience. 
 
 
 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-436-7
COLLA 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

REFERENCES 
[1] S. Popadiuok and C. W. Choo, “Innovation and knowledge 
creation: How are these concepts related?,” International 
Journal of Information Management, vol. 26, pp. 302-312, 
2006. 
[2] D. Esterhuizen, C. S. L. Schutte, and A. S. A. du Toit, 
“Knowledge creation processes as critical enablers for 
innovation,” 
International 
Journal 
of 
Information 
Management, vol. 32, pp. 354-364, 2012. 
[3] D. Schneckenberg, “Open innovation and knowledge 
networking in a multinational corporation,” Journal of 
Business Strategy, vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 14-24, 2015. 
[4] M. Mitrega, S. Forkmann, C. Ramos, and S. C. Hennenerg, 
«Networking capability in business relationships – Concept 
and scale development,» Industrial Marketing Management, 
vol. 41, pp. 739-751, 2012. 
[5] K. Blomqvist and J. Levy, “Collaboration capability – A focal 
Concept in Knowledge Creation and Collaborative Innovation 
in Networks,” International Journal of Management Concepts 
and Philosophy, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 31-48, 2006. 
[6] M. Assink, "Inhibitors of disruptive innovation capability: a 
conceptual 
model," 
European 
Journal 
of 
Innovation 
Management, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 215-233, 2006. 
[7] T. A. Barnes, I. R. Pashby, and A, M, Gibbons, «Managing 
collaborative R&D projects: development of a practical 
management 
tool,” 
International 
Journal 
of 
Project 
Management, vol. 24, pp. 395-404, 2006. 
[8] A. Seufert, G. von Krogh, and A. Bach, “Towards knowledge 
networking,” Journal of Knowledge Management, vol. 3, no. 
3, pp.180-190, 1999. 
[9] M. Christopher, “The Agile Supply Chain: Competing in 
Volatile Markets,” Industrial Marketing Management, vol. 29, 
no. 1, pp. 37-44, 2000. 
[10] Frost and Sullivan, “Meetings Around the World: The Impact 
of Collaboration on Business Performance,” Frost & Sullivan 
White Paper, Silicon Valley, Palo Alto, CA. 
[11] B. B. Tyler, “The Complementarity of Cooperative and 
Technological 
Competencies. 
A 
Resource-Based 
Perspective,” Journal of English Technology Management, 
vol. 18, pp. 1-27, 2001. 
[12] T. Barnes, I. Pashby, and A. Gibbons, “Effective University-
Industry 
Interaction: 
A 
Multi-case 
Evaluation 
of 
Collaborative 
R&D 
Projects,” 
European 
Management 
Journal, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 272-285, 2002. 
[13] M. V. Almeida and A. L. Soares, “Knowledge sharing in 
project-based organizations: Overcoming the informational 
limbo,” International Journal of Information Management, 
vol. 34, pp. 770-779, 2014. 
[14] corporate.elisa.com 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-436-7
COLLA 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

