An Experience on Leadership Identification in Social Cognocracy Network 
 
Alberto Turón 
e-mail: turon@unizar.es 
Juan Aguarón 
e-mail: aguaron@unizar.es 
 
José María Moreno-Jiménez 
e-mail: moreno@unizar.es 
María Teresa Escobar 
e-mail: mescobar@unizar.es
Grupo Decisión Multicriterio Zaragoza (GDMZ) 
Facultad de Economía y Empresa, Universidad de Zaragoza 
Zaragoza, Spain 
 
 
Abstract—In this work we show the results of a decision 
making experience conducted through the Social Cognocracy 
Network. This collaborative social network, developed by the 
Zaragoza Multicriteria Decision Making Group (GDMZ), is 
based on the principles that support the cognitive democracy 
known as e-cognocracy. The network considers three levels of 
interaction: information, content creation and decision 
making. E-cognocracy uses two rounds in order to incorporate 
preferences through an e-voting module and an intermediate 
round of discussion in which the arguments that support the 
individual positions and decisions are added by means of a 
forum. In addition, the forum provides quantitative measures 
that reflect the reputation of the actors and the relevance of 
topics and comments. This quantitative information is used to 
propose a procedure for the identification of the social leaders, 
the persons whose opinions influence the preferences of others. 
Keywords—Policy Making, Social Cognocracy Network, 
Reputation, Influence, Leadership Identification. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
E-cognocracy [1][2] is a cognitive democracy oriented to 
the extraction and sharing of knowledge associated with the 
scientific resolution of public decision making problems 
related with the governance of society. It uses two rounds in 
order to incorporate preferences through an e-voting module 
and an intermediate round of discussion in which the 
arguments that support the individual positions are added by 
means of a forum. 
In the voting round the priorities associated to the 
alternatives are compared on two separate occasions; in the 
discussion step, the arguments for and against these 
alternatives, which are defended by the decision makers, are 
incorporated by posting messages and comments to the 
messages. In addition to the text that contains the decision 
makers’ arguments, each post includes the information about 
three quantitative measures that reflect the importance given 
by the author and the reader to the post and the extent of 
their agreement with it. All this quantitative information and 
the relationships and influence indicators within the 
discussion network are used to propose a procedure for the 
identification of the social leaders –the persons whose 
opinions influence the preferences of others. 
To do so, it is necessary to measure how an actor’s vote 
is influenced by the opinions of the other actors. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
The experience involved a citizen’s participation process 
based on the use of a social network, Social Cognocracy 
Network, that integrates the voting and discussion processes 
and provides tools to analyze the resulting preference 
structures. 
A. The Social Cognocracy Network 
Social Cognocracy Network (SCN) is a social network 
designed by the Zaragoza Multicriteria Decision Making 
Group (GDMZ). Based on the e-cognocracy, SCN promotes 
the citizen participation. Three participation levels are 
possible: (i) information (ii) content creation (iii) decision 
making. The citizens can achieve one of those participation 
levels 
depending 
on 
their 
involvement 
and 
their 
responsibility. 
B. Reputation, Relevance and Influence 
From the point of view of Social Cognocracy Network, 
three different types of nodes can be defined, according to 
their role in the process: 
 
Persons: individuals that take part in the voting and 
discussion processes, either decision makers or 
guests. 
 
Topics: discussion threads proposed, grouped into 
categories defined during the problem-design stage. 
 
Comments: any of the messages, arguments… 
expressed by the participants as messages published 
in the forum. 
Each comment comes with the identification (nickname) 
of its author. All comments about a topic are grouped in a 
page under a header containing the topic title. 
Two basic indicators of influence are defined: 
 
Reputation of an actor: measurement of the prestige 
the actor has among the participants. 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-436-7
COLLA 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

 
Relevance of a topic or a comment: measurement of 
the capability of the topic or comment to shape the 
actors’ opinions. 
A person Pj can give his/her opinion about other persons, 
topics and comments, by giving values from 0 to 10 to three 
quantitative indices: 
 
Index 
Rates 
Confidence Cij 
The author Pi of a comment
T-Importance IijT 
A topic Ti 
C-Importance IijC 
A comment Ci 
 
Persons can also assess the importance of their own 
topics and comments and even to themselves (self-trust). 
From these indices, the reputation RiP of persons and the 
relevance of topics (RiT) and comments (RiC) are obtained 
using the expressions: 
 
 
(1)  
 
 
(2)  
 
 
(3)  
 
being N the total number of comments that a topic has 
received and nc the number of answers to a specific comment 
in that topic. 
A person’s reputation, as well as the importance the 
community gives to a topic or a message, can influence the 
preferences of other persons. Under the e-cognocracy, this 
influence will result in changes in the preference structures 
of these other persons from one round to another.   
III. 
CASE STUDY 
Social Cognocracy Network was used in an experience 
related to the design of the metropolitan public transport 
network of the city of Zaragoza (Spain). Four alternatives 
were proposed. Representatives of political parties defended 
their proposals in a classroom with students of E-government 
and Public Decision Making (4th course of the Degree in 
Economy at University of Zaragoza). After a first voting 
round, in which only the students were allowed to 
participate, a discussion was developed in the forum, with 
the participation of the students and the political 
representatives. In the forum, the participants could valuate 
the reputation of the others, as well as the importance of the 
comments posted (Figure 1). Then, a second voting round 
was performed. The voters’ preferences were expressed by 
using Analytic Hierarchy Process [3]. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Numerical and visual analyses show the influence of the 
opinions in the change of the actors’ preference structures. 
The quantitative valuations of the posts allow calculating the 
influence of the different participants and their comments. 
An interactive 3D visualization tool is used to explore the 
results (Figure 2). Individual preference structures are 
represented on the simplex x1+x2+x3+x4=1, being xi the 
preferences given by each voter to each alternative Ai, 
i=1,…,4. From the visual analysis some relevant facts stand 
out: 24 zones define the different positions of the voters with 
respect to the four alternatives; although the results of the 
two rounds offer few significant differences, only an 
inversion in the preferences of the alternatives chosen in 
second and third places, it seems clear that the participants 
with greater reputation persuaded to take their opinion 
(influenced) voters who, in the first round, had favored other 
alternatives. Analyzing specifically the behavior of these 
voters, it can be observed that the change in their opinion is 
in line with the opinions expressed by the four best valued 
voters. The importance of the comments in which these 
opinions have been exposed is also high.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was partially funded by the Spanish 
Ministry of Economy and Innovation Research Project 
“Social Cognocracy Network” (Ref. ECO2011-24181). 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. M. Moreno-Jiménez, “E-cognocracia: Nueva Sociedad, 
Nueva Democracia,” (“E-cognocracy: New Society, New 
Democracy”), Estudios de Economía Aplicada, vol. 24(1–2), 
2006, pp. 559–581. 
[2] J. M. Moreno-Jiménez, and W. Polasek, “E-democracy and 
Knowledge. A Multicriteria Framework for the New 
Democratic Era,” Journal Multicriteria Decision Analysis, 
vol. 12, 2003, pp. 163–176. 
[3] T. Saaty, “The Analytic Hierarchy Process,” McGraw-Hill, 
New York, 1980. 
 
 
 
       
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-436-7
COLLA 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

 
Figure 1.  Discussion window with the thread of comments of a topic, showing the input fields used for assessing the reputation of the actors (persons) and 
the relevance of the topics and comments. 
 
 
       
Figure 2.  Several 3D views of the simplex showing the voters’ preference structures: (1) after the first round (2); after the second round, being the size of 
each point proportional to the reputation of the voter; (3) changes in the preference structures of each voter. The box represents the overall (group) 
preference structure. 
 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-436-7
COLLA 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

