Standardisation of Enterprise Architecture Development for Smart Cities 
 
Zohreh Pourzolfaghar and Viviana Bastidas                 
School of Computing  
Dublin City University (DCU) 
Dublin, Ireland 
zohreh.pourzolfaghar@dcu.ie 
viviana.bastidasmelo2@mail.dcu.ie 
Aleksas Mamkaitis and Markus Helfert 
School of Computing  
Dublin City University (DCU) 
Dublin, Ireland 
aleksas.mamkaitis2@mail.dcu.ie 
markus.helfert@dcu.ie
 
 
Abstract— Managing the complexity of the Information and 
Communications Technology (ICT) services in smart cities 
raises a need to use enterprise architecture frameworks to 
solve the complexity issues. However, the majority of the 
existing enterprise architecture frameworks have been 
developed to address the concerns and issues of the 
stakeholders in their associated world. To address challenges 
including complexity, multi-stakeholders and the service-
oriented nature of smart cities, this paper presents an 
enterprise architecture framework that can be used as a way to 
manage enterprise architectures in smart cities. This 
framework focuses on establishing contextual requirements 
and definitions for smart city systems and services. In contrast 
to other approaches, in this paper we focus on two important 
layers, i.e., context layer and service layer, as well as their 
relationships. The framework is valuable in developing smart 
services. It also contributes to the understanding of smart city 
enterprise architectures. 
Keywords-smart 
cities; 
enterprise 
architecture; 
smart 
services. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Smart cities are complex systems, which use ICT 
services to improve citizens’ quality of life. One of the 
current issues in smart cities is dealing with complexity of 
ICT services. For instance, challenges to connect various 
systems in smart cities [10] are due to the complexity of the 
smart cities. During the last decades, many Enterprise 
Architecture (EA) frameworks have been developed to 
manage complex information systems, processes and 
infrastructures in organisations and systems. Each of these 
enterprise architecture frameworks has been developed to 
address specific needs and concerns of the stakeholders and 
issues for their world [1]. According to a study comparing 
the frameworks by [1], we draw the conclusion that some of 
the well-known enterprise architecture frameworks have not 
considered the aspects which are critical for smart cities. 
Referring to the definitions for smart cities, the realisation of 
smartness is happening by providing services to the citizens 
[36]-[40][59]. Therefore, citizens (users) view is crucial for 
delivering effective services. Another example is related to 
the service life cycle. According to the comparison results by 
[1], the maintenance phase has been neglected for the 
majority of the frameworks. From the smart city perspective, 
a maintenance phase is crucial to deliver qualified and 
sustainable services to the citizens. Indeed, maintainability 
and sustainability are two of the quality factors [2] for smart 
cities.  
According to the above mentioned discussion, an 
enterprise architecture framework for smart cities should 
consider smart city stakeholders and their concerns for 
improving the quality of life for citizens. For this purpose, 
we introduce a methodological framework to manage smart 
city enterprise architecture which can be used as a 
standardised approach to develop smart services. This 
framework contains two new layers, including the context 
and service layers, as well as the initial relationships between 
them. This paper aims to introduce the components and 
concepts to establish the new layers and relationships.  
The remainder of the paper is organised as follows. In 
Section 
2, 
five 
well-known 
enterprise 
architecture 
frameworks are reviewed to define the problem. In Section 3, 
the presented enterprise architecture for smart cities is 
introduced. In Section 4, it is explained how the evaluation 
of the created architecture is performed through simulation. 
In the discussion section, we argue that the presented 
enterprise architecture for smart cities can deal with smart 
city stakeholders and their concerns, leading to enhancement 
of the quality of the delivered services to the citizens. 
II. 
RESEARCH METHOD 
This paper follows the design science research approach 
by [3] and [11] to present an enterprise architecture 
framework for smart cities. According to this research 
method, the first step is to define the problem. For this 
purpose, 
some 
well-known 
enterprise 
architecture 
frameworks are explored with regard to critical views for 
smart cities, i.e. citizens (user) view and their related phases 
in SDLC. The second step is to propose a solution for the 
recognised problem. To build up the solution artefact, this 
research follows the layered structure of an existing 
architecture by [7]. Then, relying on the related literature, the 
steps to construct the architectural layers and their 
relationships are elaborated. At last step, simulation is 
introduced as a method to assess the generated architecture. 
For this purpose, the created architecture for a service use-
case in River city is evaluated and discussed. 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-645-3
COLLA 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

III. 
LITERATURE REVIEW TO DEFINE THE PROBLEM 
A. Existing Enterprise Architecture Frameworks 
Designing an enterprise is a system engineering approach 
to determine the required capabilities for designing the 
organisation, 
processes, 
services, 
information, 
and 
technologies [12].  Architectures are created usually to 
manage 
and 
organise 
the 
complexity 
of 
systems. 
Architectures are utilised to construct blueprints of an 
enterprise for organising system components, e.g., interfaces, 
processes, services and much more [4]. Booch [5] stated that 
enterprise architecture is the way to architect and plan the 
enterprise to have the best human performance and output. 
To describe and model various aspects of enterprises, 
researchers have proposed different approaches [7]. Most 
frameworks follow a process and integration aim [13]. 
Enterprise architectures usually consist of two main 
approaches: an enterprise architecture Framework together 
with an implementation methodology [14]. A common 
approach among prominent frameworks is the transition and 
implementation from strategic business objectives into the 
infrastructure and systems design. Enterprise architecture 
aims to support and enable this transition by providing ways 
to design concepts of an enterprise.  
Usually frameworks use views and layers to describe 
architectural elements to manage complexity (e.g., process, 
service, and technology). Each of the views illustrates a 
different perspective meaningful to specific stakeholders.  
Layering decomposes a system into groups of related 
components whose processes provide services to subsequent 
layers. For instance, components like sensors at technology 
layer support an application layer by providing data to them.  
Over the last decades, number of enterprise architecture 
frameworks including the Zachman Framework [6], 
Department of Defense Architecture Framework (DoDAF) 
(Chief Information Officer U.S. Department of Defense 
2010), Federal Enterprise Architecture Framework (FEAF) 
[8] (Office of Management and Budget 2012), Treasury 
Enterprise Architecture Framework (TEAF), and The Open 
Group Architectural Framework (TOGAF) [9], have been 
developed. Common to these frameworks is reducing 
enterprises’ 
complexities 
by 
considering 
disparate 
viewpoints and organising various aspects in ways that make 
an enterprise understandable. Despite of existing overlaps 
and similarities between these frameworks, each of them was 
designed to address specific needs and concerns of the 
stakeholders and issues for their world [1].  
To specify the targeted concern and stakeholders of each 
framework, this study adopts the results of a comparison 
study by [1], whether the enterprise architecture frameworks 
encompass the entire software development life cycle 
(SDLC), as well as all stakeholders’ views.  The character 
‘Y’ in the cells implies that the corresponding framework has 
provided details for the SDLC phase, or considered 
mentioned stakeholders’ views. The adopted results are 
shown in Table I.  
 
TABLE I.  
COMPARISON OF THE ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE 
FRAMEWORKS (ADOPTED FROM [1]) 
Framework 
SDLC Phases 
Views/Perspe
ctives 
Planning 
Analysis 
Design  
Implementation 
Maintenance 
Planner 
Owner 
Designer 
Builder 
Subcontractor 
User 
Zachman 
Y Y Y Y - 
Y Y Y Y Y Y 
DoDAF 
Y Y Y Y - 
Y Y Y Y - 
- 
FEAF 
Y Y Y Y - 
Y Y Y Y Y - 
TEAF 
Y Y Y Y - 
Y Y Y Y 
- 
TOGAF 
- 
Y Y Y - 
- 
Y Y 
- 
- 
 
Reviewing Table I, empty (gray) cells unfold that critical 
aspects from smart city perspective have not been considered 
in the explored enterprise architecture frameworks. The first 
observation is that the user view has received the least 
attention, while the citizens/users are paramount in smart 
cities. According to the definition for smart services by [42], 
the ultimate goal for services in smart cities is to respond to 
the citizens’ needs and concerns. Consequently, citizens 
(users) concerns are crucial in the enterprise architecture for 
smart cities.  
The second observation is related to the maintenance 
phase which is of concern for authorities in smart cities, due 
to sustainability of the delivered services. As [2] stated 
sustainability and all other quality factors are crucial to 
realise smartness in the cities. Many standards (e.g., sensor 
security standards, [2]), and principles (e.g., open data), have 
been developed in smart cities, as the enablers of quality 
factors (e.g., security, confidentiality, [2]). In summary, it is 
concluded that some important aspects from smart city 
perspective cannot be addressed by the explored enterprise 
architecture frameworks. To address these challenges, this 
paper introduces an enterprise architecture in the following 
section. 
IV. 
DESIGNING ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURES FOR SMART 
CITIES 
The overall view of the enterprise architecture for smart 
cities includes strategic and operational components as 
follows: 
vision 
and 
strategy 
management, 
portfolio 
management, service design, implementation and change 
management (See Figure 1).  
 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-645-3
COLLA 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

 
Figure 1.  General overview of the framework to develop the presented 
enterprise architecture for smart cities  
The focus of this paper is on the service design part. With 
this aim, this study follows [7] to put the architectural layers 
together. The presented layered architecture includes: 
Context layer, service layer, information system layer and 
technology layer (Figure 2).  
 
 
Figure 2.  Overview of the architectural layers for design of services  
The first two layers, i.e., context layer and service layer, 
have been initiated by this research for the first time. The 
context layer plays an important role to capture the 
contextual concerns from ‘vision management’ and transfer 
them to the service layer. In service layer, these requirements 
are considered to provide a detailed service description 
which will have relationships with information system layer 
and technology layer. A summary of the aims of focus of the 
presented layers is shown in Table II. 
TABLE II.  
COMPARISON OF THE ENTERPRISE ARCHITECTURE 
FRAMEWORKS (ADOPTED FROM [1]) 
Architectural 
Layer 
Aim and Focus 
Context 
To capture smart city context information 
about strategies, priorities and other critical 
aspects (e.g., stakeholders and their concerns), 
required to deliver effective services to the 
citizens. 
Service 
To define appropriate goals, scope and etc. for 
services with regard to the smart city 
requirements, concerns and priorities. 
Information 
To identify the data elements, data flows and 
the data interrelations required to support 
service function [4]. 
Technology 
To support information function and the 
system/application function [4]. 
 
In the following three sub-section more details are 
provided for three main processes to capture smart city 
context information, to develop service description, and to 
relate the service description to the information layer. 
A. Context Layer 
To define the context layer, this study relies on two 
definitions for smart cities and smart services, and a 
taxonomy of the smart city requirements by [42]. The 
selected definitions are as below: 
Smart cities are innovative cities which use ICT to 
facilitate daily activities of citizens to improve their 
quality of life [58]. 
Smart services are the services which respond to the 
smart city stakeholders concerns and fulfil smart city 
quality factors [42]. 
 
Regarding the above mentioned definitions, the context 
layer constitutes of the components to specify the 
stakeholders, their concerns, quality factors and their 
enablers/drivers. According to the taxonomy, the main 
stakeholders in smart cities are classified as follows: citizens, 
authorities, 
and 
service 
developers. Each 
of 
these 
stakeholders have their own specific concerns. Some 
examples of these concerns are: lower cost (for citizens), 
realisation smartness (for authorities), and more benefits and 
market share (for service developers). Likewise, the quality 
factors are defined as another component of the context 
layer. 
The 
quality 
factors 
(e.g., 
maintainability, 
interoperability, usability) should be fulfilled by the services 
in smart cities. The next two components are related to the 
enablers of the quality factors, i.e., standards (e.g., sensor 
security standards), and principles, (e.g., data principles). For 
any specific service, related standards and principles are 
required to be considered. Another component for context 
layer is the constraints (e.g., contractual constraints). This 
component is to avoid some consequences like low quality 
services, which are arising from some constraints like time 
and cost limitations. The last component for this layer is 
about documenting all the above mentioned initial 
considerations. The outcome of this process is a 
comprehensive collection of the considerations which have 
been defined based on the requirements and concerns for 
smart cities. All the above mentioned details are summarised 
in the form of a process. The defined activities for this 
process are as below: 
 
Specify smart city stakeholders, (considering the 
defined classes of stakeholders) to specify the target 
stakeholders for a specific service/initiative 
 
Specify stakeholders' concerns for various classes of 
stakeholders, to specify the target concern to be 
addressed by the service/initiative 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-645-3
COLLA 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

 
Specify the quality factors to be met by the 
service/initiative 
 
Specify related standards in the target domain for the 
service/initiative 
 
Specify related principles to enable the quality 
factors 
 
Specify the constraints (e.g., the budget for the 
project), 
to 
define 
appropriate 
goals 
for 
service/initiative 
 
Documenting 
all 
the 
considerations 
and 
specifications by the previous activities   
 
All the before mentioned activities for this layer are utilised 
to 
define 
appropriate 
goal 
and 
scope 
for 
smart 
services/initiatives. In this way, alignment of the designed 
services with ultimate goal of the smart cities (which is 
improvement of quality of life) is ensured.  
B. Service Layer 
Service layer describes the “operant” resources of the 
service system, specifically service actors and their 
interactions. The types of service actors can be private 
persons, organizations, governments, and even countries, 
depend on the context [15] and the depth of service and 
service system analysis. This layer does not include 
resources, such as information or technology, and their 
function is to support actors and their interactions in the 
Service Layer. 
Further, we present activities for the service system 
description. The aim of these activities is to extract and 
record contextual information for service modelling and 
design. 
  
 
Commence a service description including the 
necessary stakeholders who can provide the relevant 
service design information [16]  
 
Identify a function of the service [17] and [18] and 
its positioning within the Smart City domains [19]-
[21] 
 
Articulate a use-case for the service [22] 
 
Clarify 
an 
exchange 
medium 
for 
service 
remuneration [23]-[27] 
 
List service actors [28] and types of their interactions 
 
Identify actor resources [29] based on each service 
actor contributions to the service 
 
Define an experience and Value proposition 
[27][30][31] that service is intending to provide 
 
Perform a PESTLE analysis to further understanding 
of the context within which the service will operate 
[32]-[34] 
 
Complete a service description by consolidating the 
information gathered from the domain [35]. 
 
The purpose of a service description is to provide a 
sufficient amount of information towards the Service System 
modelling and design. 
C. Relationships 
The service layer defines components such as city 
services, domains, stakeholders, locations, etc. to support the 
smart city goals and to facilitate and optimize intelligent 
decision making [42]-[44]. The information layer defines 
components such as applications, software services and data 
to support the automation or realization of city services 
[41][45][46]. The service layer and the information layer are 
physically and logically disconnected at the moment. Smart 
city architectures do not support the relationships across 
these architectural views. The identification of the 
architectural concepts and their relationships are essential for 
providing an alignment between these layers.  
Smart city architectures must support the connection 
between service and information layers to ensure that 
citizens’ needs are met by solutions provided by information 
technology 
[47]. However, 
in 
practice, 
smart 
city 
architectures do not present an application process to 
establish the relationships between the service and 
information layers. This makes smart city architectures fail 
to provide a foundation to guide the modelling of integrated 
and coherent models which meet the citizens’ needs. The 
resulting models can fail to support the analysis, 
implementation, and maintenance of such city services. 
To tackle this problem, this section defines a process for 
an alignment of service and information layers in smart city 
architectures. The proposed process aims to define the key 
activities regarding an identification of the relationships 
between architectural concepts of the service layer and the 
information layer. The key activities of a proposed process 
are defined as follows.  
 
Specify different smart city domains (e.g., health, 
education, mobility, environment, tourism, etc.) for 
each city service [48] and [49] 
 
Define the required data entities for each stakeholder 
(e.g., 
city 
authorities, 
citizens, 
communities, 
retailers, etc.)  [50] and [51] 
 
Define the data entities which are provided or 
consumed by each city service  [50] and [51] 
 
Define the digital tools, monitoring applications, 
application 
modules, 
or 
another 
deployable 
component to support each city service [44] and [52] 
 
Capture the location or place (e.g., roads, bridges, 
airports, tunnels, buildings, etc.) where software 
services operate [53] and [54] 
 
Define the required software services which support 
each city service [55] and [56] 
 
Specify a domain (e.g., health, education, mobility, 
environment, tourism, etc.) to which the software 
services belong [44][46][57]  
 
The above mentioned process has been established to 
ensure appropriate relationships between the service and 
information layers. Also, it aims to help researchers and 
practitioners as follows. First, it helps organizations that need 
to design an architecture for smart cities to understand the 
issues associated with the relationships between these layers. 
Second, a formalisation of this process can help them to 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-645-3
COLLA 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

realise important advances in the design of more effective 
smart city architectures and make an industrial uptake of 
architectures research efforts easier. Finally, the proposed 
process supports the connection between the service and 
information layers to ensure that citizens’ needs are met by 
city solutions provided by information technology. 
V. 
EVALUATION 
In this section, we will explain how the quality of a 
specific architecture can be evaluated by simulation. 
SimEvents software provides a simulation framework for 
analysing event-driven models to optimise performance 
characteristics such as latency, workload, conversion, and 
entity loss. Generators, switches, queues, servers and other 
predefined blocks enable us to model various important 
aspects of the system architecture such as processing delays, 
routing, prioritisation for communication and scheduling 
tasks. 
A discrete-event system in a Simulink model is usually 
constructed from various blocks such as, generators, queues 
and servers. These blocks are used for producing and 
processing our entities, which represent discrete items of 
interest. Examples of entities are network packets in a 
communication system, customers in a restaurant, sensor 
readings or footfalls in an enterprise application. The motion 
and 
changes 
in 
entity 
attributes, 
corresponding 
to 
asynchronous events, update the system states such as length 
of a queue or entity service time in a server. In discrete-event 
systems, asynchronous discrete incidents (events) cause and 
affect the state transitions of the system.  
 
Figure 3.  The real use-case from River city. 
Figure 3 shows a very simple real use-case in the River city. 
The created architecture for the use-case stands on the 
presented enterprise architecture for smart cities. For this 
study’s purpose, the right-side of the architecture shown in 
the figure is modelled. Specifically, we are interested in the 
effect of the Number of Processed Entities on the overall 
latency of the system which is measured by the number of 
entities reached the final destination. 
For demonstration purposes, we will show two different 
results based on two different values of the “number of 
servers” property. For this purpose, the simulation is run for 
100 time units, and is represented as the x axe in the 
following Figures 4, 5. 
 
 
Average time of entities waiting in the queue to be processed 
 
Number of processed entities reached the final destination 
Figure 4.  First Run (number of servers = 2). 
 
Average time of entities waiting in the queue to be processed 
 
Number of processed entities reached the final destination 
Figure 5.  Second Run (number of servers = 5). 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-645-3
COLLA 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

It is obvious that an increase of the processing power (by 
increasing the number of servers from 2 to 5) leads to 
decrease of waiting time to almost zero. In addition, the final 
number of entities reached the final destination have become 
linear with the time. This simulation demonstrates how to 
evaluate the architectures which are created based on the 
presented smart city enterprise architecture. 
VI. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
Smart cities are complex systems which provide 
enormous ICT services to the citizens to improve their 
quality of life. Complexities in smart cities cause difficulties 
in management of provided services in terms of achieving 
smart city goals. Many years ago, enterprise architecture 
have been posed to solve complexity issues for organisations 
and systems. However, smart cities and organisations have 
different nature. Smart cities are service-oriented and 
organisations 
are 
business-oriented. 
Addressing 
the 
challenges arising from this difference, this paper presented 
the steps for designing new layers and relationships 
necessary for development of architectures for smart cities 
service. The first layer, i.e., context layer aims to capture 
smart city contextual information and transfer it to the 
service layer. The service layer provides information on 
service descriptions. This information is utilised by both, 
information and technology, layers. The relationships enable 
communications between the service layer and the 
information layer. The future study for this research will be 
defining other required relationships, e.g., between the 
service layer and the technology layer. The outcome of this 
research contributes to development of a reference 
architecture for smart cities.   
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the Science Foundation 
Ireland grant “13/RC/2094” and co-funded under the 
European Regional Development Fund through the Southern 
and Eastern Regional Operational Programme to Lero - the 
Irish Software Research Centre (www.lero.ie).   
REFERENCES 
[1] L. Urbaczewski and S. Mrdalj, “A comparison of enterprise 
architecture frameworks,” Issues in Information Systems, vol. 
7, no. 2, 2006, pp.18-23. 
[2] G. Kakarontzas, L. Anthopoulos, D. Chatzakou and A. 
Vakali, “A conceptual enterprise architecture framework for 
smart cities: A survey based approach,” in e-Business (ICE-
B), 11th International Conference on IEEE, 2014, pp. 47-54. 
[3] K. Peffers, T. Tuunanen, M. A. Rothenberger and S. 
Chatterjee, “A design science research methodology for 
information systems research,” Journal of management 
information systems, vol. 24, no. 3, 2007, pp. 45-77. 
[4] D. Minoli, Enterprise architecture A to Z: frameworks, 
business 
process 
modeling, 
SOA, 
and 
infrastructure 
technology, CRC press, 2008. 
[5] G. 
Booch, 
“Enterprise 
architecture 
and 
technical 
architecture,” IEEE Software, vol. 27, no. 2, , 2010, pp. 96. 
[6] J. A. Zachman, “A framework for information systems 
architecture,” IBM systems journal, vol. 26, no. 3, 1987, pp. 
276-292. 
[7] M. Meyer, M. Helfert and C. O’Brien, An analysis of 
enterprise architecture maturity frameworks. In Perspectives 
in Business Informatics Research. Berlin, Heidelberg: 
Springer, 2011, pp. 167-177. 
[8] FEAF,The Chief Information Officers Council, Federal 
Enterprise Architecture Framework (FEAF) v1.1, 1999. 
[9] The Open Group, The Open Group Architecture Framework 
TOGAF Version 9.1, 2011. 
[10] Z. Pourzolfaghar and M. Helfert, Integration of Buildings 
Information with Live Data from IoT Devices, in Connected 
Environments for the Internet of Things. Cham: Springer, 
2017, pp. 169-185. 
[11] L. Ostrowski and M. Helfert, “Design science evaluation–
example of experimental design,” Journal of Emerging Trends 
in Computing and Information Sciences, vol. 3, no. 9, 2012, 
pp.  253-262. 
[12] R. E. Giachetti, Design of enterprise systems: Theory. 
architecture, and methods. Florida, 2010. 
[13] J. W. Ross and G. Westerman, “Preparing for utility 
computing: The role of IT architecture and relationship 
management,” IBM Systems Journal, vol. 43, no. 1, 2004, pp. 
5-19. 
[14] B. D. Rouhani, M. N. R. Mahrin, F. Nikpay, R. B. Ahmad and 
P. Nikfard, “A systematic literature review on enterprise 
architecture implementation Methodologies,” Information and 
Software Technology, vol. 62, 2015, pp. 1-20. 
[15] J. Spohrer, L. Anderson, N. Pass and T. Ager, “Service 
science and service-dominant logic,” In Otago Forum, vol. 2, 
no. 2, 2008, pp. 4-18. 
[16] J. Cardoso, A. Barros, N. May and U. Kylau, “Towards a 
unified service description language for the internet of 
services: Requirements and first developments,” In Services 
Computing (SCC), IEEE International Conference, 2010, pp. 
602-609.  
[17] C. H. Lovelock, Developing and managing the customer-
service function in the service sector. The Service Encounter: 
Managing Employee Customer Interaction in Service 
Business, Lexington, MA: Lexington Books, 1985, pp. 265-
80. 
[18] Q. Su, Z. Li, Y. T. Song and T. Chen, “Conceptualizing 
consumers' perceptions of e-commerce quality,” International 
Journal of Retail and Distribution Management, vol. 36, no. 5, 
2008, pp. 360-374. 
[19] T. Nam and T. A. Pardo, “Conceptualizing smart city with 
dimensions of technology, people, and institutions,” in 
Proceedings of the 12th annual international digital 
government 
research 
conference: 
digital 
government 
innovation in challenging times,ACM, 2011, pp. 282-291.  
[20] P. Neirotti, A. De Marco, A. C. Cagliano, G. Mangano and F. 
Scorrano, “Current trends in Smart City initiatives: Some 
stylised facts,” Cities, vol. 38, 2014, pp. 25-36. 
[21] R. Giffinger and N. Pichler-Milanović, Smart cities: Ranking 
of European medium-sized cities. Vienna: Centre of Regional 
Science, 2007. 
[22] S. Adolph, A. Cockburn and P. Bramble, Patterns for 
effective use cases. Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing 
Co., Inc., 2002. 
[23] R. G. Hansen, “A theory for the choice of exchange medium 
in mergers and acquisitions,” Journal of business, 1987, 
pp.75-95. 
[24] R. G. Hansen, “A theory for the choice of exchange medium 
in the market for corporate control,” Journal of Business, vol. 
60, no. 1, 1987, pp.75-95. 
[25] S. Bignoux, “Short-term strategic alliances: a social exchange 
perspective,” Management decision, vol. 44, no. 5, 2006, pp. 
615-627. 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-645-3
COLLA 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

[26] M. Nowak and K. Sigmund, “A strategy of win-stay, lose-
shift that outperforms tit-for-tat in the Prisoner's Dilemma 
game,” Nature, vol. 364, no. 6432, 1993, p. 56. 
[27] B. Edvardsson, B. Tronvoll and T. Gruber, “Expanding 
understanding of service exchange and value co-creation: a 
social construction approach,” Journal of the Academy of 
Marketing Science, vol. 39, no. 2, 2011, pp. 327-339. 
[28] J. M. Bryson, “What to do when stakeholders matter: 
stakeholder identification and analysis techniques,” Public 
management review, vol. 6, no. 1, 2004, pp. 21-53. 
[29] S. Albert, B. E. Ashforth and J. E. Dutton, “Organizational 
identity and identification: Charting new waters and building 
new bridges,” Academy of management review, vol. 25, no. 
1, 2000, pp. 13-17. 
[30] P. Frow and A. Payne, “A stakeholder perspective of the 
value proposition concept,” European journal of marketing, 
vol. 45, no. 1/2, 2011, pp. 223-240. 
[31] C. Gentile, N. Spiller and G. Noci, “How to sustain the 
customer experience:: An overview of experience components 
that 
co-create 
value 
with 
the 
customer,” 
European 
management journal, vol. 25, no. 5, 2007, pp. 395-410. 
[32] G. C. Peng and M. Nunes, “Using PEST analysis as a tool for 
refining and focusing contexts for information systems 
research.” 
[33] F. M. E. Team, PESTLE Analysis. Strategy Skills. Free 
management ebooks, 2013, p. 15. 
[34] P. Newton, What is the PESTLE Analysis? 2014. 
[35] A. Arsanjani, “Service-oriented modeling and architecture,” 
IBM developer works, vol. 1, 2004, p. 15. 
[36] R. E. Hall, “The vision of a smart city,” in Proceedings of the 
2nd International Life Extension Technology Workshop, 
Paris, France, 2000. 
[37] L. Anavitarte and B. Tratz-Ryan, “Market Insight: Smart 
Cities” in Emerging Markets, Gartner, Stamford, CT, 2010, 
pp. 39-61. 
[38] D. Ludlow and Z. Khan, “Participatory democracy and the 
governance of smart cities,” in Proceedings of 26th Annual 
AESOP Congress, Ankara, Turkey, 2012. 
[39] J. Fenn and M. Raskino, Gartner's hype cycle special report 
for 2011, Stamford, CT: Gartner, 2011. 
[40] R. Giffinger, C. Fertner, H. Kramar, R. Kalasek, N. Pichler-
Milanovic and E. Meijers, “Smart cities–Ranking of European 
medium-sized cities,” Vienna: Centre of Regional Science, 
2007. 
[41] J. Massana, C. Pous, L. Burgas, J. Melendez and J. Colomer, 
“Identifying services for short-term load forecasting using 
data driven models in a Smart City platform,” Sustain. Cities 
Soc., vol. 28, 2017, pp. 108–117. 
[42] Z. Pourzolfaghar and M. Helfert, “Taxonomy of Smart 
Elements for Designing Effective Services,” in Proceeding of 
23rd American Conference of Information Systems (AMCIS), 
2017, pp. 1–10. 
[43] N. Mohamed, J. Al-Jaroodi, I. Jawhar, S. Lazarova-Molnar 
and S. Mahmoud, “SmartCityWare: A service-oriented 
middleware for cloud and fog enabled smart city services,” 
IEEE Access, vol. 5, 2017, pp. 17576–17588. 
[44] A. Hefnawy, A. Bouras and C. Cherifi, “IoT for Smart City 
Services,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on 
Internet of things and Cloud Computing, 2016, p. 55. 
[45] P. M. Singh, M. Van Sinderen and R. Wieringa, “Reference 
Architecture for Integration Platforms,” IEEE 21st Int. Enterp. 
Distrib. Object Comput. Conf., 2017, pp. 113–122. 
[46] W. Rong, Z. Xiong, D. Cooper, C. Li and H. Sheng, “Smart 
city architecture: A technology guide for implementation and 
design challenges,” China Commun., vol. 11, no. 3, 2014, pp. 
56–69. 
[47] L. Anthopoulos, “Defining Smart City Architecture for 
Sustainability,” 
in 
Proceedings 
of 
14th 
Electronic 
Government and 7th Electronic Participation Conference 
(IFIP2015), 2015, pp. 140-147. 
[48] A. Gaur, B. Scotney, G. Parr and S. McClean, “Smart city 
architecture and its applications based on IoT,” Procedia 
Comput. Sci., vol. 52, no. 1, 2015, pp. 1089–1094. 
[49] P. Neirotti, A. De Marco, A. C. Cagliano, G. Mangano and F. 
Scorrano, “Current trends in Smart City initiatives: Some 
stylised facts,” Cities, vol. 38, 2014, pp. 25–36. 
[50] S. Consoli,V. Presutti, D. R. Recupero, A. G. Nuzzolese, S. 
Peroni and A. Gangemi, “Producing Linked Data for Smart 
Cities: The Case of Catania,” Big Data Res., vol. 7, 2017, pp. 
1–15. 
[51] A. Ilhan, R. Möhlmann and W. G. Stock, “A Community 
Architecture Framework for Smart Cities,” Citizen’s Right to 
Digit. City. Springer Singapore, 2015, pp. 231–252. 
[52] M. Nitti, V. Pilloni, D. Giusto and V. Popescu, “IoT 
Architecture for a Sustainable Tourism Application in a Smart 
City Environment,” Mob. Inf. Syst. 2017. 
[53] P. Nesi, C. Badii, P. Bellini, D. Cenni, G. Martelli and M. 
Paolucci, “Km4City Smart City API: An Integrated Support 
for Mobility Services,” in 2016 IEEE International 
Conference on Smart Computing, SMARTCOMP 2016, 
2016. 
[54] J. R. Gil-Garcia, T. A. Pardo and T. Nam, “What makes a city 
smart? Identifying core components and proposing an 
integrative and comprehensive conceptualization,” Inf. Polity, 
vol. 20, no. 1, 2015, pp. 61–87. 
[55] E. F. Z. Santana, A. P. Chaves, M. A. Gerosa, F. Kon and D. 
Milojicic, “Software platforms for smart cities: Concepts, 
requirements, 
challenges, 
and 
a 
unified 
reference 
architecture,” arXiv Prepr. arXiv1609.08089, 2016. 
[56] S. Clement, D. Mckee and J. Xu, “Service-Oriented 
Reference Architecture for Smart Cities,” in Service-Oriented 
System Engineering (SOSE), IEEE Symposium, 2017, pp. 
81–85. 
[57] N. Zakaria Bawany and J. A. Shamsi, “Smart City 
Architecture: Vision and Challenges,” Int. J. Adv. Comput. 
Sci. Appl., vol. 6, no. 11, 2015, pp. 246–255. 
[58] ITU-T FG-SSC, “Smart sustainable cities: An analysis of 
definitions,” Technical report, ITU-T, 2014. 
[59] M. L. Marsal-Llacuna and M. B. López-Ibáñez, “Smart urban 
planning: Designing urban land use from urban time use,” 
Journal of urban technology, vol. 21, no. 1, 2014, pp. 39-56. 
 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-645-3
COLLA 2018 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

