Would you like to Participate? – Stakeholder Involvement in the Development 
Process of Digital Strategies for Municipalities 
Kristina Roeding 
Chair of Information Systems  
University of Siegen 
Siegen, Germany 
kristina.roeding@uni-siegen.de 
Frederike Marie Oschinsky 
Chair of Information Systems  
University of Siegen 
Siegen, Germany 
frederike.oschinsky@uni-siegen.de  
Hans Christian Klein 
Chair of Information Systems  
University of Siegen 
Siegen, Germany 
christian.klein@uni-siegen.de 
Andreas Weigel 
Chair of Information Systems  
University of Siegen 
Siegen, Germany 
andreas.weigel@uni-siegen.de
Bjoern Niehaves 
Chair of Information Systems  
University of Siegen 
Siegen, Germany 
bjoern.niehaves@uni-siegen.de 
 
Abstract—Today there is a high pressure on municipalities to 
adapt to the digital demands of their citizens and to involve 
them in decision-making processes. One way to achieve this 
transformation is with the instrument of digital strategies to 
guide municipalities’ way and to get them involved right at the 
start. In our case study, we analyzed strategic documents of 22 
national and international smart cities regarding participation 
in the age of digitization. We conducted semi-structured 
interviews with seven of those cities asking about chances and 
challenges they had while developing their digital strategies 
using participatory elements. We also conducted expert 
interviews and a survey based on our findings from the 
interviews. One of the key aspects we looked at was the process 
of involving different stakeholders in the development process 
of digital strategies. As the development of a digital strategy, as 
guideline 
for 
the 
digital 
transformation 
process 
of 
municipalities, we look at the starting point of participatory 
processes when we look at the development of a digital city. 
Our results show, that the aim of cities is high to involve 
different stakeholders. However, it is often hard to encourage 
stakeholder to participate. We therefore propose important 
guidelines, which need to be taken care of for participatory 
processes regarding the development of digital strategies for 
municipalities. 
Keywords-Digital 
strategy; 
digital 
transformation; 
participatory process; stakeholder involvement. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
When it comes to digitization municipalities are often 
said to be slow and far behind technological developments. 
Nevertheless, nowadays there are many federal state projects 
helping to face municipalities’ digitization. Federal states try 
to help their municipalities with state subsidies. The result is 
that many municipalities use those state subsidies to do 
projects regarding digitization in different sectors. However, 
those projects often last only for their duration of funding. 
Afterwards, the projects cannot be carried on. This is a 
phenomenon often seen in the public sector. Nevertheless, 
what can help municipalities to set their projects long 
lasting?  At this point, digital strategies and stakeholder 
involvement become more and more important.  
 Recent literature had a look at digital strategies, for 
example from the business perspective. Digital strategies, in 
the context of businesses can be defined as “organizational 
strategy formulated and executed by leveraging digital 
resources to create differential value”, aligned with the 
existing Information Systems (IS) Literature [1].  
 
Aligning with recent literature that has contributed to a 
deeper understanding of digital strategies in the IS ([1]-[4]) 
and digital strategies regarding smart cities [5], we want to 
aim to continue this tradition in light of current 
developments 
regarding 
stakeholder 
involvement. 
Specifically, we seek to shift the focus from previous 
conceptualizations, to a new form of conceptualization that 
also takes into account participatory elements of digital 
strategies, 
especially 
for 
municipalities, 
regarding 
stakeholder involvement.  
 
Recognizing the need to get a better understanding of the 
construct of digital strategies with the focus on stakeholder 
involvement, the first goal of our study is to contribute to the 
exiting literature. We want to give clear information about 
the questions on “how to develop a digital strategy focusing 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-722-1
COLLA 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

on stakeholder involvement?” and “What kind of actors are 
important to involve in the process of developing a digital 
strategy?”. Our objectives are motivated by the fact, that due 
to emerging consumer technologies, citizens of different 
stakeholder groups are more familiar with technological 
possibilities and have great ideas of how public services 
should be made available in the digital era.  
 
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. The 
second Section gives an overview of digital strategies and 
participation in the context of smart cities and municipalities. 
The third Section describes the research design of this study. 
In Section 4, the findings of the case studies and the survey 
are presented and in Section 5, we give rise to guidelines for 
stakeholder involvement. The Discussion is shown in 
Section 6. Section 7 points out limitations and aspects for 
future research. 
II. 
BACKGROUND AND BRIEF THEORETICAL REVIEWS  
The construct of strategy has been discussed widely in 
existing literature (e.g., in the IS and management literature) 
[4]. As an example [3] conducted a comprehensive literature 
review on IS strategy starting with looking at strategies from 
the perspective of the management science literature [3]. In 
their study, IS Strategy was defined as “the organizational 
perspective on the investment in, deployment, use, and 
management of information systems” [3]. As a result of their 
literature review, [3] showed that a variation of expressions 
(e.g., Information technology (IT) strategy, IS strategy, IS/IT 
strategy or information strategy) have been introduced in 
literature to represent the same construct [3]. However, 
looking at digital strategies shows, that they are understood 
to be even more, looking not only for examples on the 
investment and management of information systems but 
rather on the whole business [1]. Aligning with [1] and [6], 
such a digital business strategy could be defined as an 
“organizational strategy formulated and executed by 
leveraging digital resources to create differential value” [1] 
and “to support or shape an organization’s competitive 
strategy, its plan for gaining and maintaining competitive 
advantage”([6] and [15]).  
 
Looking at participation, we notice that participation is 
widely used as construct for example in the management 
science literature but also in the smart city literature ([7]-
[11],[21],[22]). Against this background and in the context of 
IS and management science literature, [11] defines 
participation as “allowing workers to have input regarding a 
proposed change” (p.134). When we looked at participation, 
we find that the adaption of the definition of [11] fits best our 
definition of participation. Aligned with [11], we define 
participation as allowing citizens to have input regarding a 
proposed change.  
Existing 
theories 
have 
addressed 
contemporary 
developments regarding digital strategies or participation in 
various ways. As an example, Effing et al. [7] developed a 
Social Smart City framework, which includes a set of digital 
strategies (e.g., crowdsourcing strategy and open data 
strategy) for participatory governance in smart cities. Spil et 
al. [8] showed, using three cities (Hamburg, Berlin and 
Enschede) as case studies that a quadruple helix structure of 
citizens, companies, universities and government ensures 
effective participation. This phenomenon can be seen also by 
[9], who proposed suggestions regarding actions and projects 
in smart cities from the quadruple helix, thus creating a 
“360-degree” model for prioritizing smart city interventions 
in Greek cities. Ergazakis et al. [10] proposed a Digital City 
Concept and an integrated methodology for Digital City 
development in order to help regions and cities to adopt best 
practices from information technology. However, existing 
conceptualizations of digital strategies for municipalities and 
their process of development often did not look at the 
participatory process, explicitly the involvement of different 
stakeholders (e.g., politicians, companies, normal citizens, 
science) in the development process of a digital strategy for 
municipalities. In order to address our objective, this paper is 
guided by the following research question (RQ): 
 
RQ: How can different stakeholder be involved in the 
development process of a digital strategy for municipalities? 
III. 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
In order to explore how participatory elements and 
different stakeholders get involved in the development 
process of digital strategies for municipalities, we conducted 
a mixed-method approach of qualitative and quantitative 
research [13]. The study at hand only shows the results 
regarding participation. Other elements of the study are 
published in other formats or conferences. First, we 
conducted a case study [14] consisting of qualitative and 
quantitative content analyses of digital strategy documents 
(aligned to the definition by [15]) in practice (we aligned our 
process on [15] who followed this methodological approach 
to conceptualize structural features of digital strategies for 
municipalities). We looked for criteria as for example, the 
development process and steps municipalities took to write 
their digital strategy. Moreover, we looked at how 
municipalities involved different stakeholders at different 
levels of their process. From the results of the content 
analysis, we conducted a qualitative process analysis 
combined with expert interviews (employees who developed 
the digital strategy). Afterwards, we reflected our results 
back to experts (e.g., chief digital officers, chief information 
officers, digital experts and mayors) in a workshop. Next, we 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-722-1
COLLA 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

conducted with the results from our case studies and based 
on existing literature a survey addressed towards the digital 
experts of the municipalities. Our mixed-method approach, 
aligned with [15] can be seen in Figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1. Research Design (aligned with [15]) 
 
We used case studies because they are a useful method 
while investing complex phenomena that have not been fully 
explored, and do not allow the analysis of causal 
relationships ([14] and [16]). Furthermore, aligning with 
[17], case studies allow us an in-depth analysis of 
phenomena that are related to the context where those 
phenomena occur [17]. Since our mentioned aspects are 
relevant to our objective and study, case study research is a 
well-suited method for the first part of our endeavor [15]. 
Especially, it is supposed that the strength of case studies lies 
in their internal validity whilst their weakness is often to be 
the external validity [15]. In order to increase the external 
validity of our case study, we introduced two forms of 
measures: First, our study was conducted in a team. This 
means, that at least three researchers conducted all phases, 
which are described in the following. With the use of 
multiple investigators, we were able to implement 
triangulation (investigator triangulation ([15] and [16])). As 
second measure, we included multiple cases to reduce case-
specific findings ([14] and [18]). We selected our cases using 
content-related validity ([15] and [19]). We carefully choose 
the following 22 cities as cases: Birmingham, Brussels, Cape 
Town, Copenhagen, Den Haag, Dubai, Duesseldorf, 
Edmonton, Eindhoven, Gothenburg, Hamburg, Leipzig, 
London, Manchester, New Orleans, New York City, 
Oldenburg, Sonderborg, Stavanger, Sydney, Tallinn and 
Vienna. 
 
With the findings of our case study, we started to develop 
a survey. Therefore, the survey is comprised out of the 
findings from different stages of the case studies. In detail, 
the survey consists out of elements and items, which we 
hypothesize having an effect on the involvement of 
stakeholders during the development process of a digital 
strategy for municipalities. These elements and items are 
direct findings out of existing digital strategies reflected into 
the existing literature. For example in our study, we focused 
on participation as an important dimension evolving out of 
the qualitative and quantitative analysis of the strategic 
documents. Participation as possible dimension was 
confirmed through the expert interviews and later on in the 
expert workshop. We found a construct fitting our 
understanding of participation in existing literature. We 
adapted the construct of participation from [11], e.g., “Which 
aspects regarding digital strategies play a role regarding 
participation of citizens? Citizens are able to take part in 
decision-making processes.”. Aligned with [11] every item 
of the survey was asked using a 5-point Likert scale ranging 
from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). In a next 
step, we cumulated the answers 1 and 2 from the Likert scale 
to one new scale called “fully disagree” and 4 and 5 to “fully 
agree”. Aligned with [15] number 3 of the Likert scale 
stayed as “neither”. Using relative frequencies [15], we were 
able to show how often and strong individuals of the 
municipalities agreed or disagreed with the proposed 
participatory elements in the development process of digital 
strategies for municipalities, where each participatory 
element stayed for itself. 
 
We have to note that our study shows only a small part of 
a more comprehensive study we conducted regarding digital 
strategies for municipalities. Therefore, when rolling out our 
survey, we first run a pretest on 300 municipalities in 
Germany. We choose municipalities regarding their number 
of inhabitants in relation to the overall population of the state 
the municipality is located in. We calculated the number of 
municipalities taken for a state in relation to the number of 
municipalities in general [15]. As the survey was going to be 
run in the federal state of North-Rhine Westphalia (NRW) in 
Germany, the pre-test was conducted in every state in 
Germany leaving NRW out of the scope [15]. 
Afterwards, we adapted our survey regarding the results 
of the pre-test we conducted. We conducted our final survey 
in the state of NRW. Aligning with [15], we asked all 396 
NRW-municipalities and 31 districts to participate in our 
study. With a response rate of 34%, 133 municipalities and 
12 districts took part in our study.  
IV. 
FINDINGS 
Our first findings included findings from the analysis of 
the strategic documents of 22 smart cities. Those findings 
from our qualitative and quantitative document analysis 
showed that in 43% of our analyzed strategic documents of 
municipalities citizens got involved in developing the digital 
strategy. In 29% stakeholder from economy and in 52% 
science got involved. The interviews corroborate this aspect. 
Developing a digital strategy means setting the direction for 
the digital transformation. However, a small group of people 
cannot choose this direction. Different stakeholders need to 
be involved. Learnings from the interviews showed us that 
for each smart city it was hard to associate with different 
stakeholders and to motivate them to get involved in the 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-722-1
COLLA 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

development of a digital strategy as guideline for the digital 
transformation of their city.  
 
Findings from our survey show that when we asked for 
responsibilities while developing and implementing a digital 
strategy we found that mayors take a big part of involvement 
at this stage. For example, when we asked for “who is 
responsible for the development of a digital strategy in your 
municipality?”, we found that 82% of the municipalities 
filled in that the mayor is responsible. In 75% the city 
counselor, in 84% the head of department, in 42% an 
employee and in 72% a work group is responsible for the 
development. When we asked for “who is responsible for the 
implementation of a digital strategy in your municipality?”, 
we found that 66% of the municipalities filled in that the 
mayor is responsible. In 64% the city counselor, in 84% the 
head of department, in 64% an employee and in 60% a work 
group is responsible for the development. Our findings show 
that the development stage is one of the responsibilities of 
the mayor. However, when it comes to the stage of 
implementing a digital strategy the head of department is 
responsible for further processes. With this finding, we get to 
know responsibilities at each stage of the development 
process of a digital strategy helping us to better understand, 
who the person in charge is for stakeholder involvement at 
each step.   
 
Third, we also asked for important aspects regarding 
citizen participation (“Which aspects regarding citizen 
participation are important for digital strategies?). We found 
that in 88% of the municipalities citizens can ask questions. 
62% of the municipalities involve citizens in decision-
making processes and 51% are getting involved in the 
implementation of digital strategies. We found that even 
more than half of the municipalities who took part in our 
survey are given the possibility to get involved in the process 
of the development of a digital strategy.  
 
As we concentrated in our study on the involvement of 
different stakeholders in the development process of a digital 
strategy for municipalities, we also asked for the 
involvement of different stakeholders beside citizens. We 
asked “To which information do you refer to while 
developing your digital strategy?” and “At your public 
administration expert knowledge is present.” We found that 
87% of the municipalities involve external experts in their 
development of a digital strategy. 50% refer to information 
from science or involve expert knowledge. 39% involve city-
owned companies in the development of a digital strategy.   
  
Aligning with [15], we wanted to control for the 
employees answering our survey. For this reason, we put a 
question in the survey, asking for the name and position of 
the employee. In our study, employees or mayors, who are 
concentrating on the topic of digitalization in their 
municipalities, answered each conducted survey. 
V. 
GUIDELINE DEVELOPMENT 
With our findings, we were able to give rise to four 
guidelines for the involvement of different stakeholders in 
the 
development 
process 
of 
digital 
strategies 
for 
municipalities. We found, that first, digitalization is a matter 
of executives, second digitalization needs participatory 
processes, third digital strategies need competences and 
fourth digitalization is a joint task. 
 
Digitalization is a matter of executives. The findings 
show that talking about the development and implementation 
of digital strategies the person in charge are mayors and the 
head of the departments. This distribution of responsibility 
shows that digitalization is a matter of executives who lead 
the way to digital transformation.  
 
Digitalization needs participatory processes. When we 
look at the way of how citizens get involved in the 
development of a digital strategy for their municipality we 
clearly see that digitalization needs participatory processes. 
Citizens are often able to ask questions. Nevertheless, when 
we 
look 
at 
the 
process 
of 
decision-making 
and 
implementation, we see that there are still more possibilities 
to get citizens involved. Municipalities need to work on these 
possibilities and on ways to get more citizens involved and to 
make it easier for them to take part in the different processes.  
 
Digital strategies need competences. Looking at the 
involvement of different experts, science and city-owned 
companies, we see that the development of a digital strategy 
needs different competences and different perspectives from 
a variety of fields of action. Municipalities can still work on 
the references of information from science and city-owned 
companies. Different perspectives help municipalities to set 
their goals long lasting, taking into account different 
possibilities digitalization can have to help municipalities in 
their daily life. 
 
Digitalization is a joint task. As last guideline, we see 
digitalization as a joint task of different stakeholders. Our 
findings showed us how important it is to get different 
stakeholders involved. We also could see on which stages of 
the development process different personas are in charge. 
Nevertheless, it is important that these different stakeholders 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-722-1
COLLA 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

involved are working together to develop a digital strategy 
for their municipality. 
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
Implications for theory. Aligning with references [7]-[11], 
we were able to look at participation in the development 
process of digital strategies. Especially we looked at digital 
strategies in the public sector for municipalities. Participation 
in the public sector involves many different stakeholders. 
Based on our case study we referred to different types of 
stakeholders extending recent literature ([7]-[9]). Our types 
of stakeholders involved citizens, economy, and science, 
functional roles of the public administration, external experts 
and city-owned companies. We were able to extend the 
construct of participation from [11] and to adapt it in the 
public sector. 
 
Implications for practice. With our findings, we were able 
to give rise to guidelines for municipalities developing a 
digital strategy. Aligning with the guidelines should help 
municipalities to define participation their own way and to 
get different types of stakeholders involved in the 
development process of a digital strategy. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
Regardless of the theoretical and practical relevance of 
our study, it is pointed with difficulties and shortcomings 
that leave room for future research. Aligning with [15] we 
have to note, besides the regular limitations of case studies 
(e.g., its weak internal validations), that our study is of an 
explorative nature. Its intention is to extend current 
perspectives on the development process of digital strategies, 
especially for municipalities regarding the involvement of 
different stakeholders. Our research can therefore be used to 
further develop the way different stakeholders can get 
involved in the development process of digital strategies, but 
is somewhat weak in its theoretical contribution. Second, in 
our study the unit of analysis is the municipality. As we 
asked for the development process of digital strategies for 
municipalities focusing on stakeholder involvement, only 
one of the employees of the municipal administration 
answered our survey representing the whole municipality. 
We were relying on those employees who answered our 
survey. Third, as we looked at digital strategies from an IS 
and management perspective, we defined participation in our 
study aligning with the results from our case study and 
aligning with our context of our study. Nevertheless, when 
we look at participation, this is a construct, which can be 
seen in a variety of ways. We aligned with the definition of 
[11], but there are many different possibilities to define 
participation. We also looked at participation only at the 
level of the development process of a digital strategy. 
However, looking at a smart city and their participation 
processes there is much more which need to be considered as 
[7] and [8] shows.  
 
In order to overcome these limitations, future research 
might ask, aligning with [15], more than one employee per 
municipality and make sure the employees answer the survey 
by themselves. Future research should also consider a variety 
of definitions for participation and not only stuck on 
definitions used in the area of development of digital 
strategies for municipalities from an IS and management 
science perspectives. There are more possibilities to define 
participation. Moreover, looking not only at the development 
process of digital strategies for municipalities but looking at 
a smart city gives a wider range of how participation can be 
defined and realized. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Bharadwaj, O. A. El Sawy, P. A. Pavlou and N. 
Venkatraman, “Digital Business Strategy: To-ward a next 
generation of insights,” MIS Qarterly, 37, pp. 471-482, 2013. 
[2] V. Arvidsson, J. Holmström and K. Lyytinen, “Information 
systems use as strategy practice: A multi-dimensional view of 
strategic information system implementation and use,” 
Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 23, pp. 45–61, 
2014.  
[3] D. Q. Chen, M. Mocker, D. S. Preston and A. Teubner, 
“Information 
Systems 
Strategy: 
Reconceptualization, 
Measurement, and Implications,” MIS Quarterly, 34, pp. 233-
259, 2010.  
[4] S. Cummings, and D. Wilson, “Images of strategy,” Oxford, 
UK: Blackwell/Wiley. 
[5] E. Almirall et al., “Smart Cities at the Crossroads: New 
Tensions in City Transformation,” Californian Management 
Review, 59, pp. 141–152, 2016. 
[6] Y.E. Chan and S.L. Huff, “Strategy: an information systems 
research perspective,” Journal of Strategic Information 
Systems, 1, pp. 191–204, 2014. 
[7] R. Effing and B. Groot, “Social Smart City: Introducing 
digital and social strategies for participatory governance in 
smart cities,” Electronic Government: 15th IFIP WG 8.5 
International Conference, EGOW 2016, Guimares, Portugal, 
September 5-8, Proceedings, pp. 241-252, 2016.  DOI: 
10.1007/978-3-319-44421-5_19 
[8] T.A.M. Spil, R. Effing and J. Kwast, “Smart City 
Participation: 
Dream 
or 
Reality? 
A 
Comparison 
of 
Participatory Strategies from Hamburg, Berlin & Enschede,” 
Digital Nations – Smart Cities, Innovation, and Suistanibility: 
16th IFIP WG 6.11 Conference on e-Business, e-Services, ans 
e-Society, I3E 2017, Delhi, India, November 21-23, 
Proceedings, pp. 122 – 134, 2017. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-
68557-1_12 
[9] Y. Charalabidis, C. Alexopoulos, N. Vogiatzis and D.E. 
Kolokotronis, “A 360-Degree Model for Prioritizing Smart 
Cities Initiatives, with the Participation of Municipality 
Officials, Citizens and Experts,” In: E-Participation in Smart 
Cities: Technologies and Models of Governance for Citizen 
Engagement. 
Public 
Administration 
and 
Information 
Technology, vol 34. Springer, Cham, 2019. 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-722-1
COLLA 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

[10] E. Ergazakis, K. Ergazakis, D. Askounis and Y. Charalabidis, 
“Digital Cities: Towards an integrated decision support 
methodology,” Telematics and Informatics, Volume 28, Issue 
3, pp. 148-162, 2010.  DOI: 10.1016/j.tele.2010.09.002 
[11] C.R. Wanberg and J.T. Banas, “Predictors and outcomes of 
openness to changes in a reorganizing workplace,” Journal of 
Applied Psychology, 85, pp. 132-142, 2000. 
[12] J. Luftman, K. Lyytinen and T. Ben Zvi, “Enhancing the 
measurement of information technology (IT) business 
alignment and its influence on company performance,” 
Journal of Information Technology, 32, pp. 26–46, 2017. 
[13] A. Bryman, “Integrating quantitative and qualitative research: 
how is it done?,” Qualitative Research, 6, pp. 97–113, 2006. 
[14] R.K. Yin, “Validity and generalization in future case study 
evaluations,” Evaluation, 19, pp. 321–332, 2013. 
[15] B. Niehaves, K. Roeding and F. M. Oschinsky, “Structural 
features of digital strategies for municipalities,” In: “The Art 
of Structuring - Bridging the Gap Between Information 
Systems Research an Practice”, K. Bergener, M. Räckers, A. 
Stein, Cham, Springer International Publishing, pp. 427-437, 
2019. 
[16] I. Benbasat and R.N. Taylor, “The Impact of Cognitive Styles 
on Information System Design,” MIS Quarterly, 2, pp. 43-54, 
1978. 
[17] T.V. Bonoma, “Case Research in Marketing: Opportunities, 
Problems, and a Process,” Journal of Marketing Research, 22, 
pp. 199-208, 1985. 
[18] I. Benbasat, D. K., Goldstein, and M. Mead, “The Case 
Research Strategy in Studies of Information Systems,” MIS 
Quarterly, 11, pp. 369-386, 1987. 
[19] S.M. Downing and T.M. Haladyna, “Handbook of test 
development,” L. Erlbaum, Mahwah, N.J., 2006. 
[20] L.G. Anthopoulos, and C.G. Reddick, “Understanding 
electronic government research and smart city: A framework 
and empirical evidence,” Information Polity, 21, pp. 99–117, 
2016. 
[21] A. Meijer, and M.P.R. Bolívar, “Governing the smart city: a 
review of the literature on smart urban governance,” 
International Review Administration Science, 82, pp. 392–
408, 2016. 
 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-722-1
COLLA 2019 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

