wEnergy: A Field Experiment on Energy Consumption and Social Feedback
Anders Dal´en, Timm Teubner, Christof Weinhardt
Institute of Information Systems and Management
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT)
Karlsruhe, Germany
dalen@kit.edu, timm.teubner@kit.edu, weinhardt@kit.edu
Abstract—This paper presents the work-in-progress research
project wEnergy. The aim of the project is the conception,
execution and evaluation of a medium-scale ﬁeld experiment
on the impact of different forms of feedback on electricity
consumption in private households. The 45 participating house-
holds (students’ shared apartments) will be equipped with a
non-intrusive and low cost sensor device. Energy consumption
is then tracked in a high timely resolution and fed back live to
the participants through the project website. After a calibration
phase, the actual experiment begins. We employ a between-
subject design to test the effect of a) feedback on one’s own
current and historic consumption (control) versus b) social
feedback, comprising the consumption data of a peer group
of households (treatment).
Keywords-social feedback; energy consumption; smart me-
tering; experimental economics; ﬁeld study.
I. INTRODUCTION
Smart metering is on the rise and consumers are seeing
an increase of utility efforts to make the traditional energy
meter information more transparent. However, enticing al-
ready busy consumers with direct access to their meter data
has proven to be difﬁcult. Two of the largest information
driven businesses, Google and Microsoft, have both pulled
the plug on their energy feedback projects due to lack of
interest (google.com/powermeter, microsoft-hohm.com).
However, the potential for energy efﬁciency in households
through more knowledgable consumers still remains: similar
households in terms of location, size, appliances and dweller
demographics have shown a difference in energy usage with
a factor of two(!) [1].
Until now, the impact of direct feedback on energy
consumption is not conclusive. There are several research
and commercial projects that continue to develop visual-
izations and ﬂexible control of energy consumption (e.g.,
luciddesigngroup.com, tendrilinc.com, mysmartgrid.de, rrre-
volve.ch, discovergy.com). However, it is still debated to
what point end users can be informed and motivated to
become more energy efﬁcient. Furthermore, ﬁeld evaluations
of social feedback and mechanisms that allow for compari-
son and collaboration among energy users are predominately
based on questionnaires and lack access to the energy
data and the ability to correlate the stated inﬂuence to the
measured one [2], [3].
By gathering and presenting energy information we want
to make the interaction with energy more transparent, and,
by adding a social, collaborative component, we hope to
explore and promote the effects of interpersonal comparison
and sharing of best practices for energy efﬁciency gains in
the scope of the project. We want to evaluate whether a
collaborative form of sharing energy information can help
sustain the interest for energy information and promote ac-
tion in a ﬁeld study. We want to contribute to understanding
the effects of making people realize their actual consumption
and giving them understandable and easily operable tools
for exploring, visualizing, and evaluating this data—both in
a private and a social context. To this end, we use non-
intrusive hardware that are easy to install and low cost.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows:
Section II provides a brief overview on related literature
and projects regarding energy data gathering and sharing.
Sections III and IV describe the underlying architecture
and user interaction logic of the platform website and
give insight into technical related issues such as hardware,
measurement, data handling and precision. In Section, V
the experimental design and the evaluation approach are
outlined. Since the project is work-in-progress, we conclude
with a few ideas on methodological and topical extensions
and plans for future research.
II. ENERGY DATA GATHERING AND SHARING
Information is understood as a fundamental component
of the future, more dynamic and efﬁcient, energy system
[4]. Energy consumption metering is traditionally supplied
from the utility, but more privately owned measuring devices
are becoming prevalent. Having direct access to energy
information on total consumption has shown to produce
savings of 5 − 15% in a number of studies [5].
With more detailed information on speciﬁc appliances
users have shown even further behavioral changes like
lowering overall standby power consumption and operating
appliances more stringently [6].
As energy information become more pervasive and avail-
able over the internet, more sophisticated informational
campaigns are possible. Improving the access to the en-
ergy information is, for example, becoming easier to do
through modern portable devices. This is leveraged in the
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

eMeter project, which has shown great success in mak-
ing energy feedback more convenient and ubiquitous [7].
Another promising use of energy consumption information,
which will be further evaluated in this project, is simply to
exchange this information with other participants. Previous
studies in this ﬁeld have found these comparative and
collaborative properties to have an exceptionally high impact
on consumption behavior [8] [9].
One important distinction to make about social feedback
is that there is seldom a feedback model that will be
appreciated by every participant. For example, one British
study found that the subjects disliked being compared to
their peers and questioned its legitimacy, while a similar
Norwegian study found a positive response to the compara-
tive information [2] [3]. In general, social feedback has been
found to be more effective than self comparison with historic
data. This effect is stronger when the proclaimed goal is
relevant and precious, and also when participants can relate
well to their peers, for instance because they are similar—
or in a similar situation [11]. Where previous studies have
either evaluated a range of feedback mechanisms, or focused
on social feedback in aggregated form, this study aims to
combine these approaches. By strictly evaluating the effects
of sharing energy information with the aid of highly granular
and modern information technology this paper speciﬁcally
addresses the research gap of social feedback in a smart-
meter era.
III. PLATFORM ARCHITECTURE
The wEnergy visualization framework is designed around
a database driven website. Users can log on to their private
account with username and password. The platform consists
of four sections, the dashboard, the consumption overview,
the appliance overview, and the social ranking.
The dashboard gives a very direct consumption feedback
to the user. The m latest consumption measurements are
plotted where m can be selected among different values (25,
50, 100, and 250) in order to enable an intuitive exploration
of the data. A status bar indicates how much energy is
used at the moment—color-coded from green to red. This
measure is normalized to the interval [0, 1] where the current
consumption is divided by the 90 percent quantile consump-
tion in the last 2 days. The timely resolution of this plot is
0.2 Hz (one value per ﬁve seconds), corresponding to the
frequency of the power measurement at the household site.
The dashboard shall provide an intuition on how much users
currently consume and how the power-on of a particular
appliance adds to this value.
The consumption overview, lets the users see how much
they are consuming over the course of a day, week, or
month. Average consumption (in kW) is plotted. The actual
consumption of the respective period is indicated in red
and half transparent, and the historic average of the user’s
consumption for the period is plotted unobtrusively in gray
Figure 1.
Consumption view as presented to the user, daily consumption,
aggregation: 5 minute intervals, red: actual consumption, grey: historic
average consumption
in the background (cf. Fig. 1). This enables an instant
comparison between actual current and average consumption
and enables users to evaluate their current behavior (bench-
marked against their own historic average). The timely
resolution is 5 or 15 minutes for the day view, 30 minutes
for the week view, and 180 minutes for the month view.
The appliance overview is an experimental feature and
serves as an indicator for users, which of their appliances
that are currently active, and how much power these appli-
ances consume. Note, that it is a difﬁcult task to determine
when speciﬁc appliances are switched on or off, since
power signals are noisy, occur simultaneously and interfer
with each other. Appliance recognition has been subject to
extensive research in the past decades [12] [13]. However,
even though progress has been made in this area, most
current solutions for disaggregating appliances use highly
specialized hardware that is hard to scale to the number
of households that could beneﬁt from this feedback [14].
This part of our website functionality addresses this gap
and is intended to give users a more intuitive sense of their
electricity consumption.
Finally, the social ranking lets the users see, how much
energy they use compared to their peer group. Thereby,
users are ranked not according to their absolute, but relative
consumption referred to their own ﬂoating historic average.
This means that participants, which consume less than
usually will occur on top—but ﬁnd it harder to be on top in
the consecutive weeks, since a low consumption naturally
decreases the reference value. Each peer group consists of
about 5 households, with similar demographic characteristics
(see Section V for a more detailed description).
IV. TECHNICAL APPROACH
Our hardware approach to measuring electricity consump-
tion comprises two components, based on the openenergy-
monitor project (www.openenergymonitor.org). The ﬁrst
component consists of a battery powered sensor, that is
attached to the main power lines in the fuse box of the
household. The measurement is non-invasive, meaning that
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

Figure 2.
Measurement System Overview: power line (single phase),
current clamp sensor, sensor device, communication unit, web server
participants will be able to install the device at home
themselves, no expert knowledge or certiﬁcation is required.
However, a student assistant checks on the installations
manually to assure reliability. The entire process usually
takes not more than 10 minutes.
The German grid provides alternating current on 3 phases,
50 Hz and a nominal voltage of 230V. At the fusebox each
phase corresponds to one of the main wires. We attach a
ferrite split-core current transformer (CT) with n = 2000
turns and a maximum current restriction of Iin
max = 100A.
The data consumption data then is processed on an At-
mega micro-controller. It is fed by voltage at 3.3V , restrict-
ing the incoming signal to the analog-to-digital converter
(ADC) to a voltage up to this value. This means that the
incoming current from the CT must be limited, in order
not to put the integrated circuit at risk of an overvoltage.
Since most of the fuses in German households have a
trigger threshold of 50A or less, we chose the on-board
burden resistor accordingly. Supposing an ideal transformer
(I1/I2 = n2/n1) and using Ohm’s law (U = R × I) we
deduce the burden resistance to be 66Ω. By using a 60Ω-
resistor we leave room for a 5A overshoot without sacriﬁcing
too much resolution.
The micro controller processes the voltage information
from the CT and the burden resistor on a 10-bit scale
(210), which results in a resolution of 8.7 VA/bit. Note that
only current—not voltage—is measured. A more detailed
analysis of real and reactive power is thus unavailable.
However, the hardware can easily be extended to include this
measurement, which has been conﬁrmed in initial testing.
The second component (base unit) handles the communi-
cation with the central web-server. The sensor and base unit
communicate via radio at 868 MHz frequency. The base unit
is connected to the router of the household via ethernet and
pushes the data objects to our central server using JSON
elements. The entire system scheme is depicted in Figure
2.
V. EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
We aim to assess consumption behavior in a ﬁeld exper-
iment. Therefore, 45 voluntarily participating households,
selected from a mutually comparable student milieu with
2 through 4 residents per household are equipped with the
sensor system. Participants are invited to the Institute and are
elaborately briefed about the project, use of the hardware,
etc. The actual experiment is then carried out in two stages.
In the initial calibration phase (2 weeks), the metering
devices are installed and consumption is monitored. The
participants ﬁll out forms asking for perceived energy con-
sumption knowledge, personal characteristics and general
demographic factors. There is no feedback to the households
whatsoever in this phase and the website functionality is
limited. The calibration phase serves to establish a base level
of consumption and to classify the households’ consumption
proﬁles. Participants also sign the general terms of use
and agree that consumption data is stored and published
anonymously.
In the treatment phase, the actual experiment begins. This
phase lasts 8 weeks. As stated above, we use a between-
subject design. The 45 households are partitioned into two
groups, the control group (n0 = 20 and the treatment
group (nT = 25). From then on, the participants of the
different groups face different website functionalities. The
control group can access the dashboard, and the consumption
overview, whereas the treatment group can, in addition to
that, access the social feedback, which is basically a ranking.
The 30 treatment households are partitioned into peer groups
of about 5—based on consumption-relevant characteristics
such as number of residents, square meters of the apartment,
type of the stove (gas/ electric), and consumption proﬁle as
indicated in the calibration phase. Every peer group has its
own social ranking. The decisive value for the position in
this ranking is the current week’s aggregated consumption,
referred to the own average weekly consumption during the
preceding weeks. This ranking value rt = ct/(
1
t−1
Pt−1
i=1 ct)
is a percentage value where ct denotes the electricity con-
sumption in week t. With the beginning of every new week,
all ranking values are set to 0. Note that the way the ranking
is computed inherently balances the game play of the
experiment. A household with a particular low consumption
in one week will thereby lower its reference value and thus
be less likely to achieve a top position in the ranking—
and vice versa. In respect of participant motivation, this is
a preferable design characteristic, since the best chances to
achieve a high rank vary from week to week.
There are several different approaches for evaluating
participants behavior. First, total consumption as the most
obvious measure will be analyzed. Second, the idle con-
sumption levels (e.g. during nights or absence of residents)
can be used as indicators of how consistently lights, laptops,
monitors, standby appliances etc. are switched off. This
is suitable for analyzing whether users care about their
consumption and consciously alter their behavior. Third,
the total number and frequency of peak loads potentially
explains whether high-load appliances such as water-boiler,
vacuum cleaner, or electric heating were replaced by other,
less wasting alternatives (broom, gas stove, warm pullover).
Also variance, timely distribution, and load quantiles are
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

interesting points of reference in order to explain what the
experiment participants actually do.
Note that, for the participants, there is no monetary
incentive to be on top of the social ranking. Nevertheless,
we expect the mere presence of the comparison to have an
effect on consumption behavior—lowering total consump-
tion. Also, we expect total consumption to differ between the
initial calibration and experimental phase for all subjects—
irrespective of the treatment.
VI. CONCLUSION
Academic research on real-life consumption behavior
under systematically manipulated conditions is sparse. Lab
experiments put participants outside their natural environ-
ment, which appears to be crucial for studying consumption
behavior, since it is inherently and closely linked to the own
home, particular habits and routines. Our project addresses
this gap. We are developing an easily installable and ﬂexible
platform to enable and evaluate the effects of social feedback
and collaboration in the context of energy consumption.
We expect that this will lead to a more general knowledge
and awareness, and eventually a lower total consumption. It
will be crucial to maintain a high level of participation and
interest during the experiment.
Beyond the social feedback context we also anticipate
other studies within the same framework. For example,
communication among the members of a peer group can
be introduced in order to foster peer effects like internal
collaboration, e.g. sharing of tips for efﬁcient usage. Also
competition between different peer-groups appears conceiv-
able. Eventually, the provision of applications for mobile
devices brings consumption feedback even closer to the
users and their daily routines—which ultimately may be a
substantial contribution to a more appropriate dealing with
electrical energy—and thus welfare and sustainability.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research is made possible by the MFG Stiftung
Baden-W¨urttemberg, which funds the project through the
Karl-Steinbuch-Stipendium. We would like to extend our
gratitude to all members of the MFG team for their magnif-
icent support.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Swanson, M. Blasnik, and E. Calhoun, “Measuring public
beneﬁt from measuring public beneﬁt from energy efﬁcient
homes,” prepared by Advanced Energy for the U.S. EP, 2005.
[2] S. Roberts, “Consumer preferences for improving energy con-
sumption feedback,” prepared by the Center for Sustainable
Energy for Ofgem, May 2004.
[3] H. Wilhite, A. Hoivik, and J. G. Olsen, “Advances in the use
of consumption feedback information in energy billing: The
experiences of a norwegian energy utility,” in Proceedings
from the ACEEE 1998 Summer Study on Energy Efﬁciency
in Buildings, European Council for an Energy Efﬁcient
Economy.
Paris: ECEEE 1999 Summer Study on Energy
Efﬁciency in Buildings, 1999.
[4] T. Philippine and N. Devernois, Promoting Energy Efﬁ-
ciency Investments: Case Studies in the Residential Sector.
Paris: International Energy Agency, Agence franc¸aise de
d´eveloppement Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development, 2008.
[5] S. Darby, “The effectiveness of feedback on energy consump-
tion: A review for DEFRA of the literature on metering,
billing, and direct displays,” Environmental Change Institute,
University of Oxford, Tech. Rep., April 2006.
[6] T. Ueno, R. Inada, O. Saeki, and K. Tsuji, “Effectiveness
of an energy-consumption information system for residential
buildings,” Applied Energy, vol. 83, no. 8, pp. 868 – 883,
2006.
[7] M. Weiss, “emeter: Stromverbrauchsfeedback auf basis eines
pervasive energy monitoring systems,” in Energieinformatik
2010, 2010.
[8] T. Dietz, G. T. Gardner, J. Gilligan, P. C. Stern, and M. P.
Vandenbergh, “Household actions can provide a behavioral
wedge to rapidly reduce us carbon emissions,” Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 106, no. 44, pp.
18 452–18 456, November 2009.
[9] H. Staats, P. Harland, and H. A. M. Wilke, “Effecting durable
change: A team approach to improve environmental behavior
in the household,” Environment Behavior, vol. 36, no. 3, pp.
341–367, 2004.
[10] C. Grevet, J. Mankoff, and S. Anderson, “Design and evalua-
tion of a social visualization aimed at encouraging sustainable
behavior,” in 2010 43rd Hawaii International Conference on
System Sciences, January 2010.
[11] P. Petkov, F. K¨obler, M. Foth, and H. Krcmar, “Motivating do-
mestic energy conservation through comparative, community-
based feedback in mobile and social media,” in Proceedings
of the 5th International Conference on Communities and
Technologies, ser. CT ’11.
New York, NY, USA: ACM,
2011, pp. 21–30.
[12] L. Norford, S. Leeb, D. Luo, and S. Shaw, “Advanced elec-
trical load monitoring: A wealth of information at low cost,”
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Tech. Rep., 1999.
[13] S. Patel, T. Robertson, J. Kientz, M. Reynolds, and G. Abowd,
“At the ﬂick of a switch: Detecting and classifying unique
electrical events on the residential power line,” in UbiComp
2007.
Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 2007, pp. 271–288.
[14] H. Pihala, Non-intrusive appliance load monitoring system
based on a modern kWh-meter.
Espoo, Finland: Technical
Research Centre of Finland (VTT), 1998.
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

