CLPMtool - Collaborative Learning Project Management Tool for Moodle 
Marcelo Augusto Rauh Schmitt 
Instituto Federal do Rio Grande do Sul 
Porto Alegre, Brasil 
marcelo.schmitt@poa.ifrs.edu.br 
Liane Margarida Rockenbach Tarouco 
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul 
Porto Alegre, Brasil  
liane@penta.ufrgs.br
 
 
Abstract—Collaboration is an essential element of teaching-
learning process. Nevertheless, it does not happen without the 
presence of coordination mechanisms. Considering that 
information technology is relevant in supporting group 
coordination, a software that promotes and assists the 
coordination of collaboration was developed. The software is 
based on a coordination framework that permits the definition 
of flexible collaboration scripts. The students are the authors of 
their collaboration models. This paper describes a tool 
(CLPMtool) that was created as a plugin to be attached to 
Moodle learning management system (LMS). It can favor 
collaborative learning by organizing group work respecting the 
particular characteristics of each learning scenario. 
Keywords-collaborative 
learning; 
project 
management; 
scripts. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
The promotion of collaboration towards learning is 
considered an essential educational procedure. According to 
Johnson et al [1], cooperation, compared with individualistic 
efforts, tends to result in higher achievement, greater long-
term retention of what is learned, more frequent use of 
critical thinking and meta-cognitive thought, more accurate 
and creative problem-solving and more willingness to persist 
in working.  For Soller [2], collaborative learning brings 
benefits to the cognitive process, encouraging students to ask 
questions, to explain their opinions, articulate their reasoning 
and reflect on their knowledge. Fischer et al [3] emphasize 
that collaborative learning prepares students for the 
challenges of contemporary society. 
 
For Henri et al [4], collaborative learning is not a 
learning theory, but a journey towards the progressive 
construction of knowledge. According to Bostrom et al [5], 
collaborative learning is a strategy that encourages students 
to work together in order to accomplish shared learning 
outcomes. Qi et al. [6] consider that collaborative learning 
refers to methodologies and environments in which learners 
engage in a common task where each individual depends on 
and is accountable to each other. Resta et al [7] use the 
definition that collaborative learning is a process where two 
or more people learn together.  
 
One can notice common characteristics in the published 
writings of the authors who were previously quoted. For all 
of them, collaborative learning is a practice that demands an 
active participation of the student in his own knowledge 
building. The apprentice is the main subject of his 
development because he learns while he is eliciting his ideas 
as part of a group, listening to other explanations, 
reformulating 
rationales, 
and 
contributing 
to 
others' 
development. He is not someone to be taught, he is the 
leading figure of the whole learning process.  According to 
Stahl [8], in collaborative learning, the teacher becomes a 
facilitator of knowledge building, supporting and directing 
its construction. Schneider [9] employ expressions like 
“facilitator”, “manager” and “orchestrator” when he is 
referring to the teacher's role. Resta et al [7] accentuate that 
the teacher is a facilitator instead of a “sage on stage”. Henri 
et al [4] express this change in the roles of teachers and 
students by emphasizing that the collaboration journey is 
characterized by more egalitarian relationships between all 
learning actors. 
 
Stahl et al [10] sustain that learning happens through 
interactions among students. They learn by expressing their 
questions, pursuing lines of inquiry together, teaching each 
other and seeing how others are learning. Morishima et al. 
[11] summarize, in a simple formula, the benefits of using a 
collaborative learning environment through the expressions 
"learning by teaching" and "learning by observation". 
Collaborative learning is indeed a process, a pathway, a 
dynamics of new knowledge construction and validation. 
 
Collaboration depends on coordination. According to 
Henri et al [4], to coordinate is to effectively manage 
activities, people and resources for a particular purpose. 
They affirm that collaboration requires the coordination of 
the activities of the members of a group, and coordinating 
the resolution of a problem is to split it into subtasks, to 
assign responsibilities, and to utilize resources. For Lewis et 
al. [12], coordination is the act of working together 
harmoniously, which consists in overcoming conflicts. The 
organization and management of activities of both large 
groups and small groups should be facilitated so that learning 
happens in harmony and efficiently. Kim et al [13] consider 
that correct coordination work allows group members to 
have accurate mutual understanding about their tasks and 
team, and consequently, to successfully achieve their final 
goal.  
 
Researchers who study such subject attest the need do 
coordinate collaboration. Collaboration and coordination are 
inseparable concepts when related to learning. Computer 
Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) literature presents 
coordination as an imperative element to build harmonious 
and productive collaboration [14]-[17]. The distribution of 
learners in a group and the assignment of a task to them do 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

not guarantee that learning-effective collaboration will occur 
[18]. Collaboration is not a trivial activity. It implies 
interdependence among participating students, and such 
interdependence necessarily demands coordination of actions 
[19].  
 
Hermann et al [20] affirm that coordination is central for 
the quality of the problem-solving process and its outcome.  
According to Henri et al [4], collaboration necessitates the 
coordination of group activities. Malone et al [19] sustain the 
idea that it is easier to notice the need for coordination when 
it is absent. Coordination absence may lead to unclear task 
assignment, lack of time management, redundant work and 
resources, unshared resources and dissatisfied students [13].   
 
Due to the essential role of coordination in collaborative 
learning, it is important to develop technological solutions to 
support it [13][17][21]. Considering the benefits brought by 
collaborative learning and the fundamental need of 
coordinating collaboration, we have sought to develop a 
coordination framework suitable for learning context and a 
tool that implements this framework. The coordination 
model was introduced in a previous paper [22]. While that 
paper described the proposed coordination framework, this 
one describes the tool that was deployed.  
 
In Section II of this paper, the coordination scheme is 
discussed, showing the necessity of a collaboration script 
but proposing self-constructed models. Section III describes 
the software developed. Conclusions are presented in 
Section IV. 
II. 
COLLABORATIVE LEARNING COORDINATION  
A. Flexible collaboration scripts  
Given that coordination plays a key role for the success 
of the collaborative learning process, it is necessary to 
promote it. One way to promote it is to create explicit 
mechanisms that force people to organize their work. Even 
unconsciously, students and teachers structure the way they 
interact over collaborative activities. They define long term 
and short term goals, organize intermediate tasks and 
determine the necessary resources to achieve their objectives. 
But if we want to promote coordination, we cannot rely on 
the initiative of individuals. We need to support coordination 
of collaboration. 
Many researchers advocate the use of collaboration 
scripts [23][24] as a method of conducting the collaborative 
process. Coordination is established by a script that rules the 
activities of the group members. However, the use of default 
scripts, to some extent, deviates from the idea of true 
collaboration because it can disrupt the natural process of 
solving a problem  [25]. Heinze et al [26] assume that either 
an unguided approach to coordination or a very structured 
one can lead to undesirable effects in a learning community. 
Schneider [9] reaches the same conclusion when he 
addresses projects and implementation of pedagogical 
scenarios. According to him, teachers have to find a balance 
between student freedom, which is necessary for intellectual 
development and motivation,   and certain guiding principles, 
which are indispensable to keep collaborative tasks running. 
According to Dimitriadis et al. [27], there is a growing 
concern of CSCL researchers on how to design coordination 
mechanisms and maintain the flexibility of scripting.  The 
effectiveness of using scripts is a highly controversial topic 
[28]. Haake et al [29] have found no general advantages in 
the usage of scripts concerning acquisition of knowledge. 
One of the greatest challenges regarding the coordination 
of collaborative learning is to establish a balance between the 
freedom of students and the power of intervention of 
teachers. The responsibility of the coordination of activities 
in collaborative learning is not an exclusive assignment of 
the teacher. Carell et al [30] affirm that while the definition 
of the task and its presentation can mainly be carried out by 
teachers, the plan of the collaboration process has to be 
developed by the students themselves as opposed to being 
delivered to them. Even though the primary objective of a 
collective work is usually given by the teacher, the steps to 
accomplish this goal are usually defined by the group 
members. Intermediate tasks are defined, with deadlines and 
products. Often, the group needs to review the process of 
knowledge collective construction and decide for new 
directions. This more refined planning of how collaboration 
will take place is essential. Without it, the attainment of the 
ultimate goal is uncertain. 
The creation of subtasks permits that students initiate 
their planning by defining more abstract phases and make 
successive refinements of these phases, creating, each time, 
more specific definitions. Collaboration is a cyclic process 
[31] and this kind of top-down task definition makes explicit 
this constant renegotiation. Every renegotiation conducts to 
new tasks. These mechanisms should not be considered as 
inhibitors to the collaboration process since the preparation 
of the collaborative work carried out by those who will 
collaborate facilitates the accomplishment of the intended 
goal. Those who plan will have a better understanding of 
what was planned and, as a rule, a stronger commitment to 
the activity.  
Considering that learning is essentially a social process 
[32], collective planning itself is an opportunity to learn and 
to develop learning skills. Those who are not capable of 
planning an activity by them will do it with other's help and 
will acquire a new knowledge. During task definition, 
students interact, new concepts may be internalized, and 
common ground is created facilitating project development.  
If the use of scripts can be an obstacle for collaboration 
to prosper, it is reasonable to consider the use of a computer 
system to support a coordination schema that produces 
multiple collaboration arrangements not restricted to a 
particular model. Students should be able to structure 
collaborative process with a high level of autonomy. They 
should be able to dynamically build their own collaboration 
model. The teacher, on the other hand, should be authorized 
to intervene in those situations that he diagnoses as 
prejudicial for learning. A tool whose purpose is to facilitate 
the coordination of collaborative learning must make 
students the leading actors of the process, promoting the 
emergence of a reflexive, critical, argumentative and 
autonomous thought on reality. At the same time, it must 
create conditions for the teacher to monitor the process and 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

to realize the best moment for imperative course corrections, 
aiming collaborative learning.  
B. Proposed framework 
As students need to organize how they will collaborate to 
learn [4][14]-[19], one could carefully observe coordination 
mechanisms used in corporate groupware as an alternative to 
support collaborative learning. Project Management Tools, 
found in corporative groupwares, may help to make learning 
management systems more efficient on issues related to the 
coordination of collaboration due to the fact that they pay 
special attention to coordination aspects of collaboration, 
such as problem organization, task assignment, deadline 
setting and activity progress tracking.  
Schmitt et al [22] proposed a coordination framework. 
The main characteristic of that framework is to allow 
students and teachers to create collaboration scripts (or 
models) tailored to specific learning scenarios. It has two 
basic assumptions: students have an active participation in 
the organization of collaborative learning and project 
management tools can be used to support the coordination of 
collaboration in educational contexts. Through project 
definition and task organization, students and teachers 
coordinate collaboration and create a script that is more 
adequate for achieving specific goals. 
III. 
CLPMTOOL 
A. Reasons to deploy a Moodle plugin 
Currently, learning management systems are used both in 
distance learning programs and in on-site classes. In the first 
case, they are essential means to managing courses, allowing 
communication among students and teachers, deploying of 
learning objects (texts, hypertexts, videos, simulations, 
games, exercises), and organizing courses (registration of 
students, participation assessment, grades publication). In the 
second case, they are used as a support tool for the on-site 
activities, allowing communication at any time, and 
publishing 
of 
learning 
resources 
that 
lead 
to 
the 
consolidation and deepening of what is learned in the 
classroom. Thus, learning management systems are, 
increasingly, becoming well know environments to students 
and teachers. 
Stahl [33] asserts that CSCL artifacts must be built, 
among other things, to support and structure collaboration. 
Although there are free project management tools that can be 
used by any community, the dissociation between the 
learning management system and any tool used to coordinate 
the collaboration can hamper the learning process. A first 
case study [22], which used Egroupware [34] as project 
manager software, revealed that the use of two different 
environments brings difficulties for students, especially with 
regard to the process of learning to use a new user interface. 
This same case study indicated that the intended coordination 
framework does not occur spontaneously. It is necessary, 
therefore, that the tool implements components that cause the 
organization of collaboration, that is, it must provide ways to 
make it clear to students and teachers the coordination 
phases that exist to execute collaborative activities.  
The reasons given above led to the decision of building a 
project management tool integrated to a virtual learning 
environment. We opted for the implementation of a Moodle 
module since the institutions which researchers belong to use 
this software. It was also taken into consideration that a large 
community, present in several countries, could benefit from 
such module since Moodle is used in more than 83,000 sites, 
in at least 236 countries.  
B. Plugin description 
 
CLPMtool was developed based on the defined 
coordination framework. The tool consists of five modules 
(Figure 1): 
a) Project Control Module  - allows the definition of 
activities to be undertaken by groups of students. 
b) Task Control Module Tasks - allows students and 
teachers to define and track tasks that comprise the 
activity. 
c) Gant Chart Control Module - presents a graphical 
view of the development of the activity. 
d) 
Forum 
Control 
Module 
- 
organizes 
group 
asynchronous discussion. 
e) Chat Control Module - organizes group synchronous 
discussion. 
 
The system uses features that are already present in 
Moodle. The modules that control project, tasks and Gantt 
charts use Moodle libraries that administer users and groups 
of the virtual learning environment. Thus, the management 
of users and groups is carried out by teachers the same way 
as they do in any Moodle block. The modules that control 
forums and chats use what is already available inside the 
environment, integrating everything and organizing groups 
of students  
 
Figure 1 - CLPMtool modules 
 
 
 
The plugin is used as any Moodle block. Teachers only 
have to enable it inside a course and perform an initial 
setup. This initial setup includes the following actions: 
a) Inside the course / outside the block 
a. Groups creation 
b. Forum creation 
c. Chat creation 
Moodle	  
Forum	  
Moodle	  
Chat	  
Moodle	  users	  and	  group	  control	  
Moodle 
Gantt	  
Chart	  
Control	  
Module	  
Project	  
Control	  
Module	  
Task	  
Control	  
Module	  
Forum	  
Control	  
Module	  
Chat	  
Control	  
Module	  
CLPMtool 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

b) Inside CLPMtool 
a. Initial activity definition 
b. Project deadline definition 
c. Forum and chat association. 
 
 
Once the block is set, it can be used to assist in the 
coordination 
of 
collaboration. 
The 
coordination 
is 
accomplished in three phases: 
a) identification by the teacher of a basic activity (really 
important for the student groups to define their projects); 
b) definition by the groups of the projects that will be 
executed; 
c) creation and control of task execution.  
 
 
As proposed in the coordination framework [22], 
initially, the teacher defines an activity to be developed by 
the students. The students, in turn, build a collaboration plan 
in order to achieve the intended objectives. Although the 
teacher should not be the protagonist of actions, one cannot 
ignore his responsibility in identifying the skills and the 
abilities that must be acquired by the students, as well as the 
means to foster collaboration.  
 
The plugin requires the definition of the activity to occur 
when the block is initially configured. This definition is a 
short textual instruction, accompanied by the start and end 
dates of the activity. It is up to the teacher to create a clear 
description of his intentions. That description must prompt 
students to build a collaboration plan. An unclear definition 
from the teacher may cause groups to make proposals 
dissociated from learning objectives. A very narrow 
definition will withdraw from the students the opportunity 
to establish how the collaboration will occur. In that case the 
chances to produce among the groups the emergence of 
argumentative writing, critical thinking, articulation of 
thought and autonomy will be reduced.  
 
Students will be able to access the block and create their 
projects as soon as the plugin is setup by the teacher. The 
plugin is part of an environment already known and used by 
all students. Once the activity is created, each student will 
have access to the project of his own group. The plugin 
integrates in the same environment already known and used 
by students, the management of the project itself and the 
communication tools - forum and chat (Figure 2).  
 
Figure 2 - CLPMtool project definition screen 
 
 
 
 
That strategy seeks to establish a balance between an 
autonomous attitude of the students and an appropriate 
mediation of the teacher. The proposed project is a 
collective construction of students assembled under the 
mentoring of the teacher. 
 
After defining a project, students detail how the 
objectives will be achieved. This is accomplished by 
defining tasks. Figure 3 shows CLPMtool screen that allows 
the definition of a task. Just like in a corporate project 
manager, deadlines and responsibilities are set, and the user 
can register and observe each task progress. 
 
Students build a collaboration model best suited for 
achieving the intended goals through the proposed tasks. 
The plugin forces them to be authors of the collaboration 
script and they perceive themselves as coordinators of the 
whole activity. 
 
 
 
Figure 3 - CLPMtool task definition screen 
 
 
In addition to the commitment of all involved - students 
and teachers - collaborative learning requires that group 
members have a common understanding of the objectives 
and the planned pathway to accomplish them. Macmillan et 
al [35] state that for a team to act harmoniously in order to 
achieve a common goal, this team should have shared 
information on the situation and on the other group 
members. In the process of knowledge construction, it is 
essential that all students become aware of the activities 
developed by their colleagues [36]. There must be a mental 
model shared by group members for collaboration to occur 
[13]. In this context, it is important that students and 
teachers are able to realize the defined collaboration script 
and to monitor the fulfillment of activities through time. It is 
possible to visualize the main plan of actions by clicking 
over the tab named "Tasks"  (Figure 4). From this interface, 
users may 
a) view the collaboration model that was built; 
b) track the progress of the tasks; 
c) identify each task status; 
d) modify each task; 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

e) edit tasks; 
f) create new tasks.  
 
 
CLPMtool makes it possible to define multiple 
collaboration models by implementing the proposed 
coordination framework. Aiming to promote collaborative 
learning, the software has mechanisms that drive user 
actions. For the actions of students and teachers to comply 
with the coordination schema, it is essential that students 
signal their propositions and teachers their reviews. In the 
case of project definition, signaling is done by changing the 
project state: "Students planning the project" or "project 
set". The current state is shown to the users with the textual 
definition. The assessment of the proposed project occurs 
during the planning process or after the students warn the 
teacher by some communication tool.  
 
Managing a task is more complex. Because of that, we 
decided to implement a more explicit signaling mechanism, 
which would be more independent from the communication 
tools (forum and chat). It includes planning, tracking and 
assessment of tasks. Table 1 shows the many states that are 
signaled in order to define, execute and evaluate a task.  
 
Depending on the context, students may perform 
different actions on the task. CLPMtool allows students to 
change the status of the task according to the defined 
coordination framework. For example, a planning task may 
be delivered by any student of the group to the teacher in 
order to be assessed. This will make the state and the 
associated icon to change to "Teacher assessing planning 
task." The same is valid for a running task that may have a 
change in its progress status or may be delivered to the 
teacher for evaluation. On the other hand, the group cannot 
change a task that is being evaluated by the teacher   
 
It is also possible to follow the evolution of collaborative 
work through a Gantt chart. This type of chart, as well as the 
screen that summarizes task states (Figure 4), is 
fundamental for the group members to acquire the same 
understanding of what is being held. The coordination of 
collaboration requires a common understanding about the 
objectives to be achieved and the responsibilities of the 
group and of each of its members. Collaboration harmony, 
also obtained by proper coordination, depends on the 
understanding of all participants of the proposed dynamic 
and its progress in time. Graphical views always contribute 
to the realization of what is aimed and how far the target is. 
 
 Figure 4 - CLPMtool task tracking screen 
 
Table 1- Sates and icons used in CLPMtool to signal task status.  
CLPMtool actions 
Icon 
Framework status 
Students planning a task 
 
Students planning a task 
Students ask the teacher if 
the task is well planned 
 
Teacher evaluating task 
planning 
Teacher accepted task 
planning and students are 
executing it 
 
Students executing the task 
Teacher did not accept task 
planning and students are 
correcting it  
 
Students planning a task 
Students considered the 
task finished and the 
teacher is evaluating it 
 
Teacher evaluating task 
execution 
Teacher considered the 
task finished 
 
The end 
Teacher did not considered 
the task finished and 
students must redo it 
 
Students executing the task 
 
 
 
 
Finally, the plugin allows students to communicate with 
each other through a forum board or a chat room in the same 
interface. Communication via the existing tools in Moodle 
facilitates users exchange of messages. Besides that, the 
integration into the same workspace indicates to students 
and teachers the need to communicate in order to define and 
execute the collaboration model.  
C. Plugin coordination mechanisms  
CLPMtool permits students, with the assistance of 
teachers, to coordinate their collaborative activities. The 
various actions of users on the system correspond to the 
following coordination procedures: 
1) Project description visualization 
The visualization of project description is a coordination 
activity since they perform those actions during planning and 
execution phases in order to maintain a common 
understanding of the project. 
2) Project description editing 
Editing the project description indicates a stage in the 
process of building the collaboration model. The greater the 
group autonomy, the lower the participation of teachers in 
this action.  
3) Project status update 
Updating the project status marks the moment when the 
teacher believes that the proposal meets the learning 
objectives. It may also set the need for students to return to 
discuss their proposals. It is a coordination activity as it 
corresponds to an explicit indication of project status change. 
4) Task creation 
By adding tasks to the project, students detail the 
collaborative model that will be used in achieving the main 
goal. The greater the group autonomy, the lower the 
participation of teachers in this action. 
5) Task editing 
 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

When students edit tasks they are articulating and 
bethinking their proposals. It corresponds to an interaction 
with 
the 
intention 
of 
collectively 
constructing 
the 
collaboration model.  
6) Task list view 
 
When consulting the list of tasks, students and teachers 
are trying to better understand what was planned or being 
planned and how the project is progressing.  
7) Task status update  
Updating the status of a task corresponds to an explicit 
communication about progress in achieving the intended 
objectives. 
8)  Task removal 
 
When a task is deleted, the teacher is mediating the 
coordination process and is proposing a change in the 
collaboration model.  
9) Gantt chart visualization 
 
When consulting the project Gantt chart, students and 
teachers are, once again, trying to better understand what 
was planned or being planned and how the project is 
progressing. 
10) Forum and chat usage 
When using the forum and chat tools, students and 
teachers are communicating to build a model of 
collaboration or to carry out the model created. 
IV CONCLUSIONS 
In order to evaluate CLPMtool, a case study was carried 
on. Three groups of students used the tool in a PHP course. 
The logs related to coordination activities produced by the 
software were analysed and the students were interviewed. 
All students found the tool useful to improve organization, 
control and communication in collaborative learning. Data 
related to task list view, and even Gantt Map view, indicated 
that students’ actions did not limit to produce the requested 
planning like in the first experiment. Students used 
CLPMtool to get situated and to control the execution of 
collaborative process. Logs also revealed the distinct 
collaboration schemas produced by the coordination model. 
Those results were presented in [22]. 
This work, like many CSCL researches, investigates how 
computational tools can support collaborative learning. 
Coordination is a constitutive element of the collaboration 
process intended to produce learning, deserving attention 
from the community that researches how technology can 
support collaborative learning. This paper presented software 
that was developed with the aim of favoring the coordination 
of collaboration. CLPMtool is a project manager for the 
collaborative learning in that it combines elements found in 
corporate groupware (definition of projects and tasks) and 
features required in the educational context (integration with 
a virtual learning environment, mechanisms to facilitate the 
roles of students and teachers, records of users' activities for 
later analysis). This software was created with the premise 
that students are active constructors of their collaboration 
script.  
We intend to continue this study in order to propose and 
develop models and artifacts that better support collaborative 
learning. Considering that when using project managers, 
collaboration is organized as projects and tasks, it is 
important to investigate how the task level of detailing may 
influence the collaborative activity. One question that still 
demands investigation is which explicit coordination 
mechanisms may further favor collaboration. It is also 
necessary to incorporate the artifacts produced during the 
collaboration process into the coordination tool. At last, we 
believe that agile project methodologies can contribute to 
enhance the coordination framework since there are some 
similarities between agile projects and projects as an 
instrument to promote collaborative learning. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1]  D. W. Johnson, R. T. Johnson, and K Smith, "The State of 
Cooperative Learning in Postsecondary and Professional 
Settings," in M. Svinici and M. Sweet (Eds.), Educational 
Psychology Review, 2007. 
[2] A. Soller, A. Martinez, P. Jermann, and M. Muehlenbrock, 
"From Mirroring to Guiding: A Review of State of the Art 
Technology 
for 
Supporting 
Collaborative 
Learning," 
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education. v. 
15, p. 261–290, 2005.  
[3] G. Fischer, M. Rohde, and V. Wulf, "Community-based 
learning: The core competency of residential, research-based 
universities," Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, v. 
2, n. 1, p. 9-40, 2007. 
[4] F. Henri and K. Lundfren-Cayrol, "Apprentissage collaboratif 
et nouvelles technologies," Centre de recherche LICEF - 
Bureau de technologie d’apprentissage, Canada. 1998.  
[5] R. P. Bostrom, S. Gupta, and J. R. Hill. "Peer-to-peer 
technology in collaborative learning networks: applications 
and research issues," International Journal of Knowledge and 
Learning. v. 4, n. 1, p. 36-57, 2008. 
[6] C. X. Qi, Z. F. QI, J. Y. Sang, and Y. J. Sun, "Web-based 
collaborative 
learning 
system," 
in 
2nd 
International 
Conference on Networking and Digital Society (ICNDS). 
Wenzhou, 2010, p. 557-560.   
[7] P. Resta and T. Lafarriere, "Technology in support of 
collaborative learning," Educational Psychology Review, v. 
19, n. 1, p. 65-83, 2007. 
[8] G. Stahl, "Group cognition: computer support for building 
collaborative learning," Cambridge, London: The MIT Press. 
2006. 
[9] D. K. Schneider, "Conception and implementation of rich 
pedagogical scenarios through collaborative portal sites: clear 
focus and fuzzy edges," in International Conference on Open 
and Online Learning (ICOOL), University of Mauritius. 2003. 
From: 
<http://tecfa.unige.ch/proj/seed/catalog/docs/icool03-
schneider.pdf>. Accessed: Jun, 12 2013. 
[10] G. Stahl, T. Koschman, and D. Suthers, "Computer-supported 
collaborative learning: an historical perspective," in R. K. 
Sawye (Ed.), Cambridge handbook of the learning sciences. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2006, p. 409-
426. 
[11] Y. Morishima, H. Nakajima, S. Brave, R. Yamada, H. 
Maldonado, C. Nass, and S. Kawaij. "The Role of Affect and 
Sociality in the Agent-Based Collaborative Learning System," 
in Affective Dialog Systems: Tutorial and Research 
Workshop. 2004. Springer-Verlag New York Inc. New York, 
NY. p.265-275. 
[12] C. Lewis, R. Reitsma, E. V. Wilson, and I. Zigurs, "Extending 
coordination theory to deal with goal conflicts," in G. M. 
Olson, T. W. Malone, and J. B. Smith (Eds.). Coordination 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

theory and collaboration technology. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
2001. p. 651-672. 
[13] H. Kim and D. Kim, "The effects of the coordination support 
on shared mental models and coordinated action," British 
Journal of Educational Technology, v. 39, n.3, p. 522-537, 
2008. 
[14] J. Janssen, G. Erkens, P. A Kirschner, and P. A Kansellar, 
"Task-related 
and 
social 
regulation 
during 
online 
collaborative 
learning," 
Metacognition 
and 
Learning. 
Springer, p. 1-19, 2010. 
[15] P. Moguel, P. Tchounikinem and A. Tricot, "Supporting 
learners' self-organization: An exploratory study," Intelligent 
Tutoring Systems. v. 2, p. 123-133, 2010.  
[16] A. R. Anayaan F. G. Boticario, "Reveal the Collaboration in a 
Open Learning Environment - Methods And Models," in 
Artificial And Natural Computation (LNCS 2009 - part 1), 
5601, p. 464-475. 
[17] Q. Wang and H. L. Woo, "Facilitating coordination in the 
collaborative learning process," 2nd International Conference 
on Education Technology and Compute. 2010, v.1, p. 1181-
118.   
[18] A. L. Soller, "Supporting social interaction in an intelligent 
collaborative learning system," International Journal of 
Artificial Intelligence in Education, v. 12, p. 40–62, 2001. 
[19] T. W. Malone and K. Crowston, "The interdisciplinary study 
of coordination," in G. M. Olso, T. W. Malone, and J. B. 
Smith 
(Eds.). 
Coordination 
theory 
and 
collaboration 
technology. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 2001. p. 7-50. 
[20] F. Hermann, N. Rummerl, and H. Spada, "Solving the case 
together: The challenge of net-based interdisciplinary 
collaboration," in P. Dillenbourg, A. Eurelings e K. 
Hakkarainen (Eds.). Proceedings of the first European 
Conference on Computer Supported Collaborative Learning. 
Maastricht, 2001, p. 293-300. 
[21] F. W. Hesse, "Being told to do something or just being aware 
of something? An alternative approach to scripting in CSCL," 
in F. Fischer, I. Kollar, H. Mandl, and J. Haake, (Eds.), 
Scripting 
computer-supported 
collaborative 
learning. 
Cognitive, computational and educational perspectives. New 
York: Springer, 2007, p. 91-98. 
[22] M. A. R. Schmitt and L. M. R. Tarouco, "The Use of Project 
Management 
Tools 
to 
Support 
the 
Coordination 
of 
Collaborative Learning," in CSEDU (2) (pp. 345-352), 2011.  
[23] R. Morris, A. F. Hadwin, C. L. Z. Gress, M. Miller, M. Fior, 
H. Church, and P. H. Winne, "Designing roles, scripts, and 
prompts to support CSCL in study," Computers in Human 
Behavior. v. 26, n. 5, p. 815–824, 2010. 
[24] P. Dillenbourg and F. Hong, The mechanics of CSCL macro 
scripts, 
International 
Journal 
of 
Computer-Supported 
Collaborative Learning. v. 3, n. 1, p. 5-23, 2008. 
[25] P Dillenbourg, "Over-Scripting CSCL: The risks  of blending 
collaborative learning with instructional design," in P. A. 
Kirschner (Ed.), Inaugural Address, Three Worlds of CSCL. 
Can We Support CSCL? Heerlen: Open Universiteit 
Nederland, 2002. p. 61-91. 
[26] A. Heinze and C. Procter, "Online Communication and 
Information 
Technology 
Education," 
The 
journal 
of 
information technology education, v. 5, p. 235-249, 2006. 
[27] Y. Dimitriadis, J. I. Asenxio-Perez, D. Hernades-Leo, J. 
Roschelle, J. Brecht, and D. Tatar. "From socially-mediated to 
technology-mediated coordination: a study of design tensions 
using GroupScribbles, in Proceedings of Computer Supported 
Collaborative Learning 2007. New Jersey, 2007. 
[28] G. 
Stahl 
and 
F. 
Hesse, 
"A 
prism 
of 
CSCL 
research," International 
Journal 
of 
Computer-Supported 
Collaborative Learning, v. 5, n. 2, p. 137-139, 2010.  
[29] J. M. Haake and H. Pfister, "Scripting a distance-learning 
university course: do students benefit from net-based scripted 
collaboration?, International Journal of Computer-Supported 
Collaborative Learning. v. 5, n. 2, p. 191-210, 2010. 
[30] A. Carell, T. Herrman, A. Kienle, and N. Menold, "Improving 
the coordination of collaborative learning with process 
models," in T. Soschmann, D. Suthers, and T. W. Chan 
(Eds.). Proceedings of the CSCL 2005, Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2005, p. 18–27. 
[31] H. Fuks, A. B. Raposo, and M. A. Gerosa, "Do Modelo de 
Colaboração 3C à Engenharia de Groupware," Webmidia2003 
- Simpósio Brasileiro de Sistemas Multimídia e Web, Trilha 
especial de Trabalho Cooperativo Assistido por Computador. 
Salvador, novembro 2003, p. 445-452. 
[32] L. S. Vygotsky, "Formação Social da Mente," 6.ed. São 
Paulo: Martins Fontes, 1998. 
[33] G. Stahl, "Building collaborative knowing: elements of a 
social theory of CSCL," in P. Dillembourg (Series Ed.), J. W. 
Strijbos, P. A. Kirschner, and R. L. Martens. (Vol. Eds.), 
Computer-supported collaborative learning: Vol 3. What we 
know about CSCL: And implementing it in higher education. 
Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic/Spinger Verlag, 2004. p. 53-
85. 
[34] Egroupware, http://www.egroupware.org, accessed: Apr, 10 
2014. 
[35] J. Macmillan, E. Entin, and D. Serfaty, "Communication 
overhead: the hidden cost of team cognition," in E. Salas and 
S. Fiore (Eds.), Team cognition: understanding the factors 
that drive process and performance. American Psychological 
Association, 2004. 
[36] T. Hampel, H. Selke, and S. Vitt, "Deployment of simple 
user-centered collaborative technologies in educational 
institutions - experiences and requirements," in Proceedings 
of the 14th IEEE International Workshops on Enabling 
Technologies: Infrastructure for Collaborative Enterprise. 
2005. p. 207-212. 
 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

