Collaborative Works in Construction Projects in Cambodia 
Toward a Workflow Scenario Identification 
 
Kannary Keth 
BATir dept. – Université Libre de Bruxelles 
Brussels, Belgium 
Materials Science and Structure research unit – Institute of 
Technology of Cambodia 
Phnom Penh, Cambodia 
e-mail : Kannary.keth@ulb.be 
 
 
 
 
Samia Ben Rajeb              
BATir dept. – Université Libre de Bruxelles 
Brussels, Belgium 
e-mail : samia.ben.rajeb@ulb.be 
 
 
Virak Han  
Faculty of Civil Engineering – Institute of Technology of 
Cambodia 
Phnom Penh, Cambodia 
e-mail : virak@itc.edu.kh 
Abstract—Collaboration plays a vital role in defining the 
efficiency of each construction project. The main stakeholders 
are the owners, designers, and contractors. Moreover, 
architecture, structure, mechanical, electrical, and plumbing 
are the five disciplines defined as essential in the building 
design process. However, there needs to be more research on 
the collaborative works of those disciplines in the Cambodian 
context. In this research, we interviewed sixteen participants: 
architects, structural engineers, and Mechanical, Electrical, 
and Plumbing (MEP) specialists based on three components of 
collaboration: 
coordination, 
communication, 
and 
co-
production. In addition, we also asked about the experiences of 
Building Information Modeling/Model/Management (BIM), 
which is introduced in many researches as the solution to 
information management problems between the different 
actors in the construction sector. The results put forward 
identify four workflow scenarios. Most of the interviewees are 
not yet familiar with BIM and are not applying it to their 
projects. They are most often involved in more traditional 
approaches to project delivery, even in large-scale projects. 
The study thus shows that the main factor that makes the 
workflow’s scenarios differ in the Cambodian construction 
sector is the degree and timing of collaboration that is built 
between the owner(s), designers, and contractor(s). 
Keywords-collaboration process; workflow; construction 
sector; Cambodia; contract. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The construction industry is a significant contributor to 
Cambodia’s economic growth, contributing to 9.1% of 
Cambodia’s total Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in 2018 
[1]. Since the 1990s, the number of foreign investors, 
including those from China, South Korea, Japan, European 
countries, and America, has increased [2]. Due to these 
investments in infrastructure development and rapid 
urbanization, construction has grown significantly in the past 
decade [3][4]. 
However, those construction projects were challenged 
with poor cost and schedule performance [5]. These two 
things are competitive in the current projects worldwide [6]. 
Waste in construction projects happens at each phase of the 
project life cycle which increases cost and lowers the 
performance of the project.  
Previous research indicated that “collaboration is 
essential to the success of construction projects [7].” 
Meanwhile, managing the collaboration of many specialized 
project actors was also a challenge in the construction project 
development [6]. To improve these performances, we should 
identify the current stage of the collaborative process ahead.  
The three main parties in the construction project 
development are the owner, the designer, and the contractor. 
The legal definition of the interaction of these actors is stated 
in the contract [8].   
Five disciplines: architectural design, civil design, 
structural design, mechanical design, and electrical design, 
have been defined as essential in the building design process 
[9]. 
In this study, we will identify the collaborative process of 
the owner, designer, and contractor from the architecture, 
structure, and MEP (Mechanical, Electrical, and Plumbing) 
disciplines. We focus on construction projects in the 
Cambodian context and answer the following questions: 
• 
What is the interaction between the owners, 
designers, and contractors in the Cambodian 
context? 
• 
What are the workflow and collaborative processes 
of the above actors in each phase of the construction 
projects in Cambodia? 
• 
Is BIM perceived by these professionals as an 
alternative to overcome poor cost and schedule 
performance in the future? 
We have conducted several interviews to answer these 
various questions and structured this article into six parts. 
Firstly, we introduce the Cambodian context, problem, 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
COLLA 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

research questions, and content. Secondly, we review the 
literature for defining “collaboration,” and the three 
components of collaborative works. Moreover, we define the 
construction project life cycle, the construction contract in 
Cambodia, and Building Information Modeling/Model/ 
Management. Thirdly, in part of the methodology section, 
we explain the structure of our interviews and the 
participants’ information. Fourthly, in the results section, we 
illustrate the relationship of the owners, designers, and 
contractors, the four scenarios of workflow, the balance of 
collaboration, and BIM experiences and perspectives. 
Fifthly, we discuss the results. Finally, we finish paper with 
the conclusion of our research findings and further work. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
A. "Collaboration" : Many definitions 
Several definitions are given for Collaboration. Some 
speak of collective activity in general, and others propose 
differentiating them in terms of collaboration or cooperation. 
Both collaboration and cooperation are inter-organizational. 
Nevertheless, we refer to the definition of collaboration as 
the relationship with a common goal. In contrast, cooperation 
refers to “relationship among participants in a project, which 
does not commonly relate by vision or mission, resulting in 
separated project organization with independent structures, 
where the project culture is based on control and 
coordination to solve problems independently to maximize 
the value of the own organization [10].” 
In our case, we borrow the definition of Wood and Gray 
(1991), who describe collaboration as an interactive process 
of a group of actors that work together to make joint 
decision-making on a problem domain [11] by sharing their 
vision, 
information, 
and 
process 
via 
interacting, 
communicating, exchanging, coordinating, and approving in 
order to meet their common goal [12]. In the construction 
management domain, “collaboration” is defined as “a central 
element of success throughout the lifecycle of construction 
project [13][14].” Schöttle et al [10] stated that the factors to 
reaching 
a 
successful 
collaboration 
are 
“trust, 
communication, commitment, knowledge, sharing, and 
information exchange [10].” Moreover, “the project-based 
nature of the Architect, Engineer, and construction industry 
requires collaboration, or at a minimum some form of 
negotiated interaction [15].”  
B. The three components of collaborative work  
To understand the components of collaborative work, we 
base ourselves on Ellis’s model [16], which is also used by 
many researchers [17][18]. According to the various studies, 
collaboration 
is 
the 
composition 
of 
Coordination, 
Communication, and Co-production. 
Coordination is how the work is structured[19]. The 
coordinative activities manage the task for actors to perform 
and the relationship between the actors to complete the tasks 
[20]. 
Communication is about exchanging information and 
sharing knowledge [21] to ensure that all actors get a 
common referential [14]. The information can be 
transmitted in different forms, e.g., verbal, written, or  [21]. 
However, the development of technologies has supported 
communication, including “the electronic communication 
system (mail systems, facsimile transfer, voice and video 
conferencing) and shared workspace systems (virtual 
meeting rooms, remote screen sharing and electronically 
aided intelligent whiteboards (shared application) [21].” 
Table I shows the supported system variant of place and 
time which was originally presented by DeSanctis and 
Gallupe [22].   
Co-production is the action related to creating or realizing 
the project design or building [20][23]. Those actions can be 
an action of a single actor or multi actors [23]. This concept 
also includes the decision-making of problem-solving.   
 
TABLE I. GROUP DECISION-SUPPORTED SYSTEM [22] 
 
Synchronous  
Asynchronous 
Same place 
Face-to-face 
meetings 
and discussion aids 
Team 
meeting 
rooms 
and discussion areas 
Different place 
Voice/ 
video 
conferences, 
virtual 
meeting rooms, shared 
applications 
Messaging systems, e.g., 
e-mail, multi-user editors 
and collaborative writing 
tools, workflow systems 
C. Construction project life cycle phase 
The life cycle phases of a traditional project include 
project initiation, design, permitting, BID and award, 
construction, and commissioning and operation phases [22]. 
In 
the 
initiation 
phase, 
they 
study 
the 
funding, 
environmental impact, and the potential of the project. The 
design phase is about conceptual design. Preliminary 
engineering is also a part of the design phase. It helps 
analyze and validate the project. From this phase, the owner 
can choose the option that meets their budget and 
requirements. Then, they detail the final design to request 
the permit. The detailed drawing and specifications are also 
submitted to the contractors' companies to bid. The selected 
contractor must complete the project as stated in the 
contract. The contractor must join in operation activities and 
commissioning when the construction phase is completed  
[24]. 
Naming these phases may differ between countries, but 
the principle remains the same. For example, in Belgium, 
the design and construction phase of the project is divided 
into eight main sub-phases: preliminary studies (PRE), 
summary pre-project (APS), detailed pre-project (APD), 
construction of urban planning permit (PDU), construction 
of the contractor consultation (DCE), suit, development of 
works contracts (MDT), work execution (EXE), suit, and 
additional assignments phase (MSU) [25].  
In the PRE phase, the owners gather information about 
their project and define the requirements, including the 
project's characteristics, budget, etc. All that information 
must be provided to the architect to study. Then, the 
architect sketches three proposals to the owner. APS phase, 
they summarize and search for more information from the 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
COLLA 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

PRE phase and develop the selected sketch. They also study 
energy performance choice, technical security, ventilation, 
and acoustics. APD is the phase of coordination structure 
and technical design. They choose the material, ventilation, 
etc., and calculate the PEB. The PDU phase is the 
registration for the environment, construction permit, and 
Energy Performance of Building (PEB) certificate. The 
DCE phase is the phase of preparing documents for 
contracts. MDT is a phase of analysis, choosing the 
contractor company, and signing the contract. EXE phase, 
the site works start and follow the plans in the agreement. 
There are regular meetings and report submissions in the 
phase. The MSU phase is the final step to be completed 
[25].  
 In Cambodia, the design/build phase is divided into 8 
phases: initial, conceptual design, schematic design, 
permitting, tender, BID, construction, and post-construction 
phase. Our study will use these nomenclatures to describe 
our identified workflow scenarios. 
D. Construction contract in Cambodia   
The contract is one of the most important parts of the 
construction project. Those contracts define the role and 
responsibility of the main actors. According to the contract 
agreement, the owners should expect the result, payment, 
and follow up the work.  
In Cambodian context, there is adopted a sub-decree on 
construction permits in 1997, as well as the Civil code in 
2007; and land law in 2001. However, it needs clear 
construction law regulations and a standard construction 
contract. The absence of a standard contract leads to the 
International Federation of Consulting Engineers (FIDIC) 
standard, is generally used for Cambodian construction 
projects [26].  
FIDIC standards published in 1999 have four standard 
forms of contracts: 
• 
Conditions 
of 
Contract 
for 
Construction 
recommended (1) for the project designed by the 
owner or engineer. The contractor builds the building 
following the design provided by the owner [27].  
• 
Conditions of Contract for Plant and Design-build 
recommended (2) for “the provision of electrical 
and/or mechanical plants, and for the design and 
execution of building or engineering works” on a 
design/build basis. The contractor designs most or all 
the work [28].  
• 
Conditions of Contract for EPC/Turnkey projects 
recommended for “a process or power plant, a 
factory or similar facility, an infrastructure project, 
or other types of development [29].”  
 (i) a higher degree of certainty of final price and 
time is required 
(ii) the contractor takes total responsibility for the 
design and execution of the project, with little 
involvement from the employer.  
• 
Short form of Contract (3) recommended for 
building or engineering works, which is a small 
value (less than US$500,000) or short-term work 
(less than six months) [30] [31].  
In our study, we are interested in only the conditions of 
the contract for construction, conditions of the contract for 
plant and design-build, and the short form of the contract, 
which are recommended for building or engineering works. 
The definition of the contractual relationship between actors 
is the aim of these standards [32]. 
All contract standards have identified the tasks and 
responsibilities of three actors: employer (owner), engineer 
(designer), and contractor. We compare those contract 
standards based on the duties of actors, as shown in Table II. 
• 
Contractors in (1) and (3) design only for extent 
specification. Otherwise, they design almost all the 
projects in (2).  
• 
The requests for construction and environmental 
permits are the owners’ responsibility.  
• 
Providing 
instructions 
and 
requesting 
any 
requirement to the contractor is the owner's 
responsibility in (2) and (3). Otherwise, it is the 
designer's responsibility in (1). 
• 
There is the owner's representative who acts on 
behalf of the owners in (2) and (3)—otherwise, the 
designers who work on the owner's behalf in (1). On 
behalf of the owner, the owner's representative and 
designers have the authority to check, inspect the 
site, join decision-making, and make requests to the 
contractor on behalf of the owner. 
• 
The contractor also executes and completes the 
project. 
 
TABLE II. COMPARISON OF THE RESPONSIBILITIES OF ACTORS 
IN STANDARD FORM: CONDITION CONTRACT FOR 
CONSTRUCTION, CONDITION CONTRACT FOR PLANT AND 
DESIGN-BUILD, AND SHORT FORM OF CONTRACT 
 
Task 
Condition 
contract for 
construction 
[27] 
Condition 
contract for plant 
and design-build 
[28] 
Short form of 
contract [30] 
Designing the project  
Owner/ 
designer 
Contractor 
Owner/ 
designer 
Requesting 
construction and 
environmental permits  
Owner 
Owner 
Owner 
Giving the instruction 
Designer 
Owner 
Owner 
Designing to the 
extent specified in the 
contract 
Contractor 
Contractor 
Contractor 
Execution plan  
Contractor 
Contractor 
Contractor 
Completing the work 
(building) 
Contractor  
Contractor  
Contractor  
Submitting details of 
the arrangements and 
method 
which 
the 
contractor proposes to 
adopt 
for 
the 
execution of the work  
Contractor  
Contractor  
 
Requesting details of 
Designer 
Owner's 
Owner's 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
COLLA 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

the arrangements and 
method  
representative 
representative 
Action on the owner’s 
behalf 
under 
the 
contract: 
approval, 
check, 
certificate, 
consent, examination, 
inspection, 
instruction, 
notice, 
proposal, request, test 
Designer  
Owner's 
representative 
Owner's 
representative 
 
E. Towards Building Information Modeling, Models, 
Management (BIM) for Construction 4.0 
Construction 4.0 aims to encourage the implementation 
of new information and communication technologies at the 
construction service to improve collaboration, productivity, 
and quality, reduce project delay, reduce cost, and manage 
complex projects throughout the construction building life 
cycle [33]. BIM is presented as the most appropriate 
solution to enable the change towards the Construction 4.0 
practice and as the potential tool/method for solving the 
problems in the architecture, engineering, and construction 
industry [34]. It is a real impact on the way the protagonists 
of the project work together and share documents and 
information about a building life cycle [35].  
Many sources define BIM with different meanings. The 
National BIM Standard-United States defines Building 
Information Modeling as “a digital representation of 
physical and functional characteristics of a facility forming 
a reliable basis for decisions during its life-cycle; defined as 
an existing from earliest conception to demolition [36].” 
International standard (ISO 19650-1: 2018) defines BIM 
as the “use of a shared digital representation of a built asset 
to facilitate design, construction, and operation processes to 
form a reliable basis for decisions [37].” 
The letters “B” and “I” represent the civil construction or 
infrastructures (Building) and the information, respectively, 
which represents the real added value of this methodology 
in the context of 3D modeling. Otherwise, “M” has been 
given many definitions. BIM (modeling) is a process of 
creating models; BIM (model) is the model which obtains 
the data and information for building; BIM (management) is 
the process of information management on the one hand and 
collaboration management on the other [38]. These three Ms 
complete the meaning of BIM and reflect the complexity of 
the resulting collaborative process and data sharing between 
the various actors and protagonists of the project throughout 
the life cycle of the building.  
The previous research on BIM adoption in Cambodia 
demonstrated that the most significant driver is project 
visualization and schedule performance. The challenge is 
the strong industry resistance to change [39]. Therefore, it 
seems important to us today to fully understand and analyze 
the collaborative processes in the construction sector in 
Cambodia to best prepare it for change, help it overcome 
this strong inertia, and encourage the adoption of a 4.0 
build. 
Rezaei and Sistani [40] found that the professionals in the 
construction sector are confidential with hand drawing and 
2D and 3D CAD software, especially AutoCAD software. 
Otherwise, those professionals lack BIM-based skills and 
knowledge [40][41], while most companies in United States 
and European countries are considering adopting BIM.  
Oraee et al. [41] studied the barrier in BIM-based by 
reviewing the literature. He presented the need for a 
collaborative culture of teams in the project, which is a 
barrier to collaboration in BIM-based. Our study is to 
understand how multi-stakeholders collaborate deeply. It 
will be an interest in improving collaborative methods and 
tools. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY  
We gathered participants' thoughts, feelings, and 
perspectives through qualitative research via semi-structured 
interviews. This data allowed us to collect detailed problems 
in the participants' practice. To understand the collaborative 
work components, we based ourselves on the Ellis’s model 
(Cf. II.B.) [16].  
We divided the semi-structured interview into five 
themes: 
• 
Presentation project and company: participants 
described the projects they have been involved in 
and his company's role in those projects. 
• 
Coordination: participants answered questions 
about their roles and responsibilities in the project. 
We defined the participants' tasks (individual and 
overlapping tasks) and participants' roles. They 
mentioned how the work was structured and their 
interactions with other actors to complete the tasks.  
• 
Communication: 
participants 
explained 
the 
communication methods and tools for teams. 
Participants described the procedure of sharing 
understanding, knowledge, and information. 
• 
Co-production: we focused on the action that actors 
produced tasks or projects, especially the method 
and tools they used.  
• 
BIM experience and perspective: we asked the 
participants a straightforward question to see their 
first expression. The question is “Have you ever 
heard of BIM?” If so, participants explained their 
experiences and perspective. 
The semi-structured interviews proceeded from sixteen 
participants for around fourteen hours in total. Those 
participants are from three disciplines: architecture, structure, 
and MEP. They worked in different companies and played 
different roles, including MEP engineers, architects, and 
structural engineers (Table III). 
The COVID-19 context limits the participant’s amount. It 
effectively reduced our chances of reaching the participants. 
However, five to twenty-five samples are sufficient for 
qualitative research [42]. Thus, the sample size of 16 is also 
considered acceptable. We know that this size could limit our 
research, but our work has allowed us to trace specific trends 
in the collaboration sector and shed light on the collaboration 
process and the Workflow. This first study also allowed us to 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
COLLA 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

ask more specific questions regarding the specificity of the 
construction sector in Cambodia to best prepare for the 
implementation of BIM and construction 4.0. 
 
TABLE III. PARTICIPANTS’ INFORMATION 
 
No 
Role 
Company 
Responsibility 
1 
MEP engineer 
1 
Contractor 
Site coordination 
2 
MEP engineer 
2 
Contractor 
Site coordination 
3 
Architect 1 
Owner  
Conception 
designs, 
detailed drawings 
4 
Architect 2 
Designer 
Conception 
design, 
detailed 
drawings, 
structural designs, site 
coordination 
 
 
Sub-contractor 
(finishing) 
Conception 
designs, 
detailed drawings, and 
site coordination 
5 
Architect 3 
Contractor 
Conception 
designs, 
detailed 
drawings, 
structural designs, site 
coordination, 
claim 
money 
6 
Architect 4 
Owner  
Conception 
designs, 
detailed drawings, site 
coordination 
7 
Structural 
Engineer 1 
Owner 
Structural 
designs, 
detailed drawing, site 
coordination 
8 
Structural 
Engineer 2 
Owner 
Safety, quality controls 
9 
Architect 5 
Architect 
Conception designs 
10 
Architect 6- 
freelancer 
Architect 
Conception designs 
11 
Architect 7 
Design and Build 
(family company) 
Conception designs 
Design and Build 
BIM modeling, BIM 
coordination 
12 
MEP engineer 
3 
Design and Build 
Scheduling, 
coordination 
13 
Structural 
engineer 3  
Design and build 
Coordination, 
management  
14 
Structural 
engineer 4 
(manager)  
Design and build 
Coordination, 
management 
15 
Architect 8 
Design and build 
Site consultation 
Design and build 
Conception 
designs, 
site consultation 
16 
Architect 9 
Architect 
Conception designs 
 
 
IV. 
RESULTS 
A. Actors relationship 
We categorized the type of them depending on the 
relationship between the owner, designer, and contractor. In 
the result, we obtain categories following: 
1) Category 1 
The owner separated the contract between the designer 
and the contractor. Participants who were involved with this 
project said that “[…] the foreign company provided the 
architectural plan […]”; and a local architect provided the 
finishing plan.  
2) Category 2 
The owner owned a company which has a full-package 
team: designer and constructor. He could be a real estate 
agent, or he owns a company with many campuses. Thus, 
the owner used the same design for his many projects.  
The architect participant stated, “I design […], but I had 
to respect the previous project reference or guideline”; “I 
kept its style, function, similar size, and then I suited it in 
the new terrain.”  Projects could be banks, coffee shops, 
stores, factories, or the uniform residential building as 
Borey. The architect proposed and discussed the new 
architectural plan with the owner. The architectural plan 
must respect the standard of the previous project.  
3) Category 3 
The owner owned the full package of the design team. 
The contractor company built the project by follow up and 
participating in discussions from owner or his representative 
in construction phase.  
4) Category 4 
The owner hired a design-build company.  
B. Workflow 
Phase in Cambodia: initial, conceptual design, schematic 
design, tender design, permitting, BID, construction, and 
post-construction. The construction projects’ workflow in 
Cambodia has been defined in four scenarios as shown in 
Figure 1. 
1) Scenario A  
The 
architect 
proposed 
the 
conception 
design 
corresponding to the owner’s requirements. The structural 
and MEP consultants also supported and advised on the 
design. They here had a role in giving ideas, critiquing, and 
predicting 
future 
technical 
problems. 
As 
owner’s 
representatives, they also participated in accepting or 
rejecting the architect’s proposal. If the owner requests, the 
architect modifies his proposal until the owner approves it. 
Otherwise, the presence of consultants here was only in 
some cases. They did not participate in the conceptual 
design phase for some projects presented in Figure 2. 
Schematic design phase, structural and MEP designers 
proposed the structural and MEP design, respectively. Then, 
they submitted those plans to the architect, who overlayed 
them and identified the clashes. The architect, structural 
engineer, and MEP engineer discussed solving those 
clashes. They modified those plans until these three parties, 
and the owner approved.   
Then, the architect, structural engineer, and MEP engineer 
detailed their plans. They also must list material quantities 
in detail and submit them to the owner. The owner gave 
these tender documents to many contractors for studies. 
Those contractors’ companies applied their proposal 
attached with cost estimates, build method, schedule, etc. 
Then, the owner chose a company to be a contractor. 
In the construction phase, the contractor submitted the 
progress report to the owner or consultant and completed the 
work mentioned in the contract. 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
COLLA 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

2) Scenario B 
The architect proposed the conceptual architecture under 
supporting of the structure and MEP engineer. If the owner 
rejects the proposal, it must repeat it. If the owner accepts 
the proposal, it moves to schematic design. 
Structure and MEP engineers designed the structure and 
MEP plan, respectively. The architect had a role in 
overlapping the three plans. Then, the architect, owner, 
structure, and MEP engineer discussed solving the clashes 
or technical problems between those three discipline plans. 
After the approval of the schematic design, the architect, 
structural, and MEP engineer provided detailed drawings for 
the building. 
3) Scenario C  
The workflow in the conceptual and schematic design 
phase is the same as in scenario B. The difference is the 
designer from the owner teams. The tender, construction, 
and post-construction workflow is the same as in scenario 
A. 
4) Scenario D 
An architect designs conceptual design. The Schematic 
Design phase is the same as in scenario A. The workflow of 
the tender, construction and post-construction phases is the 
same as in scenario B. But the contractors who designed and 
built the structure and MEP.  
C. Collaborative work: a balance between communication, 
coordination, and co-production  
The participant stated, “architect is remote, and we do the 
videoconference. The participant added, “[…] we sent 
questions via e-mail and got a response one week later.” In 
Cambodia, actors mostly communicate via social media in 
routine work, such as Telegram, WhatsApp, WeChat, etc., 
and in the form of voices, text, videos, and pictures. The 
architect shared all plans in Dropbox. If there were any 
updates, he sent us an e-mail with the link for access to a 
modified plan. 
They discussed it face-to-face. It can be a formal or 
informal meeting. A face-to-face meeting is better than a 
distant meeting to solve the critical situation [21]. Not only 
Computer-Aided (CAD) but actors also printed to make a 
discussion during the meetings. Workers preferred hard 
copies compared to soft copies. After getting the agreement, 
they updated the plan. The participant said, “[…] after 
discussion, I made a cloud in red color on layout and made a 
note, e.g., 3rd-floor modification on the layout plan.” Other 
actors received the updated information. 
In the construction phase, they discussed daily with the 
internal team (MEP management team, subcontractor) and 
finishing team, rarely with an architect. The structure team 
works more often with an architect. One participant 
mentioned about using DWG Fast view app to demonstrate 
Figure 1. Four workflow scenarios in construction in Cambodia. 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
COLLA 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

2D plans. It also allows him to use AutoCAD to verify its 
dimension and take notes by smartphone.  
D. BIM experiences and perspectives. 
In the results, we got eleven of sixteen participants who 
knew BIM. They took the course provided by their company 
or learned from the online course. Otherwise, most of them 
have never experienced this in practice. One stated, “Our 
team used BIM to estimate quantity and cost in the BID 
phase and plan schedule for site works.” 
An architecture company owner stated that he is 
interested in BIM. Nevertheless, he is concerned with the 
expense and time spent training his staff. Moreover, he will 
consider if it is the requirement of the project owner. 
Another mentioned that he understanded the BIM benefits 
in construction but needs more time to learn. However, due 
to BIM is not familiar to everyone, he still must export BIM 
models to DWG format each time he shared his document 
with partner.   
One of sixteen participants works on BIM modeling 
(architecture model) and BIM coordinator (architecture, 
structure, and MEP models). His company has trained him. 
He stated, “BIM is beneficial, especially, it reduces the 
waste time of reworks.” He added, “we met the difficulty 
when adopting BIM because we were used to the traditional 
software, and it is difficult to change.” Moreover, there need 
to be more experts to help them resolve the problem they 
meet. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
Scenarios A and D, the project will be challenged with 
many technical problems in the schematic design phase if 
there is not participation of a structural and MEP engineers 
in the concept design phase. Engineers will request the 
architect to make many changes affecting the conception 
design that due to wasting time and design costs. Otherwise, 
with the collaboration of other disciplines, the conceptual 
design will easily convince the owner to accept, reducing 
design error, time, and cost. The architect, structural 
engineer, and MEP engineer participated in the project since 
the early design phase in scenarios B and C. As the claim of 
[41], the actors tend to isolate working, which is the 
roadblock to BIM collaboration. Thus, the collaborative 
culture in our scenarios is a good sight of the construction 
sector in Cambodia to influence BIM collaboration. 
We compared the actor’s duties in each phase. Thus, we 
figured out the similarity and differences between our 
workflow scenarios and the workflow we assumed from the 
FIDIC contracts. Scenarios A and C are comparable to (1). 
In condition contract for construction, the designer or owner 
design almost the whole project. At the same time, the 
designer also brings this action in scenario A, and the owner 
completes this task in scenario C. In scenarios A and C, the 
contractor specified the design and completed the works as 
mentioned in (1). 
We compared Scenario D with (2). In Scenario D, the 
designer designed only the conceptual design. The 
contractor designed in the schematic design phase. At the 
same time, the contractor designed almost the whole project 
in (2). The contractor in Scenario D also handled the work 
after the design phase, such as giving instructions, 
specifying design, method, execution, and completing the 
project, as mentioned in (2). In scenario B, the owner 
handles everything by himself. We cannot find a similarity 
between scenario B with any case in FIDIC contracts. 
Cambodia’s construction sector still uses CAD as the 
main tool to complete projects, as Rezaei and Sistani 
claimed [40]. Overall, actors are familiar with traditional 
project delivery methods. They are used to the problem and 
resistant to change. The participant stated, “normally, we 
had to re-model, re-check, and re-work. I don’t think other 
tools can reduce it”. Nevertheless, the participants who had 
experience with BIM practice or BIM training strongly 
believe that the waste from poor cost and schedule 
performance will be reduced by BIM adoption. 
The BIM-based processed in the BID phase (Figure 3). 
The contractor modeled BIM models in different disciplines 
based on the final designs that were provided. The 
contractor also extended the specific details. He coordinated 
the BIM-Models collaboration, identified the clashes and 
co-produced multi-disciplinary model via visualization. 
Moreover, he estimated the cost and scheduled performance 
in the further execution works. In our participant’s case, the 
contractor volunteered using BIM by put a lot of effort and 
had a strong commitment into fighting the barrier of 
adoption BIM in Cambodia’s construction project: “strong 
industry resistance to change [37].”  
Figure 2. Scenario A in the conceptual design phase. 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
COLLA 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

 
 
Figure 3.Workflow of BIM modeling in a project in Cambodia. 
 
The companies have a willingness to use BIM by starting 
from training their staff. Yet, it takes a lot of time and puts 
effort. In United States, the companies prefer to employ 
candidate with BIM skills rather than those who lack BIM 
knowledge [40]. Thus, Cambodia should promote the BIM 
course in architecture, engineering, and construction 
university.  
Addition, it requires the regulation of BIM. The 
architecture company’s owner said, “I’ll accept to move to a 
BIM-based model if it is the governments or owners’ 
requirement.” Moreover, it also required contractual 
standards 
that 
support 
multidisciplinary 
actors’ 
organizational structures [40]. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
The empirical findings of this study will offer insight 
into the construction sector to obtain successful projects, 
especially in Cambodia. 
A. Findings 
Most projects are delivered by using traditional 
approaches, even large-scale projects. The study thus shows 
that the main factor that makes these scenarios differ in the 
Cambodian construction sector is the degree and timing of 
collaboration built between the owner(s), designers, and 
contractor(s). Otherwise, BIM has yet to become familiar in 
Cambodia. It needs to be more motivation, training, and 
practicality, especially motivation from the government. The 
experts involved in large projects strongly believe that BIM 
can influence their project to be more productive. Yet, they 
still resistance to change. Cambodia’s construction sectors 
need precise management and contract standards aligned 
with the Cambodian context, which identifies the accurate 
tasks, duties, and interactions of actors involved in the 
project. Those standards should have the vision for a new 
project delivery approach, such as BIM, which can solve the 
current problem of cost and schedule performance and 
influence more productive projects. Moreover, to adopt BIM, 
Cambodia should focus on increasing human resources, 
which will be the new actor in the BIM process, such as BIM 
modelers, BIM coordinators, and BIM managers. 
B. Further research 
Further research should focus on analyzing the impact 
and identify potentially adopts BIM into Cambodian 
context. This guideline will help the construction sector 
move forward to the method BIM. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We extend special gratitude to all the industrial experts 
who responded to the semi-structured interview and 
contributed with their valuable input. Our thanks and 
appreciation to ARES-COMBOdIA project for being 
financial support this research. This research is participated 
in by two research laboratories from BATir-ULB, and MSS-
ITC. 
REFERENCES 
[1] “Annual Report 2018,” Cambodia, 2018. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.nbc.org.kh/download_files/publication/annual_re
p_eng/Annual_Report_2018_ENG.pdf. 
[2] S. Bodach, “Partnership Ready Cambodia : The construction 
sector Current situation,” Internationale Zusammenarbeit 
(GIZ) GmbH, Eschborn, Nov. 2019. 
[3] S. Durdyev, M. Omarov, and S. Ismail, “Causes of delay in 
residential construction projects in Cambodia,” Cogent Eng., 
vol. 4, no. 1, 2017, doi: 10.1080/23311916.2017.1291117. 
[4] Y. Kang, Z. Jin, C. Hyun, and H. Park, “Construction 
Management Functions for Developing Countries: Case of 
Cambodia,” J. Manag. Eng., vol. 34, no. 3, p. 05018004, 
2018, doi: 10.1061/(asce)me.1943-5479.0000609. 
[5] Cambodia Industrial Development Policy 2015-2025: Market 
Orientation and Enabling Environment for Industrial 
Development, no. 6th, March. Royal Government of 
Cambodia, Council of Ministers, 2015. 
[6] G. Wu, X. Zhao, and J. Zuo, “Effects of inter-organizational 
conflicts on construction project added value in China,” Int. J. 
Confl. Manag., vol. 28, no. 5, pp. 695–723, 2017, doi: 
10.1108/IJCMA-03-2017-0025. 
[7] S. Hamidah, A. Rahman, I. Rohani, and N. Faisol, “The 
Importance of Collaboration in Construction Industry from 
Contractors ’ Perspectives,” Procedia - Soc. Behav. Sci., vol. 
129, pp. 414–421, 2014, doi: 10.1016/j.sbspro.2014.03.695. 
[8] D. W. Halpin and B. A. Senior, Construction Management, 
4th ed. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2010. 
[9] V. Peansupap and R. Ly, “Evaluating the Impact Level of 
Design Errors in Structural and Other Building Components 
in Building Construction Projects in Cambodia,” Procedia 
Eng., 
vol. 
123, 
pp. 
370–378, 
2015, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.proeng.2015.10.049. 
[10] A. Schöttle, S. Haghsheno, and F. Gehbauer, “Defining 
cooperation and collaboration in the context of lean 
construction,” 22nd Annu. Conf. Int. Gr. Lean Constr. 
Underst. Improv. Proj. Based Prod. IGLC 2014, vol. 49, no. 
0, pp. 1269–1280, 2014. 
[11] D. J. Wood and B. Gray, “Toward a Comprehensive Theory 
of Collaboration,” J. Appl. Behav. Sci., vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 
139–162, 1991, doi: 10.1177/0021886391272001. 
[12] M. Ilich, B. Becerik, and B. Aultman, “Online collaboration: 
why aren’t we using our tools? Publication,” Publ. 
ofArchitectural Eng. Inst. Constr. Inst. ASCE, vol. 6, p. 10, 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
COLLA 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

2006, doi: 10.1007/s00766-016-0254-6. 
[13] M. Oraee, M. R. Hosseini, E. Papadonikolaki, R. Palliyaguru, 
and M. Arashpour, “Collaboration in BIM-based construction 
networks: A bibliometric-qualitative literature review,” Int. J. 
Proj. Manag., vol. 35, no. 7, pp. 1288–1301, 2017, doi: 
10.1016/j.ijproman.2017.07.001. 
[14] F. Détienne, M. Baker, and J. M. Burkhardt, “Perspectives on 
quality of collaboration in design,” CoDesign, vol. 8, no. 4, 
pp. 197–199, 2012, doi: 10.1080/15710882.2012.742350. 
[15] E. 
A. 
Poirier, 
D. 
Forgues, 
and 
S. 
Staub-French, 
“Understanding the impact of BIM on collaboration: a 
Canadian case study,” Build. Res. Inf., vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 681–
695, 2017, doi: 10.1080/09613218.2017.1324724. 
[16] C. Ellis and J. Wainer, “A conceptual model of groupware,” 
Proc. 1994 ACM Conf. Comput. Support. Coop. Work. CSCW 
1994, 
no. 
January 
1999, 
pp. 
79–88, 
1994, 
doi: 
10.1145/192844.192878. 
[17] X. Calixte, S. Ben Rajeb, and P. Leclercq, “Traçabilité de 
l’usage des outils de conception dans un processus 
collaboratif [Traceability of the use of design tools in a 
collaborative process],” SHS Web Conf., vol. 47, p. 01004, 
2018, doi: 10.1051/shsconf/20184701004. 
[18] N. Gasmallah, M. Oussalah, and A. Amirat, “Towards a 
classification for software architecture evolution studies,” 
Conf. Francoph. sur les Archit. Logicielles, CAL 2016, no. 
August, pp. 42–51, 2016, doi: 10.3199/JESA.45.1-n. 
[19] X. Calixte, G. Gronier, S. Ben Rajeb, and P. Leclercq, 
“Impact des outils numériques de communication et 
d’échanges d’information dans les processus de conception 
collaborative 
[Impact 
of 
digital 
communication 
and 
information 
exchange 
tools 
in 
collaborative 
design 
processes],” 01 Des., pp. 1–14, 2018, [Online]. Available: 
http://hdl.handle.net/2268/229949. 
[20] P. E. Weiseth, B. E. Munkvold, B. Tvedte, and S. Larsen, 
“The wheel of collaboration tools: A typology for analysis 
within a holistic framework,” Proc. ACM Conf. Comput. 
Support. Coop. Work. CSCW, pp. 239–248, 2006, doi: 
10.1145/1180875.1180913. 
[21] J. Clarkson and C. Eckert, Design process improvement: A 
review of current practice, no. January 2021. 2005. 
[22] G. DeSanctis and R. B. Gallupe, “Foundation for the Study of 
Group Decision Support Systems.,” Manage. Sci., vol. 33, no. 
5, pp. 589–609, 1987, doi: 10.1287/mnsc.33.5.589. 
[23] X. Calixte, “Les outils dans l’activité collective médiatisée en 
conception : traçabilité des usages au sein du processus de 
conception architecturale [Tools in mediated collective 
activity in design: traceability of uses within the architectural 
design process],” Université de Liège, Université Libre de 
Bruxelles, 2021. 
[24] K. 
Shadan 
and 
G. 
Fleming, 
“Construction 
Project 
Management Handbook, FTA Report No. 0015,” 2012. 
[25] “Ordre des Architectes: L’architecte et ses missions [Order of 
Architects: the Architect and his Missions],” p. 10, 2020. 
[26] S. S. Karkala, “Construction Contracts in Cambodia,” 
Construction 
& 
Property, 
2018. 
https://construction-
property.com/construction-contracts-in-cambodia/ 
(accessed 
Nov. 23, 2022). 
[27] Conditions of Contract for Construction, 1st ed. International 
Federation of Consulting Engineers (FIDIC), 1999. 
[28] Plant and Design-Build, 1st ed. International Federation of 
Consulting Engineers (FIDIC), 1999. 
[29] Conditions of Contract for EPC / Turnkey Projects. 
International Federation of Consulting Engineers (FIDIC), 
1999. 
[30] Short Form of Contract, 1st ed. International Federation of 
Consulting Engineers (FIDIC), 1999. 
[31] The FIDIC Contracts Guide: conditions of contract for 
construction, conditions of contract for plant and design-
build, conditions of contract for EPC/Turnkey projects, 1st 
ed. International Federation of Consulting Engineers (FIDIC), 
2000. 
[32] C. Fellowes, “Introduction to FIDIC contracts,” 2012. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.mayerbrown.com/en/perspectives-
events/publications/2012/12/introduction-to-fidic-contracts. 
[33] R. Maskuriy, A. Selamat, K. N. Ali, P. Maresova, and O. 
Krejcar, “Industry 4 . 0 for the Construction Industry — How 
Ready Is the Industry ?,” Appl. Sci., vol. 9, no. 14, p. 2819, 
2019, 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://doi.org/10.3390/app9142819. 
[34] C. Eastman, P. Teicholz, R. Sacks, and K. Liston, BIM 
Handbook: A Guide to Building Information Modeling for 
Owners, Managers, Architects, Engineers, Contractors, and 
Fabricators, vol. 53, no. 9. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 
Hoboken, New Jersey, 2008. 
[35] B. Succar, “Building Information Modelling Maturity 
Matrix,” in Handbook of Research on Building Information 
Modeling and Construction Informations: Concepts and 
Technologies, Hershey, PA, USA: Information Science 
Reference, IGI Publishing, 2010, pp. 65–103. 
[36] “Frequently asked questions about the National HR Standards 
Project,” 
2014. 
https://www.nationalbimstandard.org/faqs#faq1 
(accessed 
Dec. 06, 2022). 
[37] R. Matos, F. Rodrigues, H. Rodrigues, and A. Costa, 
“Building condition assessment supported by Building 
Information Modelling,” J. Build. Eng., vol. 38, no. January, 
p. 102186, 2021, doi: 10.1016/j.jobe.2021.102186. 
[38] “Modeling , Model and Management : the three M ’ s of BIM 
and 
the 
right 
BIM 
tools,” 
2021. 
https://biblus.accasoftware.com/en/modeling-model-and-
management-the-three-ms-of-bim-and-the-right-bim-tools/ 
(accessed Nov. 23, 2022). 
[39] S. Durdyev, J. Mbachu, D. Thurnell, L. Zhao, and M. R. 
Hosseini, “BIM Adoption in the Cambodian Construction 
Industry: Key Drivers and Barriers,” ISPRS Int. J. Geo-
Information, 
vol. 
10, 
no. 
4, 
p. 
215, 
2021, 
doi: 
10.3390/ijgi10040215. 
[40] A. Rezaei and N. S. Sistani, “BIM Implementation in 
Developing Countries,” 10th Int. Congr. Adv. Civ. Eng., 2012. 
[41] M. Oraee, M. R. Hosseini, D. J. Edwards, H. Li, E. 
Papadonikolaki, and D. Cao, “Collaboration barriers in BIM-
based construction networks: A conceptual model,” Int. J. 
Proj. Manag., vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 839–854, 2019, doi: 
10.1016/j.ijproman.2019.05.004. 
[42] J. W. Creswell, Qualitative inquiry and research design: 
Choosing among five approaches. Sage Publications, Inc., 
1998. 
 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
COLLA 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

