Wireless Communication for Smart Grids
Abdulrahman Yarali
Murray State University
Email: ayarali@murraystate.edu
Saifur Rahman
Virginia Polytechnic & State University
Email: srahman@vt.edu
Abstract— Integration of information and communication
technologies 
with 
the 
traditional 
of 
electric 
power
infrastructures and creation of an interoperable, scalable,
and flexible smart grid will require numerous technological
innovations and advancements. The purpose of this paper is
to take a detailed look at the various technologies which may
be utilized in the data transmission for the smart grid and
the problems or difficulties that must be overcome to
effectively use them.   A variety of wireless systems are
analyzed and we discuss the security of these mediums as
privacy remains a major obstacle for implementing smart
grid technology.
Keywords-component;
smart 
grid, 
wireless 
systems,
security, information and communication, SCADA
I.
INTRODUCTION
The U.S. electricity generating and distribution
infrastructure 
is 
undergoing 
dramatic 
changes.
Historically, the industry has been driven from the
production and supplier side where very large base load
plants (mainly coal and nuclear) have maintained enough
supply to handle the normal requirements with excess
capacity available on demand.  Recently, interest in
renewable energy has greatly increased leading to more
wind farms and solar plants.  While these comprise only a
very small fraction of the total electrical generation
capability of the nation, their contribution is expected to
grow in the coming decades.  However, if these energy
solutions are ever to have a major impact, several
technological challenges must be met and solved.  Among
these are efficient, large scale energy storage solutions and
the 
establishment 
of 
an 
extensive, 
responsive
communications network to control the entire power grid.
The buzz phrase for this updated and improved
electrical system is “the Smart Grid.”  The smart grid is
intended to more efficiently operate this network of
generators and distributors of power with automatic
control and operation of the various systems in response to
user needs and power availability.  The reality is that there
is no defined standard or picture of what the smart grid is.
It is an emerging technology whose full purposes and
requirements will only become clearer as the marketplace
drives it.    Presently, there are projects in place or ongoing
throughout the U.S. to install smart meters on customer
premises which take the place of the old electric usage
meters which simply recorded the total usage for a given
time period (typically one month.)  At a minimum, these
smart meters will allow the utility to obtain readings
automatically 
through 
any 
of 
several 
possible
communication channels.  However, this is simply the first
step in the smart grid process.  Eventually, these meters
are expected to provide constant, real time data back to the
utility in order to constantly monitor usage rates, detect
problems, and adjust the grid accordingly [1].
This change is itself simply an intermediate step as the
true power of a smart grid lies in two way communication
between the utility and the customer.  Ideally, the customer
will be sent information through the smart meter providing
items such as power rate pricing which fluctuates based on
the time of day and usage rates.  The smart meter may
communicate directly with appliances such as a washer
and dryer, the stove and refrigerator, the heating and air
unit, and the charging station for an electric car.
Communication in the smart grid can be divided into
two primary sections - short range communication such as
a home area network (HAN) which connects the varied
devices of the home to its smart meter and the longer range
transmission necessary to span the distance from the utility
to the customer.  In fact, a smart grid requires further
communication 
between 
the 
interconnected 
utility
generators and suppliers but that is beyond the scope of
this paper.  Ensuring security in each of these networks
(which may each have different media) will be required as
all of them must work together for the smart grid to
function properly.
Many of the communication and security components
are 
common 
between 
these 
energy 
subsystems.
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) is the
core subsystem of smart grid. A second and a key
component to smart grid is a number of secure, highly
available wireless networks. These wireless technologies
include WiMAX, WLAN, WAN, all generations of
cellular technologies and wireless sensor protocols.
Comprehensive security solution is a third key component
as privacy remains a major obstacle for implementing
smart grid technology [2].
This paper is presenting challenges, benefits and how,
where, and what type of wireless communication systems
are suitable for deployment in the electric power system.
Various wireless technologies are discussed and analyzed
for implementation. A concise summary of the technical
underpinnings of each wireless technology with its
strength and weakness    is provided.
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

II.
COMMUNICATION SECURITY
Placing a smart grid into operation is intended to produce a
more reliable and resilient electrical system.  However, the
introduction of two way communication between the
millions of devices on the grid may in fact greatly increase
the problems associated with securing it.    Therefore,
placing the control of this grid onto computers and other
smart devices which can affect its reliability means that
extreme diligence must be used to protect the integrity of
both the data and the infrastructure that collects and
transmits it.  In fact, it has been reported that cyber spies
from Russia and China have already gained access to the
U.S. electrical grid and may have even planted software
into the system to cause future disruptions [3]. A recent
report from the security firm McAfee details a wide
ranging network hacking scheme that affected dozens of
companies and government agencies around the world [4].
Looking at an individual household that is on the smart
grid, there are privacy concerns as well.     With the proper
resources and ineffective security, a hacker with a
malicious intent could even gain control of portions of the
grid by compromising the communication system causing
a widespread blackout.  Since the grid is interconnected,
this could in turn lead to power disruptions and control
problems through a large region of the country [3].
Although not directly affecting the electrical grid, in
November 2011, an attacker was able to gain access to the
control system of an Illinois municipal water supplier and
remotely disable operating equipment, highlighting the
very real danger posed by these types of attacks [5].
In order to achieve comprehensive energy management
and utility control, smart meters will also be applied to gas
and water meters.  This expansion of the smart grid
infrastructure brings further complexity to the system.
Like any computer network, the smart grid must meet
several requirements.  High reliability and availability are
essential for proper control and operation of the grid so the
system must be robust and include levels of redundancy
for critical applications.  The communication architecture
must be able to span the large distances of the grid and
effectively handle the large number of nodes (all of the
individual smart meters) and the data they produce without
excessive delays.  The network should also be
maintainable – i.e. updates and improvements should be
simple to perform and not require physical modifications
at each node.  Lastly and perhaps most importantly, the
network should contain these foundational supports in
regards to security management [6]. First is the issue of
trust.  To work effectively, one must have assurance that
the devices on the network are legal, that their messages
are valid and that the data has not been manipulated.
There must be a means of controlling who can access the
network and send messages on it [7]. This is normally
managed by some type of key protocol and an
authentication mechanism.  Privacy is also a paramount
concern in order to prevent unauthorized users from being
able to capture and read the data on the network [8].
While these security factors are software related, smart
grid security must also rely heavily on physical protection.
Whereas a typical network’s infrastructure is located
inside locked communication cabinets or rooms, many of
the devices on the smart grid are in accessible locations
where anyone can gain access.  Smart meters are normally
located on the outside of houses and incorporating
elaborate security mechanisms for them is either
impractical or too expensive.  Electrical substations and
power lines are located in remote locations in many
instances, making oversight and protection problematic.
These concerns mean that it is likely that a component of
the smart grid will be compromised [6].  Having protocols
in place to detect and bypass or eliminate these effected
components is another essential aspect of smart grid
security.  NIST released its smart grid security guidelines,
NISTIR 7628, in 2010.  While this document provides a
broad overview of the security concerns and generic
instructions on what should be done to protect the system,
details have yet to be published [ 9].
Generally, securing a wired network is easier, as the
attacker must force access to the system.  With firewalls,
proper password protocols, and a strong understanding by
the people involved of what vulnerabilities exist, good
security can be accomplished.  This will be vitality
important for the wired portions of the smart grid as well
but wireless networks can be more problematic.
As wireless communication becomes more and more
widespread, however, this comes with a price as radio
waves are free to be intercepted by anyone who chooses to
listen.  The architecture for most smart grid applications
involves at least some element of wireless communication
meaning that the data and control information of the
electrical grid is exposed to those with the proper
equipment and knowledge.  The followings are  various
types of attacks to which a wireless system may be
vulnerable [10]:
•
Passive attacks are those in which the attacker
simply listens to the network transmissions.
•
Active attacks can take the following forms.
Masquerading is when an attacker impersonates a valid
user to gain access to the network.  A replay attack occurs
when an attacker captures valid transmissions (by
eavesdropping) and then retransmits the messages to
appear as a legitimate user.  Message modification or
tampering occurs when a valid message is altered in some
way.
•
A Denial of Service (DoS) attack is intended to
completely halt network traffic.
•
A Man in the Middle (MITM) attack can occur
when an attacker gains access to the network between two
valid nodes.
Wireless mesh networks are vulnerable to some
special attacks which affect their routing mechanism.  A
blackhole attack occurs when a malicious node in the
mesh claims to have a link to the destination when in fact
it does not.  The message is then dropped and never
retransmitted.  A wormhole attack relies on the attacker
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

capturing or installing two malicious nodes into the mesh.
Messages that are sent through the wormhole can be
analyzed or dropped to cause disruptions.  Along similar
lines as a DoS attack, a resource depletion attack may
target a battery powered node and force it to respond to or
send so many messages and requests that its power is
depleted [11].
III.
NETWORKARCHITECTURE AND
TECHNOLOGIES
As utilities move from proof-of-concept trials to
planning and deployment of the wireless infrastructure in
order to enable their smart grid initiatives, they face a wide
array of decisions that will determine their long-term
success. The smart grid will revolutionize the way they run
their business—and perhaps it will change their business
entirely. Electric utilities’ focus is likely to shift from
selling 
power 
to 
managing 
its 
production 
and
consumption, with economic incentives to increase power
efficiency in generation, distribution and consumption,
rather than sales.
How can utilities choose the wireless infrastructure that
is best suited to their current and future requirements?
How can they pick the technology that will most smoothly
evolve along with their smart grid applications?
The first step is to get a solid understanding of their
overall requirements—initial ones and long-term ones.
This might seem straightforward, but it can easily become
challenging, since the requirements are dependent on new
operational processes that have not been introduced yet.
Utilities are bound to find that smart grid applications will,
to some extent, work differently than anticipated, so they
need some leeway to accommodate change.
For the smart grid home area network (HAN), various
media are available with the ZigBee standard currently
dominating this industry segment.  Many appliance
manufacturers have joined the ZigBee consortium which
has given it a solid lead for this market.  Bluetooth is
another viable technology for this area and the Bluetooth
consortium is currently pushing to expand their role in the
smart grid [12]. With the preponderance of Wi-Fi
networks in many homes, it must also be considered as a
potential solution. While not significantly mentioned in the
discussion of the smart grid, it would seem that power line
communication within the home could also be a logical
choice for transferring data between the smart meter and
the items within a house.  For the problem of
communication between the customer and the supplier,
wireless mesh networks seemed to have taken the lead in
the U.S. at this point in the implementation.  However,
broadband over power lines (BPL) which is also called
power line carrier (PLC) has been utilized for many years
for other applications and may play a factor in the smart
grid.  WiMAX as well as cellular phone service networks
have also been employed recently.
This report is analyzing how, where, and what type of
wireless communications are suitable for deployment in
the electric power system and to inform implementers of
their options in wireless technologies. We provide a
concise summary of the technical underpinnings of each
wireless technology. We also outline the feature set and
the strengths and weaknesses of each technology.
A.
SCADA
Although not the focus of the paper, the existing
computerized infrastructure of the electric grid must not be
overlooked in regards to security.  The U.S. electrical
industry has utilized computer control systems for many
years to assist in operating the power grid.  Supervisory
Control and Data Acquisition (SDADA) systems consist
of remote terminal units (RTU) located at power
generating stations, and substations, and other grid
positions along with centralized operator stations.  RTUs
collect and transmit instrument readings and process
control actions from the operator stations.  These systems
have been designed for supplier and distributor control and
monitoring and not for data collection or control of
individual customers.  They were also predominantly built
from proprietary vendor hardware and software and were
not necessarily connected to a network.  These facts made
system security relatively easy to implement with little
danger of attack.  However, in recent years, the trend has
been to software applications run on “off the shelf”
hardware [13]. The author recently assisted with the
replacement of a SCADA system for a large industrial
facility.  Even if an attacker was given access to the
original system, it is unlikely that much could have been
accomplished given the archaic and antiquated hardware
and software.  However, the new system is built on PC
platforms from a known large supplier running a Microsoft
Windows OS.  Obviously the number of potential
knowledgeable attackers that could penetrate the system
has now risen dramatically.  For this location, mitigating
these potential attackers meant ensuring that the SCADA
system has no connection to any other network.  However,
for the smart grid to work, this is not an option for most
power producers and distributors.  Not only must their
systems interconnect more than ever, they must now also
interface with thousands or even millions of smart meters
located throughout their systems – each a possible point of
a network breach.
B.
Smart Meters
According to a recent report by Bell Labs, smart meters
are the perhaps the weakest link in smart grid security, but
they will undoubtedly be the heart of the system [14].
The current method of recording the electricity usage of
most customers in the U.S is through the typical manually
read meters that 
have 
been used
for decades.
Approximately twenty years ago, some advances in this
technology began to be made with the introduction of
automated meter reading (AMR) [15].  In many cases,
these devices incorporated short range radio transmitters
which could be read by a utility employee driving nearby
with a receiver.  Some more advanced applications used
low bandwidth data transmission over the power lines to
send this data back to an aggregation point.  As with most
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

projects, cost is normally a major factor and smart meter
installations are no exception.  With tens of millions of
potential installations throughout the U.S., the meters
must be inexpensive in order to justify their use.
However, this also means that their physical protection is
limited.  To minimize costs, they don’t incorporate anti-
tampering devices such as pressure sensors to alert the
system that a problem exists or a system breach may have
occurred.  In addition, due to the priority of maintaining
low cost devices, the processing power is comparatively
small.  This restricts the complexity of the security
algorithms that can be used by such devices.
With smart meters sending data to the electricity
supplier automatically, there would actually not be a need
to have the meter mounted outside the customer premises.
Placing the meters inside a garage or other room would
provide a much more protected location and aid in the
security of the smart grid.  This would require moving or
extended the power line terminus from their normal
location to the interior which would add considerable
expense and most likely be prohibitive for any extensive
smart grid projects.  However, for any new homes built in
areas with existing smart meters infrastructure, this may
be a useful option.
At the present time, there is no standard solution
for communication between the smart meters and the
electrical supplier’s networks.  Figure 1 shows a group of
smart homes connected to the grid.  Data could be sent
wirelessly to an access point at the local power pole or via
communication over the low voltage power lines.  Large
amounts of smart meter data could be collected at a
substation and then sent back to the utility.  The backhaul
connection to the utility might be via a common carrier or
a utility owned network.  Much depends on the density of
meters in a particular area and the distance of those
meters from data collection points.  No one technology
may fit every situation.  The design of the smart grid for
rural areas may look very different from those in an urban
setting.  As mentioned previously, the final design and
capabilities of the smart grid has not been determined
either.  For instance, if the smart meters are simply to
provide real time usage data every 15 minutes, a relatively
slow bandwidth network may be sufficient.
If it is
expected that the meters will themselves be data
collection points for all of a household’s appliances and
will report this information several times per minute, the
transmission of this information may require a very high
speed network.  The remainder of this paper will closely
examine the possible mediums for both the in house
network and the meter to supplier side.
Figure 1: Overall grid diagram
C.
ZIigbee
IEEE 802.15.4 defines standards for the MAC
and PHY layers for personal area networks.  ZigBee is the
trade name for a set of applications that run on these
standards as defined by the ZigBee alliance.  It is a low
power, wireless mesh network that is designed to be used
in a wide range of applications, including smart home
control systems.  Although the devices have a short range
(10-100m, less in practice), the mesh design means
networks can cover fairly large areas.  Many smart meters
have ZigBee chip sets in order to communicate with smart
devices in the home.
For security, ZigBee relies on 128 bit AES
encryption.  It also includes a 32 bit message integrity
code (MIC) and frame counter to address replay concerns.
Security is applied by default at the network layer but
higher level security is optional and not required.
With its low cost, low power usage, mesh
networking, and strong vendor support, ZigBee has many
attractive characteristics for a smart home network that
can easily attach to a smart meter for total integration.
However, its security issues may be a cause of concern.
As its importance and use increases, more and more
hackers will be drawn to attacking it which may expose
even more problems.  To use ZigBee for complete power
control from the utility, the smart meter will need to share
keys with the various appliances of the homeowner.
However, due to security concerns, it remains to be seen
if the utility would be willing to share these keys, possibly
making system integration difficult [16].
D.
Bluetooth
Similar to ZigBee, Bluetooth is the trade name
for a wireless personal area network (WPAN).  Although
this technology holds a commanding position in the cell
phone accessory industry, it has not made a large impact
in the HAN/smart home market.  However, the industry
consortium behind the technology is promoting itself for
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

smart grid applications.  Unlike ZigBee, Bluetooth is not
a mesh network but it is able to transmit at greater speeds
(~1 Mbps) while using only slightly more power with an
advertised range up to 100 m.
For one aspect of security, Bluetooth utilizes
frequency hopping during communication but there are
devices available on the market which can match the
changes and therefore eavesdrop on any transmissions.
One of Bluetooth’s features is the ease of “pairing” two
devices so that they can communicate.  This can be
accomplished by placing the device in a discoverable
mode.  However, if let in such a state, the device may be
open to attack.  Another possible avenue of attack is the
fact that Bluetooth addresses are not encrypted during
transmission, even when in a secure mode that encrypts
the rest of the message.  With a known address, the
attacker can initiate communication with a device and
potentially upload viruses or other malicious software.25
Like other wireless technologies, Bluetooth also
uses the 2.4 GHz spectrum so interference is possible with
Wi-Fi and ZigBee.  Without a mesh network, Bluetooth is
more limited than ZigBee in the total area it can cover.  It
is also at a disadvantage since most smart meters are
already designed and shipped with embedded ZigBee
chips.  However, it does have one advantage in that most
computers and smart phones can communicate via
Bluetooth which would make integrating the controls for
the smart home with devices we already use very simple.
E.
Ethernet over Power
Powerline networking or power line carrier
(PLC) is a potentially attractive means of connecting the
smart meter to the electrical devices in the home. The
latest versions of this technology use orthogonal
frequency division multiplexing (OFDM) and claim
speeds of up to 200 Mbps.  Although practical results are
probably far lower in most instances, it would still be
more than adequate for smart home communication.
To incorporate this technology in the smart grid,
the smart meter would need PLC technology built in from
the suppliers so that the signals could be injected into the
home wiring from the source.  Ideally, the smart
appliances to be controlled in the home would also have
embedded PLC devices but they could also simply
connect via an adaptor as described above.  In this
application, the smart meter would act as the server (if
necessary) and poll and/or send control messages to the
attached devices.
Having a possibly more secure system is one of
the benefits of using this technology.  There would be no
wireless transmissions like ZigBee, Bluetooth, or Wi-Fi
which could be heard by an eavesdropper.  However, this
does not mean that there are no potential security
vulnerabilities.  Like all of the systems described, the
smart meter itself is still vulnerable and could be attacked
and compromised.  Also, the typical residential power
distribution system supplies several houses from one low
voltage transformer.  Since these locations are all tied
together, any signals injected onto the lines from one
house can be sensed at other houses as well.  PLC device
manufacturers recognize this and incorporate message
encryption schemes into their products.  Like wireless
systems, any signals which are available can be probed by
hackers for weaknesses and potentially exploited.  The
danger is significantly reduced with PLC as the actual
power lines would have to be tapped so war-driving
would not be possible.  In addition, if this technology
were to be used, a low pass filter could be installed in the
smart meter to prevent these signals from going beyond
the home.
Several variations of PLC are in existence and
can be dependent upon what portion of the transmission
grid is being utilized.  As shown in figure 1, through
equipment at the generating station, high voltage level
(generally 161 kV – 345 kV) electricity is supplied to the
grid and carried to substations located closer to the
customers.  Step down transformers at these substations
drop the high voltage down to a medium voltage level
(e.g. 14kV).  From there it is sent through the local grid to
various areas near the customers.  Small transformers
further reduce the level to the standard 120/240 V level
for household use and reach the customer through the
individual electric meters.  Each of these transformers can
act as a low pass filter which effectively blocks high
frequency transmissions from passing through.  In
addition, 
dependent 
upon 
the 
frequency 
used,
transmissions over power lines suffer from high signal
attenuation.   Therefore for many applications, repeaters
may be required to transmit through the entire grid.
One potential problem with PLC relates to the
irradiated signal from the placement of the carrier signal
on the transmission lines.  Some of the frequencies used
overlap with those used by short wave radio operators and
other systems and there is a concern that widespread use
of PLC could be harmful to that media.  In areas where it
is currently being used, however, no mention has been
found of problems being reported. No mention has been
found of any security concerns in regard to these
irradiated signals being picked up by eavesdroppers
either.  Due to the lethal voltages present on the
transmission lines, there is built in security protection
which the other mediums do not have.  It is highly
unlikely that an attacker would attempt to tap into this
network.
F.
Wi-Fi
Wi-Fi is an extremely popular wireless protocol
that is found in many homes already for home area
networks and Internet access.  The latest version, IEEE
802.11n, boasts speeds of up to 300Mbps.  While the
outdoor range of Wi-Fi can exceed 300 feet, 100 feet or
less is more typical of indoor applications.  While this
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

does give at a significant advantage over other
technologies, this comes with a price as its power
consumption is much higher than ZigBee and Bluetooth.
Studies have shown that Wi-Fi would consume more than
two times as much power as ZigBee in a standard smart
home environment [17]. As the most popular wireless
standard, Wi-Fi has garnered considerable interest from
hackers and researchers which has revealed several
security holes and concerns.  However, this has led to
improvements in its security protocols, possibly making it
more secure than competing technologies now.  Refer to
the earlier section of this paper for a detailed look at Wi-
Fi security.
For Wi-Fi to be used as the smart home
communication medium, other concerns would need to be
addressed, beyond security and power usage.  Obviously,
appliance manufacturers would need to add Wi-Fi
capability to their products.  If this is done, would the
utility use the customer’s personal Wi-Fi network (HAN)
for the communication between these products and the
smart meter, or as is more likely, would the utility install
a separate network, with the smart meter as the access
point?  This could lead to interference concerns,
especially in densely populated areas.
Furthering this problem is the use of Wi-Fi based wireless
mesh networks for the communication between the smart
meter and the utility itself.  This method and competing
technologies for this application will be investigated next.
G.
Wireless Mesh Network
Wireless 
mesh 
networks 
are 
an 
easily
deployable, inexpensive means of providing wireless
network coverage over a large area.  They are an
accumulation of mutually supportive wireless access
points (AP) which are arranged in such a manner to allow
multiple paths back to some physical location which is
normally a wired network or wireless hot spot.    Since
most mobile devices can communicate via Wi-Fi, mesh
networks are normally based on 802.11 protocols with the
addition of some means of routing control [18].  In
relation to the smart grid, the smart meters could be the
APs of the network with an aggregation node located at a
local substation which is connected back to the utility
through some other media.  A mesh network could also be
created by installing APs at various locations throughout a
city or neighborhood with the smart meters being the
clients.  Data from the customers would be transmitted
from the smart meters through the mesh network to some
aggregation point where it would then make its way back
to the utility.  Some substations are already connected via
copper wiring or fiber optic so additional networking
infrastructure may not be required.  Control commands
and information from the utility would flow in the
opposite direction.  A mesh would provide an
inexpensive, yet high speed network for the utility and
could be implemented quickly.
Along with the normal security concerns of
wireless transmission, the mesh network opens up a
number of other worries in regards to the routing
protocols that take the information back to the base
station or aggregator.  A mesh network for smart grid
purposes will not be ad hoc, but rather a fixed network
where all nodes are known.  With fixed nodes, it is then
assumed that all the nodes are friendly and there is an
expected trust between nodes.  Therefore, if an attacker
gains access to an AP or smart meter, they may be able to
severely disrupt network traffic.  In order to maintain low
costs for the mesh devices, physical protection is minimal
so this is a very real threat.  There are three crucial
security goals in this regard: having some means of
detecting a compromised node, securing the routing
mechanism, and ensuring all nodes have equal access to
the network [19]. Several articles that are available
discuss means for detecting malicious nodes but intrusion
detection is an area that must be further studied and
improved.  Secure routing mechanisms are also available
and if used properly should aid in preventing attacks on
this protocol.  However, even with secure key exchange
mechanisms, by physically attacking a node one may be
able to gain this key data and impersonate a valid node.
Since each node pair should have their own keys, this
should not allow an attacker to successfully eavesdrop on
other nodes.  However, even if no data is compromised,
the loss of any functionality to the smart grid with its
expected constant data flow may cause reliability issues to
the electrical system.
While 
mesh 
networks 
provide 
extreme
flexibility, there very make-up also makes them
vulnerable to attackers.  In order to safely and effectively
use this type of design for the aggregation of smart grid
data, further improvements in physical protection and
routing protocols may be required.  Other technologies
may not have the ease of deployment that a wireless mesh
enjoys, but security concerns may override this benefit
[20].
H.
WiMAX
WiMAX 
(Worldwide 
Interoperability
for
Microwave Access) is the trade name for a broadband
wireless access medium defined under IEEE 802.16.
Initially the standards were limited to fixed, line-of-sight
transmission but have since also incorporated standards
for mobile, non-line-of-sight access.  While the range for
WiMAX transmission can be up to 30 miles, three to five
miles is more typical in practice.  This does provide
significantly greater range than Wi-Fi, making it a more
useful medium for this application.  In addition WiMAX
uses the 2.5 GHz spectrum making it less prone to
interference from other sources and wireless devices.  The
latest standards allow for data rates up to 1 Gbps although
this bandwidth must be divided between the users.
WiMAX service is provided by a base station which then
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

allows connections by subscriber stations which would be
the smart meters in our application.  This is essentially the
same as cellular phone service and WiMAX is one of the
technologies being used for 4G implementations by the
cellular providers [21].
For security, WiMAX utilizes the strong AES
encryption method and also includes key management
and authentication.  The first version of its key
management protocol was subject to attacks but this has
since been strengthened.  It is assumed that any new
devices for the smart grid would include the latest
protection.  Like any wireless medium, WiMAX is
susceptible to DoS attacks by jamming and scrambling
attacks where the jammer only transmits during certain
periods to disrupt control information. Other attacks have
been proposed involving a weakness in the initial network
entry and key exchange [22]. By eavesdropping at the
proper time, one could gain enough information to
implement a MITM attack, thereby compromising the
security of all traffic routed through the node.  One may
also be able to gain enough access to the system to
transmit various control messages which could effectively
overload the system.  However, since the devices tied to
the smart grid are not mobile and constantly changing
WiMAX base stations (and therefore exchanging keys
and performing authentication routinely), there should be
little opportunity to exploit these vulnerabilities in this
application.
One question to be answered for a WiMAX
implementation is who would own the network.  Should a
utility install its own private system or rent from a cellular
provider?  It is expected that a utility would want total
control of any network tied to the smart grid but it may be
much less expensive to lease network capacity.  However,
it would have to be determined if the required QoS could
be maintained.
I.
Wireless Scenarios and  Implementations
The desire to reduce electricity consumption, add
renewable energy sources to the mix of supply options,
and better control the entire electrical system, a new smart
grid is being proposed and implemented.  The
development of smart grid is essential for achieving
energy security, economic development and climate
change mitigation. It is important to note that there is no
single deployment that will define the communications
architecture of the electric power systems. The electric
power system will require communications with great
flexibility 
and 
complexity. 
Common 
challenges
associated with wireless communications are probabilistic
channel behavior, interference and jamming, and
eavesdropping and interception [23].
One of the challenges in deploying data
communication networks is the number of variations in
configuration and connectivity that are implemented. The
following table shows examples of scenarios to wireless
technology implementation.
For obtaining data communications coverage
quickly and inexpensively over a large geographic area,
both WiMAX and 3G/4G cellular technologies should be
considered. WiMAX at the present holds a bandwidth and
latency advantage over 3G cellular communications;
however, with the imminent LTE deployment from
multiple carriers, we believe this advantage will be short-
lived. Unlike WiMAX deployments, LTE will mostly
reuse existing cellular networks and should be a
straightforward evolution of the 3G cellular networks.
Both of these technologies operate over licensed spectrum
and therefore should be protected against unintended
interference. In terms of scalability, we know that the
cellular networks are capable of accommodating hundreds
of millions of subscribers while providing both voice and
data communications. WiMAX networks have been
deployed to provide wireless local loop service
successfully. However, presently, WiMAX networks only
support a small fraction of users compared to 3G cellular
networks. Whether using WiMAX or 3G/4G cellular, we
recommend a combination of application-level security
and virtual private networking (VPN) for transporting
electric power system information over these public
networks. Smart grids can provide significant benefits to
developing countries. Capacity building, targeted analysis
and roadmaps – created collaboratively with developed
and developing countries – are required to determine
specific needs and solutions in technology and regulation.
Table 1. Wireless Technology Suitability(Example Scenarios to
Wireless Technology Mapping)[23]
Wi
MAX
WI FI
IEEE 802.15.4
HSP
A/E
DVO
LTE/H
SPA+
UMTS
Wirele
ss
HART
ISA100
.11a
Zig
bee
Feeder
Reconfiguration
S[1]
N [2,4]
NS[2]
NS[2]
NS
[2,3]
S[1]
S[1]
Within a
Customer
Premise
NS
[5]
S
S
S
S
NS
[5]
NS[5]
Customer
Premise to Ctrl
Ctr
S[1]
NS[2]
NS[2]
NS [2]
NS
[2]
S[1]
S [1]
Within 
a 
Bulk
Generation Plant
NS
[5]
Surveillance
and Sensor
Aggregation
Sensor
Netwks
Sensor
Netwks
NS
[3]
NS
[5]
NS[5]
Transmission
System to Ctrl Ctr
S[1]
NS[2,4]
NS[2]
NS[2]
NS
[2,3]
S[1]
S[1]
Bulk Plant to Ctrl
Ctr
S[1]
NS[2,4]
NS[2]
NS[2]
NS
[2,3]
S[1]
S[1]
S= Suitable        NS= Not Suitable
1.
Wide Area Networks may be overwhelmed by excessive
demand created by an emergency, natural disaster, or large
public gathering (e.g., Presidential Inauguration).
2.
Technology does not possess necessary geographic coverage
area.
3.
Technology does not offer sufficient security.
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

4.
Unlicensed Spectrum susceptible to significant interference.
5.
Wide-area technology not suitable for use within a confined
area
IV.
CONCLUSIONS
The desire to reduce electricity consumption, add
renewable energy sources to the mix of supply options,
and better control the entire electrical system, a new smart
grid is being proposed and implemented. At the present,
there is no one solution to the problem or one network
which the industry has settled on.  Wireless options are
easy to implement and enjoy wide support but present
security concerns that could be compromised to disable
and damage the infrastructure of the system.  Installing
wired systems would add excessive costs and power line
communication has obstacles to overcome before it can be
used in a fully implemented smart grid capacity.  Based
on the current situation, it is believed smart home
networks will continue to be installed for household use
but it is unlikely that any serious attempt to completely
automate them with the grid occurs in coming years.
Most likely we will see a movement toward the system
design used by Florida Power and Light which can read
meters a few times per hour and provide control messages
to quickly drop load if necessary.  In such a system, PLC
may become the method of choice and would aid in
minimizing the security issues of using wireless
technology.  Separating the hype from the reality of the
smart grid is difficult.  Even with government
intervention and funding, the ultimate design will be
driven by the marketplace.  Over the coming years, it is
predicted that an old technology (PLC) finds more use
than the latest wireless infrastructure even with its high
speed and ease of use.
REFERENCES
1.
INL 
Critical 
Infrastructure 
Protection/Resilience
Center, “Study of Security Attributes of Smart Grid
Systems –Current Cyber Security Issues,” Department
of Energy, 2009.
2.
Anthony R. Metke, Randy L. Ekl, “Security
Technology for Smart Grid Networks,” IEEE
Transaction on Smart Grid, Vol. 1, No. 1, June 2010
3.
Clemente, Judy, “The Security Vulnerabilities of the
Smart Grid,” Journal of Energy Security, June, 2009.
4.
Alperovitch, Dmitri, “Revealed: Operation Shady
RAT,” McAfee White Paper, accessed via Internet
from
http://www.mcafee.com/us/resources/white-
papers/wp-operation-shady-rat.pdf, 
November 
22,
2011.
5.
Finkle, Jim, “U.S. probes cyber attack on water system
in central Illinois,” Reuters, accessed via Internet from
http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/45359594/ns/technolo
gy_and_science-security/t/us-investigates-cyber-
attack-illinois-water-system/#.TtlFrlYlpI4, November
25, 2011.
6.
Perrig, Adrian et al, “Security in Wireless Sensor
Networks,” Communications of the ACM, Jun2004,
Vol. 47 Issue 6, p53-57.
7.
Khurana, Himanshu, “Smart-Grid Security Issues,”
IEEE Security & Privacy, Volume 8 Issue 1, 2010, pp.
81-85.
8.
Sauter, 
Thilo, 
“End-to-End 
Communication
Architecture for Smart Grids,” IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Electronics, Volume 58 Issue 4, 2011, pp.
1218-1228.
9.
Guidelines for Smart Grid Cyber Security: Vol. 2,
Privacy and the Smart Grid, NISTIR 7628, August
2010, 
accessed 
via 
Internet 
from
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistir/ir7628/nistir-
7628_vol2.pdf, November 16, 2011.
10. Souppaya, Murugiah et al, “Guidelines for Securing
Wireless Local Area Networks (WLANs) (Draft),”
NIST Special Publication 800-153.
11. Yi, Ping et al, “A Survey on Security in Wireless
Mesh Networks,” IETE Technical Review, Volume:
27, Issue 1, 2010, pp. 6-14.
12. Merritt, Rick, “Bluetooth group explores apps in smart
grid,” www.eetimes.com, 2/24/2010, accessed via
Internet 
from
http://www.eetimes.com/electronics-
news/4087913/Bluetooth-group-explores-apps-in-
smart-grid, November 14, 2011.
13. Ericsson, Goran N., “Cyber Security and Power
System Communication-Essential Parts of a Smart
Grid Infrastructure,” IEEE Transactions on Power
Delivery, Volume 25 Issue 3, 2010, pp. 1501-1507.
14. Budka, Kenneth C. et al, “Communication Network
Architecture and Design Principles for Smart Grids,”
Bell Labs Technical Journal, Volume: 15 Issue: 2,
2010, pp. 205-227.
15. Galli, Stefano, “For the Grid and Through the Grid:
The Role of Power Line Communications in the Smart
Grid,” Proceedings of the IEEE, Volume 99 Issue 6,
2011, pp. 998-1027.
16. Bialoglowy, Marek, “Bluetooth Security Review, Part
1,” 
accessed 
via 
Internet 
from
http://www.symantec.com/connect/articles/bluetooth-
security-review-part-1, November 12, 2011.
17. Electric Light & Power, “GE study: ZigBee is better
than 
WiFi 
for 
smart 
grid 
home
communications,”December 9, 2010, PennWell Corp.,
accessed 
via 
Internet 
from
http://www.elp.com/index/display/article-
display/1328413615/articles/electric-light-
power/smartgrid/2010/12/GE_study__ZigBee_is_bette
r_than_WiFi_for_smart_grid_home_communications_
.html, November 14, 2011.
18. A. Gerkis, “A Survey of Wireless Mesh Networking
Security Technology and Threats,” SANS Institute,
2006, 
accessed 
via 
Internet 
from
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

http://www.sans.org/reading_room/whitepapers/ho
nors/survey-wireless-mesh-networking-security-
technology-threats_1657, November 4, 2011.
19. Salem, Naouel Ben et al, “Securing Wireless Mesh
Networks,” Laboratory of Computer Communications
and Applications, École Polytechnique Dédérale de
Lausanne.
20. Yarali, A. & Ahsant B., Rahman S. , “Wireless Mesh
Networking: A Key Solution for Emergency & Rural
Applications,” MESH2009, June 18-23, 2009
-
Athens Greece.
21. Yarali, A., Rahman S. & Bwanga M.,” WiMAX: The
Innovative Wireless Access Technology,” Journal of
Communication (JCM), Academy Publisher, 3, (2),
53-63, 2008 .
22. Nguyen, Trung, “A survey of WiMAX security
threats,”Computer Science Department, Washington
University, 2009.
23. Ba Akyol, H Kirkman et al, “A Survey of Wireless
Communications for the Electric Power System,”
Pacific 
Northwest 
national 
Laboratory, 
U.S.
Department of Energy, January 2010.
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

