The Support for the Integration of BIM 
Through Collaborative Action Research: ShareLab 
Charlène Naville1, Pierre Leclercq1 and Samia Ben Rajeb1,2 
1LUCID - Lab for User Cognition & Innovative Design, University of Liège, Belgium 
2COLLAeB - Lab of Collaborative Design and Digital Mediations, University of Bruxelles, Belgium 
e-mail: charlene.naville @ student.ulg.ac.be, samia.benrajeb / pierre.leclercq @ ulg.ac.be 
 
 
Abstract— Building Information Modeling (BIM) deals with 
building technologies and techniques that cover the entire 
lifespan of a building or structure. It allows for building design 
and documentation (information modelling), as well as the 
coordination and management of information (information 
management) that describes the building, its limitations and its 
performance objectives. This article questions the integration 
of BIM in the integrated design processes of major 
architectural and engineering firms. It proposes collaborative 
action research: ShareLab as a new approach to the 
appropriation of BIM paradigms. Equipped with various 
methods of reflection and information collection, the goal of 
ShareLab use is to collaboratively construct a common 
understanding of various issues and a shared vision of the 
stakes at play. This is done in an effort to push businesses into 
the BIM integration process. 
Keywords-BIM; collaboration; action research; change 
management; the science of design; the performance of a design 
project: time and tools. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This section describes the BIM context and issues as well 
as the notion of ShareLab.. 
A. BIM: a response to current industrial and societal stake 
In today’s world, collaboration plays an integral part in 
design especially in the public domain. There is an ever 
growing number of players who, as early as the initial stages, 
intervene in the layout of a project. This number continues to 
grow due to more stringent performance demands and 
shorter deadlines. 
In this context, Building Information Modeling (BIM) 
methods and technology allow for integrated “teamwork” 
during the entire design, construction and life cycle of the 
building. BIM uses numerical models to design and represent 
the data relating to the building, its limitations and its 
performance objectives. This information is managed and 
coordinated by a collaborative process called the BIM, 
whose integration is yet to be concocted [1]. 
This innovative collaborative approach calls upon the 
participation of all the players involved in the construction 
project (architects, engineers, entrepreneurs, contracting 
authorities, managers and clients) and it covers the project’s 
entire lifespan. While the management, sharing and 
synchronisation of information remains a major challenge in 
the process, the numerical templates of the building represent 
a fundamental evolution in the field and are effecting 
changes worldwide. 
The results of BIM pilot projects demonstrate the many 
advantages of its implementation [2]: the meeting of delivery 
deadlines and the reduction of construction costs through 
decreasing human design errors. In contrast to other fields in 
the manufacturing sector, the construction industry has 
evolved very little in its methods and its work efficiency. 
The positive BIM performance results are revelatory of its 
potential. As a result of increased dialogue between various 
players who hope to improve project performance and 
overall productivity, construction projects have become more 
elaborate. The use of these integrated technologies and 
processes are seen as a promising way to respond to this 
increase in project complexity [3]. 
There are two main reasons why businesses have 
switched to BIM: 1) the every growing demands on the 
performance of buildings on a technical, environmental ad 
budgetary level, and 2) the legislative constraints that 
increasingly recommend the use of BIM technologies and 
methods to answer public requests for tender. For example, 
European Union member countries have progressively begun 
implementing the January 15, 2014 European Union 
directive, which encourages the use of BIMs for the 
financing of public projects. Since 2016, Norway, Denmark, 
Finland, Great Britain and the Netherlands have committed 
to managing these types of major projects through 
collaborative BIM processes. 
B. Issues 
Through the use of data sharing models, businesses can 
efficiently use new procedures and technologies to create 
projects that are more environmentally and economically 
friendly throughout their entire life cycle. However, this 
requires both internal and external action. Internally, it 
necessitates a review of current practices and workflows, and 
externally, a response to the new realities of competitivity 
and innovation [4]. Thus, the implementation of a BIM work 
process calls for significant change on an organizational, 
technical and even legal level.  
The switch from a sequential organization, organization 
by “batches”, to a BIM collective, where players work 
concurrently in order to achieve a common goal, entails the 
integration of complex organizational processes [5] . There is 
ever growing need to manage change in way that helps 
professionals and firms adapt to their changing environment 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

and coordinate their market vision with that of present 
operational realities.  
The goal of this study is to develop, experiment and 
validate a new participatory approach for understanding the 
implementation of BIM in the integrated design process. 
This study proposes collaborative action research as a means 
to achieve this end. This new method is structured in order to 
be applied in large construction firms and as a same time to 
take into consideration the specificity of each actors and its 
function in the organization of a building project. 
C. Structure of the paper 
The state of the art presents different studies and methods 
developed to guide the change to BIM work practices and 
technologies. The section following expound the structure 
of a new approach to deals with this issue: the Sharelab. 
Then, methodological tools used for the Sharelab are 
broached before demonstrating the interest of the method 
for BIM integration. The conclusion proposes a summary, 
with limitations and perspectives of the research. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
There 
have 
been 
many 
recent 
studies 
on 
the 
interoperability of objects in 3D and on the advantages that 
BIM can bring to the optimization of construction deadlines 
[6]. In order to increase productivity through the use of BIM, 
businesses must implement specialised technologies from 
software providers and computer consultants. That being 
said, to fully benefit from the use of BIM, businesses need to 
go beyond this technocentric view and organize around their 
own company and management. 
A. International Studies 
On an international level, a Canadian study by Staub-
French, [2] focuses on two primary objectives: the first, the 
analysis of the usage of BIM in a variety of professions and 
projects; the second, the study of best practices in real cases 
that cover different levels of the business. Among the 
recently developed methods and tools, Penn State 
University’s [7] approach is at the forefront. The goal of this 
approach is twofold: 1) the identification of BIM objectives 
and the tasks and steps that need to be taken for their 
attainment, and 2) globally defining and coordinating BIM 
project requirements by involving all players. The study is 
based on the idea that BIM serves a large database of uses 
and that it is primarily suited for comparing user objectives 
and capabilities. 
TABLE I.  
COMPARATIVE  TABLE OF DIFFERENT BIM INTEGRATION GUIDES ‘ APPLICATION FRAMEWORK 
 
Author / Editor 
Target audience 
Objective announced 
Field of application 
PAS 1192-2    
(UK, 2013) 
BSI (British Standard 
Institution) 
Every actor of building 
industry, BIM qualified 
and experimented. 
To propose a set of tools 
to apply rapidly to support 
BIM integration 
The whole life cycle of a 
construction project  
Statsbygg BIM 
Manual 1.2.1 
(Norway, 2013) 
Statsbygg, 
buildingSMART member 
Every actor involved in a 
BIM process 
To guide the use of BIM 
software 
The whole life cycle of a 
construction project 
Singapore BIM 
Guide (2013) 
Building and Construction 
Authority 
A global document is 
addressed to the whole 
building trade and 
specific ones target every 
actor 
To demystify the BIM 
and to give keys for the 
use of BIM at each stage 
of a project 
The whole life cycle of a 
construction project with 
specific approach 
according to the different 
building trades. 
Planning Guide 
for Facility 
Owners (US, 
2013) 
CIC, Computer Integrated 
Construction 
Contractor  
To help contractors 
implementing BIM in 
construction projects 
Preliminary studies to 
prepare a project, from 
the definition of needs to 
execution deals 
The Guide to BIM 
(Belgium, 2015) 
ADEB-VBA 
Every actwor of building 
industry 
To propose a support for 
collaboration and digital 
information exchange 
The whole life cycle of a 
construction project 
Methodological 
Guide for BIM 
project 
convention 
(France, 2016) 
Mediaconstruct, 
buildingSMART member 
Every actor of building 
industry 
To guide professionals in 
the formalization of a 
BIM convention in their 
projects 
The whole life cycle of a 
construction project, 
vocabulary adapted for 
conception and 
construction stages 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

B. European Studies 
There has been much recent research in Europe concerning 
the development of tools for the evaluation of BIM practices 
in the construction industry. These research initiatives 
include the BIMetric method, which is the product of the 
collaboration 
of 
three 
research 
laboratories 
(LIST 
Luxembourg, LRA Toulouse and MAACC Paris) [8]. These 
laboratories developed this approach for “Plan Urbanisme 
Construction et Architecture” (PUCA), an interministerial 
French organization. It was inspired by two goals in the 
aforementioned Penn State University approach: 1) the 
evaluation of the maturity of the organization of the industry 
with regards to BIM and 2) the identification of investment 
return for the implementation of BIM processes on the 
project level. Today, many architectural agencies in France 
and Luxembourg have already implemented this type of 
evaluation. 
C. Project Positioning 
In parallel to international and European studies, many 
BIM guides and standards have recently emerged throughout 
the world, such as the BIM Guide of Singapore [9], the 
Statsbygg BIM manual of Norway [10], the Guide to BIM 
[11], the British Standard Institution PAS [12], and the 
Methodological Guide for BIM project convention of France 
[13]. These primarily technocentric methods allow for the 
standardization and guidance in the use of BIM technologies.  
Table I proposes a synthetic comparison between a 
selection of guides frequently mentioned in conferences and 
used by professionals. These methodologies refer to the 
global project organization and aim to guide the interaction 
between the different building trade actors. The BIM 
integration at the scale of individual firm, internal change 
management, is not mentioned much. The Penn State 
University approach [7] distinguish itself to the extent that a 
specific maturity matrix is proposed in order to help 
contractors forming a project team in accordance to 
professional’s competences.  But the goal remains evaluating 
BIM expertise and not guiding professional to improve it. 
For the purpose of our study, we hope to satisfy the need 
for a global collaborative approach that is user oriented. We 
adapt the tools developed in the Penn State University study 
to consider social issues of BIM implementation, that is to 
say the change management to new technologies and work 
practices. It is this that will propel businesses to go beyond 
the evaluation stage of BIM integration to demanding 
industry change and support in their technological 
implementation of collaborative processes between various 
players in the construction sector. 
III. 
PROPOSED METHODOLOGY: SHARELAB 
The novelty of our research resides in the fact that it is 
based on a collaborative research approach. In this approach, 
borrowed from social sciences, actions are at the heart of the 
research and they aim to understand and transform practices. 
The individuals involved in the observed processes are thus 
both players and collaborators in the research [14]. In order 
to measure the weight of the effects of each action, the 
researcher is required to observe the tasks, attitudes and the 
language used, as well as quantitative data that resulted from 
the action. This method is well-developed in the field of 
social and human sciences and should prove to be of great 
interest in this new context. In the short term, collaborative 
action research yields a better understanding of the evolving 
organizational and technological implementations, thus 
aiding businesses in their improvement and mastery. The 
long-term goal is “learning how to learn” by to enabling 
companies to progressively develop their own processes and 
workshops.  
 
 
Figure 1.  The cyclical approach to Action Research, inspired by [16]. 
Problem identification
Topic formulation
by consulting
the participants
Realized 
object
Action plan
Definition
of methods and hypotheses
Intervention
Practical Plan
Controlled and evaluated actions
Data Review
Analyze
Impact evaluationof the action
qualitative and quantitative criteria
Reassessment of problem
Redirect the problem
depending on the results
analysis
Co-
construc-
ted object
Approache
d object
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

In order to better monitor the evolution of BIM in various 
firms, we advocate ShareLab, an approach based on 
collaborative action research and adapted to the realm of 
design and construction. ShareLab [15] unites partners from 
various levels in the industry. With the assistance of a 
researcher, the collaborators are able to create a common 
understanding of the issues. This shared perspective helps 
them advance in their reflection on and their creation of a 
common vision and of a shared short- and long-term strategy 
for the implementation of a BIM process at the heart of the 
business. In this immersive process, researchers and industry 
players have an equal role to play in the design of the various 
stages of the research. This grants us access to information 
that is useful to understanding complex situations. 
Applications are conducted in the various types of 
multidisciplinary businesses and multi-sites of professionals 
in building construction and design. 
More precisely, this action research approach, adapted to 
the building domain, is conducted by means of a series of 
cycles that are composed of the following five steps (Fig. 1). 
To complete the description of the cycle that is described 
in Fig. 1, here are a few precisions on the initial step for the 
identification of the problem. The basis for these precisions 
is a threefold concept: 
• 
the definition of the object related to the preliminary 
work carried out by the researcher, as well as the 
researcher’s understanding of the subject, its logic, 
impact and scope. It is from this starting point that 
the researcher can propose the general direction of 
the research to the collaborators; 
• 
the formulation of the subject and its validation (goal 
co-constructed), architects and engineers involved in 
the company management are requested at this stage 
in order to integrate the research project to the firm 
objectives; 
• 
the elaboration of hypotheses, that are based on a 
depth study of the issues, allows for the development 
of an initial action plan (goal accomplished) [17]. 
The second step of the cycle is to define the action plan: 
the researcher formulates hypotheses and develops, with the 
collaboration of the change project’s supervisors on site, 
different scientific methods and protocols.  
The following step is the intervention phase, during 
which the action plan is put in place. Actions are measured, 
controlled and examined gradually through data collection. 
Afterwards, the effects of the actions are quantitatively and 
qualitatively analysed, with tools and indicators presented in 
the next section. This step, like the entire cycle is achieved 
collaboratively: each player contributes to the evolution of 
the process.  
Lastly, the initial question is re-evaluated with the whole 
change project’s actors and the results of the analysis are 
kept in mind in order to draft the subject of the research. The 
subsequent cycle will, therefore, begin on the basis of this 
new definition of the problem. 
IV. 
SHARELAB’S METHODOLOGICAL TOOLS 
In order to have a complete understanding of BIM 
implementation on the business level, one must begin by 
describing the actual situation. This description must reflect 
a vision shared by each of the participants. This new 
approach that we are proposing by means of ShareLab plays 
a role in change management and helps brings about 
transformation at the centre of the organization. This is 
achieved through a common understanding of the problem’s 
main issues and goals. As a process for change, our 
hypothesis is more effective and less disruptive if each 
player is aware of the stakes and the issues at hand, and 
when they each contribute to the definition of the project’s 
objectives. 
Furthermore, 
this 
method 
involves 
groundworkers in the research process. Their involvement 
allows for the consolidation of a shared business 
consciousness, which facilitates the creation of a common 
vision. This, in turn, moves the change process toward the 
desired craftsmanship.  
The first stage of analysis of BIM integration is 
observation by means of an analysis chart, based on the Penn 
State University study, defined and readjusted according to 
the circumstances as presented in the next paragraph. This 
phase serves to define BIM’s operational capacity in the 
selected fields of study. 
Researchers 
use 
observations, 
partially 
guided 
interviews, 
self-confrontation 
and 
other 
participatory 
practices, within agencies and design offices, to map out the 
various situations and attitudes that can help businesses 
better define their processes and expertise. These maps 
represent a common point of reference for all the players 
involved in the design process. These results are then used to 
define and implement an action plan (corporate governance). 
This plan is key in guiding the integration process toward the 
realization of the efficiency goals defined in the previous 
stage. 
An interactive heuristic chart will then provide users with 
a tool that is adaptable and suitable to reflection. Inspired by 
design thinking, this method provides support to the 
conception phase of the process. Its objective is to stimulate 
cognitive processes of design in order to re-examine work 
methods, practices and strategies [18]. 
A. Maturity Chart 
The maturity chart developed by our team was inspired 
by the American Penn State University study [7]. As 
mentioned in the state of the art, this study participates in the 
production of reference documents in the United States. The 
purpose of these documents is to help contracting authorities 
implement BIM in the management of their projects. Here, 
we have adapted this tool to the process of design. The chart 
that we use in our study has the following six main 
categories: (1) strategy, (2) the uses of BIM, (3) processes, 
(4) information, (5) infrastructure, (6) operational. These 
categories are divided into subcategories, ranging from 0 to 
5, that detail their level of maturity. Fig. 2 is an example of 
our “Infrastructure” chart. 
Researchers can take a variety of situations into 
consideration in order to fill in the analysis chart. The Penn 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

State University Study [7] suggests that researchers must 
examine two conditions to complete this maturity matrix: 
• 
the maturity of the BIM in the business at the 
moment of the study. 
• 
the maturity desired by the business. 
In order to apply this tool on site, we propose that 
researchers make a distinction between the “perceived” and 
the “real” situation so to define the current level of maturity 
(Fig. 3).  
TABLE II.  
AN EXAMPLE OF THE ELABORATED SUBCATEGORIES OF THE “INFRASTRUCTURE” CATEGORY. 
 
Infrastructure 
 
 
Level of maturity 
 
0 
Non-existent 
1 
Initial 
2 
Defined 
3 
Managed / 
Shared 
4 
Formalized 
5 
Optimized 
Software 
The programs 
and IT 
architecture 
used in BIM 
implementatio
n 
No BIM 
compatible 
software 
Object-oriented 
software (BIM 
software) 
BIM software 
database 
Advanced 
software 
systems 
compatible 
with BIM 
The use of 
software 
systems 
compatible 
with other 
participants 
A program 
created to 
evolve with the 
BIM software 
market 
Hardware 
The technical 
equipment and 
information 
used in BIM 
implementatio
n 
Inadequate 
hardware 
Some hardware 
that ensures the 
use of BIM 
software 
All hardware is 
BIM software 
compatible 
Some hardware 
can support 
advanced 
BIM software 
systems 
All hardware 
can support the 
use of 
advanced BIM 
software 
systems 
The program is 
developed to 
ensure that the 
hardware 
adapts to 
changes in 
market 
requirements. 
Software and 
Hardware 
Management 
The 
management of 
the transition 
between old 
and new 
infrastructure 
No BIM 
infrastructure 
The business 
has initiated a 
BIM 
infrastructure 
through various 
pilot projects 
without 
changing its 
former 
infrastructure 
The business 
has defined a 
hybrid 
infrastructure 
between the old 
and the new 
The business 
applies the new 
infrastructure 
in certain 
departments / 
satellite offices 
The business 
applies the new 
infrastructure 
to each of its 
departments / 
satellite offices 
The business 
develops its 
own API* in 
order to work 
with its 
external 
partners 
 
 
Example of modification from Penn State University matrix 
* An API (Application Programming Interface) is a programming interface that grants access to a selected piece of program data. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Taking different situations, specified by actors, into consideration for charting BIM maturity levels.
PennState 
Implemented 
Current situation 
 
Perceived  by     
directors vs collaborators 
 
Desired 
 
Desired  
(short term / long term) 
Real 
(in each department) 
 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

B. Self-confrontation 
Our research team applied this analysis chart to 
pluridisciplinary and multi-site design agencies and 
construction firms. We adapted this method to define the 
level of BIM implementation in various agencies based on 
the perceptions of employees and upper management. In 
order to collect this data, we combined self-confrontation 
techniques 
with 
partially 
directed 
interviews 
and 
observations on site. Self-confrontation is vital to our 
approach, as it uses collaborative action, to characterize and 
chart the flow of data and work in the project. Self-
confrontation is composed of the following six steps: 
• 
use introductory questions to appeal to short-term 
memory. The researcher asks the participant general 
questions about the project on which the participant 
has worked by way of BIM. The researcher 
encourages the participant to speak about concrete 
project components (the schedule, teams affected, 
libraries consulted, the tools used, his or her role, his 
or her use of BIM in the project, the level of detail 
that he or she managed etc.). The answers to these 
questions can either serve as new examples for the 
maturity chart, or they can help the researcher to 
better conduct the remainder of the interview and 
formalize the process; 
• 
begin to work on the groundwork for the layout of the 
project (supported by a legend created by the 
researcher). The researcher asks participants to 
sequentially draw the main phases of the process and 
to list, in the order of importance, the various players 
involved. Only the participant draws in this step. The 
researcher is permitted to accompany the participant 
in parallel; 
• 
detail each phase by describing the main actions that 
were taken in the process. It is important to explicitly 
highlight the start and finish of each phase, as well as 
the main decisions that were taken; 
• 
review and supplement the actions in each stage (by 
way of a tracing paper placed on the outline of the 
actions that have been successfully carried out). In an 
effort to verify the interoperability between various 
documents/ models used/ produced, specify the input 
documents/ models, the software used and the output 
of each player and describe the transition from one 
document or model to another; 
• 
detect the problem areas and provide a description for 
them (by placing another piece of tracing paper 
placed on top of the former). This is done in an effort 
to understand their source, to glean expertise and 
feedback regarding participants’ experience and to 
potentially optimize the process; 
• 
define and standardize the different workflows that 
were discussed during the sum of the interviews. 
After a couple of days, ask the participants to evaluate 
them. 
This approach removes the researcher from his or her 
traditional role in data collection, treatment and analysis. In 
the traditional model the creator relies completely on the 
researcher’s interpretation of the information collected, 
observed, treated and analyzed. In compliance to the 
principles of collaborative action research, through our 
approach, the creator is also one of the actors and she or he 
contributes to the creation of his or her own workflow. This 
type of research method not only fosters a shared 
understanding of the role of each player in the design 
process, but it also helps chart the different steps. The 
charting of these stages helps standardize, manage and 
optimize them. 
C. The heuristic card 
Our team used an interactive heuristic card to focus the 
discussion on the skills that were developed at the heart of an 
agency in relation to BIM. This was done in an effort to 
highlight internal expertise, as well as the difficulties and 
disappointments encountered during the implementation of 
BIM. This card has a two input approach: (1) the expertise 
applied to support the implementation of BIM in the 
business, (2) the skills devoted to the creation of a design 
project. For each of the aforementioned inputs, researchers 
suggest and define various fields of action on the heuristic 
card. This is done in an effort to encourage contemplation on 
the part of the participants with regard to their own practices. 
Fig. 4 illustrates an example of the proposed field, with the 
definitions of the terms used. 
The application of a heuristic card is characterized by a 
two-step process: 
• 
understanding the proposed sites and questioning the 
way in which actions are implemented in the agency 
- do they use a BIM, classic or hybrid method;  
• 
concretely describe the practices used, by answering 
the questions: “why?”, “with what?”, “with whom?”. 
V. 
SHARELAB AT THE SERVICE OF IMPLEMENTATION 
A. On site use: building a context for exchange 
The Sharelab, based on collaboration and interaction, 
requires confrontation between the results of actions and the 
participants (Fig. 1), so the practical use of this approach on 
site requires a minimum of two cycles. The first allows for 
exchange, the creation of a collective consciousness and a 
shared understanding of the context and the issues at hand. 
This first cycle permits participants to work together to 
create a shared vision of the realities on site. 
A second interventionary cycle is then necessary to 
construct a common goal. The synchronisation of the various 
players with regards to the present context serves as support 
for the definition of the project’s aim and of the steps 
required to be taken in order to solve the problem at hand. 
 
1) The involvement of different partners 
The choice of ShareLab partners and players is a question in 
its own right. The same issue can be broached in each level 
of the organization through the participation of players with 
differing views and roles. With regards to the types of 
questions asked and the subjects discussed, the presence of 
members from the upper echelons of the company can 
greatly influence the direction of the conversation. 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  An example of the field of reflection of a heuristic card. 
 
Figure 4.  Photos showing the situations for the application of ShareLab.
In the goal of promoting collective awareness of the 
realities on site and of elaborating a goal for the future, the 
presence of these actors is fundamental. Therefore, the 
various players can participate in the research process at any 
one of the many steps of the cycle with the knowledge that it 
is the researcher who secures the transmission of information 
and assures participants’ anonymity. 
In the context of pluridisciplinary professionals, the 
involvement of participants from various backgrounds in the 
research process creates an environment that is ripe for 
exchange. The interaction of different types of industry 
professionals from various sectors fosters in depth 
discussions regarding the realities on site. Moreover, it 
promotes cooperation of services that often work toward the 
same goal through different approaches and/ or project 
timelines (Fig. 5). 
 
2) Restitution as a foundation for research 
The systematic planning of a minimum of two phases of 
intervention allows for feedback, in the second meeting with 
the participants, regarding the analysis made during the first 
meeting. The restitution step is one of the “methodological 
commitments” that frames players in the interactive research 
process [19]. Restitution allows ShareLab participants to 
confirm the analysis that the researcher proposed at the 
beginning of the intervention. This validation is key in 
preparing results and in ensuring conformity in the data that 
ShareLab participants provided. While the second cycle 
presents an interesting opportunity for return, each ShareLab 
should have a restitution phase so to corroborate the 
researcher’s analysis and to respect his or her commitments. 
Furthermore, restitution is in and of itself an object of 
analysis for the researcher. Not only do participant responses 
contribute to adjusting the intentions of the study, but they 
also bolster them. In fact, participants see restitution as a 
possibility to give feedback on the entire situation, and this 
new perspective can bring about many different types of 
reactions among the participants. As Beaujolin-Bellet note 
[19], the observation and the collection of this return is 
highly useful in the development of a plan for the 
comprehension of the subject, and it can also challenge to the 
initial version of the researcher’s analysis.  
If restitution is fundamental in the course of action-
research in preparing and reinforcing data analysis, it is all 
the more necessary at the end of the process to bring a close 
to the intervention. Restitution at the end of the research 
protects the researcher from the “temptation of a hasty 
conclusion” [20] and it ensures the continuity of the work 
Document: use a physical or numerical way of expression that is both 
transferable and shareable, in order to express a decision or a piece 
information. 
Standardize 
create a single model to represent information related 
to different entities (the same object database for 
different projects, a framework for process mapping 
…). 
Identify 
indicate the nature, the category and the 
characteristics of a decision or a piece of information. 
Regroup 
assemble the information that has been produced 
separately in order to optimize and facilitate their 
access. 
 
Document 
 
Standardize 
 
Regroup 
 
Identify 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

performed during the research phase by encouraging 
professionals’ ownership and autonomy. 
 
3) Equip and organize the context for exchange 
In order to respect professional time constraints and in 
the spirit of efficiency in the discussion of key issues, 
moments of sharing and discussion are moderated by the 
researcher. The research team prepares the proposed 
ShareLab methods beforehand, and the individual researcher 
allots the time that he or she deems necessary for the 
completion of each step. The researcher is, therefore, the 
master of his or her own time during the intervention phase.  
During the discussions, the researcher’s goal is to guide 
the topics of conversation with a dual objective in mind: 1) 
to collect sufficiently elaborated data for analysis and 
validation and 2) to compile varying points of view in order 
to highlight controversial, as well as agreed upon topics. To 
properly execute this mission, the researcher must relaunch 
certain topics during the discussion. There are two ways to 
relaunch a discussion in order to comply to both of the 
aforementioned goals: 1) ask for precisions with regard to a 
specific subject that is discussed by one of the participants. 
Questions such as “why?”, “with whom?”, “with what?” 
allow the researcher to better define the comments’ intention. 
2) Go back to the remark of one of participants and ask the 
other participants to comment on them. 
 
4) Participant Feedback at the end of each ShareLab 
Participant feedback with regard to ShareLab is an 
important step in the process. The assessment of the 
participants allows the researcher to discern their opinion and 
understanding of the methodological tools that the researcher 
used (such as the maturity chart or the heuristic card that was 
presented in paragraph IV). It also helps the researcher 
understand the participants’ opinion on the relevance of the 
intervention of an external researcher in internal business 
issues. In fact, in the interest of the business, ShareLab’s 
goal is to help professionals in change management and in 
periods of transition, where traditional work practices and 
methods are put into question. In this context it is essential to 
evaluate the impact of the use of ShareLab during the course 
of the research in order to glean answers to the issues facing 
BIM implementation.  
This evaluation helps justify (or not) the need for and the 
intervention of a research team on site. The reciprocal 
interest of the research team and the group of professionals is 
a motivating factor for participants, and it can positively 
influence their involvement and dialogue. 
B. The possibilities and difficulties of ShareLab: 
the position and the involvement of the researcher 
The participation of different players in the ShareLab 
project allows for the creation of an environment of 
exchange. The participants are accompanied by the 
researcher through the evaluation of the level of maturity of 
BIM in the company or through the use of interactive 
heuristic cards. These moments of communication create the 
ideal environment for the collection of data that is related to 
participants’ 
experiences 
and 
daily 
practices. 
The 
spontaneous sharing of this information and its subsequent 
analysis promotes the creation of a common consciousness 
to support the process of change.  
A multi-participant dialogue about an issue that puts into 
question customary work practices will inevitably generate 
heated debates [19], where a social or sensitive issue may 
come into play. It is imperative that the researcher clearly 
defines his or her role so to avoid any confusion on the part 
of the participants regarding his or her opinion on the subject 
matter. The researcher’s adoption of a non-judgemental 
approach and his or her assurance of participant anonymity is 
vital to encouraging participants to speak freely without 
feeling evaluated and without the fear of negative 
repercussions outside the ShareLab. Furthermore, by 
attentively listening to each participant, researchers are able 
to maintain their neutrality and to guide participants in their 
thought process in order to help them find the words to 
describe their frustrations.  
In the spirit of encouraging participants to define their 
objectives and to elaborate on different solutions, the 
expression of individual frustrations and points of contention 
can prove helpful in the development and the conception of 
vectors of change. 
C. Participant feedback: what are the next steps in 
ShareLab? 
Participant feedback regarding ShareLab use gives 
researchers the opportunity to collect data regarding 
participants’ perception of ShareLab’s contribution to the 
implementation of BIM in the business. 
The initial ShareLabs examine the issue at large. This is 
done by way of a maturity matrix at the agency level or 
through heuristic cards at the project level. This allows the 
researchers to define the primary factors for crisis and the 
areas for development. With the goal of proposing more and 
more concrete solutions for the problem, once the initial 
phase is complete, ShareLabs can target more specific 
problems and focus on specific questions, such as the 
integration of BIM on the building site, the creation of an 
agency specific BIM chart or even the elaboration of a BIM 
offer suggested to a contracting authority. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION: SUMMARY, CONTRIBUTIONS 
AND LIMITATIONS 
The implementation of ShareLabs through collaborative 
action research is a new way of finding solutions to the 
issues that construction companies face in their application 
of BIM technology. Contrary to a technocratic view 
regarding the implementation of BIM tools and practices, the 
ShareLab approach takes into consideration societal and 
individual stakes with regard to change. Actual studies led on 
site gave significant results. Following our intervention in a 
large company of engineering and architecture, the firm 
developed different actions to structure the change to BIM 
with its collaborators: working groups to solve specific 
questions, a BIM day to share the progress with the whole 
team. 
The immersion of the researcher in the professional 
environment can give rise to concern regarding his or her 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

position on the topic and his or her relationship with the 
various players. By remaining neutral and objective 
throughout the entire process, the researcher promotes an 
environment of exchange among all players on site.  
Businesses may consider the time that participants 
dedicate to ShareLabs as unproductive. Moreover, the 
professional environment makes it difficult for all staff to 
participate in such research. These factors oblige researchers 
to use test groups that may not be entirely representative of 
all levels of the organization. Moreover, involvement and 
motivation of actors on site are essential and these 
parameters still have to be included in the structure of the 
ShareLab method. That being said, if BIM methods and 
technologies are to succeed in improving the efficiency of 
the organization of a construction project, businesses must 
optimise the time it takes to synchronize and coordinate the 
implementation of BIM. This way, businesses are able to 
reduce the time it takes between making a decision and its 
execution. This optimization of the time needed to 
synchronise between stakeholders requires a discussion and 
exchange phase in order to build a common understanding of 
the stakes within companies and agencies.  
The actual perspectives relate to the relation between the 
building designer, the contracting authority and the builder. 
That why our research will go on larger intervention, 
involving more actors with different function at the scale of 
the construction project. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Azhar, M. Khalfan, and T. Maqsood, "Building 
Information 
Modeling 
(BIM) 
: 
Now 
and 
Beyond." 
Australasian Journal of Construction Economics and 
Building, 
vol. 
12, 
pp. 
15-28, 
Dec 
2012, 
doi: 
10.5130/ajceb.v12i4.3032. 
[2] S. Staub-French, Building Information Modeling (BIM) 'Best 
Practices' Project Report, 2011. [Online]. Available from: 
bim-
civil.sites.olt.ubc.ca/files/2014/06/BIMBestPractices2011.pdf 
[retrieved: october, 2016]. 
[3] NSCSC, 
Nova 
Scotia 
Construction 
Sector 
Council, 
Functional Information Technology Phase 1: Detailed 
Analysis. Construction Engineering and Management Group, 
Université du Nouveau Brunswick, 2010. [Online] Available 
from:http://www.nscsc.ca/Documents/FIT_Final_Report_Part
_I-v7_web_copy.pdf [retrieved: july, 2016]. 
[4] J. Taylor and P. Bernstein, "Paradigm Trajectories of Building 
Information Modeling Practice in Project Networks." In 
Journal of Management in engineering, vol. 25, pp. 69-76, 
April 2009, doi: 10.1061/(ASCE)0742-597X(2009)25:2(69). 
[5] R. 
Deutsch, 
BIM 
integrated 
design : 
strategies 
for 
architectural practice. John Wiley & Sons, 2011. 
[6] S. Azhar, "Building Information Modeling (BIM): Trends, 
Benefits, Risks and Challenges for the AEC Industry", In 
ASCE 
Journal 
of 
Leadership 
and 
Management 
in 
Engineering, vol. 11, pp 241-252, July 2011, doi: 
10.1061/(ASCE)LM.1943-5630.0000127. 
[7] CIC (Computer Intergated Construction Research Program). 
Planning Guide for Facility Owners. The Pennsylvania State 
University, 
2013. 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
http://bim.psu.edu/resources/owner/bim_planning_guide_for_
facility_owners-version_2.0.pdf [retrieved: october, 2016]. 
[8] LIST, LRA, MAACC, La méthode BIMétric, 2015. [Online] 
Available from: http://bimetric.list.lu/ [retrieved: september, 
2016]. 
[9] BCA, (Building and Construction Authority), BIM Essential 
Guide for Architectural Consultants. Singapour Government, 
2013. [Online] Available from: 
https://www.corenet.gov.sg/media/586146/Essential-Guide-
Archi.pdf [retrieved: september, 2016]. 
[10] Statsbygg. Statsbygg BIM Manual 1.2.1. 2013. [Online] 
Available from: 
http://www.statsbygg.no/Files/publikasjoner/manualer/Statsby
ggBIM-manual-ver1-2-1eng-2013-12-17.pdf [retrieved: 
october, 2016]. 
[11] ADEB-VBA. (2015). The Guide to BIM, 2015. [Online] 
Available 
from: 
http://adeb-vba.be/the-guide-to-bim.pdf 
[retrieved: october, 2016]. 
[12] BSI (British Standard Institution). (2013). PAS 1192-2:2013 
Specification 
for 
information 
management 
for 
the 
capital/delivery phase of construction projects using building 
information 
modelling. 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
http://shop.bsigroup.com/navigate-by/pas/pas- 
1192-22013/  
[retrieved: june, 2016]. 
[13] MediaConstruct. (2016). Methodological Guide for BIM 
project 
convention. 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
//www.mediaconstruct.fr/sinformer/le-blog-du-bim/post/4730 
[retrieved: october, 2016]. 
[14] G. Monceau, "La recherche-action en France : histoire récente 
et usages actuels." In Les recherches-actions collaboratives, 
Presses de l’EHESP, pp 21-31, 2015. 
[15] S. Ben Rajeb, A. Senciuc, and I. Pluchinotta, "ShareLab, 
Support for Collective Intelligence." In Proceedings of the 
Fifth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative 
Networks, Systems and Applications. COLLA'15, Malta, 
2015, pp 152-161. 
[16] M. Catroux, "Introduction à la recherche-action : modalités 
d'une démarche théorique centrée sur la pratique." In 
Recherche et pratiques pédagogiques en langues de spécialité, 
21, 8-20, 2002. 
[17] F. Saint-Luc, La recherche-action : une recherche à visée 
formatrice et transformatrice, 2014. [Online] Available 
http://www.icem-pedagogie-
freinet.org/sites/default/files/la_recherche-action.pdf 
[retrieved: september, 2016]. 
[18] T. Brown, Design Thinking, Harvard Business Review, June 
2008. 
[19] R. 
Beaujolin-Bellet, 
"Recherches 
interactives 
sur 
les 
restructurations : quels engagements du chercheur ?" In La 
recherche-intervention 
peut-elle 
être 
socialement 
responsable ? Paris : Vuibert, pp 85-102, 2008. 
[20] F. Pichault, O. Lisein, G. Rondeaux, and V. Xhauflaire, "La 
recherche-intervention face à ses tentations." In La recherche-
intervention peut-elle être socialement responsable ? Paris : 
Vuibert, pp 7-25, 2008. 
 
 
• 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-517-3
COLLA 2016 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

