Instrumented analysis method for collaboration activities 
Samia Ben Rajeb and Pierre Leclercq 
University of Liege 
LUCID Lab for User Cognition & Innovative Design 
Liege, Belgium 
e-mail: samia.benrajeb / pierre.leclercq @ ulg.ac.be 
 
 
Abstract— Analysing collective design activities is a difficult 
task, especially in a context that involves the remote 
collaboration and/or multidisciplinarity. It is thus necessary to 
define a dedicated analysis process, instrumented by tools that 
can facilitate the data acquisition and visualization. The 
method presented here enables to cross-reference the two 
aspects of a complex collective activity: the process and the 
content treated by a group. Our method offers the possibility 
to analyse different types of collective work configurations (co-
attendance or remote / instrumented or not). Its flexibility 
leaves the possibility to the researcher to update his frame and 
thus avoid the preconceptions earlier defined before the 
activity without possibility to reconsider. 
Keywords-collaborative design; methodologies and tools for 
collaborative activity analysis; visualization of collaborative 
processes. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Collective activities have been the object of much 
research in psychology, ergonomics, and cognitive science 
that aim to create models for this kind of complex interaction 
[1]. These are based on two models of synchronisation: the 
first is cognitive synchronisation, relating to the construction 
of a context of shared knowledge; the other is operational 
synchronisation, relating to the division of tasks of the 
different collaborators [2]. These synchronisations aim to 
build awareness that will enable collaborators to interact with 
their environment and with a group of actors [3]. The place 
of the common ground is primordial because it contributes to 
the sharing of each one’s specific competence and the 
acquisition of new competences to work in groups [4]. Other 
research has also highlighted the complexity of these 
activities because they can be different depending on the 
number of actors [5], the aim of the activity [6], the space 
and the time during which these interactions take place [7]. 
For the diversity of configurations involving several 
actors, supports (which can be specifications of tools as well 
as the organisation of on-going work groups) have been 
proposed in the context of the scientific field of Computer 
Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) and, more precisely, 
of the Computer Support for Cooperative Design (CSCD, 
focussing on collective design activities). 
In this context, the framework of our study only concerns 
the design meetings, held in co-presence or remotely, 
between different actors (architects, engineers, or designers) 
who are collaborating on the same project (and not 
coordinating, for example). This phase is that of the 
emergence of ideas that evolve corresponding to the 
interactions and graphic representations that are produced 
and shared. It is so much more difficult to observe and 
analyse when they take place at a distance. The analysis of 
this complex collaborative activity interests us because it 
raises several methodological questions for the researcher, in 
terms of the methods of collection, treatment and analysis of 
data, which we will develop in this article. 
Our goal consists of designing an operational method to 
analyse the process of any complex collaborative activity, to 
code efficiently the gathered data and to assist in their 
analysis. As opposed to classical protocols and existing tools, 
we aim to use real time data collection (in addition to video 
support that usually requires from 3 to 10 times the duration 
of the observed activity), a flexible coding frame, which 
allows to adapt the coding variables and analysis criteria, and 
a agile visualisation tool, which can help the interpretation 
work, using dynamic graphs and diagrams. 
This paper will first present a short state of the art on 
understanding collective activities (section II) and a 
description of our research context and our application 
framework (section III). The section IV will describe our 
process for analysing collaboration activities and the 
COMMON Tools support. Finally, the conclusions will 
emphasize the flexibility of our instrumented method and 
trace some perspectives. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
AND QUESTION OF RESEARCH 
A. Understanding collective activity and gathering data 
Since the 90’s, many research projects have aimed to 
promote and aid collective activity. In a synthetic manner, 
one can distinguish [6][8]-[11]: those that try to categorise 
and define collective activity; those that concentrate on the 
technical aspects of this activity; those that focus on the 
social aspects; those that deal with developing man-machine 
interfaces 
and 
others 
man-man 
interfaces 
to 
help 
collaboration; those that develop methods and tools to 
analyse this complex activity in their real context  or in the 
laboratory. 
Focussing on this last aspect to understand collective 
activity from the research point of view, one of the main 
methods of gathering and treating data to analyse situations 
of collaboration is the "Protocol analysis" [12], which 
generally takes place in controlled environments. "Protocol 
analysis" is based on two methods of gathering data that can, 
separately, 
produce 
similar 
results 
for 
coherent 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-436-7
COLLA 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

understanding of the problem-solving process and can also 
be complementary depending on the research objectives 
[13]. 
"Retrospective protocols" consist of asking the operator, 
after having finished his activity, to choose representative 
elements of his activity and then to describe them in order to 
better define the specificities of his work, alone or within a 
group. Thus, it concerns the study of design objects and their 
components independently of the situations in which they 
evolve [12]. In our opinion, this approach contributes to 
changing the designers’ point of view of their design object 
by asking them to conceptualise their activity by calling on 
their memory. It has nevertheless been shown that if the 
stored information calls on short-term memory, the 
cumulative data can provide important details related to the 
research question [10] and the origins of choice to solve one 
problem or another [14]. Self-confrontation can also be 
another approach to analyse a task already completed. It 
consists of asking an operator to realise a self-examination of 
his own work process (alone and/or with others) from filmed 
sequences of his activity [15]. But, in our opinion, this other 
method demands that the operator make a big investment in 
terms of time and involvement in the research. 
"Concurrent protocols" consist of the operator verbalising 
orally out loud his thoughts while working on a specific task 
(like the "think aloud" [16]). His thoughts are then 
transcribed, coded, and analysed by the researcher. This 
approach comes from the hypothesis that the verbalisation of 
thoughts during the process of problem-solving does not 
affect the process [12]. Other researchers do not agree with 
this hypothesis and think that the "retrospective protocols" 
are less intrusive in the process since it is put into play once 
the activity is finished [17]. But, in the context of collective 
activity, the actors naturally find themselves in the obligation 
of speaking and verbalising their thoughts in order to 
collaborate. In this way, the "concurrent protocols" make 
sense, in our opinion, because it is closer to the real work 
conditions and the context. Taking into account the context 
where the activity takes place reinforces the ecological 
validity of the observations and does not exclude the social 
process, the team work and the communication which make 
up the daily work. 
B. Choose an approach and define its analytical steps 
The methodological approach for the analysis and 
treatment of data are all the more varied and can result in 
qualitative or quantitative results. To reach a certain degree 
of precision in data processing, these methods are generally 
based on a segmentation system that, according [14], can be 
slanted according to two approaches. 
• "Process-oriented segmentation": this approach cuts the 
process into several sequences relative to the actors’ 
intentions and identifies the time spent for each of these 
sequences, as well as the correlation between them. 
According to [18], the COMET method for example [11], 
allows one to describe the principal identification phases and 
argumentation of a problem. As for the coding table 
developed for the specific analysis of the comparison of the 
points of view in concurrent engineering, it enables one to 
draw up a tree diagram of propositions and verbal 
interactions between the collaborating actors [19]. The 
analysis by the word-processing software ALCESTE [20] 
enables, moreover, to structure the information put into play 
and shared by the actors to solve a problem. Even though all 
these methods are complementary, this "Process-oriented 
segmentation" approach is sometimes criticized because it 
does not look closely enough at the contents, that is, the 
problem treated by the actors during the activity, the 
documents and annotations that are produced [21]. 
• "Content-oriented segmentation": this approach enables 
one to complete the first as it looks specifically at the visual 
contents (representations, annotations, references, artifacts, 
etc.) and examines the cognitive interactions between the 
designers and the artifacts [15]. One of the best-known 
methods is that of Gero [22], which is based on a principle of 
encoding, called FBS, depending on the functionality of the 
object ("Function"), the behaviour of the actors ("Behavior"), 
and the structure of the collaboration ("Structure"). In this 
way, the author formulates the design as a series of 
transformations of the model’s functions. Brassac & Gregori 
[23] propose a clinical approach that looks at the real activity 
and its different interactions, by studying the discursive 
productions, the gestures, the graphical representations and 
the conversational sequence. In our opinion, this approach 
enables one not only to hierarchize the acts of language, by 
breaking them down into sequences and sub-sequences, but 
also to illustrate the conversational dynamic between the 
collaborators [23]. In the same way, being based on 
ethnographical studies, Boujut & Laureillard introduce 
themselves directly into real industrial context and propose 
methods of "research-action", analysing this framework and 
introducing new tools to aid the collaboration [24]. 
Faced with this variety of methods, our approach is 
clearly placed in the "concurrent protocols" that look at the 
process, both at the evolution of the process and in the time 
("process-oriented segmentation"), and at the different 
interactions between the actors, as well as the design project 
that is treated ("context-oriented segmentation"). 
The difficulty lies in the context of our research. In fact, 
our analyses concern the collective activities (in co-presence 
and/or remotely) that take place: (1) either in a professional 
context that does not allow, for reasons of confidentiality, to 
gather the audio data and/or videos to treat and analyse them 
afterwards, (2) or in a pedagogical context of project 
realisation over an entire semester involving students, 
teachers, and experts (substantial, complex and difficult-to-
analyse data). In our opinion, it is a question of studying the 
ensemble of these interactions (oral and graphical) with the 
objective of describing the process of negotiation and 
making collective decisions. This description takes places, in 
our method, in a qualitative manner and is also supported by 
the visualisation of the quantitative data looking into the 
many criteria that play a role in the specification of the 
collective activity.  
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-436-7
COLLA 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

III. 
RESEARCH CONTEXT 
AND APPLICATION FRAMEWORK 
A. Research context 
This research project fits into the framework of the ARC 
(Actions de Recherche concertée) program. This program is 
financed by the Walloon-Bruxelles Community and involves 
the multidisciplinary consortium COMMON (Natural 
Multimodal Mediatised Collaboration), which groups about 
fifteen researchers from five departments of the University of 
Liège: engineering sciences (LUCID, Lab for User 
Cognition and Innovative Design, that coordinated the 
scientific program), linguistics and semiotics (Science of 
Language and Rhetoric), work psychology, and cognitive 
sciences (LECIT, Laboratory of Cognitive Ergonomics and 
Intervention in Work), architecture (Architecture and 
Society) and medicine (Systematic Human Anatomy) [25]. 
Being spread over four years (2011-15) the objective of this 
research project focussed on the analysis of multimodal 
characteristics of collaboration and verbal and non-verbal 
exchanges in complex activities. To answer this question, the 
consortium put in place a method of analysis of collaborative 
practices that are presented in this article based on multiple 
observations and real practices, articulating quantitative with 
qualitative ones. 
B. Application Framework 
We have applied this method to analyse different 
configurations involving co-presence and remote meetings 
that bring together varied actors in "training by projects" 
contexts and in professional contexts (cf. Figure 1).  
 
 
Figure 1.  Examined configurations: freehand collaboration vs 
instrumented work / remote collboration vs co-attendance meeting. 
Focussing on complex collective activities and, more 
specifically, on collaborative design activities, we have 
examined fields of architecture as well as engineering, 
design and ergonomics. The variety of analyses on the 
quantity of gathered data were privileged because it is 
difficult to observe complex collective activities in detail, 
even taking place in a limited lapse of time. Our gathered 
data vary between four hours in professional contexts to 
several months in the "training by projects" framework. We 
have also privileged situations grouping a limited number of 
participants (between 2 and 5 participants) to get a finer 
understanding of the activity. Focussing on the integration of 
new technology being used in these collective activities, 
certain analysis (mostly the remote ones) involved the use of 
an innovative system called Collaborative Digital Studio. 
This system associates 3 elements: video-conferencing 
(enabling geographically distant collaborators to see each 
other and to discuss remotely in real time), a digital table 
using an electronic pen (by which collaborators can interact 
graphically via an electronic pen), and a graphic interaction 
software called SketSha [26]. Developed in the LUCID 
Laboratory of the University of Liège, this allows remote 
collaborators to share documents (sketches, plans, pictures, 
technical drawings and texts) and to interact graphically in 
real time [27]. 
IV. 
ANALYSING DATA PROCESS 
Fitting into the "concurrent protocols" method, we have 
tried to grasp the particularities of collective activity put to 
work in real social contexts to try to help them. To do this, 
we defined a group of criteria put forward in our state of art 
and that focus as well on the project as the design object 
itself. The criteria we examined here concern: the actions put 
into play by each actor, their typology and their evolution 
over time, the work spaces involved and the passage from 
one to another, the documents used and the kinds of 
annotations produced, the evolution of the shared design 
object in terms of the degree of abstraction and the degree of 
grasping. These criteria are important to define before 
beginning because they contribute to fixing the observation 
protocol and gathering data as well as the treatment and its 
analysis that takes into account: (1) time, (2) the role of each 
actor and his work space, and (3) the implications of these 
interactions in the evolution of the object to be designed. 
A. Observation 
To carry out the data gathering during an activity, two 
methods can be put to work. The first concerns the video 
recording that was applied in the "training-by-projects". 
These videos were captured according to two focal lengths: a 
wide angle (centered process) to film all the scene of the 
interaction between the actors and a narrow angle (content-
centered) on the work surface to film all the artifacts and 
annotations put into play during collaborative work. 
The second, which demands more preparation before the 
observation, concerns rapid note-taking. To do this, 
observers that were trained in this method in advance 
(between 3 and 4 researchers per situation) receive different 
observation methods to which are attached pre-constructed 
tables according to the theme of the data: 
• Theme 1. Observe the collaboration: list established 
according to time landmarks, interactions of designers and 
their work spaces (I-space, We-space, Space-between [28]), 
documents used and representations realised during the 
process; counting possible emotions explicitly expressed. 
• Theme 2. Observe the design: following the design 
process and the artifacts that are created or shared by the 
designers (parts of the project concerned by each action, 
documents used and/or created) and listing analogies and 
references put to work. 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-436-7
COLLA 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

• Theme 3. Observe freely: qualitative tracking, always in 
relation to time, of the evolution of the object conceived and 
negotiated in the group, tracking key moments and particular 
uses of tools used during the design process. 
This list of chronological actions and their modalities can 
be completed in real time by the observers, thanks to this 
rapid note-taking form. 
B. Treatment 
During this phase, the temporal point of reference takes 
on its importance. All gathered data are first synchronized 
then coded according to the criteria cited above from the 
note-taking. A common description of the collaborative 
process is then constructed in the form of actions based on a 
consensus between the different observers. By putting each 
action into words, the observers cut the activity into 
moments of interactions that they then code in relation to the 
categories defining the collaborative process and that of 
design. This division is made via a coding frame (cf. Figure 
2). 
 
Figure 2.  Process-oriented vs content-oriented segmentations. 
This frame divides the activity vertically, according to 
the temporal point of reference in order to describe the 
process ("process-oriented segmentation"), and horizontally 
following the predefined categories of analysis in order to 
describe the content and the specificity of each action 
("content-oriented segmentation") defined according to the 
following categories: type of action, concerned space of 
work, documents used, representations created, degree of 
grasping and degree of the object’s abstraction, manifested 
emotions, etc. The process-oriented segmentation and the 
data of the content-oriented segmentation are written in a 
differed time frame, after the observation phase, by mixing 
the points of view of observers and observed collaborators, 
in one common and unique coding Excel file. 
 
C. COMMON Tools 
After their synchronization and coding, the data is then 
treated in COMMON Tools (CT). CT is a web platform 
initiated in the framework of the ARC COMMON project 
and developed by LUCID of the University of Liège. It was 
made available to the researchers enabling the transformation 
of the data from the coding frame (in the .csv or .xls files) 
into consolidated data then quantified and translated 
according to different choices of visual formalisms (pie, 
stacked columns, time line, crossing, clouds, etc. This tool 
offers researchers a tool for visualizing data in order to 
analyze the collective design activity in the form of a panel 
of interactive graphics (generating multiple graphs per 
analysis-type). It enables one to visualize the crossing of data 
treated in relation to time, occurrences and the specificities 
of each actor involved in the collective design process (cf 
Figure 3). 
By comparison to other usual visualisation tools (like 
Excel for example), CT offers a crossed data representation, 
which allows to observe concomitance of two variables (cf. 
Figure 4) and a of timeline representation, with dynamic 
functions to zoom in a particular duration of time along the 
observed process (cf. Figure 5). 
 
 
Figure 3.  Example of visualizations proposed by the COMMON Tools : 
types of used representations in five steps of the observed process : oral / 
written / symbolic / 2D / 3D / others / none. 
 
Figure 4.  Example of visualizations proposed by the COMMON Tools : 
collective object characterization  
(crossing level of abstraction / level of grasping) 
Let's give two result examples that has been brought 
thanks to this analysing process using the COMMON Tools. 
It has been possible for us to show the importance of 
space management in the collaborative process between the 
designers. In fact, it has been shown that the group cohesion 
is favored by the enhanced spaces offered by the 
Collaborative Digital Studio, creating intermediary spatiality 
between the enhanced presence and virtual co-presence. 
According to our analysis, these augmented spaces 
participate in helping and giving tools for learning to 
collaborate for students on one hand. They favor, on the 
other hand, sharing depending on the empowerment and the 
creation of private conversations (aparté) [29]. 
Moreover, the contribution of these augmented spaces 
has been demonstrated in the production of the group. In 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-436-7
COLLA 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

fact, the Digital Collaborative Studio enables remote sharing 
of different artifacts in real time thus favoring collective 
production and, in certain observed cases, to realize drawings 
by two hands in an instantaneous and synchronized manner. 
These augmented spaces interfere also on the production 
operations the and interpretation of a drawing thus creating 
new manners of construction of the shared artifact in pairs. 
D. Analysis  
The analysis that is proposed here focusses on the 
process as well as the contents, by describing the evolution, 
in time, of the interactions of the actors and their 
implications in the common design object. It integrates the 
relevant descriptive dimensions already released in a 
qualitative manner during the transcript (communicational 
strategies, kinds of sequences, forms of collaboration, 
corporal communication, relational evolution, etc.). This 
qualitative point of view is then enriched by the 
interpretation of quantitative visualizations, offered by the 
COMMON Tools. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Example of visualization proposed by the COMMON Tools. 
Time line of the design object : context / whole / part / detail / none. 
V. 
CONCLUSION, LIMITS AND PERSPECTIVES 
The method presented here and summarized in Figure 6, 
enables us to cross-reference the two aspects of a complex 
collective activity: the process and the content treated by a 
group. It focusses on the specificity of each actor, his work 
space, his documents as well as the interactions with other 
collaborators. 
The direct observation method, without the possibility to 
record video data, moreover enables one to rationalize the 
rapid note-taking process. This procedure is not as 
complicated as the treatment of the verbalization but it does 
not produce only the qualitative observations. With the 
COMMON Tools, the researcher also has quick and easy 
access to the graphs during his analysis, with the support of a 
diversity of visual formalisms among, which he can 
interactively choose those which prove to be the most 
pertinent to be useful for his research question. 
Contrary to other systems (cf. Section II.B), the 
flexibility of our method offers the possibility to renew, to 
call into question and/or add categories during the transcript 
and coding. This flexibility enables, on one hand, to analyze 
a substantial corpus of diverse configurations of collective 
activities involving several actors, and, on the other hand, to 
leave the possibility to the researcher to update his frame and 
thus avoid the preconceptions earlier defined before the 
activity without possibility to reconsider. 
 
!
 
Figure 6.  Process for analysing collaboration activities. 
The main limit of the "concurrent protocols" is that the 
observed actors know that they are being observed, and that 
interferes with their way to work and interact together [14]. 
That is why it is important that the observers must be 
perfectly trained, capable and motivated. Thus, it is 
primordial to prepare them well and, more specifically, in the 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-436-7
COLLA 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

context where rapid note-taking is essential. In such a 
context, we recommend a first phase where the observers 
take note of what happens during the first half hour of 
observation, according to very specific missions (cf. Section 
IV.A). Afterwards, the process is temporally suspended: all 
the observers meet in an isolated room, far from the observed 
site, to discuss for a few minutes their difficulties in 
observing. This phase allows them to stabilize and 
coordinate their strategies in order to start again, afterwards, 
their note-taking in a more coherent way and better adapted 
to the observed context. 
A second difficulty was raised at the level of data 
processing (cf. Section IV.B). This difficulty concerns the 
choice of different criteria corresponding to each action 
treated. It is sometimes difficult to categorize each action in 
an exclusive and definitive manner. Nevertheless, the 
proposed frame makes it possible to cut the actions into sub-
actions (vertically, in relation to time). It also offers the 
possibility to cross two categories (horizontally coded) and, 
thus, to clearly specify the links between one criterion and 
another. This flexibility and crossing are necessary to 
prevent beforehand interpretation by the analyst, who risks to 
make shortcuts in the conclusions or to slant the coding 
according to his own preconceptions. 
A final difficulty is to be emphasized concerning the 
multiplication of proposed graphs by the COMMON Tools 
for 
visualizing 
the 
data 
(cf. 
Section 
IV.C). 
This 
multiplication enriches the analyses but makes the job of 
interpretation more difficult to organize. In fact, it is 
important to keep this flexible aspect, at the level of 
choosing the formalism, as well as at the level of the variety 
of criteria to be crossed. It is nevertheless contradictory to 
think that simple statistics done automatically by a tool could 
make sense by themselves. The method put forward in this 
article, leaning on the COMMON Tools, above all, enables 
one to build a first quantitative structure of observations to 
get one’s bearings in the qualitative analysis of complex 
collective activity. It does not pretend to lead directly to 
interpretations and activity shortcuts by these quantitative 
data. It orchestrates and facilitates the work of interpretation 
and thus, enables the researcher/analyst to quantitatively 
confirm or reject hypotheses made during observations 
qualitatively ahead of the treated corpus. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is financed thanks to the grant Research 
Concerted Actions (ARC COMMON 2011-2015), the 
Scientific Research Direction of Education, French and 
Belgian Community, granted by the Wallonie-Europe 
Academy. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Karen, J. Ostergaard, and J. D. Summers, "Development of 
a systematic classification and taxonomy of collaborative 
design activities", in Journal of Engineering Design, 20:1, pp. 
57-81, 2009. 
[2] F. Darses, P. Falzon, and P. Béguin, "Collective design 
processes", in Proceeding of COOP'96, Second International 
Conference on the Design of Cooperative Systems. Juan-les-
Pins, Sophia-Antipolis, INRIA, 1996. 
[3] J. M. Carroll, D. C. Neale, P.L. Isenhour, M. B. Rosson, and 
D.S. McCrickard, “Notification and awareness: synchronizing 
task-oriented collaborative activity,” in International Journal 
Of Human-Computer Studies, 58, pp. 605-632, 2003.  
[4] J. S. Gero and U. Kannengiesser, “The situated function- 
behaviour-structure framework,” in Design Studies, 25 (4), 
pp. 373-391, 2004.  
[5] P. A. Gloor, “Swarm Creativity: Competitive Advantage 
through 
Collaborative 
Innovation 
Networks,” 
Oxford 
University Press, Oxford, New York, 2006.  
[6] Y. E. Kalay, “Architecture's New Media. Principles, Theories, 
and Methods of Computer-Aided Design,” in The MIT Press: 
Communication, MIT Press, Cambridge, pp. 83-198, 2004. 
[7] W. W. Gaver, “The affordances of media spaces for 
collaboration,” in Proceedings of CSCW'92, ACM, New 
York, 1992. 
[8] P. Dillenbourg, et al., “The socio-cognitive functions of 
community mirrors,” in Proceedings of the 4th International 
Conference on New Educational Environments, Lugano, 
2002.  
[9] P. Leclercq, “Going collaborative,” in Proceedings of 5th 
International 
conference 
CDVE 
Computer 
Aided 
Architectural Design: Experience Insight and Challenges, 
Calvià, Mallorca, 2008.  
[10] J. S. Gero and H. H. Tang, “The differences between 
retrospective and concurrent protocols in revealing the 
process-oriented aspecs of the design process,” in Design 
Studies, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 283-95, 2001.  
[11] F. Darses, P. Falzon, and C. Mondutéguy, “Paradigmes et 
modèles pour l’analyse cognitive des activités finalisées,” in 
Ergonomie, Presses Universitaires de France, Paris, pp. 191-
212, 2004.  
[12] K. A. Ericsson and H. A. Simon, “Protocol analysis: Verbal 
reports as data,” in MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1993. 
[13] H. Kuusela and P. Pallab, “A comparison of concurrent and 
retrospective verbal protocol analysis,” in American Journal 
of Psychology, vol. 113, no. 3, pp. 387-404, 2000.  
[14] L. Nguyen and G. Shanks, “A framework for understanding 
creativity in requirements engineering,” in Information and 
Software Technology 51, pp. 655–662, 2009. 
[15] M. Suwa, T. Purcell, and J. Gero, “Macroscopic analysis of 
design processes based on a scheme for coding designers' 
cognitive actions,” in Design Studies, vol. 19 pp. 455-83, 
1998.  
[16] C. H. Lewis, “Using the "Thinking Aloud" Method In 
Cognitive Interface Design,” in Technical report, IBM. RC-
9265, 1982. 
[17] P. Lloyd, B. Lawson, and P. Scott, “Can concurrent 
verbalisation reveal design cognition?,” in Design Studies, 
vol. 16, pp. 237-59, 1995.  
[18] G. Gronier, “Méthodes d’analyse des communications 
fonctionnelles en situation de travail collectif,” in Recherches 
Qualitatives, 9, 153-171, 2010. 
[19] F. Détienne, G. Martin, and E. Lavigne, “Viewpoints in co-
design: a field study in concurrent engineering,” in Design 
Studies, 26, pp. 215-241, 2005.  
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-436-7
COLLA 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

[20] M. Reinert, “Alceste, une méthode statistique et sémiotique 
d’analyse de discours; application aux Rêveries du promeneur 
solitaire,” in La Revue française de psychiatrie et de 
psychologie médicale, 49(5), pp. 32-46, 2001.  
[21] K. Dorst and J. Dijkhuis, “Comparing paradigms for 
describing design activity,” in Design Studies 16, pp. 261-
274, 1995.  
[22] J. S. Gero and T. M. Neill, “An approach to the analysis of 
design protocols,” in Design Studies, vol. 19, pp. 21-61, 1998.  
[23] C. Brassac and N. Gregori, “Co-construction de sens en 
situation de conception d’un outil didactique,” in Studia 
Romanic Posnaniensia, no 25/26, pp. 55-66, 2000. 
[24] J. F. Boujut and P. Laureillard, “A co-operation framework 
for product–process integration in engineering design,” in 
Design Studies 23 (6), pp. 497–513, 2002.  
[25] www.lucid.ulg.ac.be/www/research/common/ [retrieved: July, 
2015]. 
[26] www.sketsha.be [retrieved: July, 2015]. 
[27] S. Safin, V. Delfosse, and P. Leclercq, “Mixed-reality 
prototypes to support early creative design,” in The 
Engineering of Mixed Reality Systems, Springer, London, pp. 
419-445, 2010.  
[28] S. Ben Rajeb and P. Leclercq, “Using Spatial Augmented 
Reality in Synchronous Collaborative Design,” in Lecture 
Notes in Computer Sciences, Springer, vol. 8091, pp. 6-15, 
2013.   
[29] S. Ben Rajeb and P. Leclercq, “ Spatial augmented reality in 
collaborative design training: articulation between I-space, 
We-space and Space-between”, in Lecture Notes in Computer 
Sciences, Springer, LNCS 8526, vol 2, pp. 343-353, 2015.  
 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-436-7
COLLA 2015 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

