Stay Committed 
On the Role of Organizational Commitment for Virtual Collaboration in SMEs
Juni Mohos 
Chair of Entrepreneurship and Family Business 
University of Siegen  
Siegen, Germany 
e-mail: juni.mohos@uni-siegen.de 
Anna Zeuge 
Chair of Information Systems  
University of Siegen  
Siegen, Germany 
email: anna.zeuge@uni-siegen.de
Caroline Ressing 
Chair of Information Systems 
University of Siegen  
Siegen, Germany 
e-mail: caroline.ressing@uni-siegen.de 
 
Bjoern Niehaves 
Chair of Digital Public  
University of Bremen 
Bremen, Germany 
e-mail: niehaves@uni-bremen.de 
 
Petra Moog 
Chair of Entrepreneurship and Family Business 
University of Siegen 
Siegen, Germany 
e-mail: p.moog@uni-siegen.de 
 
 
Abstract— The COVID-19 pandemic intensified virtual 
collaboration, which is equally crucial and challenging for 
Small and Medium-sized Enterprises (SMEs). Our paper 
investigates the role organizational commitment plays for 
virtual collaboration and identifies how organizational 
commitment can be sustained in virtual collaboration in the 
unique context of SMEs. Participants in the research included 
15 members of virtual teams within SMEs, employed in 
knowledge work. We found that organizational commitment is 
of great importance in virtual collaboration in SMEs. Our 
findings suggest that organizational commitment is only 
established in physical collaboration, but it can be maintained 
in virtual collaboration. Our initial findings serve as a starting 
point for further research on organizational commitment in 
virtual collaboration. Implications for practitioners as well as 
the research community are discussed.  
Keywords 
– 
virtual 
colloboration; 
organisational 
commitment; SMEs; qualitative research. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The crisis-driven digital transformation of work i.e., the 
enforced digital transformation induced by the COVID-19 
pandemic [1][2], has led to the fact that location-independent 
collaboration became a standard practice [3][4]. Although 
working from home is no longer enforced, many 
organizations are discussing whether and to what extent 
virtual collaboration should be continued in the future [5]. 
While many advantages of virtual collaboration for 
employees (e.g., improved work-life-balance), teams (e.g., 
spontaneous collaboration possibilities) and organizations 
(e.g., greater productivity and shorter development times) 
occurred [e.g., [6][7]], the pandemic highlighted also many 
challenges of virtual collaboration starting with poor internet 
connectivity and ending with decreasing organizational 
commitment of employees [8][9].  
The crisis-driven digital transformation offers unique 
opportunities, especially for Small and Medium-sized 
Enterprises 
(SMEs). 
For 
example, 
through 
virtual 
collaboration, SMEs can draw on qualified specialists 
regardless of where they live, which addresses the problem 
of the shortage of skilled workers [10][11]. Since SMEs are 
basically facing a shortage of resources, they can reduce 
transfer time and costs as well as travel expenses through 
virtual collaboration [12][13].  
Research on virtual collaboration indicates that it requires 
formalized 
structures 
and 
coordination 
to 
moderate 
unavoidable turbulences and unpredictability occurring in 
virtual collaboration [14][15]. Pierce and Hansen [16] argue 
that adherence to structures and scheduled videoconferences 
are also important to increase trust within the team and 
strengthen 
virtual 
collaboration. 
Furthermore, 
communication and the exchange of personal information are 
essential and have to be fostered in virtual collaboration 
[14][15]. 
SMEs tend to be informal structured and rather lack 
development of internal communication instruments [17]. 
Rather than formal structures, personal collaboration is 
characteristic of SMEs – resulting in greater involvement and 
visibility. For this reason, employees of SMEs have a higher 
organizational commitment than employees of larger 
companies [18], not least because informal and personal 
communication is a regular part of their daily work. 
However, SMEs also depend on the organizational 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
COLLA 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

commitment of their employees, as this ensures that 
employees are not poached because of resources that SMEs 
cannot offer [18]. 
This brings up the interesting conundrum of how 
meaningful organizational commitment is in virtual 
collaboration and how organizational commitment is 
affected by the tension between physical and virtual 
collaboration in SMEs. Therefore, our research aims to 
answer the following Research Question (RQ): Which role 
does 
organizational 
commitment 
play 
for 
virtual 
collaboration in SMEs and how can it be sustained?  
Our paper is structured as follows: Firstly, the theoretical 
background on virtual collaboration and organizational 
commitment in SMEs is briefly examined. Secondly, the 
methodological approach is described, and the findings of 
our research are presented. Finally, we conclude with 
discussing potential implications to theory and practice and 
identify the limitations of our work as well as further 
research outlook.  
II. 
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND 
A. Virtual Collaboration  
Collaboration, according to Briggs et al. [19], describes 
one level of teamwork. Collaboration refers to the interaction 
of individuals within a team to create value that individual 
members could not achieve through individual effort [19, 
20]. Thus, the sum of the performance of all individuals and 
of the team as a whole are essential for the success of the 
team [20]. Collaboration can be understood as a collective 
effort to achieve a team goal [21][22]. Collaboration consists 
of a number of dimensions, such as trust [23], 
communication [24] and coordination [25].  
With physical collaboration being a process where team 
members collaborate face-to-face, virtual collaboration is a 
collaboration process in which team members primally work 
together virtually [26]. According to Peters & Manz [27] 
virtual collaboration transcends time and space, connects 
people from various organizations, functions and disciplines, 
and connects all team members’ abilities. 
 
B. Organizational Commitment in SMEs 
According to Mowday et al. [28], organizational 
commitment can be defined as “1) a strong belief in and 
acceptance of the organization’s goals and values; (2) a 
willingness to exert considerable effort on behalf of the 
organization; and (3) a strong desire to maintain membership 
in the organization”. Organizational commitment refers to 
the relative emotional intensity of employees’ identification 
with their organization [29] and the decision of an employee 
to continue working with their organization [30]. The 
concept is closely associated with employee turnover, 
absenteeism 
and 
performance 
[28][31]. 
Levels 
of 
commitment can also affect employees’ effort, attitudes and 
behaviors, levels of job satisfaction, and eventually firm 
performance [e.g., [32]-[35]. Compared to job satisfaction, 
commitment is considered to be more ingrained, robust, and 
long-term than job satisfaction [36].  
Particularly 
to 
SMEs 
organizational 
commitment 
challenges are pertinent, since their performance depends on 
their ability to use the discretion of a relatively limited 
number of employees [18][37]. This can be of special 
importance considering the limited resources they can offer 
their employees compared to larger organizations [18]. 
III. 
METHODOLOGICAL APPROACH 
To achieve a comprehensive and in-depth insight into the 
influences of organizational commitment on virtual 
collaboration, we applied an inductive, qualitative approach 
[38]. Therefore, unstructured interviews with open-ended 
questions with 15 interviewees took place over a period of 4 
months. A list of the interviewees is provided in Table 1. 
The interviewees were between 26 and 56 years old at 
the time of data collection, with an average age of 35 years. 8 
of the interviewees stated that they were female and 7 
defined themselves as male. All interviewees worked 
predominantly remotely and were employed in the field of 
knowledge 
work. 
The 
organizations 
to 
which 
the 
interviewees belonged were located in Germany and 
employed less than 250 employees and can therefore be 
defined as SMEs [39].  
 
TABLE I.  
INTERVIEW PARTNERS 
ID 
Industry 
Job title 
Age 
Gender 
O1-I1 
IT 
Founder 
26 
male 
O1-I2 
IT 
Software Developer 
45 
male 
O1-I3 
IT 
Software Developer 
30 
male 
O2-I1 
Consulting 
CEO 
48 
female 
O2-I2 
Consulting 
Consultant Supply Chain 
31 
female 
O2-I3 
Consulting 
Consulting Supply Chain 
27 
female 
O3-I1 
Software 
Talent Acquisition Manager 
29 
male 
O4-I1 
IT 
Customer Success Manager 
28 
female 
O4-I2 
IT 
Customer Success Manager 
35 
male 
O4-I3 
IT 
Head of Customer Service 
32 
female 
O5-I1 
IT 
Software Developer 
28 
male 
O5-I2 
IT 
COO 
34 
female 
O6-I1 
Construction 
CEO 
56 
male 
O6-I2 
Construction  
Architect 
32 
female 
O6-I3 
Construction 
Architect 
31 
female 
 
We used an open-ended, semi-structured guideline [40], 
which conformed to Sarker's guidelines for qualitative 
research 
[40][41]. 
We 
conducted 
three 
preliminary 
interviews before the first version of the questionnaire was 
refined. Only minor changes had to be made to the interview 
guide. We then recorded the interviews and afterwards 
transcribed them verbatim and anonymized. We analyzed the 
transcribed files using MAXQDA software. First, we 
independently applied open coding [42][43]. Subsequently, 
axial codes were formed by comparing and grouping the 
open codes [42]. In a final step, the axial codes were grouped 
by subject (i.e., selective coding). The analysis ended with 
saturation.  
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
COLLA 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

IV. 
FINDINGS 
We were able to identify three main grounding findings. 
Firstly, organizational commitment is still and even more of 
high relevance for employees when working remotely. 
Remote work has different requirements than continuous 
work in the office, which makes committing to the 
organization even more necessary. Secondly, organizational 
commitment only appears to be established in direct contact, 
i.e., when the employees are onsite in the office. However, 
we also found factors that enhance organizational 
commitment, which are sustained in remote work using 
formal and informal practices and routines. Our third finding 
is thus that organizational commitment can be maintained to 
a certain degree in virtual collaboration. 
 
A. Organizational Commitment is Still and Even More 
Relevant in Remote Work 
Organizational commitment is generated by a variety of 
(ultimately very individual) factors. These range, for 
example, from adequate communication and trust to 
participation and the feeling of being heard. The factors 
mentioned are often associated with attitudes and self-
perception of managers, which are first of all location- 
independent. Thus, it is clear that organizational commitment 
has relevance in the remote work setting and that it is of 
great importance to foster communication among the 
employees.   
 
The personal fit is definitely crucial, meaning that you 
somehow have the feeling that you can identify with the 
values and goals of the organization [...], you feel like you 
belong. You have certain points that you would like to 
address: Push forward, change. And you are given the 
opportunity to do so [...] That certainly contributes to the 
feeling of belonging. I don't really see a difference [remotely 
in contrast to onsite] (O2-I4).  
 
In my opinion, the fact that people stay in the company 
depends mainly on [...] whether they are appreciated. [...] 
How can you appreciate remotely? Through communication 
and by telling employees that they have done a great job. 
(O1-I2)  
 
Beyond location-independent factors, there are situations 
where organizational commitment plays an even more 
important role remotely than onsite. When employees are not 
physically working in the company, for instance, there are 
modified control mechanisms that are subconsciously and 
implicitly in place when they are working in the office - for 
example, from supervisors to employees or even between 
employees. In addition, the range of potential jobs is greater 
in remote work. In this context, interviewees name 
organizational commitment as an important instrument for 
employee bonding in virtual collaboration.  
 
You never know [...] what the person is really doing at 
home. Theoretically, they could also make a call with a 
potential employer, with a headhunter [...], and simply ask 
for a new offer [...]. That's why I think it's important to make 
sure that such a scenario simply doesn't happen, but that you 
feel like you belong to a club so strongly that you have no 
interest in being poached (O1-I1).  
 
Here in my current work […] for example it is working 
well, because we have this constant contact and there are 
real people I am working with. But when it is remote work 
with people I only have contact with via email, I don’t have 
the feeling that I let anyone down and […] I would not feel 
guilty if I just cut off the cooperation (O6-I2)  
 
B. Organizational Commitment only Establishes in Onsite 
Work 
Based on the interviews, we derive that the concept of 
organizational commitment is closely linked to team 
cohesion and team trust and cannot be considered separately. 
Planned onsite days for team events or to meet colleagues are 
considered important. Interviewees often critically reflect 
that it is difficult to maintain their commitment to the 
organization virtually and that the development of 
organizational commitment requires direct interaction with 
colleagues within the organization.  
In order to really strengthen this bond 100%, I think […] 
that you have to see each other physically […]. This is only 
possible up to a certain degree [remotely]. (O1-I1)  
 
The interviews show that the factors to which 
interviewees ascribe the development of organizational 
commitment can only be established through personal 
contact. Communication between colleagues is highlighted 
as central and small talk and private conversations in 
particular are considered elementary for the sense of 
belonging.  
 
The lack of face-to-face communication, this is missing. 
It's a different feeling and people don’t have that bonding, 
that brotherhood. [...] in between or during lunch break, we 
talk about other things and so on. When we work from home 
or remotely, that doesn’t happen. (...) The identification with 
the company does not exist. (O1-I3)  
 
Face-to-face communication is perceived as more natural 
than virtual meetings could represent. In this context, one 
issue lies in the currently prevailing work culture, which 
does not intend room for small talk in remote work. This 
makes it difficult to establish private dialogue in virtual 
collaboration that does not seem forced.  
 
When I come into the office daily and see someone, I 
have a quick chat and ask them: “Hey, how’s life and how's 
the travel planning going?” or “How’s the house-building 
going?” or whatever. It’s easy because you see each other 
and just make small talk. But small talk remotely is very 
difficult, because it is always seen as a waste, always seen as 
not efficient. I don’t call my colleague and say, “Hi, I have 
to ask, how’s your house-building going?” That would 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
COLLA 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

actually seem a bit bizarre if I were to do that. How do I get 
this small talk into it [remote work] without it seeming so 
forced? (O2-I1)  
 
Communication is not as fluent as when you are in the 
office in person and have your colleagues sitting right next to 
you [...]. In my opinion, you will never achieve the same 
level of interaction between employees. In other words, you 
will never achieve the same quality (O3-I1).  
 
Various routines lay the foundations for the onsite 
organizational commitment. These are informally found 
between employees and include private small talk and shared 
humor, coffee, or office grapevine. 
 
Small talk is missing remotely. Making a little joke, going 
to the coffee machine together. I’m a non-smoker, but going 
out for a smoke together, for example. [...] It’s just not 
possible remotely. (O1-I2)  
 
On the organizational side, there are formal routines 
enhancing organizational commitment. In this context, 
interviewees mention workshops in person, team events, 
joint 
participation 
in 
sporting 
events 
and 
annual 
‘workations’.  
 
What we also like to do is participating in sport events as 
a team, as an entire company. And then it’s also part of it 
that we always design our t-shirts ourselves in advance and 
we don’t hand it over to an agency, but we really do it 
together as a team, think of cool things and then apply them. 
That’s part of it. [...] And of course that also helps people to 
identify with the company in some way. (O2-I4). 
 
C. Organizational Commitment can be Maintained in 
Virtual Collaboration  
The interviews show that organizational commitment is 
formed in presence. However, if employees are equipped 
with a certain amount of organizational commitment (from 
onsite work), this can be maintained in virtual collaboration. 
This requires more explicit routines and structures than in 
work onsite.  
 
I think you need more structures remotely. Well, you need 
structures, you need processes, and if those are there and if 
they are clear and everyone can stick to them, then I believe 
that on the one hand you have a certain freedom, a certain 
flexibility that you can offer your employees, and on the 
other hand they also know exactly what they have to do and 
how in order to fulfill or meet the requirements. And I do 
believe that the employees are then particularly loyal 
because they can combine freedom and work wonderfully 
with each other (O4-I3).  
 
In addition, the availability of remote work can lead to 
the strengthening of organizational commitment due to the 
improved work-life balance and the associated feeling of 
“being understood by the organization”. Interviewees see the 
advantages of virtual collaboration and value the freedom it 
offers.  
 
This freedom of working hybrid helps them to feel more 
fulfilled in their personal lifes because they are able to 
maintain that balance and that directly contributes to the 
engagement to the company, because they feel like “my 
company understands me and provides me the flexibility”. 
(O5-I2)  
 
In order to maintain organizational commitment in virtual 
collaboration, organizations strive for various routines that 
are intended to maintain organizational commitment. 
Interviewees mention, among others, participation in the 
form of holistic task responsibility or tools that enable 
transparency about company internals remotely. 
 
I am part of the company and not just an employee. Yes, 
we do remote work but what I say in the company has an 
impact. I am not just the employee doing my tasks. I own a 
part, maybe not financially, but [...] in the direction of 
technology, for example. There are my tasks and if I say that 
something doesn’t work that is also listened to. (O1-I3)  
There is a ‘virtual deal bell’ where everyone gets an 
email from HubSpot. It’s automated with confetti when you 
open it, “the customer has now signed the project here, 
we’ve just made €150,000 in sales”. (O1-O1)  
 
Further routines identified from the interviews are related 
to communication and trust among employees. For instance, 
team meetings are planned on a regular basis or a periodical 
1:1 appointment with the supervisor is set up in order to have 
the opportunity to directly address any problems that would 
disappear unseen in virtual collaboration. Other routines 
included the scheduling of specific times for private small 
talk or inviting employees at weekly cross-company 
meetings to share moments of their private life. 
 
At the jour fixe [...] we always have five minutes to 
arrive. Where we just chat privately. [...] It doesn't feel 
forced anymore if you keep it really simple like that. (O2-I1) 
 
So every Monday morning, the CEO or me, we talk a 
little bit about the company, what was happening, funding 
and then two or three people […] can talk about their 
hobbies, their wedding, whatever they want to, anything from 
their personal life they are comfortable sharing with. I had 
also given the chance to people who are shy, that they can 
write a blog post. […] You get to see so much about the 
people. […] It gives you points to talk to that person, you 
build a connection. (O5-I2) 
 
However, 
it 
becomes 
apparent 
that 
maintaining 
organizational commitment virtually requires much more 
effort and consciousness than onsite. Whereas in the office, 
managers or employees can notice directly in personal 
contact when problems, dissatisfaction or demotivation arise, 
this aspect requires more time and effort in virtual 
collaboration.  
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
COLLA 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

That’s challenging, really understanding where the needs 
are, where the problems are. Are they suffering, is their 
mental health fine? Are they stressed? You can ask these 
questions, but you have to spend time to build a relationship 
for that person to open up and really talk about it. 
Otherwise, I can go and ask but people assume nothing is 
wrong. You can see and sense something is wrong. That 
building, that takes a lot of effort and time in remote work 
versus when you are in the office. You can go for lunch or 
have a smoke and they can discuss these things far more 
easily. Making it work remotely I would say this effort is a 
lot more. So, people have to put conscious effort in this. This 
itself is a challenge. (O5-I2) 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
We conducted a qualitative study to shed light on the 
context 
of 
organizational 
commitment 
and 
virtual 
collaboration in SMEs. To answer our proposed RQ we can 
say that organizational commitment appears to be highly 
relevant in the virtual collaboration context. We also found 
that the development of organizational commitment has to 
take 
place 
onsite, 
as 
it 
depends 
on 
face-to-face 
communication, trust between employees and team cohesion. 
However, organizational commitment can though be 
maintained in virtual collaboration. Our findings suggest that 
more effort and mindfulness are necessary to sustain 
organizational commitment in virtual collaboration, but is 
still possible, when planned and executed in a structured 
manner.  
While organizational commitment is a widely studied 
field, it has not yet received much attention in the context of 
virtual collaboration in SMEs. By interviewing 15 
employees, we were able to provide initial insights and 
derive implications for both, theory, and practice.  
Our findings are important to theory, as we contribute to 
the organizational commitment literature by looking at 
organizational commitment in virtual teams. The fact that 
organizational commitment is created onsite and can be 
maintained in virtual collaboration provide important 
indications of the origins of organizational commitment. We 
were thus able to transfer established findings to a modern 
working context. This will enable future research to discover 
new entry points and advance research in this so far little-
studied field. Beside the organizational commitment 
literature, our initial findings may be starting points in the 
field of virtual collaboration. The understanding that 
organizational commitment can be maintained virtually 
provides insight into how virtual collaboration in SMEs 
should be designed to strengthen the attachment of 
employees to the organization.  
In addition, we were able to derive implications for 
practice. We underlined the importance of organizational 
commitment for virtual collaboration in SMEs. Practitioners 
should therefore initially focus on creating awareness in the 
organization. For SMEs virtual collaboration provides a 
competitive advantage to recruit skilled workers. Here they 
should take action to support the maintenance of 
organizational commitment in virtual collaboration e.g., 
allocating financial or personnel resources. 
Our research supports SMEs with measures to 
successfully build and maintain organizational commitment 
(virtually). SMEs should focus on giving employees 
sufficient opportunity and reason to build organizational 
commitment onsite and establish structured opportunities to 
maintain organizational commitment in virtual collaboration.  
As with every research, our research comes with 
limitations, which invite future research to build on. Firstly, 
we conducted qualitative research where the typical 
limitations of qualitative studies are included (e.g., weak 
internal validation). Future research could use quantitative 
research, where concrete measures of organizational 
commitment could be applied and quantitatively tested. 
Further, the size of our sample gives cause to limitation. In 
addition to a larger sample size, it would also be interesting 
to conduct further research using a case study design 
between different SMEs and thus taking different employee 
groups into account. A comparison with larger companies 
could also yield interesting findings. Ultimately, our research 
can only serve as an initial starting point for linking 
organizational commitment and virtual collaboration. Further 
research should explore in more depth which factors of 
virtual 
collaboration 
(e.g., 
communication, 
trust, 
coordination) influence organizational commitment in SMEs 
and how. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper investigated the role of organizational 
commitment for virtual collaboration in SMEs. This was 
achieved by conducting 15 unstructured interviews yielding 
new insights into how organizational commitment can be 
sustained in virtual collaboration. The findings suggest that 
organizational commitment is built only in physical 
collaboration but can be sustained in virtual collaboration. 
This paper provides an important starting point for future 
research on virtual organizational commitment and provides 
important insights for practitioners. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1]  P. Di Gangi et al. MISQE Crisis Driven Digital 
Transformation. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from:  
https://app.box.com/s/qxq80bpaa1zl6exhnrudzx9vey8ulyy8 
2022.12.20 
[2]  C. R. Haslam, S. Madsen, and J. A. Nielsen, "Crisis-driven 
Digital Transformation: Examining the Online University 
Triggered by COVID-19" in Digitalization, D. R. A. Schallmo 
and J. Tidd, Eds. Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp. 
291–303, 2021. 
[3]  K. M. Kniffin et al., "COVID-19 and the Workplace: 
Implications, Issues, and Insights for Future Research and 
Action",  Am Psychol, vol. 76, pp. 63–77, 2021. 
[4]  L. Waizenegger, B. McKenna, W. Cai, and T. Bendz, "An 
Affordance Perspective of Team Collaboration and Enforced 
Working from Home During COVID-19", Eur J Inf Syst, vol. 
29, pp. 429–442, 2020. 
[5]  H. Merritt, "Home Office Adoption after COVID-19", SSRN 
Electron J, pp. 1–12, 2021. 
[6]  C. Ipsen, M. van Veldhoven, K. Kirchner, and J. P. Hansen, 
"Six Key Advantages and Disadvantages of Working from 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
COLLA 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

Home in Europe during COVID-19", Int J Environ Res Public 
Health, vol. 18, pp. 1–17,  2021. 
[7]  E. Obdržálková and M. Moravcová, "Pros and Cons of Home 
Office during the Covid-19 Pandemic" in: Proceedings of the 
SHS Web of Conferences, Z. Caha, M. Ruschak, and V. 
Velková, Eds. pp. 1-9, 2022. 
[8]  N. Chanana, "Employee Engagement Practices During 
COVID-19 Lockdown", J Public Aff, vol. 21, pp. 1-8, 2020. 
[9]  D. K. Prasad, D. M. R. Mangipudi, D. R. Vaidya, and  B. 
Muralidhar, 
"Organizational 
Climate, 
Opportunities, 
Challenges and Psychological wellbeing of the remote 
working employees during COVID-19 pandemic: a general 
linear model approach with reference to information 
technology industry in hyderabad", Int J Adv Res Eng 
Technol IJARET; vol. 11, pp. 372-389, 2020.  
[10] N.  Ale Ebrahim, S. Ahmed, and Z. Taha, "SMEs; Virtual 
Research and Development (R&D) Teams and New Product 
Development: A Literature Review", Int J Phys Sci, vol. 5, 
pp. 916-930, 2010. 
[11]  L. L. Martins, L. L. Gilson, and M. T. Maynard, "Virtual 
teams: What Do We Know and Where Do We Go From 
Here?" J Manag, vol. 30, pp. 805-835, 2004. 
[12]  E. F. McDonough, K. B. Kahnb, and G. Barczaka, "An 
Investigation of the Use of Global, Virtual, and Colocated 
New Product Development Teams", J Prod Innov Manag Int 
Publ Prod Dev Manag Assoc, vol. 18, pp. 110–120, 2001. 
[13]  D. J. Rice, B. D. Davidson, J. F. Dannenhoffer, and G. K. 
Gay, "Improving the Effectiveness of Virtual Teams by 
Adapting Team Processes", Comput Support Coop Work 
CSCW, vol. 16, pp. 567–594, 2007. 
[14]  S. J. Zaccaro, A. L. Rittman, and M. A. Marks, "Team 
Leadership", Leadersh Q, vol. 12, pp. 451–483, 2001. 
[15]  I. Zigurs, "Leadership in Virtual Teams: Oxymoron or 
Opportunity?", Organ Dyn, vol. 31, pp. 339–351, 2003. 
[16]  E. A. Pierce and S. W. Hansen, "Leadership, Trust, and 
Effectivemess in Virtual Teams", in: Proceedings of the 29th 
International Conference on Information Systems, 2008. 
[17]  F. Perrini, A. Russo, and A. Tencati, "CSR Strategies of 
SMEs and Large Firms. Evidence from Italy", J Bus Ethics, 
vol. 74, pp. 285–300, 2007. 
[18]  D. 
De 
Clercq 
and 
I. 
B. 
Belausteguigoitia 
Rius, 
"Organizational 
Commitment 
in 
Mexican 
Small 
and 
Medium‐Sized 
Firms: 
The 
Role 
of 
Work 
Status 
Organizational Climate, and Entrepreneurial Orientation", J 
Small Bus Manag, vol. 45, pp. 467–490, 2007. 
[19]  R. O. Briggs, G. Kolfschoten, G.-J. De Vreede, C. Albrecht, 
and D. R. Dean, "A Seven-layer Model of Collaboration: 
Separation of Concerns for Designers of Collaboration 
Systems", in: Proceedings of the 33rd International 
Conference on Information Systems, pp. 1-14, 2009. 
[20]  J. F. Nunamaker, N. C. Romano, and R. O. Briggs, "A 
Framework for Collaboration and Knowledge Management", 
in: Proceedings of the 34th Hawaii International Conference 
on System Sciences, pp. 1-12, 2001. 
[21]  A. Weigel, A. Zeuge, T. L. Baumgart, and B. Niehaves, 
"Bittersweet Virtual Reality Collaboration: Necessary and 
Sufficient Conditions", in: Proceedings of the 42nd 
International Conference on Information Systems, pp. 1-17, 
2021. 
[22]  A. Weigel et al., "Competence Transfer in Virtual Realities: 
Can Virtual Reality Bring Products and Services Together?",  
WORK J Prev Assess Rehabil, vol. 72, pp. 1727–1743, 2022. 
[23]  H. G. Brown, M. S. Poole, and T. L. Rodgers, "Interpersonal 
Traits, Complementarity, and Trust in Virtual Collaboration",  
J Manag Inf Syst, vol. 20, pp. 15–138, 2004. 
[24]  A. Deshpande, H. Sharp, L. Barroca, and P. Gregory, 
"Remote Working and Collaboration in Agile Teams", in: 
International Conference on Information Systems, pp. 11-14, 
2016. 
[25] H. C. Bruns, "Working Alone Together: Coordination in 
Collaboration Across Domains of Expertise", Acad Manage J, 
vol. 56, pp. 62–83, 2013. 
[26] L.  Hossain and R. T. Wigand, "ICT Enabled Virtual 
Collaboration through Trust", J Comput-Mediat Commun; 
vol. 10, JCMC1014, 2004. 
[27]  L. M. Peters, and C .C. Manz, "Identifying Antecedents of 
Virtual Team Collaboration", Team Perform Manag Int J, vol. 
13, pp. 117–129, 2007.  
[28]  R. T. Mowday, R. M. Steers, and L. W. Porter, "The 
Measurement of Organizational Commitment", J Vocat 
Behav, vol. 14, pp. 224–247, 1979. 
[29] C.  Bulut and O. Culha, "The Effects of Organizational 
Training on Organizational Commitment", Int J Train Dev, 
vol. 14, pp. 309–322, 2010. 
[30]  J. P. Meyer and N. J. Allen, "A Three-Component 
Conceptualization of Organizational Commitment", Hum 
Resour Manag Rev, vol. 1, pp. 61–89, 1991. 
[31]  R. E. Walton, "From Control to Commitment in the 
Workplace: In Factory after Factory, There is a Revolution 
Under Way in the Management of Work", US Department of 
Labor, 
Bureau 
of 
Labor-Management 
Relations 
and 
Cooperative, 1985. 
[32] S. Brown, J. McHardy, R. McNabb, and K. Taylor, 
"Workplace 
Performance, 
Worker 
Commitment, 
and 
Loyalty",  J Econ Manag Strategy, vol. 20, pp. 925–955, 
2011. 
[33]  S. Gaertner, "Structural Determinants of Job Satisfaction and 
Organizational Commitment in Turnover Models", Hum 
Resour Manag Rev, vol. 9, pp. 479–493, 1999. 
[34]  D. A. Harrison, D. A. Newman, and P. L. Roth, "How 
Important are Job Attitudes? Meta-analytic Comparisons of 
Integrative Behavioral Outcomes and Time Sequences", Acad 
Manage J, vol. 49, pp. 305–325, 2006. 
[35]  J. R. Lincoln and A. L. Kalleberg, "Commitment, Quits, and 
Work Organization in Japanese and US Plants", ILR Rev, vol. 
50, pp. 39–59, 1996. 
[36]  R. P. Tett and J. P. Meyer, "Job Satisfaction, Organizational 
Commitment, Turnover Intention, and Turnover: Path 
Analyses Based on Meta‐Analytic Findings", Pers Psychol, 
vol. 46, pp. 259–293, 1993. 
[37]  J. Kickul, "Promises Made, Promises Broken: An Exploration 
of Employee Attraction and Retention Practices in Small 
Business", J Small Bus Manag, vol. 39, pp. 320–335, 2001. 
[38]  U. Flick, E. von Kardorff, and I. Steinke, "What is Qualitative 
Research? An Introduction to the Field", in: A Companion to 
Qualitative Research, U. Flick, E. von Kardorff, and I. 
Steinke, Eds. London: Sage publications, pp. 3–11, 2004. 
[39]  European Commission. SME Definition. Internal Market, 
Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs. [Online]. Available 
from:  https://single-market-economy.ec.europa.eu/smes/sme-
definition_en 2022.12.20 
[40]  L. Pumplun, C. Tauchert, and M. Heidt, "A New 
Organizational Chassis for Artificial Intelligence-Exploring 
Organizational Readiness Factors", in: Proceedings of the 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
COLLA 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

28th European Conference on Information Systems, pp. 1-15, 
2019. 
[41]  S. Sarker, X. Xiao, and T. Beaulieu, "Qualitative Studies in 
Information Systems: A Critical Review and Some Guiding 
Principles", Manag Inf Syst Q, vol. 37, pp. iii–xviii, 2013. 
[42]  J. Corbin and A. Strauss, "Basics of Qualitative Research: 
Techniques and Procedures for Developing Grounded 
Theory", Sage publications, 2014. 
[43]  B. G. Glaser and A. L. Strauss, "The Discovery of Grounded 
Theory: Strategies for Qualitative Research", Routledge, 
2017. 
 
 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
COLLA 2023 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

