 
Towards a Collaborative System for Delivery of Remote Mine Services 
Craig James1, Weidong Huang2, Kazys Stepanas1, Eleonora Widzyk-Capehart1, Leila Alem1, Chris Gunn1,       
Matt Adcock1, Kerstin Haustein1 
1CSIRO, Australia; 2University of Tasmania, Australia 
{craig.a.james, kazys.stepanas, eleonora.widzyk-capehart, leila.alem, chris.gunn, matt.adcock, kerstin.haustein}@csiro.au; 
tony.huang@utas.edu.au 
 
 
 
 
Abstract—While work has been done to support remote 
collaboration, and many remote access products exist, these 
efforts often need stable connections and high bandwidths, or 
have a mix of functionality, poor security, or complicated set 
up processes. There is no singular piece of remote 
collaboration technology suitable for the remote delivery of 
high-quality planning and scheduling services to clients at a 
mining site. To fill this gap, a remote mining engineer (RME) 
concept has been proposed and a functional requirements 
analysis has been conducted. Based on the identified 
requirements, a further study was performed to characterise 
existing technologies and identify the scope for future work. 
We report on the method and findings of this study in this 
paper. The main contribution is the identification of a suitable 
collaboration tool for developing RME. 
Keywords-Remote collaboration; Remote expert services; 
Tele-operation; Screen sharing; Remote mining engineer 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Mining companies (service requestors) employ engineers 
for critical roles in on-site planning and operations, but 
access to skilled staff willing to work in remote locations is 
difficult [7]. Mining engineering firms (service providers) 
can retain top-level personnel in metropolitan areas but they 
require frequent trips to remote mining locations to maintain 
effective communication with service requestors. This results 
in high travel burdens and service costs, and lengthy, 
inefficient exchanges over email or phone calls to ensure the 
services requested are delivered.  
Individually, remote communication technologies such as 
tele-conferencing, Skype, desktop sharing, telephony, and 
email services do not address the following key challenges in 
the open cut mining environment:  
 
Quality of service – effective remote communication 
relies on clear reception of as many cues as possible 
(text, tone, gesture, facial expressions).  
 
Low bandwidth – broadband communications in 
remote areas is still very poor.  
 
High security – need to protect integrity of data and 
control systems where downtime from malicious 
intrusions can introduce high production penalties  
 
Usability – available remote technologies are 
difficult to set up, configure and maintain. 
There is a body of work in the areas of tele-
assistance/tele-collaboration 
to 
improve 
collaboration 
between personnel in remote and metropolitan areas (e.g., 
[2][3][8][9][11]). However, much of this work involves the 
use of bandwidth or display formats unsuitable for mines 
[10]. 
A Remote Mining Engineer (RME) concept has been 
investigated in the literature [1]. Based on this work, we 
intended to develop a RME system with the following 
objectives: 
 
Facilitate collaboration between staff inside the 
service provider and between staff of the service 
provider and the service requester.  
 
Reduce the need for staff of the service provider to 
be present remotely without compromising the 
quality of services provided. 
This system would combine existing (text, voice, 
visualisation 
and 
data 
sharing) 
and 
innovative 
communication 
technologies 
(tele-presence, 
tele-
collaboration, tele-assistance, and immersive environments) 
to improve collaboration and communication over long 
distances between on-site and off-site personnel. More 
specifically the system will rely on the following 
technologies: 
 
Tele-presence to enable a sense of physical presence 
with remote personnel. 
 
Collaborative workspaces to share manipulation of 
notes and sketches. 
 
Communication technologies (video and audio). 
 
Visualisation technology to share 2D and 3D data. 
In the remainder of this paper, we briefly introduce the 
work done for the requirements analysis first in Section 2. 
We then present the method in Section 3 and results of our 
research in Section 4. Finally the paper concludes with a 
summary and future work in Section 5. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
Remote service delivery is becoming increasingly 
popular in modern business activities. This is mainly due to 
the requirements of reducing operational cost and increasing 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

production efficiency. In this section, we briefly review the 
background information of our study. 
A. Model of Remote Service Delivery 
Previous studies revealed that service providers often 
follow a common business model to deliver remote mine 
services to their clients (e.g., [1]), illustrated in Figure 1. 
A business case is started by a request from the client. 
This activates a range of work routines by the service 
provider, such as project initiation, site visit, internal task 
assignment, task progress report and check-up, task 
collaboration and discussion, document exchange and task 
re-assignment. Depending on the request context, the service 
can be executed by one or more personnel either collocated 
or in different locations. Communication methods include: 
face-to-face, video, audio, text messaging, emails, and data 
sharing via physical media. 
 
Figure 1.  Business model. 
B. Requirement Analysis 
Observation-based user experience design methods were 
combined with scenario-based software design techniques 
for requirement analysis. Meetings were conducted with the 
client manager to understand high-level expectations and 
identify typical work procedures and scenarios [6]. On-site 
observations were made of how work is actually carried out 
by engineers, followed by focus group and individual 
interviews to elicit and analyse user needs.  
C. Key Requirements 
The results of our requirement analysis highlighted three 
key challenges in developing a remote collaboration system, 
namely: 
 
Bandwidth limitations. 
 
Security concerns. 
 
Usability issues. 
Seven user cases were identified as key requirements 
when implementing a solution for delivering effective 
services remotely. These user cases are: 
 
Communicate through text, audio and video. 
 
Send contact requests and also accept / reject. 
 
Manage the system and user configuration. 
 
Share full screens or application windows. 
 
Manage different parts of the collaboration tool over 
different screens. 
 
Share electronic whiteboards and annotate. 
 
Transfer data over the network. 
III. 
RESEARCH METHOD 
Based on the requirements obtained, it was decided to 
make most use of existing technologies for the RME design 
and development. A scoping study was conducted to identify 
the best suitable technologies to inform the design of the 
RME system. 
There are a large number of tele-collaboration products 
on the market that offer a range of services that had the 
potential to meet some of the requirements for delivering 
services to remote clients. 
A broad product survey of 56 candidates was conducted. 
These candidates were then further examined to provide a 
recommendation on an initial system satisfying some of the 
requirements, and highlighting scope for extensions or 
replacements needed to satisfy all of the requirements. 
The scoping study narrowed the list down to eight, which 
were then tested against more prominent limitations and user 
cases required.  This resulted in two candidates that satisfied 
some of the limitations and user cases required.   
Adobe’s Connect Pro [4] and Cisco’s WebEx [5] were 
the final two. Connect Pro was felt to be more suitable as it 
was more stable and handled 3D content better. A summary 
of this process follows in the next section. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
Using the research method described in the previous 
section, we adopted a three-step process for our study: broad 
review, narrow review and user-case testing. These steps are 
presented in detail as follows. 
A. Broad Review 
The first step was to survey collaboration tools, deciding 
on the best one usable for mining engineers to work 
remotely. A list of 56 possible products was complied.  
With the wide variety of products it was necessary to 
narrow the key collaboration features that would be needed. 
These features, in order of importance, were: 
 
Audio communication. 
 
Sharing of application snapshots. 
 
Annotation over application snapshots. 
 
Sharing of 3D applications (using OpenGL). 
 
Sharing control of applications. 
 
Video of participants. 
 
Ability to transfer files. 
 
Recording. 
 
Having a tool to schedule meetings. 
Many products were also eliminated in this phase 
because they did not have sufficient security facilities, or 
could not deal with network firewalls. 
B. Narrow Review 
This list of products was reduced to eight, based on the 
product documentation. The products in this shortlist, 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

included: JoinMe, YuuGuu, MeetingPlace, GoToMeeting, 
Mikogo, TeamViewer, Connect Pro, and WebEx. These 
products were then installed and tested. 
The first five were eliminated because they did not have 
appropriate audio and/or video facilities. The sixth was 
eliminated because it had problems with annotation over 
OpenGL. 
C. Use-case Testing 
The remaining two products, Connect Pro [4] and 
WebEx [5] were investigated in more detail with a full set of 
test cases based on the user requirements. It was found that 
these products were very close in features offered. The main 
difference was in the way they responded when annotation 
modes were selected: 
 
In Connect Pro, participants drew on a static 
snapshot of an application (see Figure 2). 
 
In WebEx, participants could annotate on a dynamic 
view of an application (2D or 3D). 
 
 
Figure 2.  Connect Pro used for sharing and annotation. 
The second approach seemed more powerful, allowing 
for indicators, such as animating lines or pointers, to 
continue operating in a scene. However, the live annotation 
feature in WebEx was sometimes unreliable with 3D 
applications, having annotations disappearing in many 
situations, lending a preference to Connect Pro’s approach. 
D. Bandwidth Testing 
Connect Pro was then tested against reduced bandwidth 
conditions. For this test, a bandwidth-throttling program was 
installed at one end of a high-bandwidth network to simulate 
low-bandwidth conditions.  
It was assumed that reliable audio communication was 
essential for any collaboration, so this was taken as a 
measure of usability. If the audio became unusable, the 
condition failed. Tests were repeated for different 
combinations of features, to find the minimum bandwidth 
that sustained features while still permitting bi-directional 
audio. The results are shown in Table 1. As can be seen from 
this table, for all features to be functional, the minimum 
bandwidth is 400 Kbits/s. 
Google Earth was used as the shared application, as it 
uses OpenGL for its 3D rendering. During the tests, audio 
was considered unusable if parts of the audio stream were 
missing or if latency was so large that conversations were not 
possible. It was observed that as the bandwidth was limited, 
the audio latency would increase. This may be due to packet 
retransmission 
within 
the 
TCP/IP 
communications 
mechanism. During two-hours of the bandwidth testing 
session the overall upload and download data transfer was 
greater than 1 Gigabyte each way. This may illustrate that 
the overall throughput allowance must be fairly high 
regardless of bandwidth. 
TABLE I.  
BANDWIDTH TEST RESULTS 
Bandwidth 
(Kbits/s) 
Audio 
Video 
Sharing 
Annotation Experience1 
100 
Y 
N 
N 
N 
Poor 
150 
Y 
N 
N 
N 
Good 
200 
Y 
N 
Y (low)2 
Y 
Good 
250 
Y 
N 
N 
Y 
Good 
300 
Y 
Y 
N 
N 
Good 
350 
Y 
N 
Y (low)2 
Y 
Ok 
400 
Y 
Y 
Y (low)2 
Y 
Ok 
450 
Y 
N 
Y (high)3 
Y 
Good 
525 
Y 
Y 
Y (high)3 
Y 
Good 
1 – Subjective experience rating; poor, Ok, good. 
2 – Low refresh frequency OpenGL application (Qt sample). 
3 – High refresh frequency OpenGL application (Google Earth). 
 
It should be noted that Connect Pro did not automatically 
detect bandwidth and adjust any features. These had to be 
turned on and off by users. 
E. Results Summary 
Connect Pro was chosen for the more explicit and stable 
approach of sharing and annotating over an application. This 
approach also left the presenter with the ability to interact 
with other windows on the desktop when annotation was 
enabled. 
 
V. 
SUMMARY AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we have presented our approach towards 
the design and implementation of the RME system. This 
approach makes use of the existing the technologies for 
knowledge development and for system design. First, 56 
candidates were compiled and compared based on their 
functionalities and application requirements. This resulted in 
8 products being identified for further testing in a simulated 
mining office environment. In the end, Connect Pro was the 
winner that was considered to be the best suitable system to 
meet our specific user needs and to inform the design and 
implementation of the RME system. We are currently 
working on possible new functions in addition to what was 
available in Connect Pro.   
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

For future work, we plan to start the full system 
development life cycle based on the identified user 
requirements and design recommendations. It is hoped that 
end users will be fully involved in the process and their 
needs will be fully addressed whenever possible. We also 
plan to experiment and incorporate some additional 
technologies into the RME system. These include augmented 
reality, remote gestures, remote fault diagnosis and virtual 
presence.  
REFERENCES 
[1] W. Huang, C. James, L. Alem, E. Widzyk-Capehart, and K. 
Haustein, A scenario- and observation-based requirement 
analysis for delivery of remote mining services. OzCHI 2012, 
pp. 249-252. 
[2] C. James, T. Bednarz, K. Haustein, L. Alem, C. Caris, and A. 
Castleden. Tele-operation of a mobile mining robot using a 
panoramic display: an exploration of operators sense of 
presence. CASE, 2011, pp. 279-284. 
[3] P. Gurevich, J. Lanir, B. Cohen, and R. Stone. TeleAdvisor: a 
versatile augmented reality tool for remote assistance. 
CHI’11, pp. 619-622. 
[4] Adobe Connect, http://www.adobe.com/ 
products/adobeconnect.html. Accessed April 2014. 
[5] Cisco WebEx, http://www.webex.com/. Accessed April 2014. 
[6] P. Vlaar, P. van Fenema, and V. Tiwari, Cocreating 
understanding and value in distributed work: how members of 
onsite and offshore vendor teams give, make, demand, and 
break sense. MIS Q. 2008, 32, pp. 227-255. 
[7] Ernst and Young, Business risks facing mining and metals 
2011-2012, Ernst & Young Business Risk Report, 2010. 
[8] K. Hirata, Y. Harada, T. Takada, S. Aoyagi, Y. Shirai, N. 
Yamashita, K. Kaji, J. Yamato, and K. Nakazawa, t-Room: 
Next Generation Video Communication System. Proceedings 
of 
World 
Telecommunications 
Congress 
at 
IEEE Globecom (WTC’08), 2008. 
[9] W. Huang and L. Alem, Supporting hand gestures in mobile 
remote collaboration: a usability evaluation. BCS HCI 2011, 
pp. 211-216. 
[10] L. Steiner and R. Burgess-Limerick, 2007. Equipment related 
issues and controls in the USA underground coal mining 
industry. Ergonomics Australia, 2007, 21, pp. 4-12. 
[11] F. Tecchia, L. Alem, and W. Huang, 3D helping hands: a 
gesture based MR system for remote collaboration. VRCAI 
2012, pp. 323-328. 
 
 
 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

