Intelligent Product States 
Exploring the Synergy of Intelligent Products and State Characteristics in Collaborative Manufacturing 
Benjamin Knoke, Thorsten Wuest, Karl Hribernik, Klaus-Dieter Thoben 
BIBA - Bremer Institut für Produktion und Logistik GmbH 
Bremen, Germany 
{kno, wue, hri, tho}@biba.uni-bremen.de 
 
Abstract—Along its lifecycle, a product passes through several 
states, which can be described by their characteristics. This 
concept of product state characteristics can be utilized in 
manufacturing process chains to improve the process quality 
by e.g., increasing transparency. The basic approach of 
describing a product state by its state-characteristics can be 
transferred into a collaborative manufacturing environment, 
however, in that case, a performing communication structure 
is indispensable. The goal of this paper is to explore if this 
concept is applicable for Intelligent Products and to what 
extent they can contribute to facilitate this endeavor. 
Accordingly, the idea of Intelligent Product States is 
introduced, including Intelligent Products sensing their own 
current state, interacting with the process and / or other 
products in order to achieve better results (e.g., quality) for 
themselves or following generations of products. Concluding, a 
classification model is presented to introduce a first structure 
of characteristics describing the different levels of Intelligent 
Product States (IPS). 
Keywords-Intelligent Products; Intelligent Product State; 
Product State Characteristics 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Effectivity and efficiency are terms that are repetitively 
taught in management seminars throughout the world. They 
imply the aim of maximizing the effect and minimize the use 
of resources in the actions of organizations. When 
transferred to the business objectives of a manufacturer, 
these principles manifest in the task of achieving the 
maximal product quality possible, with minimal use of 
resources. Both factors can be influenced by the actions of 
the manufacturer, which are taken within its manufacturing 
processes. The quality of these manufacturing processes is a 
key factor to determine the product quality and necessary 
effort of resources [1]. 
In a collaborative manufacturing network, qualitative 
manufacturing processes are not only important to evade 
costly manufacturing errors, but also to maintain a good 
reputation within the network. To achieve this, the 
improvement of process quality necessitates different types 
of knowledge to determine the current state, the targeted 
state, and the methodology to get there [2], [3]. From a 
deterministic point of view, these states can be described 
with certain characteristics that require knowledge about the 
current state of the product and the parameters of the process 
[4]. 
In order to gain and implement such viable knowledge 
within 
a 
collaborating 
manufacturing 
chain, 
certain 
capabilities are required. Upon sensing, communication, and 
interpretation, inter- and intra-organizational barriers may 
arise towards knowledge exchange [5]. 
This paper explores to what extent Intelligent Products 
can facilitate the crossing of the above mentioned barriers 
and support the measuring, storage, and communication of 
knowledge based on state-characteristics and process 
parameters 
within 
a 
collaborative 
manufacturing 
environment. Therefore, first, a brief introduction in product 
state and state-characteristics along with an application 
scenario in a collaborative environment is given. Followed 
by an introduction of Intelligent Products as the main pillars 
this paper is based on. Finally, these concepts are merged 
into a combined concept, named Intelligent Product State. 
Concluding, the impact of this new concept on collaborations 
and collaboration performance is explained. 
II. 
PRODUCT STATE IN COLLABORATIVE 
MANUFACTURING 
To provide an overview on the possibilities of state-
characteristics to support collaborative manufacturing 
process chains, this section provides a definition, depicts 
application scenarios, and introduces intelligent products as a 
possible approach to realize a knowledge transfer based on 
state-characteristics. 
A manufacturing process chain’s purpose is to transform 
raw materials to final products through different value 
adding processes in order to satisfy the customer 
requirements. Consequently, the overarching goal of every 
manufacturing process chain is to add value to a work piece, 
component or product [6], (hereinafter the term product will 
be used comprehensively for a physical item) with each 
process step. Adding value in manufacturing implies 
physical transformation of the physical product (e.g., 
transformation of form, hardness, chemical composition, 
etc.). The specific purpose of every process step is to 
execute a part of the physical transformation of the product. 
Thus, the state of the product is changed at least with every 
(value adding) process. Looking at a product by its state has 
the advantage of being able to describe or record the 
transformation. Therefore, looking at the product state along 
the whole manufacturing process chain accumulates a 
complete picture of realized measures and transforming 
processes. 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-287-5
COLLA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

A. Product State-Characteristics 
The concept of the product state based view describes a 
product at certain times during a manufacturing process 
chain or after, through a combination of relevant state 
characteristics. As definable and ascertainable measures, 
state characteristics can be described in a quantitative or 
qualitative way. The state of a product changes due to 
external influence from one point in time to another when at 
least one descriptive state characteristic changes [4]. In other 
words, every product has a deterministic state that can be 
described at every time by its characteristics. These state-
characteristics changes can appear during the whole product 
lifecycle, but are especially present during the beginning of 
life phase, the manufacturing stage. 
The various characteristics can include measures of 
physical, chemical, or biological nature (e.g., location, 
dimensions, chemical composition, and internal tension). 
However it is a challenge to identify a set of relevant 
state characteristics, which are sufficient to describe the 
product completely. Furthermore, the complexity is 
increasing when taking the influencing factors, most of all 
the manufacturing processes, triggering the state change into 
account. 
The state characteristic change can, among others, be 
characterized as intentional (planed), an example for an 
intentional 
state 
change 
is 
through 
machining, 
or 
unintentional (unplanned), e.g., state change through 
corrosion when a metal part is stored out in the open. A 
slightly different characterization of state change is if the 
observer is aware, e.g., diameter change after machining or 
unaware, e.g., inflicting residual stress through clamping, of 
the state change. This aspect is very closely related to the 
following knowledge reasons.  
Further difficulties occur on the attempt to derive an 
information model on the basis of the product state. The state 
characteristics and the influencing factors on state change 
can be known, e.g., influence of heat treatment of the harness 
of steel or unknown, e.g., effects of residual stress allocation 
on distortion (knowledge reasons).  
Another aspect, which is more of a technical nature, is 
the state characteristic change measureable, e.g., weight or 
unmeasureable, e.g., in an economical sensible way during 
the manufacturing process (technical and/or economic 
reasons). 
The above reasons may make it difficult to derive certain 
state characteristics; they might though be relevant by having 
a significant impact on the quality of a product and thus the 
success of a manufacturing process chain. This impact is 
described by an exemplary application scenario within the 
next section, against a collaborative background. 
B. Application Scenario for State-Characteristics in a 
Collaborative Manufacturing Environment 
In the past decades a trend in manufacturing led from 
single integrated companies over static supply-chains to 
dynamic collaborations [7]. It has therefore to be taken into 
consideration, that manufacturing process chains are not 
executed at a single location, but spread geographically as 
well as organizationally instead. 
An application scenario for the application of state-
characteristics has been described by [8], as in Figure 1. It 
describes the manufacturing of a steel disc through the 
different process groups of casting, forging, machining, and 
heat treatment. In this level of detail, the steel disc passes 
through five different states, which can be described by 
certain characteristics. Due to the final heat treatment, 
internal tensions may become visible by resulting in a 
change of the disc’s geometry. If these geometries exceed 
acceptable limits, the disc is rendered a defective good. As 
no practical models to incorporate these changes are 
available, the geometry is usually adjusted approximately 
before the heat treatment. 
 
Figure 1.  Transforming of a product during a multi-stage manufacturing programme [8] 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-287-5
COLLA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

One simple approach to manage this manufacturing 
process chain with state-characteristics is to establish a 
feedback loop about the geometrics of the steel disc after 
hardening to adjust the parameters of the machining process. 
This feedback adds transparency to the process chain and can 
thus increase its quality, assuming that the steel discs after 
forging have a sufficient homogeneous quality. 
In a collaborative manufacturing environment, each 
process group of this manufacturing program can be 
executed by a different company. Such a feedback loop 
would 
therefore 
have 
to 
be 
established 
between 
organizations. This adds further complexity to the 
manufacturing, as additional logistics and information 
exchange needs to be implemented. This approach 
necessitates a clear structure within the organization of the 
collaboration to identify, share/distribute and use product and 
process information [9]. 
The shift towards collaboration in manufacturing 
paradigms is accompanied by an increasing development of 
ICT applications, which enable new approaches of 
operations management. Intelligent products are one 
outcome of this development, which can be combined with 
production states, to create the concept of Intelligent Product 
State (IPS), as described in the following section. 
III. 
INTELLIGENT PRODUCTS TO SUPPORT THE USAGE OF 
STATE-CHARATERISTICS IN COLLABORATIVE 
MANUFACTURING ENVIRONMENT 
The management of a manufacturing process chain from 
a product state based view can be supported by the 
capabilities of Intelligent Products. To explore this approach, 
this section provides a definition of Intelligent Products, and 
describes the concept of the Intelligent Product State (IPS) 
along a classification model. 
A. Intelligent Products 
Intelligent Products, also known as Smart Products, are 
physical items, which may be transported, processed or used 
and which comprise the ability to act in an intelligent 
(“smart”) manner. McFarlane et al. (2003) defines the 
Intelligent Product as “[...] a physical and information based 
representation of an item [...] which possesses a unique 
identification, is capable of communicating effectively with 
its environment, can retain or store data about itself, deploys 
a language to display its features, production requirements, 
etc., and is capable of participating in or making decisions 
relevant to its own destiny” [10]. 
[11] characterizes intelligent products by describing 
related attributes: 
 
Situatedness: 
recognition 
of 
situational 
and 
community contexts. 
 
Personalization: in terms of tailoring the product 
according to buyer’s and consumer’s needs and 
affects  
 
Adaptiveness: the ability to change product 
behavior according to buyer’s and user’s responses 
and tasks  
 
Pro-activity: anticipation of user’s plans and 
intentions  
 
Business-awareness: consideration of business and 
legal constraints  
 
Network capability: the ability to communicate and 
bundle with other products 
These attributes describe the abilities of Intelligent 
Products, but are somehow qualitatively and leave a certain 
variance in their degree of fulfillment. Another dimension to 
determine the degree of intelligence of Intelligent Products 
can be added by addressing the characteristics of their tasks. 
They may exhibit varies from simple data processing to 
complex pro-active behavior. This is the focus of the 
definitions in [10] and [12]. Three dimensions of 
charactering Intelligent Products are suggested by [13]: 
Level of Intelligence, Location of Intelligence and 
Aggregation Level of Intelligence, as shown in Figure 2. 
 
Figure 2.  Classification model of Intelligent Products [13] 
The first dimension describes whether the Intelligent 
Product exhibits information handling, problem notification, 
or decision making capabilities. The second shows whether 
the intelligence is built into the object, or whether it is 
located in the network. Finally, the aggregation level 
describes whether the item itself is intelligent, or whether 
intelligence is aggregated at container level.  
Intelligent Products have been shown to be applicable to 
various scenarios and business models. For instance, [12] 
describe the application of the concept to supply network 
information management problems. Other examples are the 
application of the Intelligent Products to supply chain [14], 
manufacturing control [10], and production, distribution and 
warehouse management logistics [15]. A comprehensive 
overview of fields of application for Intelligent Products can 
be found in survey paper by [13]. 
Thus, an Intelligent Product is more than just the physical 
product – it also includes the enabling information 
infrastructure. Intelligent Products can make use of available 
advanced information infrastructures enhancing the quality 
of information and accessibility for humans who interact 
with them. Furthermore, Intelligent Products can make use, 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-287-5
COLLA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

e.g., of RFID, sensors, and embedded computing throughout 
their lifecycles in order to collect data for example about 
their 
usage, 
service, 
maintenance, 
upgrading, 
decommissioning and disposal. They thus can contribute 
significantly to closing the information loops throughout the 
product lifecycle and are fundamental to a holistic 
implementation of Closed-loop PLM in many products. 
B. Intelligent Product State (IPS) 
The gist of the Intelligent Product State (IPS) is the 
combination of Intelligent Products with the concept of the 
product state based view. This approach leads to Intelligent 
Products that support a product state based process 
management. Against this background, a product state can be 
intelligent, if its characteristics are monitored by an 
intelligent product. The extent of this support strongly 
depends on the product’s capabilities. Their contribution can 
span from passive communication to corrective actions. The 
different levels of intelligence in managing with state-
characteristic can be drawn according to the classification 
model of Intelligent Products, as shown in Figure 3. 
 
Figure 3.  Levels of Intelligence of the Intelligent Product State 
These levels of intelligence determine the ability of the 
intelligent products to process information about their state-
characteristics: 
 
Sensing capabilities are the basic requirement to 
gather any information about state-characteristics. 
These capabilities require the knowledge about the 
relevant characteristics, and the methodology to 
measure them. 
 
Communication capabilities build upon the sensing 
state-characteristics. The ability of Intelligent 
Products to actively communicate the sensed 
information to an internal or external interpreter. 
 
Interpretation is the task of understanding the 
information 
by 
semantic 
analysis 
and 
contextualization. 
 
The Implementation of measures to change its own 
state is based on the previous interpretation and 
identified correction potential. 
The latter determines a level of intelligence, at which 
products pro-actively participate in their own management. 
Based on one or multiple characteristics, they are capable of 
recognizing their own state, can identify an improved state, 
and possess the methodology to change accordingly.  
Some exemplary applications of these capabilities could 
be: 
 
To enable an adjustment of functionalities during 
usage-phase 
(e.g., 
car-seat 
with 
settings 
management)  
 
To enable a complex customization of the product 
on instance level (e.g., a car-seat with memory 
functions for different users) 
 
To enable more complex functionalities (e.g., a car-
seat providing settings in context of a driving 
situation) 
When transferred to collaborative manufacturing, the IPS 
can be viewed from a different perspective that is described 
in the following section. 
C. IPS in Collaborations 
By equipping products with the ability to participate in 
the control of these processes, collaborators could facilitate 
the structure of their networks by reducing their necessary 
management efforts. This especially impacts on the early 
phase of collaboration. Nevertheless, a new layer of 
complexity occurs through the distributed process structure, 
but is accompanied by synergistic factors as well.  
 
Figure 4.  Addressee of Relevant Information of the IPS 
If information concerning state-characteristics is obtained 
within a collaborative manufacturing environment, it might 
not be directly applicable, but instead address a process at 
another location. Thus, organizational barriers might be 
crossed from the sensing of a state-characteristic until the 
implementation of corrective measures. As visualized in 
Figure 4, the addressee of relevant information can be 
located: 
 
Within the local organization 
 
Aim at the processes of a collaborating partner 
 
Outside of the network 
While information, addressing the local organization, 
might be easier to process, the interaction with partners and 
outsiders becomes more difficult, as not only intra- but inter-
organizational barriers apply [5]. Although an Intelligent 
Product does not face barriers due to personal differences or 
a lack in encouragement, another layer of organizational 
barriers arises. Information has to be treated confidential 
according to the contractual basis and the level of trust in the 
collaboration [16]. When using IPS in collaborations, data 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-287-5
COLLA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

protection should though be considered. Especially, if IPS 
are active outside of the network, e.g., an Intelligent Product 
interacts with a user.  
One approach to manage communication between 
Intelligent Products and users is the Product Avatar since its 
initial introduction as a technical concept, it has evolved into 
the concept of a customisable “digital representation” of 
product-related information [17]. 
This product-user interaction is influenced by the 
location of intelligence. While an independent intelligent 
product could also be used offline, a connection to a network 
is necessary, if the product is depending on the network’s 
intelligence. In collaborative manufacturing process chains, a 
network connection is mandatory to not only just take 
correcting or improving actions, but also to allow IPS to 
learn upstream the manufacturing process chain. The 
location of intelligence can therefore be considered another 
dimension to describe the IPS. 
 
Figure 5.  Classification Model of IPS 
The Classification Model of IPS is comprised of the 
Level of Intelligence, the addressee of relevant information, 
and the location of intelligence. It has been summarized in 
Figure 5. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
The capabilities of Intelligent Products can contribute to 
increase the transparency and thus quality of a manufacturing 
process chain, based on the concept of product states. This 
combination has been described as IPS. In a collaborative 
manufacturing environment, these IPS can facilitate and 
improve a distributed management, but at the same time 
requires an open-minded culture throughout the process 
chain and faces concerns in sort of data protection. 
The research of this paper was somehow limited, as only 
the application of IPS on the manufacturing of products has 
been considered. But also “virtual” state-characteristics, such 
as successful quality control, or customer satisfaction can be 
defined. 
Accordingly, 
an 
intelligent 
product-service 
combination, which is aware of its own state and is able to 
adjust itself to act in order to achieve a better result, could be 
applied to realize an Intelligent Service State. 
This paper describes the concept of IPS, which is only 
the theoretical product of the combination of product states 
with Intelligent Products. This concept will be elaborated, 
and supported by a case study, which will be conducted for 
its application. 
Upon this, future research will explore the characteristics 
of intra- and inter- organizational barriers to exchange 
information and knowledge against this background, as they 
significantly differ, as soon as the exchange is supported by 
the application of Intelligent Products. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been funded by the European Commission 
through ICT Project BIVEE: Business Innovation and 
Virtual Enterprise Environment (grant agreement: 285746). 
The authors wish to acknowledge the Commission for their 
support. We also wish to acknowledge our gratitude and 
appreciation to all the BIVEE project partners for their 
contribution during the development of various ideas and 
concepts presented in this paper. 
REFERENCES 
[1] E. Brinksmeier, “Prozeß- und Werkstückqualität in der 
Feinbearbeitung,“ 
Fortschritt-Berichte 
VDI 
Reihe2: 
Fertigungstechnik Nr. 234. Düsseldorf: VDI Verlag. 1991. 
[2] B. Knoke, T. Wuest, and K.-D. Thoben, “Characteristics of 
knowledge and barriers towards innovation and improvement 
in collaborative manufacturing process chains,” accepted for 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-287-5
COLLA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

publication at the 25th International Conference on Advanced 
Information Systems Engineering, 2013. 
[3] K. Kyriakopoulos and K. de Ruyter, “Knowledge stocks and 
information flows in new product development,” Journal of 
Management Studies, vol. 41:8, 2004, pp. 1469–1498. 
[4] T. Wuest, D. Klein, and K.-D. Thoben, “State of steel 
products in industrial production processes,” Procedia 
Engineering, vol. 10, 2011, pp. 2220-2225. 
[5] B. Knoke, T. Wuest, and K.-D. Thoben, “Fragmented 
knowledge in collaborative manufacturing process chains,” 
accepted for publication at the 2013 International Conference 
on Collaboration Technologies and Systems (CTS 2013), San 
Diego, California, 2013. 
[6] S. Kalpakjian and S. R. Schmid, “Manufacturing engineering 
and technology,” New Jersey: Prentice Hall, 2009. 
[7] M. Seifert, “Collaboration formation in virtual organisations 
by applying prospective performance measurement,” Verlag 
Mainz. Aachen, 2009. 
[8] T. Wuest, C. Irgens, and K.-D. Thoben, “An approach to 
quality monitoring in manufacturing using supervised 
machine learning on product state based data,” Journal of 
Intelligent Manufacturing, March 2013, pp. 1-14. 
[9] Y. Merali and Z. Bennett, “Web 2.0 and network intelligence, 
context and semantics for Knowledge Management,” 
Technologies for Personal Productivity, vol. 11, 2011, pp.11-
26. 
[10] D. McFarlane, S. Sarma, J. L. Chirn, C. Y. Wong, and K. 
Ashton, “Auto ID systems and in-telligent manufacturing 
control,” Eng Appl of Artif Intell 16, 2003, pp. 365-376. 
[11] W. Maass and U. Varshney, “Preface to the focus theme 
section: Smart Products,“ Electronic Markets, vol. 18, 2008, 
pp. 211–215. 
[12] M. Kärkkäinen, J. Holmström, K. Främling, and K. Artto, 
“Intelligent products - a step towards a more effective project 
delivery chain,” Computers in Industry, vol. 50, 2003, pp. 
141-151. 
[13] G. G. Meyer, K. Främling, and J. Holmström, “Intelligent 
Products: a survey,” Computers in Industry, vol. 60, 2009, pp. 
137-148. 
[14] O. Ventä, “Intelligent Products and systems. Technology 
theme - final report,” VTT, Espoo: VTT Publications, 304, 
2007. 
[15] C. Wong, D. McFarlane, A. Zaharudin, and V. Agarwal, “The 
Intelligent Product driven Supply Chain,” in: IEEE Int. 
Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, vol. 4, 2002. 
[16] D. Malhotra and F. Lumineau, “Trust and collaboration in the 
aftermath of conflict: the effects of contract structure,” 
Academy of Management, vol. 54, 2011, pp. 981-998. 
[17] T. Wuest, K. Hribernik, and K.-D. Thoben, “Digital 
representation of Intelligent Products: Product Avatar 2.0,” 
In: Abramovici, M. et al. (Eds.) (2013). Smart Product 
Engineering. Proceedings of the 23rd CIRP Design 
Conference, March 11th - March 13th, 2013, Bochum, 
Germany, 2013. 
[18] K. Hribernik, L. Rabe, K.-D. Thoben, and J. Schumacher, 
“The product avatar as a product-instance-centric information 
management concept,” International Journal of Product 
Lifecycle Management, vol. 1, 2006, pp. 367-379. 
 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-287-5
COLLA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

