Challenges of Digital Era: Potential and Pitfalls of Social Media  
Ethics and Trust in Collaborative Cross-Domains 
 
Nerutė Kligienė, Aurimas Rapečka 
Institute of Mathematics and Informatics,  
Vilnius University (IMI VU) 
Vilnius, Lithuania 
e-mail: nerute.kligiene@mii.vu.lt; aurimas.rapecka@mii.vu.lt  
 
Abstract – The paper surveys the risks and benefits what a user 
faces in networked environment and how those challenges can 
be competed.  The question is how to measure a potential or 
benefits of such complex phenomenon as the collaborative 
cross-domains in social media. We propose an innovative 
solution – to consider this in context of digital tools and the 
entities 
involved 
into 
cooperation-collaboration: 
core 
researchers, engineers developing information systems and 
tools, marketing technologists, users-consumers of services and 
products. The ways of collecting data and measures for 
protection privacy issues of data collected online as they were 
applied during the last two decades are overviewed in this 
paper. There is no universal law protecting online user’s 
privacy in global world and hardly will it be ever. For a while 
only the awareness of the users, the Codes of Professional 
Ethics and a fairness of firms involved into collaboration could 
help them to avoid pitfalls hidden in social media. The 
summary table shows at a glance benefits and dangers met in 
social media by its explorers and users. An example included 
demonstrates how consumers’ data can be analyzed and used 
by companies for behavioral targeting via clustering model and 
Bayesian approach in recommender systems.  
 
Keywords – social media; networking; digital footprint; data 
privacy; safety online; professional ethics; recommender systems. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Today‟s Internet is an indispensable condition of normal 
life. Internet is a remarkable catalyst for creativity, 
collaboration and innovation providing opportunities that 
would have been impossible to imagine just two decades 
ago. Nowadays two contradictory Myths are popular, they 
stress: (i) unlimited opportunities to user in social media – a 
techno-enthusiastic vision; (ii) dangers and pitfalls for users 
of new technologies. Our aim is to investigate these Myths 
in context of individuals or other entities involved in order 
to identify WHEN and to WHOM benefits could become a 
real danger. We will consider how social media can entail 
both – potential and pitfalls. It is shown that legislation 
means were not helpful in several countries. The idea that 
the Codes of Professional Ethics can help users to avoid 
dangers hidden in social media is the main innovation of 
this paper and a possible solution.  
The World Wide Web rapidly grew since the end of the 
90s. An essential base for emerging social media came with 
Web 2.0. Social media are open, web-based and user-
friendly applications that provide new possibilities when it 
comes to the co-creation of content (blogs, wiki, Flickr, 
Twitter), social networking (Facebook), the sharing of taste 
and relevance (Amazon, Google Page Rank). Besides of a 
great positive impact, several authors pointed at the 
disruptive potential of social media, when collecting and 
sharing consumers‟ information [1][2]. 
The entities involved into a cooperation-collaboration 
are: researchers in core principles and methods, informatics 
engineers developing systems, networks and applications, 
marketing technologists, users providing data and the users-
consumers of services and products provided by firms 
involved into entire process of social media development.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Collaborative cross-domains and users in a process 
 
Fig.1 illustrates how these collaborative cross-domains, 
theoretical and applied, interact among each other and 
involve the users in a process. Users‟ data are the object of 
investigation, the main goal of a whole process is to focus 
on satisfaction of users‟ needs and to ensure profitable 
business. It is interesting to notice that the mathematical 
background and principles used in new technologies is 
almost the same as they were developed in previous 
centuries. Clustering and decision theory, classification 
rules for multidimensional data, Bayesian network models – 
to mention only a few of those  methods and models what 
are widely used nowadays in creating modern information 
ICT tools, 
applications
Mathematical background: 
concepts, methods
Marketing Technologies
Social media
Users-
consumers 
 
34
COLLA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-143-4

communication technologies (ICT) tools and applications 
for data mining and analysis.   
Traditionally, data were gathered using surveys, public 
records and questionnaires in a very labor intensive way. As 
digital interaction has become the norm, the labor intensive 
gathering has become redundant. On line users now present 
all data via their digital footprint and social graph.  
The definitions and explanations of concepts are given 
in Section 2. Section 3 is devoted to a short overview of 
extremely rapidly evolving ICT situation, the problems 
emerging there and the attempts to solve them. Section 4 
contains an example – one selected algorithm to 
demonstrate how data are used to construct a proposal to 
user. Section 5 considers the Codes of Professional Ethics as 
one of possible solutions of emerging problems. 
II. 
DEFINITIONS AND IDENTIFICATION OF CONCEPTS  
A. Digital Footprint 
A digital footprint is a trail left by an entities interactions 
in a digital environment; including their usage of TV, mobile 
phone, internet and World Wide Web, mobile web and other 
devices and sensors [3]. Digital footprints provide data on 
what an entity has performed in the digital environment and 
are valuable in other social media services [2][3]. In social 
media a digital footprint is the size of an individual‟s online 
presence as it relates to the number of individuals they 
interact with. 
A digital footprint is a collection of activities and 
behaviors recorded when an entity (such as a person) 
interacts in a digital environment. It may include the 
recording of activities such as system login and logouts, 
visits to a web-page, accessed or created files, or e-mails and 
chat messages. The digital footprint allows interested parties 
to access data for data mining or profiling purposes. 
Early usage of the term focused on information left by 
web activity alone, but came to represent data created and 
consumed by all devices and sensors [2]. Footprints are 
about where we have been, for how long, how often, and the 
inter-relationships – for the most part they are memories and 
moments. But digital footprints are not about user‟ identity, 
passport, bank account or social security number.  
B. Web Browsing and Digital Shadow 
The digital footprint applicable specifically to the World 
Wide Web is the internet footprint; also known as cyber 
shadow or digital shadow, information is left behind as a 
result of a user's web-browsing activities, including through 
the use of cookies. The term usually applies to an individual 
person, but can also refer to a business, organization, and 
corporation or object [3], let us call them stakeholders. 
Information may be intentionally or unintentionally left 
behind by the user; with it being either passively or actively 
collected by other interested parties. Depending on the 
amount of information left behind, it may be easy for other 
parties to gather large amounts of information on that 
individual using simple search engines. Internet footprints 
are used by interested parties for several reasons, including 
cyber-vetting, where interviewers could research applicants 
based on their online activities.  
C. Behavioral Targeting 
Behavioral targeting is a new marketing technique used 
by online publishers and advertisers to increase the 
effectiveness of their campaigns. Behavioral targeting uses 
information collected on an individual's web-browsing 
behavior, such as the pages they have visited or the searches 
they have made, to select which advertisements to display to 
that individual. Behavioral marketing can be used on its 
own or in conjunction with other forms of targeting based 
on factors like geography, demographics or the surrounding 
content. On line users now present, most often without their 
conscious awareness, all data via their digital footprint and 
social graph. Behavioral targeting is illustrated in Section 4.  
D. Social Graph and Social Network 
A graph is an abstract concept used in discrete 
mathematics; the social graph describes the relationships 
between individuals online, as opposed to the concept of a 
social network, which describes relationships in the real 
world [3] but nowadays these concepts are merged. The data 
what users provide include preferences, activities, social, 
economic and demographic facts. Consumers are now 
unconsciously offering, as a raw data feed, their entire 
digital footprint which includes new data about friends, 
linkages, location, influences, content created, games, 
attention and much more from web, mobile and TV. These 
data streams come in real time; this is an exceptional 
peculiarity of our modern time. 
E. Social Media as Consumer-Generated Media 
Social media are media for social interaction, using 
highly accessible and scalable publishing techniques. Social 
media use web-based technologies to turn communication 
into interactive dialogue. Social media is also defined as "a 
group of Internet-based applications that build on the 
ideological and technological foundations of Web 2.0, 
which allows the creation and exchange of user-generated 
content" [4]. A common thread running through all 
definitions of social media is a blending of technology and 
social interaction for the co-creation of value. 
There are various statistics that account for social media 
ever growing usage and effectiveness for individuals and 
organizations worldwide. Such usage of social media allows 
digital tracing data to include individual interests, social 
groups, behaviors, and location. It is important to notice that 
data can be gathered from sensors within devices, collected 
and analyzed without user‟ awareness. 
III. 
CHALLENGES  AND PROBLEMS 
A. The Potential and Pitfalls of Social Media 
The diffusion and usage of social media applications 
have been growing so dramatically that these applications 
35
COLLA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-143-4

and services have become a mainstream. The research has 
revealed the explosive development of social computing & 
informatics activities, social networking sites attract the 
millions of new visitors, the millions of user-created videos 
are uploaded onto photo and video-sharing sites [5]. 
In spite of enormous growth the researchers need to be 
aware of: (a) different degrees of user participation: active 
users (contributors) versus passive users; (b) usage divides: 
young people are quicker to adopt social media. Both 
aspects force researchers to reflect critically on the potential 
and pitfalls of a social media. In addition to the aspects 
mentioned above, we may do not neglect other aspects of a 
„dark side‟ of Web 2.0. More specifically, the active role of 
the user – as a contributor of so-called „user-generated 
content on platforms such as YouTube, MySpace and 
Facebook‟ – seems to lead to new forms of exploitation and 
reorganization of labor in informational capitalism [6]. 
Users are becoming producers by actively contributing 
with content and interaction. Simultaneously, however, they 
constitute an audience commodity that is sold to advertisers. 
Other aspects that should be taken into account are the issue 
of trust in information found, privacy and surveillance [7]. 
The question is to what extent users are self-reflexive about 
and sufficiently aware of changes in privacy and personal 
data, i.e., how their digital activities are monitored, 
processed, analyzed and commoditized by third parties. 
TABLE I.  
SUMMARY OF FINDINGS AT A GLANCE 
Actors 
Results of Online Involvement in Social Media  
Activity 
Potentials 
Pitfalls 
Users-
consumers 
Consuming  
Wanted offers 
Spammed 
Users 
Providing data 
(un)conciously 
Targeted adds, 
self promotion 
Privacy 
infringement 
Firms 
Profit seeking 
Profit, products 
tailored to needs 
Missing 
techno-
knowledge 
Marketing 
Collecting 
digital 
footprints  
Effective 
behavioral 
targeting, adds 
Loss in 
general if only 
the economic 
goals focused 
Media 
Developers 
Data mining, 
strategy for 
monitoring 
Using Internet as 
new currency in a 
digital world 
Illegal 
massive data, 
forensic 
process 
ICT 
Engineers 
Creating soft 
and tools for 
networks, DB, 
applications 
Interesting 
framework for  
new apps, 
increased 
competence 
Work for third 
parties, to 
become 
involved into 
unfair game 
Researchers 
Developing new 
concepts, 
adapting the old 
one to new 
situation 
Study of new 
power relation in 
computer 
mediated society, 
new science areas 
Loss  of IPR* 
when partners 
in applications 
earn a wealth  
IPR* – Intellectual Property Rights 
  
The outline of multifaceted investigation of social media 
and their potentials and/or pitfalls across the various actors-
stakeholders of social media is given in Table I, where we 
summarize the main potentials and pitfalls possible to occur 
in whole process. It is not a surprise, that all of identified 
stakeholders have benefits as well as face various dangers in 
new media. We state that in many cases those dangers can 
be eliminated by fair role of researchers in the process of 
policymaking and applying ethics in science and profession. 
The role of ICT engineers is basic; they can stop malicious 
use of data by rejecting “dark deals”. Now we will consider 
trials to regulate situation by legislation issues. 
B. Trials to Regulate Online Privacy Issues 
Many online users and advocacy groups are concerned 
about privacy issues around doing some type of targeting. 
Data privacy issues across the countries and trials to regulate 
behavioral advertising as well as governmental policies 
concerning social media during the last two decades will be 
dealt here shortly. The behavioral targeting industry is trying 
to keep all information non-personally identifiable or to 
obtain permission from end-users (so called a notice-based 
approach) [8]. But privacy experts and advocates widely 
agree that the notice-based model is outdated. Few 
consumers read privacy policies, and if they do, most 
consumers are not able to understand the complicated jargon 
used in such policies to describe increasingly complex data 
collection practices. Consumers have not complained about 
data collection online, mainly, because in most cases the 
collection is invisible to them.  
The European Commission (EC) raised a number of 
concerns related to online data collection (of personal data), 
profiling and behavioral targeting, and is looking for 
"enforcing existing regulation" [9] mainly by fixing a time 
how long collected data have to be stored and how deleted 
by user. EC initiated the research envisioning a future of 
digital Europe; the four scenarios are described [10]. 
The Federal Trade Commission (FTC), an independent 
agency of the United States government for the promotion 
of consumer protection adopted a self-regulatory approach 
since 90th. More recently, FTC has signaled intent to revisit 
its traditional notice-based framework and will recommend 
new policies on online privacy & behavioral targeting [11].  
Social networking sites provide direct access to the 
public, but unchecked, these Web 2.0 tools sometimes can 
do more harm than good. Governments are finding out the 
hard way that social media is a double-edged sword [12]. 
C. Is it True that There is no Global Solution? 
The potential and pitfalls of social media and several 
trials to regulate situation in various levels were mentioned 
here. We have dealt with only a few instances on persons‟ 
privacy problems in digital age of an active user of Internet 
– only one possibility of many others, available as modern 
world opportunities.   Networked world is a world without 
limits; it is different from a previous world in principle 
when human beings were accustomed  to live thousands of 
years, having own territory, country  and  the law system 
specific to that country. A global world has no separate 
territories and no common juridical law system applicable to 
a networked global world for a while. For example, the user 
36
COLLA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-143-4

is searching online when being in the country A, the server 
providing information of interest is located in the country B, 
the information was collected from other several countries, 
say C, D, E. Moreover, a company engaged in behavioral 
targeting is situated in the country F. If some illegal action 
is suspected in a whole chain of these activities, which 
country‟s law should be applied? Usually, the attempts to 
apply, say, intellectual property rights from offline case do 
fail in online situation. Not talking about much more 
complicated situations concerning so called cyber attacks or 
cyber wars, happening time to time and showing a tragic 
vulnerability of networks and systems as well as disabilities 
of security technologies currently available. Wiki Leaks‟ 
recent adventures, as well as the latest events in the North 
Africa, should lead to rethinking a lot of things. The mass 
political protests in Tunis and Egypt at early 2011 when 
Facebook, as it was said, helped to organize the meetings 
really demonstrated the power of social media even in such 
countries where one can‟t expect. The first reaction of the 
government there was to forbid a social media but soon it 
was converted into usage of it–for propagation of own aims.   
IV. 
HOW IT WORKS? – AN EXAMPLE OF  
RECOMMENDATION ALGORITHM WITH DETAILS  
Two basic entities which appear in any Recommender 
system (RS) are the user (consumer, customer) and the item 
(also referred to as product, service). A user is a person who 
enters RS providing his opinion (often unconsciously) about 
various items and receives recommendations of new items 
from the system. The goal of RS is to generate suggestions 
of new items or to predict the utility of a specific item for a 
particular user – to apply a behavioral targeting.  
Any RS consists of three parts: the input, the information 
filtering, and the output level. The input part is a workspace 
of Data Mining, as seen in the Fig. 2. In the second step – 
various information filtering algorithms are used. RS is 
producing recommendation or prediction in the output level. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. General processing in Recommender system 
 
The input of RS depends on the type of information, 
filtering algorithms selected. Usually the input data can be 
divided into three main categories: 
1.  Rating (or vote) expresses opinion of user on the item 
in question; usually it has a numerical value (say, from 1 to 
10 or often a binary format: 0 and 1 is used).  
2. Demographic data providing information about the 
age, sex, education and etc. of users. 
3. Content data, which are obtained from a textual 
analysis of the user‟ documents related to the items already 
rated and the digital footprints collected. 
As a rule, RS is collecting information about users and 
often stores their private data. This is appropriate for RS with 
the input data belonging to the above-mentioned categories 2 
and 3. Demographic data analyzed together with content data 
– private e-mails, chats, blogs allow identifying the user, and 
the question is only an acceptable scalability. 
Let us formalize a bit the approach. Let m be the number 
of users uk in the set U = {u1, u2,..., um} and n – the number 
of items ij in the set I = {i1, i2,...,in}. Let the opinion of the 
user uk about the item ij is denoted by rkj. All these ratings 
are collected in the rating matrix of size m x n denoted by R. 
Often a time dimension is added to the user-item space. The 
item ij itself can be a vector as well, containing the features 
as components. In a general case R is a multidimensional 
space. Each user ui  where i = 1, 2,..., m, has rated only a part 
of items in I  therefore he has a list of items Ii as a subset of 
I, for which he expressed his opinion about. The matrix R 
then has not rated values, often numerous. There are various 
techniques [13] for tackling the problems caused by those 
not available ratings.  
An example of the rating matrix with the scale from 1 to 
10, where not available ratings are marked as NA, is shown 
in the Fig. 3. The simplest problem to be solved here is to 
predict the rating r15 of the target user u1 by joining the 
opinions of other users, what are most similar to u1. Various 
similarity measures are helpful: from the classical Pearson 
correlation to the k-nearest neighbor rule. 
 
 
Item i1 
Item i2 
Item i3 
Item i4 
Item i5 
User u1 
5 
7 
5 
7 
? 
User u2 
5 
NA 
5 
7 
9 
User u3 
5 
7 
NA 
7 
9 
User u4 
6 
6 
6 
6 
5 
User u5 
NA 
6 
6 
6 
5 
 
Selections 
 
Target user 
 
Most similar to target users 
 
Ratings to be used in prediction 
 
Rating to be predicted 
 
Figure 3. An example of user-item rating matrix R 
 
A large part of the information filtering algorithms 
capture user's opinions on different products and similarities 
between users. Working through the filtering results, RS 
generates a proposal for the consumer.  
 The output of RS can be a Recommendation or a 
Prediction of rating.  The Prediction is a numerical value 
r*aj which means a predicted rating of the user ua to item ij.  
The Recommendation is expressed as a list of T items, 
which the user would like the most, according to the system.  
Selecting: 
Recommendation space, 
Rating function, 
Decision rule 
37
COLLA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-143-4

Recommendation approach can be content-based or 
based on the collaborative filtering but some authors 
indicate that results are better by combining collaborative 
filtering methods and content-based methods in RS. In this 
case the Bayesian method is used often.  
Let us outline the Bayesian approach to RS in 
networking. Suppose that we have a number of features for 
products, by which we need to divide products into 
categories or classes Cj,  j = 1, 2,…, p in order to make 
better recommendations to users who enjoy the products in 
their category. The probability of product, say D, being in 
class Cj is calculated, according Bayes theorem, as follows: 
 
P (Cj |D) = P (Cj) P (D |Cj) / P (D), j = 1, 2,…, p, (1) 
 
where P(Cj |D), P(Cj), P(D|Cj), and P(D) are posterior, prior 
probabilities, the likelihood, and the evidence, respectively. 
Usual assumption is that the product D has a set of features 
(F1,...,Fs) that are conditionally independent, then  equation 
(1) can be expressed as follows: 
 
 
     s 
P (Cj |D) = P (Cj) Π P (Fi |Cj) / P (F1,...,Fs).  
(2) 
 
 
  i = 1 
    In order to apply this formula we need to know or 
evaluate a priori the probability of each class P (Cj) and to 
know a distribution of features Fi which the most often is 
assumed to be the Gaussian. An estimate P*(Cj) for P (Cj) 
can be derived from training samples. 
    The product D is assigned to that particular class for 
which the posterior probability P (Cj |D) calculated by 
formulae (2) is the greatest one and will be recommended to 
other users belonging to that class. 
     What results can be expected by stakeholders in this 
example? Users are asked to rate products. If they do, they 
participate process consciously and will receive targeted 
adds. A negative aspect could be if a user is misclassified or 
the proposals become too interfering. Firms and marketing 
have an effective behavioural targeting if they do a fair 
business and do not sell the collected data to third parties.  
V. 
CODES OF PROFESSIONAL ETHICS 
Investigation of situation concerning privacy matters and 
a safety of an individual searching Internet or participating in 
other social media, described in the previous sections of this 
survey, shows that there are no universal means to overcome 
possible dangers and to enjoy only the potentials of social 
media. Self-regulation approach is not working, as interested 
parties and advocacy groups expected in early days of 
emerging ICT; the law system in a global level is not 
available and hardly will be available in real time.  
Nevertheless, for a while there is a simple solution – each 
entity involved into networking, collecting data and 
marketing activities has to follow the own Code of Ethics. 
The Ethics of Science is applied already many years in all 
fields of a biomedical and biotechnological research and 
several others. Now it is a time to discover that the Code of 
Ethics in Engineering Science has become a pressing need in 
digital age and especially in the context of new media. In this 
section we will survey shortly the activities over the world 
on Science and Professional Ethics fostering. 
A. Activities in the North America Continent 
Probably the oldest source (issued as early as 1912) is 
the Code of Principles of Professional Conduct of the 
American Institute of Electrical Engineers [14], now it is 
accessible online via Library of the Center for the Study of 
Ethics in the Professions (CSEP).  Very soon this Code will 
be celebrating a hundred years!  General principles remain 
the same through centenary. CSEP Library [15] contains 
many other Codes of Professional Ethics. 
The Online Ethics Center is maintained by the National 
Academy of Engineering and is a part of the Center for 
Engineering, Ethics, and Society at the Center for the Study 
of Ethics in the Professions at the Illinois Institute of 
Technology; they are working together [16]. It provides 
readily accessible literature and information, case studies 
and references, and discussion groups on ethics in 
engineering and science.  Numerous sample scenarios on 
issues surrounding Internet privacy can be found in [16]. 
Many of the contemporary Code of Ethics with principles 
and guidelines are well applicable in situation of ethics and 
trust needed in the collaborative cross-domains. 
B. European Activities in Fostering Science Ethics 
The intense discussions in the research community on 
the appropriate approaches to maintain high standards in 
research practice were initiated by the European Science 
Foundation since 2000. The concerns were raised that the 
“self-regulation of science, based on traditional approaches 
was not sufficiently meeting heightened public and political 
expectations” [17]. This resulted in survey stating that the 
need has become more pressing today, as national research 
organizations encourage and support their research 
communities to engage in collaborative research efforts 
across borders. The report, where 18 countries covered in 
detail, provides a basis for an overview of mechanisms to 
promote good research practice and to handle cases of 
alleged research misconduct that exist in different European 
countries. The report contain recommendations to learned 
societies, research-funding agencies, research-performing 
organizations. The codes/guidelines analyzed in the report 
are different in two main aspects. On one hand there are 
documents which cover all research disciplines and on other 
hand those presenting the perspective of certain research 
fields. The situation connected to misconduct in the social 
media collaborative cross-domains could be improved in the 
light and recommendations of this report [17]. 
C. The Global Ethics Observatory 
The Global Ethics Observatory (GEObs) – a free global 
repository of searchable information on ethics institutions, 
38
COLLA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-143-4

experts, legislation, codes of conduct and teaching 
programmes around the world [18]. The GEObs is a system 
of databases developed and maintained by UNESCO to 
provide information on ethics in science and technology, 
launched in December 2005. It consists of five independent 
databases: experts in ethics; key institutions active in areas 
of ethics; Ethics Teaching Programmes; Ethics-Related 
Legislation and Guidelines; Codes of Conduct. This 
database currently contains 151 codes of conduct of which 
over 30 are issued by Europe-based institutions.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In the rapidly evolving digital age our theoretical 
frameworks at hand and used ICT tools, applications must 
be critically investigated. The concept of mass self-
communication provides an interesting framework for 
studying new power relations in our computer-mediated 
society; however, it is not free of criticism. This survey 
summarized the positive and negative sides of social media. 
Positive Aspects. Analyzing ever-changing situation 
during a couple of last decades the positive impact was 
identified: the users are becoming producers by actively 
contributing with content and interaction; the firms using 
personalization of user data are able to offer them 
innovative products and services and work more effectively. 
It could lead to new products tailored to the needs of 
Internet users. Targeted advertising allows customers to 
receive offers and information about goods and services in 
which they are actually interested. 
Negative Aspects. The benefits mentioned above in real 
world too often are shadowed by malicious use of data and 
information. Additional risks to trust arise in the domain 
under 
investigation, 
mainly 
due 
to 
its 
potential 
pervasiveness, large scale and involvement of users. The 
Internet companies collect the massive volume of data. Users 
constitute an audience commodity that is sold to advertisers. 
Very often users are left ignorant or they are not informed 
properly how their digital activities are monitored, 
processed, analyzed and commoditized by third parties.  
Future Tasks. The security technologies have to be 
developed to address the malicious use of data and 
information. The aspects that should be taken into account 
are the issue of privacy and surveillance and special means 
have to be developed for evaluating a safety of social media, 
similarly to the quality of digital repository evaluation 
[19][20]. “The digital community was failing to decently 
answer the challenge of how to measure or even make sense 
of the results and impacts of embracing this new world” [21]. 
The role of researchers in the process of policymaking, 
applying Codes of Professional Ethics is the most important. 
For a while only the means increasing awareness of the 
users, the professional Codes of Ethics and a fairness of 
firms involved into collaboration could help to avoid pitfalls 
menacing in social media. The guidelines of Codes of 
Professional Ethics could help at least partially to contest 
challenges of social media by all stakeholders involved, 
while security technologies and laws ensuring privacy in a 
global world without borders and limits are not developed. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Hassan and J. Thomas, “The New Media Reader: A 
Critical Introduction”, London/New York: Routledge, 2006.  
[2] T. Fish, “ My Digital Footprint”, A Book Online, September 
2009, <http://www.mydigitalfootprint.com/footprint-
cms/Cover.html> 08.04.2011. 
[3] Wikipedia  <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/> 08.04.2011. 
[4]  A. M. Kaplan, and M. Haenlein. "Users of the world, unite! 
The challenges and opportunities of Social Media". Business 
Horizons 53 (1): 2010, pp. 59–68. 
[5] K. Ala-Mutka, D. Broster, and all, “The Impact of Social 
Computing on the EU Information Society and Economy”, 
Luxembourg: Office for Official Publication of the EC, 2009. 
[6] C. Fuchs,“Some Reflections on Manuel Castells‟ Book 
„Communication Power”, TripleC – Open Access Journal for 
a Global Sustainable Information Society 7(1), 2009,  pp. 94-
108. 
[7] M. Andrejevic, “The Discipline of Watching: Detection, Risk 
and Lateral Surveillance” Critical Studies in Media 
Communication 23 (5), 2006, pp. 391-407. 
[8] M.Martin 
"ISP 
Behavioral 
Targeting 
versus 
You"  
<http://www.seoserpent.com/2008-09/isp-behavioral-
targeting/> 08.04.2011. 
[9] Behavioural Targeting at the European Consumer Summit, 
European Digital Rights – EDRI-gram – Number 7.7, 8 April 
2009, <http://www.edri.org/edri-gram/number7.7/behavoural-
target-eu-consumers> 08.04.2011. 
[10] European Commission, JRC-IPTS, “Envisioning Digital 
Europe 2030: Scenarios for ICT in Future Governance and 
Policy Modelling”, 2010, pp. 1-84, doi:10.2791/49877. 
[11] Protecting Consumer Privacy in an Era of Rapid Changes// 
Preliminary FTC Staff Report, December  2010, pp. 1-122. 
<http://www.scribd.com/doc/44477465/FTC-Online-Privacy-
Report> 08.04.2011. 
[12] Russell Nichols, “Governments Need Social Media Policies to 
Avoid Pitfalls”, GOVERNING, December 7, 2010. 
[13] E.Vozalis, K. G. Margarits “Analysis of Recommender 
Systems Algorithms”, HERCMA. University of Macedonia, 
Greece, 2003, pp. 1-14. 
[14] Code of Principles of Professional Conduct, American 
Institute of Electrical Engineers, 1912, Retrieved 08.04.2011 
<http://ethics.iit.edu/indexOfCodes-.php?key=9_763_1745>.  
[15] Center for the Study of Ethics in the Professions, 
<http://ethics.iit.edu/index3.php> 08.04.2011. 
[16] Online Ethics Center for Engineering, National Academy of 
Engineering, "Disclaimer, Permissions, Citations,  and Links" 
<www.onlineethics.org/about/permissions.aspx> 08.04.2011. 
[17] European Science Foundation, “Stewards of Integrity. 
Institutional Approaches to Promote and Safeguard Good 
Research Practice in Europe”, Strasbourg, 2008, 56 p. 
[18] The Global Ethics Observatory (GEObs). The system of data 
bases, <www.unesco.org/shs/ethics/geobs> 08.04.2011. 
[19] N. Kligienė,  "Structural Model for Digital Repository Quality 
Evaluation in Context of Usage", International Conference 
eChallenges e-2009, 21-23 October, 2009, Istanbul, Turkey. 
[20] N. Kligienė, “E-Accessibility Marking a Quality of Digital 
Repository”, Proceedings of the 2nd International Multi-
Conference on Society, Cybernetics and Informatics, 10-13 
July 2009,  Orlando, Florida, USA,  v. 2, pp. 167-172. 
[21] Measurementcamp - Open source movement measuring social 
media, <http://measurementcamp.wikidot.com/about > 
08.04.2011. 
39
COLLA 2011 : The First International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-143-4

