Adopting Collaborative Business Process Patterns for an Enterprise 2.0 Banking 
Information System 
Antonio Capodieci, Giuseppe Del Fiore, Luca Mainetti 
Department of Innovation Engineering 
University of Salento 
Lecce, Italy 
{antonio.capodieci, giuseppe.delfiore, luca.mainetti}@unisalento.it 
 
Abstract—The use in the workplace of Web 2.0 tools by 
knowledge workers has changed companies’ operational 
practices by introducing new collaborative processes. This 
paper presents the application of a set of “cross-domain” 
collaborative business processes applied to a model of the 
Enterprise 2.0 Banking Information System. The case 
studies presented use collaborative business patterns. The 
aims are to resolve emerging organizational issues to support 
the activities of knowledge workers, to increase their 
productivity and their ability to find the information they 
need, and to enable collaboration with colleagues. All this is 
made possible using Web 2.0 tools, without changing their 
habits and by integrating the knowledge generated within 
the corporate information systems. In this article, we use the 
previously presented collaborative patterns in a different 
application context, to model an Enterprise Banking 
Information System. 
Keywords: Business Practices; Business Process Patterns; 
Collaboration; Coordination; Enterprise 2.0, Knowledge 
Workers. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The “knowledge worker” [1] is a form of employee, 
that, in the last fifty years, has become more and more 
important to companies. The knowledge worker is “a 
person who works primarily with information or a worker 
who develops and uses knowledge in the workplace”. 
They are people who can manage multiple tasks all 
together working in different contexts and having different 
channels to deliver information [2]. They must manage 
different parallel “knowledge processes” [3]. These 
processes may not be codified in formal procedures but 
could be unstructured or semi-structured and could change 
continuously. Thanks to the advent of Web 2.0, we can see 
that there are knowledge processes, which are not coded in 
formal structures. This is because knowledge workers 
collaborate using many basic tools at work but they are not 
checked by traditional information systems. To keep 
knowledge 
processes 
(unstructured) 
and 
business 
processes (structured) coherent is very important at this 
time; moving from tacit to explicit knowledge [4][5] to be 
involved in shaping a new kind of information system 
known as Enterprise 2.0 [6]. To understand the 
information demand and the different roles in the 
organizational field we have to have a formal definition of 
business practice. Researchers, such as Henkel at al. [7], 
said that enterprise models and business models have 
adequate tools for the design and maintenance of 
processes, which require collaboration in agile and flexible 
networks. 
We tried to understand the business process 
management (BPM) approach in order to solve the 
modelling issues involved in business practices. Our first 
goal was to describe the processes that involve knowledge 
workers in collaboration and coordination. To achieve this 
we integrated them into the information system and so we 
obtained efficient (i.e., without waste of resources and 
time) and effective (i.e., with high quality to meet specific 
needs) process models. Then we worked to reduce the 
impact on the overall organization, shaping just the 
recurring business practice atoms, i.e., patterns. 
A pattern-based approach is important both in re-
designing processes [8] and for the design of information 
systems from scratch. The idea of patterns has already 
been useful in practical contexts and it will be suitable in 
others [9]. This idea started from the traditional business 
process design method [10] and from the software 
engineering field [9]. The use of workflow patterns has 
been shown in different studies as a solution in modelling 
business processes [11], to manage collaborative work 
[12] or, in other cases, to categorize recurring problems. 
In this paper, we apply a pattern-based approach to 
knowledge processes as a key factor in quickly identifying 
and rapidly applying business practices to support the 
activities 
of 
knowledge 
workers, 
increasing 
their 
productivity in the networked workplace without changing 
their habits. The paper presents a case study highlighting 
the issues related to the modelling of knowledge processes, 
demonstrating the difficulty of managing tacit knowledge. 
To address these issues, we used a set of business patterns, 
which can be useful in modelling collaborative and 
cooperative activities within business practices. 
The paper is structured as follows: the next section 
reports on key related work in the areas of analysis, 
description, identification and application of business 
practices, mainly to address knowledge workers’ emerging 
needs. Section III provides readers with an overview of the 
methodological approach used to identify collaborative 
processes. Section IV describes the first case in the 
banking industry and how it has been modelled using a 
pattern-based approach. Section V describes the second 
case in the banking industry and how it has been modelled 
using a pattern-based approach. Finally, Section VI 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

summarizes our key messages and sketches future research 
directions. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In this section, we study the explicit modelling of 
business practice to try to give support to collaborative and 
cooperative semi-structured processes. In [13] the authors 
clarify the relationship between information, knowledge 
and competitiveness by introducing the model of the 
“knowledge ladder”. Based on the knowledge ladder, the 
terms, fields of action and the maturity model of KM are 
explained. In addition, the authors demonstrate, with a 
case study, the conversion of tacit and explicit knowledge 
according to the SECI model. 
Business practices are the most useful practices used to 
organize 
internal 
company 
processes. 
Therefore, 
identifying better practices is really important to achieve 
efficient and effective business practices, but also for there 
to be the possibility of reusing knowledge and expertise 
[14]. Each company should find methods to provide the 
necessary level of abstraction while modelling daily 
practices. However, at the same time, companies must 
manage and preserve social capital through knowledge 
workers [15]. 
Knowledge workers can be classified into different 
categories reflecting what he\she does in the work process 
in which he\she is involved [1]. Every day, each 
knowledge worker is involved in different unstructured 
activities that are information intensive but without 
technology support. For this reason, there is rapid 
information overload that has a negative impact on 
performance. To date, there have been few studies on this 
topic. Andriole [16] attempts to demonstrate how new 
technologies enable companies to cost-effectively increase 
their productivity and their competitive advantage if 
properly deployed. If a company wants to increase its 
productivity, it must integrate emerging technologies (first 
of all from Web 2.0) in traditional business processes [17]. 
In this way, the information system can allow the 
knowledge worker to use the right information, in the right 
format, at the right time. Nevertheless, we must understand 
that processes are made up of people, and that people will 
use the technology to improve their work. To achieve this 
goal, knowledge workers should be provided with an 
integrated space where they can retrieve all the 
information and tools they need. 
Some research has been carried out in this area. 
Authors, Jennings et al. [18], propose analysing specific 
possible lightweight ad hoc processes, known as “micro 
workflows”. By using gestural analysis of human agents 
within such flexible micro workflows, in combination with 
social analysis techniques, a new flexibility in business 
processes can be identified. Thus, the authors wants to 
better define how people work in companies and how they 
can use Web 2.0 tools in their daily activities to get better 
results. Stephenson et al. [19] present business process 
patterns in order to enhance the design of the public health 
care business process. 
In this context, the main technological areas, through 
which 
Enterprise 
2.0 
is 
carried 
out, 
are 
social 
network/community, unified communication/collaboration 
and enterprise content management. 
Cook introduces the concept of the collaboration 
process in addition to the traditional business processes. It 
is the way in which a company organizes its work [20]. 
Collaboration processes have the characteristic that there is 
collaboration among the participating stakeholders to 
achieve a common goal. This collaboration takes place 
through the combination of communication tools, both 
traditional (e-mail, telephone, direct conversation) and 
Web 2.0 oriented [21]. 
Harrison [22] argues that it is necessary to amplify 
human-driven processes in order to understand how to 
describe such work formally, then to capture this 
knowledge in a software tool. This requires changing both 
business process modelling and information systems. The 
author analyses the nature of work and explains how 
information systems can support it in the future. In order to 
describe human work and the interaction between humans 
and technology, the identification of patterns can be a 
useful approach allowing for fine-grained modelling 
support, as Gschwind et al. [23] point out. However, the 
modelling tools currently available do not fully support the 
application of patterns, although, as these authors 
demonstrate, it is possible to use an approach through 
which business users receive help in understanding the 
context through design patterns. 
The concept of pattern [9] has been useful in practical 
contexts and will probably be useful in others. A pattern-
based approach has been exploited for many years in the 
software engineering field but, over the last decade, the 
concept has been inherited by the business processes area. 
Some authors [10][11][24]-[28] point out that most of the 
analysts, who have actually worked on simplifying 
business processes, have focused on reusing or identifying 
some process elements from one process that can be re-
applied to another, or at least identifying when similar 
processes are encountered. Our solution, which comes 
from the methodology of business process patterns, is very 
helpful in the information systems field and is an 
important step towards creating a structured and 
systematic way of managing business practices both in real 
[27][28] and in virtual environments [29]. The next 
sections addresses this issue presenting the reuse of 
patterns identified in different application contexts, to 
model an Enterprise Banking Information System. 
III. 
THE METHODOLOGY USED 
In this section, the methodological approach used to 
identify collaborative processes is described. The 
Introduction shows how the adaptive and unstructured 
nature of knowledge generation processes could become 
an obstacle to the formalization of business practices on a 
large scale. 
In order to identify and apply the patterns of 
collaborative processes, an approach that considers the 
needs of the organization and the best currently available 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

practices for the identification and application of model 
patterns has to be adopted. 
The approach to be followed to identify and apply the 
patterns of collaborative business processes is divided into 
six phases: 
1) The first phase is characterized by the analysis of 
the business environment with much attention given to 
identifying some of the processes and areas that are 
characterized by both intense collaborative activities 
among the workers and the need to use Web 2.0 tools. One 
of the first steps in this preliminary stage will be to 
identify competence areas of the company and how the 
employees are involved in various projects. In this 
situation, it can be seen that the workers are used to 
working and collaborating with each other. The 
interactions among the actors are not very often pre-
defined, some activities are carried out manually and many 
others through the use of unstructured communication 
tools (chat or e-mail), so all the different professionals, 
who collaborate with each other to achieve common goals, 
need to be identified. 
In this stage, we have to identify the various case studies 
through: 
• 
“Focus groups” with business leaders and heads 
of business units; 
• 
A questionnaire. 
2) The work continues in the second phase: modelling 
the business processes detectable within the case used, 
selected in the previous step through the use of BPMN. A 
number of processes need to be studied, taking care to 
analyse both the business practices that are codified and all 
the activities used every day that are not already encoded 
or pre-determined. In other words, first of all, all the 
collaborative 
practices 
should 
be 
highlighted 
and 
modelled. 
3) In the third step, the study and comparison of the 
BPMN diagrams of all the modelled processes starts; to 
identify new patterns, it is necessary to focus on all 
repetitive common and atomic “segments” which are in 
the modelling performed in the previous phase. Particular 
attention should be paid to collaborative and cooperative 
activities, where we found a number of practices that have 
considerable repetitiveness. Each pattern that may be 
identified must shape typical situations in Enterprise 2.0 
and, if they are properly applied, they will provide 
concrete support to the actors involved in such situations. 
Typical situations, into which actors can fall within an 
organization, are characterized by strong collaboration 
among them, that contributes to performing a particular 
task, and intensive use of Web 2.0 tools (such as wiki, 
blog, chat, etc.) to assist the activity’s progress. So, the 
identified patterns respond to two fundamental needs: on 
the one hand to managing the collaboration among 
different actors that are called to work to accomplish a 
given task without a pre-defined and pre-structured 
sequence, and on the other hand, they allow the best use of 
the typical Web 2.0 tools within the enterprise. 
In conclusion, the approach to be used for the 
identification of design patterns requires the modelling of 
processes related to three types of activities: 
• 
Activities related to cooperation among workers 
in order to achieve a specific goal (collaboration 
activity); 
• 
Activities that require the cooperation of different 
people with different roles, that are not encoded 
in the traditional information systems, and for 
which it is useful to keep track of the messages 
exchanged in order not to lose information 
(coordination activity); 
• 
Activities that are repeated many times and for 
which there is a risk of losing useful information 
from 
the 
enterprise 
(know-how 
elicitation 
activity). 
4) Some of the “repetitive segments” detected in the 
previous step may already be known, so at this stage, it is 
necessary to verify the existence of patterns similar or 
identical to the segments identified. In such a case, it is 
better to use the known solutions that have already been 
applied and validated in different contexts. Otherwise, 
these segments can be considered new, such as new 
patterns. 
5) During the fifth phase, the design patterns identified 
in the third step start to be applied to model and realize a 
prototype of the collaborative information system. The 
purpose of this step is to verify the validity of the approach 
adopted in the identification of the patterns and to apply 
those patterns in the realization of a collaborative 
information system. The identified patterns should be used 
both in the design of the conceptual model of the platform, 
and in its implementation in order to achieve a 
development framework that allows: 
• 
Structured and unstructured information flows to 
be managed together; 
• 
A portfolio of solutions to support unstructured 
business processes to be incorporated; 
• 
The creation of a workspace focused and 
customized to the needs of the individual worker. 
6) Following the experimentation, in order to verify 
the usefulness of the use of the patterns in the context of 
collaborative information systems, the data of the trial 
(sixth phase, evaluation of design patterns) needs to be 
collected. The experimental checking of the activities must 
be conducted by administering questionnaires to the 
knowledge workers to evaluate the system. The testing 
must be preceded by a training session targeted at users 
involved in the identified processes, with the goal of 
explaining the project and to show the main functions of 
the system and its areas of use. Once the trial is ended, the 
users need to meet again in order to give feedback on: 
• 
The potential of the tool and the benefits 
associated with its use: 
• 
Level of usability; 
• 
Areas 
of 
intervention 
for 
subsequent 
improvement; 
• 
Possible extensions to other features. 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

Finally, the evaluation data should be subsequently 
reworked. 
IV. 
DESCRIPTION OF THE CIRCULARS CASE 
A bank circular is a communication sent to multiple 
recipients to give orders, to advise on provisions, or to 
transmit information. The creation and approval of a 
circular follows a particular well-defined process that 
includes the engagement by multiple actors involved at 
various stages. Every actor in the process must perform his 
function within his field of competence and responsibility. 
The process is started by the Head of the Central 
Office, who requires the distribution of a circular to the 
various editors that are part of the office in order to submit 
it for the attention of Organization and Quality, which has 
the power to authorize the circular. Some refusals should 
transpire thereby giving the editor the opportunity to 
modify the circular and resubmit it to Organization and 
Quality through the Head of the Central Office. The 
process of revision may require more comparisons 
between the Head of the Central Office and Organization 
and Quality, at each time refining the characteristics of the 
circular. Upon the approval of the latter, the process may 
follow different paths according to the type of circular. For 
example, some may require the signature of one or more 
competent structures, others may require a compliance 
opinion, and others may require both or neither of the two 
mentioned stages. All these stages become mandatory and 
essential for the completion of approval. Finally, a positive 
opinion by the Chief Operating Officer and General 
Manager is necessary to allow Organization and Quality to 
publish the circular. 
A. Modelling of the Case (TO-BE) 
After the preliminary phase characterized by careful 
analysis of the business practices that are not codified and 
of all the possible collaborative processes that currently do 
not meet the needs of knowledge workers, was made the 
modelling of the process using the BPMN notation. This 
activity has led to the definition of the process “Circular” 
that is shown in Figure 1. This highlights the presence of a 
number of sub-processes that will be detailed below. 
This process involves several actors including: 
Organization
Central	  Office
Organization	  and	  Quality
Competent	  
Structure
Compliance	  Service
Chief	  
Operating	  
Officer
General	  Manager
START
Create	  
Circular
Propose	  
Circular
Verify	  
Proposal
Modify	  
Proposal
Verify	  
Circular	  
Refused
Accepted
Integration	  
of	  Content
Reject	  
Proposal
Sign	  
Document
Check?
Verify	  
Circular
	  Check	  
Compliance
NO	  
Check	  
Compliance
OK?
Verify	  
Circular
Approved?
Singn	  
Circular
Yes
Verify	  
Circular
Approved?
Singn	  
Circular
Yes
Verify	  
Definitive	  
Circular
Publicize
Circular
END
No
Allocation	  of	  
Contribuition	  
and	  Deadlines
Accepted	  with	  modification
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
Accepted/
Refused?
 
Figure 1. BPMN process design “Circular”. 
 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

Responsible for Central Office; Editor; Organization; 
Competent 
Structure; 
Compliance 
Service; 
Chief 
Operating Officer; General Manager. 
All these actors are strictly necessary to take care of 
every aspect of the definition, approval and publication of 
a circular. 
1) Secondary Process – Allocation of Contributions 
and Deadlines 
Figure 2 shows the BPMN sub-process “Allocation of 
Contributions and Deadlines”. The sub-process is started 
by the Head of the Central Office in order to coordinate 
the contributions and the deadlines of the individual 
collaborators (editors), who will take part in drafting the 
Circular. This task ends when the various collaborators 
finalize their decisions. This sub-process has been 
modelled using the pattern Deadline Agreement, already 
published in [27]. This pattern aims to create a model 
according to which the deadline agreement activity can be 
performed efficiently, taking into account the different 
needs of the people involved. Two classes of actor 
characterize the pattern: the Requestor, who is responsible 
for the whole activity completion, and one or more 
Providers, who must provide the required contributions. 
To agree on the assignment of the work and the internal 
release date, the Requestor, first of all, defines the date by 
which any contribution must be provided. Then he/she 
carries out an initial assignment of work activities; so two 
collaborative 
activities 
(“Work 
Partitioning” 
and 
“Deadline Collaborative Definition”) begin. Each of them 
involves a Requestor and the Providers. 
These collaborative activities deal with assigning the 
work (“Partitions the Work” task) and agreeing the 
internal release dates for each Provider (“Defines Deadline 
Date” task) respectively. The two tasks are sub-processes 
modelled through the collaborative editing pattern. 
A Decision Team is made up of the Requestor and the 
Providers who, using collaborative tools, agree on the 
assignment of the work and the internal deadline 
definition. When the Work Partitioning and the Deadline 
Collaborative Definition are finished, the Requestor, 
through the “Finalizes Decision” task, formalizes the 
decisions made and he/she defines the latest date, against 
the dates agreed with the Providers, as the deadline for the 
conclusion of their activities. If these deadlines exceed the 
date defined initially by the Requestor, a new iteration of 
the two collaborative activities can be carried out. 
2) Secondary Process – Create Circular 
Figure 3 shows the BPMN sub-process “Create 
Circular”. The sub-process is started by the Head of the 
Central Office in order to achieve a draft Circular to be 
proposed to Organization and Quality. The process ends 
when the various collaborators (Editors) finish submitting 
their contributions. The secondary process “Create 
Head	  of	  the	  Central	  Office
Collaborator/
Collaborators
Defines
	  Deadline	  
Date
Carries	  Out	  
an	  Initial	  
Assignment
Partitions	  
the	  Work
Partitions	  
the	  Work
Defines
	  Deadline	  
Date
Define
	  Deadline	  Date
Finalise	  
Decision
Defines	  
Collaborator/
Collaborators
Date	  
Determined<
Deadline	  
Date?
Yes
No
 
Figure 2. BPMN sub-process design “Allocation of Contribution and Deadlines”. 
Head	  of	  Central	  Office
Collaborator/
Collaborators
Collaborator	  Contribution	  request	  
Collaborator/
Collaborators
Contribution	  
Request	  
Verify	  
Contribution
Create	  
Contribution
Send	  
Contribution
Contribution	  	  
Request
Contribution	  
OK?
No
Save
Contribution
Yes
Verify	  
Complete	  
Document
No
Yes
Define	  new	  
Collaborator
The	  
contribution	  
was	  sent	  
from	  
contributor?
The	  
collaborator	  can	  
complete	  the	  
task?
 
Figure 3. BPMN sub-process design “Create Circular”. 
 
 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

Circular” was modelled using the pattern Retrieve 
Contributions, already published in [27]. This pattern aims 
to model situations in which the contributions that each 
actor must provide need to be collected in order to achieve 
a common goal and aims to solve the problem of retrieving 
contributions produced by knowledge workers. It takes 
into account the need to collect the contributions by a pre-
defined date in order to have time to elaborate them. The 
Retrieve Contribution Pattern foresees the involvement of 
a Requestor and one or more Providers. The Requestor 
identifies the resources that will have to provide the 
contributions, while the Providers produce and submit the 
required contributions. The use of the following pattern 
involves the use of the pattern/sub-process “Coordinates 
Enhanced Contributions”. This pattern aims to verify and 
evaluate the received contribution. It allows for 
coordinating the contributions of other actors. First of all, 
the system checks whether a Provider has delivered the 
contribution assigned to him/her. If the contribution has 
not been received, the system requests the contribution 
from the Provider. Otherwise, the received contribution is 
evaluated. It is then registered if it matches quality 
attributes or, if it does not meet the requirements, the 
system asks the Provider for a new version. 
3) Secondary Process – Integration of Content 
The sub-process is started by the Manager of 
Organization and Quality in order to define contributions 
and request them from some of the relevant structures. The 
process ends when all the structures embody all the 
contents that are within their competences. The figure is 
omitted because even the sub-process “Integration of 
Content” was modelled using the pattern Retrieve 
Contributions, already published in [27], described in the 
previous paragraph. 
4) Secondary Process – Sign Document 
Figure 4 shows the BPMN sub-process “Sign 
Document”. The sub-process is started by the Manager of 
Organization and Quality in order to request the signature 
from all the relevant structures that have participated in the 
integration phase of the content. The process ends when all 
the structures sign the document or on reaching a default 
deadline. In the latter situation, the principle of tacit 
consent will be applied. The secondary process “Sign 
Document” has another internal sub-process called “Send 
Reminder”, which makes use of the pattern Reminder, 
already published in [27]. This sub-process is started by 
the Manager of Organization and Quality in order to solicit 
all the relevant structures that have not already signed the 
document by a certain time. 
V. 
DESCRIPTION OF THE NEW BANKING PRODUCT 
CASE 
The definition of the products of a bank, or in general 
of a credit institution, follows a well-defined process that 
starts from the analysis of the market and ends with the 
marketing of the product. Every actor in the process is 
called upon to perform his function within his field of 
competence and responsibility. The actor that starts the 
process is the Business Unit that, based on a careful 
analysis of the market, defines the type of product to be 
marketed, the target customers to whom it can be offered 
and the strategic opportunities arising. The prototype of 
the defined product is subjected to the Organization Unit, 
who examines the solution by providing feedback to the 
Business Unit. The Organization Unit, based on the 
parameters of the product, will execute a plan of 
simulations by calculating the indices of synthetic cost, 
comparing them with the thresholds of usury, highlighting 
some anomalies. The product analysis phase will give the 
Organization Unit the opportunity to express an opinion on 
the feasibility of marketing the product. If some conditions 
and/or fundamental principles are not respected, the 
prototype will achieve review status and will be referred 
back to the Business with some suggestions and 
corrections. The process of revision may require more 
comparisons between Business and Organization, each 
time honing the characteristics of the product. Once it has 
received a positive opinion, the definition of the 
information content to be included in the information pack 
and the pre-contractual information provided by legislation 
concerning banking transparency proceeds. At this stage,  
the layout and content are defined according to the format 
of the Bank of Italy. The actors involved at this step of the 
process are: Legal Advice function, which provides 
support for the preparation of contractual clauses; the 
Compliance function, which evaluates its compliance with 
standards; and Operation Unit, that provides for the 
creation of documents, inserting the regulatory information 
and examples in the defined models. 
The Operation Unit will perform the activities of 
“merging” the template shared between the Legal and 
Compliance functions and the function prototype 
Organization	  and	  Quality
Send	  Reminder
Obtain	  Sign
Define	  SC
Define
	  Overall	  
Deadline
Define
	  Deadline	  
SC
Define	  
Reminder	  
Request
Obtain	  
Sign
No
Yes
The	  signature	  
has	  been	  
received?
 
Figure 4. BPMN sub-process design “Send Reminder”. 
 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

document approved by the Organization. The final 
validation is delegated to the bodies with executive 
resolution powers (Board, Executive Committee) that 
officially approve, unless otherwise specified, the new 
product, establishing its effective date. With the official 
resolution, the bank circular, which informs the sales 
network of the availability of a new product, is drawn up. 
On the start day for the new product, all of the 
information and communication platforms will have the 
necessary documents required by the regulations for Bank 
Transparency. The disclosure will also reach the third-
party brokerage company that distributes institute 
products. 
A. Modelling of the Case (TO-BE) 
 Completed the analysis phase of the process described 
above, the modelling of the same proceeds through the 
BPMN notation. This activity has led to the definition of 
the process “New Banking Product”. This process involves 
several actors including: Business Unit; Organization Unit; 
Operation Unit; Legal Function; Compliance Function; 
Executive Committee. 
All these figures are strictly necessary to take care of 
every aspect of the definition, approval and marketing of 
a New Banking Product. Figure 5 shows the design 
process of the BPMN New Banking Product. It can be 
seen that the process follows a well-defined path that 
starts from the analysis of the market and ends with the 
marketing of the product. The presence of some 
Bank
Operation	  Unit
Organization	  Unit
Legal	  Function
Business	  Unit
Compliance	  
Function
Executive	  
Committee
Defines	  
Product	  
Prototype
Product	  
Analysis
Propose	  
Adjustments
No
Defines	  
Template	  
and	  Content
Drafting	  
Contractual	  
Clauses
Merging	  
Content
Analysis	  
accordance	  
with	  standard
Yes
Date	  of	  
Commencement
Approved
Product	  
Verify
Circular
Pubblication
Save
Compliance	  
Signature
Prepares	  Template
Analysis	  
Accordance	  
with	  Standard
Accordant?
It	  waits	  until	  it	  receives	  the	  singnature
Allocation	  of	  
Contribuitions	  
and	  Deadlines
Date	  of	  
commencement
Message	  
exchange	  
to	  resolve	  
questions	  
about	  the	  
template
Proposal	  
feasible?
 
Figure 5. BPMN process design “New Banking Product”. 
Chief	  Business	  Unit
Collaborator/
Collaborators
Defines
	  Deadline	  
Date
Carries	  Out	  
an	  Initial	  
Assignment
Partitions	  
the	  Work
Partitions	  
the	  Work
Defines
	  Deadline	  
Date
Define
	  Deadline	  Date
Finalise	  
Decision
Defines	  
Collaborator/
Collaborators
Date	  
Determined<
Deadline	  
Date?
Yes
No
 
Figure 6. BPMN sub-process design “Allocation of Contribution and Deadlines”. 
 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

secondary processes, which will be detailed later, can also 
be seen. 
1) Secondary Process – Allocation of Contributions 
and Deadlines 
Figure 6 shows the design of the BPMN sub-process 
“Allocation of Contributions and Deadlines”. The sub-
process is started by the manager of the business in order 
to coordinate the contributions and the experiences of the 
individual contributors who will take part in the drafting of 
the prototype of the new banking product. This task ends 
when the various collaborators finalize their decisions. The 
secondary process “Allocation of Contributions and 
Deadlines” was modelled using the pattern Deadline 
agreement, already published in [27] described in Section 
IV paragraph 1. 
2) Secondary Process – Define Prototype of the 
Product 
Figure 7 shows the design of the BPMN sub-process 
“Define Prototype of the Product”. The sub-process is 
started by the manager of the business in order to realize a 
prototype of a new banking product to be proposed to 
Organization Unit. The process ends when the various 
collaborators finish submitting their contributions. The 
secondary process “Define Prototype of the Product” was 
modelled using the pattern Retrieve Contributions, already 
published in [27] described in Section IV paragraph 2. 
 
3) Secondary Process – Merging Content 
The sub-process is started by the Head of Operations in 
order to define contributions and request them from some 
of the relevant structures. The process ends when all the 
structures embody all the contents of their competences 
and the Operation Unit merges them. Even the secondary 
process “Merging Content” was modelled using the 
pattern Retrieve Contributions, already published in [27] 
described in in Section IV paragraph 2. 
4) Secondary Process – Define Template and Content 
Figure 8 shows the BPMN design of the secondary 
process “Define Template and Content”. The sub-process 
is started by the Head of Operations in order to request 
information useful in defining the template and content 
for the definition of the new banking product. The process 
ends when the template and the content are well defined. 
The sub-process “Define Template and Content” was 
modelled using the pattern Aggregate Activity Loop, 
already published in [26]. This pattern is used in contexts 
where there is a need to extract structured information 
from activities carried out with tools, such as Skype, e-
mail, MSN, etc., which allow unstructured information to 
be conveyed. 
Chief	  Business	  Unit
Collaborator/
Collaborators
Collaborator	  Contribution	  request	  
Collaborator/
Collaborators
Contribution	  
Request	  
Verify	  
Contribution
Create	  
Contribution
Send	  
Contribution
Contribution	  	  
Request
Contribution	  
OK?
No
Save
Contribution
Yes
Verify	  
Complete	  
Document
No
Yes
Define	  new	  
Collaborator
The	  
contribution	  
was	  sent	  
from	  
contributor?
The	  
collaborator	  can	  
complete	  the	  
task?
 
Figure 7. BPMN sub-process design “Define Prototype of the Product”. 
Chief	  Business	  Unit
	  Function	  Compliance
Define	  
Template	  
and	  Content
Information	  
aggregator
Questions? Yes
No
Define	  
Template	  
and	  Content
Exchange	  of	  
information	  with	  
Compliance	  
Function
Use	  of	  different	  
communication	  
tools
Exchange	  of	  
information	  with	  
Business	  Function
 
Figure 8. BPMN sub-process design “Define Template and Content”. 
 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

VI. 
EVALUATION CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we presented the application of a set of 
“Cross-domain” Collaborative Business Patterns applied 
to a model of the Enterprise 2.0 Banking Information 
System. 
We also presented a pattern-based approach to re-
designing business practices, which involves knowledge-
intensive activities, in order to meet the challenge of 
providing a conceptual tool to organize knowledge 
activities and integrate them within business processes. 
We originally exploited the method of workflow patterns 
in knowledge processes as a key factor to quickly identify 
and rapidly apply effective business practices to support 
the activities of knowledge workers. By using a real case 
study, in an ICT company, we presented a set of design 
patterns able to model collaborative activities that readers 
can find [26][27][28]. Its aim was to resolve emerging 
organizational issues to support the activities of knowledge 
workers, to increase their productivity and their ability to 
find the information they need, and to enable collaboration 
with colleagues. The patterns previously presented 
[26][27] were extracted from a case study completely 
different from the one shown here, in fact the subject of 
the case study was the collaborative processes of an ICT 
company. The case studies presented in this paper use 
collaborative business patterns, to model collaborative 
processes in the banking sector. The patterns were applied 
without any modification and the results were immediately 
usable in the modelling of collaborative bank processes. In 
this way, it was possible to test the generality of the 
identified patterns that can be defined as cross-domain 
patterns. 
Moreover, the proposed approach allows companies to 
identify and design collaborative recurring activities in 
enterprise practices. Collaboration patterns can coexist 
with traditional business processes. Compared with the 
state of the art [19], our approach does not focused on a 
specific application domain but can be used in several 
situations where the problem of managing collaboration 
arises. While the state of the art mainly deals with the 
sociological aspects of collaboration [30], we identified 
new collaboration patterns and presented an example of 
their representation using BPMN. 
Currently, an inquiry is underway with several 
modellers to evaluate the proposed approach. The 
evaluation will be described in our future work.  
Future research will concern, the application of the 
patterns to other case studies in various fields and to the 
realization, using the Collaborative Pattern, of a prototype 
of an Enterprise 2.0 Information System. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research has been supported within the research 
project D@Work 2.0 (Documentation at Work 2.0) by the 
Italian Ministry of Economic Development (MISE), with 
the funding initiative "Fondo per l' Innovazione 
Tecnologica (F.I.T.) istituito dall'art.14 della legge 46/82", 
and by Links Management and Technology S.p.a., which 
is the project leader. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Thinking for a living: How to get better performances and 
results from knowledge workers, Davenport, T. H. (2005),  
Harvard Business Press. 
[2] H. Baars, and H. G. Kemper, “Management Support with 
Structured and Unstructured Data - An Integrated Business 
Intelligence 
Framework,” 
Information 
Systems 
Management, (2008), 25(2), 132-148.  
[3] E. Simperl, et al. I. Thurlow, P. Warren, F. Dengler, J. 
Davies, M. Grobelnik, C. R. Moreno, “Overcoming 
Information Overload in the Enterprise: The Active 
Approach,” IEEE Internet Computing, (2010), 14(6), 39-
46. doi: 10.1109/mic.2010.146. 
[4] M. V. Alderete, “SME E-Cooperation: A Theoretical Team 
Contract 
Analysis 
Under 
Hidden 
Information,” 
International Journal of e-Collaboration (IJeC), (2012), 
8(1), 53-64. doi: 10.4018/jec.2012010104. 
[5] A. Jashapara, “Moving beyond tacit and explicit 
distinctions: a realist theory of organizational knowledge, 
(2007), Journal of Information Science,” 33(6), 752-766. 
doi: 10.1177/0165551506078404. 
[6] R. W. Maule, and S. Gallup, “Enterprise 2.0 Collaboration 
for Collective Knowledge and Intelligence Applications,” 
In T. Sobh (Ed.), Innovations and Advances in Computer 
Sciences and Engineering (2010),  (pp. 567-572): Springer 
Netherlands. 
[7] M. Henkel, P. Johannesson, and E. Perjons, “An Approach 
for 
E-Service 
Design 
using 
Enterprise 
Models,” 
International Journal of Information System Modeling and 
Design, (2011), 2(1), 1-23. doi: 10.4018/jismd.2011010101 
[8] P. F. Drucker, “Landmarks of Tomorrow,” New York: 
Harper, (1959). 
[9] M. Fowler, “Analysis Patterns: reusable object models,” 
Addison-Wesley, (1997).  
[10] W. M. P. Van Der Aalst, A. H. M. Ter Hofstede, B. 
Kiepuszewski,  and A. P. Barros, “Workflow Patterns,” 
Distributed Parallel Databases, (2003), 14(1), 5-51. doi: 
10.1023/a:1022883727209. 
[11] N. Russell, A. ter Hofstede, W. van der Aalst, and N. 
Mulyar, “Workflow Control-Flow Patterns: A Revised 
View,” (2006). 
[12] T. Winograd, “A language/action perspective on the design 
of cooperative work,” Paper presented at the ACM 
conference on Computer-supported cooperative work, 
Austin, Texas, (1986). 
[13] K. North, G. Kumta, “Knowledge in Organisations,” 
Knowledge Management, Springer Texts in Business and 
Economics (2014), pp 31.61. 
[14] U. Remus, “Exploring the Dynamics behind Knowledge 
Management Challenges: An Enterprise Resource Planning 
Case Study,” Information Systems Management, (2012), 
29(3), 188-200. 
[15] H. Hall, and M. Goody, “KM, culture and compromise: 
interventions to promote knowledge sharing supported by 
technology in corporate environments,” Journal of 
Information 
Science, 
(2007), 
33(2), 
181-188. 
doi: 
10.1177/0165551506070708. 
[16] S. J. Andriole, “Business impact of Web 2.0 technologies,” 
Communications of the ACM, (2010), 53(12), 67-79. doi: 
10.1145/1859204.1859225. 
[17] A. P. McAfee, “Enterprise 2.0: The dawn of emergent 
collaboration,” 
Management 
of 
Technology 
and 
Innovation, (2006), 47(3), 21-28.  
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

[18] B. Jennings, and A. Finkelstein, “MicroWork ow Gestural 
Analysis: Representa-tion in Social Business Processes,” 
presented at the 7th Business Process Management 
Conference, (2009), Ulm. 
[19] C. Stephenson, and W. Bandara, “Enhancing best practices 
in public health: using process patterns for business process 
management,” Paper presented at the 15th European 
Conference on Information Systems, (2007). 
[20] N. Cook, “Enterprise 2.0: How social software will change 
the future of work,” Ashgate Publishing Company, (2008). 
[21] B. Sari, H. Loeh, and B. R. Katzy, “Emerging 
Collaboration Routines in Knowledge-Intensive Work 
Processes: Insights from Three Case Studies,” International 
Journal of e-Collaboration (IJeC), (2010), 6(1), 33-52. doi: 
10.4018/jec.2010091103. 
[22] K. Harrison-Broninski, “Human Interactions: The Heart 
And Soul Of Business Process Management,” Meghan 
Kiffer Pr, (2005). 
[23] T. Gschwind, J. Koehler, and J. Wong, “Applying Patterns 
during Business Process Modeling,” In M. Dumas, M. 
Reichert & M.-C. Shan (Eds.), Business Process 
Management (2008), (Vol. 5240, pp. 4-19): Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg. 
[24] N. Desai, A. K. Chopra, and M. P. Singh, “Amoeba: A 
methodology 
for 
modeling 
and 
evolving 
cross-
organizational business processes,” ACM Transactions on 
Software Engineering and Methodology (TOSEM), (2009), 
19(2), 1-45. doi: 10.1145/1571629.1571632. 
[25] A. Mitra, and A. Gupta, “Agile Systems With Reusable 
Patterns of Business Knowledge: A Component-Based 
Approach,” Artech House, Inc. (2005). 
[26] U. Barchetti, A. Capodieci, A. L., Guido, and L. Mainetti, 
“Modeling Collaboration Processes Through Design 
Patterns,” Computing and Informatics, (2011), 30(1), 113-
135. 
[27] U. Barchetti, A. Capodieci, A. L. Guido, and L. Mainetti, 
“Collaborative Process Management for the Networked 
Enterprise: A Case Study,” Paper presented at the 26th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Advanced 
Information 
Networking and Applications Workshops (WAINA '12), 
(2012a).  
[28] U. Barchetti, A. Capodieci, A. L. Guido, and L. Mainetti, 
“Information Systems for Knowledge Workers: The 
Kpeople Enterprise 2.0 Tool,” In X. S. Wang, I. Cruz, A. 
Delis & G. Huang (Eds.), Web Information Systems 
Engineering – WISE 2012 (Vol. LNCS 7651, pp. 804-807), 
Berlin Heidelberg: Springer. 
[29] N. Di Blas, A. Bucciero, L. Mainetti, and P. Paolini, 
“Multi-User 
Virtual 
Environments 
for 
Learning: 
Experience and Technology Design,” IEEE Transactions 
on Learning Technologies, (2012), 5(4), 349-365.  
[30] R. O. Briggs, “Collaboration Engineering with ThinkLets 
to Pursue Sustained Success with Group Support Systems,” 
Journal of management information systems, (2003), 31-
64. 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-351-3
COLLA 2014 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

