Instructional Design of the Communicative Blended Learning for Chinese as a 
Foreign Language 
Satoko Sugie 
Graduate School of International Media, Communication and Tourism Studies 
Hokkaido University 
Sapporo, Japan 
sugie@imc.hokudai.ac.jp 
 
Abstract— This paper proposes research in progress regarding 
educational practice. The objective of this research is the 
construction of the communicative blended learning model 
suitable for CFL (Chinese as a Foreign Language) class in 
Japan. The problem addressed in the research is that of how to 
foster and keep motivation for Chinese language learning at 
CFL classes at a high school in Japan, and how to locate that 
motivation in the realities of students’ own every-day lives. The 
major contribution of this research is to provide opportunities 
for increasing contact with young Chinese native speakers 
through the systematic language learning model utilizing 
Information and Communication Technology, which helps 
develop practical Chinese typing skills and enhances CFL 
learning motivation and satisfaction. In this research, novice 
learners took part in blended learning with face-to face 
grammatical practice, web-based training and bulletin board 
system interaction with Chinese native speakers. The 
qualitative analysis of students’ assessment shows that 
Japanese learners have an improved feeling of satisfaction and 
feeling of effectiveness from the experiences of real on-line 
Chinese verbal communication with native speakers. This 
communicative blended learning model has highly increased 
the motivation for Chinese language learning in the non-
Chinese speaking environment. 
Keywords-Computer Asisted Language Learning; Network 
Based Language Teaching; e-learning; blended learning 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This paper is composed of 8 parts including introduction, 
previous studies about Chinese language education with ICT, 
instructional design  models, site design and contents, 
collaborative classwork and online interaction, data 
collection, data analysis and present findings, and conclusion 
and future work. 
In Japan, the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, 
Science 
and 
Technology 
(MEXT) 
has 
promoted 
globalization and the adoption of IT (Information 
Technology) in high school education since the late 1990s. 
The “New Reform of Education Guidelines” was announced 
in 2009, in which measures of digitalization at high school 
are mentioned, as well as the recommendation of ICT 
(Information and Communication Technology) utilization in 
the classroom [1]. At the same time, with the recent rapid 
economic development of China, the level of interest in 
learning Chinese is on the rise. However, most high schools 
continue to bolster English education as the primary foreign 
language for learners, and Chinese is usually offered as a 
“Second Foreign Language”. There are few professionals of 
Chinese language pedagogy at high schools in Japan, and the 
teaching/learning environment (monolingual environment, 
closed classroom, large class size, and short class hours) 
makes class management highly difficult. Unfortunately, 
Chinese education goals are often separated into two 
extremes: Simply grammatical competence, or just for fun. 
Most teachers who teach, and students who learn, Chinese, 
aimed at simply obtaining required grades or passing exams, 
eventually develop a dislike for the Chinese language. 
II. 
PREVIOUS STUDIES ABOUT CHINESE LANGUAGE 
EDUCATION WITH ICT 
Under the influence of the Internet’s growth and 
development of ICT, the digitization of Chinese language 
education has gradually been developed. Academic 
associations and international conferences focused on the 
introduction of ICT methods in Chinese language teaching 
and learning have also been established, for example, the 
“Association for Modernization of Chinese Language 
Education (AMCLE)” [2] or “The International Conference 
and Workshops on Technology and Chinese Language 
Teaching (TCLT)” [3] etc. In this way, practical educational 
methods with ICT have developed globally and are being 
applied in many parts of the world. 
TABLE I.  
NUMBER OF PAPERS ABOUT  DIGITIZATION OF CHINESE 
LANGUAGE EDUCATION (AMCLE) [4][5][6][7] 
Year
Venue 
Theme 
Published 
papers
1995
San Francisco,
USA 
Collections of Papers  
contents 
unknown
(NIS) 
2000
Guilin, 
China 
Modernized Educational Technologies 
and Chinese Teaching and Learning 
2002
Nanjing, 
China 
E-Learning and Chinese Teaching and 
Learning 
2004
Beijing, 
China 
New Technologies in Teaching and
Learning Chinese 
79 
2006
Hongkong, 
China 
Research and Applications of Digitized 
Chinese Teaching and Learning 
76 
2008
Daejeon, 
Korea 
Advancements and Insights of Digitized 
Chinese Teaching and Learning 
103 
2010
Yantai, 
China 
Digitized Teaching of Chinese as a 
Foreign 
Language 
(Practice 
and 
Reflection) 
60 
 
On the other hand, in Japan, in spite of the neighboring 
country of China, only several research papers related to the 
practical educational methods with ICT about CFL have 
appeared at the relevant conferences (see Table II). Also, 
they 
have 
few 
discussions 
about 
the 
practice 
of 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

communication-focused 
and 
learner-centered 
Chinese 
language education with ICT. 
Thus, the practice of the communicative blended learning 
for Chinese language education is an unexplored field. The 
research about this field is significantly worthy and 
meaningful challenge in Japan. 
TABLE II.  
NUMBER OF PAPERS ABOUT  DIGITALIZATION OF CHINESE 
LANGUAGE EDUCATION IN JAPAN [8] 
Year 
Title of the conference 
Published 
papers 
2001 
-2011 
The Chinese Linguistic Society of Japan 
28 
The Japan Association of Chinese Language 
Education 
14 
 Japan Society for Educational Technology 
(JSET) 
11 
Japanese Society for Information and Systems 
inEducation（JSiSE） 
6 
III. 
INSTRUCTIONAL DESIGN MODELS 
The objective of this research is the design of a 
communicative blended learning model for CFL. In this 
paper, the definition of blended learning is the delivery of 
teaching/learning through the combination of online and 
face-to-face interaction resulting in improved student 
learning. [9] It is necessary to design the lesson plan based 
on a systematic ID (instructional design) process. The most 
basic and applicative ID process consists of the following 
steps: (1) Analyze, (2) Design, (3) Develop, (4) Implement, 
(5) Evaluate (ADDIE model) [10]. Of these five steps, (1) is 
the most important fundamental. 
Chinese language learners in Japan do not have ready 
access to Chinese-speaking environments and rarely have 
opportunities to communicate with Chinese people in daily 
life. A general lack of awareness of the need for Chinese 
language competence is also an issue; students are not aware 
of any benefit in learning the language, especially in a closed 
classroom environment. In this situation, the key to ID is 
knowing how to analyze learners’ needs, context, 
educational goals, performance goals, and how to motivate 
learners to learn and use Chinese. Keller’s ARCS-V model 
[11] – a model derived from the synthesis of motivational 
concepts and theories, namely attention (A), relevance (R), 
confidence (C), satisfaction (S) and volition (V) – is one of 
the most helpful concepts of the motivational design for 
learning (see Table III). 
TABLE III.  
ARCS-V MODEL [11] 
Attention 
Motivation to learn is promoted when a learner’s 
curiosity is aroused due to a perceived gap in current 
knowledge. 
Sub category: Perceptual Arousal/Inquiry 
Arousal/Variability 
Relevance 
 Motivation to learn is promoted when the knowledge to 
be learned is perceived to be meaningfully related to a 
learner’s goals. 
Sub category: Familiarity/Goal Orientation/Motive 
Matching 
Confidence 
 Motivation to learn is promoted when learners believe 
they can succeed in mastering the learning task. 
Sub category: Learning Requirement/Success 
Opportunities/Internal Attribution 
Satisfaction
 Motivation to learn is promoted when learners anticipate 
and experience satisfying outcomes to a learning task. 
Sub category: Natural Consequences/Positive 
Consequences/Equity 
Volition 
Motivation to learn is promoted and maintained when 
learners employ volitional (self-regulatory) strategies to 
protect their intentions. 
 
In the present study, a Chinese lesson plan is carefully 
designed to cover each of the elements of the ARCS-V 
model. Figure 1 shows the communicative blended learning 
design, which includes learner-centered & communication-
focused interaction. This circular process will generate the 
interest of learners in various aspects of China as a country 
and foster motivation to learn the Chinese language.  
As shown in Figure 1, Chinese novice learners (Japanese 
high school students) take part in a one-year communicative 
blended learning class, which is based on the study of 
grammar in the general classroom and WBT (web-based 
training) and on-line interaction between Chinese college 
students in an ICT-equipped classroom. Through the first 
semester (April to September), Japanese students study basic 
vocabulary and grammar, and at the same time, practice 
simplified Chinese typing as preparation for BBS interaction. 
In the second semester (October to February), in addition to 
the learning contents above, Japanese and Chinese students 
start BBS interaction, for their own purpose of practical 
communication. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Communicative Blended Learning Design 
IV. 
SITE DESIGN AND CONTENTS 
Learners work on the unique web site “Chinese and 
Japanese Students Interaction Web” (see Figure 2) which 
was developed on a UNIX server managed by Hokkaido 
University, built around the free contents management 
system “Magic3” [12]. WBT and BBS interaction are carried 
out on this web site. In consideration of security and 
information protection, users must be pre-registered by an 
administrator. User access is restricted through the use of a 
password. 
 
Classroom 
Computer room 
Computer room 
On-line interaction (BBS chat)
Real communicative context
Practical use of vocabulary & 
grammar 
Text-based learning 
Vocabulary & grammar 
Pronunciation & conversation
WBT 
Review vocabulary & grammar
Simplified Chinese typing 
First semester 
Second semester 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

 
Figure 2.  Top Page of Chinese and Japanese Students Interaction Web [13] 
The “Interaction Web” site contents consist of 4 major 
parts, the functions of which are as follows: 
TABLE IV.  
“INTERACTION WEB” SITE CONTENTS 
Contents 
only 
for 
Japanese 
students 
Instructions on how to change the PC settings 
Instructions on how to type simplified Chinese 
characters 
WBT (textbook reviews, typing exercises) 
Contents 
for 
Chinese 
and 
Japanese 
students 
BBS 
Japanese school and class activities introduction 
Chinese school introduction 
School annual events introduction 
Course 
assessment 
Japanese and Chinese students make assessment online 
(via Moodle CMS) and give feedback at the end of 
semester 
Links 
Japanese and Chinese school  web site 
On-line dictionaries and translation site 
Chinese grammar explanation site 
Chinese level certification test information 
V. 
COLLABORATIVE CLASSWORK AND ONLINE 
INTERACTION 
Japanese high school students planed and created video 
content, namely a “school introduction”, text & photo 
contents regarding “hot trends with Japanese high school 
students”, and video content consisting of Chinese speeches 
introducing Japanese culture (see Figure 3). In addition, 
students wrote on topics such as “self-introduction” and “my 
hobby” on the BBS. 26 Chinese college students saw this 
content and directly interacted with Japanese students (see 
Figure 4). 
As a basic rule of BBS interaction, Japanese and Chinese 
learners must use both Japanese and Chinese at the same 
time. In this way, they not only practice reading and writing 
in the foreign language which they are studying, but can also 
demonstrate authentic verbal behavior to each other in their 
respective languages. However, it is difficult to control the 
language use of Chinese students all the time; at times, they 
only write in Japanese because they do not always access the 
BBS during class hours. They will also take part in this 
interactive activity as a volunteer after returning to their 
dormitories. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Japanese school and class activities introduction 
 
Figure 4.  Japanese and Chinese students’ Interaction on BBS 
VI. 
DATA COLLECTION 
The aim of data collection is to understand the actual 
feelings of Japanese students towards collaborative blended 
learning.  
The “Chinese and Japanese Students Interaction Web” 
was established in August, 2009, and content was upgraded 
annually. In this research, data collection was based on 
classwork from May to December in 2011. 13 Japanese high 
school students and 26 Chinese college students directly 
interacted via the BBS. Japanese students accessed the BBS 
during Chinese class hours, and Chinese students accessed 
the BBS from their own computers after class. Data was 
collected via an online questionnaire (see Figure 5) and a 
group interview after the second semester.  
Login box 
User notices both in Japanese 
and Chinese language 
Recent update and 
online classwork instruction 
Streaming video: 
Chinese speech about 
“Hot spring in Japan”and  
“geography of Japan” 
Text & photo content in Chinese about “hot trends 
between Japanese high school students” 
A Japanese student has written 
self-introduction both in Japanese 
A Chinese student wrote comment 
both in Japanese and Chinese, 
cheering up and giving a support
1.Contents only 
for Japanese 
students 
2.Contents for 
Chinese and 
Japanese 
students 
3.Course 
assessment 
4.Links to useful 
web site 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

 
Figure 5.  Online Questionnaire Constructed by Moodle 
The online questionnaire and supplementary interview 
consisted of 3 parts, (1) course design (Q.1-16), (2) 
collaborative group work (Q.1-20), and (3) outcomes of the 
communicative blended learning (Q.1-25). 
Because of the difference of semester periods between 
Japan and China, only data from the Japanese students has 
been collected at the current moment. 
VII. DATA ANALYSIS AND PRESENT FINDINGS 
In this exploratory research, to understand whether the 
communicative blended learning design worked as expected 
or not, the qualitative analysis of learners’ subjective 
personal reaction was the first step in the analysis. 13 
Japanese students assessed communicative blended learning 
for CFL, and their answers show positive improve of ICT 
skills and a growing motivation for learning Chinese 
language. Figure 6 and 7 show a portion of the quantitative 
analysis (closed questions), and Figure 8 shows the 
qualitative analysis (open questions). 
As shown in Figure 6, all Japanese students surveyed 
showed positive feelings of effectiveness in relation to the 
communicative blended learning design for CFL. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Positive Feelings for Communicative Blended Learning for CFL 
As for the reasons for positive feelings of effectiveness, 
Japanese students mentioned the following, with Figure 7 
showing a concept map created via open coding (the heavier 
the line, the greater number of students mentioning the same 
concepts in the open questions). 
The most remarkable reaction was that 6 students had 
positive feelings in terms of the course being a “well-
connected learning process”, which means they felt they 
could apply language knowledge acquired in the classroom 
to real interaction situations. This in turn led to other positive 
feelings such as “there was value in real interaction with 
Chinese native speakers” or “was able to experience 
authentic Chinese language”. This value recognition of self-
directed and practical use of Chinese language in specific 
interaction situations increased their motivation for learning 
CFL. Also, some students were “aware of the importance of 
classroom 
study”, which 
means 
they independently 
recognized a lack of vocabulary or grammatical competence, 
and the need for classwork to rectify that situation. 
“Computer skill acquisition” was also an example of positive 
feedback. Students recognized future demand for an 
integrated ability of Chinese language, computer skills and 
ICT. 
Returning to the present study's central model of 
motivational design, the Japanese students’ feedback apply 
well to the five elements in the ARCS-V model. 
 
 
 
[A]= Attention, [R]= Relevance, [C]=Confidence, [S]=Satisfaction, [V]=Volition  
Figure 7.  Open Coding Map: Reasons of Positive Feeling Towards 
Communicative Blended Learning for CFL 
As another significant effect of communicative blended 
learning for CFL, all participants acquired Chinese IME 
setting and simplified Chinese typing skills. More than half 
the participants felt confident about creating Chinese 
documents and Chinese to Japanese or Japanese to Chinese 
translation abilities with on-line learning support tools and 
resources. Indeed, all participants submitted Chinese writing 
assignments created in MS Word in preparation for BBS 
interaction, even though some of the participants did not 
have much confidence in their abilities.  
 
 
Figure 8.  Practical Skill Acquisition 
9
4
0
0
0
agree
relatively agree
no opinion
relatively disagree
disagree
(person)
Q(3)-25. Did communicative blended learning for CFL have a 
positive effect for Chinese education in Japanese high school? 
(single answer allowed) (n=13)
13
13
8
8
8
7
7
5
5
1
set up Chinese IME keyboard system
Sinplified Chinese typing
create word document in Chinese
translate Chinese into Japanese with…
translate Japanese into Chinese with…
search Chinese information via internet
look up Chinese words with Chinese…
search various information via internet
communicate with Chinese people via …
access Chinese (Sinplified Chinese)…
Q.(3)-23. What kind of practical skills did you acquire?
(multiple answers allowed) (n=13)
(People)
set up Chinese IME keyboard system 
Sinplified Chinese typing 
create word document in Chinese 
search Chinese information via Internet 
search various information via Internet 
communicate with Chinese people via Internet  
access Chinese (Sinplified Chinese) website 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In conclusion, the communicative blended learning 
design for CFL highly increased the motivation for Chinese 
language learning in a non-Chinese speaking environment. 
The qualitative analysis of students’ assessment shows that 
the Japanese learners acquired an improved feeling of 
satisfaction and feeling of effectiveness through the 
experience of real on-line Chinese verbal communication 
with Chinese native speakers, analyzed according to the 
ARCS-V instructional design model. 
The future challenge is to collect more feedback from 
both Japanese and Chinese students in order to ascertain the 
validity of the effect of communicative blended learning for 
CFL. It is necessary to abstract the feeling of effectiveness 
through the axial cording (comparing incident to incident) 
and selective coding (to refine the hypothesis or theory) 
based on the grounded theory [14], aiming ultimately at the 
goal of theoretical generalization. 
Also, in order to provide real insights to the effectiveness 
of this communicative blended learning model, the adaptive 
triangulation must be considered. CFL class size is almost 
the same every year (about 30 learners for the first year class 
and about 10 learners for the second year class), therefore it 
is difficult to validate the evidence solely through qualitative 
analysis. Therefore, one must be careful to ensure the 
objectivity of results. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
I am heartily thankful to collaborators Wang You (Jilin 
Huaqiao Foreign Language Institute), Chen Lili (China 
Three Gorges University), and their students, whose 
encouragement and support ensured the viability of this 
project.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Japan. The Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and 
Technology (MEXT). “New Reform of Education Guidelines,” 
Section 
8 
Foreign 
Language, 
2009 
[retrived: 
http://www.mext.go.jp/a_menu/shotou/new-
cs/youryou/eiyaku/__icsFiles/afieldfile/2011/04/11/1298353_9.pdf, 
March, 2012] 
[2] 
Association for Modernization of Chinese Language Education 
[retrieved: http://www.amcle.org, April, 2012] 
[3] 
The International Conference and Workshops on Technology and 
Chinese Language Teaching  [retrieved: http://www.tclt.us, April, 
2012] 
[4] 
P. Zhang, J. Song, and J. Xu (Ed.). “Digitized Teaching of Chinese as 
a Foreign Language (Practice and Reflection), ” Proc. The 
Association for Modernization of Chinese Language Education 
(AMCLE). Beijing: Qinghua University Press, 2010. 
[5] 
P. Zhang, J. Xu, and R. Gan (Ed.). “Advancements and Insights of 
Digitized Chinese Teaching and Learning,” Proc. The Association for 
Modernization of Chinese Language Education (AMCLE). Beijing: 
Qinghua University Press, 2008. 
[6] 
P. Zhang, S. Lin, C. Fang, T. Xie, J. Xie, and J. Xu (Ed.). “Research 
and Applications of Digitized Chinese Teaching and Learning,” Proc. 
The Association for Modernization of Chinese Language Education 
(AMCLE). Beijing: Qinghua University Press, 2006. 
[7] 
P. Zhang, T. Xie, and J. Xu (Ed.). “New Technologies in Teaching 
and Learning Chinese,” Proc. The Association for Modernization of 
Chinese Language Education (AMCLE). Beijing: Qinghua University 
Press, 2004. 
[8] 
S. Sugie. “The Construction for Chinese Language Study Support 
Site Utilizing NBLT (Network Besed Language Teaching)-Interactive 
Learners’ Community between Japanese and Chinese Highschool 
Students-,” Master’s thesis, Hokkaido University (Japanese version 
only), 
2011, 
pp. 
31-43. 
[retrieved: 
http://eprints.lib.hokudai.ac.jp/dspace/handle/2115/47301, 
April, 
2012] 
[9] 
A. Heinze. “Blended Learning; An Interpretative Action Research 
Study,” 
2008 
(Doctoral 
dissertation) 
[retrieved: 
http://usir.salford.ac.uk/1653/1/Heinze_2008_blended_e-learning.pdf, 
April, 2012] 
[10] W. W. Lee and D. L. Owens, “Multimedia-based Instructional 
Design: Computer-Based Training; Web-Based Training; Distance 
Broadcast Training; Performance-Based Solutions,” San Fransisco: 
Pfeiffer, 2004, p. 3. 
[11] J. Keller. “Motivational design for learning and performance: The 
ARCS model approach,” New York: Springer, 2010. [Tras. & Ed. 
by Katsuaki Suzuki, Tokyo: Kitaoji Shobo, 2011] 
[12] Magic3 [retrieved: http://www.magic3.org, April, 2012] 
[13] Chinese and Japanese Students Interaction Web [retrieved: 
http://mithrandir.iic.hokudai.ac.jp/sugie/magic3, April, 2012] 
[14] A. Strauss and J. Corbin. “Basics of Qualitative Research Techniques 
and Procedures for Developing Grounded Theory (2nd edition),” 
Sage Publications: London, 1998. 
[15] Y. Nishihori,  “Effectiveness of Collaborative Language Learning in 
a Multicultural Distance Class over Broadband Networks”, Proc. 
AILA 2008. The 15th World Congress of Applied Linguistics 
Multilingualism: Challenges and Opportunities, August 2008, p. 136. 
[16] M. Warschauer and R. Kern. “Networked Language Teaching: 
Concepts and Practice”, 2000, Cambridge University Press. 
[17] A. Heinze and C. Procter. “The significance of the reflective 
practitioner in blended learning”, International Journal of Mobile and 
Blended Learning (IJMBL), 2(2), 2010. In Press [retrieved: 
http://usir.salford.ac.uk/8823/3/IJMBL_Vol_2_No_2_Paper_2.pdf, 
April, 2012] 
 
 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

