A Collaborative Management Design Model for Career Planning 
 
Weibao Chang 
Academy of Mathematics and systems science 
Chinese Academy of Sciences 
Beijing, P.R. China 
cwb@amss.ac.cn 
Liqiang Wang 
Department of Enterprise Platform Services 
Microsoft (China) Co., Ltd 
Beijing, P.R. China 
bewang@microsoft.com
 
 
Abstract — This paper proposes the collaborative management 
design for career planning, which is an advanced management 
function in the modern human resource management system. 
Its implementation is quite complicated. Especially for a large 
enterprise, its huge size, complicated positions and diversified 
staffs make HR with career planning even more difficult and 
face two main challenges: one is coordination with other 
human 
resource 
modules 
(e.g., 
recruitment, 
training, 
performance appraisal, etc.), another is collaboration in the 
career planning process. It is needed to address issues such as: 
the problem of evolution of appraisal standards, the problem 
of satisfying corporation and employees in appraisal, the 
problem to involve every employee in career path planning. 
This article proposes a “data-driven, function-coordination” 
concept, and provides a collaborative design framework, based 
on its applications in Sinopec. 
Keywords – HR; position; career planning; Collaboration; 
CBR 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The intense competition among companies ultimately is 
the competition for talents, therefore a first-rate enterprise 
must have first-class human resource management (HR) [6], 
and furthermore it must have the first-class HR management 
software system. HR software includes many functional 
modules: 
recruitment 
management, 
staff 
training 
management, salary management, performance management, 
human resource planning, career planning, employee 
self-service, and so on.  Issue that  career planning [1] 
must resolve is how to make the promoted plan of next 
several positions and ultimate objective based the current 
position, certainly it does not exclude the possibility of being 
transferred to another position at the same level. The career 
planning process generally includes: self-assessment, present 
status examination, career path planning, and procedure 
management. 
Career path planning covers the whole lifecycle of HR 
management and has interoperability requirements with 
almost all other modules. In a traditional career path 
planning software system, if the appraisal standards changed, 
the data for the old standards becomes obsolete and cannot 
be used anymore. Upstream systems and downstream 
systems, which are based on the old standards, must be 
modified before working with the new standards.  In this 
article, a mapping model for the evolution appraisal 
standards is introduced to address the problem of change of 
standards. The article also describes how to improve the 
interoperability through providing Web Services and 
messaging mechanism. 
In a modern enterprise, talents are the most valuable asset. 
A traditional appraisal is driven by the organization and 
managers. The employees are not actively involved and their 
ideas and opinions are not well considered. As a result, the 
employees do not have their career paths well aligned with 
the organization’s goals. The organization must provide a 
way to enable every employee to be actively involved and to 
align their personal goals with the organization’s goals [2]. 
The article describes collaboration solutions in the appraisal 
process and self-service career path planning, which will 
improve the satisfaction and loyalty of the employees. The 
growth of employee users supports the prosperity of the 
corporation. 
The core function of career planning is to give the 
different career planning according to the different person. A 
large company’s HR is more complex. It contains numerous 
subsidiaries, complex positions, and a huge number of 
employees. In Sinopec (China Petrochemical Corporation), 
for example, the number of employees is measured by 
millions and there are almost 50,000 branches. The positions 
in a large enterprise are complicated and so is the personnel 
career path planning. On the side, it has a large historical 
data as its advantage. CBR (case-based reasoning) technique 
in artificial intelligence is used to plan career paths of 
employees [4] [5]. By searching same or similar cases in the 
existing system, the next career paths can be designed. At the 
same time, the self-learning mechanism is used to adopt 
expert’s advices and to add new cases to optimize, and 
improve the system.  
In the following, the fundamental model of career 
planning is introduced in Section 2. Section 3 studies the 
coordination issue between the HR modules. Section 4 
addresses the network coordination issue. Section 5 applies 
CBR to plan the career paths. Section 6 summarizes with the 
conclusion and future work. 
II. 
GENERAL MODEL FOR CAREER PLANNING 
The career planning serves each employee of whole 
companies. Our goal is to give different career paths 
(position paths) for each employee. A large enterprise 
contains giant subsidiaries, complex positions and a huge 
number of employees. In Sinopec, for example, the number 
of employees is measured in millions and there are hundreds 
of thousands of positions, which have a series of indexes to 
evaluate [9]. 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-287-5
COLLA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

Suppose there are ℓ employees and m positions in the enterprise, 
and set n indexes for evaluation. 
 The employee set is: 
 
                  . 
(1)
 The position set is: 
 
                  . 
(2) 
Each position includes two important attributes at least: 
parent position and salary level. The parent position means 
the superior position being report to. If the parent position is 
NULL, the position is at the top-level. A position tree based 
on the parent position attributes can be drawn as below. 
 
P1
P11
P12
P1n
P111
P112
P113
...
...
P1n1
P1n2
 
 
Figure 1. Example of a position tree. 
The salary level is a measurement of the position’s value. 
In general, if a position reports to another position, the latter 
has a higher salary level. SL(    is used to describe the 
salary level of the position   . 
There are some specific indexes to evaluate a position. 
All the indexes make up the full index set to evaluate all the 
positions: 
 
                  . 
(3) 
In the set,    can be the appraisal, professional interest, 
professional value or personality standard. One index can be 
applied to multiple positions. 
Every index can have a serial scores and max(  ) means 
the maximum score of the index   . 
There is the essential attribute of index: parent index. 
Same as positions, an index tree based on the parent index 
attributes can be drawn as below.  
X1
X11
X12
X1n
X111
X112
...
...
X1n1
X121
...
 
 
Figure 2. Example of an index tree. 
In Sinopec, for example, the index tree is set up with 5 
levels. 
Some indexes in the index set can be used to evaluate a 
specific position, and the related thresholds and weights can 
be specified at same time. 
For a specific position   , the index subset   , related 
threshold set    and weight set    can be defined as 
follows. 
 
       
    
       
                            ; (4) 
 
       
    
       
           ; 
(5) 
 
       
    
       
           . 
(6) 
After completing the definitions, all the employees with 
the positions can be evaluated. For the employee    at the 
position   , the evaluation result set     can be calculated. 
 
     {  
     
        
  }                        ; (7) 
    . 
Theoretically, the employee   qualifies for the 
position   , if: 
 
  
      
              . 
(8) 
As a result, the entire position path chain for the 
employee    may be gotten. 
 
       
    
       
                            . (9) 
In general, the salary level of the position is monotone 
rise: 
 
     
          
 
                 . 
(10) 
The goal of the career planning is to make the different 
position path chains for all the employees. 
III. 
COLLABORATION WITH OTHER MODULES IN HR 
In a modern corporation, there are many information 
systems to support daily operations and business growth. 
Career path planning system has close collaboration with 
other systems in recruiting, training, performance appraisal 
and promotion process [1]. The interoperability among these 
supporting systems is the key to make functional groups to 
coordinate smoothly together. 
In order to support the collaboration of different modules 
in HR, the “data-driven, function-coordination” concept is 
proposed, which uses a generic data model for the appraisal 
process and a unified way to coordinate with other functions. 
To implement this concept, it needed to address two basic 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-287-5
COLLA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

problems: 1. the evolution of index standards; 2. the 
collaboration with other modules in HR. 
A. Evolution of Standards 
The lifecycle of appraisal is usually aligned with physical 
or fiscal year. At the beginning of the new cycle, the 
organization will define the standards based on the strategies 
and priorities. No matter if the change of standards is minor 
or significant, it will affect historical records and any 
upstream/downstream systems, which reference the changed 
indexes. The change can be categorized as adding, removing, 
updating an index or changing the calculation formulas.  
The evolution mapping model is used to address the 
above problems. Given a sub-tree of index tree as example, it 
can be changed twice since the first year. The changes are 
illustrated in below diagram: 
 
X1
X11
X12
X13
X111
X112
X113
X1
X11
X12
X13
X111
X112
X113
X131
X1
X11
X12
X13
X111
X112
X113
X131
X114
Calculate
Calculate
The First Year
The Second Year
The Third Year
 
 
Figure 3. Illustration of the evolution mapping model. 
In the first round changes, the index “X113” is removed 
and the index “X131” is added. In the second round changes, 
the definition of index “X111” is changed. 
For deleting an index (e.g., “X113”), the index is marked 
as obsolete but will not be dropped physically. A user cannot 
set value for an obsolete index, but other systems can still 
use the value of this index as before. This will not break 
upstream or downstream systems. The data for obsolete 
indexes will be kept as historical data and can be used as fact 
data for business intelligence. 
For adding an index (e.g., “X131”), it will change the 
calculation rule for the parent index. If the parent one was a 
leaf before, it may have inputting values before but will only 
have calculated value after the change. 
For updating an index (e.g., “X111”), it will add a new 
index and mark the old index as obsolete. At the same time, 
it will allow the user to define the function from old to new 
index: 
 
                . 
(11) 
The value of “F114” can be calculated based on this 
function     . 
In order to be compatible with other systems, a reverse 
function can be defined as: 
 
                . 
(12) 
With this function, it can calculate the value of “X111” 
when the value of “X114” is inputted or changed. Any 
system that reference “X111” can work as before and use the 
scores after the index changed. 
Table 1 shows the example of the inputted and calculated 
values for an employee: 
TABLE 1. EXAMPLE OF INPUTTED AND CALCULATED VALUES 
Cycle 
X1 X11 
X111 X112 X113 X12 
X13 
X131 
X114 
1 
C 
C 
F 
F 
F 
F 
F 
 
C 
2 
C 
C 
F 
F 
 
F 
C 
F 
C 
3 
C 
C 
C 
F 
 
F 
C 
F 
F 
 
In above table, “F” means inputted fact value and “C” 
means calculated value. 
From the table, it can tell that values of the index “X113” 
are kept. When index “X111” was changed to “X114” on the 
third year, index “X114” has calculated values for first and 
second year by calling    . On the third year, “X111” has 
calculated value by calling    . This makes it possible to 
compare all the indexes over the three years. 
To sum up, the mapping model of changed indexes 
makes it possible to change standards while keeping the 
history data and the interoperability with other systems. 
For a large enterprise, the value of the history data will 
increase year by year. In Sinopec, it will turn into a huge data 
repository. A distributed database system can be built for 
long term data storage. 
B. Collaboration with Mudules in HR 
The key model for career path planning is appraisal 
standard of the indexes. Some values of the indexes are from 
other modules in HR, e.g., the degree data result from 
training module and attendance rate in check-in module. The 
appraisal module also provides information to other modules, 
such as open positions and position requirements for 
recruiting module, training requirements to training 
management module and projected employee growth for 
strategy analysis. 
In order to provide data to downstream system and allow 
upstream systems to update information in career planning 
system, it provides Web Services around appraisal standards 
[7] [8]. The Web Services provide operations to query 
definitions of appraisal standards, query requirements of 
positions, update scores for indexes, make calculation and 
query appraisal results. All branches of Sinopec across all the 
regions can integrate with the central Web Services. 
The systems for a corporation are loose coupled. In order 
to orchestrate them to work together, it provides a messaging 
mechanism. The messaging system provides ways to send 
message to other modules or persons. For example, when the 
appraisal cycle starts, it sends calendar items to all 
participants. The events will show up in calendar on a PC or 
a mobile.  The receivers can access system by clicking the 
link in the event.  
Based on the projected changes for next year, it can send 
out projected open positions to recruiting module. This 
makes it possible to start the talent recruiting work in 
advance. 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-287-5
COLLA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

IV. 
COLLABORATION IN CAREER PLANNING PROCESS 
Career planning is an employee driven process. In the 
context of the corporation and society, with the help of the 
corporation, experts, mentors and friends, the employee 
improves himself/herself in one or several appraisal index 
and moves from one position to another. The corporation 
establishes the index appraisal standards, which set the 
expectation for an employee’s career development. At the 
same time, the corporation needs to provide a collaboration 
platform for self-serviced career planning [2]. 
A. Appraisal with Collaboration 
 
A traditional appraisal process is mainly driven by a 
manager. The manager defines expectations based on the 
appraisal standards, and then communicates the expectations 
to the employee. The manager measures the actual 
performance, compares with expectations and provides 
feedbacks to the employee. The employee takes actions 
based on feedbacks and the manager will measure and 
compare again. This is an on-going measure and feedback 
process. At the end of a cycle, the manager records the 
results. Figure 4 shows the whole process of a traditional 
appraisal. 
 
 
 
Figure 4. The appraisal process. 
A limitation of the process is that employees are not 
actively involved. 360-degree performance appraisal was 
introduced to address the problems of the traditional 
appraisal [3]. 
 
Figure 5. The 360-degree performance appraisal. 
The 360-degree performance appraisal is a process to get 
feedbacks from members of an employee’s immediate work 
circle. The challenge is how to make the process efficient as 
it involves much collaboration across the teams. With the 
career planning system, all steps can be done online.  
When the appraisal starts, it will send reminders to 
employees. An employee will see events on his/her calendar 
on a PC or a mobile. Following the guide in the reminders, 
the employee can nominate other employees to provide 
feedbacks. The nomination will be sent to the manager who 
then can choose from the list, add other employees if 
necessary and send out the invitations. The employees who 
are invited will receive reminders in their calendars. Opening 
the events, they can follow the guide to provide feedbacks. 
The feedbacks are for indexes defined by the organization. 
The manager will grade an employee based on the 
feedbacks and other defined indexes, and then the manager 
can communicate the results to the employee. As the 
feedbacks are collected from a wide audience, the manager 
can grade more subjectively and the employee can get more 
helpful advices. The collaboration process improves the 
precision of the appraisal and the satisfaction of the 
employee. 
B. Self-Serviced Career Planning 
In additional to the appraisal, an organization can provide 
a self-serviced career planning system to support the growth 
of employees. Figure 6 shows four steps in self-serviced 
career planning. 
 
 
 
Figure 6. The Self-Serviced Career Planning Process. 
Step 1: take tests. The system provides a career interest 
test, a career value test and a personality test. When an 
employee finishes those tests, he/she will have a profile in 
the system. The profile can be fact data for business 
intelligence analysis. The employee can search other 
employees based on his/her test results. Other employees can 
find theirs based on their profiles. It will build up a social 
system from the career perspective. 
Step 2: set goals. Career planning is to set goals for 
career growth. The employee can search positions based on 
his/her test and appraisal results. The system can also 
recommend open positions based on an analysis of the 
employee and positions’ requirements. 
Step 3: take actions. The employee may find mentors for 
some fields, join in some groups and attend some training. 
Step 4: contribute. As an employee grows up, he/she can 
provide help to other employees. He can be a mentor and add 
some resources. The system can also provide ranking or 
endorsement to mentors or experts. This will encourage 
volunteers to contribute to the system. 
The four steps are iterative growth steps for all 
employees. They enable every employee to create a 
high-quality career path plan. With this information, the 
Define 
Expectations 
Communicate 
Expectations 
Measue the Actual 
Performance 
Compare with 
Expectations 
Provide 
Feedbacks 
Record 
Performance 
Employee 
Manager 
Suppliers 
Team 
Memebers 
Subordinate 
Peers 
Customers 
Take Tests 
• Set 
Profile 
• Fact Data 
for BI 
Set Goals 
• Search 
Positions 
Take 
Actions 
• Find 
Mentors 
• Join 
Groups 
• Training 
Contribute 
• Be a 
Mentor 
• Add 
Resource 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-287-5
COLLA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

organization can have the dynamic information of talents and 
win in competitions. 
V. 
CAREER PATH PLANNING 
Career path is a series of positions in the corporation. 
Section 4 describes how to get evaluation result from the 
collaboration process. This section will describe how to get 
the career path that fits an employee. In other words, how 
can an employee find a positive higher-level position? This 
section will solve the problem. Based on “Suitable is the 
best”, the “Qualifying Rate” concept is proposed at first. 
A. Defining Qualifying Rate 
The position requirements and the evaluation are 
described in Section 2. For a specific position   , the index 
subset   , related threshold set    and weight set    can be 
specified. For the employee    at the position    , the 
evaluation result set     can be calculated in Section 4.  
Theoretically, the employee   qualifies for the 
position   , if   
      
              . In general, that is 
impossible for the next higher-level position, because he has 
not worked at the position yet. 
The Qualifying Rate     of the employee    for the 
position    is defined as follows. 
 
    
∑
 (  
      
 ) 
  
 
   (  
 )
  
  
   
  
; 
(13) 
                   . 
Here,        
   is the maximum value of the index   
  
It is obvious that: 
 
                             . 
(14) 
In general, positive     means that employee    
qualifies for the position   , and negative     means the 
opposite. For example, in the following diagram, employee 1 
qualifies for the position, and employee 2 does not qualify 
for the position. 
 
 
 
Figure 7. The capability model. 
B. Finding the next higher-level position 
From the above definition of Qualifying Rate, all the    s 
for an employee    to a position    can be calculated, which 
may be different from the current position. The next problem 
is how to select the next suitable higher-level position for the 
employee. 
Actually, the maximum     is just the decision. The 
position    is the most suitable higher-level position where: 
 
                         , 
(15) 
and the salary level (defined in Section 2) of    is higher 
than the one of the current position. 
C. Finding the career path 
The way to find the next higher-level position is 
proposed as above, but it is impossible to use the way to get 
the entire position path for the significant distance in position 
hierarchy. Career planning is to give the different career 
planning way according to the different person. This is 
complicated in a large enterprise, which normally has 
multiple levels and numerous regions. For instance, Sinopec 
Group has five levels of branches, three types of companies 
along the industry chain, millions of employees and almost 
50,000 branches. Rich historical career path data may be 
used to find similar career path cases. 
CBR technique in an artificial intelligence may be 
applied to career path planning. 
 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-287-5
COLLA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

 
 
Figure 8. CBR proess diagram. 
From the above diagram, the following “4-R” steps 
support the career path planning. 
Step 1: Retrieving. For an employee with an existing 
position, it looks for the same cases in the case library.  
Step 2: Reusing. If the same case is found, it recalls the 
historical data to plan the employee’s position path.  
Step 3: Revising. If no such case, the computer finds the 
most similar case, and saves it to a new case for the 
employee and HR manager to revise 
Step 4: Returning. Add the new case to the case library, if 
there is not any problem. 
The core technology is the matching algorithm. Based on 
current position, it can find the matching case, which has the 
minimum difference between the two persons. The distance 
definition of two persons    and    at position    may be 
given by: 
 
    
∑
    (  
      
  ) 
  
 
   (  
 )
  
  
   
  
. 
(16) 
By constantly learning, the case library gradually 
becomes bigger and bigger. This model was considered 
effective when tested in Sinopec. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Career planning is a collaborative effort of the employees, 
their teammates, managers and the corporation. This paper 
described a framework of information system to support the 
collaborations in career planning process. It defined a model 
for appraisal standards, and then it elaborated how to manage 
the evolution of standards and interactions with other 
modules in HR system. After that, it proposed the appraisal 
process and collaborations in the process. Based on the 
analysis of the rich and well organized historical data, career 
path planning supporting information system can be a 
valuable assistant to the employees and the corporation. 
The traditional career path selection is a manual process. 
The paper introduced an innovative solution to make 
automatic decision of the career path planning, which is 
based on the proposed Qualifying Rate to find the 
next-higher level positions and to get the whole career path 
by CBR. 
As this is a general framework to provide support of 
collaborations in career planning, only skeleton was defined. 
The future work will elaborate the data model and define 
more details of CBR. The model will be adjusted and 
improved based its applications in the corporations. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This paper is supported by the National Center for 
Mathematics and Interdisciplinary Sciences, CAS。Thank 
Prof. Changshui Zhang from Tsinghua University for his 
instructions to this paper. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Gary W. Carter, Kevin W. Cook, and David W. Dorsey, “Career 
paths: charting courses to success for organizations and their 
employees”, Chichester, U.K., Wiley-Blackwell, 2009, pp. 69-90. 
[2] 
Jessica Keyes, “Enterprise 2.0: Social Networking Tools to 
Transform Your Organization”, Boca Raton, Fla. CRC Press, c2013 
[3] 
Richard Lepsinger and Anntoinette D. Lucia, “The Art and Science of 
360-degree Feedback, Second Edition”, San Francisco, c2009. 
[4] 
Qijun Xia and Ming Rao, Dynamic case-based reasonin for process 
operation support systems, Engineering Applications of Artifacial 
Intelligence, Vol. 12, Issue 3, June 1999, pp. 343-361. 
[5] 
Agnar Aamodt and Enric Plaza, Case-based resoning: foundational 
issues, methodological variations, and system approaches, Artifical 
Intelligence Communications, Vol. 7, Number 1 / 1994, pp. 39-59. 
[6] 
H. John Bernardin and Joyce E. A. Russell, Human Resource 
Management: An Experiential Approach, New York, McGraw Hill, 
1998. 
[7] 
Mohammad Mehedi Hassan and Eui-Nam Huh, Dynamic cloud 
collaboration platform: a market-oriented approach, New York, NY, 
Springer, 2013.  
[8] 
Manlio Del Giudice, Elias G. Carayannis, and Maria Rosaria Della 
Peruta, 
Cross-Cultural 
Knowledge 
Management: 
Fostering 
Innovation and Collaboration Inside the Multicultural Enterprise, 
New York, NY, Springer, 2012, pp. 49-62. 
[9] 
Weibao Chang and Changshui Zhang, Model for Evaluation and 
Optimal Distribution of the Service Branches of Large Business 
Enterprises, Proceedings of the 2012 International Conference on 
e-Learning, e-Business, Enterprise Information Systems, and 
e-Government, WORLDCOMP’12, July16-19, 2012, Las Vegas 
Nevada, USA, pp. 273-279. 
 
 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-287-5
COLLA 2013 : The Third International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

