Consideration of the Function to Find Friends in Social Games 
 
Kohei Otake 
Graduate School of Business Administration 
Senshu University 
Kanagawa, Japan 
e-mail: mm111005@senshu-u.jp 
Tomofumi Uetake 
School of Business Administration 
Senshu University 
Kanagawa, Japan 
e-mail: uetake@isc.senshu-u.ac.jp
 
 
Abstract—Recently, 
social 
games 
have 
been 
attracting 
attention. Social games can be enjoyed more by building a 
relationship with other players. However, many users are 
playing social games only with their friends. There are 
functions to find friends through social games and social 
networking services, but these existing functions are not 
enough to find friends easily. In this paper, we consider the 
function to find friends in social game to find friends easily. In 
addition, we examine the method of visualizing and 
representing the friend candidates. We find that our 
visualization method may be effective to find good "like-
minded people" easily. 
Keywords－social game; SNS; network analysis; community 
forum; visualization 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Recently, social networking services (SNSs) are growing 
in popularity. SNS are web-based online services that focus 
on the building and reflecting of social networks among 
people. The typical SNS in Japan are Facebook, Mobage, 
mixi and GREE. Usually, these SNS companies sell online 
advertising on their sites. Their business model is based upon 
a large membership count. So, it is very important for SNS to 
assemble a large number of users. In this situation, social 
games have also been attracting attention [1][8]. It is because 
interesting social games can gather many users; so, SNS 
companies have introduced the social games aggressively. 
One of the features of social games is in leveraging the 
player's social network [2]. A player can share his/her game 
with friends. So, social games can be enjoyed more by 
building a relationship with other players. For example, 
FarmVille [15], a farm training game developed by Zynga in 
2009, is a very simple and easy game. However, players can 
share information and their experiences with "like-minded 
people" and "friends". This game was become popular and 
has more than 100 million users.  
Therefore, in social games, playing with "like-minded 
people" and "friends" is just as important as the contents of 
the game. So, it is important for social game developers and 
SNS companies to provide functions that can support finding 
"like-minded people" and "friends" easily [7]. 
Usually, there are two ways to contact unknown users in 
a social game. One way is through a function, provided by 
the game, to find friends. However, it is difficult to contact 
with unknown users through this function, because it is 
difficult to get enough information to communicate with 
each other. Another way is a (formal or informal) 
community forum provided by SNS. We think that this is 
very good to start new relationships, because it includes a 
large amount of information. But, this is not enough function 
to find good "like-minded people" and "friends" easily in a 
social game. 
There has been a lot of research about SNS [3][4][5]. For 
example, there has been research which focused on the 
structure of large-scale friend networks [5], analysis of 
network structures [10][11] and a growth models of SNS 
[12]. Since users recognize and make friends mutually in 
SNS, this research is static network research. Moreover, 
paying attention to the relationships with friends, network 
analysis using active users and an active link which changes 
dynamically has been studied [13]. Much of this research 
used social network analysis (SNA). 
The research was also performed on small-scale SNS 
(Regional SNS). So, the research on social games offered by 
large-scale SNS has stopped only at the research on a 
characteristic business model from the height of the novelty. 
Social games are attracting a lot of attention in recent 
years. They have also expanded market size and now service 
as killer contents of SNS. We think the relationships with 
friends through social games need to show clearly what kind 
of influences they were on users. Moreover, we think that it 
is necessary to examine how to exhibit effectively the 
function which social games have. In this paper, we observed 
"the method of finding a new friend through SNS" at the 
social game which draws cautions in recent years using SNA. 
But there has been little research about social games.  
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes 
problems of the social game. In Section 3, we consider the 
characteristics of the functions provided by SNS and social 
games. In Section 4, we examine our proposed methods. 
Section 5 summarizes our paper and describes our future 
works. 
II. 
PROBLEMS OF SOCIAL GAMES 
At first, in order to clarify the problems of social games, 
we carried out a questionnaire to social game players (84 
university students). The main questions are as follows. 
 
 
What kind of social games do you play? 
 
What kind of people do you play with? 
 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

Through the results of questionnaires, we found that 
many of them did not make new friends in social games. 
Many users are playing social games with already known 
users. They felt social games are fun, but it is difficult to 
make new friends. So, we interviewed five social game 
players (two experts and three beginners) about the difficulty 
mentioned above. Through the results of these interviews, 
we found that many players felt anxiety when they made 
contact with unknown users. Moreover, we found following 
two problems.  
 
1) Many players of social games who want friends do 
not know what kind of information is needed to contact 
unknown players 
2) It is difficult to contact to the friend candidates, 
because there are many candidates who have a wide 
variety of personal information. 
 
To solve the former problem, we focused on the 
community forum about the social game that includes large 
amount of information [6]. We analyzed the bulletin board 
for friend on “Bandit Nation” a Japanese social game from 
Mobage. We also categorized the posts that were written on 
the community forum. To clarify the information that is 
needed to contact unknown players, we used conjoint 
analysis based on the above categories. In the results of this 
analysis, the following three elements have been important in 
the bulletin board to contact with unknown players, in 
addition to basic attributes such as their status and conditions 
for which a partner is asked (For further information, see [6]). 
 
 
Manners: local rules of the game or netiquette 
 
Merits: mutual benefit (ex. replacing items) 
 
Communication: 
The 
frequency 
of 
message 
exchange, and the method of contact 
 
As mentioned above, although we have examined the 
former problem, we have not examined the latter problem 
yet. Therefore, we will now focus on the latter problem and 
we examine a method that supports contact with unknown 
friend candidates effectively in this paper. 
III. 
CONSIDERATION OF THE FUNCTION TO FIND FRIENDS 
By using an existing function in social games, a player 
can find the friend candidates. But in many cases, there are 
many friend candidates. Moreover, they usually have a wide 
variety of personal information. However, players cannot see 
personal information of individual candidates easily. So, the 
player is difficult to find "like-minded people". Moreover, 
contact with unknown users is usually uneasy. Since the 
information acquired in the game is restrictive, it is difficult 
for players to judge whether a candidate is appropriate or not. 
In order to solve this problem, we think that it is necessary to 
use information indicating the identity of the friend 
candidates.  
Usually, there are following types of information in SNS. 
 
 
User profiles  
 
User preferences 
 
On Mobage [14], a personal page includes following 
types of information. 
 
a) SNS friends 
b) Game titles which the user plays 
c) Communities to which the user belongs   
d) Favorite channels linked with video-sharing sites 
e) Profile (avatar, areas, jobs, age etc…) 
 
By using the above types of information, we think that it 
is effective for players to judge whether a friend candidates 
is appropriate or not. By analyzing personal pages in 
Mobage, we found that many users do not use d) Favorite 
channels, and users often do not publish e) Profile. So, it was 
difficult to use the above types of information. Therefore, we 
used a) Friends, b) Game titles and c) Communities in this 
paper.  
Moreover, there are many various the friend candidates. 
In this situation, we think that visualization is also important 
finding "like-minded people" effectively. So, we will 
examine the methods to visualize the relation between the 
player and friend candidates in next section. 
IV. 
EXAMINATION OF METHOD TO VISUALIZE 
In this paper, to examine the methods to visualize the 
relation between the player and friend candidates, we 
focused on Bandit Nation a major Japanese social game from 
Mobage and we set up the following situations (Tables I, II). 
TABLE I.  
PLAYER INFORMATION 
Game status 
Player’s preference 
Level: 100 
Type: Sexy 
Number of friends: 8 
Number of registered games: 2 
Number of communities: 9 
TABLE II.  
SEARCH CONDITIONS 
Required game status 
Attributes 
Level: 50 or more 
Type: Sexy 
Good manners 
Can cooperate in the game 
Can communicate in-game or through SNS 
Initial avatar: Not OK 
Items replace: OK 
TABLE III.  
PROPERTIES OF 14 FRIEND CANDIDATES 
 
Friends 
Game titles 
(Except Bandit 
Nation) 
Communities 
Average 
60.7 / user 
7.2 / user 
4 / user 
Max 
286 
35 
17 
Min 
8 
0 
0 
Standard 
Deviation 
75.3 
8.4 
4.6 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

We extracted users that satisfy at least three of the above 
conditions. As a result of searching, we extracted 14 friend 
candidates from about 200 users who wrote on the recruiting 
community forum in Bandit Nation. Properties of the 14 
friend candidates are shown in Table III. 
In this paper, we considered the following combination 
of information (case1, 2, 3) in order to find "like-minded 
people" effectively. 
 
 
Case 1: friends, games and communities  
 
Case 2: games and communities. 
 
Case 3: games, game categories and communities 
 
To grasp the relationship between the player and friend 
candidates easily, we visualize the properties of friend 
candidates using network analysis. In this paper, we used 
Pajek, a program for large network analysis, to draw network 
diagrams. The network diagram is drawn in the Kamada-
Kawai layout algorithm that uses spring forces proportional 
to the graph theoretic distances [9]. The network diagram 
specifications are shown in Table IV. 
TABLE IV.  
SPECIFICATION OF A NETWORK DIAGRAM 
Item names 
note 
Player node 
large gray triangle 
Friend candidates’ (fc) node 
small triangle 
Friend candidates’ friends’ node 
large circle 
Community node 
small ellipse 
Game title node 
small square 
Game category node 
small diamond 
Paths to communities and games from fc 
black path 
Paths to friends from fc 
gray path 
Paths to game categories from fc 
black and dots path 
Paths to game categories from Game 
gray and dots path 
 
A. Network diagram using Case 1 data 
At the beginning, we used case 1 data and we drew a 
network diagram (see Figure 1). 
At first glance, we found that the overwhelming majority 
of nodes are friend candidates’ friends’ nodes. Moreover, as 
mentioned above, the number of friends had a big difference 
by friend candidates. Therefore, the friend candidates who 
have many friends tended to be plotted far from the player 
when using the Kamada-Kawai layout algorithm. But it is 
not a negative factor for recruiters. If the player and the 
friend candidates have a large number of mutual friends, the 
network diagram may be plotted accurately. Therefore, this 
method may be effective to apply to closed communities 
(such as university SNS, enterprise SNS, etc.). However, 
users who wrote in the recruiting community forum had few 
mutual friends; so, we think that it is difficult to use this 
method in this case. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Part of the network diagram of case 1 
B. Network diagram using Case 2 data 
In case 1, we found that the player and friend candidates 
did not have mutual friends in the recruiting community 
forum. Therefore, we thought that it is difficult to use friend 
candidates’ friends’ information to draw the network 
diagram. So, we drew the network diagram by using Game 
and Community nodes only (see Figure 2). 
 
 
Figure 2.  Part of the network diagram of case 2 
Although there is a difference in users in case 2, the 
distance between users is shortened compared with case 1.  
Users who play the same game or belong to the same 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

communities are plotted especially near. We think that case 2 
can represent an accurate network diagram when compared 
to case 1. Furthermore, the network diagram of case 2 is 
easier-to-use than the network diagram of case 1.  However, 
when users are playing many different games, the problem 
that they will be plotted far from each other in network 
diagram arises. Playing various games is not a negative 
factor. If the player and the friend candidates have a large 
number of mutual game titles, the network diagram may be 
plotted accurately. But, users who wrote in the recruiting 
community forum had few mutual game titles, so we think 
that it is difficult to use this method in this case. 
C. Network diagram using Case 3 data 
In case 3, we used 10 game categories (RPG, Sports/Race, 
Puzzle, Action/Timing, Quiz/learning, Simulation/training, 
Adventure, Board/Card, Gambling, Other) of Mobage to 
draw a network diagram (see Figure 3). 
 
 
Figure 3.  Part of the network diagram of case 3 
We think that it is possible to measure the distance 
accurately by using game categories. Moreover, even if users 
do not play the same game title, the player can find "like-
minded people" in social games easily. We think that case 3 
can represent an accurate network diagram when compared 
to case 2.  
To evaluate this network diagram, we judged three users 
who were plotted nearby the player by analyzing their 
personal information. Through this evaluation, these three 
users seemed to be "like-minded people" for the player in 
this case. So, we think that this method is more effective to 
find good "like-minded people" easily in a social game than 
the existing social game’s function.  
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS 
In this paper, we focused on social games. Social games 
can be enjoyed more by building a relationship with other 
players. However, many users are playing social games with 
their friends only. They feel that making new friends in 
social games is difficult. To solve this problem, we focused 
on the difficulties which arise when a user contacts friend 
candidates. In order to solve this problem, we think that it is 
necessary to use information indicating the identity of friend 
candidates. Moreover, we examine the methods used to 
visualize the relationship between the player and friend 
candidates. We considered three cases of combination of 
information in order to find "like-minded people" effectively. 
We found that visualization of the relation between the 
player and friend candidates by using the user’s preference 
information may be effective to find good "like-minded 
people" easily. 
But, we set a same weight to all paths to draw the 
network diagram. So, there is still room for deliberation. We 
should research the reasonable weight of the paths. We 
should also evaluate our proposal. These are our plans for 
future works. 
REFERENCES 
[1] "The annual On-line Game industry report in 2009, 2010, 
2011" (In Japanese) 
[2] "FGH : Famitsu game hakusho 2010, 2011", enterbrain (In 
Japanese) 
[3] Y. Matsuo (2006), "Indivisuals and Collaboration in Web2.0 
Environments", Information Processing Society of Japan, Vol. 
47, No. 11, pp. 1229-1236 (In Japanese) 
[4] L. A. Adamic, O. Buyukkokten, and E. Adar (2003), "A 
Social Network Caught in the web", First Monday, Vol. 8, No. 
6 
[5] K. Yuta, N. Ono, and Y. Fujiwara (2006), "Structural 
Analysis of Human Network in Social Networking Services", 
Information Processing Society of Japan, Vol. 47, No. 3, pp. 
865-874 (In Japanese) 
[6] K. Otake and T. Uetake (2011), "Consideration for 
community activation in social games", The Japanese Society 
for AI, SIG-KSN-009-01 (In Japanese) 
[7] K. Otake, T. Fukutomi, and T. Uetake (2011), "Quality of 
Community in Social Game", HCI International 2011 posters’ 
extended abstracts Communications in Computer and 
Information Science, Vol. 173, Part VI, pp. 464-468 
[8] M. Nojima (2008), "Why do people buy things why do not 
form", NTT shuppan sha. (In Japanese)  
[9] T. Kamada and S. Kawai (1989), "An algorithm for drawing 
general undirected graphs information", Processing Letters, 
Vol. 31, pp. 7-15 
[10] F. Toriumi, K. Ishida, and K. Ishii (2008), “Analysis of 
Network of Regional SNS”, IEICE technical report, AI2008-
22 108 (208), pp. 33-38 
[11] Y. Matsuo and Y. Yasuda (2006), “How Relations are Built 
within a SNS world - Social Network Analysis on Mixi -“, 
Transactions 
of 
the 
Japanese 
Society 
for 
Artificial 
Intelligence technical report, AI 22, pp. 531-541 
[12] K. Ishida, F. Toriumi, and K. Ishii (2008), “Proposal for a 
Growth Model of Social Network Servise”, Proceedings of 
Web Intelligence and Intelligent Agent Technology, pp. 91-97 
[13] R. Yamaguchi, F. Toriumi, and K. Ishii (2009), “Analysis of 
user behavior in SNS”, IEICE, AI, 108(456), pp. 69-74 
[14] <http://yahoo-mbga.jp/>, 01. 30. 2012 
[15] <http://company.zynga.com/games/farmville/>, 01. 30. 2012 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

