Oh, no! Not Another Web-based Desktop! 
 
Anna Goy, Giovanna Petrone, Marino Segnan 
Dipartimento di Informatica 
Università di Torino 
Torino, Italy 
{goy, giovanna, marino}@di.unito.it
 
 
Abstract—Among the advantages of cloud services, the most 
important are ubiquitous availability and collaboration 
support. Are the current technological solutions up to the job, 
in order to face the challenges posed by these two features? To 
provide an answer, the paper surveys some examples of online 
collaboration applications and concludes that what is still 
missing is an environment that acts as a “glue” with respect to 
all user online activities. We present TablesPlusPlus (T++), an 
online meta-environment handling thematic and collaborative 
contexts as tables. The user sits at to organize and perform her 
activities, thanks to an effective support to user collaboration. 
The paper discusses the characteristics of T++ and describes its 
architecture, together with our proof-of-concept prototype. 
T++ represents the missing environment, acting as a “glue” 
with respect to heterogeneous collaborative user activities. 
Keywords-Online collaboration; cloud services; ubiquitous 
services; activity context; Web desktop. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Cloud computing [10] is the paradigm that enabled the 
most recent step of a trend started with the so called Web 2.0 
[37] some years ago: Web sites become more interactive, 
enabling users to perform various kind of activities online; 
tools installed on the user’s PC are replaced by services 
offered over the Net and accessed through a Web browser; 
connection availability increased significantly, enabling 
users to be almost always online; mobile apps available for 
smartphones and tablets enable users to connect to online 
services anytime/anywhere; social software provided over 
the Internet supports collaboration and sharing among users. 
Cloud services (i.e., Web-based applications running “in 
the cloud”) have many advantages with respect to stand-
alone applications: e.g., they are less expensive, they are 
always up to date, they are more secure. However, from our 
point of view, the two main advantages of cloud services are 
ubiquitous availability and collaboration support. A cloud 
service is always available to the user, provided that she has 
a device with a Web browser (or an app) and an internet 
connection. Moreover, cloud services provide a flexible and 
effective support to collaborative activities of users. Users 
can connect to their office applications from home in order to 
read or update documents; they can access their family 
calendar and schedule appointments while sitting on a train; 
they can participate in a discussion aimed at taking an urgent 
decision through their smartphones; and so on. Computer 
Supported Collaborative Work (CSCW) is a research field 
that dates back to the ‘80s, but the growth of the Web in the 
last decades, coupled with widespread internet availability, 
has brought a huge impulse to the need of supporting user 
working or living in different places to collaborate on 
various kinds of activities, even outside the company 
environment. Moreover, a number of key factors have made 
Web-based user collaboration an issue of major importance. 
Such factors can be summarized as follows. 
(1) In the last decade there has been a cultural shift 
towards “24/7 sharing” [20], meaning that people are, or 
need to be, always online, in order to share content, 
information, knowledge. In particular, Girard and colleagues 
claim that people born between 1980 and 2000 can be 
considered a “share generation”: they “grew up digital” and 
consider sharing information and knowledge as a natural 
attitude, much more than their parents [20]. 
(2) Many experts from different fields claim that 
encouraging collaboration in work environment results in 
huge benefits for the company itself. Effective collaboration 
and knowledge sharing among workers could result in an 
enhanced innovation capacity, decreased time to market, 
reduced time in the sales circle or in customer care services, 
reduced travel costs, easier decision making [20]. 
(3) Private and, in particular, family life has become 
much more complex than before [33][34]: families have to 
coordinate many mundane activities, involving parents, 
children, or both. School activities can require parents 
participation; children are involved in cultural or sports after-
school activities; they have an active social life which has to 
be supported; parents have to merge work commitments with 
family needs and personal leisure; and so on. 
(4) Work tends to be performed ubiquitously: it is not 
necessary, or possible, to be always physically at the 
workplace; people are more and more used to perform work 
tasks remotely, not only from home, but while traveling, for 
instance [28]. This trend leads to the idea of a virtual 
enterprise [20][33], in which physical offices are not 
important, or even do not exist, while many activities and 
communications take place in the cloud. 
(5) Work and private life tend to mix together [20][33]: 
they are not distinct spheres any more, handled at different 
times and places, and with different tools. People get used to 
connect to their cloud office while at home, or on holiday; 
private and work calendars should be integrated in order to 
have an holistic view of personal schedules, which enables 
an integrated management of life activities [27][34]. 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

The question this paper tries to answer is the following: 
are the current technological solutions up to the job, in order 
to face these challenges? To answer this question we will 
briefly survey the various available solutions supporting user 
collaboration in different contexts (Section II). On the basis 
of this critical analysis, we will conclude that what is missing 
is not just another collaborative tool, but a framework 
supporting 
the 
user 
in 
easily 
managing 
different 
collaborative tools all together. This goal is reached by 
proposing an innovative interaction model, implemented by 
an application that acts as a “glue” with respect to all user 
activities (Section III). We will conclude the paper 
highlighting the major open issues of our work (Section IV). 
II. 
RELATED WORK AND MOTIVATIONS 
An exhaustive survey of the existing Web-based 
applications supporting various type of collaboration is 
impossible to realize, since their number is huge. The 
AppAppeal Web site [4] provides a thorough review of more 
than two thousands existing online collaboration tools 
(grouped in 154 categories). However, we would like to take 
some of them into account, as representatives of the different 
categories, in order to provide an overview of the supported 
functionalities, which should highlight what is still missing. 
A good and wide survey can be found in [33]. 
The oldest and most popular applications that, to some 
extent, support user collaboration are online communication 
tools, like email, instant messages, and chat managers (e.g., 
AOL Instant Messenger [3], Windows Live Messenger [31]). 
More complex multi-party communication applications are 
Web-based audio/video conferencing tools, usually including 
file sharing, annotation, whiteboard features, chat, etc. An 
An example is Skype [39], among many others. Moreover, 
online file sharing repositories (e.g., Dropbox [13]) enable 
users to store and to exchange files in different formats. 
Besides these “historical” solutions, there are plenty of 
applications enabling collaboration on specific activities. A 
significant 
example 
are 
online 
services 
enabling 
collaborative word processing, including spreadsheets and 
presentations editing (e.g., Google Documents [24], 
eXpresso [16], Empressr [15]). 
The major family of applications supporting user 
collaboration includes groupware and project management 
tools. Many of the current solutions are Web-based (e.g., 
EGroupware [14], Feng Office [19], ActiveCollab [1], 
BSCW [7]), usually support workflow management, and are 
often integrated with communication tools, productivity 
applications (e.g., word processing), and document sharing. 
Some recent online services provide a more flexible 
collaboration support. For instance, Cohuman (recently 
rebranded as Mindjet Connect Action) [9] supports users in 
coordinating and planning their daily tasks and projects; 
Kohive [30] is an Web-based collaborative desktop 
particularly suitable for small businesses and informal 
groups; Teambox [40] is an open source collaboration tool 
enabling users to coordinate team members by assigning 
tasks, managing projects, and sharing ideas and documents. 
Moreover, there are many tool suites aiming at 
supporting collaborative work within the enterprise, like, 
e.g., Microsoft Office 365 [32] and Google Apps for 
Business [23]. Such suites typically support email, 
messaging 
services, 
chat, 
and 
video-conferencing; 
collaborative word processing; file sharing, shared calendars, 
and often also Web site development and maintenance. Other 
type of enterprise cloud collaboration environments are tools 
like 
Cisco 
Collaboration 
Cloud 
[8], 
addressing 
teleconferencing environments to help small companies to be 
present at their customer sites, without traveling burdens. 
All these applications are usually oriented to workflow 
and enterprise content management, and can be hardly 
exploited to manage the different aspects of everyday 
activities, merging business and private concerns (as outlined 
in Section I). Moreover, they are typically based on closed 
architectures: although they offer many services, the user is 
forced to abandon her favorite collaborative tools in favor of 
an exclusive adoption of the groupware application; another 
consequence of the closed architecture is the impossibility of 
plugging in external services, to enhance the system 
functionality answering a user need. 
Besides enterprise-oriented applications, there are tools 
which aim at a simpler handling of to-do lists, thus more 
suited to informal collaboration contexts. E.g., Google Tasks 
[24] handles simple tasks as lists of text notes and it is 
integrated with Google Calendar [24] and Google Mail [24], 
thus enabling users to easily convert an email message into a 
task. Other popular task managers are Things [41], for Mac 
and iPhone, and DoIt [12]. These tools have some strong 
limitations: their integration with other possible sources of 
tasks (e.g., instant messages, social networks) is very limited; 
tasks are handled as simple text notes, with no structure and 
no integration with other applications supporting their 
execution; and their collaborative features are very poor. 
There are also some environments aiming at providing 
comprehensive 
suites 
including 
different 
integrated 
collaborative tools. A popular example is Zoho suite [42], 
that includes online business intelligence and CRM tools, 
besides project management, collaborative word-processing, 
communication facilities, and so on. Another type of Web 
application geared towards providing a unified access to 
different collaborative tools are the so-called Web-based 
desktops (Webtops), usually characterized by a desktop-like 
graphical user interface, often similar to that of Windows or 
Mac OS, accessible via a simple Web browser. Some 
popular Webtops are eyeOS [17], Nivio [35]. 
All these solutions, providing a unified environment for 
accessing different services, are probably the best answer to 
the requirements stated in Section I. However, they still 
suffer a lack of integration with heterogeneous applications, 
since the applications available in such suites are only those 
provided by the same provider or by a partner of it. 
Finally, there is a particular type of Web sites that, to 
some extent, enables user collaboration, and that is worth 
mentioning since it is by far the most popular way people use 
to communicate and share contents: social networks, like 
Delicious [11], enabling users to keep their bookmarks 
online and to share them, or like the more generic Facebook 
[18] and Google+ [26]. Within social networks, the main 
goals 
are 
communicating 
and 
sharing 
rather 
than 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

collaborating. Miller states this very clearly: “I find social 
network groups especially useful for community groups, far-
flung friends, and families. You get just enough functionality 
to keep everyone in touch with each other” [33]. “These 
groups lack the advanced collaboration features that help to 
keep group projects on track” [33]. However, since they are 
used by a huge number of people, we think that they must be 
taken into careful account. Thus, in the following we briefly 
survey the main functionality of the most popular one, i.e., 
Facebook, and of its most recent competitor, Google+. 
Being both social platforms, Facebook and Google+ 
share many features. In both cases, the main interaction 
metaphor is accessing a “stream” of content, and the basic 
activities are reading/publishing posts and state updates, and 
sharing information. Both Facebook and Google+ enable the 
user to create private, possibly overlapping groups of 
contacts, which in Google+ are called circles. The main goal 
of Google+ circles is selective sharing (users can publish 
content available only to some circles) and selective 
following (they can decide to see only the contents published 
by members of a circle). Chat presence is not selective with 
respect to circles/groups; however, in both Facebook and 
Google+, the user can manually configure selective presence 
with respect to pre-defined lists of contacts. Group chat can 
be used to plan activities with multiple people, in both cases. 
Google+ is fully integrated with many Google services (e.g., 
Google Mail, Google Documents, Google Talk); similar 
services are provided also by Facebook, but Google services 
integration is supported by the Google toolbar, which 
provides notifications concerning the Google environment 
even when the user is not looking at any Google+ page. 
Finally, both platforms are easily accessible from mobile 
devices (through Android and iPhone apps). 
Besides these common features, there are also some 
differences. The first set of differences concerns Google+ 
circle management (with respect to Facebook groups). Circle 
names (and thus circles tout court) are visible only to their 
owner, and represent an individual “perspective” on the 
social network. On the contrary, Faceboook groups are “in 
the world” and are not simply a “view” of it. When invited, a 
user receives a notification and is automatically added to the 
group. The mechanism is similar in Google+: circles can 
contain people I think are interesting, even if they are not 
aware of belonging to a circle of mine, and even if we do not 
know each other; Google+ notifies you if I added you to one 
of my circles, but does not notify if I move someone, for 
example, from my “friends” circle to my “ugly people” one. 
One of the most interesting aspects of Google+ is that users 
can share a post with people who are not Google+ users: in 
this case, sharing is done via email. Finally, Google+ offers 
an innovative functionality, called hangouts: Google+ users 
can access virtual video-rooms where people can meet online 
to chat or to see a YouTube video all together. An interesting 
aspect of hangouts is that they do not have an “owner” and 
control is totally “egalitarian”: everyone in it can invite 
anybody else and can act (play, stop, pause) on a YouTube 
video shown in the “room”. 
We would like to conclude this section by highlighting 
the main reasons why social networks are not enough to 
support user collaboration in the perspective outlined in 
Section I. As we stated above, social networks are mainly 
focused on communication and sharing, enabling the user to 
move within structured streams of contents. As a 
consequence, in Facebook groups, collaboration tools are 
basically limited to chat interaction; in addition, Facebook 
chat, like other chats, is limited from a workspace awareness 
viewpoint, since it does not support selective presence based 
on group membership. Also Google+ circles fail to support 
user collaboration in a general sense: each circle, in fact, 
exists only from the viewpoint of its creator, and thus it 
cannot be used by the circle members for managing the 
execution of shared activities. Moreover, due to their 
different goal, social networks, similarly to the other 
collaborative environments discussed before, lack the 
integration with heterogeneous services. Thus, social 
networks, like many other collaboration tools mentioned 
above, can be seen as one of the possibilities offered to Web 
users to communicate, share and - to some extent - 
collaborate online. However, what is still missing is a meta-
environment which should be able to manage all the different 
tools the user is used to, by organizing them in workspaces 
which have, as their main characteristic, the effective support 
to a “egalitarian” and user-friendly collaboration. Next 
section describes our proposal in this direction. 
III. 
OUR PROPOSAL: TABLESPLUSPLUS 
The interaction model we propose is based on the 
metaphor of tables the user sits at in order to perform 
(online) activities. Tables represent activity contexts, and can 
be created around an interest or a more specific goal. E.g., 
we can have a permanent table about my interest in 
Buddhism, but also a temporary table for the organization of 
a journey to India. The meta-environment enabling users to 
create and manage tables is called TablesPlusPlus (T++). In 
the following, we will describe a usage scenario, to provide 
the reader with an intuitive idea of the support that T++ 
could offer. Then, we will characterize tables in order to 
differentiate them from currently available proposals, and 
finally we will present T++ architecture, together with our 
proof-of-concept implementation. 
A. Usage Scenario 
Maria is a 40 years old researcher at the local university; 
she is married with Marc and they have two children, Albert 
and Paula; Maria is interested in Buddhism, and sometimes 
she leads travel groups to India. Within her T++ 
environment, she has (among others) the following tables: 
(T1) Research, used to manage her collaborations with 
her research group at the university. Table members are four 
colleagues of her. Objects lying on this table are: a Zoho 
Project, used to manage a research project including foreign 
partners; various documents concerning her current main 
research thread; some related papers and materials (links to 
online pdf documents or Web sites); a small workflow, used 
to handle tasks concerning a national project proposal. 
(T2) Family, used to manage family life. Table members 
are her husband Marc, her children, and her mother Louise. 
Objects lying on this table are some to-do items (e.g., book a 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

visit to the dentist for Albert), a shared document containing 
the shopping list, a link to the Genova Aquarium Web site 
(Paula is going there with her classmates next week). This 
table is also subscribed to a public publish&subscribe (P&S) 
service, where children’s school office publishes news about 
interesting events involving families. 
(T3) Buddhism, used to handle the activities related to 
her interests in that topic. Table members are Daniel and 
some other friends. Objects lying on this table are links to 
articles, books and Web sites concerning Eastern philosophy. 
This table is also subscribed to a public P&S service, where 
some associations related to Buddhism publish news. 
(T4) Journey to India, used to organize the journey she 
will lead, planned for next summer. Table members are 
Linda (the secretary of the tour operator organizing the 
journey) and Daniel (who usually helps her in arranging the 
cultural aspects of her journeys). Objects lying on this table 
are links to Web sites related to travel locations and a to-do 
list with activities concerning the travel organization. 
All Maria’s tables contain her calendar, shared with the 
other table members. Visibility can be configured with 
respect to single tables (e.g., when sitting at the Research 
table, people see that Maria is not available next Friday, but 
they cannot see that she will be in Genova with Paula). 
At lunch time, Maria is in her office; she sits at the 
Family table and notices that both her husband and grandma’ 
Louise are at the table too; so she writes a message on the 
table blackboard to decide who is going to take Albert to the 
basket training session and Paula to the jazz-dance class. 
Louise reads Maria’s message and offers to take Paula; Marc 
asks Maria to contact him later on in order to decide who 
will take Albert. Maria, by a simple click, transforms Marc’s 
message in a task Contact_Marc with deadline at 17 
(automatically copied also as a calendar event), and creates a 
new task, Take_Paula, assigned to Louise. 
While Maria is at a cafè for lunch, she receives an alert 
on his smarthphone, notifying her that the Buddhism table 
has been updated. Maria enters T++, sits at the Buddhism 
table and read the new message about a conference on 
Buddhism in Western countries, arrived from the P&S 
service. She decides that the conference is interesting, thus, 
by a simple click, she adds it to her calendar. 
Later on, when she is back home, she connects again to 
T++ through her personal tablet, sits at the Journey to India 
table and starts writing a document (using Google 
Documents) describing the cultural events for the journey. 
Daniel appears online and comments on the content that 
Maria is writing. The collaborative editing goes on for a 
while; Daniel and Maria also add some references to 
interesting Web sites they found, as new table objects. When 
they leave the table, Linda is notified about table updates. 
B. The Role of Tables 
Within T++, tables have been conceived in order to 
support and facilitate “democratic” and user-friendly online 
collaboration, by providing, at the same time, a flexible and 
manageable integrated organization of individual activities: 
this is the most important aspect underlying T++ design. 
Moreover, the following features are important in order to 
understand the role of tables and to differentiate them from 
simple user groups. 
(1) Tables in T++ are meta-structures upon applications 
and services. The goal is to build a “view” on the user own 
Web space, used to collaborate and to organize her activities, 
hopefully not providing yet another tool. In particular, tables 
represent thematic contexts, helping the user to manage 
separated, 
coherent 
and 
structured 
workspaces, 
encompassing all types of activities (from personal to work-
related ones). At the same time, tables represent common 
places where users can, synchronously or asynchronously, 
share information, actively work together on a document, a 
to-do list, a set of bookmarks, and so on. 
(2) Tables are populated by objects, rather than links to 
applications and services. Such objects can be of any sort: 
documents, to-do lists and workflows, calendar views, 
bookmarks, images, Dropbox “spaces”, projects, and so on. 
Moreover, they can be labeled as “public” (i.e., visible to all 
table members) or “private” (i.e., visible only to their 
creator). Also table messages can be public, i.e., published 
on the table blackboard and thus visible to all table members, 
or private, in which case they represent personal notes. 
(3) Objects can be tagged, in order to structure them in 
(possibly multiple) categories, easily accessible through a tag 
cloud. For example, on the Journey to India table, Maria 
could tag a set of objects as “travel organization”, and 
another (possibly overlapping) set as “cultural evenings”. 
(4) Tables enable users to collaborate with people sitting 
at the same table: every table participant is enabled to modify 
public objects lying on the table. This means that every table 
participant can, for instance, edit documents lying on the 
table by accessing an online word processing service, but 
also that she can organize the table, by adding and deleting 
objects, as well as by inviting people. Differently from all 
types of “virtual rooms”, tables enable both synchronous and 
asynchronous collaboration. In fact, they notify table 
members - according to the notification policy individually 
configured by each member - about all relevant events 
occurring on the table (e.g., an object has been added or 
modified; a new public message has been published on the 
table blackboard; a new member has joined the table; a task 
has been completed; and so on). 
(5) Tables are shared: they are not a single user’s “view” 
on objects and people, but a “collective view”: when a user 
sets up a table and invites people, everyone who agrees will 
see the table and will be able to work on it. For this reason, 
users invited to a table become members of it only if they 
agree (differently, for example, from Google+ circles). 
(6) 
Tables 
represents 
activity 
contexts 
enabling 
workspace awareness and selective presence: differently 
from standard chat tools, when a user is sitting at a table, the 
(default) presence panel will show her a list including only 
table members, and, among them, who is currently online 
and sitting at that table. When a user is sitting at a table, she 
remains invisible within other tables, thus she is not 
disturbed with chat or calls coming from different contexts. 
(7) Tables contain members’ calendars, shared with the 
other table members. However, the visibility policy can be 
configured with respect to single tables: for example, the 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

user can decide to completely hide her calendar on table T1,  
to allow complete visibility (e.g., what she is doing during 
the weekend) on table T2, and to enable partial visibility 
(e.g. only that she is busy during the weekend) on table T3. 
(8) Scheduling of common activities is supported by the 
Smart Shared Calendar Management Service. This service is 
briefly described in Section III.C (see also [5]). 
(9) Tasks, to-do lists, and lightweight workflows are 
managed by the Collaborative Task Management Service, 
which is briefly described in Section III.C (see also [5][6]). 
(9) Other objects are managed by the user’s favorite 
collaborative applications. When double-clicking an object, 
or choosing the “modify” option from the object menu, the 
corresponding application is run, enabling the user to 
view/modify the object. 
(10) A person can be member of different tables and an 
object can belong to different tables (in case of editable 
objects, like Google Documents items, if the user tries to put 
on a table T2 an object that already lies on table T1, the 
system asks her whether she wants to add it in read-only 
modality or if she wants to create a new independent copy). 
There are two further characteristics that are particularly 
meaningful in T++, since they represent the openness of the 
environment, by enabling users to link tables to remote 
services, and allowing the participation of people which are 
not fully T++ registered users: 
(11) Tables can be subscribed to public P&S services, 
where external services publishes news (e.g., RSS feeds); 
subscribed tables receive messages from such hubs and 
publish them on the table blackboard, thus making them 
visible to all table members (see Section III.C). 
(12) People can collaborate to a table work even without 
being users of the T++ environment. An example scenario of 
how T++ manages the interaction with people who are not 
T++ users is the following. Maria would like to invite her 
friend Ann at the Journey to India table, even though she 
knows that Ann does not want to register to T++. Maria, 
through the table user interface, sends the invitation (an 
email with an “accept” link). If Ann accepts the invitation 
but does not register to T++, she will simply receive an email 
confirming her membership to the table (and the system 
keeps track of her through her email address, as a 
non_T++_user). If Maria publishes a public message on the 
table blackboard, T++ sends Ann an email containing 
Maria’s message. Ann can reply to this email: T++ receives 
her answer and publishes it on the table blackboard (making 
it thus available to all table users). The same mechanism 
enables Ann to receive notifications coming from P&S 
services the table is subscribed to (see Section III.C). 
Finally, it is worth mentioning that T++ is accessible 
both from desktop PC and from mobile devices (including 
smartphones); see Section III.C for some details. 
C. T++ Architecture and Proof-of-Concept Prototype 
The T++ environment is implemented as a cloud 
application. The proof-of-concept prototype is a GWT [25] 
application, deployed on the Google App Engine [22], but 
the same architecture should work on other cloud hosting 
environments. The cloud services offered by T++ are 
available both from the GWT client running within the 
browser and from the Android App, as shown in Fig. 1. We 
exploit the Android Cloud to Device Messaging (C2DM [2]) 
to send data (lightweight messages) from servers to the 
applications on Android devices. 
 
 
Figure 1.  T++ architecture. 
Fig. 1 also depicts T++ architecture. The main 
component is the Table Management Service, that handles 
tables within the environment. The Table Mgm Service 
exploits the Smart Shared Calendar Management Service, 
that automatically accesses members calendars to find time 
slots in which they are available (see [5]). The Object 
Management Service handles all the issues related to objects 
lying on tables. It exploits other collaborative applications in 
order to offer tools for collaboratively modifying objects: 
e.g., a collaborative online word processing application (like 
Google Documents), a project management tool (like Zoho 
Projects), a social network (like Facebook), and so on. 
Moreover, it exploits the Collaborative Task Management 
Service (see [5][6]), that enables table members to share 
tasks, to partially order them in lightweight workflows, and 
to link each task to the Web tool needed to perform it. The 
People Management Service handles table membership and 
selective presence. The Message Management Service 
handles 
user 
public 
messages, 
published 
on 
table 
blackboards, and user private notes. The Notification 
Management Service takes care of the notifications related to 
table activities. Notifications can be generated by table 
events (table members performing some significant action on 
the table), or by external public hubs (Public P&S Services 
in the figure) tables are subscribed to. 
T++ exploits the JavaMail API [29] and a T++ email 
account (on Google Mail) to send and receive messages from 
people who are not T++ users. The T++ users already 
registered as Google or Facebook users do not need to 
register again, given that the People Mgm Service exploits 
OAuth [36] to give access to users and collect information 
already available on their Google or Facebook accounts. 
All T++ cloud services exploit the App Engine 
schemaless Object Datastore [21]: they save data objects as 
entities having properties, i.e., named values of one of 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

several supported data types. The datastore can execute 
multiple operations in a single transaction: this is especially 
useful for distributed Web applications like T++, where 
multiple users may be accessing or manipulating the same 
data at the same time. 
The subscription of a table to a public P&S service (e.g., 
Pubsubhubbub [38]) is a simple operation, consisting in 
adding an URL in the table configuration panel, and is one of 
the operations available to table members, when sitting at the 
table. Moreover, tables can be configured in order to react to 
published events in a more complex way. This kind of 
integration requires the implementation of some code within 
the Table Mgm Service. The complexity of such code 
depends on the format of the data published and on the 
nature of the internal activity to be triggered (see [5] for 
more details about remote services integration). 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, after an analysis of some examples of 
different types of Web-based collaborative tools, we 
concluded that what is missing is a framework providing the 
user with a “view” on her own Web space, effectively 
supporting her in collaborating and organizing her life 
activities. We thus proposed T++, a meta-environment based 
on the metaphor of tables, i.e., activity contexts that can be 
created to handle objects (documents, links, tasks, and so on) 
related to an interest or a specific goal. In presenting T++, 
we also took into account the possibility of subscribing 
tables to public P&S services, in order to get information 
from remote services, and the possibility, for people who are 
not T++ users, of collaborating to a table work through their 
email accounts. These two aspects, in particular, require 
further work. The integration of T++ with remote services 
through public P&S services could be enhanced taking into 
account the semantics of the exchanged data. The interaction 
with not T++ users, could be enhanced by supporting, within 
a table context, the usage of other online collaborative 
applications the user may be registered to (e.g., Facebook). 
The need for an effective support to a “democratic” and 
user-friendly online collaboration coupled with a flexible and 
integrated organization of individual activities has been 
elicited by means of informal interviews with Web users 
used to exploit social networks and online collaborative 
tools. However, the actual usefulness and usability of a 
framework like T++ depends on the evaluation of real users; 
for this reason, we are planning a set of tests with Web users, 
aimed at evaluating these aspects of our proposal. 
REFERENCES 
[1] ActiveCollab: www.activecollab.com, 04.11.2012 
[2] Android 
Cloud 
to 
Device 
Messaging 
(C2DM): 
code.google.com/android/c2dm, 04.11.2012 
[3] AOL Instant Messenger: www.aim.com, 04.11.2012 
[4] AppAppeal: www.appappeal.com, 04.11.2012 
[5] L. Ardissono, G. Bosio, A. Goy, G. Petrone, and M. Segnan, 
“Integration of cloud services for web collaboration: a user-
centered perspective”, in Models for Capitalizing on Web 
Engineering Advancements: Trends and Discoveries, G. I. 
Alkhatib, Ed., Hershey, PA: IGI Global, 2012, pp. 1-19. 
[6] L. Ardissono, G. Bosio, A. Goy, G. Petrone, M. Segnan, and 
F. Torretta, “Collaboration support for activity management 
in a Personal Cloud”, Int. Journal of Distributed Systems and 
Technologies (IJDST), 2(4), 2011, pp. 30-43. 
[7] BSCW: public.bscw.de/en/about.html, 04.11.2012 
[8] Cisco Collaboration Cloud: www.cisco.com/en/US/solutions/ 
ns1007/collaboration_cloud.html, 04.11.2012 
[9] Cohuman/Mindjet Connect: www.cohuman.com, 04.11.2012 
[10] M. 
Creeger, 
“CTO 
roundtable: 
Cloud 
computing”, 
Communications of the ACM, 52(8), 2009, pp. 50–65. 
[11] Delicious: delicious.com, 04.11.2012 
[12] DoIt: www.doit.im, 04.11.2012 
[13] Dropbox: www.dropbox.com, 04.11.2012 
[14] EGroupware: www.egroupware.org, 04.11.2012 
[15] Empressr: www.empressr.com, 04.11.2012 
[16] eXpresso: www.expressocorp.com, 04.11.2012 
[17] eyeOS: www.eyeos.com, 04.11.2012 
[18] Facebook: www.facebook.com, 04.11.2012 
[19] Feng Office: www.fengoffice.com, 04.11.2012 
[20] J. Girard, C. Gordon, and J. Girard, “Knowledge Sharing as 
an Enabler of Virtual Business”. The Electronic Journal of 
Knowledge Management, 9(3), 2011, pp. 181-187. 
[21] Google App Engine Datastore: code.google.com/appengine/ 
docs/java/datastore, 04.11.2012 
[22] Google App Engine: code.google.com/appengine, 04.11.2012 
[23] Google Apps for Business: www.google.com/apps/intl/en/ 
business/index.html, 04.11.2012 
[24] Google 
Apps: 
www.google.com/apps/intl/en/group/, 
04.11.2012 
[25] GWT: developers.google.com/web-toolkit, 04.11.2012 
[26] Google+: plus.google.com, 04.11.2012 
[27] A. Grimes, and A. Brush, “Life scheduling to support 
multiple social roles”, Proc. 26th Annual CHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems, New York, NY: ACM 
Press, 2008, pp. 821–824. 
[28] D. Hislop, and C. Axtell, “The neglect of spatial mobility in 
contemporary studies of work: The case of telework”, New 
Technology, Work and Employment, 22(1), 2007, pp. 34–51. 
[29] JavaMail API: www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javamail, 
04.11.2012 
[30] Kohive: kohive.com, 04.11.2012 
[31] Ms Messenger: explore.live.com/windows-live-messenger, 
04.11.2012 
[32] Ms Office 365: www.microsoft.com/office365, 04.11.2012 
[33] M. Miller, “Cloud Computing. Web-Based Applications That 
Change the Way You Work and Collaborate Online”, 
Indianapolis, IN: Que Publishing, 2009. 
[34] C. Neustaedter, A. J. B. Brush, and S. Greenberg, “The 
calendar is crucial: Coordination and awareness through the 
family calendar”, ACM Transaction on Computer-Human 
Interaction, 16(1), 2009, pp. 6:1-6:48. 
[35] Nivio: www.nivio.com, 04.11.2012 
[36] OAuth: oauth.net/2, 04.11.2012 
[37] T. O’Reilly, “What is Web 2.0: Design patterns and business 
models for the next generation of software”, Communications 
& Strategies, 1(65), 2007, 17–37. 
[38] Pubsubhubbub:code.google.com/p/pubsubhubbub, 04.11.2012 
[39] Skype: www.skype.com, 04.11.2012 
[40] Teambox: teambox.com, 04.11.2012 
[41] Things: culturedcode.com/things, 04.11.2012 
[42] Zoho suite: www.zoho.com, 04.11.2012 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-206-6
COLLA 2012 : The Second International Conference on Advanced Collaborative Networks, Systems and Applications

