An Integrated Scientiﬁc Experiment Framework for
Numerical Analysis in e-Science Environment
Sookyoung Park∗, Hyejeong Kang∗, Yoonhee Kim∗, Chongam Kim†, Yunjung Hyun‡
∗Dept. of Computer Science, Sookmyung Women’s University, Seoul, Korea
Email: {blue, hjkang, yulan}@sookmyung.ac.kr
†School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
Email: chongam@snu.ac.kr
‡Korea Environment Institute, Seoul, Korea
Email: yjhyun@kei.re.kr
Abstract—The analytical experiments for numerical analysis
lead a sequence of complex scientiﬁc computations composing
of numerical equations and require enormous computing re-
sources with appropriate management tools. Currently most
studies on e-Science environments for numerical studies focus
on solving speciﬁc problems to drag out the best performance
of matters and have less interest in providing a uniform
framework to apply for diverse numerical domains, especially
for ﬂuid dynamics. This paper presents an integrated e-Science
experiment framework which could be easily applicable to
solve various numerical analyses in ﬂuid dynamics. As a proof-
of-concept, an integrated e-Science framework with diverse
numerical analyses has been designed and implemented over
UNICORE that runs over grid computing environment.
Keywords-e-Science; PSE; scientiﬁc numerical analysis; UNI-
CORE
I. INTRODUCTION
The experimentation in numerical analysis needs highly
efﬁcient and enormous computational resources because
these experiments are composed of computations of compli-
cated numerical equations and computation-intensive opera-
tions. Many studies and developments have been proposed to
support the various scientiﬁc computational applications in
e-Science environments. But, already developed frameworks
support e-Science environment only for analyzing speciﬁc
computational model [1][2][3][4][5]. By constructing re-
search environments which is deﬁned per-application in spe-
ciﬁc e-Science environment, it is difﬁcult to conduct research
efﬁciently and access heterogeneous resource in absence of
common interfaces even though they have similar processes.
Also, as proceeding e-Science developments, common inter-
faces, and integrated environments are required to provide
various analyze techniques to research and reuse it with
demands of other applications requirements. Our research
has focused on the integrated scientiﬁc experimental envi-
ronment for numerical analysis, especially in ﬂuid dynamics.
UNICORE (Uniform Interface to COmputing REsources)
[6] has been developed for an integrated common environ-
ment. However, adding speciﬁc applications to UNICORE
is difﬁcult to general scientists or researchers because they
have to develop interfaces for each their experiments using
GridBean [7].
On developing a Problem Solving Environment (PSE) for
numerical applications in ﬂuid dynamics, we are principally
concerned with the following requirements:
• Support research execution in diverse computing envi-
ronment: it can be executed in personal computer or
grid environments.
• Support an independent experimental environment on
each research domain.
• Support pre-process for generating input ﬁles of numer-
ical analysis.
• Support post-process for visualizing analyzed results.
In this paper, we describe a design and implementation of
the PSE that aims to provide a numerical study environment
that requires seamless access into grid resources through a
common interface for diverse domains in ﬂuid dynamics. To
support scientiﬁc computational application, we developed
a common and integrated e-Science environment based on
UNICORE Rich Client supporting a user interface to each
application using GridBean. In a precedent study [8], we
implemented just one application in a domain, i.e. 1D Euler
equation in compressible ﬂows. It is hard to say as an
integrated framework. So, in this work, we expand our target
range of domains as compressible ﬂows, turbulent ﬂows and
multiphase ﬂows in ﬂuid dynamics.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section
2, related works are reviewed. In Section 3, an execution
scenario for numerical studies and design of PSE frame-
work architecture are described. The implementation of PSE
framework is presented in Section 4. Finally, conclusion and
future work are stated in Section 5.
II. RELATED WORK
In this section we shall brieﬂy present some approaches
that are representative for the areas of grid computing
environment and e-Science projects which are based on
Eclipse.
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-222-6
COMPUTATION TOOLS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Computational Logics, Algebras, Programming, Tools, and Benchmarking

A variety of scientiﬁc computational applications for
numerical study have been developed, like FLOWGRID
[5], and they have been executed on grid environment with
functions of managing and monitoring computational jobs
as well as supporting simulations. FLOWGRID is a grid ap-
plication for solving Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD)
problems and FlowServe middleware [9] is provided for
interactions on different interfaces. FLOWGRID is carried
out targeting the specialized engineers only and limited in
terms of extensibility.
One of the most well-known Eclipse-based e-Science
environments is g-Eclipse [10], which is an integrated
workbench framework to access the power of existing grid
infrastructures. The g-Eclipse supports connectors between a
user environment and many different grid middlewares (such
as gLite, UNICORE, Globus toolkit) and provides tools to
customize users experimental environments. However, g-
Eclipse included as a plugin to existing eclipse IDE (In-
tegrated Development Environment), is uncomfortable with
complicated interfaces because there exists the irrelevance
of the functions to users experimentations.
UNICORE [6] is a Grid computing technology providing
grid software that combines resources of supercomputer
centers and makes them available through the Internet.
Within the UNICORE environment the user has a convenient
way of using distributed computing resources without having
to learn site or system speciﬁcs by a seamless way.
Also the UNICORE supports various clients for jobs
creation, submission, and monitoring, both graphical and
command-line oriented. The graphical UNICORE Rich
Client referred to as URC used in our framework offers
graphical editors for setting up job descriptions. Instead of
editing text-based job descriptions, the user is provided high
level interfaces which are tailored to the applications what
he wants to execute on remote systems. And these graphical
interfaces are developed using GridBean which provides
pluggable interfaces.
Our framework is speciﬁcally supported in the UNICORE
Rich client (URC) as adding scientiﬁc domain-speciﬁc plu-
gins. Besides, the advantage of adopting open standards in
UNICORE 6 allows for the seamless use of UNICORE
components by other technologies.
III. DESIGN OF INTEGRATED SCIENTIFIC EXPERIMENT
FRAMEWORK
A. Framework Scenario for numerical study
A numerical analysis environment for target domains such
as compressible ﬂows, turbulent ﬂows and multiphase ﬂows
require pre-process, simulation process, and post-process.
Figure 1 shows a scenario of using our PSE framework.
At ﬁrst, the user installs our PSE program on PC and then
selects a method of numerical studies to be performed. In
pre-process step, the user can generate or upload input ﬁles
that are proper for the selected numerical study. When it
Figure 1.
Scenario for numerical study
Figure 2.
Framework Architecture
is ﬁnished, in simulation process step, the user conﬁgures
solving conditions such as experiment method. The user
selects resource to submit the job and then a JSDL (Job
Submission Description Language) ﬁle which speciﬁed by
GridBean model about a job deﬁnition and attributes will be
submitted and executed at the previously selected resource.
If the job execution is ﬁnished, the user can check whether
the execution is ﬁnished, and then he can download output
ﬁles. As a post-process step, graphical view is also offered
for output ﬁles which require visualization.
B. Integrated Scientiﬁc Experiment Framework Architecture
The overall architecture of the framework based on UNI-
CORE is depicted in Figure 2. If the user submits a job or
a workﬂow for speciﬁc application using PSE framework
interfaces based on URC, Resource Broker receives the
requests from UNICORE Client and collects the necessary
information (such as application name, resource informa-
tion; number of nodes, number of cores) through Resource
Monitoring to choose the set of acceptable machines. If well
suited resource (s) is selected, the job with user information
is authenticated by Gateway and forwarded to web services
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-222-6
COMPUTATION TOOLS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Computational Logics, Algebras, Programming, Tools, and Benchmarking

Figure 3.
Client Architecture
interfaces offered by UNICORE/X server and executes it
on Target System Interface. The workﬂow job is supported
by Workﬂow Service module that interacts with Resource
Broker and Meta-Scheduling Service. The Meta-Scheduling
Service collects information across all pre-selected resources
about availability, user policies, and cost parameters.
Figure 3 shows entire plugins architecture in client-side,
it is made up of two layers, the one is basic UNICORE
plugins that constitute the core of the URC and the other is
Fluid Dynamics plugins that consist of applications for three
research domains. Descriptions of basic UNICORE plugins
can be found in other publication [11].
The following list contains short descriptions of Fluid
Dynamics Plugins about what each plugin does:
• HCL Euler 1D / HCL Euler 2D: Plugins for the
numerical study of compressible ﬂows.
• Multiphase 2D / Multiphase 3D: Plugins for the numer-
ical study of multiphase ﬂows.
• Turbulent 3D: A plugin for the numerical study of
turbulent ﬂows.
• Mesh Generator: A plugin for generating input ﬁles and
setting up boundary conditions of pre-processing that
may be used for the applications.
• Visualization: A plugin for post-process to visualize the
experiment results.
• Resource Management Service: A module to add job
properties for speciﬁc application and provides ﬁlters
that ﬁnd resources with certain types or attributes.
• Project Management Service: A module to management
history of experiments such as execution information,
simulation results, errors, log ﬁles and user descrip-
tions.
IV. IMPLEMENTATION
To implement user interfaces of PSE in three other
domains, we developed applications speciﬁc plugins per
each application using GridBean that is presented above
Section 3. Within these plugins, components are organized
Figure 4.
An Integrated Scientiﬁc Experiment Tool
Figure 5.
A Mesh Generator and a Visualization Tool
dynamically by providing functions to control events of the
experiment. For a speciﬁc example of user interfaces, to ex-
ecute the Multiphase 3D numerical study of the multiphase
ﬂows is shown in Figure 4. Figure 5 depicts a mesh generator
for pre-processing and a visualization tool for post-process
in HCL 2D Euler numerical study. Moreover, with the aim
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-222-6
COMPUTATION TOOLS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Computational Logics, Algebras, Programming, Tools, and Benchmarking

of an integrated workbench framework, applications in three
other domains can be accessed through a uniform manner
within a PSE.
Basically user interfaces of the framework consist of one
or more plugin modules and one data model depends on
each of numerical studies method. But, there are a lot of
methods and parameters which need to experiment.
For users convenience, we developed interface to be
organized dynamically by controlling event about the experi-
ment method selection. To dynamically conﬁgure parameters
when experimental methods are selected in each application,
we classiﬁed parameters as commonly applied ones and
additional ones instead of deﬁning a set of parameters in
each experimental method. Deﬁning parameter sets like
this, makes management of parameters more efﬁcient and
accurate.
In case of middleware, we used most of UNICORE, and
we modiﬁed IDB (Incarnation DB) which saved applications
information such as name, version, location of an executable
ﬁle, and parameters required for the job execution. Also,
in order to provide resources among authorized users only,
we generated authorization keys for each application and its
information is managed through XUUDB.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we presented a design of the integrated
scientiﬁc experiment framework supporting numerical anal-
ysis in ﬂuid dynamics within e-Science environments. The
framework adopting three numerical analysis applications
is implemented as a proof-of-concept within the Eclipse-
based UNICORE Rich Client. The implementation contains
a mechanism to deﬁne sequences of simulations and the
framework can conveniently add other numerical analysis
models. A common execution environment to support var-
ious applications that are in diverse domains is important.
Hence, this framework is expected to improve their exper-
iments efﬁciency, convenience and reusability of technolo-
gies.
In the future, we will expand our framework to support
more complex experiments and more diverse numerical
study methods. Also we plan to develop a resource selection
algorithm reﬂecting requirements of application and proper-
ties of resources.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the National Institute for
Mathematical Sciences (NIMS) grant funded by the Korean
government (No. A21101).
This research was supported by Basic Science Research
Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea
(NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education, Science, and
Technology (#2012-0002572).
REFERENCES
[1] Jung-hyun Cho, Byung Sang Kim, Eunhye Song, Yoonhee
Kim, Chongam Kim, and Min Joong JEONG, “e-AIRS : An
Integrated Aerospace Portal for Collaborative Experiments
and Dynamic Parametric Studies”, Proc. of the KIISE Korea
Computer Congress 2006, Vol. 33, No. 2 (A), pp. 552-556,
2006 (in Korean)
[2] Jung-hyun Cho, Cinyoung Hur, Yoonhee Kim, Chongam Kim,
and Kum Won Cho, “CFD Research System for e-Science
based Cyber Education”, Korean Network Operations and
Management (KNOM) Review, Vol. 12, No. 1, pp. 42 50,
June, 2009 (in Korean)
[3] Chemomentum Project,
http://www.chemomentum.org/ [retrieved: 5, 2012]
[4] Bioclipse Project,
http://www.biomedcentral.com/ [retrieved: 5, 2012]
[5] FLOWGRID Project,
http://www.unizar.es/ﬂowgrid/ [retrieved: 5, 2012]
[6] UNICORE, http://www.unicore.eu/ [retrieved: 5, 2012]
[7] Sandra Bergmann. GridBean Developers Guide. UNICORE,
2009.
[8] Hyejeong Kang, Kyoung-A Yoon, Seoyoung Kim, Yoonhee
Kim, and Chongam Kim, “An e-Science problem solving en-
vironment for scientiﬁc numerical study”, International Con-
ference on Advanced Communication Technology, ICACT,
Gangwon-Do, Korea (South), pp. 266-269., Feb, 2011
[9] FlowServe middleware,
http://www.unizar.es/ﬂowgrid/middleware.htm [retrieved: 5,
2012]
[10] g-Eclipse, http://www.geclipse.org/ [retrieved: 5, 2012]
[11] Bastian Demuth, Bernd Schuller, Sonja Holl, Jason Daivandy,
Andre Giesler, and Valentina Huber, “The UNICORE Rich
Client: Facilitating the Automated Execution of Scientiﬁc
Workﬂows”, Proceedings of 6th IEEE International Con-
ference on e-Science (e-Science 2010), pp. 238-245, IEEE
Computer Society Press, 2010.
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-222-6
COMPUTATION TOOLS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Computational Logics, Algebras, Programming, Tools, and Benchmarking

