Temperature Based Embedded Programming Algorithm For Conventional 
Machines Condition Monitoring 
Michael Kanisuru Adeyeri 
Department of Mechanical Engineering 
The Federal University of Technology, Akure 
Ondo State, Nigeria 
sademike2003@yahoo.co.uk; mkadeyeri@futa.edu.ng   
Adeyemi Adegbemisipo Aderoba  
Department of Mechanical Engineering 
The Federal University of Technology, Akure 
Ondo State, Nigeria 
babalojojo@yahoo.com  
Buliaminu Kareem 
Department of Mechanical Engineering 
The Federal University of Technology, Akure 
Ondo State, Nigeria 
bkareem@futa.edu.ng  
Sunday Olumide Adewale 
Department of Computer Science 
The Federal University of Technology, Akure 
Ondo State, Nigeria 
adewale_olumide@yahoo.co.uk
 
 
Abstract— A temperature-based embedded programming 
algorithm for conventional machines condition monitoring is 
being discussed. Machinery health deteriorates day in day out 
as they are being used for production purposes. If a proper 
check, maintenance activities and monitoring are not put in 
place, such machinery would not perform optimally and 
production efficiency would be affected. Based on this, the 
present work focuses on programming a temperature sensor 
AD595 and K-type thermocouple using a C programming 
language as a means of embedding them into the 
microcontroller with a real time clock (RTC) incorporated to 
keep the time of events and temperature readings of the 
machines’ components for effective maintenance plan. The 
whole design is embedded in production machines to keep 
monitoring the machines’ conditions and behavior as related to 
temperature induced faults and breakdown matters. The 
algorithm interprets and reports the fault class name to the 
operator, diagnosis and proffer solutions based on the 
embedded decision block. The hardware resulting from the 
design was tested using a conventional elevator, silos and 
hammer mill (which are parts of the production set up line for 
the production of vegetable oil) for a period of four months. 
The output performance is satisfactory as maintenance 
decision and machines’ health monitoring are optimized.  
 
Keywords-Temperature; thermocouple; algorithm; 
conventional machines; condition monitoring; microcontroller. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 Machinery is required to operate within a relatively close 
set of limits. These limits, or operating conditions, are 
designed to allow for safe operation of the equipment and to 
ensure that equipment or system design specifications are 
not exceeded. These limits are usually set to optimize 
product quality and throughput (load) without overstressing 
the equipment. 
Conventional machines are machines which are operated 
manually. These machines are controlled by cams, gears, 
levers, or screws. Examples of these machines are Lathe, 
grinding machine, flaking machine, extruder and just to 
mention a few. They indeed needed special attention to safe 
guard or vouch safe for their functionality and optimal 
performance as compared to the non conventional machines 
which are controlled automatically by integrated computer. 
Manufacturing process objective focuses on efficient 
production of products with speciﬁc shape, acceptable 
dimensional accuracy and quality. Slight deviation of the 
machine conditions from a prescribed plan will affect the 
ﬁnal product quality and standard. Global industrial 
competition and the current economic conditions have 
geared up many manufacturing organizations to improve 
product quality and cut production costs simultaneously. 
The requirements for increased plant productivity, safety, 
and reduced cost on maintenance, have resulted to a growth 
in popularity of methods for condition monitoring to aid the 
planning of plant preventive maintenance and operational 
policies [1]. 
Malfunctions in equipment and components are often 
sources of reduced productivity and increased maintenance 
costs in various industrial applications. For this reason, 
machine condition monitoring is being pursued to recognize 
incipient faults in striving towards optimizing maintenance 
and productivity in conventional machines. 
From literature, current production systems have 
unsatisfactory 
overall 
availability 
due 
to 
excessive 
downtime caused by either quality related issues or 
machine/component failures [2]. Current single station’s 
mean-time-to-failure 
(MTTF) and 
mean-time-to-repair 
(MTTR) assessment does not reveal overall system 
performance and dynamic resourcing which is not addressed 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-222-6
COMPUTATION TOOLS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Computational Logics, Algebras, Programming, Tools, and Benchmarking

in today’s total productive maintenance (TPM) and 
manufacturing execution systems (MES) [2]. 
In real life applications, measuring temperature is not 
really a problem especially in practical applications like 
medical and air conditioning systems.  In industrial setting 
on the other hand, temperature signal conditioning becomes 
a concept that needs to be given special attention to 
convention machines. That is why very high precision and 
accuracy is the ultimate goal of any model that targets 
programming ambient physical parameters like temperature. 
In order to achieve the above, an embedded programming 
model is established to ensure sensing temperature and 
delivering the accurate result.   
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Condition monitoring is a maintenance process where the 
condition of equipment with respect to overheating and 
vibration is monitored for early signs of impending failure. 
Equipment 
can 
be 
monitored 
using 
sophisticated 
instrumentation such as vibration analysis equipment or the 
human senses. Where instrumentation is used, actual limits 
can be imposed to trigger maintenance activity. Condition 
Monitoring (CM), Predictive Maintenance (PM) and 
Condition Based Maintenance (CBM) are other terms used 
to describe this process. 
Machine condition monitoring involves the intermittent 
or continuous collection and interpretation of data relating 
to the operating condition of those critical components of a 
machine. Monitoring can greatly reduce maintenance costs 
by giving adequate notice on pending failures to permit 
planned 
repairs, 
as 
opposed 
to 
costly 
emergency 
breakdowns with their attendant lost production, overtime, 
and expediting costs [3]. 
Failure occurs when a component, structure, or system is 
unable to fulfill its intended purpose, resulting in its 
retirement from usable service. Possible failure modes 
include component deformation, fracture, surface changes 
such as cracks, material changes, displacement, leakage, and 
contamination [4]. Secondary effects, or symptoms, often 
occur prior to total machine failure, providing indicators for 
predicting failure onset. Frequently used indicators are 
vibration signals; noise, heat generation, and particle wear 
levels as measured in machine lubricants. 
Condition-based maintenance is a maintenance strategy that 
recommends maintenance actions based on the information 
collected through condition monitoring. And the aim of this 
strategy is to improve the equipment’s reliability, 
availability, or its associated life cycle costs [5].  
Neelam [6] researched on condition monitoring and fault 
diagnosis of induction motor using motor current signature 
analysis. Neelam’s research consists of experimental 
characterization of rotor faults in induction motors operating 
under different loading conditions in which the fault 
algorithm developed monitors the amplitudes over time. 
And five different faults vis a viz, rotor fault,  short winding 
fault, eccentricity fault, bearing fault and load fault are 
practically implemented and their effects on motor’s current 
are considered with help of different signal conditioning 
techniques. 
Condition-based 
maintenance is the 
diagnosis 
of 
component failure or a prognosis of a component’s time to 
failure [7]. Jasper et al. [7] aimed at formulation of 
empirical postulates regarding the technical system, 
managerial system and workforce knowledge. 
Mahantesh et al. [8] developed and tested a condition-
monitoring sub-module of an integrated plant maintenance 
management application based on artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) 
techniques, mainly knowledge-based systems, having 
several modules, sub modules and sections. The paper 
collectively deals with the analysis of the state-of-the-art 
expert systems for diagnosis and maintenance of general-
purpose industrial machinery. 
Christian 
[9] 
researched 
on 
competing 
through 
maintenance strategies in which the competitive factors 
were examined. The research work shows that equipment 
maintenance and reliability management are importantly 
associated with an organization’s competitiveness and be 
given adequate attention in the organization’s strategic 
planning. 
Liliane et al. [10] evaluated the effectiveness of 
maintenance strategies under four frameworks that can 
identify and evaluate the effectiveness of a given 
maintenance strategy in a company. The four frameworks 
implored are minimization of manufacturing’s negative 
potential, 
achievement 
of 
parity 
(neutrality) 
with 
competitors, provision of credible support to the business 
strategy and aiming a manufacturing-based competitive 
advantage. And it is found that the framework is applicable 
and useful for the strategic management of the maintenance 
function as well as enhancing the competitive advantage of 
a company.  
Jihong [11] modeled a prognostic algorithm for machine 
performance assessment and their applications explored a 
performance model through the advantage of logistic 
regression analysis with maximum likelihood technique and 
predict the remaining useful life, which would lead to 
proactive maintenance processes in minimizing downtime 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-222-6
COMPUTATION TOOLS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Computational Logics, Algebras, Programming, Tools, and Benchmarking

of machinery and production in various industries, thus 
increasing eﬃciency of operations and manufacturing. They 
buttress their research with two kinds of application 
situations with or without enough historical data.  
Today’s technology has given room for invention of 
computer numerically controlled machines for production 
purpose in which integrated circuits and sensors related to 
maintenance information are embedded to keep track of 
machines’ health for effective and optimized performance of 
the machines. But there is need to bridge the gap between 
these computerized and conventional machines age so that 
the conventional machine users can effectively enjoy the 
machines’ throughput with minimal breakdown and 
compete in the industrial world without abandoning the 
conventional machines. Hence the needs for this research 
work to provide a medium where temperature sensors could 
be embedded in conventional machines for monitoring their 
health status and functionality. Therefore the present work 
describes temperature algorithm for temperature sensor that 
is needed in assisting, monitoring the behavior of machines’ 
performance or health status and the maintenance activities 
required for maintaining or preventing temperature related 
faults or breakdown of conventional machines such as 
elevator machine, silos and hammer mill. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
A. Temperature Model Equation 
Temperature measurement (e.g., temperature-indicating 
paint, thermograph) helps detect potential failures related to 
a temperature change in equipment. Measured temperature 
changes can indicate problems such as excessive mechanical 
friction (like faulty bearings, inadequate lubrication), 
degraded heat transfer and poor electrical connections (for 
examples, loose, corroded or oxidized connections). The 
below equation1. is used in modeling temperature 
monitoring for machines. 
nt
b
T
o
i
ita
U
T
T
]
1[ +
=
  
 
 
      (1) 
where  
iT at
: the predicted value of temperature at next planned 
measuring time 
iT o
: the current temperature value  
nt  :   periodic time numbering of readings 
UT
: temperature deteriorating factor and it is expressed as 
c
m
o
i
T
T
T
T
U
−
=
       
 
 
      (2) 
iT : initial temperature value 
o
T  =  measured Temperature before 
iT at
 
c
m
T  =  Critical temperature limit level 
 b : is a function of speed, environmental condition and 
demand frequency. 
Therefore, if 
at
i
c
m
T
T
≥
, then maintenance is required, 
otherwise do not.   
 
B. Factors influecing  the choice of Temperature sensor 
The difference between serial and special manufacturing 
is only the mechanical structure of the sensors. The 
criterions used in choosing temperature sensor are as listed 
below: 
• 
At which position is the temperature to be 
measured? 
• 
The medium at which temperature is to be 
determined? 
• 
Which diameter can be installed in the production 
process? 
• 
Mechanical process connection to be used 
• 
The type of electrical connection 
• 
Which mechanical and thermal stress is the sensor 
subjected to?  
The answers to these questions are the basis for the 
choice of special temperature sensors for mechanical 
machines and these have assisted in choosing k-type 
thermocouple for this research. 
A block diagram of the AD594/AD595 thermo-couple 
signal conditioner IC is shown in Fig. 1. A Type K 
thermocouple is joined to amplifier differential Pins 1 and 
14 so as to reference the local temperature. With the IC also 
at the local temperature, an ice point compensation circuit 
develops a voltage equal to the deficiency in the locally 
referenced thermocouple loop. This voltage is then applied 
to a second preamplifier whose output is summed with the 
output of the input amplifier. The resultant output is then 
applied to the in-put of a main output amplifier with 
feedback to set the gain of the combined signals. The ice 
point compensation voltage is scaled to equal the voltage 
that would be produced by an ice bath referenced 
thermocouple measuring the IC temperature. This voltage is 
then summed with the locally referenced loop voltage, the 
result being a loop voltage with respect to an ice point [12]. 
The circuit description diagram for this thermocouple is as 
shown in Fig. 2.  
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-222-6
COMPUTATION TOOLS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Computational Logics, Algebras, Programming, Tools, and Benchmarking

 
 
Figure 1. AD595 Block Diagram 
 
Figure 2. The AD594/AD595 Circuit Description 
C. Embedded interface 
The following components are used in keeping track of 
the system: 
i. Analog Digital Converter (ADC): The output from 
the sensor is usually an analog signal that needs to be 
converted to a discrete signal for proper digitization. In 
order to achieve this, an analog to digital conversion module 
is required. For this model, a 10 bit ADC resolution is made 
used of. 
ii. Microcontroller:  The microcontroller used for 
developing this model is Atmel Atmega 16 MCU, this is an 
8 bit MCU but with internal 10 bit resolution ADC module. 
This makes the MCU a choice for this model. 
The block diagram shown in Fig. 3 depicts the proposed 
arrangement of the embedded temperature sensor interface 
with the machine 
 
Figure 3. Block diagram of proposed arrangement of temperature sensor 
interface with conventional machine    
D. Model Algorithm 
The code for the microcontroller is developed in C 
language which is not included in this paper. The 
preliminary exercise carried out in order to get the basis of 
the conventional machine is to:  
i. 
study the temperature behavioural pattern of the 
machine to model; and  
ii. 
get the trend of the temperature pattern of the 
machine system by recording ten to twenty 
readings of the temperature over a wide period of 
time and noting the performance rating of the 
machine against the corresponding temperatures.  
While the algorithm developed for the model is as 
stated below: 
 
Step-1   Setting up: set up display, set up real time clock and 
set up the internal analog to digital   converter 
Step-2 Wait for responses 
Step-3 Set timer T to zero second and the counter to zero 
Step-4    Initialize timer 
Step-5 Is timer equals 10seconds? 
Step-6 If no, go back to timer initialization, else get the   
ADC value 
Step-7 Counter stores value to RAM 
Step-8 Has counter counted to ten values? 
Step-9   If no, continue with timer initialization, else counter 
reset to zero 
Step-10 Calculate average temperature 
Step-11 Store value in EEPROM, convert temperature value 
to ASCII and get real time 
Step-12  Display value and time 
Step-13 Use inference decision block: for example, if 
at
i
c
m
T
T
≥
 , then maintenance is required, otherwise 
do not; make inference on machine parts affected 
and give suggestion 
Step-14  Is decision made? If yes, display decision 
Step-15 Delay sets in to cater for decision displayed, else 
back to reset 
Step-16  Go to start 
 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-222-6
COMPUTATION TOOLS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Computational Logics, Algebras, Programming, Tools, and Benchmarking

This algorithm is therefore translated into flowchart 
shown in Fig. 4, so as to have a better understanding of the 
system. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Flowchart of the Temperature sensor Model Algorithm [12] 
 
 
IV. 
MODEL VALIDATION 
The stated algorithm had been transformed into codes in 
C programming so as to ensure the practicality of the model 
(though this aspect will not be discussed in this submission). 
The whole system is tested by using a conventional elevator, 
silos and hammer mill which is a part of the production set 
up line for the production of vegetable oil for a period of  
four  months. The readings taken are as shown in table1. 
The machine components being affected by temperature are 
listed with their corresponding readings. N denotes normal 
machine temperature reading on on-load condition and A 
connotes abnormal temperature reading. 
 
 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-222-6
COMPUTATION TOOLS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Computational Logics, Algebras, Programming, Tools, and Benchmarking

 
 
TABLE I.  GEARBOX TEMPERATURE TREND READINGS AND MAINTENANCE MODEL SUGGESTION DECISION  OF 
ELEVATOR, SILO AND HAMMER MILL MACHINES
 
Sampling 
dates 
Elevator’s  Gear box temperature 
(oC), conditions and decision 
Silo’s Gear box temperature (oC), 
conditions and decision 
Hammer mill’s Gear box temperature 
(oC), conditions and decision  
Temp. 
conditi
ons 
Model decision 
suggestion on 
maintenance 
activities 
Temp. 
conditions 
Model decision 
suggestion on 
maintenance 
activities 
Temp. 
conditions 
Model decision 
suggestion on 
maintenance 
activities 
01/11/2011 
40.0 
N 
 
49.5 
N 
 
69.6 
A 
Poor lubrication 
10/11/2011 
40.8 
N 
 
50.0 
N 
 
42.6 
N 
 
15/11/2011 
40.8 
N 
 
50.0 
N 
 
42.7 
N 
 
20/11/2011 
46.0 
N 
 
50.0 
N 
 
43.0 
N 
 
01/12/2011 
46.0 
N 
 
51.0 
N 
 
43.0 
N 
 
05/12/2011 
46.2 
N 
 
51.3 
N 
 
43.2 
N 
 
10/12/2011 
46.1 
N 
 
52.0 
N 
 
44.1 
N 
 
15/12/2011 
46.2 
N 
 
52.0 
N 
 
44.1 
N 
 
22/12/2011 
46.5 
N 
 
52.0 
N 
 
44.5 
N 
 
01/01/2012 
46.6 
N 
 
52.0 
N 
 
46.6 
N 
 
10/01/2012 
46.7 
N 
 
52.0 
N 
 
48.9 
N 
 
20/01/2012 
47.0 
N 
 
65.0 
A 
Stop 
machine. 
Check 
for 
foreign materials 
and dirt in ball 
bearing 
50.0 
N 
 
01/02/2012 
45.9 
N 
 
50.0 
N 
 
45.9 
N 
 
25/02/2012 
75.0 
A 
Stop 
machine. 
Check 
ball 
bearing 
50.0 
N 
 
46.0 
N 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As seen from Table 1, on the 1st of November, 2011, 
the temperature readings sampled from the production 
process revealed that the temperature values of the elevator 
gear box, silo gear box and hammer mill gear box read 40 
oC, 49.5 oC and 69.6 oC respectively. And the corresponding 
health status of these machines indicated that they are 
normal except that of hammer mill which is abnormal. On 
this note, the model gave a maintenance suggestion clue that 
the temperature abnormality is as a result of poor 
lubrication. Looking through the Table 1, it has shown that 
the model algorithm is correct as it could distinguish 
between when the machine conditions are normal, abnormal 
and display maintenance suggestion messages which are 
valid and result oriented. 
 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The efficient and optimum performances of machines 
lie on the prompt and on-line monitoring of the machine 
components and behavior. The research work under 
discussion has really shown that temperature which is one of 
the key factors affecting machine performance could be 
monitored to aid maintenance plan.  It is to be hoped that the 
tool herein described will assist conventional equipment 
maintenance and personnel in decision making as they 
progress towards optimizing maintenance plans. 
The present work could not give the overall true picture 
of the machine health status, therefore the future work 
would entail building an integrated sub-system hardware 
that incorporates other machine condition monitoring 
indices such as vibration and machine wear sensors which 
will assist in having a full diagnosis of the machines, and 
thus enhancing its functionality.  
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Y. Zhan, V.  Makis,  and A.K.S. Jardine,  “Adaptive model for 
vibration monitoring of rotating machinery subject to random 
deterioration” Journal of Quality in Maintenance Engineering Vol. 9 
No. 
4, 
2003 
pp. 
351-375 
(http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/13552510310503222) 
[retrieved: 
July, 
2012] 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-222-6
COMPUTATION TOOLS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Computational Logics, Algebras, Programming, Tools, and Benchmarking

[2] A. Alhad, C. Xiaohui; L. Jay, N. Jun, and Y. Ziming, 
“Optimized 
Maintenance 
Design 
for 
Manufacturing 
Performance improvement using simulation.” Proceedings of 
the 40th Conference on Winter Simulation Conference, IEEE, 
2008, pp. 1811-1819. 
[3] G.M. Knapp and H.P. Wang, “Machine fault classification: a 
neural network approach'', International Journal of Production 
Research, 
Vol. 
30 
No. 
4, 
1992, 
pp. 
811-823. 
(http://www.emerald-library.com) [retrieved: June, 2012] 
[4] R.H. 
Lyon, Machinery Noise and Diagnostics, 1987, 
Butterworth, Boston, MA 
[5] A.K.S. Jardine, T. Joseph, and D. Benjevic, “Optimizing 
Condition-based Maintenance decisions for equipment subject 
to Vibration Monitoring”, Journal of Quality in Maintenance 
Engineering 
Vol. 
5 
No. 
3, 
1999, 
pp. 
192-202. 
(http://www.emerald-library.com) [retrieved: June, 2012] 
[6] M. Neelam, “Condition Monitoring and Fault Diagnosis of 
Induction Motor Using Motor Current Signature Analysis” P.hD 
Thesis, 
National 
Institute 
of 
Technology, 
Kurukshetra 
(Haryana) India, 2010. 
[7] V. Jasper, K. Warse, and W. Hans,  “Managing Condition based 
Maintenance Technology, a multiple case study in the process 
industry”, Journal of Quality in   
Maintenance Engineering Vol. 17 No. 1, 2011, pp. 40-62. 
[http://www.emerald-library.com, June, 2012] 
[8] N. Mahantesh, A. Ramachandra, and A.N. Satosh Kumar 
“Artificial  Intelligence-based Condition Monitoring for Plant 
Maintenance; Assembly Automation Vol. 28, No. 2,  2008,  pp. 
143–150. 
[9] N. Christian Madu, “Competing Through Maintenance 
Strategies” International Journal of Quality & Reliability 
Management, Vol. 17, No. 9, 2000, pp. 938-948. MCB 
University Press. 
[10] P. Liliane, K.P. Srinivas, and V. Ann, ‘Evaluating the 
Effectiveness of Maintenance Strategies” Journal of Quality in 
Maintenance Engineering Vol. 12 No. 1, 2, 2006,  pp. 7-20. 
Emerald Group Publishing Ltd. March, 2010 
[11] Y. Jihong, K. Muammer, and L. Jay, ”A prognostic algorithm 
for machine performance assessment and its application” 
Production Planning & Control, Taylor and Francis Group,  
Vol. 15, No. 8, December 2004, pp.  796–801.  
[12] M. 
Joe, 
“Application 
note 
on 
Thermocouple 
Signal 
Conditioning Using the AD594/AD595”  One Technology Way 
Norwood, USA [http://www.analog.com November, 2011] 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-222-6
COMPUTATION TOOLS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Computational Logics, Algebras, Programming, Tools, and Benchmarking

