First-Order Combinatorics Presenting a Conceptual Framework for Two Levels of
Expressive Power of Predicate Logic
Mikhail Peretyat’kin
Institute of Mathematics and Mathematical Modeling
Almaty, Kazakhstan
e-mail: m.g.peretyatkin@predicate-logic.org
Abstract—In this work, we proceed to study ﬁnitary and inﬁni-
tary ﬁrst-order combinatorics within the framework of a new
approach intended to investigations of predicate logic. Some
properties of these combinatorics are established. We present
a general scheme of semantic layers of model-theoretic prop-
erties having importance in the given direction. A number of
demonstrations is given showing essence of both ﬁnitary and
inﬁnitary combinatorial methods for ﬁrst-order theories. The
work represents a basis for further investigations on expressive
power of predicate logic.
Keywords—ﬁrst order logic; theory; ﬁnitely axiomatizable the-
ory; computably axiomatizable theory; Tarski-Lindenbaum algebra;
model-theoretic property; computation; ﬁrst-order combinatorics.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Constructions of ﬁnitely axiomatizable theories were cre-
ated to answer questions concerning a common problem about
expressive power of ﬁrst-order logic. There are constructions
of Church [2], Kleene [7], Hanf [5], Peretyat’kin [12], and
others. Each construction represents a general method for
constructing ﬁnitely axiomatizable theories that can yield a
series of ﬁnitely axiomatizable theories depending on one
or a few input parameters. One can manage properties of
the obtained theory by choice of the parameters. Some open
questions on expressive power of ﬁrst-order logic can also be
solved with simpler methods based on the signature reduction
procedures.
The idea to introduce a ﬁrst-order combinatorial termi-
nology have arisen from the available approaches to solve
a principal problem of characterization of predicate logic
of a ﬁnite language by building isomorphisms between the
Tarski-Lindenbaum algebras of predicate calculi of two ﬁnite
rich signatures with preservation as a large semantic layer
of model-theoretic properties as possible [9][10][11]. The
method of constructing such an isomorphism [10] is based
on algorithmic computation in ﬁrst-order predicate logic. It
uses a universal construction of ﬁnitely axiomatizable theories
simulating some computation of a Turing machine carrying out
the role of a computer-controller. This approach can be said to
be an inﬁnitary ﬁrst-order combinatorics. The second method
of constructing the isomorphism, [11], is based on a ﬁnite
combinatorial transformation in predicate logic. It uses so-
called ﬁnite-to-ﬁnite signature reduction procedures and can be
said to be ﬁnitary ﬁrst-order combinatorics. In the work [14],
a complex of concepts and general speciﬁcations connected
with ﬁrst-order combinatorics was given together with some
reasoning justifying the combinatorial terminology for use in
this direction. In this work, we introduce a number of further
concepts and formulate some claims concerning applications of
the ﬁnitary and inﬁnitary ﬁrst-order combinatorial methods for
construction and transformation of theories in predicate logic.
Besides, a series of general statements is formulated, and a
number of demonstrations are given showing essence of the
concepts related with ﬁnitary and inﬁnitary ﬁrst-order combi-
natorics and outlining limits of their possible applications.
In the third section, we introduce deﬁnitions of semantic
layers relevant in this direction, in the fourth section we
introduce a concept of the relation of virtual deﬁnable equiv-
alence between theories, the ﬁfth section describes a common
scheme of application for inﬁnitary ﬁrst-order combinatorics,
the sixth section speciﬁes possible versions of the universal
construction of ﬁnitely axiomatizable theories, in the seventh
section we list some common statements concerning ﬁrst-
order combinatorics, in the eighth section we describe main
situations corresponding to ﬁrst-order combinatorics. In the
ninth section we give some summary to the paper.
II.
PRELIMINARIES
Theories in ﬁrst-order predicate logic with equality are con-
sidered. General concepts of model theory, algorithm theory,
Boolean algebras, and constructive models can be found in
Hodges [6], Rogers [17], and Goncharov and Ershov [4]. Basic
concepts concerning ﬁrst-order combinatorics can be found in
[14]. Generally, incomplete theories of ﬁnite or enumerable
signatures are considered.
A ﬁnite signature is called rich, if it contains at least one
nary predicate or function symbol for n>1, or two unary
function symbols. The following notations are used: FL(σ) is
the set of all formulas of signature σ, FLk(σ) is the set of all
formulas of signature σ with free variables x0,...,xk−1, SL(σ)
is the set of all sentences (i.e., closed formulas) of signature σ.
A theory is said to be computably axiomatizable if it admits a
computable system of axioms. By L(T ), we denote the Tarski-
Lindenbaum algebra of theory T of formulas without free
variables, while L(T ) denotes the Tarski-Lindenbaum algebra
L(T ) considered together with a G¨odel numbering γ; thereby,
the concept of a computable isomorphism is applicable to such
objects.
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-344-5
COMPUTATION TOOLS 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Computational Logics, Algebras, Programming, Tools, and Benchmarking

Let σ be a signature, and Σ be a subset of SL(σ). By
[Σ]⋆, we denote a theory of a signature σ ′ ⊆ σ generated
by the set Σ as a set of its axioms, where σ′ contains
only those symbols from σ that occur in formulas of the set
Σ. Let σ∞ be a ﬁxed enumerable maximally large inﬁnite
signature containing countably many both constant symbols,
symbols of propositional variables, and predicate and function
symbols of each arity n> 0. If a theory T of signature σ ∞
is deﬁned by the set of axioms {Φi |i∈Wm} as follows:
T = [Σ]⋆ (where Wm is mth computably enumerable set in
Posts’s numbering), the number m is called a weak computably
enumerable index or simply weak index of T , and we denote
this theory by T ⋆{m}, m∈N. This sequence represents all
possible computably axiomatizable theories, up to an algebraic
isomorphism of theories. Symbol P(X0,...,Xa), shortly P, is
specialized to denote a propositional formula of signature σ ∗ =
{X0,X1,...,Xk,...;k ∈N} (consisting of propositional vari-
ables), while a specializes the number of variables occurred in
the formula. By PRO, we denote the set of all such formulas,
while Pi(X0,...,Xa(i)), i∈N, is a ﬁxed G¨odel numbering
of the set PRO. For a set A⊆ N, record A|= P denotes
the value of term P(χA(0),χA(1),...,χA(a)), where χA(x)
is characteristic function of the set A. Here, propositional
formula P plays the role of a table condition applicable for
set A⊆ N.
Formulation to the universal construction FU of ﬁnitely
axiomatizable theories can be found in [12,Ch.6]. Main deﬁ-
nitions connected with semantic layers are found in [14]. We
use notation MQL for the model quasiexact semantic layer
presenting inﬁnitary ﬁrst-order combinatorics, [14].
III.
FIRST-ORDER COMBINATORICS AND A SCHEME OF
SEMANTIC LAYERS
In accordance with speciﬁcations [14], signature reduc-
tion procedures represent a basis for the concept of ﬁrst-
order combinatorics; they are considered as particular cases
of combinatorial methods in predicate logic. Signature trans-
formations “ﬁnite-to-ﬁnite” represent ﬁnitary combinatorial
methods, while signature reduction procedures “inﬁnite-to-
ﬁnite” represent inﬁnitary combinatorial methods. The problem
is to generalize these particular methods to a maximum general
approach for which it would be possible to apply such a serious
term as ’combinatorics’. A principal aim of the combinatorial
approach is to characterize classes of ﬁnitary and inﬁnitary
methods of transformation of theories. After that, we can
deﬁne the ﬁnitary semantic layer as the set of those model-
theoretic properties p which are preserved under ﬁnitary ﬁrst-
order methods, and inﬁnitary semantic layer as the set of those
properties p which are preserved under inﬁnitary methods. For
the ﬁrst-order combinatorial approach, its perfection is consid-
ered as a demand of higher priority, while the maximality of
the semantic layers of preserved model-theoretic properties is
considered as a demand of secondary priority.
In Fig. 1, we present a scheme of inclusions between
the semantic layers and similarity relations relevant for ﬁrst-
order combinatorics. Two relations ≈ and ≈a in the top
are relations of isomorphism of theories, where ≈ means a
model isomorphism or simply isomorphism, while ≈a means
an algebraic isomorphism or ∃∩∀-presentable equivalence
between two theories. Although ≈ and ≈a are not similarity
relations, they are included in the scheme for the sake of
completeness. Relations ≡l and ≡al are similarity relations
relative to the semantic layer ML consisting of all model
properties, and respectively, to the layer AL consisting of all
algebraic properties. Semantic layers MDL, ADL, MCL, etc.,
and corresponding similarity relations ≡ad, ≡d, etc., are de-
ﬁned by the classes of singleton, Cartesian, and respectively,
Cartesian-quotient interpretations [14]. Leading letter A means
an algebraic version while M means a model version. A
middle letter S means ’singleton’, C means ’Cartesian’, and
Fig. 1. A scheme of semantic layers of model-theoretic properties
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-344-5
COMPUTATION TOOLS 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Computational Logics, Algebras, Programming, Tools, and Benchmarking

D means ’Cartesian-quotient’. The Hanf layer HL is supposed
to be ∅.
Inﬁnitary semantic layer MQL [12][14] has a sophisticated
deﬁnition. Therefore, it would be useful to introduce a simple
rule to check whether a model-theoretic property p is included
in this layer. For this purpose, we consider two following
classes of interpretations of theories:
I :T →T ⟨ϕm1
1 /ε1,...,ϕmk
k /εk⟩,
(1)
I :T →T ⟨ϕm1
1 /ε1,...,ϕmk
k /εk⟩⊕SI,
(2)
where T is a computably axiomatizable theory of an enu-
merable signature σ, κ = ⟨ϕm1
1 /ε1,...,ϕmk
k /εk⟩ is a tuple of
formulas of signature σ suitable for the Cartesian-quotient
extensions, [14,Section 3], while SI is the theory of a successor
relation with an initial element in signature {◁2,c}. Based on
this, we deﬁne two following semantic layers:
Reference_Block
(3)
(a) FINL = the set of all model-theoretic properties p of
algebraic type preserved by any interpretation I of the form
(1) with an arbitrary computably axiomatizable theory T and
arbitrary tuple κ of this form,
(b) INFL = the set of all model-theoretic properties p of
algebraic type preserved by any interpretation I of the form
(2) with an arbitrary computably axiomatizable theory T and
arbitrary tuple κ of this form.
End_Ref
It can be checked that the following assertions take place:
FINL = ADL,
(4)
INFL
R= I2fL,
INFL∩ML
R= I2fL ∩ML
R=UniL.
(5)
This shows that the family (1) forms a representative class of
interpretations for ﬁnitary semantic layer ADL. On the other
hand, a simple modiﬁcation (2) of the scheme (1) forms a
class of interpretations for the semantic layer INFL, that, in
view of (5), can play the role of a simple rule to check
whether a model-theoretic property p is included in inﬁnitary
semantic layer. The layer FINL is said to be the rapid ﬁnitary
semantic layer, while INFL is said to be the rapid inﬁnitary
semantic layer. Simplicity of the deﬁnitions (3)(a) and (3)(b)
ensures relevance of the layers FINL and INFL for ﬁrst-order
combinatorics.
As for the algebraic version of the inﬁnitary semantic layer,
it is currently not supported by any version of the universal
construction of ﬁnitely axiomatizable theories. This layer is
included in the scheme in Fig. 1 for completeness (shown by
a dashed circle).
IV.
VIRTUAL DEFINABLE EXTENSIONS AND FINITARY
FIRST-ORDER COMBINATORICS
There is a known in model theory method of addition to the
universe imaginary elements corresponding to a deﬁnable set
of elements or even to a ﬁrst-order deﬁnable set of tuples of
certain length modulo a deﬁnable equivalence relation (they
are said to be virtual elements). Let’s add a ﬁnite set of
virtual regions to the universe. Furthermore, we have to include
in signature new predicates distinguishing these areas and
establishing a relation of the new elements with the old tuples
modulo the equivalence relations. There is a possibility, based
on predicate logic, to manipulate with ﬁrst-order formulas in
the extended universe containing the source universe together
with the added virtual areas. For this purpose, it is required
to deﬁne special rules of construction and interpretation of
ﬁrst-order formulas in such an extended region. This method
allows us, remaining inside the old universe of models of
theory T , to manipulate with language of ﬁrst-order logic in
models of some new theory S, which is possible said to be
a virtual ﬁrst-order deﬁnable extension of the source theory
T . One can mention that, any model-theoretic properties of
theories T and S should be considered as coincided since the
virtually extended theory S is presented in the initial theory
T . Furthermore, notice that such an operation of addition of
a ﬁnite number of virtual deﬁnable regions can be performed
in a general situation when the source theory T is incomplete.
In this case, we obtain a computable isomorphism between
the Tarski-Lindenbaum algebras μ:L(T )→L(S) preserving
all really model-theoretic properties.
Two theories T and S are said to be virtually deﬁnably
equivalent, written as T ∼
≈S, if there are virtual deﬁnable
extensions T ′ of T and S′ of S such that T ′ and S′ are
algebraically isomorphic, T ′ ≈a S′. This relation, close to that
considered in Manders [8], seems to be the most common
equivalence relation between ﬁrst-order theories. Since the
operation of a virtual deﬁnable extension of a theory is closely
related to the operation of Cartesian-quotient extension of a
theory, [14,Section 3], we obtain that this relation between
theories plays the principal role within the complex of concepts
for ﬁnitary ﬁrst-order combinatorics.
V.
NORMALIZED SCHEME FOR INFINITARY FIRST-ORDER
COMBINATORICS
In this section, we specify some method of construction
of ﬁnitely axiomatizable theories with pre-assigned model-
theoretic properties. In the most common case, the target
theory depends on an input parameter n. Our goal is to con-
struct a ﬁnitely axiomatizable theory F = F (n) of a given ﬁnite
rich signature τ. First, we build an intermediate computably
axiomatizable theory T = T (n) using some particular method.
Signature of T :
σ = {Xi |i∈N} ∪ σ′,
(6)
where Xi, i∈N, is a sequence of nulary predicates (i.e.,
propositional variables), and σ′ depends on the aim of our
construction. Axioms of T consist of three groups:
Frame : a group of axioms describing general form of a
so-called skeleton of the theory; these axioms depend on the
aims of the construction;
Space: formulas of the form P(X0,...,Xa), with P ∈PRO;
Ext : formulas of the form P(X0,...,Xa)→Ψ, with P ∈
PRO and Ψ ∈SL(σ′).
Applying the universal construction FU, we build a ﬁnitely
axiomatizable theory F = F (n) = FU(T,τ) of the wished ﬁnite
rich signature τ together with a computable isomorphism μ:
L(T )→L(F) between the Tarski-Lindenbaum algebras pre-
serving model-theoretic properties of their completions within
the inﬁnitary semantic layer MQL.
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-344-5
COMPUTATION TOOLS 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Computational Logics, Algebras, Programming, Tools, and Benchmarking

Introduce the following notation
θi = μ(Xi), i∈N.
(7)
For an arbitrary set A⊆ N, we denote
T [A]= T + {Xi |i∈A}∪{⌝Xj |j ∈N∖A},
F[A]= F + {θi |i∈A}∪{⌝θj |j ∈N∖A}.
(8)
Furthermore, we deﬁne a number m such that
Wm = {k |T ⊢Pk(X0,...,Xa(k))},
(9)
and introduce the following notation
Ω(m)= {A⊆ N|(∀k∈Ω(m))A|= Pk}.
(10)
Any object involved in the transformation n → T → F
is presented via appropriate computably enumerable index or
G¨odel number such that the whole passage n → T → F is
deﬁned by an effective operator relative to indices and/or G¨odel
numbers. The given complex of transformations is said to be
normalized if the following conditions are satisﬁed:
(a) T ⊢P(X0,...,Xa) ⇔ T.Spase⊢P(X0,...,Xa), P ∈PRO,
(b) (∀A⊆ N) T [A] is either complete or contradictory.
(11)
These conditions are, in fact, natural. If we have an
arbitrary effective transformation n → T ′ → F ′, where T ′ is
a computably axiomatizable theory constructed from n, and
F ′ is a ﬁnitely axiomatizable theory of signature τ obtained
from T ′ by the universal construction, then, this scheme
can equivalently be transformed in the form of a normalized
scheme n → T → F. Furthermore, any normalized complex
must satisfy the following properties: (a) T [A], A∈Ω(m)
represents the family of all complete extensions of T ; (b)
F[A], A∈Ω(m), represents the family of all complete ex-
tensions of F; (c) isomorphism μ maps T [A] to F[A], for
all A∈Ω(m); (d) for any A∈Ω(m) complete theories T [A]
and F[A] have identical model-theoretic properties within the
inﬁnitary semantic layer MQL; (e) effectively, in the system
of axioms of T , one can ﬁnd s∈N such that function ϕ A
s (t)
is characteristic for the set Nom(T [A]), for all A∈Ω(m); a
deﬁnition of ϕA
s (t) is found in [17, p.130].
VI.
VERSIONS OF THE UNIVERSAL CONSTRUCTION
Hereafter, we use notation MQL for a sublayer of the
inﬁnitary layer MQL.
Simplest form of the universal construction, denoted FˇU, is
presented by:
Statement 1. [GENERIC UNIVERSAL CONSTRUCTION: A PRIM-
ITIVE FORM] The following assertion holds (where MQL⊆
MQL):
(∀ c.a. theory T)(∃ f.a. theory F)

T ≡MQL F

.
(12)
A more common formulation to the universal construction,
[12,Th.0.6.1]:
Statement 2. [GENERIC UNIVERSAL CONSTRUCTION: A NOR-
MAL FORM] Given an arbitrary computably axiomatizable
theory T and a ﬁnite rich signature σ. Effectively in a weak
c.e. index of T and G¨odel number of σ, one can construct
a ﬁnitely axiomatizable theory F = FU(T,σ) of signature σ
together with a computable isomorphism μ:L(T )→L(F)
between the Tarski-Lindenbaum algebras preserving all model-
theoretic properties within the layer MQL (it is supposed that
MQL⊆ MQL).
The following dependence statement takes place.
Lemma 3. Having any version of the universal construc-
tion in the primitive form (12) with the semantic layer MQL⊆
MQL, one can restore the missing effectiveness requirement
obtaining its normal form presented in Statement 2 with the
same layer MQL.
PROOF. First, we introduce an operation with a sequence
of theories. We use sequence T ⋆{n}, n∈N, including all, up
to an isomorphism, c.a. theories, cf. Preliminaries. Let T ⋆{n}
has signature σn. It is assumed that σn ∩σk = ∅ for all n, k
such that n̸= k. Consider the following new signature
σ′= {Z0
i |i∈N}∪{U 1, c}∪σ0 ∪σ1 ∪...∪σk ∪...,
(13)
where Z0
i , i∈N, are symbols of nulary predicates. It is
assumed that the symbols U, c, and Zi, i∈N, do not belong
to σ0 ∪σ1 ∪...∪σk ∪... .
Construct theory T u
c.a. of signature σ′ deﬁned by the
following set of axioms:
1◦. U(x)↔(x̸= c),
2◦. (∃x)U(x),
3◦. Zn → ⌝Zk, n,k∈N, n̸= k,
4◦. Zn →(on U(x), axioms of Tn are satisﬁed), n∈N,
5◦. Zn →(outside U(x), σn-symbols deﬁned trivially),
6◦. ⌝Zk →(all σk-symbols are deﬁned c-trivially), k∈N.
Denote this theory by 
n∈NT ⋆{n}. The statement above
“deﬁned c-trivially” means that all σk-predicates are identically
false, each σk-function f m satisﬁes f(x1,...,xm)= x1 for all
its arguments, and each σk-constant is interpreted by c.
We can show that the following assertions hold:
(a) theory T u
c.a. =
n∈NTn is computably axiomatizable;
(b) for any n∈N, theory T u
c.a.∪{Zn} is algebraically
isomorphic to the constant extension T ⋆{n}⟨c⟩ of the theory
T ⋆{n};
(c) there is a computable isomorphism μn :L(T ⋆{n})→
L(T u
c.a. ∪{Zn})
preserving all
model-theoretic properties
within the semantic layer ASL.
Part (a) is a consequence of the fact that the sequence
T ⋆{n}, n∈N, is computable. Part (b) is checked immediately.
Part (c) is a consequence of (b).
Now, we are going to use the universal c.a. theory T u
c.a.
to deduce the normal form of the universal construction from
its primitive form. Applying the primitive form (12) of the
universal construction, we ﬁnd a ﬁnitely axiomatizable theory
F0 together with a computable isomorphism μ0 :L(T u
c.a.)→
L(F0) preserving the layer MQL. After that, a construction
with the effectiveness requirement is obtained as an immediate
consequence of the universality condition for T u
c.a. stated in
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-344-5
COMPUTATION TOOLS 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Computational Logics, Algebras, Programming, Tools, and Benchmarking

(a)–(c); namely, we have to perform the following transforma-
tion:
T ⋆
{n} → T u
c.a.+{Zn}


S
→ FˇU(S) → Redu(FˇU(S),σ),
(14)
where Redu(H,σ) denotes a signature reduction procedure
from a ﬁnitely axiomatizable theory H to such a theory of ﬁ-
nite rich signature σ. By construction, we can effectively build
a computable isomorphism between the Tarski-Lindenbaum
algebras of theories T ⋆{n} and Redu(FˇU(T u
c.a.+{Zn}),σ).
Thus, the transformation (14) can play the role of a normal
form of the universal construction with the layer MQL.
□
The following statement represents so-called universal-
under-canonical construction; alternatively, it is said to be the
canonical-mini construction:
Statement 4. There is a routine proof (by way of transfor-
mation of theories based on the methods of inﬁnitary ﬁrst-
order combinatorics) that, from statement of the canonical
construction, [12, Ch.3, Th.3.1.1], deduces a weak version of
the universal construction with the following semantic layer
of model-theoretic properties (denoted by M1L◦):
(a) existence of a prime model, its strong constructivizabil-
ity, and the value of its algorithmic dimension (relative
to strong constructivizations);
(b) existence of a countable saturated model and its strong
constructivizability.
PROOF. Only outline of the proof is given. The canoni-
cal construction can control those model-theoretic properties
which are expressible in signature σ∗ = {P 1
0 ,P 1
1 ,...,P 1
k ,...;k ∈
N} with inﬁnitely many unary predicates (pay an attention:
Chapter 3 of [12] is titled “The construction over a unary
list”, where the list means a layer). On the other hand,
the pointed out layer M1L◦ consists of exactly those model-
theoretic properties controlled by the canonical construction,
which are expressible in terms of structure of the Tarski-
Lindenbaum algebras Ln(T ), n∈N, n> 0, of theory T .
Let T be an arbitrary computably axiomatizable theory
of an enumerable signature σ′ having G¨odel numbering Φi,
i∈N, for the set SL(σ′). The sequence of sentences Φi, i∈N,
is a generating set for the Tarski-Lindenbaum algebra L(T ).
Enrich σ′ with propositional variables Xi, i∈N, and add to
T additional axioms Xi ↔Φi, i∈N. Construct parameterized
Stone space Ω(m) for T relative to generating sequence
Xi, i∈N. Considering a set A∈Ω(m) as an oracle, let’s
construct Boolean algebra B = 
0<i<ωLk(T [A]) that, in fact,
is a c.e. Boolean algebra relative to computation with oracle
A. It is an important moment that satisfaction of each model-
theoretic property p ∈M1L◦ in theory T is expressible (in a
known way) via the algebra B. On the other hand, we can
present the algebra B (depending on oracle A) via c.e. binary
tree computable with the same oracle. This gives a value
to the second parameter s∈N to the canonical construction.
Applying the construction FC to the obtained pair of input
arguments (m,s), we ﬁnally build theory F = FC(m,s,σ) that,
by virtue of main statement of the canonical construction, is
the required ﬁnitely axiomatizable theory.
□
Mention that, an available proof for the canonical con-
struction is essentially simpler in comparison with that for
the universal construction. On the other hand, the proof given
above represents a demonstration of the methods of inﬁnitary
ﬁrst-order combinatorics.
VII.
SUMMARY: SOME COMMON STATEMENTS
CONCERNING FIRST-ORDER COMBINATORICS
In this paragraph, we formulate a series of common
statements corresponding to ﬁnitary and inﬁnitary ﬁrst-order
combinatorics (or not corresponding to such a combinatorics).
S1. In the case of ﬁnitary ﬁrst-order combinatorics, char-
acteristic property of the transformation between theories is
availability of a one-to-one mapping between the isomorphism
types of their models (this property is said to be the model-
bijectiveness).
S2. In the case of inﬁnitary ﬁrst-order combinatorics, a
characteristic property of the construction is availability of
non-standard fragments in models of the target theory, whose
description should be simple enough; moreover, this simplicity
is a principal demand of inﬁnitary ﬁrst-order combinatorics.
S3. In the case of inﬁnitary ﬁrst-order combinatorics,
our goal is to build a computably axiomatizable theory that,
generally, may be incomplete; a description of the family of
all complete extensions of the theory should be presented;
the axioms should provide some pre-assigned properties of
these extensions depending on an input parameter; applying
an appropriate version of the universal construction, we obtain
the target ﬁnitely axiomatizable theory.
S4. In the case of inﬁnitary ﬁrst-order combinatorics, the
input parameter could be absent if our goal is to build a
separate example of ﬁnitely axiomatizable theory with some
pre-assigned properties; on the other hand, we can use a few
input parameters (more than one) if it is necessary for the
problem considered.
S5. In the case of inﬁnitary ﬁrst-order combinatorics, a
complete theory may be considered as a particular case of
incomplete theories; however, if the purpose is limited with
complete theories only, such a construction does not corre-
spond to speciﬁcations of inﬁnitary ﬁrst-order combinatorics
or is weakly linked with it.
S6. If we consider or build an incomplete theory, but it is
impossible to parameterize the family of its complete exten-
sions, such a construction does not correspond to speciﬁcations
of inﬁnitary ﬁrst-order combinatorics or is weakly linked with
it.
S7. In the case of inﬁnitary ﬁrst-order combinatorics, ﬁrst
of all, the used methods of construction or transformation of
theories are principal; as for the requirements of computability
of the construction and enumerability of the signature, they
ordinarily are satisﬁed automatically.
S8. In the case of inﬁnitary ﬁrst-order combinatorics, a
sublayer of the full inﬁnitary semantic layer MQL may be
considered; an empty layer ∅ is also admissible.
VIII.
DEMONSTRATIONS: SITUATIONS CORRESPONDING
TO FIRST-ORDER COMBINATORICS
In this section, we consider a number of typical examples
of applications of ﬁnitary and inﬁnitary combinatorial meth-
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-344-5
COMPUTATION TOOLS 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Computational Logics, Algebras, Programming, Tools, and Benchmarking

ods; we also demonstrate some situations when methods of
construction and transformation of theories does not corre-
spond to the concept of ﬁrst-order combinatorics.
1) Deﬁnitionally
equivalent
theories:
In
[16, p. 481],
C. Pinter writes, “There are many common instances of the-
ories, which may be formulated naturally in more than one
way, using different sets of primitive relations and operations.
For example, lattice theory may be presented as a ... theory
... with the operations + and ·, or alternatively, as a theory ...
whose language has only one nonlogical symbol ⩽. ... When
theories T and T ′ are related in this manner, they are said
to be deﬁnitionally equivalent.” Similar sense has the concept
of relation of synonymity of theories introduced in Bouvere
[1]. As mentioned in [18,p.130], “... synonymity requires the
universe to remain unchanged,” the same is also true relative
to Pinter’s deﬁnitional equivalence. Some additional examples:
Boolean algebras can be considered in the signature either
{∪,∩,−,0,1}, or {⊆,0,1}, or even {+,·,0,1}; group theory
can be considered in the signature either {·,e}, or {·}, or even
{+,θ}, etc. In these situations, we have a simpliﬁed version
of ﬁnitary ﬁrst-order combinatorics (because more common
virtual deﬁnable extensions of theories are not used here).
2) Virtual deﬁnitionally equivalent theories: Some situ-
ations which are close to ﬁnitary ﬁrst-order combinatorics
were discussed by Leslaw Szczerba in [18]. At [18, p. 130]
he writes, “... authors frequently use sequences of elements
as new elements, members of a new universe (e.g., points
may be pairs of real numbers as in the case of the Cartesian
plane), universes might be restricted to deﬁnable subsets,
and moreover, new elements might be equivalence classes
with respect to some deﬁnable equivalence relation.” These
statements exactly correspond to the concept of Cartesian
extension of a theory and, in other words, to the concept of
a virtual deﬁnitional extension of a theory. Here, we exactly
have ﬁnitary ﬁrst-order combinatorics. Dale Myers in [9, p.85]
calls this transformation an interpretive isomorphism and states
that this deﬁnition was introduced in Manders [8] (author’s
remark: Manders’ deﬁnition is based on Szczerba’s ideas).
Some additional examples: (a) Consider the class K of models,
which are Boolean algebras in signature {∪,∩} with omitted
both particular elements 0 and 1; thereby, the operations are
partial. Alternatively, we can consider this class of systems in
signature {⊆}. Applying virtual deﬁnable extension to Th(K),
we can obtain theory BA of Boolean algebras. From this
fact, we obtain that theories Th(K) and BA have identical
model-theoretic properties (namely, there is a computable
isomorphism μ:L(Th(K))→L(BA) that preserves all model-
theoretic properties). (b) Another example is a system of
positive real numbers N= (R>0,·,+,−) with partial operation
−. Applying virtual deﬁnable extension to Th(N), we can ob-
tain theory Th(M), where M= (R,·,+,−); thereby, theories
Th(N) and Th(M) have identical model-theoretic properties.
In all these cases, we have a situation of ﬁnitary ﬁrst-order
combinatorics.
3) Particular examples of ﬁnitely axiomatizable theories:
Suppose that we are going to construct a ﬁnitely axiomatizable
theory F of a given ﬁnite rich signature σ satisfying the
following properties: the set of all complete extensions of
F consists of a countable sequence Fk, k ∈N∪{ω}, such
that, each of the theories F0, F1, F2, ... is ω-stable theory
and is ﬁnitely axiomatizable over F, while Fω is not ﬁnitely
axiomatizable over F, it is not ω-stable and has a prime
model. First, we have to ﬁnd a computably axiomatizable
theory T with these properties (it is a simple exercise to build
such a theory). Applying the universal construction to T , we
can pass a ﬁnitely axiomatizable theory F = FU(T,σ) together
with a computable isomorphism μ:L(T )→L(F) preserving
all model-theoretic properties of the inﬁnitary semantic layer
MQL. Because both properties p1 =“theory is ω-stable” and
p2 =“theory has a prime model” belong to MQL, we obtain
ﬁnally that the theory F indeed satisﬁes the posed properties.
This example demonstrates methods of inﬁnitary ﬁrst-order
combinatorics.
4) Algorithmic complexity estimates for semantic classes:
Let σ be a ﬁnite rich signature, and Φi, i∈N, be a ﬁxed G¨odel
numbering for the set of sentences of this signature. We are
going to prove the following statement.
Theorem 5. {n|Φn determines a complete theory} ≈ Π0
2.
PROOF. The upper estimate can be established immedi-
ately.
For the lower estimate, we consider the following m-
universal in Π0
2 set: I = {n|Wn is inﬁnite }, [17, Th.13-
VIII, p.264]. Signature of the theory σ = {X 0,...,Xi,...} con-
sists of propositional variables (i.e., nulary predicates). Given
an input parameter n. Consider computably axiomatizable
theory T = T (n) of signature σ, determined by the following
set of axioms:
1◦. Xk ↔ (∃x1...xk)
0<i<j⩽k(xi ̸= xj),
2◦. Xk, k ∈Wn.
Applying the universal construction FU to T (n), we ef-
fectively ﬁnd a ﬁnitely axiomatizable theory F = F (n) =
FU(T (n),σ) of signature σ together with a computable iso-
morphism μ:L(T )→L(F). First, consider the case n∈Wn.
In this case, Wn is inﬁnite, so all models of T are inﬁnite and
the theory is ω0-categorical; thus, T is complete by Vaught
Theorem. Now, consider the case n̸∈Wn. In this case, Wn is
ﬁnite, thereby, theory T cannot be complete since it has both
ﬁnite and inﬁnite models. As a result, we have obtained that
the theory T is complete if and only if n∈I; thus, we have
n∈I ⇔Tn is complete ⇔Fn is complete.
The theory F (n) is deﬁned effectively in T (n). Therefore, there
exists a total computable function f(n) such that the sentence
Φf(n) is an axiom of this theory. Finally, we obtain the required
lower estimate:
n∈I ⇔Φf(n) determines a complete theory.
Proof of Theorem 5 demonstrates methods of inﬁnitary
ﬁrst-order combinatorics. Furthermore, there are lots of results
in this direction in [12,Ch. 8].
5) Isomorphisms between predicate calculi of different ﬁ-
nite rich signatures: We consider a problematic concern-
ing the isomorphism type of the Tarski-Lindenbaum algebra
L(PC(σ)) of predicate calculus PC(σ) of a ﬁnite rich signature
σ. Methods of [11] determine a Hanf’s isomorphism μ between
the Tarski-Lindenbaum algebras L(PC(σ1)) and L(PC(σ2)) of
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-344-5
COMPUTATION TOOLS 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Computational Logics, Algebras, Programming, Tools, and Benchmarking

any two ﬁnite rich signatures σ1 and σ2. It is assembled from
a countable set of partial mappings, which are ﬁnite-to-ﬁnite
signature reduction procedures; thereby, this isomorphism μ
preserves all really model-theoretic properties. The work by
Myers [9] also deﬁnes such an isomorphism between the
predicate calculi L(PC(σ1)) and L(PC(σ2)) that is assembled
from partial mappings described by Gaifman’s maps [3]. These
two approaches coincide with each other from the point of
view of ﬁnitary ﬁrst-order combinatorics.
6) Structure of the Tarski-Lindenbaum algebras of semantic
classes: There are lots of results in this direction in papers
[13][15] and others. Their proofs demonstrate methods of
inﬁnitary ﬁrst-order combinatorics.
7) Deﬁnability in Peano Arithmetic and set theory: Let T
be a rich theory like arithmetic or set theory (for deﬁniteness,
let T be Peano Arithmetic). It is a known fact that T is not
complete; moreover, any ﬁnitely axiomatizable extension of
T cannot be complete. Thereby, we have obtained that the
Tarski-Lindenbaum algebra L(T ) must be countable, atomless
Boolean algebra. However, axiomatic of the theory T is such
that neither direct parameterization nor even understandable
description of the family of all complete extensions is possible.
Thus, argumentation of statement S6, cf. Section VII, is
applicable to this situation concerned to rich formal systems.
Some additional examples: Church construction [2], Kleene
construction [7] (presenting an extension of Peano Arithmetic),
ﬁrst-order presentation of any universal computing system, etc.
All these examples demonstrate situations outside of the
approach based on the methods of ﬁrst-order combinatorics.
IX.
CONCLUSION
The work presents some extra details and gives general
demonstrations and speciﬁcations to the concepts of ﬁnitary
and inﬁnitary ﬁrst-order combinatorics. Based on both formal
substantiations and informal arguments, we show that the
introduced complex of concepts and deﬁnitions for the ﬁrst-
order combinatorics adequately corresponds to the problems
on expressive possibilities of predicate logic presenting a ﬁrm
basis for Computer Science as well as for other branches of
mathematics.
In Section IV, we introduced the concept of virtual de-
ﬁnable equivalence between theories; this relation presents
essence of ﬁnitary ﬁrst-order combinatorics. Further, in Section
V, we describe a scheme of application of inﬁnitary ﬁrst-order
combinatorics. This scheme represents the most general form
of a computable procedure to build a theory T from a complex
C of objects of computational nature with a transformation
of the obtained theory T to a ﬁnitely axiomatizable theory
F together with a computable isomorphism μ:L(T )→L(F)
between their Tarski-Lindenbaum algebras preserving model-
theoretic properties within the inﬁnitary semantic layer MQL
whose fundamental nature is established in [14]. In fact, a
special set X ⊆ N is used in this construction presenting a
parameterization for Stone space of the target theory. This
set X plays the role of an oracle; thereby, the transformation
related to inﬁnitary ﬁrst-order combinatorics represents, as a
whole, is a common Turing computation (it is possible to say,
computable Brute Force with an oracle).
Summarizing, we can say that, the combinatorial approach
requires sophisticated deﬁnitions and is partially based on
informal substantiation. Nevertheless, the concepts of ﬁnitary
and inﬁnitary ﬁrst-order combinatorics adequately correspond
to the posed class of problems; moreover, the informal ar-
gumentations and limitations are rather natural justifying the
appropriateness of using the combinatorial terminology in this
direction.
REFERENCES
[1]
K. Bouvere, “Synonymous theories,” The Theory of Models; Addison,
Henkin and Tarski, Eds., North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1965, pp. 402-
406.
[2]
A. Church, “A note on Entscheidungsproblem,” J. Symbolic Logic,
vol. 1, no. 1, 1937, pp. 40–41; Correction: ibid, pp. 101–102.
[3]
H. Gaifman, “Operations on relational structures, functors and classes.
I,” Proceedings of the Tarski Symposium, 1971, Proceedings of Sym-
posia in Pure Mathematics, American Mathematical Society, Provi-
dence, R.I., First edition: 1974, Second edition: 1979, pp. 21-39.
[4]
S. S. Goncharov and Y. L. Ershov, Constructive models, Plenum, New
York, 1999.
[5]
W. Hanf, “The Boolean algebra of Logic,” Bull. American Math. Soc.,
vol. 31, 1975, pp. 587–589.
[6]
W. Hodges, A shorter model theory, Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, 1997.
[7]
S.C. Kleene, “Finite axiomatizability of theories in the predicate calcu-
lus using additional predicate symbol,” Memories of American Math.
Society, no. 10, 1952, pp. 27–68.
[8]
K. Manders, “First-order logical systems and set-theoretic deﬁnability,”
Preprint, 1980.
[9]
D. Myers, “An interpretive isomorphism between binary and ternary
relations,” Structures in Logic and Computer Science: A Selection of
Essays in Honor of Andrzej Ehrenfeucht, Springer, 1997, pp. 84-105.
[10]
M. G. Peretyat’kin, “Semantic universal classes of models,” Algebra and
Logic, 1991, vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 414–434.
[11]
M. G. Peretyat’kin, “Semantic universality of theories over superlist,”
Algebra and Logic, 1992, vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 517–539.
[12]
M. G. Peretyat’kin, Finitely axiomatizable theories, Plenum, New York,
1997.
[13]
M. G. Peretyat’kin, “On the Tarski-Lindenbaum algebra of the class of
all strongly constructivizable prime models,” Proceedings of the Turing
Centenary Conference CiE2012, Lecture notes in Computer Science,
vol. 7318, Springer-Verlag: Berlin-Heidelberg, June 2012, pp. 589–598.
[14]
M. G. Peretyat’kin, “Introduction in ﬁrst-order combinatorics providing
a conceptual framework for computation in predicate logic,” Computa-
tion tools 2013, The Fourth International Conference on Computational
Logics, Algebras, Programming, Tools, and Benchmarking, IARIA,
May–June 2013, pp. 31-36.
[15]
M. G. Peretyat’kin, “The Tarski-Lindenbaum algebra of the class of all
strongly constructivizable countable saturated models,” P. Bonizzoni, V.
Brattka, and B. Lowe Eds., Computability in Europe CiE 2013, Lecture
notes in Computer Science, vol. 7921, Springer-Heidelberg, July 2013,
pp. 342–352.
[16]
C. Pinter, “Properties preserved under deﬁnitional equivalence and in-
terpretations,” Zeitschr. f. math. Logik und Grundlagen d. Math, 24,
1978, pp. 481-488.
[17]
H. J. Rogers, Theory of recursive functions and effective computability,
McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York, 1967.
[18]
L. Szczerba, “Interpretability of elementary theories,” Logic, Founda-
tions of Mathematics and Computability Theory; Butts and Hintikka,
Eds., D. Reidel Publishing Co., Dordrecht-Holland, 1977, pp. 129-145.
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-344-5
COMPUTATION TOOLS 2014 : The Fifth International Conference on Computational Logics, Algebras, Programming, Tools, and Benchmarking

