Sharing Ballistics Data across the European Union 
 
Richard S Wilson 
C3RI 
Sheffield Hallam University 
Sheffield, United Kingdom 
r.wilson@shu.ac.uk  
 
 
Lukasz Jopek 
C3RI 
Sheffield Hallam University 
Sheffield, United Kingdom 
l.jopek@shu.ac.uk  
 
 
Christopher D Bates 
C3RI 
Sheffield Hallam University 
Sheffield, United Kingdom 
c.d.bates@shu.ac.uk 
 
Abstract - Across Europe police organisations are using 
numerous systems, both computerised and manual, to capture 
information about firearm crimes. The Odyssey platform 
intends to address this issue by providing police organisations 
with the ability to access ballistics data from other European 
law enforcement agencies. The Odyssey platform is a prototype 
system that has been developed to identify standards for the 
development of a European wide ballistics information system. 
In this paper, we outline the investigation tools found within 
the platform and discuss how these were developed. The 
prototype has been demonstrated to law enforcement 
communities across Europe and is in its final stages of 
development. 
 
 Keywords – ballistics; sharing; law enforcement; data 
mining; Europe.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Police organisations across Europe deploy many 
different systems, both computerised and manual, to record 
information about crimes which involve the use of firearms. 
Ballistics crime is relatively rare – just 0.2% of all crimes in 
the UK involve firearms, but justifiably this is taken very 
seriously by Law Enforcement Agencies. The disparate 
systems used today are well suited to resolving crimes when 
they are committed locally, but problems arise when 
crossing jurisdictions.  Although individual offences are 
unlikely to cross borders, guns and bullets are moved 
between European Countries [4]. Exchanging information 
so that, for example, guns can be tracked or patterns of 
usage followed has always been difficult. Information is 
often exchanged via the telephone, email or one-to-one 
meetings. Before information can be shared, investigators 
need to have some indication that the ballistic item is linked 
to another offence.  
The Odyssey project addresses this problem by 
providing users with access to a plethora of information 
from investigations across Europe. Incidents are evaluated 
to find ones which are similar to the one under 
investigation. Detectives are then alerted to these similar 
incidents. The Odyssey platform provides police users with 
access to information such as expert and witness statements, 
images and videos, as well as details of bullets, cartridge-
cases and firearms. All of this information is presented 
through directed graphs or a historical timeline view of an 
investigation. Odyssey improves crime resolution times by 
facilitating communication between experts.  
In this paper we will describe the data structures which 
underpin Odyssey. We will provide an overview of some of 
the most recent developments in police information 
management systems followed by a description of the 
Odyssey platform prototype. The paper concludes with a 
discussion about the standards that were identified through 
the development of the prototype.   
II. 
BEYOND STATE OF THE ART 
Internationally, there are a number of crime database 
systems in use by different law enforcement agencies. Some 
of these systems include: COPLINK, NABIS (National 
Ballistics Intelligence Service), HOLMES (Home Office 
Large Major Enquiry System) 2 and I-24/7.    
COPLINK 
is 
an 
information 
and 
knowledge 
management system aimed at capturing, accessing, 
analysing, visualising and sharing information between 
United States (US) law enforcement agencies. COPLINK 
comprises of two components COPLINK Connect (CC) and 
COPLINK Detect (CD).  
CC is designed to integrate disparate heterogonous data 
sources, including legacy systems, to facilitate information 
sharing between police departments. CC provides police 
officers with access to one central data repository, which 
allows them to carry out four types of independent searches 
(person, vehicle, incidents or locations). In addition to this, 
police officers can carry out partial and phonetic based 
searching, access previous searches and upload images and 
documents. 
CD expands the functionality of CC to automatically 
find associations within police databases. It is aimed at 
supporting detectives and crime analysts in finding 
associations between people, vehicles, incidents and 
locations. At present the system is able to find associations 
between individual entities, but is unable to map them onto 
a geographical map. The strength of an association is 
determined through the use of co-occurrence analysis and 
clustering. The system is able to search for meaningful 
terms in both structured (database tables) and unstructured 
(witness statements) data [1].   
UK police forces have access to a number of 
independent database systems. These databases are used to 
record, monitor and manage offences in such areas as sex 
offences, gun crimes and major incident management.  
8
COMPUTATION TOOLS 2010 : The First International Conference on Computational Logics, Algebras, Programming, Tools, and Benchmarking
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-112-0

NABIS provides ballistic examination services, for 
twenty UK based police forces, through three hubs, which 
are based in London, Birmingham and Manchester [7]. 
The database is fundamental to the service that NABIS 
provides. The NABIS database supports the recovery and 
analysis of ballistic items. Associations between the ballistic 
information, people, objects and events are formed to create 
tactical intelligence. Security is implemented on a per-user 
basis so that users are only able to access information that is 
relevant to their role [6]. 
HOLMES2 is an information management system which 
assists police forces in the investigation of serious crimes, 
such as serial murders, large scale fraud and major disasters. 
HOLMES2 lets police forces share information and identify 
links between independent incidents. HOLMES2 is an 
Oracle based database that resides on a UNIX system [9].   
Across Europe, Interpol has implemented the I-24/7 
global police communications system that allows 188 
member countries to share information about criminals and 
criminal activities. I-24/7 provides member countries with 
24 hour access to a vast array of police information. Such 
information is related to suspected terrorists, wanted 
persons, fingerprints, DNA profiles and stolen vehicles. In 
addition to this, the I-24/7 system provides each member 
country with access to other member’s national databases 
[4]. 
When ballistics crimes are investigated, recovered items 
such as guns, bullets or cartridge-cases can be compared by 
forensic specialists.  Test-fired bullets are examined for a 
range of marks made as they pass down the barrel of the gun 
[2]. By comparing the marks on different bullets a trained 
examiner can determine if two bullets come from the same 
weapon. The process of examining bullets under a 
microscope is time-consuming and difficult.  A number of 
systems such as IBIS, Papillon and EVOFINDER have been 
built to automate the evaluation process; however, these 
systems do not inter-operate [11]. A bullet scan from one 
manufacturer's system cannot be used on anothers. 
The Odyssey project is helping to define standards for 
sharing ballistics data between systems across Europe. 
Figure 1 provides some indication of the different ballistic 
matching systems in place across Europe.  
 
 
Figure 1. Ballistic systems in place across Europe 
This is in contrast to the United States of America 
(USA), where IBIS has first mover advantage and has 
developed a centralised IBIS system. Furthermore, Odyssey 
is different to NABIS and the I-24/7 database currently in 
place in the UK and across Europe, as the NABIS database 
is specifically designed to manage the examination of 
ballistic items. The I-24/7 database has a European-wide 
database which largely retains information related to the 
individual. The I-24/7 system doesn’t integrate data from 
ballistic systems due to the heterogeneous nature of data. 
Odyssey is different to other US and European police 
systems, as Odyssey seamlessly combines relational 
querying and data mining results from multiple different 
domains. 
III. 
INTELLIGENT SEARCHING 
Odyssey retains data within two main databases - a local 
database and a central database called CEON. The local 
database is maintained by the individual police organisation, 
whilst CEON holds ballistics data uploaded by police 
organisations across Europe. The data within the local 
database is replicated within CEON through an XML 
transfer structure, which is updated on a daily basis. The 
central database is interrogated, using supervised and 
unsupervised data mining techniques, to find associations 
with other ballistic incidents that have been committed 
across Europe. It is anticipated that the central database will 
handle at least six hundred thousand new ballistic incidents 
per year. This is based on the average number of firearm 
offences committed in the UK between 1999 and 2009, 
multiplied by the number of member states [3]. Each police 
organisation with a related ballistic incident is alerted to the 
fact that an association has been found. An alert is generated 
when a potential match is identified in the central database. 
An automated message is then sent back to the user to 
inform them that a potential match has been found. This 
message is delivered to an e-mail type inbox within the GUI 
(Graphical User Interface). In addition to this, the platform 
9
COMPUTATION TOOLS 2010 : The First International Conference on Computational Logics, Algebras, Programming, Tools, and Benchmarking
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-112-0

allows individual police organisations to restrict access at 
the individual ballistic incident level to their data.  
Extracting intelligence using the GUI is achieved in two 
stages. First, the user defines the search item then they 
browse the results, which can then lead to further searches. 
Figure 2, below, shows a search that has been carried out 
through the Odyssey GUI. 
 
 
Figure 2. Odyssey GUI 
First, the user selects a basic or ballistic tactical item 
and refines their search in the search properties. The user 
then has the option to add further tactical items and link 
them to the results of the previous search. Searches are 
refined, in the platform, through the search properties which 
converts the query into OSL (Odyssey Semantic Language). 
Querying with OSL allows the user to access information 
directly from the database and combines it with intelligence 
from the data mining backend. Below is an example of a 
simple OSL query generated through the GUI. 
 
QUERY person WHERE weapon HAS VALUE Sig Sauer 
P238 AND country HAS VALUE France 
 
Expanding the query to determine similar ballistic incidents 
by using the data mining backend and within a confidence 
limit is expressed as follows: 
 
QUERY person WHERE weapon HAS VALUE Sig Sauer 
P238 AND country HAS VALUE France WITH 
CONFIDENCE > 0.7 
 
Having identified the high level information, through the 
GUI, the user is able to drill down into it. This data is 
contained within the Odyssey Evidence Repository (OER). 
The OER provides access to some of the physical artefacts 
collected through the investigation process, including: 
images, videos and expert and witness statements. 
 In addition to this, Odyssey also provides historical data 
views of related incidents. These views are presented to the 
user as a timeline. This promotes transparency as the user is 
able to identify any updates that have occurred as the 
investigation 
has 
progressed, 
which 
includes 
the 
identification of additional ballistic incidents and changes 
made to the underlying information.   
The 
intelligent 
searching 
services 
found 
within 
Odyssey’s arsenal are vital to facilitating the resolution of 
ballistic incidents committed across Europe. 
IV. 
ODYSSEY HUB 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Architecture of the Odyssey Platform 
The Odyssey platform is pragmatic software that can run on 
any standard off the shelf system. It was developed through 
the integration and repurposing of open source and common 
off the shelf software applications. These included Java, 
NetBeans, PostgreSQL, Antlr and SAS. Whilst the platform 
currently utilities SAS for the integration and mining of data 
the software could quite easily be replaced with open 
sourced software such as Python and WEKA. Figure 3 
above provides an overview of the architecture of the 
Odyssey platform. 
External data, from European police organisations, is 
extracted and transformed using SAS Integration Studio. 
This data is then loaded into the local authority database, 
which is a replication of the central database. These 
databases were developed using PostgreSQL and are based 
on the database structures currently in place at NABIS, 
Europol and CiFEx (Centre for Information on Firearms and 
Explosives) – CiFEx are ballistic experts in the UK. This 
helped to focus the development of the databases towards 
ballistic incidents. This allows the user to manage their own 
data and helps to insure the smooth transfer and integration 
of data between the local and central databases. There are 
over fifty tables in the database that are linked using Object 
Identifiers (OIDs). An OID is automatically generated when 
data is uploaded into the database, which is unique across 
 
OSL Parsers & Query Generators 
SAS 
9.2 
Semantic 
Database 
Historical 
Data 
Views 
Central 
PostgreSQL 
Instance 
CEON 
Alerting 
Results Collation 
Message Queue 
XML 
XML 
XML 
Local Authority 
GUI (Querying & 
Alerting) 
SAS Integration 
Studio 
Local PostgreSQL 
Instance 
External Data Sources 
10
COMPUTATION TOOLS 2010 : The First International Conference on Computational Logics, Algebras, Programming, Tools, and Benchmarking
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-112-0

the entire instance of the database. Referential integrity 
between items is not maintained by the databases. This 
causes scalability problems as associations between data 
items have to be made outside of the database. This issue is 
further compounded by the predicted size of the database, 
given the number of ballistic incidents per year. Indeed, as 
the platform stores images, videos and statements, the 
anticipated size of the database is expected to grow into the 
terabytes. A binary items table was therefore implemented 
within the database which works as a file system that points 
to the stored images, videos and statements. 
 Data is uploaded into the local component through the 
GUI. This is achieved through a number of automatically 
generated SQL insert statements, which is then speeded up 
through the use of OIDs. It is at this point where the user is 
able to specify the initial sharing permissions. This is done 
through the GUI, by selecting the ALLOW or DENY option 
followed by the user specified options. The user specified 
options allow the user to grant or restrict access at five 
levels: country, region, police organisation, department and 
user. These options are then changed into numerical codes 
that are later translated, along with the insert statements, 
into OSL. These codes are then retained within the 
permissions table of the authorisation database. Data is 
loaded into the local database through the GUI, see Figure 
4.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Odyssey XML Transfer Structure 
The GUI translates the OSL into SQL which is used to pass 
data to the local database as XML. The data is then 
transferred to CEON using the same XML structure, where 
it is interrogated for associations. Through the use of SAS 
integration studio, we have demonstrated that it is possible 
to extract, transform and load data from ballistic and 
incident systems into a relational database structure. 
 When a match is identified an alert is then triggered and 
sent back to the local component. If permission is granted to 
view the data, the related data is also sent back to the local 
users through the XML structure. Following on the data is 
then retained in the cache of the local component where it is 
serialised within the platform. The platform also allows the 
user to modify their data, which is done through the 
translation of SQL update or delete statements into OSL. 
The process of uploading and returning a result (alert and 
data) is completed in twenty four hours. The user is 
restricted from directly changing the data in the central 
database due to batch data mining and user processing. A 
change to the central database would occur within twenty 
four hours of a user modifying the local database. When the 
update has occurred the users receive an alert that asks them 
to re-run their query.   
 The shared data is based on the options specified by the 
user, which is retained in the permissions table within the 
authorisation database. The shared data is sent back to the 
local component through the XML structure where it is 
serialised within the platform. It is presented to the user as a 
related result within the GUI. Figure 5 below shows the 
results of an Odyssey search.  
 
Figure 5. Search Result 
This shows the related crimes committed by Edwards, 
Cooper and Bailey. 
 Querying the database is carried out through using the 
GUI, or by creating OSL with the built in assisted functions. 
Querying with the GUI, the user drags a tactical item from 
the tool bar and specifies the search options in the search 
properties. The user specified options are transformed into 
OSL using the backend semantic engine. OSL is a grammar 
that was developed in Antlr, which translates the search into 
SQL and is specifically designed to hide the underlying 
structure of the database from the user. The semantic 
language was created through understanding how police 
investigators communicate and think during investigations 
and by capturing domain specific knowledge about the 
meaning of police language. Below is an example of OSL 
and its translation into SQL: 
 
QUERY ballistic incident WHERE weapon_manufacturer 
HAS VALUE Sig Sauer AND victim_gender HAS VALUE 
female 
 
SELECT * 
FROM odyssey.ballistic_incident 
LEFT JOIN ballistic_incident_has_recovered_firearm ON 
(ballistic_incident_has_recovered_firearm.recovered_firear
m_oid = ballistic_incident.oid) 
LEFT JOIN ballistic_incident_has_recovered_firearm ON 
GUI 
 
Data 
Local Component 
 
 
Data 
CEON 
 
 
Data 
XML 
 
XML 
 
11
COMPUTATION TOOLS 2010 : The First International Conference on Computational Logics, Algebras, Programming, Tools, and Benchmarking
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-112-0

(ballistic_incident_has_recovered_firearm.recovered_firear
m_oid = recovered_firearm.oid) 
LEFT JOIN ballistic_incident_has_case ON 
(ballistic_incident_has_case.ballistic_incident_case_oid = 
ballistic_incident.oid) 
LEFT JOIN ballistic_incident_has_case ON 
(ballistic_incident_has_case.ballistic_incident_case_oid = 
case.oid) 
WHERE case.gender_of_victim = “female” AND 
recovered_firearm.manufacturer = “Sig Sauer”;  
 
 If the user specifics a confidence limit then Odyssey 
will return the results ranked in descending order of 
confidence. The confidence is calculated on a daily basis, by 
applying prebuilt algorithms to a merged copy of the central 
database tables the Odyssey data mining mart (DMM). The 
data is merged using SAS Data Integration Studio and is 
scored using prebuilt algorithms that were created in SAS 
Enterprise Miner. The score is returned to the ballistic 
incident table by matching the OID from the DMM with the 
OID in the ballistic incidents table. The ballistic incidents 
table is then sorted in descending order of score. The 
following is an example of an OSL query with an expressed 
confidence limit, which is translated into SQL: 
 
QUERY ballistic incident WHERE weapon_manufacturer 
HAS VALUE Sig Sauer AND victim_gender HAS VALUE 
female WITH CONFIDENCE > 0.7 
 
SELECT * 
FROM odyssey.ballistic_incident 
LEFT JOIN ballistic_incident_has_recovered_firearm ON 
(ballistic_incident_has_recovered_firearm.recovered_firear
m_oid = ballistic_incident.oid) 
LEFT JOIN ballistic_incident_has_recovered_firearm ON 
(ballistic_incident_has_recovered_firearm.recovered_firear
m_oid = recovered_firearm.oid) 
LEFT JOIN ballistic_incident_has_case ON 
(ballistic_incident_has_case.ballistic_incident_case_oid = 
ballistic_incident.oid) 
LEFT JOIN ballistic_incident_has_case ON 
(ballistic_incident_has_case.ballistic_incident_case_oid = 
case.oid) 
WHERE case.gender_of_victim = “female” AND 
recovered_firearm.manufacturer = “Sig Sauer” AND 
ballistic_incident.score > 0.7;  
 
 Documents are stored in a separate PostgreSQL 
database as blobs. Using local compatible software, police 
experts are able to share information across the platform. It 
helps to facilitate communication between experts, as they 
are able to access documents from other law enforcement 
agencies, 
along 
with 
their 
contact 
details. 
Such 
communication is believed to be vital in helping to resolve 
crimes that have been carried out in different locations [8].   
 Historical data are presented to the user as a timeline of 
events, which shows any updates to the incidents and any 
associated incidents that the user has the authority to view. 
An update is defined as the user deleting, updating or 
inserting data into an existing ballistic incident. The timeline 
of historical events is created through using another 
PostgreSQL database, which stores the delta along with the 
author and date/time of the change. The updated item is 
identified in the historical database by the OID of the initial 
item, combined with an SQL timestamp. The approach 
adopted by the platform is quite unique as other historical 
databases that use OIDs with timestamps have retained the 
historical data in the same database. The main argument to 
support this is that consistency and speed of data retrieval is 
maintained when the historical data is stored in the same 
database [10]. Whilst speed of retrieval and consistency of 
data items is important to the platform, the initial aim is to 
return the latest view of the ballistic incident to the user. 
The speed in which historical data is returned to the user is 
however improved, through the use of the OID and 
timestamp, as the requested data is easily ranked through 
sorting these values in ascending order.  
V. 
TOWARDS COMPLETION 
Further development of the platform will focus on the 
automatic identification of key words in expert and witness 
statements – the Odyssey Statement Miner (OSM). This will 
present the user with a list of key words, ranked in order of 
occurrence, from the associated statements. We expect that 
this will help the police experts to assess the usefulness of 
the documentation.  
 The OSM will be developed using SAS Text Miner in 
conjunction with a bespoke java programme, which 
removes any conjunctive adverbs from the statements. SAS 
Text Miner will be used to identify any words that occur 
more than three times within a statement. From this a 
dictionary of words, along with the frequency of occurrence 
will be created. This will then be presented to the user as a 
list of words in descending order of frequency. It is hoped 
that this will help the user to decide whether or not to view 
the statement.  
It is noticeable and disappointing that no EU-wide 
standards exist for secure police data systems. Odyssey has 
been able to demonstrate that widely available open 
software can be repurposed easily to build such systems. 
The project will be recommending a list of such 
technologies. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper provides an overview of some of the most 
current crime information management systems in place in 
the USA, UK and across Europe. It highlights that there is a 
need for a platform which combines data from the different 
ballistic systems currently in place across Europe. An 
overview of the functions found within the prototype are 
also discussed, which focuses upon accessing, loading, 
12
COMPUTATION TOOLS 2010 : The First International Conference on Computational Logics, Algebras, Programming, Tools, and Benchmarking
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-112-0

sharing and querying of data. The development of the 
investigation tools within the platform are also explained 
and future work in relation to the completion of the 
prototype is outlined. The paper concludes with a brief 
discussion 
regarding 
the 
standards 
that 
will 
be 
recommended at the end of the project.  
REFERENCES 
[1] Chen, H., Zeng, D., Atabakhsh, H., Wyzga, W.,  and Shroeder, J. 
(2003), COPLINK Managing Law Enforcement Data and Knowledge, 
Communications of the ACM, January 2003. Vol. 46, No.1. pp. 28-
34. 
[2] Bundeskriminalamt. (2004), Firearm Type Determination, Available 
[online]: https://www.forensic-firearms.bund.de/ [17/06/2010]. 
[3] Gun Control Network. (no date), Firearm Offences – England and 
Wales, 
Available 
[online]: 
http://www.gun-control-
network.org/GF05.htm [17/06/2010]. 
[4] Interpol. (no date,) Connecting Police: I-24/7, Interpol, Available 
[online]: 
http://www.interpol.int/Public/ICPO/FactSheets/GI03.pdf 
[17/06/2010]. 
[5] Leon, F.P. (2005) 'Automated comparison of firearm bullets', 
Forensic Science International, Vol. 156, February, pp. 40-50. 
[6] National Ballistics Intelligence Services. (no date), Database, 
Available 
[online]: 
http://www.nabis.police.uk/database.asp 
[16/06/2010]. 
[7] Sims, C. (2010), National Ballistics Intelligence Service Update 
Report, West Midlands Police Authority, Available [online]: 
http://www.west-midlands-
pa.gov.uk/documents/committees/public/2010/12_PerfandOps_22Apr
il2010_National_Ballistics_Report.pdf , [16/06/2010]. 
[8] Travis, J. (1998), ‘Informal Information Sharing Among Police 
Agencies’, National Institute of Justice, December 1998. 
[9] Unisys. (2007), What is Holmes 2?, Unisys, Available [online]: 
http://www.holmes2.com/holmes2/whatish2/ [17/06/2010]. 
[10] Van Oosterom, P. (no date), ‘Maintaining Consistent Topology 
including Historical Data in a Large Spatial Database’, Cadastre 
Netherlands. pp. 327-336. 
[11] Yates, S., Jopek, L. Johnson Mitchell, S., and Wilson, R. (2009), 
‘Semantic Interoperability between Ballistic Systems through the 
Application of Ontology’, IADIS WWW/ Internet Conference. Vol. 2 
pp. 153-157. 
 
 
 
 
13
COMPUTATION TOOLS 2010 : The First International Conference on Computational Logics, Algebras, Programming, Tools, and Benchmarking
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-112-0

