An Integrated Model for Content Management, Presentation, and Targeting
Hans-Werner Sehring
Namics – A Merkle Company
Hamburg, Germany
e-mail: hans-werner.sehring@namics.com
Abstract—The World Wide Web is the basis for increasingly
many  information  and  interaction  services.  Personalization
provides  users  with  information  and  services  that  are
adequately tailored to their current needs. Targeting, a form of
implicit personalization for groups of users, comes to broader
practical use for a growing number of commercial websites.
The wider adoption results from the availability of platforms
that incorporate targeting. Solutions are usually built on top of
content  management  systems  used  for  the  production  of
websites. The definitions required for targeting are related to
content, but they are superimposed in the sense that they are
not an integral part of the content model or the content itself.
This paper presents an initial model that is used to study the
integration of models for content, content visualizations, and
content targeting. Potential benefits from an integrated model
are manifold. It allows expressing personalization rules along
with the content they refer to in a consistent way. This way,
personalization is applied by putting content in context rather
than  through  superimposed  targeting  rules.  By  expressing
personalization  rules  in  the  same  context-dependent  and
evolvable way as content, they can also evolve over time and
can be adapted to different user contexts. On top of that, they
can be defined and maintained by content editors and other
users of a content management system.
Keywords-personalization; targeting; segmentation; context-
aware content management; content management.
I.
 INTRODUCTION
The  World  Wide  Web  has  undergone  a  tremendous
development. For over two decades now, there is research on
personalization of contents published on the web and of the
presentations used for publication.
There is a wide range of personalization approaches for
different purposes and goals [1]. These approaches differ in
several  aspects [2],  e.g.,  in  the  way  personalizations  are
derived:  explicitly  by  users  stating  their  preferences  or
implicitly by deriving them from users behavior and habit.
An example for explicit personalization are websites that
allow  the  user  to  name  their  interests  or  that  allow  to
individually  rearrange  parts  of  the  web  site.  Implicit
personalization is achieved, e.g., by observing interactions of
a user with a website [3] or by taking previously visited
websites into consideration (customer journeys, at best).
Personalization approaches also differ in the subject of
the  individual  adaptations,  e.g.,  content  or  content
representations  (visualizations  of  content  created  for
publication). Content personalization can be found, e.g., in
online shops where users receive individual pricing. Content
visualizations are personalized by, e.g., using lists of content
entries where these lists are ordered in a user-specific way.
Personalization has already been adopted to a range of
specific,  innovative  websites,  in  particular  those  that
confront  the  user  with  large  amounts  of  content.  Such
websites  use  it  to  filter  and  prioritize  content  based  on
assumed user preferences.
Currently, targeting is applied by an increasing number
of commercial websites. We consider targeting as implicit
personalization of content for user groups. The adaptation of
content is limited to predefined points, though. Typically,
part of the content is selected from building blocks that are
prepared for the different user groups.
A set of tools that has emerged during the past years
constitutes the basis that allows configuring websites for
personalization. Examples are personalization engines built
into content management systems and commerce platforms,
as  well  as  external  personalization  services  that  allow
adjusting websites to specific user groups.
There is a lack of models that would cover multiple kinds
of  personalization  approaches [4] and,  therefore,  allow
different usage scenarios to be integrated in one solution.
Typically,  commercial  products  use  means  of
personalization  that  are  superimposed  to  a  (non
individualized) base system. A content management system,
e.g., allows defining a content model according to which
content will be edited, managed, and published. This content
model  is  defined  in  a  uniform  way  for  all  users  and
application scenarios. On a different layer, personalization is
added by other means, typically rules that define how to
adjust content representations of specific user groups.
Therefore, there is no coherence between content models,
content visualization layouts, and personalization rules in
such systems. Instead, content has to be defined with all
possible  audiences  and  usage  scenarios  in  mind,
visualizations have to provide the variations to be offered as
personalizations, and personalization rules may be defined
on the basis of these definitions.
Contemporary products typically require fixed content
models and visualizations (or at least ones that cannot be
changed  by  content  editors).  This  only  leaves  such
personalization rules at the content editors’ disposal that can
be defined with respect to the possibilities and constraints
raised by content models and content visualizations.
The aim of this paper is providing first studies towards a
fully  integrated  model  that  combines  many  aspects  of
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-707-8
CONTENT 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

content and its personalized utilization. For this study, we
use the Minimalistic Meta Modeling Language (M3L) [5] as
a testbed. This language is well-suited for content models
since it covers variations and contexts of content in a direct
way.  Insights  into  a  variety  of  personalization  options
originate  from  previous  research  on  Concept-oriented
Content Management [6]. These insights are transferred to
M3L models.
Future  research  will  investigate  how to  employ  such
integrated models to cover a wide range of personalization
approaches and applications. With the help of such models it
will be possible to use more than  the set of predefined
configuration  options  that  contemporary  systems  exhibit.
Instead, these models are expected to unveil personalization
capabilities over all aspects of services, their content, and
their appearance, as well as to give the possibility of utilizing
the interconnections between these.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
describes  targeting  approaches  typically  found  in
commercial software products. Section III provides a short
introduction  into  the  M3L.  Section IV  presents  a  first
modeling experiment to utilize the M3L for expressing and
integrating  the  common  targeting  approach  into  content
models  for  websites.  Conclusions  and  acknowledgement
close the paper.
II.
TARGETING IN COMMERCIAL PRODUCTS
There is a wide range of approaches to personalization
that  can  be  found  in  the  literature  and  in  prototype
implementations. In this paper, we constrain ourselves to
targeting which is of particular importance for commercial
websites. Targeting is a form of implicit personalization of
content  assembled  for  presentation  with  respect  to  a
customer group. The personalization  itself is directed  by
rules set up by content editors.
A.
Segment-based Targeting Rules
For  targeting,  as  it  is  found  in  many  commercial
products,  users  of  a  web  site  are  assigned  segments.
Segments  are  categories  describing  a  user’s  interest  or
preferences. These are predefined for a particular website
(though there are scientific approaches that include deriving
segments by, e.g., means of clustering [7]).
The assignment of segments to users is based on tracking
(or  analytics) used during web page delivery. By tracking,
accesses  to  web  pages  are  recorded.  Depending  on  the
granularity  required,  interactions  on  smaller  parts  than  a
whole page may be counted [8].
From the web pages visited by a user, her or his interests
are derived by collecting the topics covered by those web
pages. The web pages considered in this collection could be,
e.g, those web pages that have been visited most often, or the
web pages for which the visits exceed a given threshold.
The segments assigned to a user (by that time) are used
as  a  parameter  to  content  selection  and  production  of
documents  from  content.  This  way,  content  and  its
representations  are  personalized  for  user  groups,  namely
groups consisting of users with the same segments assigned.
B.
Related Work
Targeting is found in diverse systems and services, e.g.,
in  Content  Management  Systems  (CMSs),  commerce
systems, and marketing suites.
1)
Personalization  Engines  in  Content  Management
Systems. Some CMSs have means of segmentation built in.
These systems allow equipping content with rules for the
selection of content to be included in published web pages
based on user segmentation. Like many others, the CMS
products of CoreMedia [9] and Sitecore [10] work this way.
2)
Superimposed  Personalization. 
Instead  of  an
integrated  personalization  engine  inside  a  CMS,
personalization can alternatively be applied on the basis of
an  external  service.  Adobe  Target [11] is  a  prominent
representative of this personalization approach.
3)
Consideration of Additional Information on Users.
Instead of just considering user behavior in the form of web
page access profiles, increasingly many applications are also
based on explicit customer data. Such data come from, e.g.,
a Customer Relationship Management (CRM) system, from
the history of transactions in a commerce system, from the
history of cases in a support system, or from feedback given
by means of ratings. Personalization may additionally be
based on context information, e.g., the time of day, the
device the visitor uses, or some kind of work mode she or
he  is  in [12].  Such  context  information  is  partially
considered in commercial personalization engines.
III.
THE MINIMALISTIC META MODELING LANGUAGE
The  Minimalistic  Meta  Modeling  Language (M3L,
pronounced “mel”) is a modeling language that is applicable
to a range of modeling tasks. It proved particularly useful for
context-aware content modeling [13].
For the purpose of this paper, we only introduce the static
aspects of the M3L in this section. Dynamic evaluations that
are defined by means of different rules are presented in the
subsequent section.
The descriptive power of M3L lies in the fact that the
formal semantics is rather abstract. There is no fixed domain
semantics connected to M3L definitions. There is also no
formal distinction between typical conceptual relationships
(specialization,  instantiation,  entity-attribute,  aggregation,
materialization, contextualization, etc.).
A.
Concept Definitions and References
A M3L definition consists of a series of definitions or
references. Each definition starts with a previously unused
identifier that is introduced by the definition and may end
with a period, e.g.:
Person.
A  reference  has  the  same  syntax,  but  it  names  an
identifier that has already been introduced.
We call the entity named by such an identifier a concept.
The keyword  is introduces an optional reference to a
base  concept,  making  the  newly  defined  concept  a
refinement of it.
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-707-8
CONTENT 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

A  specialization  relationship  as  known  from  object-
oriented modeling is established between the base concept
and the newly defined derived concept. This relationship
leads to the concepts defined in the context (see below) of
the base concept to be visible in the derived concept.
The keyword is always has to be followed by either a, an,
or the. The keywords a and an are synonyms for indicating
that a classification allows multiple sub-concepts of the base
concept:
Peter is a Person. John is a Person.
There may be more than one base concept. Base concepts
can be enumerated in a comma-separated list:
PeterTheEmployee is a Person, an Employee.
The keyword  the indicates a closed refinement: there
may  be  only  one  refinement  of  the  base  concept  (the
currently defined one), e.g.:
Peter is the FatherOfJohn.
Any further refinement of the base concept(s) leads to the
redefinition (“unbinding”) of the existing refinements.
Statements about already existing concepts lead to their
redefinition. For example, the following expressions define
the concept Peter in a way equivalent to the above variant:
Peter is a Person.
Peter is an Employee.
B.
Content and Context Definitions
Concept  definitions  as  introduced  in  the  preceding
section are valid in a context. Definitions like the ones seen
so far add concepts to the top of a tree of contexts. Curly
brackets open a new context, e.g.:
Person { Name is a String. }
Peter is a Person{"Peter Smith" is the Name.}
Employee { Salary is a Number. }
Programmer is an Employee.
PeterTheEmployee is a Peter, a Programmer {
  30000 is the Salary.
}
We call the outer concepts the context of the inner, and
we call the set of inner concepts the content of the outer.
In this example, we assume that concepts  String and
Number are already defined. The sub-concepts created in
context are unique specializations in that context only.
As  indicated  above,  concepts  from  the  context  of  a
concept  are inherited  by refinements.  For example,  Peter
inherits the concept Name from Person.
M3L has visibility rules that correlate to both contexts
and  refinements.  Each  context  defines  a scope in which
defined identifiers are valid. Concepts from outer contexts
are  visible  in  inner  scopes.  For  example,  in  the  above
example the concept String is visible in Person because it
is  defined  in  the  topmost  scope.  Salary is  visible  in
PeterTheEmployee because it is defined in Employee and
the context is inherited. Salary is not valid in the topmost
context and in Peter.
C.
Contextual Amendments
Concepts can be redefined in contexts. This happens by
definitions  as  those  shown  above.  For  example,  in  the
context  of  Peter,  the  concept  Name receives  a  new
refinement.
Different aspects of concepts can explicitly be redefined
in a context, e.g.:
AlternateWorld {
  Peter is a Musician {
    "Peter Miller" is the Name.
  }
}
We call a redefinition performed in a context different
from that of the original definition a conceptual amendment.
In the above example, the contextual variant of Peter in
the context of AlternateWorld is both a Person (initial
definition)  and  a  Musician (additionally  defined).  The
Name of the contextual Peter has a different refinement.
A redefinition is valid in the context it is defined in, in
sub-contexts, and in the context of refinements of the context
(since the redefinition is inherited as part of the content).
D.
Concept Narrowing
There are three important relationships between concepts
in M3L.
M3L  concept  definitions  are  passed  along  two  axes:
through visibility along the nested  contexts, and through
inheritance along the refinement relationships.
A third form of concept relationship, called narrowing, is
established  by  dynamic  analysis  rather  than  by  static
definitions like content and refinement.
For a concept c1 to be a narrowing of a concept c2, c1 and
c2 need to have a common ancestor, and they have to have
equal content. Equality in this case means that for each
content concept of  c2 there needs to be a concept in  c1’s
content that has an equal name and the same base classes.
For an example, assume definitions like:
Person { Sex. Status. }
MarriedFemalePerson is a Person {
  Female is the Sex.
  Married is the Status.
}
MarriedMalePerson is a Person {
  Male is the Sex.
  Married is the Status.
}
With these definitions, a concept
Mary is a Person {
  Female is the Sex.
  Married is the Status.
}
is a narrowing of MarriedFemalePerson, even though it is
not a refinement of that concept, and though it introduces
separate nested concepts Female and Married.
E.
Semantic Rule Definitions
For each concept, one semantic rule may be defined.
The  syntax  for  semantic rule  definitions  is  a  double
turnstile (“|=”) followed by a concept definition. A semantic
rule follows the content part of a concept definition, if such
exists.
A rule’s concept definition is not made effective directly,
but is used as a prototype for a concept to be created later.
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-707-8
CONTENT 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

The  following  example  redefines  concepts
MarriedFemalePerson and MarriedMalePerson:
MarriedFemalePerson is a Person {
  Female is the Sex. Married is the Status.
} |= Wife.
MarriedMalePerson is a Person {
  Male is the Sex. Married is the Status.
} |= Husband.
The concepts Wife and Husband are not added directly,
but  at  the  time  when  the  parent  concept  is  evaluated.
Evaluation is covered by the subsequent section.
Concepts from semantic rules are created and evaluated
in different contexts. The concept is instantiated in the same
context in which the concept carrying the rule is defined. The
context for the evaluation of a rule (evaluation of the newly
instantiated concept, that is) is that of the concept for which
the rule was defined.
In the example above, the concept Wife is created in the
root context and is then further evaluated in the context of
MarriedFemalePerson.
Rules are passed from one concept to another by means
of  inheritance.  They  are  passed  to  a  concept  from  (1)
concepts the concept is a narrowing of, and (2) from base
classes. Inheritance happens in this order: Only if the concept
is not a narrowing of a concept with a semantic rule then
rules are passed from base concepts.
For example, Mary as defined above evaluates to Wife.
F.
Syntactic Rule Definitions
Additionally, for each concept one syntactic rule may be
defined.
Such a rule, like a grammar definition, can be used in two
ways: to produce a textual representation from a concept, or
to recognize a concept from a textual representation.
A semantic rule consists of a sequence of string literals,
concept references, and the name expressions that evaluate
to the current concept’s name.
During evaluation of a syntactic rule, rules of referenced
concepts are applied recursively. Concepts without a defined
syntactic rule are evaluated to/recognized from their name.
For example, from definitions
WordList {
  Word. Remainder is a WordList.
} |- Word §" " Remainder.
OneWordWordList is a WordList |- Word.
Sentence { WordList. } |- WordList "."
HelloWorld is a Sentence {
  Words is the WordList {
    Hello is the Word.
    OneWordWordList is the Remainder {
      World is the Word. 
} } }
the textual representation Hello World. is produced.
Syntactic rule evaluation is not covered in this article.
IV.
A MODEL OF CONTENT PERSONALIZATION
This  section  provides  a  first  simple  M3L  model  of
content, its visualization on web pages, website users, web
page accesses, and the targeting of the web pages to the users
based on past web page accesses.
WebPage.
SegmentingWebPage is a WebPage {
  Topic is a Segment. }
User.
Visit {
  Visitor is a User.
  ViewedPage is a WebPage. }
Segment.
Figure 1. Base model for targetable websites.
A.
A Web Page and User Behavior Model
Figure 1 shows the essence of a M3L model for a web
page,  its users, the web page accesses,  and segments in
which to classify users.
Actual  web  pages  are  defined  as  refinements  of  the
WebPage concept. Such concepts contain content as needed
and  they  evaluate  syntactically  to  HTML  code  for  the
presentation of that page. Figure 2 shows an example.
A SegmentingWebPage has a Topic assigned. The
topic is represented by a Segment (see below).
The User concept serves as the identity of a web page
visitor. It may contain user data.
A Visit records the access of a user to a web page. In
real-world applications, typically a tracking tool is used for
this purpose.
Segments are used in a twofold manner: On web page
accesses, they name the topic of a web page in order to
derive the area of interest of a visitor. When delivering the
web page in a personalized way, a user’s segment is used to
select and evaluate personalization rules.
Segments might be managed in a structure like shown in
the example. Only the segments themselves are significant.
B.
Tracking Web Page Visits
Targeting is based on the users’ behavior. Behavior is
analyzed by tracking web page accesses. In the example of
the M3L model we do so by creating (or finding) a matching
Visit instance for a web page and user.
If  the  user  is  unknown,  we  create  a  User concept
instance at the time of the first request.
Teaser.
RessortPage is a SegmentingWebPage {
 Title is a String.
 MainContent is a String.
 NewsTeaser is a Teaser.
} |- §"<html>"...§"</html>"
SoccerOverviewPage is a RessortPage {
 Soccer is the Title.
 "On this page..." is the MainContent.
 Segments{Ressorts{Sports.}} is the Topic.
}
Segments {
 Ressorts {
  Politics is a Segment.
  Sports is a Segment. } }
Figure 2. Example of a targetable website.
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-707-8
CONTENT 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

Tracking {
 Score {
  SegmentedUser is a User.
  AssignedSegment is a Segment.
  Value. }
 Visit
 |= Score {
  Visitor is the SegmentedUser.
  ViewedPage { Topic. }
   is the AssignedSegment.
 }
 ScoreUpdate is a Score
 |= Score { 1 is the Value. }
 ScoreIncrement is a ScoreUpdate {
  Value is an Integer. }
 |= ScoreIncrement {
  Integer {
   Value is the Pred.
  } is the Value.
 }
}
Figure 3. Base model for tracking.
The assignment of segments to a user is based on the
score a segment got for a user. This score is the number of
visits of a user to web pages with a topic that equals that
segment.
In order to measure scores, we introduce the base concept
Integer with just enough conception in order to have the
ability to count. To this end,  Integers have a reference
Pred to their predecessor. Using this reference, the order of
integers is defined. The numerical value of an Integer is
thus the length of the chain of its predecessors. In M3L:
Integer { Pred is an Integer. }
0 is an Integer.
1 is an Integer { 0 is the Pred. }
The concepts defined in Figure 3 are used to manage
scores. The Value of a Score that a segment has for a user
is assigned an Integer concept as a refinement. Visits
have assigned the user and the visited page.
On every request of a user u for a web page p, the web
server issues a
CulturePage17 is a WebPage {
 "Museums and Exhibitions" is the Title.
 ReportOnNewExhibition is the MainContent.
}
Segments { Ressorts {
 Politics {
  CulturePage17 {
  LatestPollResults is a NewsTeaser. } }
 Sports {
  CulturePage17 {
   SoccerExhibition is a NewsTeaser.
   RunningGameScore is a NewsTeaser. } }
} }
Figure 4. Example of targeting definitions.
SegmentDetermination {
  InitialThreshold is an Integer.
  SegmentsOfUser {
    UTS is a User.
  }
  |= Score { UTS is the SegmentedUser. }
  Score_rec is a Score {
    Value is an Integer.
  } |= Score {
    Value { Pred. } is the Value.
    Threshold { Pred. } is the Threshold.
  }
  IncludedScore is a Score_rec {
    0 is the Threshold.
  } |= AssignedSegment.
  ExcludedScore is a Score_rec {
    0 is the Value.
  } |= Segments.
}
Figure 5. Base model for segmentation.
Tracking {
  Visit {
    u is the Visitor. p is the ViewedPage.
  } |= Score {
    Visitor is the SegmentedUser.
    p { Topic. } is the AssignedSegment. } }
Visit is here extended by a semantic rule in order to
represent a function that updates the score of a segment for a
user.  The  concept  Tracking provides  a  scope  for
individual function invocations.
If such a score already exists with the given user and the
web page's topic assigned (recognized by Value being an
Integer),  then  it  will  be  narrowed  to  the  matching
ScoreIncrement. That concept in return will increase the
value by one. This addition is done by setting value to the
successor of the current value.
Else, the semantic rule will initialize the score by setting
the Value to the Integer 1.
C.
Applying Targeting Rules
When users are segmented, the segmentation can be used
to create personalized web pages for users.
Figure 4 shows a simple example of a personalizable web
page. The  CulturePage17 has a static title and static
textual content. It also may contain a list of news teasers that
is filled in the context of a user’s segment(s). To target web
pages to users, each request of a user u for a page p will lead
to an evaluation of p in the context of u's segment(s).
The segment(s) of a user typically are derived from the
scores they have for that user. In the case of selecting the
segments  with  a  certain  threshold,  the  definitions  from
Figure 5 are used in the selection process.
The highest ranked segments of a user are evaluated
inside the concept SegmentDetermination, that serves
as a scope for executions. The concept SegmentsOfUser
acts as a function from Users to segments with scores above
the threshold. That function is invoked in the scope.
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-707-8
CONTENT 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

The evaluation is based on an  InitialThreshold
that is set inside  SegmentDetermination. Is is set to
the value that has to be reached by scored segments.
The first “invocation” of SegmentsOfUser for a user
collects all Scores of the given user. These scores are then
narrowed down during function evaluation. Each iteration of
the evaluation starts through the concept  Score_rec that
decreases both Value and Threshold by one.
If the Threshold reaches 0, then the score is narrowed
down to  IncludedScore. In that case,  the value was
greater than the threshold. The score is replaced with the
segment in this case, thus terminating the recursion.
If the Value reaches 0, however, then the value was less
than the threshold. In this case the recursion ends without a
specific result by replacing it with Segments.
By using the results of the evaluation for the segment
contexts  used  in  Figure 4,  requests  to  the  sample  page
CulturePage17 from a user u are targeted to this user:
SegmentDetermination {
  SegmentsOfUser { u is the UTS. }
    { CulturePage17. } }
At the same time as the targeted web page is derived, a
request for a web page will also increment the matching
score as defined in the previous subsection. This concludes
the circle of segmenting and targeting.
This example just demonstrates the selection of content
to display at a given position in a web page, as it is also
possible  with  commercial  products.  With  the  approach
demonstrated  here,  however,  it  will  also  be  possible  to
personalize other aspects of a web page.
V.
SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK
The paper concludes with a summary and an outlook.
A.
Summary
Many forms of personalization are discussed in literature
for quite some time now. Still, integrated models covering
most or all aspects of personalization are missing in practice.
This paper presents a study on such an integrated model,
that combines content modeling with personalization, and
that allows expressing various forms of personalization.
The  initial  modeling  approach  achieves  to  integrate
content, content representation, users, page visits, segments,
user segmentation, and targeting “rules”. This integration
allows coherent definitions of targeted web sites.
B.
Outlook.
This paper concentrates on implicit personalization of
presentations for groups of users, in practice called targeting.
A next step would be to extend the model to other forms
of personalization in order to investigate whether these fit in
equally well and can be combined within one model.
Content  delivery  and  consumption  depends  on  the
context of the user. The utilization of context information for
personalization should fit the models well using the M3L.
Still, this needs to be studied.
This paper covers an analysis based on a hypothetical
model only. It now needs to be connected to a working web
server in order to gain practical results.
To increase practical relevance, further information on
users should be integrated into the segmentation process.
Such information may come from a Customer Relationship
Management  (CRM)  system,  from  transaction  processing
systems like shop solutions, and from customer journeys.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Targeting  is  one  building  block  in  many  digitization
projects.  Valuable  insights  have,  therefore,  been  gained
thanks to colleagues, partners, and customers.
Though the model presented in this paper is not related to
the work at Namics, the author is thankful to his employer
for  letting  him  follow  his  research  ambitions  based  on
experience made in customer projects.
REFERENCES
[1]
K. Riemer and C. Totz, “The Many Faces of Personalization:
An integrative economic overview of mass customization and
personalization,” in The Customer Centric Enterprise, M. M.
Tseng  and F. T.  Piller,  Eds.  Berlin,  Heidelberg:  Springer,
pp. 35-50, 2003.
[2]
J. Blom, “Personalization: a Taxonomy,” Proc. CHI EA '00
Extended  Abstracts  on  Human  Factors  in  Computing
Systems, Apr. 2000, pp. 313-314.
[3]
J. Zhang,  “The  Perils  of  Behavior-Based  Personalization,”
Marketing Science, vol. 30, pp. 170-186, Dec. 2011.
[4]
A. L. Montgomery  and  M. D. Smith,  “Prospects  for
Personalization  on  the  Internet,”  Journal  of  Interactive
Marketing, vol. 23, pp. 130-137, Jul. 2008. 
[5]
H.-W. Sehring,  “Content  Modeling  Based  on  Concepts  in
Contexts,” Proc. Third International Conference on Creative
Content Technologies, Sep. 2011, pp. 18-23.
[6]
J. W. Schmidt  and  H.-W. Sehring,  “Conceptual  Content
Modeling  and  Management,”  Perspectives  of  System
Informatics, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 2890,
pp. 469-493, 2003.
[7]
T. Jiang  and  A. Tuzhilin,  “Improving  Personalization
Solutions through Optimal Segmentation of Customer Bases,”
IEEE  Transactions  on  Knowledge  and  Data  Engineering,
vol. 21, pp. 305-320, Mar. 2009.
[8]
K. S. Kuppusamy and G. Aghila, “A Model for Web Page
Usage Mining Based on Segmentation,” International Journal
of Computer Science and Information Technologies, vol. 2,
pp. 1144-1148, 2011.
[9]
Website of the CoreMedia AG. [Online]. Available from:
https://www.coremedia.com/ [retrieved: March, 2019]
[10] Sitecore.  Behavioral  Targeting  and  A/B  Testing:  What's
Appropriate for Your Business? [Online].  Available from:
https://www.sitecore.com/de-de/company/blog/416/behaviora
l-targeting-and-a-b-testing-what-39-s-appropriate-for-your-
business-4063 [retrieved: March, 2019]
[11] Adobe  Target.  Behavioral  targeting.  [Online].  Available
from:  https://www.adobe.com/marketing/target/behavioral-
targeting.html [retrieved: March, 2019]
[12] M. Gorgoglione,
 
C. Palmisano,
 
and
 
A. Tuzhilin,
“Personalization  in  Context:  Does  Context  Matter  When
Building Personalized Customer Models?” Proc. 6th IEEE
International  Conference  on  Data  Mining  (ICDM  2006),
Dec. 2006, pp. 222-231.
[13] H.-W. Sehring,  “Context-aware  Storage  and  Retrieval  of
Digital Content: Database Model and Schema Considerations
for Content Persistence,” International Journal on Advances
in Software, vol. 11, pp. 311-322, Dec. 2018.
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-707-8
CONTENT 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

