Developing Virtual Social Communities 
Lessons Drawn from Two Indian Social Communities 
 
 
Schubert Foo 
Wee Kim Wee School of Communication and 
Information  
Nanyang Technological University 
Singapore 
sfoo@ntu.edu.sg 
 
 
Samantha Vu 
Centre of Social Media Innovations for Communities 
Nanyang Technological University 
Singapore 
sgtvu@ntu.edu.sg 
 
Natalie Pang 
Wee Kim Wee School of Communication and 
Information  
Nanyang Technological University 
Singapore 
nlspang@ntu.edu.sg 
 
 
Shweta Verma 
Industrial Design Centre 
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay 
Mumbai, India 
shweta1089@gmail.com
 
 
 
 
Abstract — This paper presents two case studies of how the 
Bohra community and the East Indian community in Mumbai, 
India make use of social tools that include their own 
customized community online portals, Facebook and  YouTube 
to create and manage social content for their respective 
communities.  The aim is to contrast and identify learning 
points with regard to the usefulness and effectiveness of social 
tools for community engagement, and to infer design and 
development factors for building social innovations for 
communities in the future. The findings suggest that five areas 
are of particular importance: (1) Content and knowledge 
creation, (2) Preservation of cultural identity, (3) Design for 
social structures, (4) Engendering community trust, and (5) 
Adapting appropriate integrated-hybrid models. 
Keywords – social tools; community; Bohra; East Indian; 
Mumbai; 
online 
portal; 
social 
innovation; 
community 
engagement; knowledge; cultural identity; trust 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
This paper presents a baseline study of a research project 
by the COSMIC (Center of Social Media Innovations for 
Communities) at NTU (Nanyang Technological University, 
Singapore) which focuses on developing social media tools 
and innovations for developing communities, specifically for 
India’s middle of the pyramid population.  As part of this 
endeavour, this preparatory study employed a series of field 
interviews on a sample of community respondents to explore 
how two contrasting communities in Mumbai, namely, the 
India-Dawoodi Bohra and the East Indians, adopts certain 
social tools in preserving their community identity and 
maintaining their everyday social practices as exemplary 
cases whereby learning points can be drawn for building 
social tools for communities in the future. Semi-structured 
interviews with key informants and community gatekeepers 
are used, with each interview lasting between one to two 
hours. Each interview is also transcribed and content 
analysed using a line-by-line coding approach, to understand 
how community portals are used.  
Before proceeding, it is necessary to clarify our concept 
of analysis. We use the term ‘social media’ as a rather loose 
construct in the paper. This is intentional as the term has 
been widely defined and used in more western and 
developed societies. Kaplan and Haenlein [6] created a 
classification schema for social media, and in the process, 
distinguished the different social functions resulting in 
various outcomes such as Wikipedia, social networking sites 
like Facebook and LinkedIn, and gaming worlds. We 
acknowledge that these applications are characteristic of the 
contemporary Web (2.0), yet we would like to maintain the 
distinction between the definition and application of social 
media. In fact, Kaplan and Haenlein’s article [6], titled 
‘Users of the world, unite!’ was extremely provocative to us. 
The many examples of social media today are applications 
that are intricately associated with the technological presence 
and environment of the Web. But such applications and 
technological environments are not omnipresent in the 
‘world’ as described in their article’s title. In societies where 
such technological environments are absent, does it mean 
that it is impossible for social media applications to emerge? 
We would like to suggest that this is not the case. And in 
order for us to predict the technological forms of social 
media in such societies (like India), it is necessary for us to 
consider not just the technologies in use, but also the cultural 
practices that are closely entwined in such technologies. This 
is the objective of our paper.  
The paper will first go through the findings of our study 
with regards to the community members' use of social tools 
in each of the 2 case studies, the Dawoodi Bohra and the 
East Indians from Mumbai, India. The 2 cases will then be 
compared to discuss valuable learning points. As a 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-220-2
CONTENT 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

concluding note, we will reflect on relevant implications for 
design and future research. 
II. 
CASE OF THE DAWOODI BOHRA IN MUMBAI 
The Dawoodi Bohra is a Muslim community that 
originated from India. Their community leader is Syedna 
Mohammed Burhanuddin (TUS). Although there are around 
one million Bohras worldwide (Hong Kong, Singapore, 
Thailand, Malaysia, Canada, USA, and Middle East), most 
of them reside in Mumbai, Gujarat and Central India [7]. 
Overseas Dawoodi Bohras are settled in large ports and cities 
and are chiefly engaged in commercial and business 
occupations [3]. The Bohras typically perform and adhere to 
their religious rituals, social and cultural traditions with 
much zeal, regardless of their locations. With the advent of 
ICT, the Bohras have made use of community portals [2] 
with the main purpose of staying connected with their 
community and to carry out unique functions and purposes 
served by the community. The portals have standard 
functions such as log in, news, photo upload, archive, and 
directory services (see Appendix A for the screenshot of the 
portal). However, in order to access the site, each user has to 
use his or her own e-jamaat number on e-jamaat card which 
is essentially an identification card for the Bohra only. Once 
a child is born in the community, the child’s parents would 
have to apply for the e-jamaat card for the child.  The card 
number is an unique identifier for each individual from 
cradle to grave. This smart identification system does not 
only make these community sites serve as closed systems 
that are accessible only to its members but also forms the 
pillar in the organised management hierarchy in the 
community. As a result of such exclusivity, all of the 
information and content created among the members are 
discussed within the system’s boundaries and not publicly 
available elsewhere.  The following sections report on the 
findings on a series of 13 semi-structured Bohras 
interviewees conducted in Mumbai, India in January 2012. 
These interviews were conducted to understand how the 
Bohras use their community portal and e-jamaat card system. 
The interviewees consist of Bohras who have either used or 
not used the portals before (and if not used, we sought to 
understand the reasons why they were not using them). 
Community prayer sessions make up one of the many 
pulses of the Bohra community. Because of its importance - 
both as a ritual and symbol of the community's identity, 
leaders of the community have initiated the use of 
Ejamaat.com to facilitate individual registrations for such 
prayer sessions. When a community member wants to 
register for a prayer session, he has to log on to the 
Ejamaat.com site and register. The system returns a pass and 
barcode for printing.  At the prayer session, the local head 
priest checks the barcode to know if a person is registered or 
not.  Furthermore, every e-jamaat number is associated with 
a mobile phone number. As long as a community member 
registers his phone number with his e-jamaat number, he will 
automatically receive event alerts via SMS.  As such, 
community members who do not register their mobile phone 
numbers, including children (who are not old enough to use 
mobile phones), are excluded from such a service from the 
Bohra local head.  These SMSes are managed by an 
appointed person who assists the local priest in the 
community management system. He is the one who has 
access to the database of his local community households' e-
jamaat numbers, addresses, family members, business, and 
other information.   He is also in charge of uploading photos 
of functions or news about Syedna (the community leader) 
on the portal.  Community members who wish to upload 
photos cannot do it directly on the portal.  Instead, they will 
need to send them to him who acts as a gatekeeper and 
moderator to determine if these photos should be uploaded.   
Successful uploads are acknowledged by him through SMS.  
As such, the content in the portal and the determination of 
what information is being pushed to the members’ mobile 
phones are strictly and solely controlled by the local leader 
who closely follows Syedna's instructions.   This form of 
centralized authority implies that the local head is a very 
trusted follower who acts as formal advisor (on careers, 
business, etc.) for everything, especially when community 
members are unable to obtain the desired information from 
their friends or families. 
In addition to the local head, there are committees that 
manage other aspects in Bohra community. Faisel Hussani 
is the community travelling department which acts as a 
travel agent for the Bohras. Health camp and cooking camp 
are organised on a frequent basis to educate the Bohras of 
health 
issues, 
and 
traditional 
Bohra 
recipes 
with 
accompanied demonstrations.  Kardan Hasana - Committee 
of the Trust Fund is in charge of processing loan requests 
from community families who want to borrow money for 
business or education or any other purposes. The Thehsun 
Nikah Committee (TNC) handles the database of boys and 
girls at marriageable age to match them if requests from 
parents are received.  
Such a structural set up helps to explain why certain 
portal functions are used while others are not used at all and 
how social content on the Bohra sites are created. Although 
usual 
portal 
functions 
such 
as 
forum, 
news, 
photo/video/archive, and so on, are all available on all 
Bohra sites, the interview respondents reported using only 
the registration function (be it registering for praying or 
functions/events).  Users do not see a need in using the 
forum to ask questions or advices, even for cooking tips.   
Neither do they use the portals for business advertising 
despite the fact that Bohra is a business community. They 
are used to the traditional model of family business through 
generations so that the need to engage customers outside 
their existing networks is not present. However, 10 
respondents who are in some business or another, expressed 
the need to find other Bohra businessmen or businesswomen 
around worldwide, which are currently not met by the 
available business channels in the community such as 
community magazines (Badre Munir and Nasim Sehar) and 
Bohrani expo (held yearly in World Trade Center in 
Mumbai). As a result of the lack of practical needs, there is 
no social interaction on these portals. Putting it simply, the 
sites are used for pragmatic, rather than social reasons. "We 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-220-2
CONTENT 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

are not socially interconnected to others because the 
platform allows connection to the community governances 
but not with other Bohras", said one of the respondents. The 
so-called new media (Web 2.0) is used in a traditional, one-
way communication manner.  
However, in terms of sharing photos, the shortcoming 
does not lie in the lack of usefulness of the portals but on 
the affordances of these tools.  As mentioned, users cannot 
upload photos for sharing directly but need to have these 
screened and approved through the local head. As a result, 
public social media platforms such as Facebook and Flickr 
are used by the community members to share photos 
instead. Facebook is also used to search for long lost friends 
who are not on the existing Bohra networks/sites. Some 
respondents also use their mobile phones’ Bluetooth 
capability to share photos. Apparently, Facebook is heuristic 
and simple enough for the community to use it at the 
personal level.  
Such a conscious usage by the community reflects, to a 
certain 
extent, 
however 
bonded, 
well-organised 
a 
community is and however well-controlled the communal 
technological platforms are, interactions at the sub 
community level is technologically determined. Having said 
that, a certain level of trust must be present for the members 
to adopt Facebook as a photo sharing platform over their 
existing community portal. Some respondents pointed out 
that even if they are allowed to upload photos on the 
communal portals, they would still prefer to share their 
photos (of community functions) on their Facebook 
accounts.  
Although social interactions are not happening via the 
portals, the Bohras have other platforms of gathering and 
meetings. There are religious gatherings that last up to ten 
days. One example is Moharram when everyone is dressed 
in Bohra style so you can tell and meet new members of 
Bohra community. In fact, there are up to 8 such long 
duration events in the year.  
As a result of the Bohras' adopting the portals as a bank 
of 
information 
passive 
viewing 
rather 
than 
collaborative/interactive 
platforms, 
respondents 
unanimously reported that they just visited their community 
sites for topics like education in community, news about the 
leader's lectures and travels, and photos of events. Sites like 
Malumaat.com are created to become the only trusted 
source of official community information to keep everyone 
updated worldwide. Almost all respondents feel this is 
sufficient and there is no need to have other platforms or 
supplemental information on this website either.  
Along with the portals, other traditional print media 
such as flyers and pamphlets, books and magazines are 
dominant in the Bohra community. Flyers are given by local 
head or casually passed by their Bohra neighbours. 
Magazines are published once every month which are 
available for subscription. Content in these are mainly 
messages by the leader.  Larger and more important events 
will appear on TV and printed newspapers. There is a book-
Saifa covering all Bohra festivals and traditions, available in 
the most updated edition.  Another book-Busahebaa 
Saheefa includes all typical rituals such as what to do when 
a child is born, sex education, gift in proposing, etc.  A 
problem with these traditional media is the same 
information is being circulated over the years. Some 
respondents from our study expressed the need to know if 
new tradition or knowledge of the community exists since 
they have been uniformly taught the same thing over time. 
This poses a challenge to the evolution of community 
knowledge – how will new information be generated and 
how new is "new"? 
The Bohra online sites were launched around 12-13 
years ago (around the same time of the explosion of Web 
2.0).  However, interestingly enough, 3 respondents have 
never actually used these sites mainly due to the lack of 
computer literacy. Many of them pointed out that it is 
inconvenient to visit these sites since frequent power cuts in 
Mumbai does not allow them to have computers on all the 
time and few people own phones that have Internet access. 
These observations are reinforced through the interviewees' 
reflections on SMS and the mobile phones: "Every day 
morning we have to check our SMS to see if anything is 
there."; "SMS is the fastest and best rather than going and 
sitting on a laptop or a computer and then opening the site 
and see what is going on."  
The trend of favouring SMS as the means for community 
engagement negates the effectiveness and potential of Web 
2.0, resulting in an early detection of the digital divide. The 
older respondents above 50 fifty years old expressed doubts 
and hesitance in using Facebook:  "Facebook is all 
youngster" was noted by one respondent. These elder folks 
rely on their children for information updated on the portal or 
the most recent news that are not circulated via SMS. A 
quick and simple analysis of 63 Twitter feeds about Bohra 
on Twitter on a random 24 hour period also supports this 
observation of the digital divide.  Most of the tweets belong 
to the younger generation, with the oldest being middle age. 
III. 
CASE OF THE EAST INDIANS - MUMBAI 
The East Indians are Christians baptised by missionaries 
from Portugal in the 16th century [1] and have unique daily 
practices ingrained in music, prayers, and food.   In stark 
contrast to the Bohra community, the East Indians have 
adopted and embraced open platforms like YouTube and 
Facebook much more widely in addition to their official 
websites.  
At a first glance, East Indian websites [5] are not as 
advanced as the Bohra sites with professional design looks.  
The sites include a simple blog, a short history of the 
community origins, categories like Language, Folklore, 
Religion, Prayer request, Job opportunities, and others (see 
Appendix B for the screenshot of the website). The main 
difference in the East Indian sites as compared to the 
Bohras' is that information is publicly available and the sites 
allow participation without any constraints. In other words, 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-220-2
CONTENT 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

the community does not adhere to any strict rules in sharing 
information within and among other communities.  Even 
though one has to register with the site administrator using 
their personal email, they can log in easily once the 
administrator approves. Such an openness is due to the fact 
that the East Indians are becoming more and more dispersed 
and their identity are fading away even among their own 
community members.  
A total of 12 semi-structured interviews of East Indian 
respondents were conducted in Mumbai, India in February 
and March, 2012 with the same objectives to understand 
what are the technological platforms adopted by the East 
Indians for communal purposes and preserving community 
cultural heritage. Interviews lasted on average 1 hour and 30 
minutes. Each interview was translated and transcribed in 
English for content analysis as before. 
In this community, the impetus to create social content is 
mainly to create awareness amongst those outside the 
community and highlight East Indian issues and concerns to 
various government agencies due to their lack of visibility in 
popular media.  Concurrently, the East Indians of Mumbai 
have adopted Facebook and YouTube much more widely on 
a communal level, as compared to the Bohras.  The volume 
of user-generated content is greater and new community 
practices were observed.   
A content analysis of the East Indian Facebook page [4] 
(where the author is a member) provides an insight in new 
activities in these platforms, such as organising singing 
competitions, gathering requests, recipes sharing, and 
others. The Facebook community pages are updated as 
many as 20 times daily in terms of current news, daily 
prayers, religious videos, ringtones of East Indian songs, 
singing competition announcements, and so on.  Participants 
are mainly administrators followed by the newer generation 
of migrants living in modern localities with the know-how 
and access to the platform. All of these updates are 
simultaneously reflected in real time on Twitter under the 
ID #eastindians.   YouTube is used to upload singing 
competition videos only. Videos are tagged with proper 
singer names and song titles.  The number of views (145 
views on average for a video) and comments (2 comments 
on average) reflects a considerable amount of user 
participation.  
The concept of boundary objects holds much relevance 
here, to understand the community’s use of multiple 
applications in Facebook, Twitter and YouTube. The 
content posting feature in Facebook, for example, presents 
itself as a boundary object for different members of the 
community. The concept of boundary objects was first 
introduced by Starr [8] to describe symbolic objects 
functioning as an interface between communities. Such 
objects may be shared and used in common as they are 
understandable to the users, but participants need not 
understand how the others use it, nor are they required to 
comprehend how others interpret these boundary objects. 
Boundary objects are thus useful in presenting points of 
negotiation and mediation between community members, 
but are yet flexible enough to be adequately understood by 
people living and working in different contexts, to allow for 
collective work and content to be shared. In the case of the 
East Indians, they provide a common interface for members 
of the community to gather with the collective purpose of 
producing and sharing content. In other words, boundary 
objects can also be seen as a set of knowledge on its own, 
with the techniques of community interaction embedded 
within these objects. 
Singing is a unique identity and much loved culture of 
this community.  Frequent competitions of up to 3 times per 
month are not unusual.  Beyond the Internet, they are 
regularly conducted at different timings in different villages 
in Mumbai. However, the participation from youngsters and 
teenagers in this activity is noticeably low. Most 
participants are middle aged or older. This alludes to a 
generation gap in the community. Through our field studies, 
we found out that, in fact, the young are not interested in the 
community culture. What we observed on the East Indian 
sites proves that not only a generation gap exists but also a 
decreasing rate of participation among members. Blogs on 
the sites seem to encourage passive readers and not 
contributors. Even short responses, if they exist, will 
definitely help to strengthen the community identity to a 
certain extent. However, the low participation could also be 
due to the fact that the ‘active’ elders in the community rely 
on their children who are more tech savvy.  
The East Indian community engagement activities are 
still very physical and locality based. The activities are 
locally based on individual villages whilst in the Bohra case, 
festivals and functions can be held in different localities but 
they are unanimously happening at the same time in 
Mumbai.  The Bohras worldwide are updated with photos 
and news on the portals.  The absence of capturing such 
festivals and online sharing of such memories in the East 
Indian community shows that they still prefer face-to-face 
gatherings, keeping subsets of the community engaged 
rather than the community as a whole. Such community 
fragmentation and spatial divide can be detrimental to 
sustaining the community identity and heritage in the long 
run.  
Similarly to the Bohra, the East Indians still rely 
heavily on traditional print media.  Every village has a 
community magazine. These magazines are mainly used for 
matrimonial advertisements, job opportunities and other 
such marketing needs. Magazine seems to reach more 
people due to its tangible nature. Discussions about the 
articles in the magazine also take place during church events 
or social gatherings as suggested by respondents in the 
study. 
IV. 
LEARNING POINTS AND DISCUSSION 
The case studies showcased two distinct communities 
with different structures, having different information needs, 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-220-2
CONTENT 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

and adopting and using different combination of social tools 
for their engagement (Table 1). 
 
TABLE 1 - COMPARISON OF THE MAIN CHARACTERISTICS OF THE TWO 
COMMUNITIES  
 
Bohra 
East Indians 
Customised 
main 
portals: 
Ejamaat.com, 
Malumaat.com, 
Zeninfosys.com 
Others: Ajnoudin.com (1-2 lines 
daily prayers mainly used by Bohras 
in US); Moumennin.com (Business 
information, 
including 
advertisements); 
Vatansidhpur.com 
(General information for Sidhpur 
(Amatulla Saifee) community) 
Open global social media systems: 
Facebook and YouTube.  
Others:  Community association 
website 
Community activities are not locally 
based 
(Registration for gatherings from 
almost everywhere) 
Community activities are very 
locally based 
(E.g. Singing competitions, Local 
church 
meetings, 
individual 
village themed festivals (Food 
fests, cultural fests)) 
Digital divide: 
Mobile phone (elderly) vs Facebook 
(young/teens) 
 
- Generation divide 
- Different levels of technology 
adoptions between the old and 
young generation 
- Spatial divide and community 
fragmentation 
 
Trust in technologies: 
-Through practical use of customised 
portal, and   
-Adoption 
of 
Facebook 
(photo 
sharing, people/friend search) and 
Bluetooth (photo sharing) 
 
Trust in technologies:  
Through adoption of Facebook 
and YouTube (photo and video 
sharing) 
  
 
Arising from these findings, the discussion and learning 
points are centred on the following 5 areas: 
A. Content and Knowledge Creation 
The closed system adopted by the Bohra community 
ensures the old and existing knowledge is carefully 
maintained, preserved and passed down, thereby helping to 
protect their heritage and values. However, at the same time, 
the closed system inhibits the collaborative participation of 
individuals and subsequently, impedes the process of 
knowledge creation. The portals do not allow users (except 
the local leaders) to upload photos themselves, which can 
potentially become new knowledge. Even though such 
information might be considered peripheral secondary 
knowledge, such photos or any other inputs from the 
community members in future are valuable and critical for 
the process of creating content and knowledge for 
community sustainability. 
One of the major challenges moving forward is to find 
and devise mechanisms to encourage the community to 
participate more actively in the information and knowledge 
creation.  For example, if blogs on the Bohras can be created 
by capturing speech and subsequently transcribed into text 
automatically, there could be more motivation, through 
alternative inputs channels, for the users to contribute 
content. In other words, multi modal tools to capture 
information should be considered as opposed to the 
persistent and use of text-only mechanism s that most social 
tools are now equipped with. 
The East Indians, on the other hand, adopt an open 
system that can reach larger masses but they are at the stage 
of being susceptible of losing their identity. Besides, they 
tend to have community engagement activities in physical 
spaces. The challenge with such an open system model is to 
explore in what ways social media tools can be further 
enhanced or endowed with features to translate and 
transform the physical to the virtual yet maintaining good 
user experiences. Nevertheless, due to their natural 
endorsement of public social tools like Facebook and 
YouTube, the East Indian community has a good chance to 
embrace the evolving and new generations of the virtual 
environment. 
B. Preservation of Cultural Identity 
The Bohra apparently has a strong identity as a business 
community but in terms of interactions, may not exchange 
as much cultural content as the East Indian community. The 
East Indians' singing and traditional songs undoubtedly 
forms part of their unique cultural identity. The social media 
tools like Facebook and YouTube are facilitating to capture 
the intangibles of this identity to ultimately preserve the 
East Indian identity for time to come. Their use of media 
tools such as Twitter, Facebook and YouTube, also provides 
a new collection of knowledge about the cultural 
interactions and identity of the community. Towards this 
end, the concept of boundary objects may be used to 
understand the dynamics of the social infrastructure 
operating within the East Indian community.  
C. Design for Community Social Structures 
The Bohra community is so well-organised with 
explicit manpower allocation and structure that the 
community members do not feel a need to use the portals for 
functions other than registration. New practices of how a 
community can use a default set of social tools (portals in 
this case) are lacking due to their satisfaction of the status 
quo.  For such a centralised and orderly community, its 
social structures have to be taken into account in the 
development of social innovations; otherwise, the solution 
proposed will be rendered useless and redundant by such a 
community. 
D. Engendering Community Trust  
Any social innovations to be developed in the future 
must be aligned with the existing community's preferred 
medium. For an exclusive community like the Bohra, the 
members trust their own customized web portals because 
they trust the community authority. Many of the Bohras 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-220-2
CONTENT 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

expressed hesitance and doubt in other platforms not 
recommended by the Bohra leader. In order for an 
innovative tool to be used by the Bohras, it has to win the 
trust of the community leader and gatekeepers to ensure 
mass adoption of the community later on.  
In contrast, the East Indians adopted Facebook and 
YouTube due to the conveniences offered by such 
platforms, which means trust in technology is built 
inherently from affordances of the technology. Recognizing 
the element of trust before embarking on any particular 
platform/social tools increases the chances of success in 
adoption.  
Almost all of the interviewees, regardless of which 
community they are from, highlighted the convenience of 
SMSes and mobile phones, which is the preferred medium 
for communication.  This knowledge of the trust model and 
preferred channels of communication provides potential 
opportunities for new social tools. 
E. Adapting Appropriate Integrated-Hybrid Models  
Social media portals are designed to support many-to-
many communication interactions but in the case of the 
Bohra portals, they were transformed back to a one-way 
centralised platform mainly to mass message the community 
with little or few opportunities to draw participation back 
from the members.  In other words, the Bohras managed to 
adopt the multi participatory and socially enabled Web 2.0 
tool to conform to their social structures.  As a consequence, 
they failed to harness and exploit the potential of web tool.   
Moving forward, an adapting hybrid model that can integrate 
or mash together both these open and closed requirements 
may be feasible.   Hence, a combinatory closed system of 
trusted web portals interfacing with open social tools like 
Facebook to encourage multi way communication could be 
beneficial to the community. The challenge is how the 
Bohras can still allow such technologies to have a space 
within their technological framework without threatening or 
disturbing their social structures.  This might be more 
difficult to achieve as compared to the East Indians whose 
has the advantage of a strong cultural identity where current 
social tools can support. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The insights drawn from the study of these two 
contrasting communities convey a strong need to create a 
new generation of collaborative platforms for community 
members who collectively adopts a range of preferred 
technologies depending on their age groups and literacy 
levels. It is crucial to address the behavior of those that have 
an active social life but have not yet extended that to 
become mobile.  
Addressing such user needs will lead us to the design of a 
holistic solution that will both be contextual as well as 
global in nature in order to meet specific goals. A research 
driven iterative design process should be followed in this 
situation, incorporating user feedback at regular stages so as 
to evaluate initial concepts. In order to further refine the 
concepts, other forms of data collection, such as a 
quantitative survey, may be conducted with the targeted 
audience to collaborate and reinforce the qualitative 
findings. Finally, the proposed solution should be tested in 
contextual environment and detailed in order to be 
completely intuitive to the users of such a traditional yet 
pervasively online community. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The data discussed in this paper is part of a research 
project funded by the National Research Foundation (NRF) 
and managed through the multi-agency Interactive & Digital 
Media Programme Office (IDMPO) hosted by the Media 
Development Authority of Singapore (MDA) under Centre 
of Social Media Innovations for Communities (COSMIC). 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] E. W. Baptista, The East Indians: Catholic Community of 
Bombay, Salsette and Bassein. Bombay:  Bombay East Indian 
Association, 1967. 
[2] Bohra Community Portals. Retrieved May 4, 2012 from 
http://ejamaat.com/, 
http://www.zeninfosys.net/zi6/ 
and 
http://malumaat.com/main/load_advanced.html. 
[3] A. Chandavarkar, “Barbara Harris-White, India Working: 
Essays on Society and Economy,” Economic Development 
and Cultural Change, vol. 53 (3), 2005, pp. 762-765. 
[4] East Indians in Facebook [Group page]. Retrieved November 
1, 2011, from http://www.facebook.com/#!/eastindians 
[5] East Indians websites. Retrieved May 4, 2012 from 
http://www.east-indians.com/, http://www.east-indians.net/. 
[6] M. Kaplan, and M. Haenlein, “Users of the world, unite! The 
challenges and opportunities of social media,” Business 
Horizons, vol. 53 (1), 2010, pp. 59-68, 
doi:10.1016/j.bushor.2009.09.003. 
[7] S. Roy, The Dawoodi Bohras: an anthropological perspective. 
London: B.R. Publishing, 1984. 
[8] S. 
Star, 
and 
J. 
Griesemer, 
“Institutional 
ecology, 
‘Translations’ 
and 
Boundary 
Objects: 
Amateurs 
and 
Professionals in Berkeley’s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, 
1907-39,” Social Studies of Science, vol. 19 (3), 1989, pp. 
387-420. 
 
 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-220-2
CONTENT 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

Appendix A 
 
 
Dawoodi Bohra Community Portal Home Page (http://malumaat.com) 
 
 
Appendix B 
 
 
East Indian Community Portal Home Page (http://www.east-indians.com/) 
 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-220-2
CONTENT 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

