Semantic Network Analysis for VR & Coding Education in Big Data  
 
Su Jeong, Jeong 
Creativity & Personality Laboratory 
Tongmyong University 
Busan, Korea 
crystal06070@naver.com 
Jeong Jin, Youn 
Dept. Early Childhood Education 
Tongmyong University 
Busan, Korea 
jjy@tu.ac.kr
 
 
Abstract —The purpose of this study is to investigate the 
informal Big Data to understand the discourse among the 
members of VR & Coding education. Therefore, we will 
understand the social meaning of VR & Coding education and 
discuss VR & Coding education required in society. For this 
research, we looked at Big Data about 'VR & Coding 
education' which has been collected through online channel for 
the last 5 years. We collected 4392 data sets from the online 
channel, and after refining, we constructed a semantic network 
with 200 important keywords.  When we searched for 'VR + 
Coding Education', the most frequently appeared keywords 
were 'Experience', 'Virtual Reality', 'Fourth Industrial 
Revolution', 'Robot', 'Program'.  Degree centrality values were 
'experience', 'virtual reality', 'robot', 'fourth industrial 
revolution', 'infant'. Based on these results, we analyze the 
implications of VR & Coding education to society. 
Keywords-Semantic Network Analysis; VR & Coding 
Education; Big Data. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 
We live in the age of the fourth industrial revolution. It is 
clear that the future will change rapidly into the era of 
artificial intelligence. Currently, 90% of the knowledge 
learned in elementary, middle, and high schools is said to be 
obsolete in ten years [1]. Like this, changes in the education 
that suits the changes of the 4th Industrial Revolution era are 
necessary. In particular, current society is transforming into a 
software-oriented society. Companies with software skills 
are entering a whole new market, dominating the market 
with new products and services, and introducing new 
software technologies into existing company systems to 
increase efficiency.  
So how do we go about social change? We need 
preparation. Prepared individuals will survive in the future, 
but unprepared individuals can be predicted to decline or 
become more polarized. Therefore, in education, SW 
integration ability and creative problem solving ability 
should be more emphasized. To this end, it is necessary to 
introduce Software (SW) education for strengthening the 
capacity of new talent in the digital era in the educational 
field.  
Virtual Reality (VR), which is a core area of the 4th 
industry, is considered as one of the technologies leading the 
fourth industrial revolution. Just as VR technology is applied 
in various industries such as games, movies, and tourism 
media, VR can be actively introduced in education. In 
addition, since coded education improves logical thinking 
ability and problem solving ability, it can nurture self-
empowerment so that the child can actively solve the 
problem. 
Since 2019, coding education has become mandatory in 
the 5th and 6th grades of elementary schools in Korea, and 
the importance of coding education is emerging. Therefore, 
this study aims to examine the social discourse on VR and 
coding education, which can be expected to improve children 
's creativity and scientific knowledge through VR and coding 
education. 
In this study, we collected and analyzed informal data 
such as Youtube and news to see how social discourse about 
VR and coding education is formed. In addition, this study 
suggested alternatives to activate VR and coding education. 
The 'research problem' of this study is 'What is social 
discourse about VR & coding education of Big Data?’ 
 
II. 
RESEARCH METHOD AND DATA ANALYSIS  
We collected data on 'VR and coding education' through 
YouTube and news and data mining. In particular, we used 
Textom [5], a large-scale data analysis solution for data 
analysis and visualization. In addition, we used NetMiner to 
look at the degree centrality.  
The data collection period is from the beginning of the 
discussion of coding education to the present (July 23, 2014 
to April 7, 2019). The final collected data is 4392 cases. Text 
mining was performed based on data collected from Textom. 
 
III. 
RESULTS 
Keyword frequency analysis and Degree Centrality are 
summarized in the results. 
 
A. Keyword Frequency Analysis 
Based on the Big Data provided by Textom, the frequency 
analysis of the top 50 keywords through keyword analysis is 
shown in Figure 1. The result was 'Education', 'infant', 
'progress', 'target', 'program', 'computer', 'start', 'software', 
'student'. VR was analyzed by keywords such as 'game', 
'virtual reality', 'content', 'experience' and so on. Figure 2 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-707-8
CONTENT 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

shows the result of visualizing with Word Cloud. 
Word Cloud is a technique for visualizing words that are 
related to key words [2]. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Coding training Frequency analysis of 50 keywords 
 
 
Figure 2.  Visualize VR as a keyword in Word Cloud 
 
B. Degree Centrality. 
We conducted a degree centrality analysis to identify the 
keywords related to 'VR and coding education'. Degree 
centrality is an indicator of direct connection between nodes, 
so it increases when there are many direct connections with 
other nodes [3]. In the analysis of degree of centrality, the 
keywords with the highest interaction were 'Experience', 
'Virtual Reality', 'Robot', 'Fourth Industrial Revolution', 
'Child'. We confirmed that common keywords have a 
significant influence on 'VR and coding education'. 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION  
We investigated social discourse related to 'VR and 
coding education'. First, when we look through the keyword 
frequency analysis, we see many words of 'VR’ and 
'program'. This can be interpreted as a social atmosphere in 
which programs are presented based on VR in keeping with 
the changes in the era of the fourth industrial revolution.  
In addition, we can see that words such as 'elementary 
school', 'middle school', 'start' and 'obligation' appear. This 
means that the mandatory coding will be extended to 
elementary schools starting from middle and high schools in 
2018 and 2019 [4]. In addition, it is understood that the 
coding education of younger children is also considered 
because of the mandatory coding education in grades 5 and 6 
of elementary school. In particular, the need for content for 
VR and coding education applications is increasing [4].  
Therefore, when one wants to apply the coding education to 
the younger age, you can consider providing the program 
using VR. In the course of coding education, we found 
through semantic network analysis that it is possible to 
provide contents through experiential education program as 
well as virtual reality such as VR as well as augmented 
reality. In other words, positive social perception about VR 
and coding education was confirmed overall, and it was 
recognized that application to younger children was 
considered considering that it is recognized as education 
suitable for the present age. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the Ministry of Education of 
the Republic of Korea and National Research Foundation of 
Korea (NRF-2017S1A5B6067046) 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
 
[1] KBS Education Hope Project, “Learning is play,” Aug 20, 
2016. In press 
[2] J. Su-Jeong, K. So-Eun and C. Ick-Joong, “Stepmother 
Images through Analyses of Twitter and News Articles,” The 
Korea Contents Society, vol. 18(7). 2018, pp. 665-678. 
[3] K. Yong-Hak, Social Network Analysis, Seoul: Park Young-
sa, 2011. 
[4] N. Hyun-Woo, “Study of VR/AR Coding Education 
Framework strategic for Elementary and Secondary School 
Students,” Korea Science & Art  Forum, vol. 36, 2018, pp.  
85-97. 
[5] Textom, 
Big 
Data 
Analysis 
Solution, 
2018. 
http://www.textom.co.kr 
 
 
 
 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-707-8
CONTENT 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

