Collective Intelligence Utilization in the Scope of Personal Learning Environment 
 
Danguolė Rutkauskienė 
Research Laboratory of E-Learning Technologies 
Kaunas University of Technology 
Kaunas, Lithuania 
danguole.rutkauskiene@ktu.lt 
Andrej Afonin 
Research Laboratory of E-Learning Technologies 
Kaunas University of Technology 
Kaunas, Lithuania 
andrej.afonin@ktu.lt
 
 
Abstract-Personal Learning Environment (PLE) is an emerging 
concept in the field of learning technology. PLE allows users to 
aggregate information from distributed Web 2.0 services and 
organize it in the way that it is convenient for learners. Despite 
the fact, that PLE uses distributed social services as information 
source and by the nature of its design, it is a type of virtual social 
community; the social component is used very poorly in the scope 
of PLE. A new model of “wisdom of the crowd” utilization is 
presented in this paper. The exclusive feature of this method is 
both aggregated and generated information sources analysis, 
allowing developing more precise digital identity and its’ 
further use for appropriate learning sources discovery.  
Keywords-virtual social communities; personal learning 
environment; social software; Web 2.0. 
I. 
 A CONCEPT OF PERSONAL LEARNING ENVIRONMENT 
The notion of Personal Learning Environment (PLE) 
appeared as a result of discussion among experts in different 
fields regarding the future of Virtual Learning Environments 
[1]. Virtual Learning Environments were seen as a fenced 
garden 
without 
any 
connection 
with 
other 
virtual 
environments, which are used by students for information 
collection and results dissemination [2]. On the opposite, 
Personal Learning Environments were rather seen as 
platforms for content aggregation from different contexts 
were learning takes place, such as home, workplace or 
educational institution [2]. However, there is still no 
commonly accepted definition of what is a PLE.  
Some researchers see a PLE as a predefined set of 
software tools, which are used by learners to organize their 
learning process. Thus, Mark van Harmelen from 
Manchester University defines PLE as a single learner’s e-
learning system, which provides access to different e-
learning resources and/or personal or virtual learning 
environments used by students and teachers [3]. Other 
researchers use PLE as a metaphor to describe modern 
student’s online activity and environment.  Graham Attwell’s 
definition of PLE refers not only to software tools, but also 
to peripheral devices, that could ensure learning continuity 
outside the institution boundaries, such as mobile phones, 
laptops or portable music players [4]. Despite the fact that 
explicit definition of PLE is still under consideration, still a 
common feature could be highlighted – personal learning 
environment passes the control of learning process to the 
learner himself.  
PLE design and implementation is a topic of hot 
discussions as well. Nial Sclatter [5] distinguishes 
researchers to three groups with their own perspectives and 
functionality vision. According to the first group, PLE has to 
be implemented as a desktop application and serve as 
intermediate node between learner and online services [6]. In 
their perspective, PLE is a learner’s owned software 
application, 
which 
communicates 
with 
distributed 
educational web services and databases on service oriented 
bases. The second initiative group’s vision is that the PLE 
construction is based only on Internet browser, using either 
separate online services, or integrated online environments, 
that aggregates different kind of information from 
distributed, mostly Web 2.0, services, such as blogs, wiki, 
social bookmarking, multimedia sharing  and others services, 
that enable students’ collaboration and organizational 
activities. This group has most successors. Third group of 
researchers state that personal learning environment is not 
only a piece of software, but the complex infrastructure, 
which combines both software applications and distributed 
web services and technical equipment, and the main goal is 
to propose suitable teaching and learning methods for 
successful infrastructure exploitation and focus more on use 
cases and learning scenarios [4], [7].  
A PLE is a self-directed and self-controlled learning 
environment 
with 
social 
media 
background, 
which 
aggregates information from distributed, mostly Web 2.0, 
services, and allows organizing received information in the 
way that matches the learner’s needs in the most sensible 
way. 
This paper presents a new approach on how to use Web 
2.0-based collective intelligence in the scope of PLE. The 
definition of PLE has been introduced earlier on; next, a 
brief introduction to social media and hidden social 
structures in the background, types of relationships and their 
building principles. Section three introduces proposed 
method and explains its working principles in detail. Section 
four describes how the method was implemented in practice 
and shows the results that have been achieved. A case study 
finalizes the whole article. 
II. 
SOCIAL MEDIA AND THE ROLE OF CONNECTIONS 
THERE 
The previous analysis of PLE concept unveiled that due 
to its nature, PLE is a type of social media. In order to 
understand the nature of ongoing processes, an analysis on 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-220-2
CONTENT 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

 
 
 
social media is required. There are two major types of social 
media [8]:  
1. 
Social networks 
2. 
Online communities 
Everyone has their social networks (whether online or 
offline) (Fig. 1). Social networks consist of friends, family, 
co-workers and people they are acquainted with. Social 
networking sites are simply making these networks visible. 
The most important difference between social networks and 
online communities is how people are held together on these 
sites. 
People 
are 
held 
together 
by 
pre-established 
interpersonal relationships, such as classmates, friends, co-
workers, etc., on social network sites. Connections as these 
are made to last.  People join social networking sites to 
maintain old relationships and establish new connections as 
well [8]. 
Figure 1.  Structure of Social Network [8]. 
Unlike social networks, communities are held together by 
common interests (Fig. 2). It can be a mutual hobby, a 
common project or a goal, the way of life or a profession. 
People participate in online communities, because some 
members feel they can contribute to the community with 
their experience, while others feel they can benefit from 
being there. It is common for an individual to be a part of 
more than one community. Moreover, communities can 
overlap and are often nested [8]. 
Examples of the structure of social network and online 
community are presented in Fig. 1 and Fig. 2. Individuals are 
shown as red nodes in these pictures, and lines between those 
nodes represent relationships, that people establish between 
each other.  However, the nature of these relationships is 
slightly different. A relationship in social network represents, 
that two people are members of the same social structure and 
have established connection there: it could be family, friends, 
co-workers, etc. However, it’s hard to say without additional 
metrics, on how useful this relationship is to both sides, how 
strong it is, it is constant or happened only once. 
Relationships in online communities, on the other hand, are 
built in the same field and are related by the same interest. 
Relationships, of such type suite better, if there is an 
intension of using these connections for educational 
purposes. 
Figure 2.  Structure of social community [8]. 
The lifecycle of every relationship consists of three 
stages (Fig. 3):  1) creating the weak tie: the first step of any 
relationship; 2) building up the tie strength: transformation of 
weak ties into strong relationships; 3) maintaining the 
relationship: preventing strong relationships from eroding 
and reverting back to weak ties [9]. 
Figure 3.  Lifecycle of Relationship [9]. 
A weak tie could be created both in social networks and 
in online community. The formation of weak ties between 
two people depends on their desire to connect, the amount of 
communities they share in common and the network distance 
between them. But tie strength predominantly is built in 
communities. What builds strong relationship within 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-220-2
CONTENT 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

 
 
 
communities is the combination of frequent engagements, 
deep interactions, and the time spent together. If 
relationships are well developed, they become a part of 
person’s social network. So, communities are needed for 
transforming weak ties into strong ones, and social networks 
are for maintaining and sustaining these relationships 
[10][11]. 
An approach of utilizing personal social network is 
proposed by Facebook social evangelist Eric Fisher and is 
called Social Design Strategy [12]. Social design consists of 
three 
core 
components: 
identity, 
conversation 
and 
community, in other words, the person himself, the other 
people and the conversations between the person and the 
other people.  In the diagram (Fig. 4), identity is put to the 
center, conversation is in the middle and community is on 
the outside. Conversation is a media that serves as glue 
between the identity and the community. The conversation is 
the way people express their identities to the community and 
receives feedback from it. 
Figure 4.  Social Design Diagram [12]. 
 Fisher [12] proposes to start from the center and work 
the way out, during the process of designing a social product. 
That is, to allow people to create their identity, talk about it 
and build community over the time.  
However, over the time, he proposes to take the reverse 
approach and work from the outside in. That is to utilize the 
community, define new types of conversations and to 
perform further identity updates. 
III. 
“IDENTITY-NETWORK-PROPOSAL” MODEL 
The analysis of relationship development in social 
networks and online communities, as well as analysis in 
social design strategy allows defining general a model of 
collective intelligence utilization. A general method is to 
construct digital identity, create weak ties with other 
members, turn weak ties to strong relationships and maintain 
these relationships. This section presents the potential of 
proposed method of PLE’s collective intelligence for hidden 
network composition and its’ further utilization for learning 
purposes.  
The problem, in the scope of PLE, is weak ties 
establishment and their conversion into strong relationships, 
as PLE is a single persons’ environment. Nevertheless, PLE 
by its design nature aggregates data mainly from distributed 
Web 2.0 services, meaning that social network or community 
could be established on distributed services side. Proposed 
model allows overcoming this shortage and using collective 
intelligence potential, accumulated in social software 
services, in a scope of single person’s environment. 
General model (Fig. 5) working principle is as following: 
the first step is to develop the digital identity of the person. 
In order to do that, the method proposes to separate and 
analyze 2 sources of information: users’ aggregated content 
(source of knowledge) and users’ generated content 
(reflection on learning process). Similar digital identities are 
created to all PLE platform users. The map of digital users’ 
identities is created after the first step. The second step is 
finding users with similar digital identities and mapping 
them to each other. This step composes artificial 
communities that are based on users’ interests, thus creating 
weak ties between users. The third step is turning weak ties 
into strong relationships. In order to do this, users are 
prompted with other users’ operated content. A constant 
monitoring of user’s activity is performed and logged. If 
users get interested in proposed content (clicks proposed data 
for further information, adds to favorites, etc.) the weak tie 
between these two users is labeled as strong relationship. At 
the same time, users’ digital identities and connections 
between them are updated with new information.  
Figure 5.  Identity-network-proposal model. 
A more detailed model analysis is presented below. 
A. Step 1. Digital identity development. 
Main source of users’ information is distributed Web 2.0 
services, aggregated in the scope of PLE platform [13]. 
Every aggregated Web 2.0 service item usually comes with 
metadata that is called tags. Tagging is an inexpensive and 
easy way of using the wisdom of the crowd and making 
resources visible and sortable [16]. 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-220-2
CONTENT 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

 
Figure 6.  Tag list. 
Tag is a metadata about the element that allows working 
with data in a more convenient way. A set of separate tags is 
called a tag cloud. Usually, tags in a tag cloud are visualized 
in different sizes, meaning that the tag with bigger size was 
used more often. The structured list view (Fig. 6) with tags 
and their usage density shows a clear picture of users’ 
interests. At this stage, all platform users are merged to 
common matrix (Table I). 
TABLE I.  
COMMON USERS’ INTERESTS MATRIX 
 
User1 
User2 
User3 
User4 
User5 
User6 
web 2.0 
6 
5 
1 
2 
6 
3 
education 
3 
4 
9 
5 
3 
2 
technology 
5 
6 
8 
 
5 
3 
software 
6 
 
 
2 
 
 
.net 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
learning 
 
4 
2 
 
 
 
python 
 
4 
 
 
 
 
management 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
hr 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
programming 
 
 
 
 
5 
2 
 
In order to develop a more explicit users’ profile, the 
presented method proposes the usage of two types of 
metadata. The first type of the metadata comes in a form of 
tags pinned to Web 2.0 services elements. Generally, it is 
users’ aggregated content: links from social bookmarking 
services, podcasts, vodcasts and “youtube” type videos, and 
other structured information. Second part of the metadata 
comes from users’ generated content. At this stage, the 
method proposes to analyze and extract metadata from users’ 
reflections on learning activities that they post in their blogs 
and wikis. The aggregated type of metadata corresponds to 
knowledge gained during the learning process. Another 
important part of learning process is reflection, which 
corresponds to users’ generated data. As reflection 
information comes as a text (blogs, wiki, etc.) this 
information is analyzed and another set of metadata is 
generated.  
Both types of metadata (aggregated and generated) are 
combined in a common user’s interest matrix with the same 
weight (Table I). Such approach allowed defining more 
explicit user’s profile, which not only combines consumed, 
but also created contents, that correspond the gained 
knowledge and reflection during the learning process.  
B. Step 2. Implicit network composition. 
This stage is responsible for the composition of weak 
ties. At the beginning there is no activity between users, thus 
there is no possibility to define these ties upon their actions. 
Therefore, weak ties between the users are defined using 
collective intelligence algorithms. In this case, an algorithm 
is used, that calculates Pearson correlation (1) [18] between 
all users.  
) )
(
) )(
(
(
2
2
2
2





 




N
Y
Y
N
X
X
N
Y
X
XY
r
                (1) 
The result of calculations is shown in Table II. 
TABLE II.  
PEARSON CORERLATION MATRIX 
 
User1 
User2 
User3 
User4 
User5 
User6 
User1 
1 
0.6546 
-0.826 
-1.0 
1.0 
0.9449 
User2 
0.6546 
1 
0.1705 
-1.0 
0.6546 
0.866 
User3 
-0.826 
0.1705 
1 
1.0 
-0.8260 
-0.596 
User4 
-1.0 
-1.0 
1.0 
1 
-1.0 
-1.0 
User5 
1.0 
0.6546 
-0.8260 
-1.0 
1 
0.6882 
User6 
0.9449 
0.866 
-0.596 
-1.0 
0.6882 
1 
 
The results of Pearson correlation algorithm illustrate that 
the biggest coefficient and, accordingly, biggest similarity 
have user pairs (User4, User3), (User1, User6), (User2, 
User6), (User5, User6) and (User1, User2), and the smallest 
similarity is between users (User1, User4), (User2, User4), 
(User4, User5), (User4, User6), (User1, User3) and (User3, 
User6).  
Based on Pearson coefficient calculations, a set of users 
with similar preferences is made for every user. A set of 
similar users to User1 is presented in Table III. 
TABLE III.  
USERS SIMILAR TO USER1 
User 
Similarity coefficient 
User5 
1.0 
User6 
0.9449111825230654 
User2 
0.6546536707079769 
 
Data on Table III show users with similar interests as 
User1 are User5 (1.0), User6 (0.94) and User2 (0.65). It 
means that there are weak ties between User1 and User5, 
User6 and User2. 
Such matrixes are calculated for every platform user. 
After this step weak ties are established between all users 
with similar interests. 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-220-2
CONTENT 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

C. Step 3. Information tracking and proposal. 
The last step is responsible for converting weak ties into 
strong relationships. To do this, an appropriate user is 
prompted with information, operated by another user from 
similarity set. If the user responds to proposed information 
(clicks a link, saves to favorites, etc.), the weak tie get 
additional weight (gets +1 point) and is turned into strong 
relationship.  
TABLE IV.  
USER1 STRONG RELATIONSHIPS TABLE 
 
User5 
User6 
User2 
User1 
11 
8 
5 
 
Relationships with bigger weight are considered more 
valuable. This weight affects information flow that is 
prompted for user later. Also, at this stage user’s digital 
identity information is appended with new metadata 
according to his shown interests. This updated information is 
used to discover new weak ties. 
IV. 
METHOD EVALUATION 
Big players like Google, Facebook or eBay use collective 
intelligence 
utilization 
approach 
in 
their 
products. 
Nonetheless, their methods are not published and are held as 
commercial secrets. Such companies publish only general 
guidelines, 
like 
social design 
strategy, 
which 
was 
overviewed in the second chapter on this paper.  
On the other hand, collective intelligence utilization 
methods are not applied in online education systems so far. 
That is why there are no legitimate numbers to compare 
with.  
The proposed method could be implemented in any PLE 
platform. For the proof of the concept, method was 
implemented and tested in open source PLE platform 
“Dropthings” 
[17]. 
Principal 
schema 
of 
method 
implementation is illustrated in Fig. 7. 
 
PLE
Widget A1
Aggregated 
data 
analyzer
Add \ edit
Add \ edit
Add \ edit
Get
Recommendation widget
Widget An
Add \ edit
Aggregated content
Get
Get
Widget G1
Generated 
data 
analyzer
Add \ edit
Widget Gn
Add \ edit
Generated content
Get
Get
Web 2.0 service SA1
Get
Web 2.0 service SAn
Web 2.0 service SA1
Web 2.0 service SAn
Add \ edit
Get
Digital 
Profile 
Agent
Profile database
Users 
relationships
 manager
recommendations
 management
Reaction
Content
Distributed Web 2.0 services
Add \ edit
Get
 
Figure 7.  Method implementation in a scope of PLE. 
As Fig. 7 illustrates, selected for the proof of the concept 
“Dropthings” PLE platform is a widget based aggregation 
platform. As the method suggests, widgets are divided to two 
groups: ones used to aggregate content (social bookmarking, 
YouTube videos, etc.), and those, which are used to 
reflection (blogs, wiki). Each group has separate analysers. 
Aggregated data analyser extracts tags from Web 2.0 items 
and passes them to the digital profile agent. Generated 
content analyser scans user’s generated text information and 
extracts keywords from there, and passes them to the profile 
agent. The profile agent is responsible for digital identity 
storage. 
The relationships 
manager 
analyses profile 
information at the beginning and afterwards finds similar 
users according to theirs interests. That is how weak ties are 
established. The recommendation manager uses these ties to 
find potentially useful data and propose it to the user in 
recommendation widget. If proposed information is useful 
for the user, and he clicked proposed link, appropriate 
information is send to the relationships manager. The 
relationship manager adds addition weight to that 
relationship and turns it into strong connection, meaning, that 
from now on they will see more information from each other. 
Weak ties expire after predefined time, if they do not get 
additional weight. 
In order to evaluate proposed approach, the survey was 
made among users, to find out, if this method allows students 
to discover useful information. Survey results revealed that 
31% of users found such prompted help ‘extremely useful’, 
57% stated that it was ‘reasonably useful’ and only 12% 
stated that it was ‘useful occasionally or not useful at all’. 
V. 
CASE STUDY IN CONNECT PROJECT 
CONNECT [15] social learning and virtual community 
platform implements WEB-based social networking tools 
and it has been built by free Software applications (liferay). 
CONNECT is an international online community where 
everyone can find opportunities and stimulus to test oneself, 
to find chances of self-training either on one's own or with 
others, to increase own competencies in an informal way by 
exploiting the peer's experiences. 
Project partners from Italy, Czech Republic, Spain, 
France, Germany, United Kingdom and Norway has their 
national communities but more than that they can connect to 
the transnational community which can be joined by anyone. 
The Connect project aim at creating a virtual environment is 
useful for all people who are at risk of exclusion from the 
labour market. Are they women in maternity leave, people 
over fifty, immigrants or whatever, the net may provide 
various chances to re-launch themselves. The Web 2.0 
simplifies ways of creating own website at a low cost. It 
provides easy tools to promote oneself and own 
competencies in a very attractive and multimedia way. It 
offers applications to broadcast oneself easily on the net, 
contributing with opinions, discussions and products. 
As Fig. 8 illustrates, there is a possibility of finding new 
ideas, as well as possibility of taking part in discussions and 
expressing oneself. There is also an opportunity to look up 
for relevant information which was placed in the website by 
other users. 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-220-2
CONTENT 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

 
Figure 8.  Social learning environment. 
Connect Learning is organized in social network where 
users can create their profiles, post their ideas in different 
forums, create blogs, improve competences, explore 
resources, find people. Unlike for other similar websites 
there are no training courses, which usually are expected to 
be found and no teachers as well. It is just tutors and 
community members who find out together the most fruitful 
way to have the process as spontaneous as the informal 
requires. On the contrary, the direct experience made by 
people with similar problems may become an inestimable 
treasure. Surfing the net and its resources may become an 
unexpected way to learn content and train skills. Connect 
Learning could become the entrance to this world of 
opportunities and its members are to become the direct 
referents for increasing it. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
A new model of collective intelligence usage in the scope 
of personal learning environment is presented in this paper. 
The work has been implemented in the framework of Eureka 
ITEA2 project “Friends Family Colleagues Connect” [18] 
that is aiming to allow people to connect in natural and easy 
ways. An analysis of PLE concept allows defining common 
platform structure and the kind of data that is used in such 
environments. Following analysis of social media showed, 
what kind of ties and relationships are established there and 
how they can be used. Based on previous information, a 
general method of collective intelligence usage in the scope 
of PLE was proposed. Despite the fact, that PLE is designed 
for single persons’ use, the proposed model allows defining 
weak ties, that are appropriate for online communities, and 
turning them to strong relationships that are specific to social 
networks, and using these connections for users learning. 
The exclusive feature of this method is both aggregated and 
generated information source analysis. 
The proposed method was implemented in the scope of 
“Dropthings” PLE platform. Evaluation survey showed that 
the majority of users (88%) found such prompted help useful 
in their activities (31% - extremely useful, 57% - reasonably 
useful), and only 12% didn’t gain any additional value.  
The future work is maximizing usefulness of proposed 
material, which can be used for persons’ learning. Next step 
is to change +1 (or like based) prompted content evaluation 
system to a grading system (it could be grades from 1 till 5), 
and thus enhance recommended content relevance. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Wilson, O. Liber, M. Johnson, P. Beauvoir, and  
C. Milligan,  “Personal Learning Environments: challenging 
the dominant design of educational systems”. Chapter from 
E.Tomadaki & P.Scott, “Innovative Approaches for Learning 
and Knowledge Sharing”, EC-TEL, 2006, pp. 173-182. 
[2] G. Attwell, “Supporting Personal Learning in the Workplace”, 
PLE Conference, Barcelona, 2010. 
[3] M. van Harmelen, “Personal Learning Environments”, Sixth 
International 
Conference 
on 
Advanced 
Learning 
Technologies (ICALT‘06), 2006, 0-7695-2632-2/06. 
[4] G. Attwell, “Personal Learning Environments”. The Wales-
Wide 
Web 
portal, 
2006.06.01, 
web 
access: 
http://www.knownet.com/writing/weblogs/Graham_Attwell/e
ntries/6521819364, retrieved: 05, 2012. 
[5] N. Sclater,  “Web 2.0, Personal Learning Environments and 
the Future of Learning Management Systems (Research 
Bulletin, Issue 13)”, Boulder, CO: EDUCASE Center for 
Applied Research, 2008. 
[6] S. Wilson, O. Liber, M. Johnson, P. Beauvoir, and  
C. Milligan, “Personal Learning Environments: Challenging 
the dominant design of educational systems”, from 
E.Tomadaki & P.Scott, “Innovative Approaches for Learning 
and Knowledge Sharing”, EC-TEL 2006 (p. 173-182), 2006. 
[7] G. Conole, M. de Laat, T. Dillon, and J. Darby, “Students 
Experiences of Technologies. Final Project Report", JISC, 
London, 
UK. 
Web 
access 
http://www.jisc.ac.uk/publications/reports/2006/lxpfinalreport
.aspx, 2006.12.01, retrieved 05, 2012. 
[8] M. Wu, “Community vs Social Network”, 2010.06.06, web 
access 
http://lithosphere.lithium.com/t5/Building-
Community-the-Platform/Community-vs-Social-Network/ba-
p/5283, retrieved 05, 2012. 
[9] M. Wu, “How do people become connected: Community vs 
Social 
Network 
2”, 
2010.06.13, 
web 
access 
http://lithosphere.lithium.com/t5/Building-Community-the-
Platform/How-Do-People-Become-Connected-Community-
vs-Social-Networks-2/ba-p/6620, retrieved 05, 2012. 
[10] M. Wu, “From weak ties to strong ties: Community vs Social 
Network 
3”, 
2010.06.22, 
web 
access 
http://lithosphere.lithium.com/t5/Building-Community-the-
Platform/From-Weak-Ties-to-Strong-Ties-Community-vs-
Social-Networks-3/ba-p/6834, retrieved 05, 2012. 
[11] M. Wu, “Maintaining the strong tie: Community vs Social 
Network 
4”, 
2010.06.30, 
web 
access 
http://lithosphere.lithium.com/t5/Building-Community-the-
Platform/Maintaining-the-Strong-Ties-Community-vs-Social-
Networks-4/ba-p/6854, retrieved 05, 2012. 
[12] E. Fisher, “Social Design Strategy”, 2011.05.03, web access 
http://fishofthebay.com/posts/social-design-strategy, retrieved 
05, 2012. 
[13] A. Afonin, “Distributed Social Bookmarking Web Service 
Architecture. SOAP vs iCamp Feedback”, Informatics in 
Education, 2011, Vol. 10, No 2. pp. 149-162. ISSN 1648-
5831. 
[14] D. Rutkauskienė, I. Patašienė, and A. Targamadzė, 
“Advanced online tools for increasing study effectiveness in 
the Lithuanian Distance Education Network”, Lifelong 
Learning in Higher Education: Networked Teaching and 
Learning in a Knowledge Society: Proceedings of the 
EADTU Annual Conference 2008, 18-19 September 2008, 
Poitiers, France. Heerlen : European Association of Distance 
Teaching Universities, 2008. p. [1-10]. 
[15] CONNECT Project, web access http://www.connect-project.eu, 
retrieved 05, 2012. 
[16] B. Kanter, “Tagging for Collaboration and Knowledge 
Sharing”, 
2007.05.03, 
presentation 
web 
access 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-220-2
CONTENT 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

http://www.slideshare.net/kanter/tagging-for-collaboration-
and-knowledge-sharing, retrieved 05, 2012. 
[17] DROPTHINGS, 
Open 
source 
platwork, 
http://dropthings.codeplex.com, retrieved 05, 2012. 
[18] Eureka ITEA2 project “Friends Family Colleagues Connect” 
proposal, 
web 
access 
http://www.itea2.org/project/index/view/?project=10022, 
retrieved 
05, 2012. 
[19] T. Segaran, “Programmming Collective Intelligence”, O’Reilly 
Media, Inc., 2007. ISBN-10: 0-596-52932-5, ISBN-13: 978-0-596-
52932-1.
 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-220-2
CONTENT 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

