 
 
 
Location-Based  Mobile Collaborative Digital Narrative Platform 
 
Sicai Lin1, Tzu-Chieh Tsai2, Sheng-Chih Chen1, Shindi Lee2 
Master Program of Digital Content and Technologies1 
Department of Computer Science2 
National Chengchi University 
Taipei, Taiwan 
sicai720@gmail.com  ttsai@cs.nccu.edu.tw  scchen@nccu.edu.tw  shindilee@gmail.com  
 
 
Abstract—This study is based on interactive design theory, 
supplemented by the concept of communication. We propose a 
"Mobile Collaboration Digital Narrative Platform", through 
which, with the aid of technologies, a user can, depending on 
his or her location, download one’s favorite collaborative 
narrative content, and also have the ability to add, edit or 
record what is happening around; thus, linking the narrative 
content 
and 
the 
location. 
Through 
the 
function 
of 
“collaboration”, the content can be made more diverse and 
rich and the reader can better immerse him or herself in it. 
The platform also can work in offline mode. Currently, the 
preliminary design of the system has been completed, and tests 
in different situations will be conducted and user behaviors 
will be recorded and then analyzed. Quantitative and 
qualitative evaluation and analysis of interface design, 
operational processes, system functions, and collaboration 
narrative content of the output are in progress. We believe that 
this study will be an important application of mobile content. 
Keywords-Location based; Digital Narrative; Collaborative 
Narrative; Mobile Technology. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In the era of Internet and the rapidly changing 
technologies, the types of narrative have become diversified 
and rich. This also makes digital narrative have more 
different ways to create innovative and surprising content. 
One result of the Internet boom, Tim O'Reilly 
emphasized that the content generated by users, through user 
interaction with Web 2.0, results in diverse and rich content.  
This also makes the form of digital narrative has had a major 
change. The International Telecommunication Organization 
(ITU) indicated that in 2010, more than 90% of the 
worldwide population use mobile phones, of which 9.4 
million are 3G users [16]. Meanwhile, the Institute for 
Information Industry (III) in Taiwan said that for the 3rd 
quarter of 2010, 69.5 % of mobile users have subscribed to 
mobile Internet service [1]. 
 
The above data imply that we are gradually entering the 
era of mobile Internet.  Our daily lives are filled with a 
variety of mobile devices.  Thus, we can also imagine that 
the future media narrative will be impacted by the new 
technology platform and people’s lifestyle changes.  This 
will become a totally brand new outlook.   
This research is focused on the new media narrative for 
this trend, and develops a pilot platform design.  To this end, 
the goal of our work is to design a location-based mobile 
collaborative digital narrative platform.  This platform must 
have the features of ‘mobile’, ‘location-based’, and 
‘collaborative’.  The design is based on the user behavior and 
experience on using the mobile platform for digital narrative. 
With the designated collaboration features assisted by mobile 
communication technologies, users can create spark clashes 
with each other, and can even easily disseminate their ideas 
and record things with their surrounding stories. 
 
A. Why Mobile 
As mentioned earlier, data show that the number of 
mobile phones has exceeded 100% of the population, and 
mobile Internet subscription is also increasing at an 
exponential rate.   Our lifestyle is thus changing:  whatever 
we rely on computers to do before, is now being replaced by 
mobile devices.  The other is being under the influence of 
globalization. The world is like a global village, and people 
moving for interchanging information become a trend.  
Therefore, high mobility device, has been become an 
indispensable tool for modern lives. According to the survey 
from a wireless service company in U.S., SinglePoint [23], 
the phone is the closest media to the user (Figure 1).  We are 
in the age of speed and convenience; mobile phones are 
definitely becoming the best choice for users to get all the 
needed information. 
 
Figure 1. Relationship between media and users [23] 
7
CONTENT 2011 : The Third International Conference on Creative Content Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-157-1

 
 
B. Why Location-Based 
Nowadays, the characteristics of the smart mobile 
devices contain touch input, GPS, sensors, and Internet 
access capabilities.  We can only carry one mobile phone to 
make records and tell a story of life without constraints of 
space and time.  Narrative in the past has ignored the 
atmosphere of ‘space’; however, the portability of mobile 
devices gives the narrative vitality for the new development 
opportunities to the narrative of space. Narrative scholars 
such as Herman said: "a storyteller prompts his or her 
interlocutors to relocate from the here and now of the current 
interaction to the alternative space-time coordinates of the 
storyworld." [15]. Henry Jenkins said: "In a new transmedia 
storytelling environment, I want to introduce an important 
third term into this discussion - spatiality - and argue for an 
understanding of game designers less as storytellers and 
more as narrative architects." [17]. Therefore, through the 
supplement of mobile devices, the narrative may be able to 
let users add more space into the story elements.  In addition 
to the narrator, audiences are also assisted through mobile 
technology, so that the narrative content with the perception 
of space can have more immediate and immersive nature of 
the association.  Just as Y.-F. Tuan said, "we can perceive 
the body senses the presence of space" [7]. 
Besides, from the users’ habits and experience point of 
view, “location-based services” is the highest viscosity of 
service (Figure 2), according to market research consulting 
firm InsithtXplorer survey.  This is because the location is a 
significant factor in attracting users [2].  Therefore, the 
location information will be built in our platform system, and 
is also an important basis for the user to search, edit and read. 
 
 
Figure 2. Using viscosity survey [2] 
 
 
 
To this end, we also find some service and content 
providers trying to develop similar applications. These 
applications are based on the story games with location 
information. With these features, the games are more 
“stereo” and more vivid.  For example, Disney's Kim 
Possible World Showcase Adventure [24] uses Walt Disney 
World theme parks as the playgrounds, and uses the Disney 
animated TV series Kim Possible as the story elements.  In 
this game, everyone can join the organization using mobile 
devices.  The system can set the roles as heroes or villains to 
achieve the tasks given. The Walt Disney Company hoped 
that the application can impress the minds of tourists, and 
somewhat make the park much special from others. 
  The Disney's application is customized and not open to 
the public to develop more other applications. However, it 
did the concept proof of the trend for location-based story 
games. 
C. Why Collaborative 
The earliest forms of storytelling were thought to have 
been primarily oral, combined with gestures and expressions. 
Digital storytelling means using new digital tools to help 
ordinary people tell stories in a compelling and emotionally 
engaging form, so that the story becomes more rich and 
diverse and full of surprises. Cao [22] had proposed a PESE 
(Personalized Storytelling Environment) system which used 
the concept of Web 2.0, namely, collaborative narrative 
approach to production stories. The idea for PESE is to 
combine both multimedia production and Web 2.0 
production knowledge.  Storytelling is an efficient means to 
fulfill learning goals. Knowledge is exchanged within 
communities when stories are told. 
Jhao-Ling Chen [9] created collaborative narrative 
storylog which was integrating the social sciences with 
computing technology to help reveal personal brain thinking 
to realize physically by storytelling, immersed audio, 
location-specific content, and blog.  Users interact with 
others to create the story from the formation of the 
partnership, and thus widen the virtual social relationship. 
Collaborative narrative created the "Collective wisdom" 
which is an important output in the Web 2.0 era.  
Cooperation not only enriches the narrative content, but also 
broadens social relations. Through mutual cooperation with 
the exchange of ideas and feelings, then a story with 
wonderful content can be produced.  Therefore, the 
collaboration feature will be also one of the features in our 
platform design.  
 
To sum up, the contribution of this research includes the 
pilot study of the field of “mobile narrative”.  We figure out 
the important features that have to be added in such systems.  
We also base on our survey results to develop a platform to 
do field trial. 
D. This paper organization 
This paper is organized as follows: Section I, as 
aforementioned, briefed the relevant research and survey 
data.  Then we addressed the motivation, background and 
goal of our work. Section II presents the case studies. We 
will discuss and analyze the characteristics for the existing 
mobile digital narrative applications. To this end, we also 
compare them from different usage aspects. Section III will 
describe our system architecture and experimental process 
8
CONTENT 2011 : The Third International Conference on Creative Content Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-157-1

 
 
design.  Section IV presents the evaluation results for the 
study.  Finally, conclusions and future prospects will be 
presented in Section V. 
II. 
CASE STUDY 
A. PicPlz 
Picplz (Fig. 3) is a photo story-telling application.  It is 
built-in a variety of filter effects which allow users to take 
beautiful photos in different styles easily.  Photos can be also 
tagged with the location information and messages.  At the 
same time, they also can be synched with many social 
networking sites. 
 
Figure 3. PicPlz interface fig [25] 
B. Broadcastr 
Broadcastr is a voice platform. It gives a way to record 
voice that you saw and heard. Anyone can upload a voice 
recorder to the platform with the tag of its location in the 
physical coordinates.  The users have to be at the right 
location to be able to listen to the audio tagged by the same 
location.  Thus the experience of hearing the audio will be 
more ‘stereo’. (Figure 4). 
 
Figure 4. Broadcastr interface fig [26] 
C. Instgram 
Instgram is a photo story sharing application.  To use it is 
very intuitive.  Through its built-in camera effects, users do 
not have too much skill of photography, and are able to shoot 
quite photography texture photos.  Briefly speaking, what 
you see will be what is taken.  Also the recorded images can 
be uploaded to Facebook, Twitter and other social 
networking sites to share with friends (Figure 5). 
 
 
Figure 5. Instgram [27] 
D. Summary 
The above case studies show that using mobile devices to 
record our life stories or doing digital narrative creation can 
produce different narrative content.  And allowing 
interaction between people will even change the content 
subtly. Although the above applications utilize the 
characteristics of mobile phones, it still did not fully use all 
the features of smart phones.  Specifically, they are not 
sufficient to support the needs of the new narrative trend we 
mentioned in the previous section.  Therefore, our system 
design is developed for improving all the above related 
applications.  Table 1 summarizes the comparisons for the 
mobile applications including our platform, called Plastory.  
 
TABLE 1. PLASTORY (DESIGN IN THIS RESEARCH) COMPARISON WITH 
OTHER APPLICATIONS (SOURCE: THIS RESEARCH) 
 
 
 
This platform will build the database to store user-edited 
files. Users can upload or download data, and can also query 
collaborative content. In order to achieve the space concept 
of narrative, so the contents to be queried must be restricted 
with the user’s associated location.  Through the platform, 
digital narrative storytelling can have a whole new content 
creating experience. 
9
CONTENT 2011 : The Third International Conference on Creative Content Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-157-1

 
 
III. 
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE AND EXPERIMENTAL 
PROCEDURE 
A. System architecture 
The system architecture is the client-server model.  The 
server is the database for storing and processing data (story) 
generated by users.  After editing, users can upload the 
stories to the database and share the content with others.  In 
order to maintain the ‘spatiality’, only the content restricted 
to the nearby location can be queried or downloaded to the 
mobile device (client).  The mobile app will have the 
features mentioned before, e.g. location service agent, 
information processing agent, sensing management and data 
analysis, etc. (Fig. 6). 
 
 
Figure 6. System architecture 
B. System Design 
The system is implemented on the Android phones.  The 
features include the following: 
 
1. Add collaborative editing. 
2. Support offline editing. 
3. Allows the users to use a variety of media type for digital 
narrative. 
4. To a restricted geographical location, the user must visit 
the place to be able to read the existing narrative. 
 
The followings will explain the user interface and 
operation procedures for our system: 
 
First the user must apply for an account of the system to 
log in before using (Fig. 7). After logging, the system will 
remember the status automatically, unless the user clicks log 
off. 
We design four sub-pages with the main page (Figure 8).  
These four sub-pages are major frequently used functions. 
This sub-pages design in this user interface is for easily 
switching pages. Fig. 8 shows the location of nearby users 
and currently available narrative themes. 
                      
 
Figure 7. System Login screen, Figure 8. System main page 
 
Click the anchor on the map (Figure 9), the system will 
show the list of the nearby narrative themes below.  This list 
design is for easy distinguishing from all the themes, in the 
case of too many themes overlapping on the map. 
 
Figure 9. The menu bar of clicking the anchor on map 
 
Figure 10 is the profile page. The page will display the 
personal points value (the number of stars), the number of 
friends, the number of collaborative partners, and the number 
of published content.  Three types of the content presentation 
can be chosen, namely (from left to right in Fig. 10), 
rendering on the map, arranged in thumbnail and list type. 
 
 
 
Figure 10. Profile page 
 
Figure 11 is My Stuff page that includes my friends, my 
collections, and shopping cart items.  "Shopping cart items" 
is designed to allow users to access other people's stories, so 
that the contents of the platform can have a high degree of 
interaction/collaboration in order to be able to produce more 
diverse and rich content. 
Add new page is shown in Figure 12 The content is 
divided into adding new story theme, and adding 
10
CONTENT 2011 : The Third International Conference on Creative Content Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-157-1

 
 
collaborative story.  The latter can be used by any purpose of 
content creation such that the collaboration will lead to many 
possibilities of content produced, and also change the 
original mode of communication. 
                      
 
Figure 11. My Stuff page           Figure 12. Add New page 
 
We have introduced the system's main screen and 
operation procedures. After editing the content, it will be 
stored in of the local database and get synchronized with the 
Server until the networking access is available.  Besides, if 
encountering other’s mobiles in the vicinity, the newly 
editing content can be exchanged mutually in order to have 
more timely interaction and efficient collaboration with the 
content. 
C. Experimental procedures and evaluation methods 
As for experiment, we first design the use context by 
features of the platform, and then invite the users to use the 
platform for the designated situations.   The system will 
record the use process which will be evaluated for the system 
interface and usability problems between various scenarios 
by the human-machine interface evaluation method.  The 
system will also log the editing and reading situation for 
further understanding of user behaviors. The following will 
have the detailed description of the experiment: 
 
1) Contextual Design 
For evaluating the collaborative editing features for the 
platform, we design the following test scenario: 
 
During the off-campus extracurricular teaching activities 
or collaboratively collecting data, it often takes time and is 
inefficient to make notes or interaction if using pens and 
papers by the traditional ways.  However, in the mobile 
generation now, through the various functions on the mobile 
device, such as: cameras, microphones, GPS, etc., we are 
able to instantly record sound, image and location.  Our 
system platform fully integrates these functions which are 
further coupled with the collaboration mechanism.  Thus, the 
way of communication has changed and information 
dissemination becomes more real-time.  A new mode of 
digital narrative is formed.  
Besides, during the test scenario using the platform to 
create or read story/message, we are also interested in 
finding how users feel, and what users prefer in doing 
various narrations.  Therefore, we will ask the users to use 
the platform in some difference venues and at all time.  Then 
the system will have more complete log for us to analyze and 
evaluate. 
 
2) Human-Computer Interface Evaluation 
In this part, two evaluation methods for evaluation are 
adopted, namely: 
 
 
Think aloud method 
Thinking aloud method was proposed by 
Ericsson and Simon in 1984.  This method is to 
allow the users to express their thinking, feeling and 
suggestions verbally when operating the system.   
What the user do and say are recorded for analysis. 
Nielsen [20] said that using the think aloud method 
to conduct usability assessments, about 80% of 
usability problems can be found if five persons are 
tested. Almost 95% of the problems can be found if 
ten persons are tested.  Therefore, five to ten persons 
to participate in the test can get the best efficiency. 
The advantage of this method is to understand the 
relationship between how they use the system and 
what they think.  Aside, the system can be directly 
enhanced by the suggestions that users make. 
 
3) System log analysis 
We develop the points and ranking system to motivate 
users to create good quality of content and to participate 
more frequently with the collaboration.  The results will be 
displayed on the integral User's personal page to encourage 
users often use the platform.  Other users can also contribute 
and encourage high-quality content by giving appropriate 
scores.  The points will be used as the basis for ranking when 
navigating.  We think that such a mechanism should improve 
the quality of the content, and also learn the user content 
preferences and usage behaviors.  
The parameters used to calculate points are: using time, 
the number of articles published, the number of collaborative 
articles published, the number of new friends, viewing times 
of the published content, the number of content collected, the 
number of cited content (Add to Cart) and so on. Personal 
profile page will display the total score by different number 
of asterisk.  
IV. 
EVALUTION RESULTS 
The evaluation has two parts: interface/features design, 
and system performance/satisfaction.  In the first part of 
evaluation, we found out that users did like to use mobile 
devices to do narrative.  However, they prefer use more 
photos to record than audios or videos.  Nevertheless, they 
all expressed they will consider to use audio in the future. 
The reason might be that the new mobile system needs to 
take time to influence the users’ narrative behavior.  Another 
reason could be the limitations of the inconvenient mobile 
device to input voice.  Instead, most users prefer using short, 
annotated texts accompanied with the photos they take. 
By the thinking aloud method and the subjects’ feedback 
in the interface part, most subjects thought that graphical 
button interface design needs to be more intuitive.  For 
instance, the text on the screen could cause misunderstanding 
11
CONTENT 2011 : The Third International Conference on Creative Content Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-157-1

 
 
or confusion, and the screen click feedback for user is very 
important, because if there is no feedback mechanism, the 
user will not know whether the click is successful or not.  
We amended the interface design by the suggestions, then 
implemented on the android mobile phones, and did the field 
trial to evaluate the performance of the system. 
In the part of the overall system, users respond that too 
long login/upload time would miss recording important 
moments, and also could make users impatient not to 
continue operating the system.  Even so, the users all gave 
positive appreciation to our functional design. Users agreed 
that our mobile collaborative digital narrative platform have 
reached the goal of this study.  For example, the system can 
use different media to narrative, and narrative content can be 
sorted/queried.  Users assents that relation of location and 
contents is attractive. The stories generated can incur their 
curiosity, and shorten time to acquaint themselves with the 
location.  The results are consistent to the motivation and 
goal of the work.  
V. 
CONCLUTION AND FUTURE ENHANCEMENT 
The design of a location-based mobile collaborative 
narrative platform is proposed in this paper.  The field 
experimental results show that the system achieved positive 
satisfaction from the users, and did fit the narrative trend in 
the new era. 
This research can be viewed as a pilot study in the field. 
It is first focused on narrative behaviors.  According to the 
interviews, most users would like their content to be shared 
with friends.  This implies users generally prefer the social 
functions which can be extended to the system in the future. 
On the other hands, for the efficient transmission of the 
content in the databases, we will suggest to extend the 
abilities of transmission to be P2P mode or DTN (Delay 
Tolerant Network) in the next version. With this pilot study, 
we believe that the development of mobile collaborative 
platforms will achieve more successes. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Institute for Information Industry, <3rd Quarter 2010 Mobile 
Customers in Taiwan>, Date: November 24, 2010, 
Source:http://www.find.org.tw/find/home.aspx?page=many&i
d=275. 
[2] InsightXplorer, <ARO Observation-Internet Use Observed in  
2010>, 
Date: 
2010, 
Source:http://www.iama.org.tw/upload/ResourceReport/2011
0209041212213.pdf. 
[3] Liu Weigong, <Service is "Content Industry": New Trends in 
Service 
Innovation>, 
Date: 
December 
2010,  
Source:http://itc.tier.org.tw/2010/ppt/2-
3_Dr_WeiGongLiou.pdf. 
[4] Chueh-Pin Chao, <Digital Learning and Experience, the 
Efforts of European Heritage ~ (b)>, Digital Archives and 
learning newsletter, VIII XII. Date: December 15, 2009, 
Source:http://newsletter.teldap.tw/news/InsightReportContent
.php?nid=3296&lid=325. 
[5] Wikipedia, 
〈
Web2.0
〉
, 
Date: 
March, 
2011, 
Source:http://zh.wikipedia.org/zh-tw/Web_2.0. 
[6] Wikipedia, 
〈 OpenStreetMap 〉 , Date: March, 2011, 
http://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Traditional_Chinese:Main_Page. 
[7] Yi-Fu Tuan writes, Pan Guicheng translation. "Perspective in 
the Experience of Space and Place", Taipei: National Institute 
for Compilation, 1997. 
[8] Ling-yi Huang, "Space of the Digital Age - The Time of 
Narrative Structure: The Facade Site as An Example", Taiwan 
Society of Information Society Annual Conference, pages 
135-160, 2008. 
[9] Jhao-Ling Chen, "The Never Ending Story: A Collaborative 
Narrative Storylog", Ming Chuan University, Information and 
Communication Engineering, Master Thesis, 2006. 
[10] Chen Jianxiong translation, "Interaction Design", Taipei, 
Chuan-Hua Books, 2009. 
[11] Xing-sheng Kuan et al., "Design Methods", Taipei, Chuan-
Hua Books, 2008. 
[12] Insight, National Taiwan University Research Center of 
Innovation and Synergy for Intelligent Home and Living 
Technology, <Interactive Design>, Date: December, 2010,  
Source: http://insight.ntu.edu.tw/zh-tw/node/871. 
[13] Insight, National Taiwan University Research Center of 
Innovation and Synergy for Intelligent Home and Living 
Technology, <Human-Computer Interface Evaluation>, Date: 
December, 
2010, 
Source: 
http://insight.ntu.edu.tw/zh-
tw/node/693. 
[14] S. Chatman, Story and Discourse: Narrative Structure in 
Fiction and Film. Ithaca,N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1978. 
[15] Herman, Story Logic: Problems and Possibilities of Narrative. 
Lincoln & London: University of Nebraska Press, 2002. 
[16] ITU, The World in 2010, Source:http://www.itu.int/ITU-
D/ict/material/FactsFigures2010.pdf, 2010. 
[17] Henry Jenkins, "Game Design as Narrative Architecture", In 
First Person: New Media as Story, Performance, and Game. 
Edited by Pat Harrington and Noah Wardrip-Fruin. 
Cambridge: MIT Press, 2003. 
[18] R. Kristof and A. Satran, Interactivity by Design. Mountain 
View: Adobe Press, 1995. 
[19] E. G. Mishler, Research Interviewing: Context and Narrative. 
MA, Cambridge, Harvard University Press, 1986. 
[20] J. Nielsen, Usability Engineering, San Francisco: Academic, 
1993. 
[21] Nicola J Bidwell, Thomas Reitmaier, Gary Marsden, and 
Susan Hansen, “Designing with Mobile Digital Storytelling in 
Rural Africa”, CHI '10: Proceedings of the 28th International 
Conference on Human factors in computing systems, pages 
1593-1602, 2010. 
[22] Yiwei Cao, Ralf Klamma, and Andrea Martini, “Collaborative 
Storytelling in the Web 2.0”, STEG'08: Proceedings of the 
First 
International 
Workshop 
on 
Story-Telling 
and 
Educational Games at EC-TEL08, Sep. 16, 2008. 
[23] SingalPoint, <White Paper on Conversational Advertising>, 
Date: 
June 
2010, 
Source: 
www.dm2pro.com/downloads/20100609_3/download. 
[24] <Disney's Kim Possible World Showcase Adventure>, Date: 
2011, 
Source: 
http://disneyworld.disney.go.com/parks/epcot/attractions/kim-
possible/. 
[25] App 
Store, 
<picplz>, 
Date: 
June, 
2011, 
Source: 
http://itunes.apple.com/us/app/picplz/id382339383?mt=8. 
[26] App Store, <Broadcastr>, Date: May, 2011, Source: 
http://itunes.apple.com/us/app/broadcastr/id423169367?mt=8. 
[27] App 
Store, 
<Instgram>, 
Date: 
May, 
2011, 
Source: 
http://itunes.apple.com/us/app/instagram/id389801252?mt=8. 
 
12
CONTENT 2011 : The Third International Conference on Creative Content Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-157-1

