Self-Calibrated Structured Light 3D Scanner Using Color Edge Pattern 
 
Samuel Kosolapov 
Department of Electrical Engineering  
Braude Academic College of Engineering  
Karmiel 21982, Israel 
e-mail: ksamuel@braude.ac.il (Samuel Kosolapov) 
 
Abstract—A 
prototype 
of 
general-purpose 
fast 
and 
inexpensive non-laser structured light self-calibrated 3D 
scanner using a unique color edge pattern was designed, built 
and tested. The main elements of the 3D scanner are non-laser 
slide projector and inexpensive WEB camera. The pattern 
projected to the colored 3D object in test consists of a plurality 
of a pairs of color strips, white strips and black strips. In the 
simplest implementation, three basic complimentary colors 
{M, Y, C} were used, effectively creating at least 6 unique color 
edges. The addition of black and white delimiter strips enables 
the creation of a pattern containing 32 easily recognized edges 
in the simplest implementation and 153 color edges in case six 
colors {R, G, B,  M, Y, C} are used. Color edges can be easily 
(and unambiguously) detected on the true-color 2D images of 
the 3D object in-test (grabbed by WEB camera) which enable 
the reconstruction of the 3D shape from a single 2D frame. 
Optional mechanical translation of the pattern enables the 
increase in the number of edges and, after applying a sequence 
of image processing algorithms, the building of a true color 3D 
model of the scanned 3D object. In order to lessen pure 
acquisition time (when 3D object in test must not move), 
special auto-calibration elements were integrated into scanner 
mechanical construction so that auto-calibration and 3D 
reconstruction steps are executed after acquisition is finished. 
Scanner prototype was tailored to scan 3D shape of human foot 
with a 3D accuracy of about 0.5 mm in less than 2 sec, which is 
adequate for the selected exemplary application: individual 
insoles design and production. 
 
 
Keywords-image processing; 3D scanner; structured light; 
color edge detector 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
“Structure light technique” - the illumination of 3D 
objects by specially designed pattern in order to create 3D 
models of real 3D objects from set of relevant 2D images is 
well known [1][2]. A number of techniques to solve the 
“ambiguity 
problem” 
resulting 
from 
the 
usage 
of 
monochrome and color structure light patterns are known 
[1][2][3]. In the frames of previous research [4][5], a number 
of 3D scanner prototypes were build. Generally, the 
operation of a 3D scanner requires a time-consuming 
calibration step. The goal of this research was to evaluate 
the “post-acquisition calibration” concept. The re-designed 
prototype contains calibration elements (calibration bars and 
calibration markers), which are an integral part of the 
scanner mechanical construction. By using these auto-
calibration elements, required calibration information can be 
extracted after image acquisition is finished. Post-calibration 
may be especially useful in the field condition or in medical 
devices, when usage of “standard” time-consuming 
calibration procedure may be problematic. Following parts 
of this article describes main elements of the exemplary 
design of the 3D scanner, color edge pattern used, main 
blocks of the reconstruction software and results of 3D 
Scanner operation.  
II. 
SCANNER DESIGN AND OPERATION 
The exemplary design and operation of 3D Scanner 
using a unique color edge pattern (see Figure 1 and Figure 
2) was described in [3]. The main elements of the software 
used to reconstruct 3D image were described in [3][4][5]. In 
this research, additional auto-calibration elements (see 
Figure 3) were included in the scanner design. Additionally, 
electromechanical means were modified to enable micro-
movements of the slide.  
Figure 3 presents a number of original, intermediate, and 
processed 2D images obtained during reconstruction steps. 
Callout 1 points to the exemplary “MY” color edge on the 
surface of foam mold of the human foot. (Foam molds are 
used in podiatry clinics to create a “mechanical copy” of the 
human foot. The mold is used to produce individual insole 
for specific patient). Callouts 2 and 3 point to 4 (of 8) corner 
color markers. Callouts 4, 5, 6, 7 point to white calibration 
bars. Color corner markers and calibration bars are integral 
parts of the scanner design; they are always seen by the 
camera and 
used in the 
post-calibration 
and 3D 
reconstruction process.  
 
A. Unique Color Edge Pattern 
The described 3D Scanner uses a specially designed 
color pattern [3] consisting of color strips pairs, white strips 
and black strips. In the simplest implementation (presented 
on Figure 1), three basic colors {R, G, B} are used. In this 
pattern, six unique color edges are created: “RG”, “BG”, 
“RB”, “GB”, “BR” and “GR”. It must be mentioned that the 
exemplary “RG” and “GR” color edges can be easily 
distinguished by directional color edge detector (as a “color 
jump” of opposite sign) and, thus, are considered as 
different. 
Usage of color strips enables us to obtain more 
“structure light lines” from a single 2D image without an 
“ambiguity problem” [1] and thus lessen a number of 
images needed to be grabbed for 3D reconstruction. In order 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-220-2
CONTENT 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

to additionally increase speed of 3D scan, non-unique white 
and black “delimiter” strips (“wbw”) were added to the 
pattern (See Figure 1 and Figure 2).  
Theoretically, any number of colors can be used to build 
color strips. However, camera noise restricts the number of 
colors that can be reliably recognized by software, 
especially when colored 3D objects are to be scanned. 
Practically, the pattern presented on Figure 2 (having 153 
color edges) appears to be reliable enough, even when 
inexpensive low quality WEB cameras are used.  
In the following examples, the simplest pattern (32 
edges) was used, but, instead of the basic set {R, G, B}, a 
complimentary set {M, Y, C} was used in order to enable 
pattern printing by using inexpensive ink-jet printer.  
   
B. Acquisition and Pattern Translation 
Theoretically, the selected approach enables the 
reconstruction of the 3D shape of the real 3D object by using 
a single 2D image. Practically, this can be reliably executed 
only for 3D objects having a white surface. Real-life 3D 
objects are colored, which distorts pattern colors (surface 
color is combined with pattern colors).  Theoretically, by 
searching for the “color-edge” jump (instead of the specific 
colors of the adjacent strips), the 3D reconstruction from one 
2D frame can be carried out (in case the surface color 
changes in a smooth fashion).  However, practically, an 
abrupt color change of the 3D object surface makes this 
reconstruction non-reliable. 
In order to increase the reliability of the 3D scanner, 
electromechanical means enabling the translation of the slide 
in the direction normal to the direction of the pattern color 
edges were added to scanner design.  
Callouts 1 and 8 on the Figure 3 point to exemplary 
“MY” color edge on the surface of foam. It can be seen that 
the position of “MY” (and other pattern elements) is shifted 
in the horizontal direction. Additionally, it can be seen that 
the colors of the pattern are severely distorted by color of the 
foam (by comparing the strip color on the white calibration 
bars with colors on the foam surface).  
Typically, the slide was translated three times during 
acquisition (acquisition results in four raw frames). The use 
of auto-calibration enables the use of an extremely simple 
low-quality electro-mechanical translator using a stepper 
motor controlled by PC.  
In some tests, each of four raw frames was a robust mean 
of a number of frames.  
 
C. True color Image Assembly, Alignment and Decolorizing  
It is clear that on every raw frame only a part of 3D 
object’s surface is illuminated by a white light. Considering 
that the camera is not moved during acquisition, it is clear 
that by selecting the “brightest” pixels from all four raw 
frames, the “true color” 2D image of the object in test can be 
created (See Callout 9 on Figure 3).  
By using the original colors of the surface of the 3D 
object, it is possible to “de-colorize” all raw frames: referring 
to callout 10 of Figure 3, it can be seen that the color edges 
are easily distinguished now and that colors of the strips on 
the surface of white calibration bars are practically the same 
as the colors of the strips on the surface of the foam.  The 
decolorizing algorithm may lead to unreliable results at the 
dark regions (especially on the periphery). To prevent the 
appearance of “non-existed colors”, pixels in doubt are 
marked as “bad pixels” and seen as “black pixels” (Callout 
11). 
During the “decolorizing” step, four raw frames are 
“aligned” by using eight corner calibration markers (as if the 
camera axis is normal to the calibration bars). 
 
III. 
RECONSTRUCTION SOFTWARE 
A. Color edge detector and synthetic calibration lines 
The reconstruction software detects all possible color 
edges on every aligned and decolorized raw frame. Callout 
12 of Figure 3 points to the exemplary “MY” color edge 
detected by the color edge detector (the edge points are 
drawn as “black”). Callouts 13 and 14 points to the “MY” 
color edge points detected on the surface of the left and right 
base calibration bars. The Z coordinate of these bars is set as 
the zero of Z-axis.  Callouts 15 and 16 points to the “MY” 
color edge points detected on the surface of the left and right 
upper calibration bars. The Z coordinate of these bars is 
known as 40 mm. 
By drawing a line between sub-lines of callouts 13 and 
14, one can obtain the base synthetic calibration line (See 
Callout 17) and upper calibration line (Callouts 15-16 and 
18). Lines 17 and 18 are equivalent to the “standard pre-
acquisition” calibration lines. However, they are extracted 
after the acquisition is finished. If needed, an improved or 
more sophisticated algorithm can be re-used to create more 
exact calibration lines.        
B. True color 3D image reconstruction 
After synthetic calibration lines creation, {X,Y,Z} 
triangulation is trivial. By processing all “black” pixels of 
all color edges of all raw frames, a cloud of 3D points is 
created. Referring to reconstructed 2D true-color image, {R, 
G, B} the color of every 3D point of the cloud can be set. 
The special sequence of robust algorithms eliminates 
obvious outliners [4]. Resulted cloud of 3D Points can be 
presented by any appropriate way. 
 
IV. 
RESULTS 
Typical results of 3D scanner operation are presented on 
Fig. 4. Callout 1 points to the “Heights map” of the resulted 
3D model of the foam mold: the Z-coordinate is encoded as 
“pixel brightness”. Callouts 2 and 3 points to X and Y 
Height profiles (zoomed for clarity). By using cursors, the Z 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-220-2
CONTENT 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

coordinate and {R,G,B} color can be evaluated for any 
{X,Y}. 
Callout 4 of Figure 4 points to the 3D Model presented 
by using an “Oblique Projection”.  By using this 
presentation, the 3D model can be seen from any angle. 
Callout 5 presents the 3D model as a standard STL file 
(which can be sent directly to the 3D Printer on CNC).  
 Typical {X, Y, Z} accuracy of the 3D Scanner was 
about 0.5 mm. 
Typical scan time is about 2 sec (comparing with more 
than 1 min for the design described in [3]). The processing 
time depends on the PC speed and is about 30 sec. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
       For the selected application inexpensive (less than 
$100) non-laser 3D Scanner described above has a typical 
accuracy of 0.5 mm, which is less than the accuracy of 
laser-scanning devices. However, structured light scanners 
can be used when laser usage is not recommended (for 
example in medical devices) or when the high price of laser 
scanners makes them impractical. Additional advantages of 
the developed design are its relatively short scan time and 
the elimination of calibration step. 
     It can be assumed that the usage of a new generation of 
high resolution, inexpensive, and low-noise digital cameras 
will enable a significant increase in the accuracy and 
reliability of structured light 3D scanners. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
    This study was supported by TNUFA Grant from the 
Chief Scientist of the Ministry of Trade and Industry, Israel, 
and by a grant from research committee of ORT Braude 
Academic College of Engineering, Karmiel, Israel.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] R. Jain,  R. Kasturi, B.G. Schunck, “Machine Vision”, 
McGraw-Hill Inc., 1995, pp. 301-304. 
[2] P. Gockel, T. Dillman, “Computer Vision. Principles and 
Practics”, Elector International Media BV ,2008, pp. 225-250. 
[3] S. Kosolapov, “Method and Apparatus for determinimg the 
three dimensional shape and dimensions of the object, US 
Patent US 7,456,842 B2, 2008. 
[4] S. Kosolapov, Evaluation of Robust Algorithms Sequence 
Designed to Eliminate Outliners from Cloud of 3D Points 
Representing 3D Human Foot Image, SMTDA 2010, pp. 383-
389. 
[5] S. Kosolapov, “Robust Algorithms Sequence for Structured 
Light 3D Scanner Adapted for Human Foot 3D Imaging”, 
Journal of Communication and Computer, 8(7), 2011, pp. 
595-598. 
 
 
 
 
                    
 
 
 
 
    
Figure 1. Structure Light Pattern containing 6 unique color edges.            
                               Total number of edges to be extracted from one 2D image is 32  
 
 
 
 
 
      
Figure 2. Structure Light Pattern containing 30 unique color edges. 
                              Total number of edges to be extracted from one 2D image is 153.  
 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-220-2
CONTENT 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Usage of the pattern shift for reconstruction of true-color 2D image of 3D test object (foam mold)  
                                and extraction of {X,Y,Z} coordinates from synthetic calibration lines. 
                               (See text for detailed explanations)     
 
 
 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-220-2
CONTENT 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
Figure 4.  3D Models of 3D Test Object (foam mold). 
                              (See text for detailed explanations)     
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-220-2
CONTENT 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

