The New Computational Analysis Tool for Upper Limb Movement in Physiotherapy
Biomedical Applications
Jesse Teixeira da Silva
Department of Technological
and Professional Education
Federal University of Paran´a - UFPR
Curitiba, Paran´a State, Brazil
Email: jessesilva@yahoo.com.br
Jos´e Elmar Feger
Department of Technological
and Professional Education
Federal University of Paran´a - UFPR
Curitiba, Paran´a State, Brazil
Email: elmar.josefeger@gmail.com
Luiz Antˆonio Pereira Neves
Department of Technological
and Professional Education
Federal University of Paran´a - UFPR
Curitiba, Paran´a State, Brazil
Email: lapneves@gmail.com
Abstract—The present project aims at developing an interface
capable of capturing, analyzing and stimulating movements of
persons who have some motor dysfunction in the upper arms
due to accidents or congenital disabilities, i.e., those who need
rehabilitation treatment. In this paper, we have used accelerome-
ters with the objective of capturing the movements carried out by
the user. These movements are captured in the form of analogical
signals represented by voltage variation. Hence, it requires the
use of a microcontroller to handle the data. This microcontroller
controls how the data will be sent to the computer, and also, it
makes possible the transformation of the signals into the digital
format, which facilitates the processing steps and the computer
analysis. When the obtained data are sent to a computer, their
numerical transformation step starts off with speed and it is
plotted on the user screen in an animated form representing the
user’s movement. The user receives an instantaneous evaluation of
his movements throughout the time spent to execute it. The results
obtained from the experiments show that this is a promising
tool. As it is a prototype, it still needs several improvements. We
believe this tool can become a commercial technology with great
accessibility and low cost.
Keywords–Computational
Physiotherapy;
Accelerometers;
Rehabilitation Treatment; Biomedical Visualization.
I.
INTRODUCTION
With the growing use of acceleration sensors in techno-
logical products, such as video games [1], mobile phones and
computers, we believe the development of a system capable of
analyzing and stimulating the recovery of patients who suffer
from some minor arms dysfunction as a result of accidents or
some pre-existing physical handicap is needed. The beneﬁt of
this technology would be of great help and of a strong social
and intellectual impact. These technologies offer social and
personal beneﬁts to the bearers of motor handicaps [2][3][4].
Therefore, the present research proposes the conceptual-
ization and the building of an electronic device capable of
rehabilitating upper limbs using current hardware and software
technologies.
In the scientiﬁc literature, there are studies about the use of
accelerometers for physical evaluation of elderly and children
[5][6][7][8], involving gait rehabilitation and very little about
rehabilitation in the ﬁeld of physiotherapy, mainly for upper
limb movement. Thus, this fact is, our object of work.
Therefore, the main contribution of this research is a
new computational analysis tool for upper limb movement
in physiotherapy. The proposed system generates an output
containing all the movement information in a plain text format,
saving it in an embedded database. The containing information
are the positions of the selected arm during the task presented
as a challenge by the system to the user. This information
can be compared with previous database register to validate
the conformity of the movement. The system is also able to
compare this information with movements from other users
and samples, which guarantee that the relation between the
number of attempts and the movement accuracy tends to
shorten each time the system is used. Another interesting point
is that it sets out the accelerometer information and transforms
it in ”position in space” information, making possible that this
same data can be applied in a range of other organizations for
comparison and also permits the application to evolve in terms
of hardware and software without losing the historical infor-
mation, being that way, independent of future technologies and
computational architecture.
The present article is organized in the following way:
Section II addresses other works depicting the application of
accelerometers in medical applications, Section III introduces
the technology employed. Section IV describes the analysis of
results obtained, and ﬁnally, Section V presents the conclusion.
II.
STATE OF ART
Some studies on accelerometers in medical applications can
be found in the literature which some of them show the use of
accelerometers in intervention programs to promote physical
activity in children and adolescents [5][6] and include methods
for assessing physical activity focused on older adults [7][8].
Others are using accelerometers for mechanic impact analysis
in the prostheses of a bilateral lower-limb amputee during the
gait [9], aiming to elicit more precise answers.
Michaelsen et al. [10] proposed to use accelerometers
to access to identify of changes in movements of subjects
with hemiparesis, showing to be an alternative to measure
movements.
With respect to these studies, our research is innovative
because it presents a rehabilitation tool to the upper limbs, for
children and adults, using a playful manner, a video game for
better interaction of the patient with his rehabilitation process.
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-392-6
CONTENT 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

III.
PROPOSED METHODOLOGY
Because of the need of improving some of the methods
applied in physiotherapy and of facilitating the rehabilitation
of patients with upper limbs motor handicaps, the present
research proposes an interactive and functional limb movement
analysis tool. Therefore, the methodology here described uses
an exploratory approach of observational and empiric proce-
dures. To this end, the present methodology is organized in
four steps, such as shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1. Proposed metnodology.
A. Step 1 - Upper Limbs Motor Understanding
This step presents an analysis and the drawbacks faced by
people with motor handicaps of the upper limbs in order to
identify the essential requirements of physiotherapy. This is an
observational study.
B. Step 2 - Conception of Architectural Project
This step consists of deﬁnition and conception of proposed
architectural project in order to obtain human biometrics data.
C. Step 3 - Conversion of analogical into digital signals
This step is aimed at the development of a tool capable of
converting analogical signals in to digital ones. Digital signals
are necessary in order to feed them into the computational tool
to be developed.
D. Step 4 - Information data analysis
This step is aimed at the construction of a computational
tool to facilitate analysis and execution of physiotherapy
procedures.
IV.
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
A. Results of Step 1- Understanding of the Upper Limbs Motor
Movements
According to the work done by Schonke et al. [11], the
human arm is divided into three main parts: the arm, forearm
and hand. In a healthy arm, these three parts work together
with each movement and no matter how simple the movement
is there is an interaction amongst the muscles that cover theses
parts of the arm, with each one of them generating a typical
rotation, speed and acceleration which can be recognized
and standardized by the sampling of mean measurements
from different patients. With an unhealthy arm, regardless of
the anomaly, the angle formed by the different limbs, the
speed of each member, even with a resting position, suffer
minimal or marked alterations. The project we developed aims
at analyzing these alterations by converting them from the
physiologic to the digital form, i.e., if there is any physiologic
dysfunction or alteration in this limb, the equipment will be
able to recognize and help with the recovery process [12].
B. Results of Step 2 - Conception of Architectural Project
In order to develop the proposed computational tool, the
architecture design project is divided into two parts: Hardware
and Software.
1) Hardware Project: This project consists of the capture
and analysis of signals generated by the accelerometers, be-
sides the transformation of signals from the analogical to the
digital form [13]. The circuit here developed counts primarily
with the accelerometers [14], which serve as sensors for the
capture of movement, as shown in Figures 2 and 3.
Figure 2. MMA7260Q accelerometer coupled in your circuit for ease of
manipulation [14].
Figure 3. Correct position and ﬁxation of accelerometers on the user’s arm.
The accelerometers [13] work as sensors of movement
capture. The accelerometers are ﬁxed to the arm in three
different positions: wrist, forearm and shoulder. These sensors
are capable of analyzing and generating output data in the
form of potential differences (volts), and in this way informing
whether the region under analysis is at rest or moving, in
addition to the movement velocity and direction in three
dimensions, all at the same time.
In this phase, data are submitted to a differentiator circuit
where the initial potential (offset potential) is compared to that
generated by a potential divider circuit and resulting in an
output potential difference close to zero.
The three accelerometers are laid on the user arm in the
following way: the ﬁrst lies on the wrist, the second on the
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-392-6
CONTENT 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

forearm and the third close to the shoulder and held in position
by Velcroed straps (Figure 3).
The three accelerometers capture the movement of the an-
alyzed region during rest or otherwise, the speed and direction
of movements, at all times.
After acquisition, data are sent to a differentiator circuit,
where the initial potential (offset potential) is close to zero;
during the second phase data are sent to a low-pass ﬁlter
[15], where noise is minimized and input potential is ampliﬁed
in order to increase the voltage potential band analyzed. The
operational ampliﬁers generate a Chebyshev low-pass circuit
with an input voltage potential gain of eight times with a 50Hz
cut-off frequency [16]. This voltage potential gain facilitates
the analysis and conversion of analogical to digital data given
that data will be represented with a maximum of 8 bits. This
is illustrated in Tables I and II.
Afterwards, the treated data are sent to a micro-controller,
where they are organized and orderly sent to the PC via an
USP port [17].
2) Software Project:
This phase consists in receiving,
graphically displaying, analyzing and comparing the digital
signal to pre-established movement digital signals with a
meaningful concept output to the user.
Therefore, software was developed which is capable to
graphically displaying the movement made by the user, who
should try to mimic a pre-established movement generated by
the system administrator and presented to him.
Firstly, the user visualizes on the computer screen his pre-
established handicap motor movement to be performed. After
acquisition by the accelerometers, the data are processed.
In the ﬁrst step, the data are submitted to a differentiator
circuit where the initial circuit potential (offset potential) is
compared to a potential generated by a potential divider circuit
with an output potential close to zero.
In the second step, these potentials are submitted to a low-
pass ﬁlter with a cut-off frequency of 50Hz to ﬁlter out noise
and generate eight-fold ampliﬁcation in order to be analyzed
and converted to digital signals by the micro-controller.
In the third step, the generated signal arrives at the micro-
controller, where all signals are organized according with each
accelerometer and the axis read, and then transformed to the
digital format. In the micro-controller, a signal input-output
routine was developed using the C programming language.
The newly received information is sent via the USP port
to a PC by a USB serial convector cable.
In the ﬁnal step, the software handles the information. The
data are ﬁrst captured and graphically presented in agreement
with the movement performed by the user.
C. Results of Step 4 - Information Analysis
After the movement has ceased, the software evaluates
the values obtained and compares them to the values of pre-
established movements stored in the database.
Finally, a concept (comparison with what is already stored
in the database) or diagnosis is given to the movement and
thereafter the movement may be repeated or the user may
perform the next movement.
D. Experiments
The software developed with JAVA programming language
[18] under the NETBEANS development platform [19] con-
trols the input of digitally transformed signals and presents
them in a graphic form.
In addition, the software posses a database where the move-
ments to be repeated by the user and the user own movements
are stored in order to proportionate a comparative analysis
amongst the movements performed during the patient’s (user)
rehabilitation.
The proposed tool is also capable of comparing the last
movement performed by the user to the pre-established move-
ments stored in the database and return a diagnosis (concept).
In this way, the user has the option of repeating or advancing to
the next movement. Given that all information is stored in the
database, the user has the option of recording this information
in portable digital media to be taken to other professionals of
the medical area.
The testing phase was carried out after the completion of
the project implementation phase.
The differentiator circuit output band results obtained dur-
ing the testing phase are shown in Table I. These results are
the average values regarding all the three axis exactly as it is
supplied from our accelerometers. In this case, it’s possible
to see that our zero value would be in 300 millivolts and
that way we can notice that always that the value is below
300 mV it means that the arm is moving against the axis
and above it towards the axis. For example, if we have the
X axis representing the vertical movement and when the arm
is moving left, we have a value varying between 100 mV and
300 mV. When the arm is moving right we have this value
between 300 mV and 500 mV, depending on the movement
velocity.
TABLE I. POTENTIAL VALUES OBTAINED AFTER THE USE OF THE
DIFFERENTIATOR CIRCUIT.
Type/shape of movement
Potential (mV )
Still arm
≈ 300
Towards the axis
Between 300 and 500
Against the axis
Between 100 and 300
In sequence, we used a Chebyshev low-pass ﬁlter and then
a signal ampliﬁer circuit to improve these signals. With this
technique, an eight-fold gain was obtained and the electrical
noises were lowered. Our ﬁnal electric results obtained from
the micro-controller input are shown in Table II.
TABLE II. POTENTIAL VALUES OBTAINED FROM THE
MICRO-CONTROLLER INPUT WITH THE USE OF A FILTER AND WITH A GAIN
OF EIGHT-FOLD.
Type/shape of movement
Potential (V )
Still arm
≈ 2,4
Towards the axis
Between 2.4 and 4.0
Against the axis
Between 0.8 and 2.4
From the values obtained with the proposed device and
displayed in Table II, it is possible to calculate the velocity of
the arm movement.
Figure 4 demonstrates the values received from three axes
of an accelerometer when strapped to the patients wrist while
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-392-6
CONTENT 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

the calibration is running. Note that as expected, the value
that represents an arm while not moving is not the same as
the electrical value presented in the Table 1 and Table 2.
This occurs because the microprocessor delivers us values
between 0 and 255, based on its input voltage. That way
our software can estimate the velocity and position using a
simple conversion routine. Equally, we can understand, the
three calibration values obtained after a hundred rounds will
be looked at as our zero value.
Figure 4. Calibration values from the ﬁrst accelerometer’s three axes, during
a test.
Figure 5 illustrates the moment when the user executed a
software pre-established movement.
Figure 5. Movement being executed by the user. The movements activate the
Mario doll on the path to ﬁnd his beloved.
The user can repeat the movements as many times as it is
necessary and in the same way, the user can see the executed
movements during the previous steps. On the screen, the data
of the movement carried out by the user can be visualized
based on the position related to the axis x and y with the time
spent on it (see Figure 6).
In the future work, it will be possible to show the move-
ment in 3D because we already have read the z-axis. However,
it will demand one more advanced interface and it will require
more powerful equipments.
The result of calculations performed by the software is
Figure 6. Another example of movement being executed by the user, more
simply, Mario to his beloved.
a smooth movement and reﬂecting precisely the user perfor-
mance. This makes the use of this tool a viable option for
physiotherapy and revealed several improvement opportunities
and new applications.
The potential values obtained are translated into a visually
comprehensible screen readout, which allows a satisfactory
interaction between patient and software output.
V.
CONCLUSION
After the end of testing and performance prooﬁng of the
proposed device, named SAFE, we understand that it is a
prototype that still needs further improvement in order to have
its use in the physiotherapy ﬁeld.
The biggest hurdle faced in this project was to obtain
knowledge of this new technology and its implementation
within the academic environment, i.e. the accelerometers. In
spite of their presence as portable devices in the market place,
these tools still lacks specialists. This prompted us to search
for help and assistance from companies and experts abroad
and illustrated how complex and painstaking the search for
new solutions for the problems faced within this project are.
When analyzed from the academic point of view, we
believe that the project proposal was successfully achieved.
This conclusion stems from the ability to communicate and
present the data obtained and from the employment of the
information obtained. Besides, we believe the results obtained
here will stimulate a great spectrum of future opportunities of
implementation based on this solution.
Given that the programming language used here is consid-
ered slow by many when compared to more traditional lan-
guages, we believe we managed to make JAVA programming
language an ally in the task of showing the user, in a visual
way, the arm movements to be used in physiotherapy treatment.
It is worth mentioning that the results here obtained from
the executed tests with the accelerometers should present
better results when a newer generation of devices are used.
This move will allow a lesser compensation from software to
hardware deﬁciency and allowing a more precise and faster
communication and processing of information.
There is no complexity in the hardware used and this
allowed our experience to be of an easier nature and helped
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-392-6
CONTENT 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

us to elaborate new solutions to the problems faced, in ad-
dition to making this project more viable and economically
advantageous.
REFERENCES
[1]
P.
Cordeiro,
2009,
physiotherapy
innovatives
in
treatment
with
Video
Games
[online]
Available
at
http://www.acessa.com/saude/arquivo/noticias [retrieved: July, 2014].
[2]
J. Hackett, B. Johnson, A. Parkin, and T. Southwood, “Physiotherapy
and occupational therapy for juvenile chronic arthritis: custom and
practice in ﬁve centres in the uk, usa and canada,” British Journal of
Rheumatology, vol. 35, 1996, pp. 695–699.
[3]
S. Lianza, Rehabilitation Medicine.
Medicina de Reabilitac¸˜ao, 2002.
[4]
J. Suri, D. Wilson, and S. Laxminarayan, Handbook of Biomedical
Image Analysis: Volume 3: Registration Models , I. T. in Biomedi-
cal Engineering, Ed.
Springer-Verlag New York, Inc, 2005.
[5]
R. I. Medina-Blanco, A. Jimenez-Cruz, M. E. Perez-Morales, A. L.
Armendariz-Anguiano, and M. Bacardi Gascon, “Programas de in-
tervencion para la promocion de actividad ﬁsica en ninos escolares:
revision sistematica,” Nutricion Hospitalaria, vol. 26, 04 2011, pp. 265
– 270.
[6]
M. Romanzini, E. L. Petroski, and F. F. Reichert, “Thresholds of
accelerometers to estimate the intensity of physical activity in children
and adolescents: A Systematic Review,” Brazilian Journal of Kinanthro-
pometry and Human Performance, vol. 14, 00 2012, pp. 101 – 113.
[7]
D. T. Ueno, E. Sebastiao, D. I. Corazza, and S. Gobbi, “Methods for
assessing physical activity: a systematic review focused on older adults
,” Brazilian Journal of Kinanthropometry and Human Performance,
vol. 15, 04 2013, pp. 256 – 265.
[8]
R. F. I. Osti, L. M. T. Garcia, and A. A. Florindo, “Validation of the
24-hour physical activity recall in elderly adults,” Brazilian Journal of
Kinanthropometry and Human Performance, vol. 16, 00 2014, pp. 15
– 26.
[9]
J. F. Sousa, J. C. Ribeiro, C. C. Sa, A. Novo, and V. P. Lopes, “Mechanic
impact analysis in the prostheses of a bilateral lower-limb amputee
during the gait,” Fisioterapia e Pesquisa, vol. 18, 03 2011, pp. 11 –
16.
[10]
S. M. Michaelsen, R. P. Gomes, A. P. Marques, L. C. Rodrigues,
N. G. B. Junior, R. Claudino, and M. J. dos Santos, “Using an
accelerometer for analyzing a reach-to-grasp movement after stroke,”
Motriz: Revista de Educacao Fisica, vol. 19, 12 2013, pp. 746 – 752.
[11]
M. Schonke, E. Schulte, U. Schumacher, M. Voll, and K. Wesker,
Prometheus - Atlas De Anatomia Geral e Aparelho Locomotor.
Gua-
nabara Koogan, 2009.
[12]
E. L. Sanchez, “History of physical therapy in Brazil and in the World,”
Brazilian update Physiotherapy Journal, Ano II. Vol. I. N. 03, Mai/Jun.,
Sao Paulo, 1984.
[13]
S. Kurt and C. Oscar, “Implementing positioning algorithms using
accelerometers,” Freescale Semiconductor, vol. 02, 2007.
[14]
3 Axis Acceleration Sensor Board User’s Guide.
Sure Electronics Inc,
2007.
[15]
A. P. Junior, Analog electronics: operational ampliﬁers and active ﬁlters.
Porto Alegre: Bookman, 2003.
[16]
F. Najm, “Low-pass ﬁlter for computing the transition density in digital
circuits,” IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design, vol. 13, 1994,
pp. 1123–1131.
[17]
S. Franco, Design with Operational Ampliﬁers and Analog Integrated
Circuits.
New York: Mc-Graw-Hill, 2000.
[18]
B. Eckel, Thinking in Java, 4th Edition.
Prentice Hall, 2006.
[19]
2009,
welcome
to
NetBeans
[online]
Available
at
http://www.netbeans.org/ [retrieved: July, 2014].
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-392-6
CONTENT 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

