Enhancing Object-Oriented UML for Developing an Intelligent Semantic 
Knowledge Dictionary 
 
Mansoor Al Aali, Samia Yousif  
College of Information Technology 
Ahlia University 
Manama, Kingdom of Bahrain 
Emails: { malaali, syousif }@ahlia.edu.bh  
 
 
 
Abstract—This 
research 
presents 
a 
new 
SEMANTIC 
dictionary system developed by utilizing the Object-Oriented 
(OO) approach. SEMANTIC dictionary system contains 
English words, their Arabic meanings, associated actions, 
semantic relationships, inherited actions and attributes, 
exceptional 
relationships 
and 
other 
semantics 
and 
characteristics. SEMANTIC dictionary system utilizes Object-
Oriented major features, such as objects, classes, aggregation, 
inheritances, encapsulation and polymorphism. SEMANTIC 
dictionary is a knowledge base, which can be considered as an 
intelligent language model and can be used for many language 
teaching purposes. This research shows how simple phrases 
can be generated or validated to be semantically correct. In the 
process of using OO UML to represent semantic knowledge, 
we have made enhancements and additions to UML itself. 
Keywords-Semantic; 
Dictionary; 
English; 
Object 
Orientation; Teaching  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Research into natural language processing has received 
great attention and will continue to do so because of the 
importance of such topic to humanity [1][18]. Natural 
language 
processing 
presents 
two 
main 
challenges: 
representing semantics and querying these semantics. Until 
now, no one claims to have the solution to store semantics of 
complex sentences and link all its words together with the 
meaning of words, phrases of other sentences [2][12]. This 
research presents a novel approach by storing the semantics 
of English simple phrases using the Object Oriented 
techniques for teaching and learning English. Object oriented 
technique is a method of viewing knowledge at different 
levels of abstraction [19].  
English is the first or second language in most countries 
educational systems. Students in many countries study the 
English language starting from the 1st grade of elementary 
schools [9][13][14]. Mastering English in both writing and 
reading is essential and crucial to the success of students in 
high schools and colleges for them to be able to find a good 
job in the future [11]. Furthermore, the students need to feel 
more of the knowledge relating to the words to improve their 
writing skills in English. Students studying English as 
Second Language (ESL) need to use dictionaries in order to 
know what words mean and what they can do with them in 
order to understand and communicate in English [6].   
Dictionaries are one of many important tools [10] that 
can increase the students’ understanding of the language and 
develop 
their 
vocabulary. 
Furthermore, 
Learners' 
Dictionaries are used to practice English correctly, 
effectively 
and 
appropriately 
[17]. 
Consequently, 
dictionaries must have maximum semantic information for 
words related to semantic classification that will assist the 
students to understand English language, as well as improve 
and enhance their writing in English.  
Several developers have attempted to develop inclusive 
and unique dictionaries with special features that may help 
the dictionary to become more useful and popular. We have 
conducted a survey on online dictionaries and elicited that 
almost all dictionaries come under three categories: leaner, 
translator and search. Each dictionary has a number of 
features, for example, some dictionaries provide words 
definition, examples, pronunciation, words translation, text 
translation, pictures, rhymes, synonyms and words functions 
like noun, adjective, etc. Many companies have cashed in on 
the concept and have developed dictionaries for a variety of 
purposes such as Cambridge Learner’s Dictionary, Word 
Central, Ultralingua Language Software, RhymeZone, 
Wordsmyth Children's Dictionary, McGraw-Hill Children's 
Dictionary, OneLook Dictionary Search, Freesearch, Sakhr, 
Tarjim, WordNet and ALWafi. 
Writing fluently in English language requires knowledge 
of the conventional contexts, strong vocabulary, and 
collocations surrounding the word. While this information 
may be presented implicitly in dictionaries to help ESL 
learners, ESL students often have difficulties finding the 
right meaning for unfamiliar words or phrases in their 
dictionaries. In response to these difficulties, some 
researchers have proposed new ways to access the English 
lexicon [8] and presenting typical phraseology rather than 
words in isolation [6]. In addition, some researchers have 
suggested a representation, with a tree-based model of 
runtime dictionaries, allowing a very fast morphological 
analysis with semantic recognition, for example, the path 
<SPORTS/Water 
Sports/Swimming> 
describes 
the 
document field <Swimming> as a sub-field of <Water 
Sports>, which is a sub-field of super-field <SPORTS> [3].  
This research presents some aspects of semantics for 
simple sentences and phrases, for example, the simple phrase 
(boy eats book) is grammatically correct while it is wrong in 
real world meaning. In turn, SEMANTIC dictionary system 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-392-6
CONTENT 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

rejects this sentence and displays the reasons for the rejection 
and provides a dynamic correct example such as (boy eats 
apple). This is made possible because of the intelligent 
features of the Object-Oriented approach and the actions 
associated with each word (noun). Some researchers 
proposed a practical retrieval system for semantic 
representation by building relationships between verbs and 
nouns in derivation frames [3]. In SEMANTIC dictionary, 
administrators create relationships between actions (verbs) 
and classes (nouns) to provide important information about 
the meanings of nouns. For instance, the action ‘eat’ could be 
the relationship between the super classes ‘human’ and 
‘food’ which means ‘human eat food’. 
Teaching English needs to be changed or improved by 
adding various tools and new strategies that will assist 
students to comprehend English in the best way [5]. Many 
researchers continue to study a variety of new approaches in 
teaching 
English 
[1][2][7][11][12][13][14][15]. 
Communicative language teaching approach advocates the 
development of communicative competence as a primary 
goal through the extensive use of the second language as a 
means of communication during classroom lessons. Using 
computers raises students’ motivation and their performance 
as well as placing students in a learning state with full 
participation, concentration and enjoyment [4][5].  
SEMANTIC dictionary system is a web-based dictionary 
system. Each word in this dictionary belongs to a class and 
may have one or more subclasses. Subclasses inherit all the 
public attributes and operations of their super class and this 
concept is utilized in all types of processing on the 
SEMANTIC dictionary system. For example, the super class 
'human' inherits the public operation 'eat' to its subclass 'boy' 
and therefore we can generate or check the simple sentence 
‘boy eats food’ or 'boys eat food' with semantic meaning. 
The work in this research signifies that SEMANTIC 
dictionary system assists teachers to make the English 
subject more interesting and raise student's motivation and 
contribution, as well as it enables students to understand the 
meaning of words and helps them to organize sentences and 
build them correctly with semantic meaning. 
The rest of the paper consists of a number of sections. 
Section II presents the technique for incorporating semantics 
into a dictionary using the object oriented approach. In 
section II we present  a summary for enhancing UML code 
and UML diagram incorporating semantics in the 
SEMANTIC Dictionary System. The rest of the paper 
presents the different types of associations between objects 
using the enhanced UML code such as Normal Association 
(Public 
Operations), 
Recursive 
Association 
(Public 
Operations), Private Association (Private Operations), 
Exceptional Association (Exceptional Operations) and 
Subject Only Operations. We end the paper with our 
conclusions.  
 
Representing language semantics has been considered 
using a variety of tools, techniques and theories, eg, using 
the Web Ontology Language (OWL) [20][21]. OWL has 
been accepted by the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) 
as the standard knowledge representation formalism for the 
Semantic Web [21]. OWL provides a very expressive 
selection of syntactic constructs for Semantic Web ontology 
development. There are many other techniques used over 
time but it is outside the scope of this paper to survey them. 
The main focus of the research presented in this paper is to 
represent simple language semantics extracted from simple 
phrases or sentences to be used as a dictionary of knowledge 
mainly for teaching English and for English to Arabic 
translation. A number of researchers have studied 
representing Arabic semantics [22]. We have chosen UML 
[24] for its simplicity and it is suitable for the representation 
requirements. Our research is not concerned with web 
semantics nor  with general knowledge representation, but 
concerned primarily with representing simple Arabic and 
English phrases for teaching English simple sentences and 
for translation and we demonstrate its suitability in this 
paper. Section II presents the enhancements to UML 
necessary to incorporate the required level of semantics for 
the SEMANTIC dictionary system.   
The rest of the paper is divided into a number of sections. 
Section II presents the approach of applying the object-
oriented techniques to incorporate semantics in the semantic 
dictionary. Section II presents the Enhancements to UML for 
SEMANTIC Dictionary System and the enhancement of 
UML diagram for SEMANTIC dictionary system. Section 
III presents a summary discussion for the subject-only 
concept and supporting scenarios. Section IV presents the 
conclusions and future work. 
    
 
II. 
APPLYING THE OBJECT-ORIENTED 
TECHNIQUES TO INCORPORATE 
SEMANTICS IN THE SEMANTIC 
DICTIONARY  
Object-Oriented (OO) is a paradigm for creating software 
systems using objects. Objects are tangible and conceptual 
things we find in the real world. Using OO makes 
SEMANTIC dictionary system objects more semantically 
related and hence better intelligence can be implemented. 
OO has major notions such as objects, classes, inheritances, 
encapsulation and polymorphism. The OO Unified Modeling 
Language (UML) is the industry-standard language for 
specifying, visualizing, constructing, and documenting the 
artifacts of software systems. It simplifies the complex 
process of software design, making a "blueprint" for 
construction. These OO concepts were used as a model for 
representing SEMANTIC knowledge base rather than 
SEMANTIC development. The main reason for using UML 
is to model the simple semantics of the language phrases 
which can then be modelled internally in our software 
system depicting the SEMANTIC DICTIONARY system. 
Modelling using UML means the ability to directly represent 
the knowledge using an Object oriented language. The 
reasons for expanding or extending the UML is that the 
original UML does not have certain semantic concepts 
suitable for our purpose as will be illustrated in the next 
section.  
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-392-6
CONTENT 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

A. Enhancing UML for SEMANTIC Dictionary System 
The public attributes and operations are expressed with a 
plus sign (+). The private attributes and operations are 
expressed with a minus sign (-). The exceptional operations 
are expressed with a less-than sign (<). The “Subject-Only” 
operations are expressed with (&). The letter “b” is added to 
these signs (+, -, < or &) when the type of the operation is 
“Action By” while the letter “o” is added to them when the 
type of the operation is “Action On”. Notice that both 
“Exceptional” and “Subject-Only” operations are not a part 
of UML class diagram, but we added them, which means 
that the signs are according to our view as well as the 
addition of the letters “b” and “o” to the signs. The signs and 
the letters are utilized to distinguish between the actions. 
B. Enhancement of UML Diagram for SEMANTIC 
Dictionary System 
Figure 1 demonstrates two super classes with their 
subclasses, instances and relationships. The dotted lines 
mean that the diagram can be extended depending on the 
system. The first super class is called Super class A and it 
has Subclass Aa. This subclass contains three instances: 
Instance Aa1, Instance Aa2 and Instance Aa3. The second 
super class is called Super class B and it has Subclass Ba. 
This subclass consists of three instances: Instance Ba1, 
Instance Ba2 and Instance Ba3. The super classes inherit the 
public operations (Actions) to its subclasses. Accordingly, 
these subclasses inherit its public Actions to its subclasses or 
instances. Super classes are illustrated with rectangles 
divided into two compartments. Place the name of the class 
in the first partition (centered, bolded, and capitalized each 
word), list the subclasses or instances in the second partition. 
The following are the relationships between classes and the 
drawings of these relationships, as shown in Figure 2. 
Normal Association (Public Operations): It is a 
connection between classes, a semantic connection between 
objects (instances) of the classes involved in the association. 
It is normally bidirectional, which means that if an object is 
associated with another object, both objects are aware of 
each other. First direction is Action By (+b Action), and 
second direction is Action On (+o Action). The multiplicity 
(0 .. *) and (1 .. *) are used to present how many objects are 
linked. This association is inherited to the subclasses. It is 
sketched by a wide straight line connected between two 
super classes. The Action By (+b Action) is put above this 
line while the Action On (+o Action) is placed below it. 
Moreover, the multiplicity and directions’ arrows are 
presented on this line.     
Recursive Association (Public Operations): It is a 
connection between a class and itself. The association still 
presents a semantic connection between objects, but the 
connected objects are of the same class. This is also 
bidirectional and it has multiplicity like normal association. 
This association is inherited to the subclasses. It is expressed 
by a wide elbow connecter between the super class and itself. 
The Action By (+b Action) is placed above this connecter 
whereas the Action On (+o Action) is put below it. 
Furthermore, the multiplicity and directions’ arrows are 
presented on this connecter. 
Private Association (Private Operations): It is a 
connection between objects (instances). It is bidirectional; 
First direction is Action By (-b Action), and second direction 
is Action On (-o Action). This association can’t be inherited. 
It is sketched by a thin elbow connecter between two 
instances. The Action By (-b Action) is presented above this 
connecter while the Action On (-o Action) is placed below it. 
In addition, directions’ arrows are demonstrated on this 
connecter.       
Exceptional Association (Exceptional Operations): It 
is a connection between some objects and classes. 
Exceptional Action By (<b Action) means that the inherited 
action that the object can’t do and Exceptional Action On 
(<o Action) means that the inherited action can’t be carried 
out on the object. Consequently these actions are excluded 
from this object. It is demonstrated by a thin straight line 
between the instance of a super class and another super class, 
the short vertical line is put before the end up of this straight 
line. The Action By (<b Action) is shown above the straight 
line whereas the Action On (<o Action) is put below the 
straight line. 
Subject-Only Operations: It means that the action is 
done by the subject (class) without an object. It is always 
Action By (&b Action) as well as it is inherited to the 
subclasses. It is sketched by a wide straight line connected to 
the super class and end up by oval arrow. The Action By (&b 
Action) is placed above this line. 
In SEMANTIC dictionary system, the relationships or 
associations (public operation Action By (+b Action)) are 
created between two super classes manually; subsequently 
the operations Action On (+o Action) are generated between 
them automatically. The normal line is sketched between two 
super classes (Super Class A and Super Class B) indicates 
the public relationship (Action By) which is created 
manually between them while the dotted lines are sketched 
between them and its classes signify the public relationship 
(Action On) which is generated automatically as well as it 
shows the inherence public operations Action By (+b 
Action) and Action On (+o Action) as illustrated in Figure 2. 
For example, Super class A inherits the public operations 
(Action By and Action On) to its Subclass Aa and its 
instances (Instance Aa1, Instance Aa2 and Instance Aa3). 
Notice that the sketched lines of relationships between 
classes in Figure 2 are hidden in SEMANTIC dictionary 
system. The other relationships that were applied in 
SEMANTIC dictionary system can be exhibited in the same 
manner.  
Mainly, English simple sentence consists of three major 
parts are The Subject, The Verb and The Object. Now, will 
describe the Public Associations (Public Operations) and will 
explain how these relationships are achieved in the 
SEMANTIC Dictionary System as well as will present the 
intelligent aspects of it. Furthermore, it will provide more 
details about enhanced UML for drawing this type of 
relationships. The administrator or the teacher will create the 
public relationships (associations or operations) between the 
super classes utilizing simple present verbs manually. 
SEMANTIC Dictionary System has some intelligent aspects, 
for example, super classes will inherit these public 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-392-6
CONTENT 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

Super class A 
Subclass Aa 
Instance Aa1 
 Instance Aa2 
 Instance Aa3 
 
          
*                   
 
          
*                   
 
          
*                   
 
Super class B 
Subclass Ba 
Instance Ba3 
Instance Ba2 
          
*                   
 
+b Action        
+o Action 
          
*                   
 
           
*                   
 
          
*                   
 
Figure 1. Enhancement UML Diagram (Meta Diagram)  
+b 
Action 
+o 
Action 
          
0 .. *                   
 
          
1 .. *                   
 
&b Action 
-b Action 
-o Action 
<o 
Action 
<b 
Action 
Instance Ba1 
          
*                   
 
Instance Aa1 
 
Instance Aa2 
 
Instance Aa3 
 
Instance Ba3 
Instance Ba2 
Instance Ba1 
Super class A 
Super class B 
+b Action By 
+o Action On 
Subclass Aa 
Subclass Ba 
Figure 2. Classes Relationships (Meta Diagram)  
relationships within present verbs to its subclasses and it will 
produce other cases of public relationships via different 
verbs, such as: past verbs, future verbs and present 
continuous verbs automatically. The super classes will 
inherit these produced cases of public relationships to its 
subclasses as well. 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. English Simple Sentence Meta Diagram (Active Simple Sentence within Present Verb) 
 
 
 
 
 
The Subject  
The Object  
Noun (Adjectives) 
  
Present Verb 
Active 
Noun (Adjectives) 
  
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-392-6
CONTENT 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Consequently, SEMANTIC Dictionary System will 
generate several English simple sentences automatically, 
for example: active simple sentences and passive simple 
sentences within present verbs, active simple sentences 
and passive simple sentences within past verbs, active 
simple sentences and passive simple sentences within 
future verbs, active simple sentences and passive simple 
sentences within present perfect verbs and active simple 
sentences within present continues verbs. In addition, 
SEMANTIC dictionary system will generate these 
sentences using singular subject, plural subject, singular 
object and plural object. The following demonstrates the 
public relationships utilizing present verbs to generate 
active simple present sentence. 
Figure 3 illustrates the Meta diagram of active 
simple sentence within a present verb. Depending on 
Figure 3, we have drawn the enhanced UML Meta 
diagram; see Figure 4. One of "Class A" or more can 
carry out the Action By (+b Action) on one of "Class B" 
or more. On other hand, one of "Class A" or more can 
perform the Action By (+b Action). Here, the Action By 
is in the present. Similarly, "Class A" and "Class B" 
have many attributes. Figure 5 is an example in the 
SEMANTIC Dictionary System; a Boy is a human and 
his gender is masculine, an Apple is a vegetarian food 
and its gender is neuter. The public relationship between 
the Boy and the Apple is the Action By, which is the 
present verb (eat), that they have already inherited from 
their super classes (Human and Vegetarian Food 
respectively). This is the intelligent aspect of the 
SEMANTIC dictionary system. Hence, SEMANTIC 
will generate numerous sentences automatically, as 
presented in the following: A boy eats, Boys eat, A boy 
eats an apple, A boy eats apples, Boys eat an apple, 
Boys eat apples. 
Passive simple present sentence means that "The 
Subject" does not perform the action of the present verb 
in the sentence - the action is performed on it. Figure 6 
illustrates the Meta diagram of passive simple sentence 
within a present verb. Regularly, "The Subject" and 
"The Object" are nouns and they have adjectives, 
whereas when we write a simple sentence, we can write 
"The Subject" and "The Object" without any adjective. 
Moreover, we can write them in singular and plural. 
Depending on Figure 6, we have drawn the enhanced 
UML Meta diagram, see Figure 7. Action On (+o 
Action) is the action that can be carried out on one of 
"Class B" or more by one of "Class A" or more. 
Similarly, "Class A" and "Class B" have many 
attributes. Figure 8 is an example in the SEMANTIC 
Dictionary System; a Boy is a human and his gender is 
masculine, an Apple is a vegetarian food and its gender 
is neuter. The super classes (Human and Vegetarian 
Food) 
inherit 
the 
public 
relationship 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. English Simple Sentence Meta Diagram (Passive Simple Sentence within Present Verb) 
The Subject  
The Object  
Noun (Adjectives) 
  
Present Verb 
Passive 
Noun (Adjectives) 
  
Figure 7. Enhanced UML Meta Diagram within Action On (Public Relationship via 
Present Verb, which is produced) 
Class A  
 
Class B  
 
Attributes  
+o Action 
Attributes 
  
          
1 .. *                   
  
          
0 .. *                   
  
Figure 8. Example of Enhanced UML Diagram within Action On (Public Relationship via 
Present Verb) in SEMANTIC Dictionary System 
Boy 
 
Apple 
 
gender= neuter  
+o is eaten by 
gender= masculine  
          
1 .. *                   
  
          
0 .. *                   
  
Figure 4. Enhanced UML Meta Diagram within Action By (Public Relationship via Present Verb) 
Class A  
 
Class B  
 
Attributes  
+b Action 
 
Attributes 
  
          
1 .. *                   
  
          
0 .. *                   
  
Figure 5. Example of Enhanced UML Diagram within Action By (Public Relationship via 
Present Verb) in SEMANTIC Dictionary System 
 
 
 
Boy 
 
Apple 
 
gender= neuter  
+b eats 
 
gender= masculine  
          
1 .. *                   
  
          
0 .. *                   
  
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-392-6
CONTENT 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

(present verb: eat) to their subclasses (the Boy and the 
Apple respectively). Since SEMANTIC dictionary 
system has intelligent aspects, it will produce the Action 
On between the subclasses (the Boy and the Apple), 
which 
is 
the 
action 
(eaten 
by). 
Furthermore, 
SEMANTIC 
will 
generate 
various 
sentences 
automatically, as presented in the following: An apple is 
eaten, Apples are eaten, An apple is eaten by a boy, An 
apple is eaten by boys, Apples are eaten by a boy, 
Apples are eaten by boys. 
 
 
IIII. SUBJECT-ONLY EXPLANATION AND 
SCENARIOS 
 
The “Subject-Only” operations are expressed with 
an ampersand (&). The letter “b” is added to these signs 
(+, -, < or &) when the type of the operation is “Action 
By” while the letter “o” is added to them when the type 
of the operation is “Action On”. Notice that both 
“Exceptional” and “Subject-Only” operations are not a 
part of the original UML class diagram, but we added 
them, which means that their signs are according to our 
view, as well as the addition of the letters “b” and “o” to 
the signs. The signs and the letters are utilized to 
distinguish between the actions. In addition, Figure 9 
presents the following:  
 
Classes: SEMANTIC dictionary system has 
several super classes and many subclasses 
whereas Figure 9 presents three Super classes: 
Human, Vegetarian Food and Information 
Media. In addition, it shows six subclasses, 
such as (Reading) of super class Information 
Media and (Family and People) of super class 
Human.  
 
Instances: In SEMANTIC dictionary system, 
each subclass has many instances, for example 
(Man, Woman, Boy and Girl) of subclass 
People. Another example: the subclass Fruit 
has many instances that are applied in 
SEMANTIC dictionary system while Figure 9 
shows (Apple and Banana) as an example. 
 
Aggregation: A lot of aggregations are 
applied in SEMANTIC dictionary system, for 
example the super class Information Media 
consists of class Reading and the class 
Reading consists of objects or instances 
(Book, Magazine and Newspaper).  
 
Public Operations: SEMANTIC dictionary 
system has many public operations (Action 
By): for example; buys, sells and browses, for 
example: a girl buys an apple. As well as the 
public operations (Action On) which are 
generated automatically: such as; bought by, 
sold by and browsed by, for example: an apple 
is bought by a girl. 
 
Private Operations: SEMANTIC dictionary 
system has a private operation (Action By): 
“engages” for object Man. For example: a man 
engages a woman and a private operation 
(Action On): “engaged to” for object Woman. 
For example: a woman engaged to a man. 
 
Subject_Only 
Operations: 
SEMANTIC 
dictionary 
system 
contains 
several 
Subject_Only operations (Action By): such as 
Sits, Grows, Sleeps, Swims and Weeps. For 
example, a boy sits. 
 
Exceptional 
operations: 
SEMANTIC 
dictionary system has an exceptional operation 
(Action By): Cooks. For example, a boy 
cannot cook a cloth. Also, an exceptional 
operation (Action On): Cooked by. For 
example, a football is not cooked by a human.  
 
Inheritance: 
In 
SEMANTIC 
dictionary 
system the super classes inherit the public 
operations (Actions) to its subclasses. For 
example: the super class Human inherits its 
public operations such as (eat, cook, read and 
write) to its subclasses (People and Family) 
and consequently these classes inherits these 
operations to its subclasses or instances like 
(Man, Woman, and Boy).  
 
Multiplicity: 
Different 
multiplicities 
are 
applied in SEMANTIC dictionary system. For 
example: “a man eats an apple”, “Three men 
eat an apple”, “a man eats two apples” and 
“four men eat five apples”. 
 
Normal Association: SEMANTIC dictionary 
system has many normal associations, for 
example, first direction: a boy reads many 
(zero or many) books. Second direction: a 
book can be read by many (one or many) boys. 
 
Recursive 
Association: 
SEMANTIC 
dictionary system has a recursive association, 
first direction:  (one or many) woman feeds 
(one or many) sons. Second direction: (one or 
many) son fed by (one or many) women. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE 
WORK 
This paper presented a new approach for the 
development and evaluation of an intelligent English-
Arabic Object Oriented dictionary system called 
SEMANTIC. This research is the first to effectively use 
the OO concept and enhance UML to deal with English 
language semantics for simple phrases. SEMANTIC 
Dictionary System was tested on the 6th class of an 
elementary school for girls in kingdom of Bahrain to test 
its effectiveness in teaching some aspects of the English 
language and to test its level of contribution to students 
learning and the tests are very promising [23]. 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-392-6
CONTENT 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

Human 
People 
Man     
Girl  
Woman 
Boy      
          
*                   
 
          
*                   
 
          
*                   
 
          
*                   
 
Family 
Father 
Daughter 
Mother  
Son     
          
1                   
           
1                   
           
*                   
           
*                   
 
Vegetarian Food 
Fruit 
Banana 
Apple     
          
*                   
           
*                   
 
Information 
Media 
Reading 
Book     
Magazine 
Newspaper 
          
*                   
           
*                   
           
*                   
 
Grain 
Pea       
Rice      
          
*                   
           
*                   
 
Vegetable 
Radish 
Carrot   
          
*                   
 
+b Feeds          
+o Fed by 
          
*                   
 
           
*                   
 
          
*                   
 
      +o Read by 
          
1 .. *                   
 
          
0 .. *                   
 
Figure 9. Example of Enhanced UML Diagram in the SEMANTIC Dictionary System. 
   +o Written by 
          
1 .. *                   
 
          
0 .. *                   
 
+o Browsed by 
          
1 .. *                   
 
          
0 .. *                      
 
    +o Bought by 
          
1                   
 
          
0 .. *                   
 
+o Held by 
          
1 .. *                   
 
          
0 .. *                   
 
          
1                   
 
          
0 .. *                   
 
+o Sold by 
& Grows 
& Sits 
& Sleeps 
& Swims 
& Weeps 
+o Eaten by 
          
0 .. *                   
 
          
1 .. *                   
 
   +b Cooks 
          
0 .. *                   
 
          
1                   
 
    +b Cuts 
          
0 .. *                   
 
          
1                      
     +b Buys 
          
0 .. *                   
 
          
1                   
 
+b Holds 
          
0 .. *                   
 
          
1 .. *                   
 
          
0 .. *                   
 
          
1                   
 
  +b Sells 
& Grows 
-b Engages 
-o Engaged to 
<o Cooked by 
<b Cook 
<b Cook 
+b Eats 
+b Reads 
 +b Writes 
 
    +b Browses 
 +b Buys 
+b Sells 
     +b Holds 
+o Held by 
  +o Sold by 
    +o Bought by 
+o Cut by 
   +o Cooked by 
We are planning to compare our enhanced UML 
with OWL for the representation of natural language 
semantics especially for the application of translation 
from English to Arabic. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
We would like to thank Ahlia University for providing 
the support and our students for working on developing 
and testing some of our research ideas. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-392-6
CONTENT 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

REFERENCES 
[1] Al-A'ali Mansoor, “An Approach for Automatically 
Extracting Translation Rules  For a Better English-to-
Arabic Machine Translation”, Journal of Computer 
Science, Science Publishers, USA, 2007, pp. 1228-139. 
[2] Al-A'ali 
Mansoor, 
“An 
Efficient 
Technique 
for 
Identifying and Storing Syntactic and Semantic English 
Natural 
Language 
Sentence 
Patterns”, 
WSEAS 
Transactions On Systems, vol. 6, Issue 1, 2007, pp. 173-
178. 
[3] El-Sayed Atlam, K Morita, M Fuketa, and Jun-ichi Aoe, 
“A new method for selecting English field association 
terms 
of 
compound 
words 
and 
its 
knowledge 
representation”, Information Processing & Management, 
vol. 38, Issue 6, 2002, pp. 807-821. 
[4] Gwo-Jen Hwang, Po-Han Wu, and Chi-Chang Chen, 
“An online game approach for improving stu-dents’ 
learning performance in web-based problem-solving 
activities”,  Computers & Education, vol. 59, 2012, pp. 
1246–1256. 
[5] Huiwei Cai, “E-learning and English Teaching. IERI 
Procedia”, vol. 2, 2012, pp. 841-846.  
[6] Janice McAlpine and Johanne Myles, “Capturing 
phraseology in an online dictionary for advanced users of 
English as a second language: a response to user needs”, 
System, vol. 31, Issue 1, 2003, pp. 71-84. 
[7] Mansoor Al-Aali and Samia Yousif, “An Intelligent 
Multi-Lingual Object Oriented Dictionary System”, 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
11th 
WSEAS 
International 
Conference on SYSTEMS, Agios Nikolaos, Crete Island, 
Greece, July 23-25, 2007, pp. 468-473. 
[8] Mark A. Changizi, “Economically organized hierarchies 
in WordNet and the Oxford English Dictionary”,  
Cognitive Systems Research,  vol. 9, 2008, pp. 214–228. 
[9] Masoud Hashemi and Masoud Azizinezhad, “Teaching 
English To Children: A Unique, Challenging Experience 
For Teachers, Effective Teaching Ideas”,  Procedia - 
Social and Behavioral Sciences, vol. 30, 2011, pp. 2083-
2087. 
[10] Octavio Santana Suárez, Francisco J. Carreras Riudavets, 
Zenón Hernández Figueroa, and Antonio C. González 
Cabrera, “Integration of an XML electronic dictionary 
with linguistic tools for natural language processing”,  
Information Processing and Management, vol. 43, 2007, 
pp. 946-957. 
[11] Sally Wu, “Knowledge based approaches for English-
Chinese interpretation teaching and learning”, Procedia 
Social and Behavioral Sciences, vol. 2, 2010, pp. 2383-
2387. 
[12] Samia Yousif and Mansoor Al-A'ali, “Object Oriented 
Techniques for an Intelligent Multi-Purpose English 
Language Dictionary System”, 9th ICEIS – NLPCS 
2007, Funchal-Madeira/Portugal, 2007, pp. 246-255. 
[13] Senem Seda Sahenk Erkan, “Problems of English 
language instruction in primary in Turkey and their 
suggestions”, Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences, 
vol. 46, 2012, pp. 1117-1121. 
[14] Serife Demircioglu, “Teaching English vocabulary to 
young learners via drama”, Procedia Social and 
Behavioral Sciences, vol. 2, 2010, pp. 439-443. 
[15] Shehdeh Fareh, “Challenges of teaching English in the 
Arab world: Why can’t EFL programs deliver as 
expected”,  Procedia Social and Behavioral Sciences, 
vol. 2, 2010, pp. 3600–3604. 
[16] Shireen Motala, “Quality and indicators of quality in 
South 
African 
education: 
a 
critical 
appraisal”, 
International Journal of Educational Development, vol. 
21, 2001, pp. 61-78. 
[17] Stefania 
Nuccorini, 
“Pragmatics 
in 
learners' 
dictionaries”, Journal of Pragmatics, vol. 19, Issue 3, 
1993, pp. 215-237. 
[18] Taher S.K. Homeed and Mansoor Al-A'ali, “Analyzing 
Statistical and Syntactical English Text For Word 
prediction and text generation”, journal of Information 
Technology, ANSI, vol. 6, issue 7, 2007, pp. 954-962.  
[19] Xueyun Ji, “Analysis and Design for Object-oriented 
Multi-tier Architecture of Public Opinion Survey System 
Based on UML”, Procedia Engineering, vol. 15, 2011, 
pp. 5445-5449. 
[20] Mohd Syazwan Abdullah, Richard Paige, Ian Benest, 
and Chris Kimble, “Knowledge Modelling Using The 
UML Profile.”, in Ilias Maglogiannis; Kostas Karpouzis 
& Max Bramer, ed., 'AIAI' , Springer, 2006, pp. 70-77. 
[21] Cartik R. Kothari, “Enhancing Owl Ontologies With 
Relation Semantics”, International Journal Of Software 
Engineering and Knowledge Engineering, vol. 18, no.3, 
2008, pp. 327–356. 
[22] Bassam Haddad, “Semantic Representation of Arabic a 
Logical Approach Towards Towards Compositionality 
and 
Generalisedx 
Arabic 
Quantifiers”, 
2007, 
International Journal of Computer Processing of Oriental 
Languages, vol. 20, no. 1,  pp. 38-52.  
[23] Samia Yousif and Mansoor Al Aali, Evaluation of 
SEMANTIC: An Intelligent English Semantic Object 
Orientated Dictionary System, CONTENT 2015, The 
Seventh 
International 
Conference 
on 
Creative Content Technologies, March 22 - 27, 2015. 
Nice, France, to appear. 
[24] Hassan Gomaa, Designing Concurrent, Distributed, and 
Real-Time 
Applications 
with 
UML, 
ISBN: 
9780321951816, Jan 2014. 
 
 
 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-392-6
CONTENT 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

