Effect of Contrast on the Quality of 3D Visual Perception 
 
Mahsa T. Pourazad 
TELUS Communications Company, Canada  
University of British Columbia, Canada 
pourazad@ece.ubc.ca 
Zicong Mai, Panos Nasiopoulos 
University of British Columbia, Canada 
{zicongm, panos}@ece.ubc.ca 
 
 
Abstract—There are several different factors that affect the 
perceived quality of 3D content. Our objective in this paper is 
to study how the change of contrast between the objects of 
interest and the background in a scene will affect the overall 
3D visual perception. For this study, we captured outdoor and 
indoor scenes in 3D format. For each scene, the brightness of 
the background was consistent and the object’s brightness was 
changing using an external light source and/or a reflector disk. 
Subjective evaluations were performed, with the subjects being 
asked to rate the 3D perceptual quality of each sequence. The 
results showed that the Weber contrast between objects of 
interest and background should be within the range of -0.35 to 
0.55 to provide viewers with high quality of 3D experience. 
Keywords-3D TV; quality of experience; 3D perception; 
contrast  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Recently, 3D video has received increased attention 
among investors, researchers and technology developers. 
The introduction of 3D TV can only be a lasting success if 
the perceived image quality provides a significant step up 
from conventional 2D television, while maintaining the same 
viewing comfort. The availability of high quality 3D content 
will also be a key factor to this success. Recoding 3D content 
– let alone high quality - is much more demanding and 
challenging than that of its 2D counterpart in terms of 
camera setup and configuration, requiring both the director 
and camera operators to be experts in stereoscopic geometry 
and camera calibration [1]. In general, 3D content production 
needs different considerations and provisions beside the ones 
found in the conventional 2D video production. There are 
many factors and parameters that could affect the perceptual 
quality of 3D media. While the effects of different 
acquisition parameters on the 3D perception have been 
studied before, their influence on the perceived quality has 
not been assessed quantitatively. More research and studies 
are required in order to improve our understanding of the 
different factors that affect a viewer's perception of 3D video 
content. This knowledge will allow us to capture high quality 
3D content that may help reduce or even eliminate the visual 
discomfort of the viewers and thus improve the overall 
quality of experience.  To this end, the study by Goldmann et 
al. has addressed the effect that the distance between stereo 
cameras has on the perceptual quality of the captured videos 
[2]. The work presented by Xu et al. [3] investigated the 
relation between the distance of the object(s) of interest from 
the camera and the quality of the perceived images when 
watched on different size displays. Another important factor 
that affects the visual quality of 3D content is brightness [4]. 
The study by Pourazad et al. [5] investigates the effect of the 
scene’s brightness on perceptual 3D quality.  
Inspired by the above work, in this paper we study the 
effect of the contrast between the object(s) of interest and the 
background on the visual quality of 3D content. In our study, 
we capture outdoor and indoor scenes with different contrast 
levels between the main object(s) and the background. Then 
we perform extensive subjective quality assessment 
experiments to quantify the perceived quality of the 3D 
experience at different levels of contrast. The objective is to 
identify if there is a contrast range that will lead to good 3D 
representation.  
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section II 
elaborates on our experimental setup. Subjective evaluations 
are presented in Section III. Section IV elaborates on our 
experimental results. Conclusions are drawn in Section V. 
II. 
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP 
In our experiment, we aim at investigating the effect of 
changing the object’s contrast with respect to the background 
on the perceived quality of captured 3D videos. For this 
comparison, 3D videos of indoor and outdoor scenes are 
captured using stereo cameras. For each scene the brightness 
of the object(s) changes from an under-exposed to an over-
exposed level, while the brightness of the background is 
adjusted to a normally exposed level (not over/under 
exposed) and is kept relatively unchanged for all the 
different recordings of the same scene. As a result, the 
recorded videos have different contrast between the object(s) 
of interest and the background. To capture such test video 
sequences we use two identical full HD cameras (Sony 
HDR-XR500V 1080 60i NTSC) with baseline distance of 
9cm. We used the same settings on both cameras, which 
were aligned in parallel and attached to a bar that was 
custom-made for this purpose. Subsequently, the bar was 
secured to a tripod. Since zoom lenses may differ [6], only 
the extreme ends of the zoom range were used to prevent 
unsynchronized zooming. For the indoor scenes, the 
brightness of the object(s) was changed by using a dimmable 
1000W fluorescent video light source (FloLight FL-
220AW). For the outdoor scenes, since the emitted light 
from the light source was insufficient for changing the 
brightness of the object(s) (due to the presence of sunlight), 
we used a collapsible circular reflector disc with multiple 
impacts to reflect different levels of sunlight on the object(s). 
43
CONTENT 2011 : The Third International Conference on Creative Content Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-157-1

Fig. 1 shows our camera setup, the light source and the 
reflector used in our experiments.  In general, capturing 
outdoor scenes was much more challenging compared to 
indoor scenes, due to the presence of sunlight and the change 
of weather conditions which kept altering the background 
brightness.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Stereo camera setup used in the experiments. 
In order to calculate the contrast between the object(s) 
and the background first we measured the luminance of the 
object(s) and background using a multifunction light meter 
(Sekonic L-758Cine). Then, we employed Weber contrast 
definition [7] as: 

b
b
o
L
L
Contrast   L




where Lo is the luminance of an object and Lb is the average 
luminance of the background. We measure luminance since 
it indicates how much luminous power is perceived by the 
human eye when viewing the surface from a particular angle.  
III. 
SUBJECTIVE EVALUATION 
For this experiment, six stereoscopic test sequences (two 
outdoor and four indoor) and one demo video were captured 
using the stereo camera setup described in Section II. Fig. 2 
shows a snapshot of our test sequences. For each scene the 
camera exposure is adjusted such that the background area is 
neither overexposed nor underexposed. Then, the brightness 
of the object(s) is changed from an underexposed level to an 
overexposed level within multiple steps, with the brightness-
change remaining visually differentiable (see Fig. 3). In both 
cases, outdoor and indoor, each sequence is approximately 
10 seconds long. For each scene recording, we ensure that 
while the object’s brightness changes, the content of the 
scene and the background luminance remain unchanged.  
To quantify the perceived quality of the 3D experience at 
different levels of contrast, we performed subjective quality 
assessment tests. The viewing conditions of our subjective 
test were set according to the ITU-R Recommendation 
BT.500-11 [8]. Eighteen observers participated in our 
subjective tests: seven females and eleven males, ranging 
from 23 to 60 years old. All subjects had none to marginal 
3D image and video viewing experience. A 65” Full HD 3D 
display (©Panasonic, Plasma, TC-P65VT25) was used in our 
experiment. Based on our own subjective tests of many 
3DTV sets, the above display offers the best crosstalk 
reduction performance and that is the reason it was chosen 
for our tests. 
At the beginning of the experiment, a demo was played 
starting from a very dark object-exposure to a very bright 
one to help viewers become familiar with the test process 
and show them the quality-change range expected. After the 
demo, the viewers were shown each stereoscopic test 
sequence in random order of object-exposure levels. 
Between stereo videos of different object-exposures, there 
were three-second gray intervals that allowed the viewers to 
grade the perceptual quality of 3D content from 1 to 10 
(continuous scale) and relax their eyes before watching the 
next video. The perceptual quality reflects whether the 
displayed scene looks pleasant in general. In particular, 
subjects were asked to rate a combination of “naturalness”, 
“depth impression” and “comfort” as suggested by Hyunh-
Thu et al. [9].  
IV. 
RESULTS AND ANALYISIS 
After collecting the experimental results, we checked for 
the outliers based on the TU-R Recommendation BT.500-11 
[8] and then the mean opinion scores (MOS) from viewers 
were calculated. Fig. 4 shows the average perceptual 3D 
quality (MOS) versus brightness of the object(s) for all six 
stereo sequences. As it can be observed, the acceptable 
brightness level for objects in outdoor scenes is much higher 
than those in indoor scenes, due to the presence of sunlight.  
Here, the numerical value of object(s) brightness could not 
be used as a guideline for capturing high quality 3D content, 
i.e., we can not conclude if the brightness level of the 
object(s) falls in a certain range (where MOS is greater than 
6) then the subjective quality of 3D picture will be 
acceptable. The reason is that what viewers see and evaluate 
(perceived 3D visual quality) is not really measured in the 
real world but rather what has been captured by the cameras 
and displayed on the 3DTV. In other words, the final 
brightness level of the objects has been influenced by the 
exposure settings of the cameras as well as the setting 
parameters (and limitations) of the 3D display system itself.  
A way of quantifying how the final brightness level affects 
3D perception would take into consideration the luminance 
44
CONTENT 2011 : The Third International Conference on Creative Content Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-157-1

in a scene as well as the camera and display models. This 
study is part of our future work.  
In order to investigate the effect of the contrast on 3D 
perception, the contrast between the object(s) and the 
background is calculated based on equation (1) as the 
difference between the average luminance of the background 
and that of the object of interest. Fig. 5 shows the average 
subjective scores for quality of 3D content versus contrast 
for all six sequences.  
A general observation that applies to both outdoor and 
indoor scenes is that the stereo video sequences with Weber 
contrast levels of -0.35 to 0.55 between the object and 
background are more appealing to the viewers (these 
correspond to rating scores above 6, which may be regarded 
as acceptable quality). Note that although the visually 
acceptable range of object’s brightness (MOS over 6) is 
higher for the outdoor scenes compared to that of the indoor 
scenes, as shown in Fig. 4, the range of contrast that ensures 
high 3D quality is similar for both cases. It is also observed 
that low scores are associated with high contrast scenes, 
which in Fig. 5 appear at both ends of the horizontal axis, as 
contrast here is the difference between the objects’ 
brightness and that of the background. It is well known that 
crosstalk artifacts in 3D displays become severe when the 
contrast is high.   
 
Clapping
Interview
SlowMotion
Reading
Painting
McMillan
Clapping
Interview
SlowMotion
Reading
Painting
McMillan
 
Figure 2. Snap shot of captured indoor and outdoor test sequences. 
 
45
CONTENT 2011 : The Third International Conference on Creative Content Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-157-1

 
 
Figure 3. Same scene with different brightness levels of the object. 
 
10
-1
10
0
10
1
10
2
10
3
10
4
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Luminance (cd/m2)
Mean opinion scores
 
 
Reading
Interview
Clapping
SlowMotion
McMillan
Painting
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Contrast
Mean opinion scores
 
 
Reading
Interview
Clapping
SlowMotion
McMillan
Painting
 
Figure 4. Snap shot of captured indoor and outdoor test sequences.                     
 
 
 
Figure 5. Perceptual 3D quality score versus the contrast between 
object   and background. 
46
CONTENT 2011 : The Third International Conference on Creative Content Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-157-1

      In summary, this study indicates that content producers 
may improve the overall 3D quality of experience by 
adjusting the brightness of the objects to ensure that the 
Weber contrast between the background and the objects of 
interest falls between -0.35 to o.55.  
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The era of user-centric multimedia has already begun, 
and quality plays a central role in it. Attention to the quality 
of 3D content is even more important since low-quality 3D 
videos can produce eyestrain, headache, and generally 
unpleasant viewing experience for the viewers. Contrast is 
one of the important factors that affect the visual comfort and 
quality of 3D videos. In this study we addressed the problem 
of understanding the effect of contrast on the 3D quality by 
performing 
extensive 
subjective 
quality 
assessment 
experiments to quantify the perceived quality of the 3D 
experience at different levels of contrast. 
According to our results, a general observation that 
applies to outdoor and indoor scenes is that the stereo video 
sequences with Weber contrast levels of -0.35 to 0.55 
between the object(s) and the background are more 
appealing to the viewers. In summary, content producers 
may improve the overall 3D quality of experience by 
adjusting the brightness of the objects of interest in a scene 
to ensure that the Weber contrast the objects and background 
falls within the suggested range levels. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors thank the eighteen anonymous subjects that 
participated in our test. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. M. J. Meesters, W. A. IJsselsteijn, and P. J. H. Seuntiënsm, 
“A survey of perceptual evaluations and requirements of 
three-dimensional TV,” IEEE Trans. Circuits & System for 
video technology, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 381-391, 2004. 
[2] L. Goldmann, F. D. Simone, and T. Ebrahimi, "Impact of 
acquisition distortion on the quality of stereoscopic images," 
in International Workshop on Video Processing and Quality 
Metrics for Consumer Electronics, Scottsdale, Arizona, USA, 
January 13-15, 2010. 
[3] D. Xu, L. Coria, and P. Nasiopoulos "Guidelines for capturing 
high quality stereoscopic content based on a systematic 
subjective evaluation," in IEEE International Conference on 
Electronics, Circuits, and Systems, ICECS 2010, pp. 166-169, 
Athens, Greece, 2010. 
[4] B. Mendiburu, “3D Movie Making – Stereoscopic Digital 
Cinema from Script to Screen.” Elsevier, 2008. 
[5] M. T. Pourazad, Z. Mai, P. Nasiopoulos, K. Plataniotis, and 
R.K. Ward, “Effect of brightness on the quality of visual 3D 
perception,” ICIP 2011, in press. 
[6] Adobe. (2010, July) 3D stereoscopic editing with premiere 
pro 
CS5 
Win/OSX. 
[Online]. 
http://tv.adobe.com/watch/davtechtable/3d-stereoscopic-
editing-with-premierepro-cs5-winosx/. Access date: July 
2011. 
[7] R. Shapley, and C. Enroth-Cugell, “Visual adaptation and 
retinal gain controls,” Progress in Retinal Research, Vol. 3, 
pp. 263-346, 1984. 
[8] ITU-R, "Methodology for the subjective assessment of the 
quality of television pictures," ITU-R, Tech. Rep. BT.500-11, 
2002. 
[9] Q. Hyunh-Thu, P. L. Callet, and M. Barkowsky, "Video 
quality assessment: from 2D to 3D challenges and future 
trends," Proc. of 2010 IEEE 17th International Conference on 
Image Processing, (ICIP), pp. 4025-4028, 2010. 
 
 
47
CONTENT 2011 : The Third International Conference on Creative Content Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-157-1

