Constraints in Course Design Using Web 2.0 Tools: A Croatian Case 
 
Nikola Vlahovic, Zeljka Pozgaj 
Faculty of Economics and Business  
University of Zagreb 
Trg J. F. Kennedyja 6, Zagreb, Croatia 
{nvlahovic, zpozgaj}@efzg.hr  
 
 
Abstract— Even though Internet and Web have always 
supported some form of social interaction, Web 2.0 shifts this 
paradigm to a new level. As social networking that rises from 
Web 2.0 applications, gains acceptance within the Internet 
community and the general public, a concept of enabling e-
learning using Web 2.0 tools and services becomes more and 
more recognized. Goal of this paper is to evaluate empirically 
some of the constraints that are crucial for course design using 
social networking tools. A survey was carried out among 
current students at the Faculty of Economics and Business in 
Zagreb in order to evaluate issues connected with student 
constraints on course design. A cluster analysis was used in 
order to identify different student groups and their 
expectations from Web 2.0 tools that would be used to support 
e-learning. The results show that there are four typical groups 
of student attitudes towards implementation of Web 2.0 in e-
learning. A successful course design should take into account 
expectations and demands for each of these groups. According 
to these results comparison of identified needs and currently 
available practices was conducted showing the advantages 
Web 2.0 contributes to e-learning while also uncovering weak 
points that can be further improved. 
Keywords- e-learning, Web 2.0, social networking, Course 
design, cluster analysis, teaching 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Development of the Internet has influenced the way 
people communicate, work and learn, enabling new means 
and possibilities in distance learning. Distance learning 
implemented through the use of Internet services has evolved 
into e-learning paradigm. The possibilities of synchronous 
communication was introduced into learning processes, 
while the quality of asynchronous communication was 
improved using Internet services such as email, chat, forums 
and 
newsgroups. 
Also 
videoconferencing 
and 
teleconferencing made distance learning more accessible and 
cheaper for both the institutions but also for students. These 
services also allowed for new communication possibilities 
and new types of information exchange. Even though e-
learning is seen as a tremendous enhancement of distance 
learning, there is still only passive approach to acquiring and 
using educational materials [1]. 
Web 2.0 paradigm has introduced further change in the 
way e-learning can be implemented. Web 2.0 is a platform 
that enables interaction, collaboration and information 
exchange between various users resulting in participative 
creation of rich new content [2].  In terms of e-learning 
interaction between teachers and students is improved by 
emphasizing the role of students. Also interaction of students 
with each other is introduced into the learning process as a 
new significant factor that improves the results of learning. 
The goal of this paper is to examine the possibilities of 
employing Web 2.0 services and social networking services 
as an additional platform for design and creation of e-
learning course content. Based on the current attitudes of 
students a number of constraints over course design can be 
identified in order to customize this learning platform to 
suite needs of students. In order to identify these 
requirements a survey was carried out among the students at 
the Faculty of Economics and Business. The results were 
used to estimate further steps in developing current e-
learning practices and tools used, and also to develop an 
approach to the introduction of Web 2.0 as a platform for e-
learning 2.0. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 
2, e-learning and Web 2.0 are defined and explained. In 
Section 3, issues in course design are presented as seen by 
the students, teacher and institutions. In Section 4, research 
methodology is described along with the questionnaire and 
basic statistics of the targeted student sample. Also, cluster 
analysis which was used for the analysis of student groups is 
described. Results are discussed in the following Section 5, 
along with a few guidelines for the introduction of the Web 
2.0 platform. Finally, Section 6 contains conclusions and 
final remarks. 
II. 
E-LEANING AND WEB 2.0 
A. Development of e-learning 
The term e-learning pertains on a very complex and 
dynamic process regarding and connecting learning 
processes and developments in digitalisation and ICT. There 
is a multitude of definitions of e-learning in literature. Most 
of these definitions refer to certain aspects of e-learning such 
as simple adoption of electronic media [17, 18], or 
possibility of achieving distance learning [20, 21] and so on. 
Each definition describes subtle differences that are 
associated with the term itself, but different authors 
emphasise different aspects of it depending on the context. A 
more general definition of the term can be found in [19] 
where Tavangarin et al. define e-learning as “all forms of 
electronically supported learning and teaching, which are 
procedural in character and aim to effect the construction of 
knowledge with reference to individual experience, practice 
39
CONTENT 2010 : The Second International Conference on Creative Content Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-110-6

and 
knowledge 
of 
the 
learner. 
Information 
and 
communication systems, whether networked or not, serve as 
specific media […] to implement the learning process”. In 
other words e-learning is an umbrella concept, which 
comprises almost anything related to learning in combination 
with information and communication technology [4]. This 
definition includes a type of education where students work 
on their own at home and communicate with teachers and 
other 
students 
via 
e-mail, 
electronic 
forum, 
videoconferencing, chat rooms, bulletin boards … and other 
computer-based communication [3]. As Dichtanz [4] points 
out the time and space component of e-learning, the same 
definition recognizes e-learning as a collection of teaching 
and information packages in continuing education which is 
available at any time and any place and is delivered to 
learners electronically.  
E-learning development is strongly associated with the 
organisation of the distance learning process. The process of 
this evolution from distance learning to e-learning in its 
present form was carried out in three different stages: (1) 
stage before digital era; (2) digital era of the Internet and 
World Wide Web; (3) Web 2.0 stage and E-learning 2.0. 
At the very beginning of distance learning organisation, 
learning process was goal oriented, available to a particular 
audience, learning materials were in the form of print-outs, 
and the communication between students and teachers was 
based on traditional types of communication. This type of 
learning process was known as “correspondence study” or 
“correspondence education”. In his way formal education 
was made available to working people who were able to 
complete courses with minimum time spent at the education 
institution. Next advancement in distance learning process 
organisation was the application of analogue technologies in 
the learning process (radio teaching, radio-television 
teaching).  Even though this technology introduced 
additional benefits for overall learning process, learning still 
remained passive in its nature, limited to a particular 
audience and with limited communication possibilities. It 
allowed for introduction of learning in areas where learning 
process was undeliverable such as remote geographical 
locations (i.e., smaller islands of mainland, or scarcely 
populated mainland areas).   More radical advancement of 
the learning process was introduced with the appearance of 
the Internet and World Wide Web.  Information technology 
is still rapidly developing; teaching and learning materials 
are digitized, stored in databases. Due to the usage of modern 
ICT, collaboration of participants involved in learning 
process is highly facilitated.  The progression of the Internet 
has set the ground for the rapid development of e-learning 
based on the Web [6]. E-learning was established as a new 
form of learning offering new possibilities. Some of these 
possibilities include:  availability of a variety of learning 
materials in variety of presentation types, learning at one’s 
own convenience – in terms of time and place of learning, 
unlimited possibility of repetitive learning (re-learning). 
Benefits from e-learning improve both distance learning 
implementations but, unlike earlier enhancements, they also 
significantly 
improve 
traditional 
learning 
processes. 
Implementation of e-learning is based on a learning 
management system (LMS) that is used to organize and 
deliver online courses [14]. Most important functions of an 
LMS include management of the course information, tacking 
of student progress and cataloguing of reusable learning 
objects.  Learning process is enriched with simplified, user-
friendly communication possibilities, sharing of information 
and opinions among students and teachers through e-mail, 
chat, instant messaging, file sharing, etc., but still it is a type 
of passive learning. Internet was a rich source of 
information, but it didn’t allow its users to participate in the 
creation process, it didn’t allow interactivity [7]. The most 
recent enhancement of the e-learning process is achieved 
through Web 2.0. Web 2.0 refers to a change in the way the 
Internet is used, representing its innovative collaborative 
nature. Flexibility, pervasive access, user-friendliness, 
interactivity, social interaction and collaboration and 
information sharing are just some of the advantages Web 2.0 
brings to E-learning. All of these increase student motivation 
and foster student reflection [8] giving the students better 
control over their learning results. 
B. Web 2.0 paradigme and its influence on social 
networking 
Web 2.0 has made a shift in the way Internets users 
perceive and use Web content. Most of the developments of 
Internet and Web services have been technical in nature until 
Web 2.0. Most of the Web 1.0 content was published and 
edited by information owners and professionals. Even 
content that originated from the common users was first 
screened and approved or edited by web site editors or at 
least Internet service providers before it was made available 
online. Web 2.0 introduced a sociological change of the 
paradigm by excluding the middleman between Internet 
users. In this new paradigm users share their information 
directly. Internet service providers only provide the 
appropriate platform but do not interfere with the content 
that is published by the users for other users on a peer basis. 
This change enabled Internet users to become active users of 
the Web and realize potentials that were otherwise hardly 
achievable or ineffective, like collective intelligence, 
massive collaborative efforts, non-mainstream news content 
and niches, folksonomies, etc. 
Possible disadvantage or threats Web 2.0 may lead up to 
is the creation of the digital narcissism and amateurism 
which can undermine expertise and safety of available 
information. Some of the critics already warn that the Web is 
filled with mistakes, half-truths and misunderstandings that 
make navigating and using Web difficult and exhaustive. 
Nevertheless, applying Web 2.0 into the learning process 
can result in more positive change of the learning results than 
generating negative outcomes. For example, using online 
social networking service can be a good supplement to 
existing e-learning platform as it enables additional 
possibilities Web 2.0 generally provides. This is because all 
of the efforts of the students and teachers are readily publicly 
available to the whole learning group, which motivates 
students to be original. Being aware that all of the work they 
dedicate to mastering a course can be seen and appreciated 
by whole group, which can additionally stimulate students to 
40
CONTENT 2010 : The Second International Conference on Creative Content Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-110-6

make their best effort. Along with the increase of student 
interaction this is one of the most important advantage e-
learning 2.0 can provide. 
III. 
COURSE DESIGN INCORPORATING WEB 2.0 TOOLS 
Some of the most significant potentials of using Web 2.0 
tools in learning are: (1) ability to provide anytime, 
anywhere learning, (2) give access to vast amounts of 
content, (3) increase students’ opportunities to interact with 
other students, teachers and experts, (4) extend learning to 
the traditionally excluded, to the disabled and to the global 
community [9]. The actualization of these potentials, though, 
can be questionable since it largely depends on the properties 
of the course design. There is a number of issues during the 
course design using Web 2.0 services that need to be taken 
into consideration. We can divide these issues into three 
groups: issues for students, issues for teachers, and issues for 
Institutions. 
Some of the most important issues for the students 
include (1) the inadequate online access, (2) the need to 
provide training for those not skilled in the use of a range of 
software used (3) tendency to become uncritical about the 
material they get from using Web 2.0 tools and (4) the 
blurring of the distinction between full-time and part-time 
study. In the first two cases course design can be adjusted so 
that the final implementation is not overdependent upon the 
ICT [10]. The problem of underdeveloped criticism and 
assessment of obtained materials is connected with the 
students’ inability to reflect on their learning. This is a skill 
students should acquire during their earlier education as a 
permanent process that is developed continually throughout 
their study period. In order to support these processes course 
design should include additional tools to allow for formal 
reflection on lessons learned. In this way e-learning 2.0 can 
promote student self-awareness and self-criticism. Finally, in 
order to cancel the effect of blurring the distinction of full-
time and part-time study course design should be able to 
incorporate flexible study patterns so that part-time study can 
be achieved as a lifelong learning opportunity [16]. 
Most important issues for the teachers are (1) the increase 
of the workload, (2) requirement of acquiring new technical 
skills, (3) prejudice towards e-learning 2.0 and (4) unclear 
intellectual property rights. In the first two issues teachers 
need to dedicate more of their time in order to establish a 
course and invest even some additional time into acquiring 
new skills to be able to design a course. In order to minimize 
additional 
workload 
the 
course 
design 
should 
be 
implemented so that is requires minimum of maintenance 
during the running of a course. In this way teachers can 
manage their time better and successfully balance between 
gaining new skills and maintaining content of the course. 
The last two issues can be resolved by informing the staff 
about the advantages of e-learning that can promote teachers’ 
roles in the learning process and not demote them as they 
might fear. Intellectual property rights should be backed up 
by the educational institution and the LMS should allow for 
some mechanism of authentication of the users before they 
can download the learning materials [13]. 
The educational institutions should concentrate on 
resolving the following issues in order to facilitate the 
learning environment for both students and teachers: (1) 
establishing a customizable LMS of the institution [15], (2) 
support and encourage staff development and (3) define 
policies and practices in assessment processes [12]. 
IV. 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY AND RESULTS 
For the purpose of this research a survey was carried out 
among the students of the first year of undergraduate study in 
Business Economics at the University of Zagreb. 
The goal of the survey was twofold. First goal was to 
investigate student attitude towards social networking 
services and their involvement and habits in using some of 
these services. Within this part of the survey students were 
asked weather they use some of the social networking 
services, and if they do why did they join and what do they 
use these services for. Additionally students were asked if 
they can see social networks as relevant tool for e-learning. 
Second part of the survey contained questions about their 
concerns about using social networks. They were asked to 
rank dangers from using social networks and more generally 
the Internet and in the same context to asses on average how 
much time they spend using Internet. Using results from the 
first part of the survey it is possible to deduce the advantages 
from using social networks in e-learning courses, while from 
results of the second part of the survey it is possible to assess 
threats and challenges in implementation of social networks 
as e-learning tool. 
 Collected data sample contains 184 answers to survey 
questions. Majority of students were female, while only 26% 
were male students, which reflects the structure of the whole 
population of students at the Faculty of Business and 
Economics (Fig. 1). 
74%
26%
female
male
 
Figure 1.  Surveyed students by sex. 
When it comes to using particular Web 2.0 services 
Facebook is the most popular since 98% of students have an 
open profile. Other Web 2.0 services are barely represented 
since only 11% of students have an open profile with the 
second most popular service MySpace (Fig. 2). 
41
CONTENT 2010 : The Second International Conference on Creative Content Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-110-6

182
21
6
10
1
13
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
Facebook
MySpace
Twitter
Hi5
LinkedIn
Ostalo
Web 2.0 service
number of users
 
Figure 2.  Number of students with open profiles of most common Web 
2.0 services. 
Finally, 61% of students believe that the usage of Web 
2.0 services would be useful to them as an e-learning tool 
(Fig. 3). 
yes
61%
no
39%
 
Figure 3.  Number of students that believe Web 2.0 services can be used in 
e-learning successfully. 
According to these data an in-depth analysis was carried 
out using undirected data mining methodology. The goal of 
the analysis was to identify typical behaviours of students in 
terms of their usage of Web 2.0 services and attitudes 
towards e-learning and the possible combination of the two.  
Cluster analysis was applied because it can provide basis for 
generating stereotypical properties that final implementation 
of course should contain in order to appeal and become 
useful to majority of the student population. 
Cluster analysis, also called segmentation analysis or 
taxonomy analysis, is used to identify homogeneous 
subgroups of cases in data set. These groups, also known as 
clusters, are formed so that they both minimize within-group 
variation and maximize between-group variation. For each 
cluster a typical value across predictor variables is identified 
called centroid. Centroid is the value that has the minimal 
average distance for all members of each cluster, but that has 
maximum distance to centorids of other clusters [11]. By 
comparing centroids and statistics of different clusters 
differences can be determined between clusters and 
stereotypes can be created. For each stereotype a number of 
measures can be taken into account in order to customize 
final course design to targeted students. 
The analysis showed that four distinctive student groups 
can be described. All of the student groups have some 
attitudes in common. ID theft is the biggest concern for all of 
the students, while disinformation on the Web or becoming 
addicted to Web is not perceived as a threat. 
In Table 1, we can see typical values for some of the 
most important questions from the survey that make 
distinctive differences between groups. 
First cluster consists of students that spend more time 
online where they participate in forum discussions (4-e) 
communicating with their “real world” friends (3-3), but also 
meeting new people (4-b). Due to intensive online 
communication these students see the main threat for online 
security in ID theft and possibility of false introductions 
from other Internet users. This group of students has good 
experience with the online world and they are willing to use 
Web. 2.0 services in education promptly. This is why this 
cluster can be called the cluster of “skilled active online 
users” which generally represent early adopters of 
technology. 
 
Second cluster contains students that also spend more 
time online, but they do not actively participate in content 
creation in terms of posting on forums and discussion 
groups. They usually open profiles with online services 
under influence of their friends who have profiles already 
opened. They are more concerned with becoming addicted to 
Web then the other groups, but they do see a possibility of 
using Web 2.0 in the learning process but they need a bit 
more encouragement since they have a more passive 
approach. This is why we can call this group a cluster of 
TABLE I.  
SUMMARY OF DETECTED CLUSTERS 
 
Sex 
3-1* 
3-3* 
4-b* 
4-e* 
6*  
8-1*  
8-2*  
8-3*  
8-4* 
8-5*  
9 hour per week 
online 
n 
% 
1 
male 
n 
y 
y 
y 
y 
1 
4 
2 
3 
5 
7hpw to 14hpw 
42 
23 
2 
female 
y 
n 
n 
n 
y 
1 
5 
4 
2 
3 
7hpw to 14hpw 
62 
33 
3 
female 
y 
n 
n 
n 
y 
1 
5 
3 
4 
4 
less than 7hwp 
36 
20 
4 
female 
n 
n 
n 
n 
n 
2 
4 
3 
1 
5 
less than 7hpw 
44 
24 
 
3-1 – Reason for opening a social network profile: friends’ suggestion 
8-1 ID theft as a threat on soc. networks (1-high concern; 5-least concern) 
3-3 – Reason for opening a social network profile: reconnect with old friends 
8-2 false information on soc. networks (1-high concern; 5-least concern)  
4-b – Using social network for meeting new people 
8-3 false representation of other users (1-high concern; 5-least concern) 
4-e – Using social network for discussions of leisure and private topics 
8-4 lack of privacy on soc. networks (1-high concern; 5-least concern) 
6 – Do you think Web 2.0 can be used in learning process? 
8-5 addiction to soc. network and Internet (1-high concern; 5-least concern) 
42
CONTENT 2010 : The Second International Conference on Creative Content Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-110-6

“cautious passive online users” which can also be treated as 
trend followers in terms of technology adoption.  
Third cluster can be viewed as a subgroup of the second 
cluster since students from this group also tend to use online 
services on recommendation of their friends, but are rather 
cautious when using interactive tools these services provide. 
These users on the other hand spend less time online and 
have much less interest of online communication and 
Internet. This is why they are the group least concerned with 
online security issues. This cluster can be also referred to as 
the cluster of “online beginners” or late adopters. 
Finally, the fourth cluster contains students that are 
highly concerned with privacy on the Internet (8-4 in Table 
1), and this is why they are highly sceptical and unwilling 
about using Web 2.0 services as e-learning tool (6 in Table 
1). This is why this cluster can be referred to as the cluster of 
“sceptical non-users” or refusers. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
As we have shown earlier there are four distinctive 
groups of students that have different habits and attitudes 
towards the Internet, but also the possibilities in employing 
Internet services in the learning process. These results 
correspond with the expectations based on the theory of 
diffusion of innovation. What is crucial though is that during 
course design considerations of specific needs that can 
encourage each of these groups has to be taken into the 
account. The choice of Web 2.0 service is important in order 
to motivate students for the innovative approach to the 
learning process. Service that is already most popular should 
be chosen, because there is a number of users that will 
actively engage in this new form of learning (first cluster), 
and there is a number of students that can be easily 
motivated to become users of this facility (second cluster). 
While students that are skilled active online users may have 
high expectations from advanced functionalities of the e-
learning service, cautious passive online users may need 
more reassurance in the security properties of the service, 
even if the functionality of the web 2.0 service is more 
modest. These users will also benefit from well developed 
online help for Web 2.0 services, which is especially 
important for students “online beginners”. Beginners will be 
more willing to participate if they can see additional benefits 
in comparison to traditional learning that can justify time 
invested in training and learning how to use a new tool. The 
most challenging student group is the group of non-users that 
lack not only the skill for using the Internet but also 
motivation. It seems that the most motivating property of the 
Web 2.0 services seems to be the possibility of collaborative 
learning. In this way each student within the learning group 
makes higher impact on other classmates than in traditional 
learning by publishing and making available all of the works, 
research and tasks they make for the course. Every student 
can see other students’ work, which can be motivating since 
each opinion over a particular subject is expressed and made 
available. Also, the fact that all of the work is available 
online motivates students to be original and in great measure 
prevents cheating in terms of copying other students work. 
The possibilities of influencing their classmates should be 
seen as the most important factor for the students that are 
unwilling to participate in online learning activities. 
Being able to satisfy all of these needs can pose a great 
challenge and additional effort for the teachers in the starting 
phase of the course design. This can greatly discourage 
teachers in employing Web 2.0 services in the learning 
process, even though after implementation the role of the 
teacher is drastically changed and less emphasised than in 
traditional learning process. 
In order to alleviate this workload for teachers the 
institution should establish policies and practices that can 
motivate 
teachers 
effectively. 
These 
may 
include 
introduction of LMS or virtual learning environments, staff 
development possibilities and assessment frameworks. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
E-learning 2.0 is a new paradigm of distance learning 
facilitated through the use of Web 2.0 Internet services. The 
main characteristic of this approach is the shift of the roles of 
teacher and students within the learning process. Teachers’ 
influence is diminishing while the interaction between 
students gains more importance on the realization of the 
learning process though the collaborative learning. 
In this paper, we examined what are the requirements of 
students that can successfully achieve these goals. In order to 
identify student attitudes and their preferences and habits in 
using Internet services a survey was conducted among 
students at the University of Zagreb. A cluster analysis was 
employed on the gathered data. Four distinctive groups of 
typical student attitudes were identified. Groups that have 
most positive attitude to using Web 2.0 services in learning 
process are the “skilled active online users” and “cautious 
passive online users”. Survey results strongly indicated that 
adequate course design must take into consideration the 
theory of diffusion of innovation, and cover particular needs 
of all distinctive groups of users. Groups of students which 
are less inclined to using Web 2.0 services as a platform for 
e-learning are “online beginners” and “sceptical non-users” 
that require special attention during the course design. 
Currently available practices for supporting e-learning at 
the Faculty of Economics have provided a good starting 
platform for development of e-learning courses but 
additional effort is required to customize final courses for the 
identified students groups according to the survey results. 
Crucial role in achieving the goal of implementing e-learning 
2.0 is the support of the institution towards the teaching staff 
but also in the implementation and maintenance of the 
adopted learning management system. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Z. Pozgaj and N. Vlahovic, The Impact of Web 2.0 on Informal 
Education, Proceeding of the 33rd international convention on 
information 
and communication 
technology, 
electronics and 
microelectronics - MIPRO, May 24. -28, 2010, Opatija, Croatia 
[2] V. Bosilj Vukšić and M. Pejić Bach (eds.), Business Informatics, 
Element, Zagreb, 2009, p. 105 (in Croatian) 
[3] Ţ. Poţgaj, Distance learning – reality or vision, Proceedings of 15th 
International Convention MIPRO 2002, Opatija, 2002, pp.19-24. 
43
CONTENT 2010 : The Second International Conference on Creative Content Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-110-6

[4] T. Rekkedal and S. Quist-Eriksen, Internet Based E-learning, 
Pedagogy and Support Systems, http://learning.ericsson.net/socrates/ 
doc/norway .doc  [01/21/2006]. 
[5] Q. B. Chung, Sage on the Stage in the Digital Age: The Role of 
Online Lecture in Distance learning, The Electronic Journal of e-
Learning, Volume 3, Issue 1, p. 1-4, http://www.ejel.org [12/18/2006] 
[6] Ţ. Poţgaj and B. Kneţević, E-learning: Survey on Students' Opinions, 
Proccedings of 29 th International Conference on Information 
Technology Interfaces ITI2007, Cavtat/Dubrovnik, 2007, pp. 381 – 
386. 
[7] P. Isias, P. Miranda, and S. Pifano, Dessigning E-leaarning 2.0 
courses: recommendations and giudelines, Research, Reflections and 
Innovations in Integrating ICT in Education, pp. 1081-1085. 
[8] H. Ajjan and R. Hartshorne, Investigating faculty decision to adopt 
Web 2.0 technologies: Theory and empirical tests. Internet and 
Higher Education 11, 2008, pp. 71-80. 
[9] R. Mason and F. Rennie, E-Learning and Social Networking 
Handbook: Resources for Higher Education, Routledge, 2008. 
[10] M. Kirkwood and L. Price, Learners and learning in the twenty-first 
century: What do we know about students' attitudes towards 
experiences of information and communication technologies that will 
help us design courses?, Studies in Higher Education, Vol 30, No, 3, 
2005, pp. 257-274. 
[11] N. Vlahović, Lj. Milanović, and R. Škrinjar, Turning Points in 
Business Process Orientation Maturity Model: An East European 
Survey; In: Mastorakis, N., editor. WSEAS Transactions on Business 
and Economics; Vol 7, No. 1, WSEAS Press, Athens, Greece. 2010, 
pp. 22 – 32. 
[12] ] J. Ireland, H. M. Correia, and T. M. Griffin, Developing quality in 
e-learning: a framework in three parts, Qualitiy Assurence in 
Education, Vol. 17, No. 3, Emerald Publishing, 2009, pp. 250-263. 
[13] C. S. Chai, H. L. Woo, and Q. Wang, Designing Web 2.0 based 
constructivist-oriented e-learning uints, Campus-Wide Information 
Systems, Vol. 27, No. 2, Emerald, 2010, pp. 68-78. 
[14] S. Downes, E-Learning 2.0, ACM eLearn Magazine, 2005, 
http://www. elearnmag.org/subpage.cfm?section=articles&article=29-
1 [04/15/2010] 
[15] D. Jennings, Virtually effective: The measure of a learning 
environment; In: G. O’Neill, S. Moore, B. McMullin, editors. 
Emerging issues in the practice of University Learning and Teaching; 
All Ireland Society for Higher Education (AISHE), Dublin, 2005, pp. 
159-167. 
[16] R. Klamma, M. A. Chatti, E. Duval, H. Hummel, E. H. Hvannberg, 
M. Kravcik, E. Law, A. Naeve, and P. Scott, Social Software for Life-
long Learning. Educational Technology & Society, 10 (3), 2007, 
pp.72-83. 
[17] E-Learning Consultant Glossary. Address: http://www.e-learningsite. 
com/elearning/glossary/glossary.htm , 2003. [04/15/2010] 
[18] NRW Medien GmbH (ed.), The Market for e-learning providers in 
Nordrhein-Westfalen(in german), Der Markt der E-Learning-
Produzenten in Nordrhein-Westfalen. Düsseldorf (Germany), 2003. 
[19] D. Tavangarian, M. E. Leypold, K. Nölting, M. Röser, and D. Voigt, 
Is e-Learning the Solution for Individual Learning?, Electronic 
Journal of e-Learning, Vo. 2, Issue 2, Academic Conferences 
Limited, 2004, pp. 273-280 
[20] A. Rossett and K. Sheldon, Beyond The Podium: Delivering Training 
and Performance to a Digital World. San Francisco: Jossey-
Bass/Pfeiffer, 2001, p. 274. 
[21] M. Rosenberg, e-Learning: Strategies for Delivering Knowledge in 
the Digital Age. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2001,  p. 28.  
 
 
44
CONTENT 2010 : The Second International Conference on Creative Content Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2010               ISBN: 978-1-61208-110-6

