Designing Template-based Page Generator: A Case of Mobile Pad  
 
Tse-Ming Tsai1,2, Shih-Chun Chou1, Bo-Fu Liu1, Yuting Lin1, Seng-Cho T. Chou2 
1The Innovative DigiTech-Enabled Applications & Services Institute, Institute of Information Industry 
Taipei, Taiwan 
2Department of Information Management, National Taiwan University 
Taipei, Taiwan 
{eric; benchou; bofuliu; ytlin}@iii.org.tw; chou@ntu.edu.tw 
 
Abstract—The importance of web application and advanced 
technology has attracted increasing attention as among the 
concerns of individuals such as designers, traditional media 
publishers, ad agencies, and companies of all sizes in order to 
create, distribute, monetize, and optimize engaging content and 
publications for mobile pad. Pages that are often used for 
collecting and disseminating information are natural bases in 
publications. The current study presents a methodology that 
uses factoring and synthesis to process aesthetic knowledge 
involved in pages for designing template-based page generator. 
Grounded on this research, content producers/distributors 
possess flexible creation and modification of computer-
generated pages for streamlining creative content formation 
processes.  
Keywords-content management; mobile applicatopn; page 
component; publication; template 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Awareness and ownership of mobile pad (also well 
known as tablet PC) are growing, spurred by marketing 
campaigns from Apple, Amazon, Barnes & Noble or 
Research In Motion recently as well as press coverage and 
word-of-mouth buzz. According to Forrester's newest report 
in March 2012, US consumer tablet sales in 2016 expect to 
reach 60.3 million unit sales. And 112.5 million US adults 
will own a tablet in 2016, which will equal 34.3% of US 
adults [1].  
In order to seize these widespread business opportunities, 
individuals such as designers, traditional media publishers, 
ad agencies, and companies of all sizes want to create, 
distribute, monetize, and optimize engaging content and 
publications 
for 
tablet 
devices 
[2]. 
However, 
the 
specification of mobile pad is totally different from personal 
computer or even paper. How to assist traditional designers 
utilize the characteristic of mobile pad to concept creative 
layout? How to help digital publishers create innovative 
digital content for mobile pad? How to bridge the 
communication 
gap 
of 
digital 
publishing 
between 
programmer and editor in a fastest and economic way? 
Therefore, in this research, our objective is to present a 
methodology for designing a template-based page generator 
to overcome innovative editing problems. Grounded on our 
research, a product-innovation and creative content platform 
can be prototyped by the corresponding modules and 
processes. 
In this research, page refers to a leaf or a sheet in 
publications (e.g. books, magazines, newspapers, journals, 
catalogs, etc.), which are typically published for mobile pad 
devices. Pages that are often used for collecting and 
disseminating information are natural bases in publications 
[3]. 
These 
publications 
provide 
immersive 
reading 
experiences through engaging content in mobile applications 
(hereinafter referred to as “publication Apps”). 
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. 
Sections II and III define various concepts associated with 
page management, including a page, template and meta-
template. Section IV describes the factoring and synthesis of 
pages. Section V presents the methodology for designing 
template-based mobile page generator. The last section 
concludes the paper and illustrates the future work. 
II. 
CHARACTERISTICS OF PAGES 
A page in publication Apps can be decomposed into six 
parts including heading, description, background, menu, 
intension and extension. The heading part refers to the 
highlight title which summarizes the articles within a page. 
Most of the highlight titles are usually outlined in a sentence, 
such as topic, headline or subtitle. The description part is 
composed of numerous paragraphs which describes the 
details of the highlight titles. We can regard caption or 
footnote or article as a description part. The background part 
contains figures to help explain the article or beautify the 
margin. The menu part indicates the functions which prompt 
readers to do specific tasks such as jumping to a particular 
page, setting the font size or searching keywords within a 
whole publication App. The intension part is defined as the 
input data from device sensor. Take multi-touch sensor as an 
instance, reader needs two fingers to stretch the image to 
zoom in, and vice versa. Besides, when reader rotates his/her 
mobile device, the accelerator and gyroscope can detect the 
speed and direction to make the illustration upside-down. 
The content which is changed by device sensor data is called 
intension parts. The extension part refers to web content that 
must be connected to the Internet to fetch the updated data. A 
noted example is the updated tweets from social network 
websites. The last three parts including menu, intension and 
extension are specific characteristics in publication Apps in 
order to provide vivid reading experiences in this post-PC 
world.  
Each part in a page is aggregated by pieces of 
components which may be divided from static to dynamic 
[4][5]. For static components, their display effects are stable. 
We regard text as a static component that every single word 
is fixed and firmed. In other words, the display effects of 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-220-2
CONTENT 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

dynamic components are changed by input values such as 
time, location data, device holding direction, etc. We regard 
web content as a dynamic component that the web content 
area could be connected to the server to get the newest 
response, i.e. the display essence from the web content 
component is changeable. Therefore, we summarize seven 
components which are commonly used in publication Apps, 
shown as below component spectrum.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Page component spectrum from static to dynamic. 
Based on the components, the structure of a page may be 
analyzed by its purpose. Different purposes of pages may 
construct different characteristics and components. In Fig. 2, 
for instance, the pages within magazine App can be 
concluded to cover page, interior page, and advertisement 
page. Firstly, in regard to cover page we often see the 
heading and the background parts with text and image 
components. Secondly, the interior page usually contains the 
focal subject that is elaborately designed with multiple 
components. A publication App usually consists of 
numerous interior pages. Lastly, the advertisement page is 
often arranged for the advertisers. Common components of 
the advertisement page are image and web content (website 
link). 
 
 
Figure 2.  Different purpose of a page.  
(adapted from WIRED magazine App: WIRED App Guide, 19.13 free) 
III. 
LEVELS OF ABSTRACTION 
In addition to grouping related attributes into generator, 
pages can also be generalized at three different levels: page 
instance, page template and meta-template. 
 
Page instance: a page instance in publication Apps 
could be defined as a screen shot of the mobile 
device. In every digital publication App, multiple 
pages comprise a complete book or magazine.  In 
this research, we use “page” and “page instance” 
interchangeably. 
 
Page template:  the skeleton of a page, in which 
attribute values are removed and may be substituted 
by other proper ones. The example in Fig. 3 shows 
the relationship between a page and its template. A 
template may contain text, image and other 
components. 
 
Meta-template: a further abstraction of templates by 
replacing their components with associated types. 
For instance, the image and text component of the 
page templates shown in Fig. 3 can be generalized 
into a meta-template of Components because image 
component can be substituted for jpg, png, and gif 
format attributes. Also text component can be 
substituted for different wording or different font 
attributes. A meta-template can generate multiple 
templates. A template can generate multiple pages. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Meta-template, template, page and their relationship. 
(partially adapted from Bella magazine App: free edition) 
IV. 
FACTORING AND SYNTHESIS OF PAGES 
Based on different levels of abstraction, pages can be 
manipulated and managed through a factoring and synthesis 
process [6], as shown in Fig. 4. Factoring is a process of 
aggregation and generalization. It builds templates and meta-
templates from existing pages. Synthesis is a process of 
specialization and instantiation. It constructs pages from 
meta-template and templates. 
The first step in factoring is page analysis that extracts 
components to build a template. Attribute value in pages are 
removed from components to separate template and their 
affiliated data (F1). The templates are then generalized into 
meta-template (F2). 
The synthesis process constructs pages from meta-
templates and templates. When a page is needed, the user 
chooses a proper meta-template to build a template by 
defining attribute values of components (S1). Once the 
template is built, the system retrieves data from source 
material database and maps data into the template based on 
specification of the template. A page is constructed (S2).  
 
Cover Page
Advertisement Page
Interior Page
 
 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-220-2
CONTENT 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

 
Figure 4.  Factoring and synthesis of pages. 
V. 
METHODOLOGY FOR DESIGNING TEMPLATE-BASED 
DIGITAL PUBLISHING SYSTEM 
The processes of factoring and synthesis suggest a 
method for designing template-based mobile page generator. 
The method includes two major stages: design and 
application (see Fig. 5). The design stage is the process of 
factoring that includes page analysis, component design, 
meta-template design and database design. Once the meta-
template and database are available, the page generator can 
be applied to construct pages by the synthesis process. This 
section presents major modules of the method. 
 
Figure 5.  Methodology for development. 
A. Page Analysis 
The objective of page analysis is to find the attribute 
values of major characteristics for designing the page 
generator. Pages are analyzed to identify their parts 
(including heading, description, background, menu, intension 
and extension) and corresponding attribute values. The 
process of identifying characteristic parts in the page is 
recursive.  
The second step focuses on recognizing associated 
attribute values of a part. For instance, the description part is 
composed with associated attribute values such as string, 
number, jpg and mp4. 
B. Component Design 
After defining all attributes, it is necessary to find their 
relationships. The most important processes of this module 
are factoring all the attribute values and grouping some 
similar attributes. In other words, this module collects 
attributes into clusters with a homogenous structure. If the 
values are jpg, png, and gif format attributes, these attributes 
are aggregated to image component. If the values are tap, flip, 
pinch, stretch and gesture attributes, these attributes are 
aggregated to sensor component. The components may be 
divided from static to dynamic for seven components. 
C. Meta-template Design 
The purpose of meta-template design is to simplify and 
automate the process of page generation. The components in 
Fig. 1 can be combined together within a page for 127 
possibilities, as in (1). 

127
7
7
7
6
7
5
7
4
7
3
7
2
7
1







C
C
C
C
C
C
C

Note that the possibilities means the sum of the meta-
templates which refers to that the different combination 
within a page is 127 categories. To go into detail, one of the 
seven components is a kind of meta-template deriving 7 
possibilities of the meta-template. Moreover, randomly 
choosing two of the seven components will composite 21 
possibilities of the meta-template. For this similar inference, 
once the page generator chooses all of the seven components 
within a page, the number of meta-template is 1. 
D. Database Design 
To maximize the flexibility in page construction, data 
must be decomposed and stored at the elementary level. To 
accomplish this goal, source material data are indexed and 
tagged. Besides the seven components can be combined to 
meta-template, the components can be mapped to the source 
material database. Take the image component for example, 
there are several other formats or extra picture files to fill in 
the image component. All the page generator needs to do is 
assuring the index or tag in database is correctly link to the 
components in order to replace the relative attribute values of 
the components.  
E. Page Construction 
The major function of the application phase is to 
construct pages from meta-templates. To allow end users to 
create their own pages easily, it is necessary to automate the 
application process. Through this module, editor can choose 
one of the meta-templates. This meta-template is similar to 
what he/her wants to convey. Then editor has flexible 
creation and modification of computer-generated pages for 
streamlining creative content formation processes. 
 
------
------
------
-----
-----
-----
-----
-----
-----
-----
------
------
------
-----
-----
-----
-----
-----
-----
-----
Meta-template
Page Template
Pages
F1
F1
------
------
------
-----
-----
-----
-----
-----
-----
-----
------
------
------
-----
-----
-----
-----
-----
-----
-----
S2
S2
F2
F2
S1
S1
Factoring Process
Synthesis Process
Image
+
Text
----
----
----
 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-220-2
CONTENT 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The current study presents a methodology for designing 
template-based page generator. The method is based on the 
concept of factoring and synthesis to simplify content 
management. It includes two major phases: one is to derive 
meta-templates and design material databases from existing 
pages; the other is to apply meta-template to create new page 
for publication Apps. 
The contribution of the current study is two-fold. First, 
the methodology can alleviate the difficulty in flexible 
arrangement of page components, especially when creative 
presentation is necessary. It integrates several concepts and 
methods (such as factoring, synthesis, aggregation and 
generalization) into the design process to provide flexible 
necessary for individuals such as designers, traditional media 
publishers, ad agencies, and companies of all sizes that want 
to create their innovative pages easily. Second, the method 
allows a page skeleton and its associated attribute data to be 
managed separately.  This helps the construction of template-
based page generator to better use existing data in material 
database. The editor may specify different templates and fill 
them with data in the current material database. It also 
provides a greater possibility for reusing page layout and 
other presentation modules.  
In addition to managerial implication, this research 
provides profound impact in this AppEconomy era. The app 
economy began to percolate in 2007 — the year that Apple 
introduced the iPhone and Facebook turned its website into a 
platform for other programs designed for its rapidly growing 
audience. Individuals such as designers, traditional media 
publishers, ad agencies, and companies of all sizes that want 
to create, distribute, monetize, and optimize engaging 
content and publications for tablet devices desire an easiest 
tool to flexibly manage the source material (of literature and 
art) for publication Apps. Not only the traditional designers 
can utilize the characteristic of mobile pad to layout pages, 
but also the digital publishers can quickly create another new 
issue of innovative pages based on previous edition. 
Furthermore, publishers who are aiming at distinguished 
digital publishing need to develop native publication Apps 
that results in the communication gap with programmer. The 
current study provides a method for editors to sketch a 
blueprint or a solid configuration with definite expression 
toward aesthetic knowledge. The sketch speeds up the 
communication between editors and programmers. 
This work is the beginning of a line of research focused 
on flexible page management in creative content platforms.  
In the future work, this method can be implemented into an 
automated system integrating with other systems to expand 
system capabilities and evaluation of system productivity 
and user satisfaction. Moreover, leaving a space for 
innovation should also be taken into consideration since it 
has been proved that the most successful webpage designs 
are not template-based but the ones that rely on presenting 
the content in a way that meets the business owner objectives 
and attracts the attention of the end-user. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This study is conducted under the “III Innovative and 
Prospective Technologies Project” of the Institute for 
Information Industry which is subsidized by the Ministry of 
Economy Affairs of the Republic of China. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Sarah Rotman Epps, “Forecast Update: Amazon Expands 
Tablets’ 
Addressable 
Market”, 
Forrester 
Blogs, 
http://blogs.forrester.com/sarah_rotman_epps/12-03-06-
forecast_update_amazon_expands_tablets_addressable_marke
t. Retrieved Mar 13, 2012. 
[2] Bob Bringhurst, “Design Decisions for Digital Publishing 
Apps”, InDesign Docs,  http://blogs.adobe.com/indesigndocs/. 
Retrieved Mar 13, 2012.  
[3] C.W. Holsapple, A.B. Whinston, Decision Support Systems: 
A Knowledge-Based Approach, West Publishing, St. Paul, 
MN, 1996. 
[4] Chia-Hui Chang, Mohammed Kayed, Moheb Ramzy Girgis, 
Khaled F. Shaalan, “A Survey of Web Information Extraction 
Systems”, IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 
vol. 18(10), 2006,  pp. 1411-1428. 
[5] P. Fraternali, and P. Paolini, A conceptual model and a tool 
environment for developing more scalable, dynamic, and 
customizable Web applications, in: Proc. Int. Conf. EDBT98, 
Valencia Spain, March 1998. 
[6] Jen-Her Wu, Her-Sen Doonga, Ching-Chang Leeb, Tse-Chih 
Hsiac, and Ting-Peng Liang, “A methodology for designing 
form-based decision support systems”, Decision Support 
Systems, vol. 36(3), 2004, pp. 313–335.  
 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-220-2
CONTENT 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

