A Framework for Creativity in Search Results
James Sawle, Fania Raczinski, and Hongji Yang
Institute of Creative Technologies
De Montfort University
Leicester, UK
{jsawle, fania, hyang}@dmu.ac.uk
Abstract—Although trying to deﬁne creativity has been a hot
area of research in many ﬁelds, the ﬁeld of information retrieval
has remained under developed. Over the report we attempt to
deﬁne a structural deﬁnition of creativity which could be applied
to search results in order to aid users in their creative endeavours.
After deﬁning creativity for search, we have then devised a simple
metric based upon it, to show that there is a need for this
research. The results, whilst positive, could be interpreted as
a poor deﬁnition of creativity, and as such this is a sounding
paper for future work.
Index Terms—information retrieval; computational creativity
I. INTRODUCTION
Over the past decade search has been focused on returning
the smallest number of results which correlate to the user’s
information need. This has been a logical trend to pursue, as
92% of people use the internet as their ﬁrst port of call when
looking for everyday information [1].
However, this has meant that the creativity inspired by
‘surﬁng the web’ has over time slowly diminished. This
research is not advocating the end of document based search;
however, we propose that a new search engine architecture,
which aims to inspire the creativity of its users, can only be
beneﬁcial to the landscape of the world wide web.
Over the course of the paper, we deﬁne what we mean by
the creativity of a search result, with respect to a single result
as well an entire set. The concepts presented in this paper, are
inspired by ‘Pataphysics, a pseudo-philosophy deﬁned as “the
science of imaginary solutions, which symbolically attributes
the properties of objects, described by their virtuality, to their
lineaments” [2].
The rest of the paper is organised as followed. Section 2
explores deﬁnitions of creativity from both computer science
and psychology. In Section 3, we outline a general deﬁnition
of creativity in search, which can be used to create a metric.
Section 4 will see a simplistic metric to be used for the purpose
of evaluating the concept as well as some experimental data.
II. DEFINITION OF CREATIVE SEARCH
A. A Framework to Base Creativity Upon
Creativity is a subjective topic, with different people deﬁn-
ing the creative worth of a piece of information differently;
however, Newell, Shaw and Simon [3] devised a deﬁnition
based upon four criteria to categorise the creativity of a given
solution or answer.
1) The answer is novel and useful (either for the individual
or for society)
2) The answer demand that we reject ideas we had previ-
ously accepted
3) The answer results from intense motivation and persis-
tence
4) The answer comes from clarifying a problem that was
originally vague
Each of these criterion for creativity approach a deﬁnition
from a different perspective. Whilst trying to relate this to
information retrieval, it should be simple to see that criterion
1 relates to the goal of the search, whilst criterion 4 relates
to the information need, or starting point. What may be less
obvious however, is that criterion 3 relates to the scale of
the search and hence the number of dead ends that may be
encountered and that criterion 2 suggests which search paths
should be avoided whilst looking for creative results.
Whilst this framework gives us a very high level deﬁnition
of creativity, it is hard to apply it in its current form. Through
applying some of the more prevalent techniques used in the
ﬁeld of computational creativity, we can attempt to reduce this
down into a more precise deﬁnition.
B. P-Creativity and H-Creativity
Boden [4] deﬁnes that there are two forms of creativity,
P-creativity and H-creativity. P-creativity or ‘psychological’
creativity, is an idea or solution that is new to the person
who came up with it. An idea that represents ‘historical’
creativity, H-creativity, on the other hand, is one which has
not been thought of by anybody before and can therefore be
deemed a historical-sociological category [5]. H-creativity is
subsequently a special case of P-creativity which many people
consider to be the more important of the two, as this is what
drives forward human knowledge.
When we relate these concepts to search results we end up
with some interesting outcomes.
1) Single Search Result: A single search result is most
likely to be P-creative or neither. This is because, for it to be H-
creative, there must be some logic in the document that nobody
else has noticed, or drawn the same conclusions from different
information. For the single result to be neither P-creative or
H-creative, the user must have a thorough understanding of
the topic, and the result must add no new information.
2) Set of search results: A set of search results is most
likely to be P-creative. It is highly unlikely that a user would
54
CONTENT 2011 : The Third International Conference on Creative Content Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-157-1

have explored every possible creative avenue over a set of
results, unless the set is not of a trivial size. But by the same
logic, if a large range of ideas are contained, it is unlikely
that the set will be H-creative, as somebody is likely to have
linked them together.
The question becomes, is there a link between maximising
the chance of something being P-creative and H-creative or is
the link more subtle. Or is it enough for a search engine to
try and improve the chances of P-creativity for a user.
C. Exploratory and Transformational Creativity
Boden [4] goes on to deﬁne the concepts of exploratory and
transformational creativity. She deﬁnes exploratory creativity
to be the exploration of a space of partial and complete
possibilities. This therefore suggests that there are rules that
conﬁne this space. If we were therefore to alter the rules that
deﬁne the space, and subsequently alter the space that we are
exploring, this is deﬁned as transformational creativity [6].
Whilst this does give us a nice slant to look at creativity,
comparing the trade-off of traditional problem spaces com-
pared to augmented ones, this is very difﬁcult to model,
combined with the fact that the solutions found by tweaking
the rules that conﬁne the space can easily rule out the solution
in the traditional space [7].
D. Bisociation
Bisociation makes a distinction between the routine skills
of thinking on a single ‘plane’, and the creative act, which
operates on more than one plane [8]. This means, with
Koestler’s deﬁnition, that we must deﬁne creativity as a set
of results such that they are simultaneously associated with
two habitually incomparable contexts.
It is clear to see how this model extends from that of
Boden’s theory of exploratory and transformational creativity.
The fact that more than one ‘plane’ must be considered will
force a transformational process to occur. However, unlike
transformational creativity, both processes must be considered,
the exploratory and transformational. Subsequently, we should
not end up with a solution that can’t exist within the rules
deﬁned by the original problem, even if we transcend into
transformational creativity, as long as we ﬁnish the process in
the plane that we started in.
E. Conceptual Blending
The idea of combining different thought processes, whilst
more elegant than transformational creativity, does not give us
a nice deﬁnition that applies to search results as well as tying
in with our underlying philosophy. Conceptual blending is a
step closer. This general theory of cognition, formally called
Conceptual Integration Networks [9], allows us to look at a
number of different dataspaces, and attempt to ‘blend’/merge
them in such a way that the new dataspace tries to simulate
how we use large amounts of information and bring it together
to form new ideas.
F. Combinatorial Creativity
Both of the above concepts fall into the general category of
combinatorial creativity. This is a logical assumption of mod-
elling creativity, as people tend to come up with solutions by
ﬁrst looking at new combinations of currently existing ideas.
This therefore allows us to consider the idea of creativity as a
search process through the space of all possible combinations,
therefore this ﬁts into the idea of search engines.
Whilst conceptual blending explores the idea of combining
different thought processes and bisociation, looking at different
planes of creative thought; let us consider the idea of placing
the data itself into different concepts, enabling us to get the
following areas of combinatorial creativity to explore with
respect to creative search based upon philosophical.
• Placing a familiar object in an unfamiliar setting or
placing an unfamiliar object into a familiar setting.
• Blending two superﬁcially different objects or concepts
• Comparing a familiar object to a superﬁcially unrelated
and semantically distant concept
• Searching through a number of different concepts that
are related to each other but could be considered as
swerving away from the original concept. This is based
upon Epicurus’s theory of clinamen from his doctorine
of atomism [10].
III. DEFINITION
The above deﬁnitions, allow us to deﬁne creativity in search
results with pre-existing concepts agreed by the academic
community.
It is clear, that in the case of search results, we still have the
issue of a group of results providing greater creative inspiration
to one user than another. This tends to be a problem with most
metrics, the problem of objectiveness vs subjectiveness. With
subjectiveness being a quality that is important, it means that
we have a problem getting repeatable results. We therefore
need to build a deﬁnition that is as objective as possible, whilst
not overlooking some of the dynamic properties that it may
be possible to model.
At this stage it is important to stress that this is not an
attempt to model the creative process, but to give a model for
how useful a set of results might be in inspiring creativity.
A. A Single Result
It is intuitive for us to start with a single result. Whilst
maximising the possibility for a single result being H-creative,
it is very unlikely that this will be the case with a full set
of results. The issue becomes, measuring how P-creative an
individual result is to a search result.
It seems sensible to assume, that if a result has no relevance
to the search request, then the result will have no chance of
inspiring P-creativity. The more information about the search
request a single result has, increases the chance of a result
inspiring P-creativity, therefore using relevance metrics.
55
CONTENT 2011 : The Third International Conference on Creative Content Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-157-1

B. Set of Results
To improve the chances of inspiring creativity, a group of
related results which discuss a number of different areas of
the topic would logically improve the quality of the results.
As stated, if we maximise the breadth of information of a
single result it would improve creativity, we should therefore
attempt to do the same across the entire set.
The issue however, is that the majority of users do not look
past the top 10 search results [11]. Whilst this is unlikely
to be the case for people using a search engine targeted at
inspiring creativity, it does make sense to try to reduce the
overall amount of data provided. We must therefore penalise
repetition in the results provided, forcing a more diverse set
of results.
This can be taken a step further by only considering a
certain number of results and ignoring the ordering, because
there is no simple way to deﬁne how ordering affects the
creative process. With a lack of deﬁned ordering, it means
that having endless results would be tedious and counter-
productive. Whilst we have no strong view on the exact
number of results that should be considered, we believe that
it should not be substantially greater than 10, for the reason
discussed above.
The way that each result is provided to the user will affect
how the user perceives the results. A diversity of different
document types, e.g., text, images, sound, we believe would
improve the quality of creativity inspiration.
C. Results as a Set of Sets
We could extend this concept to the next logical step of
returning results as a set containing multiple related sets of
results. In this analogy, each of the inner sets could relate
to an individual concept related to the information need, and
a clearer relationship between concepts, how they relate to
each other and how the results represent the concept they are
contained within would exist.
The question becomes how we measure the creative quality
of this type of result. Due to the structure of the results, we
can attempt to model the creativity in different levels allowing
us to try and abstract the problem as much as possible.
Due to the fact that this is not a method that is currently
used to return search results, we shall not explore it further at
this point in time. However, we believe that this would be a
logical way to return results in the future.
IV. EXAMPLE METRIC
As the above deﬁnition is meant as a guideline for deﬁning
creativity, this section attempts to give a real world example.
The metric deﬁned below is a contrived example to show how
it could be applied with current search results.
A. Algebraic Deﬁnition
Taking the deﬁnition deﬁned in Section III-B, we have
derived the following abstract metric.
Let us deﬁne a query as q, a set of results as r and an
individual result as d. As such r = {d1, d2, d3, ..., di} where
i is the number of results examined.
For the quality of a single result, we shall deﬁne P(q, d) as
a measure between 0 and 1, where 1 is the optimal value.
To reduce the amount of data duplication in the returned
results, we shall deﬁne D(r) which has to return a value
between 0 and 1, where 0 means that no data is duplicated.
Let us deﬁne T(r) as a way to weigh the ﬁnal outcome of
the metric to ensure that a diverse set of document types are
returned. This metric will return 1 if a satisfactory balance is
returned, and 0 if only a single document type is returned.
We can therefore compile these measures into a single
metric, the Search Creativity Metric or SCM:
SCM = T(r) · 1
i
P
j=1 P(q, di) · (1 − D(r))
As such, this metric will always return a value between 0
and 1, with 1 being the optimal value.
B. Fleshing Out the Metric
To enable us to apply any experimental data to the metric,
we must ﬁrst give deﬁnitive deﬁnitions to each of the functions
provided above, P(q, d), D(r) and T(r).
1) D(r): As this measures the number of duplicate results
in a return set, we can easily deﬁne it as the number of results
that have a majority of information that is contained within
another article. This allows the following deﬁnition
D(r) = Numberofresultswithdatainpreviousresults
Numberofresults
As we relate each result to the previous results in the list,
the results must always be 0 < D(r) ≤ 1. This makes sense,
as even if all of the results are identical, there may still be
some creative inspiration contained in the ﬁrst result. This
also allows us to penalise results heavily for leaning too much
on one area of information.
2) T(r): As with D(r), we need to deﬁne this measure so
that we penalise for a lack of diversity, but do not eradicate all
results, as this would not reﬂect the possible creative quality
of the information returned.
For this deﬁnition, we will need to leverage on the deﬁni-
tions provided earlier. Let i is the number of results within the
result set r. We can therefore deﬁne n to be the number of
different result types that are returned, and σ to be the standard
deviation of the number of results for each media type. It is
interesting to note that 0 ≤ σ < i
2, such that σ = i
2 means
that the results are biased to only one result.
T(r) =

1 − 2·σ
i
: n > 2
0.1
: n ≤ 2
For the case of this sample measure, we have deﬁned that
for a result set to be considered to be broad enough, that it
must contain at least 3 different media types. This measure
has no empirical backing.
56
CONTENT 2011 : The Third International Conference on Creative Content Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-157-1

TABLE I: Example Results
URL
P(q, d)
Reason
www.unicorn-
darts.com
0.3
Company called Unicorn due to the
single point on a dart
en.wikipedia.org/
wiki/Unicorn
1.0
Contains mythology as well as re-
lated animals
www.unicorn-
grocery.co.uk
0.0
No relation to unicorns
www.unicorn
theatre.com
0.25
Uses the mythology of unicorns to
draw children into theatre
http://katemckinnon
.ﬁles.wordpress.
com/2008/07
0.7
Image of a unicorn but purely as
a distraction from the rest of the
article
http://www.unicorn
centre.co.uk/
0.9
Unicorn mythology about the soul
applied to a spiritual ideal includ-
ing image
http://31st-and-
chi.blogspot.com/
2010/07/bunch-
of-pictures-of-
unicorns.html
0.9
Large array of unicorn pictures.
One is identical to result 5.
http://disgrasian
.com/2010/09/
unicorns-really-do-
exist-and-theyre-asian/
0.9
Picture of unicorn and asian 2 horn
unicorn.
http://www.youtube
.com/watch?v=
Q5im0Ssyyus
0.4
Comedy cartoon video about uni-
corns.
http://www.youtube
.com/watch?v=
v25MaXwopNI
0.8
Music for a cartoon character.
3) P(q, d): With respect to the relevance of an individual
result compared to the information need, there are a number of
different methods that could be used. For example, keyword
analysis in text documents and image recognition in images,
it is clear that a separate method would be needed for each
media type that is returned.
With this in mind, for the example below, the individual
relevance of a given result will be manually determined and
a brief explanation given. The focus will be more on the
relevance of the result to the information need, with some
weighting given if there is a creative link.
C. Experimental Data
To show this metric in practice we will need to get real
world data about a topic. We have used Google to search for
results on the following creative need - unicorns from Greek
mythology.
The search term input into Google on Thursday 12th May
was ’unicorn’. Below is a table of a url to each result, their
assigned P rating and a brief description of the reason why.
We have taken the top 10 results including the ﬁrst 4 images
and videos.
Due to the repeated result in result 4 and 6, D(r) = 0.1
and T(r) = 1 − 2·0.94
10
= 0.812. If we then feed these results
into the SCM metric we get.
SCM = 0.812 · 1
10 · 6.15 · (1 − 0.1) = 0.449
A 0.449 result for us represents a set of results that contain
some creative merit, but which also could be improved. This
result could be enhanced, based on this metric, if four of the
results were to have been replaced with more relevant results.
We still need to understand whether the low result is due
to the fact that the results are not inspiring creativity as we
presume, or that the deﬁnition that we have provided is not
complete and that we need to extend it further. It is planned,
that we take this research further to answer the question using
in-depth empirical analysis.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Over the course of the report, we have attempted to deﬁne
what we mean by creativity with respect to search engine
results using the concepts from computational creativity. The
deﬁnition is focused more on the structure and relationship
between the results returned than the content of the results
themselves. This will allow us to deﬁne this separately after
carrying out further experiments.
This is evident from the metric that we generated to show
how the deﬁnition could be used. We believe that the low result
shows that the return set does not have a high creative merit;
however, more testing will be needed to check whether this is
the case, or whether the deﬁnition needs to be redeﬁned.
We believe, that whilst this paper has little empirical back-
ing, it has highlighted a short fall in the information retrieval
domain, namely that of creative search. Even from the simple
test that was conducted, it is apparent, that even when we
reach a metric for measuring the creative quality of results,
a new form of search engine will be required to achieve top
quality results consistently.
The next stage of the research will focus on applying what
we have learnt and combine quantitive and qualitative analysis
to try and develop a new metric with a strong empirical
backing. This means that our deﬁnition of creativity will likely
need to be adapted over time; however, this could allow us to
develop a metric that evolves over time to adapt to what the
users consider to be creative search.
REFERENCES
[1] D. Fallows, “The Internet and daily life,” Pew Internet and American
Life Project, 2004.
[2] A. Jarry, Selected works of Alfred Jarry, 1st ed., R. Shattuck and S. W.
Taylor, Eds.
Grove Press, 1965.
[3] A. Newell, J. G. Shaw, and H. A. Simon, The process of creative
thinking.
New York: Atherton, 1963, pp. 63 – 119.
[4] M. Boden, The Creative Mind: Myths and Mechanisms, 2nd ed.
Wei-
denfeld & Nicolson, 1992.
[5] A. Brannigan, The Social Basis of Scientiﬁc Discoveries.
Cambridge
University Press, 1981.
[6] G. A. Wiggins, “A preliminary framework for description, analysis and
comparison of creative systems,” Knowledge-Based Systems, vol. 19, pp.
449–458, 2006.
[7] M. A. Boden, Computer Models of Creativity.
Cambridge University
Press, 1999, pp. 351–372.
[8] A. Koestler, The Act of Creation.
London: Hutchinson & Co, 1964.
[9] G. Fauconnier and M. Turner, “Conceptual integration networks,” Cog-
nitive Science, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 133–187, 1998.
[10] Epicurus, The Epicurus Reader, B. Inwood and L. P. Gerson, Eds.
Hackett, 1994.
[11] C. Silverstein, H. Marais, M. Henzinger, and M. Moricz, “Analysis of a
very large web search engine query log,” SIGIR Forum, vol. 33, no. 1,
pp. 6–12, 1999.
57
CONTENT 2011 : The Third International Conference on Creative Content Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-157-1

