A Collaborative Content Publisher 
 
Wan-Ning Wang 
Department of Information Management 
Yuan Ze University 
Taoyuan, Taiwan 
s961733@mail.yzu.edu.tw 
Hsiang-An Wang 
Research Center for Information Technology 
Innovation 
Academia Sinica 
Taipei, Taiwan 
sawang@iis.sinica.edu.tw
 
 
Abstract—We propose a web application called Collaborative 
Content Publisher (CCPublisher), which enables users to 
publish content and post their work on blogs or elsewhere. 
Users can participate in collaborative writing of the content 
posted on different web pages and synchronize each content 
version. A web annotation function is also provided for users to 
annotate multimedia content on the web pages. Users can 
integrate the annotated multimedia content with their 
collaborative work and update the annotation after the original 
annotation has been modified.  Annotations of multimedia 
content in different versions of the collaborative work will be 
consistent if the same multimedia is used. With the 
CCPublisher, users can provide feedback on any web page, 
exchange ideas, and enrich the shared collaborative content as 
well as the web content. It therefore facilitates collaborative 
learning and the efficient accumulation of knowledge. 
Keywords-Collaborative 
learning; 
Web 
annotation; 
Multimedia annotation; sharing annotation; Publisher 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The concept of collaborative learning, a popular topic in 
E-learning 2.0 [1], refers to a group of learners working 
together to achieve a common goal [2]. In the collaborative 
learning process, learners share ideas or modify each other’s 
work. Thus, learners are no longer just information receivers; 
instead, through contributing, sharing and collaborating, 
they can also become information providers. As a result, 
collaborative learning increases a learner’s sense of 
achievement and motivation to learn, and also facilitates the 
development of critical thinking [3]. 
An increasing number of educationalists are exploring 
the possibility that online services could be used to enhance 
collaborative learning. For example, the State University of 
New York used Flicker’s tagging feature [4] in an online 
history course to enable students to annotate and discuss a 
series of paintings [5]; while SUNY Geneseo launched a 
collaborative writing project using Mediawiki [6]. The 
above services may not have been designed for educational 
purposes initially, but they have accelerated online 
collaboration among learners and created new educational 
opportunities. 
Existing online collaborative learning applications, such 
as Wikipedia [7] and Flicker, have certain limitations. For 
example, most of them require users to work collaboratively 
on a centralized platform. Although users can share their 
collaborative content or post it on web pages, they cannot 
provide feedback or exchange ideas on the shared content. 
This limited one-way sharing also prevents synchronizing 
changes with the original content. If the original content has 
been modified, the authors have to re-share it, which may 
take a great deal of time; otherwise, the shared content will 
be inconsistent with the latest version. 
To resolve the above problems, we have developed a 
web application called Collaborative Content Publisher 
(CCPublisher), which enables users to publish content that 
can be embedded in web pages. Editing tools are provided 
so that users can edit and give feedback directly on the 
published content. New feedback is transferred to copies of 
the published collaborative content automatically so that all 
versions are synchronized. We also provide a web 
annotation function for users to annotate multimedia in web 
pages and transform it with the annotations into 
collaborative content. The annotations of the multimedia in 
the collaborative content will be consistent with the original 
annotations. Through the content embedded in blogs or 
elsewhere, users can easily exchange comments, co-edit the 
content and expand the current version. CCPublisher 
increases the opportunities for interaction between users and 
facilitates the efficient accumulation of information. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section 2 examines existing online services related to 
collaborative learning; Section 3 presents the features of 
CCPublisher; and Section 4 describes the synchronization 
mechanism. Section 5 contains some concluding remarks. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In this section, we discuss existing online services for 
collaborative learning, with the focus on those that provide 
collaborative writing platforms and web annotation tools. 
We also consider online services for sharing collaborative 
content. 
Collaborative writing platforms, such as Wikipedia, 
Moodle wiki [8] and Google doc [9], can be used for 
collaborative learning. Wikipedia allows users to contribute 
content and collaborate with other users to modify the 
63
CONTENT 2011 : The Third International Conference on Creative Content Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-157-1

content; thus, most articles have multiple authors. An article 
will change dynamically after modification, and anyone can 
track who made a particular change. Moodle wiki, a 
component of the Moodle system, is also a collaborative 
writing platform. It enables students to participate in 
collaborative writing with peers and instructors. Teachers 
can see when each student writes a new article and view the 
records of the student’s previous online work.  Meanwhile, 
students can view and modify each other’s work. Moodle 
wiki supports group projects and can be used to develop 
group reports and maintain class records of activities on 
given topics. Google also provides a writing platform called 
Google Docs, which allows users to edit a document online 
and collaborate with other users to edit their contributions. 
Collaborative learning can also be achieved by using a 
web annotation feature, such as Tagtoo [10], Diigo [11], or 
Reframe It [12], to construct a collaborative environment. 
Tagtoo allows the user to tag images on any web pages. The 
tag, which can be a Facebook account or a link, will be 
shown on the image and shared via Facebook. Diigo enables 
users to annotate, archive and organize web pages. It is easy 
for students to participate in collaborative research projects, 
and ask questions while reading web pages. Meanwhile, 
Reframe It puts users’ comments in a sidebar that changes 
for any page. Users can comment on any page, even if it 
does not have a comment function.  
However, none of the above collaborative learning 
services provide a convenient sharing function, such as the 
capability to update shared collaborative content. Moreover, 
users cannot participate in collaborative writing on the 
shared collaborative content. For example, after sharing 
collaborative content via the embedded functionality of 
Google Docs, users cannot update the new version of 
embedded content as the original content changes, or 
provide feedback, such as comments or annotations. Tagtoo 
allows users to embed tags in web pages, but a tagged image 
cannot be shared with other web pages.  
 Using other services to share collaborative content also 
has some limitations. For example, Calameo [13] enables 
users to upload PDF or PowerPoint files and convert them 
into embeddable Flash files, which can then be used to 
embed collaborative content in web pages. Although users 
can comment on shared content, they cannot transfer their 
comments to the original collaborative work or show the 
comments on the same content embedded in other web 
pages. Another platform called Apture [14] allows 
publishers and bloggers to link and integrate multimedia or 
web pages in a dynamic layer above their own pages. Users 
can view the latest version of the content, but they cannot 
give feedback on it. 
To update web annotations, we exploit the annotation 
functions presented in our previous work [15]. The 
functions described in this paper allow users to add 
annotations to multimedia on web pages. They also enable 
users to interact with one another and maintain the 
consistency of annotations of the same multimedia on 
different web pages. Furthermore, we introduce a function 
that synchronizes the annotations of multimedia in the 
collaborative content with the annotations of the original 
web multimedia. 
III. 
THE FEATURES OF CCPUBLISHER 
CCPublisher is comprised of three components: the 
Collaborative Multimedia Web Annotator (called the “Web 
Annotator” hereafter), the Collaborative Content Editor 
(CCEditor), 
and 
the 
Collaborative 
Content 
Reader 
(CCReader).  
Fig. 1 shows the process for publishing content with the 
CCPublisher. First, the web page loaded by a user is 
embedded by the Web Annotator (step 1). The Web 
Annotator enables users to annotate web multimedia content 
that lacks an annotation capability and transfers the 
annotated multimedia content to the CCEditor for editing 
(step 2). On completion of the editing, the user can publish 
his/her collaborative content via the CCReader (step 3), 
which can be embedded in the web pages with an embedded 
code (step 4). We describe each component in detail below. 
 
 
Figure 1. The Publishing Process of CCPublisher. 
64
CONTENT 2011 : The Third International Conference on Creative Content Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-157-1

A. Collaborative Multimedia Web Annotator 
To annotate multimedia content on web pages that lack 
an annotation capability, the Web Annotator uses a parser 
to embed the annotation function in the web multimedia 
content. Fig. 2 shows an example of an image on a web 
page embedded with the annotation function. The 
annotation tool allows users to draw lines or type text on 
existing web content. After completing the annotation 
process the author can select the public mode for other 
users to view or re-edit the annotations, or select the 
private mode so that only he/she can change the 
annotation. Any annotations are displayed with the 
multimedia and recorded on the Multimedia Annotation 
Record so that users can track who made a particular 
change. The annotations made by a user will be loaded 
into the CCEditor for further editing.  
B. Collaborative Content Editor 
The CCEditor is used to publish collaborative content 
with the CCReader. The interface of the CCEditor is 
shown in Fig. 3. The editing tools on the left-hand side of 
the interface are: add lines/figures and text, or adjust the 
thickness, transparency, and color. The author can import 
materials from other web pages or local computer. The 
multimedia that was annotated by the Web Annotator will 
also be loaded into the CCEditor. 
If the author wants to import the annotations added to 
the multimedia by the Web Annotator, CCEditor or 
CCReader, he/she can click on the multimedia. The 
CCEditor will then display a pop-up window that shows 
the Multimedia Annotation Record (Fig. 4). The author 
can import and edit the annotations.  
 
Figure 2. An image embedded by the Web Annotator. 
 
 
Figure 3. The Interface of the Collaborative Content Editor. 
 
Figure 4. An example of a pop-up window that shows the Multimedia 
Annotation Record. 
The CCEditor allows the author to store changes as 
he/she complete each page, as well as sort the pages in the 
catalog and review the work. On completion of the editing, 
the CCEditor generates the collaborative content with the 
CCReader, which then creates an embedded code and a 
URL for the author to post the collaborative content on 
blogs or elsewhere. The CCPublisher will also store the 
collaborative content so that the author can go back to the 
CCEditor to re-edit it.  
The CCEditor provides three types of sharing 
mechanism. First, the author can select the public mode, 
which allows anyone on the Internet to modify and 
republish any part of the content. Second, the author can 
set content as “read-only” so that others can only view the 
material. Third, the author can restrict access so that only 
nominated members of a group can modify and republish 
the content. In addition, to prevent other users making 
inappropriate modifications of the collaborative content, 
the author can vet changes and decide which ones to 
accept.  
C. Collaborative Content Reader 
The CCReader enables users to view and make feedback 
on the collaborative content that the CCEditor generates 
theCCReader  
65
CONTENT 2011 : The Third International Conference on Creative Content Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-157-1

 
Figure 5. The Interface of Collaborative Content Reader. 
and embeds on web pages. Fig. 5 shows an example of 
the CCReader interface that authors can use to add 
annotations with the editing tools. If users want to share 
the collaborative content via the CCReader, the embedded 
code and URL are provided.  
Any part of the collaborative content can be modified 
and republished if the author has given permission. The 
changes will be recorded on the Content Annotation 
Record so that everyone can track who made a particular 
change, and the author can decide which version to accept. 
In addition, users can import annotations added to the 
multimedia by the Web Annotator, CCEditor or 
CCReader. When a user clicks on the multimedia, the 
CCReader will display a pop-up window that shows the 
Multimedia Annotation Record for users to import 
annotations. The interface of the pop-up window is the 
same as that in Fig. 4. It also provides editing tools for 
users to edit existing annotations or add new ones. The 
changes will be displayed on the multimedia in the 
collaborative content and transferred to the original 
multimedia resource embedded by the Web Annotator. 
(We describe this mechanism in Section 4). 
CCPublisher is implemented with PHP and Adobe 
FLEX. PHP is used to implement the web applications, 
transfer the annotation record and access the database; and 
Adobe FLEX is used to implement the interfaces that 
communicate between the web browser and the web server. 
We use the Apache HTTP Server 2.0 as the web server 
and MySQL as the database. 
IV. 
THE SYNCHRONIZATION MECHANISM OF 
CCPUBLISHER 
The synchronization mechanism ensures that all 
versions of shared collaborative content are consistent. As 
collaborative content may be posted on two or more web 
pages for 
users to access, CCPublisher uses 
a 
synchronization mechanism to maintain the consistency of 
all shared content. Users can choose to synchronize all 
copies of the collaborative content or synchronize the 
multimedia annotations in the collaborative content and 
the Web Annotator.  
A. Synchronizing copies of collaborative content 
Fig. 6 shows an example of synchronizing copies of 
collaborative content. The content and copies are posted 
on web pages A, B and C. After one of the pages has been 
modified, the change is sent to CCPublisher (step 1), 
which stores the modification and transfers it to copies of 
the collaborative content posted on other web pages when 
users access the CCReader (step 2). After users update 
their copies, the modification will appear in the 
collaborative content (step 3). 
B. Synchronizing multimedia annotations in 
collaborative content and the Web Annotator 
Annotations of multimedia in different versions of the 
collaborative content and the Web Annotator will be 
consistent if the authors utilize the same multimedia 
resource. Fig. 7 shows an example of synchronizing 
multimedia annotations in collaborative content and the 
Web Annotator.  
Content A and content B contain the same image 
obtained from the same web page. When reading content 
A, the user annotates the image, and the new annotation is 
transferred to the CCPublisher (step 1). When other users 
access content B, the annotation will be transferred to 
content B by the CCPublisher (step 2). After users update 
this annotation, it will be displayed in the image (step 3). 
The annotation will also be transferred to the original 
image resource embedded by the Web Annotator (step 4), 
and appear on the Web Annotator after users update the 
annotation (step 5). Similarly, when authors use the Web 
Annotator to annotate multimedia on web pages, the 
annotations are loaded to the multimedia in the embedded 
collaborative content by the CCPublisher.  
 
Figure 6. Synchronizing copies of collaborative content 
 
66
CONTENT 2011 : The Third International Conference on Creative Content Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-157-1

 
Figure 7. Synchronizing multimedia annotations in collaborative content 
and the Web Annotator. 
In summary, the CCPublisher synchronizes all shared 
versions of the collaborative content. It also synchronizes 
the multimedia annotations in the collaborative content 
and the Web Annotator. The synchronization mechanism 
allows users to exchange ideas and participate in 
collaborative writing more efficiently by providing 
immediate 
feedback 
and 
more 
communication 
opportunities. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
We have presented a web application called 
CCPublisher, which enables users to participate in 
collaborative writing of the content posted on web pages 
and helps authors synchronize different versions of the 
content. CCPublisher also solves the problem of one-way 
knowledge sharing and the inconvenience of updating 
different versions of shared content. In addition, we 
provide a web annotation function for users to collaborate 
with each other on web content that lacks an annotation 
capability. The annotations added to the web content can 
be integrated into the collaborative content. They will also 
be consistent with their original multimedia annotations. 
CCPublisher allows users to provide feedback, exchange 
ideas on any web page, and enrich the shared collaborative 
content as well as the web content. It therefore facilitates 
the accumulation of knowledge and provides more 
opportunities for collaboration. 
In our future work, we will expand the functionality of 
collaborative learning, e.g., by developing the annotation 
capability to include video annotation. We also hope to 
implement CCPublisher on portable readers, thereby 
providing users with more mobility. Moreover, we hope 
that, in the near future, all users will be able to access the 
source code to expand the functionality of collaborative 
learning or implement our application on other e-learning 
platforms. Adding these functions would increase the 
convenience and utility of CCPublisher and enhance the 
concept of collaborative learning. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was partially supported by the Taiwan E-
learning and Digital Archives Program (TELDAP), which 
is sponsored by the National Science Council of Taiwan 
under NSC Grants: NSC100-2631-H-001-020, NSC100-
2631-H-001-012 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Downes, “E-Learning 2.0,” ACM eLearn Magazine: 
Education and Technology in perspective, Oct. 2005. 
http://elearnmag.acm.org/featured.cfm?aid=1104968. 
[2] P. Dillenbourg, “What do you mean by 'collaborative 
learning'?,” In Collaborative-learning: Cognitive and 
Computational Approaches, P. Dillenbourg (Ed), Oxford: 
Elsevier, 1999, pp.1-19. 
[3] A. A. Gokhale. “Collaborative Learning Enhances Critical 
Thinking,” Journal of Technology Education, vol. 7, 1995, 
pp.22–30. 
[4] R. Giles, How to Use Flickr: The Digital Photography, 1rd 
ed., Course Technology PTR, 2006. 
[5] S. O'Hear, “e-learning 2.0 - how Web technologies are 
shaping education,” ReadWriteWeb, Aug. 8, 2006, 
http://www.readwriteweb.com/archives/e-learning_20.php. 
[6] P. Schacht, “The Collaborative Writing Project,” in Using 
Wiki in Education, sec. 2, S. Mader Eds. 2007, pp.12-23. 
[7] P. Ayers, C. Matthews and B. Yates, How Wikipedia 
Works: And How You Can Be a Part of It, 1rd ed., No 
Starch Press, 2008.  
[8] K. Brandle, “Are you ready to ‘MOODLE’?,” In Proc. of 
Language Learning & Technology, vol.9(2), 2005, pp. 16-
23. 
[9] Google Doc, http://www.google.com/google-d-s/b1.html. 
[10] Tagtoo, http://www.tagtoo.org, 07.18.2011. 
[11] B. Yuan, and B. Tan. “Explore Diigo for the First Time 
Applying to Learning Hitting the Target,” In Proc. of the 
Second International Symposium on Networking and 
Network Security, 2010, pp. 133-135. 
[12] Reframe It, http://reframeit.com, 07.18.2011. 
[13] Calameo, 
Publish 
and 
share 
documents, 
http://www.calameo.com, 07.18.2011. 
[14] Apture, http://www.apture.com, 07.18.2011. 
[15] C. Lin, F. P. Chu, H. A. Wang, and J. C. Ko, “An 
Interactive Multimedia Web Editor,” In Proc. of 8th IEEE 
Fourth International Conference, IEEE Press, 2008, pp. 
341–342. 
 
67
CONTENT 2011 : The Third International Conference on Creative Content Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-157-1

