Feasibility of a Camera-Based Instant Feedback System 
 
Samuel Kosolapov, Evgeny Gershikov and Nissim Sabag 
ORT Braude Academic College of Engineering, Karmiel, Israel 
{ksamuel, eugeny11, nsabag}@braude.ac.il   
 
Abstract—The Instant Feedback System (IFS) described in this 
article is designed to collect students’ responses to a series of 
multiple-choice questions. An IFS enables the educators to 
improve their teaching by generating real-time feedback from 
the students about the clarity of the lesson. A number of IFS are 
known: systems using wired mini-keyboards, infrared clickers, 
SMS or Internet-based smartphones applications, etc. Our long-
term goal is to create an IFS system based on the use of digital 
camera. In the frames of camera-based IFS implementation, 
every student attending the class receives a specially designed 
card containing a predefined number of color markers and a 2D 
barcode. When the students are asked a multiple-choice 
question, they answer by physically raising their cards. The 2D 
barcode on the card is used to encode the student’s ID, whereas 
2D orientation of the card encodes the number of student’s 
answer.  A number of images of the class are grabbed by the IFS 
camera and processed by a computer, which generates a list of 
student grades. Reliability of the chosen card design and camera 
placements is analyzed. We conclude that the chosen card 
recognition process demonstrates feasibility of the camera-
based IFS approach.  
 
 
Keywords-image processing; 2D barcode; color recognition; 
OCR; IFS 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Instant Feedback System (IFS) is a tool for real-time 
acquisition and processing of human responses. IFS described 
in this article is designed to collect student responses to 
multiple-choice questions in the frame of “active learning” 
approach. A number of researchers claim that active learning 
as a concept and IFS as a tool for active learning enable the 
educators to improve their teaching by generating real-time 
instant feedback from the students about how clear a specific 
lesson is for a specific student [1, 2]. A number of IFS 
implementations are known and every one of these has its own 
advantages and drawbacks. One of the implementations uses 
wired keyboards, which are simple and reliable, but wiring 
requires special rearrangements in the class in accordance 
with safety rules and this is not always possible.  Another 
implementation uses infrared (IR) clickers, which are used 
successfully in a number of universities [3, 4, 5]. However, 
price of the clicker and data collector(s), physical size of the 
clickers, and the need for periodic battery replacements makes 
wide usage of IR clickers problematic in low-budget 
universities and colleges. Another IFS implementation uses 
Short Message Service (SMS), Internet based smartphones, 
tablet or PC-based applications to collect instant responses of 
the students [6, 7]. Simplicity of implementation and logistic 
advantages of the smartphone-based IFS are obvious to 
anybody skilled in the art, however, in some classes the use of 
mobile devices is forbidden (at least during exams). The 
motivation of this research is to design, implement and test a 
simple and inexpensive IFS. Considering low prices of 
modern high-resolution digital cameras, we decided to check 
the feasibility of a camera based IFS. 
The structure of the article is as follows. In the Section II, 
we present elements of the camera-based IFS, its design and 
operation. IFS card design is described in the Subsection A. 
Image acquisition is described in Subsection B, and images 
handling in Subsection C. Then, in Section III, we describe 
main elements of the IFS Card recognition software. Section 
IV is dedicated to results of the camera-based IFS usage in the 
class. Section V presents a summary of this work, conclusions 
and possible ways to improve reliability of the camera-based 
IFS. 
II. 
IFS ELEMENTS, DESIGN AND OPERATION 
In the frames of the chosen approach, each student in the 
class gets one IFS card at the beginning of the semester or at 
the beginning of the lesson. It is assumed that the class is 
equipped with a lecturer’ computer with a projector (as seen 
in Fig. 1). It is additionally assumed, that lecturer can operate 
high-resolution digital camera. During the lecture at one or 
more times, the lecturer presents to the students a slide 
containing a multiple-choice question (later referred as IFS 
exam). After a certain time interval (e.g., 30 seconds) the 
lecturer asks the students to present their answers by raising 
their cards.  The card design is presented in Fig. 2 and is 
described in details below. The digital camera grabs a 
sequence of images of the class and stores those images. 
Specially designed software processes those images and 
generates grades list. During November 2012 – January 2013 
10 IFS exams were provided in the small-size class of 16 
students in the frames of Image Processing Laboratory (later 
“ImProc”) and 10 IFS exams sere provided in the auditory 
designed for up to 60 students in the frames of TAE course. 
Fig. 1 presents an exemplary image of the class during ImProc 
IFS exam. Fig. 3 presents two images of the class during TAE 
IFS exam. Each student in the class is invited to raise his 
individual card as an answer to the multiple-choice question 
asked by the lecturer during the lesson. Callouts of different 
colors presents results of IFS exam (in the format “Short ID 
of the Student” / “Number of the Answer”). Relevant 
technical details follow.  
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-275-2
CONTENT 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

A. IFS Card Design 
Our IFS card is of size 20cm x 20cm and contains three 
markers, which are 4cm x 4cm squares having Yellow, 
Magenta and Cyan colors, and a number of black circles (see 
Fig. 2). The black circle diameter is 2.5 cm and up to six black 
circles can be positioned in predefined places on the card. 
These six positions for black circles correspond to 6 bits of a 
custom 2D barcode and enable encoding integer numbers 
from 0 to 63 as specified in Fig. 2. This 6-bits number is used 
to encode student number in the “class list”, and is referred 
later as Short ID (SID). In the current implementation, the 
number of answers in the multiple-choice questions is four, 
which can be considered adequate for most questions of this 
kind. The number of the answer chosen by the student (#1, #2, 
#3 or #4) is encoded using the 2D orientation of the card 
relative to the horizon line. For example, positioning the IFS 
card so that the “Magenta” rectangle is in the right-bottom 
corner (as seen by the IFS camera) encodes answer #1, 
positioning the card so that the “Magenta” rectangle in the 
left-bottom corner encodes answer #2, etc.  Additional 
“Yellow” and “Cyan” rectangles enable reliable evaluation of 
the card orientation. It should be noted that the back side of 
the IFS card contains small-size numbers (1, 2, 3 and 4) 
positioned at the corners of the card, so that the student orients 
the card in such a way that the selected answer number (seen 
by the student) is in the uppermost position (as shown in Fig.  
2). IFS Cards are printed on the thick white paper by using 
specially designed “Printing Utility” (see Fig. 4 left) and 
folded for the proper rigidity (as shown in Fig. 4 right).    
B. Image Acquisition 
In a small class, one wide angle camera can monitor all the 
students (as seen in the Fig. 1).  However, in most classes even 
a wide-angle camera cannot cover all the relevant areas of the 
class. Obvious solution is to make a number of shoots by 
properly rotating and translating the camera as presented in 
the Fig. 3: minimum two images of the TAE class were 
required. Practically, a bigger number of images – typically 3-
5 images were collected for every IFS exam. For the internal 
software tests 5MP Logitech c920 HD Pro Webcam 
connected to PC was used. Logitech camera was positioned 
on the rotating stage. Specially designed PC software can 
control camera rotation and camera parameters for every 
camera position, so that for every specific class optimal image 
acquisition sequence can be created, tested and stored [8]. 
However, at the beginning of the semester, this IFS prototype 
was not operational. Hence, in this research, all the images 
were collected by using from-the-shelf digital cameras. 
Cameras were operated in the simplest “auto” mode without 
tripod. For example, image presented in Fig. 1 was collected 
by using a simple digital camera (Canon IXUS 200HS, Image 
dimensions: 4000 x 3000). Images presented in Fig. 2 were 
collected by using Samsung Galaxy EK-GC100 Android-4 
camera/PDA (Image Dimensions 4608 x 2592).    
C. Image Handling 
Practical Instant Feedback Systems must process raw 
images stored in the camera memory and present results 
instantly. In this work, raw images were stored in the camera’s 
flash memory and later copied to the computer as JPG files for 
the processing. This approach enables to compare different 
cameras and evaluate if the resolution and image stabilization 
of the specific camera are adequate. Additionally, 
intermediate storage of all the images as files enables post-
processing of the same image using different algorithms. It 
must be noted, that from-the-shelf digital camera does not 
provide access to raw image data. Hence, compressed JPG 
images were manually “decompressed” to BMP images. In 
case of the Canon camera, typical decompressed BMP image 
size was 34.3 MB. For the Samsung camera, decompressed 
BMP image size was 34.1 MB.  
 
III. 
RECOGNITION SOFTWARE 
A. Color Markers Detector 
A number of well-known approaches used to detect 
shapes 
of 
different 
colors 
were 
evaluated 
[9-13]. 
Additionally, certain elements of the approaches and 
algorithms described in [14, 15] were used. 
Images collected during IFS exams were processed by 
using specially designed “Image Recognition Utility”. 
Taking into account that colors of the simple printer used to 
print the IFS cards are not pure “MCY”, taking into account 
illumination differences and differences in the color 
characteristics of the different cameras, practical values of the 
“MCY” colors were evaluated from the typical images.  
In order to find color markers two algorithms were used. 
Algorithms #1 was based on “Color Blobs” concept [11, 12]. 
Algorithms #2 was based on “Pixel Labeling” approach [13]. 
For most images, both algorithms provided the same 
results. Fig. 5 presents an example of color marker 
recognition by using Algorithm #1. It can be seen that all the 
markers of all the IFS cards are successively recognized as 
rectangles. Additionally, it can be seen (by manual inspection 
of images in Fig. 1 and Fig. 5) that marker centers are 
recognized with nearly pixel accuracy. It can be seen that the 
Magenta color was detected in other places, e.g., the students’ 
faces and bare areas of their hands. Considering the way the 
cards were designed, this was not a problem for the images 
analyzed. However, we plan to provide some card design 
modifications in the future. 
After center of the color markers evaluation, process of 
“Cards Bounding” was executed. Referring to Fig. 6, first 
available “magenta center” was set as Point “M” and closest 
Point “C” and Point “Y” were looked for. Then distances “Y-
M” and “M-C” in pixels between above points were 
evaluated. In case above distances were in the predefined 
limits, angles “YMC”, “MCY” and “CYM” were calculated 
and compared with predefined limits. In case angles “YCM” 
and “CYM” were close to 45O , angle “CMY” was close to 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-275-2
CONTENT 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

90O,  then card was considered as “found” and its bounds 
were considered as known. This process was repeated for all 
magenta centers and results in the cards bounding (see Fig. 6 
right). On this stage card orientation (encoding number of the 
answer in accordance with Fig. 2) was evaluated by 
calculating angle between “C-M”/”M-Y” and horizontal line.        
B. 2D Barcode Analyzer  
By using the row and column, coordinates of the marker 
centers image registration for the specific card can be easily 
executed. Considering that the surface of the card is white 
and the SIDs are encoded using black circles of predefined 
sizes and positioned at predefined places (as presented in Fig. 
2), SID extraction is trivial. Combining SID and the chosen 
answer number, a final list in the format “student’s ID, 
student’s answer, grade” is compiled and presented to the 
lecturer for the purpose of student achievement analysis. 
Results of two exemplary IFS exams are presented in Fig. 7. 
 
IV. 
RESULTS 
Comparing color callouts presented in Fig. 1 and Fig. 3 
and tables presented in Fig. 7, it can be seem that while IFS 
card is properly presented to the camera, recognition of 
multiple cards is reliable enough even for the current card 
design and current image processing tools. It is obvious that 
overlapping cards ruin algorithms used. In order to prevent 
this, students were asked to use simple optical rule: “If you 
can see the camera – then the camera can see your card”. 
Senior students attending Image Processing Laboratory were 
cooperative enough and motivated enough to voluntarily 
participate in IFS exams and follow obvious exams rules, so 
that recognition rate in this small group was above 90%. As 
seen in the Fig. 1, only one card near the window was not 
recognized. Students of the TAE course were less 
cooperative. It can be seen that only 30 students of 40 
enrolled were present during exam #6 (presence in the lecture 
is not obligatory).  Five students effectively not participated 
in the exam: by raising cards in the obviously wrong way or 
by non-raising cards in the due time (Blue callout).  In three 
cases “Image Recognition Utility” failed to recognize cards 
(Red callout). It can be seen that all those three cards were 
raised in the last row. Post-exam tests reveals that diameter 
of the block circles for the problematic cards is about seven 
pixels only.   
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS 
       The proposed camera-based IFS design and the selected 
image processing algorithms prove feasibility of the camera-
based IFS approach. The proposed IFS is extremely 
inexpensive, simple to implement and requires minimum 
deployment efforts, thus it can be beneficially used to 
improve learning and teaching in institutes of education, such 
as schools, colleges and universities. In the future, we plan to 
implement fully automated real-time image acquisition and 
data processing. We expect that using automated image 
acquisition system utilizing computer controlled camera 
rotation and computer controlled brightness, contrast and 
zoom, will improve IFS reliability.  Additionally, we plan to 
implement, test and compare a number of different machine 
and human oriented IFS cards designs. We plan to use color 
edges in the future IFS cards design and to use robust color 
edge detectors [14, 15] to improve practical reliability of the 
camera-based IFS.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
    This study was supported by a grant from the research 
committee of ORT Braude Academic College of Engineering, 
Karmiel, Israel.  
     
REFERENCES 
 
[1] R. Felder and R. Brent, “Active Learning: and Introduction”, 
ASQ Higer Education Brief 2(4), August 2009, pp. 1-5. 
[2] N. Sabag and S. Kosolapov, “Using Instant Feedback System 
and Micro Exams to Enchance Active Learning”, American 
Journal of Engineering Education, Vol 3, Num 2, Fall 2012, pp. 
115-121. 
[3] D. Duncan, “Clickers: A new Teaching Aid with Exceptional 
Promise”, Astronomy Educational Review, Issue 1, Volume 5, 
2006, pp 1-19.  
[4] N. Lasry, “Clickers or Flashcards: Is There Really a Difference 
?”, The Physics Teacher, Vol 46, Aprol 2008, pp 242-244. 
[5] H. K. Bjorn, M. A. Lundberg, H. Kang and C .F. Herried, 
“Students’ Perception of Using Personal Response Systems 
“Clickers” With Cases in Science”, Journal of  College Science 
Teaching, Vol 40, No 4, 2011, pp 14-19.  
[6] C. Markett, I.A. Sanches, S, Weber and B Tangney, “Using 
short message service to encourage interactivity in the 
classroom”, Computers & Education, Volume 46, Issue 3, 
Aprol 2006, pp 280-293. 
[7] Google Apps for Education. 
http://edutraining.googleapps.com/Training-Home/module-1 
[8] M. Blumberg and O. Dvorin. “IFS System Prototype”, 
Internship Project, ORT Braude College, 2013, unpublished.  
[9] R. Jain,  R. Kasturi and B.G. Schunck, “Machine Vision”, 
McGraw-Hill Inc., 1995. 
[10] P. Gockel and T. Dillman, “Computer Vision. Principles and 
Practics”, Elector International Media BV ,2008. 
[11] A. Kirillow, “aforge.NET Library”,  www.aforgenet.com 
[12] A. Kirillow, “Detecting Some Simple Shapes in Images”, 
http://www.aforgenet.com/articles/shape_checker/   
[13] A. 
Greensted, 
“Blob 
Detection. 
Labeling”, 
http://www.labbookpages.co.uk/software/imgProc/blobDetect
ion.html  
[14] S. Kosolapov, “Evaluation of Robust Color Recognition 
Algorithm 
Optimized 
for 
Color 
Outliners 
Efective 
Eimination”, ASMDA 2011 Proceedings, pp 6-10. 
[15] T. Libe, E. Gershikov and S. Kosolapov, “Comparison of 
Methods for Horizon Line Detection in Sea Images”, 
CONTENT 2012 Proceedings, pp. 79-85. 
 
 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-275-2
CONTENT 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

                      
Figure 1. An exemplary multiple-choice ImProc IFS exam #2. See the text and following figures for detailed explanations. 
The faces of the students participating in the exam were manually brushed.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Left:  Front side of an IFS card #63 as seen by the IFS camera (Selected answer number is #1). 
Right:  Back side of an IFS card #63 as seen by the student. 
12/4 
34/3 
35/3 
15/4 
24/3 
23/3 
39/4 
30/4 
18/3 
29/4 
32/4 
26/3 
25/4 
19/4 
28/3 
Lecturer’ 
computer 
Projector. 
Projects slide with 
current multiple-
choice question 
31/4 
IFS Card Number 
Selected answer number is #1 
(Orientation: “1” is UP) 
Bit #2 
Magenta Marker 
Bit #4 
LSB (Bit #0) 
MSB (Bit #5) 
Cyan Marker 
Bit #3 
White place to 
hold the card  
Card Frame 
Yellow Marker 
Bit #1 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-275-2
CONTENT 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

 
 
 
 
Figure 3. An exemplary multiple-choice TAE IFS exam #6. Minimum two images required to cover the class. 
See the text and following figures for detailed explanations. 
The faces of the students participating in the exam were manually brushed. 
 
 
38/4 
41/3 
2/1 
44/3 
13/4 
7/3 
NF: 29/3 
NF: Wrong 
Card Side 
4/3 
NF: Card not 
raised 
4/3 
1/3 
8/4 
30/4 
5/3 
45/3 
39/3 
10/2  
30/4 
5/3 
45/3 
39/3 
10/2 
NF: Wrong 
Card Side 
20/1 
21/3 
NF: 24/4 
NF: 6/3 
31/4 
23/1 
35/4 
25/3 
33/3 
36/3 
NF: Card not 
raised 
NF: Card not 
raised 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-275-2
CONTENT 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Left: GUI of the IFS Card Printing Utility. 
Right: Folding IFS card to create “front” and “back” sides as shown in Fig. 2. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. An example of color markers recognition. All the markers of all 16 IFS cards (see Fig. 1) were successfully 
recognized as color rectangles. The calculated geometrical centers of the rectangles are marked as black dots. 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Left: Important angles between Color Markers and horizontal line. 
Right: Exemplary bounding of the three leftmost cards (from the Fig. 5) by distances and angles between markers. 
               Number of the answer is evaluated by the found card orientation.   
  
Point “M” 
Point “C” 
Point “Y” 
Answer #3 
Answer #3 
Answer #4 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-275-2
CONTENT 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

                  
 
 
Figure 7. Real IFS Exams Results. 
Left: GUI of “Image Recognition Utility”. Result of ImProc IFS exam #2.  
Image of the class was presented in Fig. 1. Processing time 18 sec.  
All 15 presented pairs {ID - number of answer} are correct for both algorithms. 
For the card #29 markers were successfully detected, number of the answer was successfully detected; however ID detection 
was failed (marked by Red callout in Fig. 1) probably because of backlight from the window: central region of the IFS card is 
more transparent than periphery region (see Fig. 4 right) 
 
Right:  Excel table created by “Image Recognition Utility”. Result of TAE IFS exam #6. 
Two images of the class were presented in Fig. 3. Processing time 35 sec.  
All 22 presented pairs {ID - number of answer} are correct for both algorithms. 
Some cards are seen as in the first as in the second images of the Fig. 3. 
In this case, last result is logged. For example: card #10 is not raised yet in the first image, but is raised in the second image.  
Three images from the last row were not recognized by the “Image Recognition utility”. (Marked by Red callout in Fig. 3) 
Probable reason for failed recognition is the lack of camera resolution.  
 
   
 
   
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-275-2
CONTENT 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

