Classification of Pathologic and Innocent Heart Murmur Based on Multimedia 
Presentations of Acoustic Heart Signals 
 
Božo Tomas 
University of Mostar, Faculty of Mechanical 
Engineering and Computing, Mostar 
University “Herzegovina”, Faculty of Social Sciences 
Dr. Milenko Brkić, Bijakovići  
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
bozo.tomas@hteronet.ba 
 
Željko Rončević 
University Clinical Hospital Mostar, 
Clinic for Children’s Diseases Mostar, 
Cardiology Department, Bosnia and Herzegovina 
zeljko.roncevic@mocable.ba 
 
Darko Zelenika 
University of Mostar, Faculty of Mechanical 
Engineering and Computing, Mostar 
University “Herzegovina”, Faculty of Social Sciences 
Dr. Milenko Brkić, Bijakovići 
Bosnia and Herzegovina 
darko_koga@hotmail.com 
 
Antonija Krtalić 
University “Herzegovina”, Faculty of Social Sciences 
Dr. Milenko Brkić 
Bijakovići, Bosnia and Herzegovina 
antonija.krtalic@hteronet.ba 
 
Abstract— Heart is a source of sound, a “live instrument” of 
very unstable structures. A sound produced by acoustic 
activity of the heart contains information about health state 
of the heart. However, very few physicians can establish 
medical diagnosis just by using the technique of listening of 
heart sounds called auscultation.  Spectral composition of 
acoustic heart beat signals in children without heart murmur 
(Normal), and with pathologic heart murmur of Ventricular 
Septal Defect (VSD) were compared with innocent Still’s 
murmur (Still) as to determine the parameters of the Still’s 
murmur. Goertzel algorithm implementation can provide a 
basic understanding of the spectral compositions of the heart 
sounds and murmurs. Still’s murmur is analyzed in more 
detail because it is incorrectly diagnosed by many doctors. 
The graphic illustrations in this paper include 3D graphic 
presentation of heart sound signals as the main achievement 
of the paper.  
Keywords-3D graphic presentation of a heart sound; 
Goertzel algorithm; Still’s heart murmur; time-frequency 
composition. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
It is well known that there are correlations between the 
health state of the heart and the sound produced by its 
beating. The quality of finding of the cardiac auscultation 
is influenced by previous knowledge, experience and even 
musical talent [1]. Heart auscultation, defined as the 
process of interpreting acoustic waves produced by the 
mechanical action of heart is a noninvasive, low-cost 
screening method and is used as fundamental tool in the 
diagnosis of cardiac diseases [2]. Unfortunately, heart 
sound interpretation by auscultations is very limited to 
human ear competence and depends highly on the skills 
and experience of the listener. At heart health diagnosis, 
the most important point is the selection between a healthy 
heart (there are no deformations on heart) and sick heart 
(there are deformations on heart). Deformations of the 
heart are manifested through pathologic murmurs, either 
there are no murmurs or there are innocent murmurs on a 
healthy heart [3]. 
 
The sound emitted by a normal cardiac cycle is 
composed of the first heart sound (S1), a time period 
between the first and second heart sound called systole, a  
second heart sound (S2) and  a time period between the 
second (S2) and first heart sound (S1) called diastole. 
Heart murmurs are extra sounds (noise) heard through 
systole or diastole. Systolic heart murmurs can be 
physiologic (innocent) without disease and pathologic 
caused by heart diseases. Innocent vibratory murmur was 
described for the first time in 1909 by an English 
paediatrician George F. Still (1868-1941) [4]. A good 
example of pathologic murmur is harsh systolic murmur of 
ventricular septal defect (VSD) caused by turbulent blood 
flow through a defect („a hole”) in ventricular septum. 
Cardiac auscultation, especially cardiac auscultation in 
children is a skill difficult to master. The human ears and 
stethoscope are not perfectly adapted to the heart sounds. 
Heart sound and murmurs are nonstationary in time and 
are arranged in the low frequency range. However, 
acoustic stethoscopes will be used for a long time but will 
gradually be repressed by electronic stethoscopes [5]. 
 
Spectral analysis of the heart sound data in most of 
published studies was obtained by applying a Fast Fourier 
Transform (FFT) and/or Wavelet Transform (WT) 
[2][6][7][8][9]. In this paper, the Goertzel algorithm was 
used and obtained results could be compared with FFT and 
WT. The algorithm was introduced by Gerald Goertzel 
(1920-2002) in 1958 [10]. 
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, 
recording and display of heart sound signals are shortly 
presented. The results of tone analysis in Still’s murmur 
are in Section III. 3D graphics presentations of a heart 
sounds and Still’s murmur are presented in Section IV. 
Section V concludes the paper with final remarks.  
II. ANALYSIS PROCEDURE 
During the children examination in outpatient clinic by 
the paediatric the cardiologists, their heart sounds were 
recorded with an electronic stethoscope. Each soundtrack 
of acoustic activity of the heart was taken for a period of 8 
seconds for each patient. Children were classified into 
34
CONTENT 2011 : The Third International Conference on Creative Content Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-157-1

three groups: children without heart murmur - Normal, 
children with physiological Still´s innocent murmur - Still 
and children with pathological murmur associated with 
congenital heart disease - VSD. All children were 
examined with ultrasound for accurate diagnosis of 
congenital heart disease. Fig. 1 shows one Normal, one 
Still and one VSD in time and Fig. 2 shows theirs 
spectrograms.  
 
(a)  
 
(b)  
 
(c)  
Figure 1. Heart sounds in time. (a) Normal in time. (b) Still in time. (c) 
VSD in time  
 
 
(a)  
 
(b)  
 
(c)  
Figure 2 Spectrogram of heart sounds. (a) Spectrogram of Normal. (b) 
Spectrogram of Still. (c)  Spectrogram of VSD 
Heart sound signals were recorded with electronic 
stethoscope 3M™ Littmann® Model 4000 in e4k format. 
After infrared transfer to a personal computer, signals 
were transformed to wav format with 3M™ Littmann® 
Sound Analysis Software. Spectrogram (based on FFT) 
and time performance of heart signals can be shown by 
this program. 
It can be seen from figures that Still begins after the 
end of the first heart sound (S1) and stops before the 
beginning of the second heart sound (S2). A Still’s 
murmur is audible from the beginning of the systole till 
after the mid systole.  Twenty (20) records of Still’s heart 
murmur, 20 of VSD and 10 records without murmur were 
used for time and spectral energy analyzing. 
Heart sounds were being recorded with sampling 
frequency of fu=8000 Hz and 16 bits of mono-
configuration and resolution of quantization. Further, the 
whole systolic duration was isolated (by hand) from the 
heart wav files, and recorded by name Still, VSD or 
Normal, depending on whether it was recording of 
innocent Still’s murmur, pathologic murmur of VSD or 
signal without murmur. This optimal sound sample was 
then processed using digital signal analysis.  
III. SOUND ANALYSIS OF STILL’S MURMUR 
Pre-recorded cardiac signals of 20 children with Still’s 
murmur are deduced for frequency of maximal sound 
energy and frequency bandwidth of Still’s murmur i.e., 
Still’s tone. For every cardiac signal, elapsed time of every 
systole is determined, and for that time interval is secluded 
(manually) for spectral analysis. Still begins to vibrate at 
the beginning of systole instantly after the end of first 
heart sound (S1) and stops before beginning of second 
heart sound (S2). Spectral analysis needs to be done in that 
interval. In that time interval (around 100 ms) in time 
frames of 20 ms, i.e., N=160 samples in discrete time 
spectral energy is calculated. 
Tuning coefficients (fixings) of frequency are set in 
that order that you can get frequency resolution of 5 Hz.  
Likewise spectral energy on selected time frame of systole 
is done within lag of 5 ms or 40 samples on discreet time 
axis. In Fig. 3, the spectral energy is shown in 5 
consecutive time frames (scanned of 40 ms of systole). 
Final position of Still’s time interval of 20 ms (N=160) is 
chosen on maximal point of its spectral energy. This Still’s 
murmur was recorded with amplification of 2x (in 
stethoscope) for better illustration.  
In Fig. 3, the spectral energy of third time frame is 
marked in red which represents maximal energy amount in 
scanned time. That time frame represents final time 
position of Stills’s murmur and in that frame frequency 
and bandwidth of Still’s murmur is calculated. For this 
Still’s murmur frequency is 130 Hz and bandwidth is 
around 50 Hz. In final time position Stills’s murmur is 
musical tone and it has maximal energy.  
Statistic analysis of 20 Still’s murmurs resulted that 
tones of Still’s murmur are situated on bandwidth span of 
90-170 Hz, while the average tone frequency is 118,75 Hz 
and the average bandwidth of Still’s murmur is 40,75 Hz. 
Frequency of tone is the frequency on which the murmur 
has maximal energy (top of curve in Fig. 3) and in most 
cases it is between 110 and 130 Hz. Frequency bandwidth 
35
CONTENT 2011 : The Third International Conference on Creative Content Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-157-1

(B =Fmax-Fmin) is determined in a way that frequency of 
tone falls in half of strength Fmin (left of the top of curve) 
and Fmax (right of the top of curve). 
 
Figure 3. Final position of Still’s murmur 
If we do not relocate a bit from the first tone S1 or if 
we analyze time frame at the end of systole we will not get 
Still’s musical tone because of the ending of the first tone 
S1 i.e., the beginning of the second tone S2. 
Likewise Fig. 3 clearly shows that Still’s murmur is 
mainly unsteady signal. Mainly all cardiac signals are 
unsteady in time span. Likewise spectral energy is mostly 
concentrated in narrow frequency bandwidth. The 
conclusion from represented material is that Still’s 
murmurs are real musical tones and Still’s murmur is a 
narrowband tone. That tone oscillates in frequency and 
amplitude. Still’s murmur begins in higher frequency and 
that frequency deteriorates in time. That change 
(deteriorating) of frequency is similar to glissando tone 
played on guitar. 
Likewise Still’s murmur oscillates on its amplitude 
during 
its 
brief 
lifespan 
(crescendo-decrescendo). 
Therefore Still’s murmur begins to play silently and is 
enhanced as it progresses and it is the loudest in the 
middle and after that gradually begins to decline and stops. 
All this occurs in systole. Still’s murmur begins at the start 
of systole, “plays” a bit longer than half of the systole and 
disappears by the next systole. 
IV. 3D GRAPHIC PRESENTATION OF STILL’S 
MURMUR S1 AND S2 
Sound, which transfers heart sound signal, carries 
many information about heart murmurs. In this study, 
systolic heart signals were analyzed. Spectral energy of 
VSD is chaotically distributed in a broad frequency 
spectrum bandwidth between 80-500 Hz and frequency of 
the biggest VSDs peak is bigger than 200 Hz.  Spectral 
energy of Still and Normal is regularly distributed in 
narrow frequency bandwidth under 200 Hz. Still has 
resonance in frequency bandwidth between 90-170 Hz 
while Normal has no resonance. Spectral energy below 80 
Hz was mainly caused by ambient noise and by late 
oscillations of first heart sound. At early systole there are 
two sounds at the same time: the late oscillations of the 
first heart sound in low frequency about 70 Hz and the 
beginning of resonance of Still’s murmur at higher 
frequency about 150 Hz [11]. Human ear can’t distinct it. 
Fig. 4 illustrates the distribution of spectral energies of 
the first heart sound S1, the second heart sound S2 and 
Still’s murmur in final time positions. Spectral energy was 
calculated on time frames of 25 ms, i.e., N=200 samples in 
discrete time. Spectral energy was calculated with distance 
points of 4 Hz. This signal is amplified by 2x. 
 
Figure 4. Comparison of the spectrum energy of Still S1 and S2  
Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 illustrate 3D graphic presentations of 
spectral composition of one typical cardiac signal with 
Still’s murmur. 
 
Figure 5. Time – frequency composition of Still’s heart murmur 
 
36
CONTENT 2011 : The Third International Conference on Creative Content Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-157-1

 
Figure 6. Time – frequency distribution of the spectrum energy of 
Still’s heart murmur 
 
These time-varying frequency graphic presentations show 
the distribution of spectral energy of heart sounds S1 and 
S2 as well as Still’s murmur. Time frames are 25 ms, i.e., 
N=200 samples in discrete time and spectral energy was 
calculated with distance points of 8 Hz. The first heart 
sound S1 as well as the second heart sound S2 have bigger 
energy and lower frequency than Still’s murmur. 
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Heart sounds are a good example of periodic, yet 
variable physiological signals [9]. Since heart sounds 
exhibit marked changes with time and frequency, they are 
therefore 
classified 
as 
nonstationary 
signals. 
To 
understand the exact feature of such signals, it is thus 
important, to study their time–frequency characteristics 
[6].  
The differences between the frequency parameters and 
the spectral compositions of heart signals with innocent 
and with pathologic murmurs are determined and shown in 
this paper. For spectral analysis of the cardio signals 
(recorded by the stethoscope) the Goertzel algorithm was 
used. It was shown that the frequency parameters as well 
as the spectral compositions of innocent Still's murmur 
and pathologic VSD murmur clearly differed. The spectral 
display of the cardio signals could be diagnostic assistance 
system for the classification of these murmurs in other 
words for the health diagnosis of a patient (auscultation-
visual diagnosis).  
Doctors using auscultation technique for VSD murmur 
mostly give right diagnosis, but in case of Still's murmur 
incorrect diagnosis are very often. In order to help doctors 
in recognition of innocent Still's murmur and of course and 
other murmurs, it is necessary to create software solutions 
with graphical displays of the cardio signals spectral 
energy in real time. Such software would be good tool to 
doctors at cardiac diagnosis. This paper is one of the first 
steps in creating such a software package. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This paper is funded by the Bosnian-Herzegovinian 
Federal Ministry of Education and Sciences within the 
scientific research project in 2010. The title of this project 
is: Classification of Pathologic and Innocent Heart 
Murmur Based on Multimedia Presentations of Acoustic 
Heart Signals. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
B. Tomas and Ž. Rončević, “Spectral Analysis of Heart 
Murmurs in Children by Goertzel Algorithm,“ The 
First International Conference on Creative Content 
Technologies CONTENT 2009, November 15-20,  
Athens/Glyfada, Greece, pp. 612-615 
[2] 
F. Javed, P.A. Venkatachalam, and M.H. Ahmed 
Fadzil, “A Signal Processing Module for the Analysis 
of Heart Sound and Heart Murmurs,“ Journal of 
Physics, Conference Series 34 (2006), pp. 1098-1105  
[3] 
B. Tomas, Ž. Rončević, D. Zelenika, and A. Krtalić, 
“Pathologic and Inocent Heart Murmurs Classification 
by Spectral Analysis of Acoustic Cardiosignals,“ 18th 
Telecommunications Forum TELFOR 2010, 23-25 
November, Belegrade – Serbia (in Serbian), pp. 575-
578 
[4] 
G.F. Still, “Common disorders and diseases of 
chilhood,“ 1st ed. London: Frowde, Hodder & 
Stoughton, 1909. 
[5] 
Ž. Rončević, “Is there future for cardiac auscultation in 
children?,” Paediatr Croat 2009; 53 (Supl 1), pp. 27-29 
(in Croatian) 
 http://hpps.kbsplit.hr/hpps-2009/pdf/dok06.pdf 
[6]  
S.M. 
Amin 
Debbal 
and 
Bereksi-Reguig 
Fethi, 
“Features for Heartbeat Sound Signal Normal and 
Pathological,” Recent Patents on Computer Science, 
2008, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 1-8 
[7] 
D.A. Balster, D.P. Chan, D.G. Rowland, and H.D. 
Allen, „Digital Acoustic Analysis of Precordial 
Innocent Versus Ventricular Septal Defect Murmurs in 
Children,“  The American Journal of Cardiology, 1997 
Jun 1, vol. 79, no. 11,  pp. 1552-1555.  
[8] 
M. Unser and A. Aldroubi, “A Review of Wavalets in 
Biomedical Applications,” Proceedings of the IEEE, 
vol. 84, no. 4, April 1996, pp. 626-638, doi: 
10.1109/5.488704. 
[9] 
G. Amit, N. Gavriely, and N. Intrator, “Cluster 
Analysis 
and 
Classification of 
Heart 
Sounds,” 
Biomedical Signal Processing and Control 4 (2009), 
pp. 26-36  
[10] 
G. Goertzel, “An algorithm for the evaluation of finite 
trigonometric series,“ American Mathematics Monthly, 
vol. 65, (January 1958), pp. 34-35 
[11] 
M. El-Segaier, O. Lilja, S. Lukkarinen, L. Sornmo, R. 
Sepponen, 
and 
E. 
Pesonen, 
“Computer-Based 
Detection and Analysis of Heart Sound and Murmur,” 
Annals of Biomedical Engineering, vol. 33, no. 7, July 
2005, pp. 937-942  
 
http://circ.ahajournals.org/cgi/content/full/103/22/2711 
37
CONTENT 2011 : The Third International Conference on Creative Content Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-157-1

