Video Teaching Materials to Train Deaf or Hard-of-Hearing Curators in Museums 
 
Miki Namatame 
Department of Industrial Information 
Tsukuba University of Technology  
Tsukuba, Japan 
miki@a.tsukuba-tech.ac.jp 
Masami Kitamura 
Department of Industrial Information 
Tsukuba University of Technology  
Tsukuba, Japan 
m-kitamr@a.tsukuba-tech.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract—We aimed to improve the information accessibility 
of museums based on the principles of “universal design” and 
“design for all.” Focusing on visitors who used sign language, 
we trained a curator to offer explanations via sign language to 
communicate scientific facts to visitors who were Deaf or 
Hard-of-Hearing (HOH). Demonstration training for hearing 
curators consists of observing the lecturer’s movements, 
dialogue with visitors, and consultation of teaching materials 
while listening to explanations. However, if trainees are 
persons with hearing impairment, they cannot observe the sign 
language interpreter, instructor’s movements, and teaching 
materials simultaneously. Consequently, trainees may overlook 
important explanations and dialogue with visitors. To address 
this problem, we recorded the lesson and created a video with 
captions for review. The materials can be operated on a tablet 
device, allowing trainees to study freely. We created two pieces 
of content, “shark eggs and sharkskin” and “human bone,” 
which were used in the aquarium and science museum, 
respectively. In this report, we describe the need for contents 
for visitors with hearing impairment in Section I and then 
introduce our related content for them and presents the reason 
to nurture curators who are sign language users with hearing 
impairment. Section III presents our curator training 
materials designed for trainees of sign language users who are 
Deaf or HOH. Lastly, we describe our future work. 
Keywords- science museum; training materials; Deaf or 
HOH curators; content design. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The definition of museum adopted by the International 
Council of Museums states [1]: “A museum is a non-profit, 
permanent institution… for the purposes of study, education 
and enjoyment.” Since the establishment of the Disability 
Discrimination Act in 1995 [2], advocacy for persons with 
disabilities has been a priority in most institutions. Museums 
therefore seek to reflect information in the discussion of 
museum research, policy, and practices. However, Atkinson 
[3] has warned that while exploring a museum collection 
constitutes a very visual experience, “deaf audiences are one 
of the most neglected by museums.”  
According to the World Health Organization [4], there 
are 466 million people in the world who suffer from hearing 
loss. The World Federation of the Deaf estimates that there 
are about 70 million deaf people worldwide who use sign 
language as their first language or mother tongue. The 
National Deaf Center [5] explains that persons with hearing 
impairment who are Deaf or HOH have different 
communication needs. Goss [6] advised that a wide range of 
multilingual communication is required for the diverse range 
of museum visitors who are Deaf or HOH. We therefore 
explored the different communication needs of Deaf and 
HOH individuals that must be addressed to break down both 
the physical and intellectual barriers they face in museums.  
In this paper, we use the “uppercase D” Deaf to describe 
the cultural identity of people with hearing loss who share a 
common culture and have a shared sign language. HOH is 
used to indicate people with Japanese as their first language 
who lip-read and use hearing aids as well as sign language to 
help their communication. The remainder of the paper is 
organized as follows. Section II introduces the related works 
and presents the reason to nurture curators who are sign 
language users with hearing impairment. Section III presents 
our curator training materials designed for trainees of sign 
language users who are Deaf or HOH. Section IV compress 
point out the advantages of training materials using media 
technology for training curators with hearing impairment. 
II. 
PREVIOUS AND RELATED WORKS 
Sanagustín [7] reported on the effects of Quick Response 
(QR) codes in museums, stating that visitors prefer direct 
mechanisms for obtaining information about the exhibits, 
such as text on a panel or videos on a screen. Consequently, 
Namatame [8] initially provided the Japanese sign language 
explanation via QR code technology at an aquarium in 
Japan. QR codes are a cost-effective way of providing 
opportunities to transform the public’s experience in 
museum-like spaces. When visitors captured the QR codes in 
front of the aquarium tanks, explanations appeared that used 
sign language videos and superimposed captions, including 
KANA. This enabled us to implement a convenient system 
that encourages Deaf visitors to visit museums and enlighten 
themselves using the sign language explanations offered by 
QR code technology.  
Deaf or HOH visitor groups who visit museums can be 
categorized into the following three groups: “spoken-
focused,” “simultaneous language,” and “sign language-
focused.” For the convenience of Deaf visitors who are sign 
language-focused, we designed the tour with a sign language 
interpreter in the science museum. Martins [9] has reported 
that Deaf visitors’ engagement is enhanced when tours are 
given by Deaf tour guides, so we tried to nurture curator sign 
language users who are Deaf or HOH. Doing so required that 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-782-5
CONTENT 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

we first design teaching materials for Deaf or HOH trainees. 
The Deaf or HOH trainees who came forward as candidates 
for this project were interested in science and had to be 
capable of using Japanese sign language to communicate and 
reading written Japanese without difficulty. 
The next section reports the teaching materials we 
designed for trainees who are Deaf or HOH. 
III. 
TRAINING MATERIALS DESIGN 
In the demonstration training for curators, a hearing 
person can observe the lecturer’s movements and dialogue 
with visitors, while consulting the teaching materials and 
listening to the explanations. However, Deaf or HOH 
trainees are unable to see the sign language interpreter, 
instructor’s movements, and materials at the same time. 
Consequently, trainees may overlook important explanations 
and dialogue with visitors. We therefore recorded the lesson 
and created a video with captions for review. The materials 
can be operated on a tablet device, meaning trainees can 
study freely. We created two pieces of content. One was 
“shark eggs and shark skins,” to be used in the aquarium, and 
the other was “human bone,” to be used in the science 
museum. 
A. Training Materials for Curators who Provide In-Person 
Explanations 
The training materials were designed for the trainees to 
use at the space in the aquarium called the “desk.” This space 
consists of a desk with some shark eggs and a shark skin 
displayed between the visitor and the curator, enabling the 
lecture to progress while communicating face to face (see 
Fig. 1). The curators in the lecture corner provide visitor 
experiences and in-person explanations and require 
conversational skills to provide visitors with new knowledge 
and stimulate their curiosity as well as the ability to field 
questions appropriately. 
The training program was conducted from September 7, 
2019 to December 5, 2019. The training process involved a 
team of four people: a Deaf curator candidate, an aquarium 
curator, a sign language interpreter, and an information 
supporter. It was designed to follow four units: individual 
visitor experiences, the study of knowledge about sharks 
using books, observation of demonstrations to learn how to 
interact with visitors, and a rehearsal. The individual training 
could be supported by both sign language interpreters and 
information supporters. However, the observation of 
demonstrations was very difficult for the trainee who was 
Deaf, the interpreter, and the information supporter, for 
several reasons: the voice conversation between the customer 
and the curator was fast and simultaneous. In addition, the 
voice conversation was conducted with the face turned down 
as the user touched several materials, one after the other. The 
time lag between the conversation and the interpreter’s 
actions had disastrous consequences, and the trainee was 
unable to lip-read because the speakers’ faces were turned 
down. 
We designed two training materials based on our 
observation of demonstrations to help solve this problem. 
We used a speech recognition system to instantly transcribe 
the description from the curator’s voice. In addition, we 
photographed the materials to be touched on the spot with 
the transcribed text that was then superimposed on the 
images (see Fig. 3). Moreover, the video was recorded at a 
fixed point, with a focus on the hand. After observing the 
demonstrations, these videos were captioned and provided to 
the trainees who were deaf to help them learn how to better 
interact with visitors (see Fig. 4). 
B. Training Materials for Curators who Provide 
Classroom-Style Lectures 
These training materials were designed for trainees 
working in the “school program” at the science museum that 
is intended for school organizations. Participants in this 
program are students and schoolteachers. Students are led by 
the schoolteachers, and they listen to the lecture in groups 
(see Fig. 2). The materials and lecture rooms are provided by 
the museum. There are fixed scenarios in the content of the 
lecture, and the curator leads the class accordingly. Curators 
must have proficient teaching skills to encourage students’ 
spontaneous thinking and promote the joy of discovery. They 
must also possess the ability to keep students engaged and 
answer questions correctly.  
We conducted the training program from November 5, 
2019, to December 6, 2019, with a team that consisted of an 
HOH trainee, a curator, an interpreter, a supporter, and a 
volunteer lecturer of the science museum. The primary 
training concerned how to teach appropriately. This program 
was very difficult for the HOH trainee, interpreter, and 
information supporter. The scenario involved several 
technical terms such as “skull,” “rib,” and “pelvis.” The 
trainee was unable to comprehend the instructor’s voice and, 
thus, encourage students’ awareness in real time. The trainee 
was also unable to hear the unspecified number of students’ 
voices, meaning he did not know why the instructor was 
making such remarks. In the classroom-style lecture, it was 
very important to understand the situation of the students and 
the timing of the instructor’s utterances. 
We designed the video materials for the lecture, which 
were divided in the unit according to the scenarios. The 
teaching materials consisted of multiple captioned videos, 
the scenario, a Q & A section, a figure with bone names, and 
the main menu. The trainee selected the necessary units from 
the menu and could study freely (see Fig. 5, 6). 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
To comprehend the design and technology of suitable 
content that guarantees information accessibility for the Deaf 
or HOH trainee, we prepared the following combinations: 
the technical approach (automatic speech recognition and 
authoring), museum type (aquarium vs. science museum), 
and presentation scenario (face-to-face vs. classroom). In the 
paper’s conclusion, we outline a methodology for adapting 
the proposed materials to other types of scenarios or different 
educational contexts.  
This report introduced training materials for Deaf or 
HOH curators in a science museum and an aquarium. The 
training materials could be operated on a tablet device and 
were shown to be very good tools for enabling Deaf or HOH 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-782-5
CONTENT 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

curators in the science museum and aquarium. Two 
technology patterns were used to create the training 
materials. The first approach involved using speech 
recognition 
technology 
to 
rapidly 
superimpose 
the 
description of the real material. The second approach was to 
add captions to the video using an authoring technique.  
Practical research in museums has taught us that the 
interpreter time lag represents a barrier to understanding 
conversations. Moreover, the physical distance of the 
exhibits and showcases impedes the ability to point at 
displays directly. 
Technologies for superimposition of descriptions and 
speech recognition can be used to correctly indicate 
exhibition points. Video teaching materials can also 
reproduce subtitles to solve the time lag between the speaker 
and the interpreter and help Deaf or HOH individuals to 
understand 
conversations. 
Furthermore, 
multimedia 
technology can represent the dialogue setting and teaching 
materials on the same screen. This research convinced us that 
training materials using media technology were essential for 
training curators with hearing impairment. 
Such types of content are adaptable and flexible for use 
in other types of scenarios or different educational contexts. 
However, they serve different purposes: one is suited to real-
time communication about exhibits, and the other is suited to 
self-learning.  
Future work is needed to evaluate the effectiveness of 
such training materials for Deaf or HOH trainees. The 
addition of sign language descriptions is planned for the next 
version of the video training material. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant 
Number 18H01046. We would like to thank the National 
Museum of Nature and Science and Aqua World Ibaraki 
Prefectural Oarai Aquarium. This study has been approved 
by the research ethics committee of the Tsukuba University 
of Technology (H30-4). 
REFERENCES 
[1] ICOM 
Statutes, 
“Section 
II-Definitions 
Article 
3,”  
http://archives.icom.museum/hist_def_eng.html, 
1974.  
retrieved: Jul. 2020. 
[2] Legislation. gov. uk, “Disability discrimination act 1995,” 
https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1995/50/data.pdf. 
retrieved: Jul. 2020. 
[3] R. Atkinson, “Opening up museums to deaf audiences,” 
Museum 
Practice, 
Museums 
Association. 
https://www.museumsassociation.org/museum-
practice/15022012-deaf-audiences-news, 2012. retrieved: Jul. 
2020. 
[4] World Health Organization, “Fact report: Deafness and 
hearing 
loss,” 
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-
sheets/detail/deafness-and-hearing-loss, 2019. retrieved: Jul. 
2020. 
[5] National 
Deaf 
Center, 
“Communicating 
with 
Deaf 
individuals,” 
https://www.nationaldeafcenter.org/sites/default/files/Commu
nicating with Deaf Individuals.pdf. retrieved: Jul. 2020. 
[6] J. Goss, E. K. Kollmann, C. Reich and S. Iacovelli, 
“Understanding the multilingualism and communication of 
museum visitors who are d/Deaf or hard of hearing,” 
Museums & Social Issues. vol. 10, pp. 52–65, 2015. 
[7] M. Pérez-Sanagustín, D. Parra, R. Verdugo, G. García-
Galleguillos and M. Nussbaum, “Using QR codes to increase 
user engagement in museum-like spaces,”  Computers in 
Human Behavior, vol. 60, pp. 73–85, 2016. 
[8] M. Namatame, M. Kitamura, D. Wakatsuki, M. Kobayashi, 
M. Miyagi and N. Kato, “Can exhibit-explanations in sign 
language contribute to the accessibility of aquariums?”  21st 
International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction. 
Proceedings Part I, vol. 33, pp. 289–294, 2019. 
[9] P. R. Martins, “Engaging the d/Deaf audience in museums: A 
case study at the Calouste Gulbenkian Museum,” Journal of 
Museum Education, vol. 41, no. 3, 202–209, 2016. 
 
 
 
 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-782-5
CONTENT 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

 
 
 
Figure 1.  Snapshot of the face-to-face lecture 
Figure 2.  Snapshot of the classroom-style lecture 
 
 
Figure 3.  Screenshot of speech recognition text  
superimposed on the image 
Figure 4.  Screenshot of video training materials to learn  
how to interact with visitors 
 
 
Figure 5.  Main menu of the training materials  
implemented on a tablet PC 
Figure 6.  Screenshot of the training materials  
with instruction points and the status video of the class 
If the egg floats off 
somewhere, it is in trouble. 
Well, the best environment for eggs is 
where their parents live. 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-782-5
CONTENT 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

