Architectural Considerations for the System Landscape of the Digital Transformation
Hans-Werner Sehring
Tallence AG
Hamburg, Germany
Email: hans-werner.sehring@tallence.com
Abstract—Since the advent of the World Wide Web the
latest, there is a growing adoption of digital media for different
purposes. It started with mere consumption through information
and entertainment services, and expanded to the engagement of
users with service providers in commercial and governmental
affairs. As a consequence, services are extended into different
directions: the communication channels used by clients, the
improvement of services by including information on users and
usage contexts, up to the goods or services in themselves that are
being delivered. To this end, established processes, even ones at
the core of a company’s value adding chain, have to be thought
over, optimized, or even restructured. The importance of these
kind of adaptations for current enterprises led to the coining
of the term digitalization or digital transformation for them.
Since systems for the support of digitalized processes consist of
many products and services that are assembled or coordinated,
a consideration of their overall system architecture is required.
In face of ready-to-use solutions that are available for speciﬁc
functionality, and also of the availability of larger ecosystems
that enable digitalized processes, often the architecture is dictated
by the components that are available in practice. Architectural
considerations that start with requirements and constraints
instead have to be applied in order to achieve the engineering
quality of other software solutions, and to meet non-functional
requirements like maintainability. The contribution of this paper
is a ﬁrst step into that direction. It starts with an analysis of
typical functional requirements of systems for the support of
digitalized processes. From these, it presents a ﬁrst approach to
an integrated architecture for digitalized systems, and it maps
requirements to common software components and services that
typically implement parts of the architecture.
Keywords—Digitization; Digitalization; Digital transformation;
Software architecture; Systems architecture; Solution architecture;
Enterprise architecture.
I. INTRODUCTION
Since the advent of the World Wide Web the latest, there is
a growing adoption of digital media for different purposes.
It started with mere consumption through information and
entertainment services, and expanded to the engagement of
users with service providers in commercial and governmental
affairs. Services, to this end, are extended into different
directions: the communication channels used by clients, the
inclusion of information on users and usage contexts into
service delivery, up to the goods or services in themselves
that are being delivered.
Nowadays, practically every business is required to offer in-
formation, fulﬁllment (e.g., sold goods or delivered services),
and support over the Internet through its website, speciﬁc
apps for touch devices, social media appearances, etc. [1]
This requirement is not limited to digital goods. In fact, it
has long been extended to the real world. Companies engage
with clients through digital services in ways that are oriented
at the clients’ needs and preferences. This includes the choice
of communication channels, as well as channel changes in the
course of a process, or even the process as a whole.
The increased engagement of clients with service providers
in conjunction with both the fact that demands are posed by
the clients and the need to rethink processes led to the coining
of the term digitalization or digital transformation for the
wider approach. Its importance is underlined by the facts that
most parts of the IT industry are now working in the ﬁeld of
digitalization and that some governments devised action plans
to encourage digital service improvements.
There is no rigid deﬁnition of what digital transformation
is or what it includes. Sometimes, the terms digitization,
digitalization, and digital transformation are interpreted as
three aspects of the transformation of processes [2]. One
attempt by Gartner for a deﬁnition is “the use of digital
technologies to change a business model and provide new
revenue and value-producing opportunities; it is the process
of moving to a digital business.” [3]
Technology is, therefore, an important driver for such busi-
ness goals. In addition to its classical functions as computing
machinery, data storage, and communication medium, the
further employment of data and IT infrastructure forms the
basis of the digital transformation [4]. With respect to systems
support for client interactions, these require going beyond the
mere utilization of IT infrastructure for the support of es-
tablished processes. Quite the opposite, established processes,
even ones at the core of a company’s value adding chain, have
to be thought over, optimized, or even restructured [5] in order
to reach the new goals.
Since systems for the support of digitalized processes
consist of many products and services that are assembled
or coordinated, a consideration of the overall architecture is
required. In face of the ready-to-use solutions that are available
for speciﬁc functionality, and also of the availability of larger
ecosystems that enable digitalized processes, often the scope
and structure of applications are dictated by the components
that are being used. This is an observation that can be made
in practice, similar to Conway’s law.
A return to old values of systems architecture seems due in
order to construct systems based on requirements and with the
aim of business value, not the other way round. Furthermore,
taking a software engineering approach to the construction
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-782-5
CONTENT 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

of systems for digitalized processes allows achieving the
engineering quality of other software solutions, and it allows
meeting non-functional requirements like maintainability.
The contribution of this paper is a ﬁrst step into that direc-
tion. It starts with an analysis of typical functional require-
ments to systems for the support digitalized processes. From
these, it presents a ﬁrst approach of an integrated architecture
for digital systems, and it maps requirements to usual software
components and services that typically implement parts of the
architecture.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: The scope
of the digital transformation is outlined by Section II. In
Section III, we give an overview of the functionality that is
expected from modern IT systems of digitalized institutions.
Section IV presents a selection of software systems, services,
and components that deliver such functionality. The paper
closes with a summary and an outlook in Section V.
II. DIGITALIZATION OF ENTERPRISES
The introductory section already introduced characteristics
of the digital transformation. Further characteristics and tech-
nological considerations follow.
A. Digital Transformation Goals
The digital transformation can no longer be handled separate
from the “real world”. Both physical as well as digital channels
are used equally. Or, put the other way around: “Every business
is now a digital business.” [6]. Companies need to (actively)
maintain customer relationships over all channels, processes
must not be hindered by media barriers between channels,
companies collect different data on product sales and on
product use, etc. In essence, more and more of an enterprise’s
processes will be transferred to the digital domain. This is
particularly important for, but not restricted to customer-facing
interactions.
This paper concentrates on processes by which institutions
interact with clients. In particular, it focuses on companies that
interact with their customers and, therefore, on interactions and
client engagement.
The paper does not, e.g., consider the digitalization of en-
gineering processes (compare Computer-Aided Design, CAD,
Computer-Aided Manufacturing, CAM, Computer-Integrated
Manufacturing, CIM, and similar technologies). It does also
not cover aspects of digitalization driven by recent technolo-
gies like, e.g., the Internet of Things (IOT), applications for
Industry 4.0 [7], Radio-Frequency Identiﬁcation (RFID), Near
Field Communication (NFC), or Beacons to collect customer
data through devices, and modern payment methods like
crypto currencies.
An understanding of customers is derived, among other
data sources, from information on customer journeys. They
are formed by all (inter)actions of customer with respect to
a current activity. For example, all web searches, web page
reads, and commercial transactions connected to a purchase
form the customer journey of buying a product. For a more
ﬁne-grained determination of the points of contact on a cus-
tomer journey, Google proposed “micro-moments” that exhibit
customers’ intent, context, and immediacy [8].
On top of the technical abilities, further important factors for
the ongoing transformation are the willingness of consumers
to take part in a digital economy and to stay informed, even
if this means putting some privacy concerns aside, as well as
the recognition of potential economic beneﬁts of digitization
and the need to foster them [9].
B. Digital Transformation Technology
Since this paper focuses on interactions between compa-
nies with their customers, system support mainly consists of
commerce functions like marketing, sales, and customer care.
There are many other aspects and opportunities related
to the digital transformation. In particular, there are other
technology-driven aspects of digitalization. Topics include, to
name just two examples, big data, e.g., behavioral data (track-
ing, purchases, etc.) on customers, and artiﬁcial intelligence
and machine learning approaches, e.g., to the analysis of big
data [10].
A plethora of products and services for digitalized enter-
prises is emerging [11]. The “Marketing Technology Land-
scape Supergraphic” [12] visualizes this for 8,000 of them.
Some of the products and services provide rather isolated func-
tionality, some try to cover a larger portion of digitalization
requirements such as integrated solutions like product suites or
service collections (by some providers called marketing clouds
or similar).
In concert, the partial solutions allow digitally transforming
a company’s processes at affordable cost. The application-
speciﬁc combination of products and services allows compa-
nies to realize competitive advantages while keeping up with
the state-of-the-art in communication with reasonable effort.
When the technical landscape that drives digital enterprises
is realized by the composition of a range of components, there
are many communication relations between them. Commu-
nication requires interfaces that ensure a coherent handling
of data and its interpretations, a common understanding of
customers in each of the components, etc. To this end, the
architecture of such technical landscapes has to be deﬁned.
III. HIGH-LEVEL ARCHITECTURE CONSIDERATION
Without formally giving a deﬁnition for architecture, we
start by studying functional building blocks of systems for
digitalized enterprises. They are assumed to be the architec-
tural building blocks of a logical architecture. In contrast to
common practice, we do not want to start with the considera-
tion of concrete components. We use the term component for
both a software product and a service.
The aim is to be able to talk about requirements and
solutions in general, to study functionality and dataﬂows. We
want to avoid the premature assignment of responsibilities to
services, and also the concentration on data exchange, data
conversions, etc., as it is often found in practice.
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-782-5
CONTENT 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

Presentation
Transaction
Management
Content
Management
Customer
Data
Enterprise
Ressource
Planning
Webpage
Client / Touch 
App
Social
Media
Content 
Editing
Ordering
Tracking Data
Customer 
Journeys
PIM
Contact Data
Payment 
Information
PLM
Catalogue
Stock
Quotes
Pricing
Procurement 
Catalogue
Buying 
History
Print
Email
Banner Ads
Playout
Interaction
Document 
Delivery
Streaming
User-
generated 
Content
Product 
Configuration
Shopping 
Basket
Quality 
Assurance
Logistics 
Interface
Personali-
zation
Content 
Planning
Support
Functions
API
Support 
History
Figure 1. Functional building blocks of a high level architecture.
Figure 1 highlights some of the functional building blocks of
an architecture. In the subsequent subsections, we study some
of them. The outer boxes are arranged as a layered architecture
in order to visualize service dependencies in general. In the
vertical dimension, the lower components each offer services
to the components that graphically are placed above them.
A. Content Publishing
Systems for digital enterprises often consider the World
Wide Web (WWW) as one of their primary channels through
which they communicate with their clients. Subsequently,
many of these systems are centered around a Content Man-
agement System (CMS) or another web-based system. Figure 2
shows the components that contribute to a publishing process
that addresses multiple channels.
A content management component primarily incorporates
functionality to store and manage content. Often, structured
(text and structure of text documents) and unstructured content
(images, sound, moving image, etc.) are distinguished because
of their different properties and the different functions asso-
ciated with their management. Unstructured content is then
managed by a Digital Asset Management (DAM) system.
Presentation
Content
Management
Webpage
Client / Touch 
App
Content 
Editing 
(Structured)
License 
Management
Playout
Document 
Delivery
Streaming
Quality 
Assurance 
(Structured)
Content 
Planning
API
Content 
Editing 
(Unstructured)
Quality 
Assurance 
(Unstructured)
Video Player
Figure 2. Content management components.
Content management typically includes quality assurance.
Some products achieve it by content staging. They copy
content that is ready for publication to a speciﬁc component
that delivers content to the playout components. Rules and
workﬂows may be associated with quality assurance.
A playout component is employed to distribute documents
that are created from content.
The receiver of such documents is a client that serves for
their presentation. Interactive applications can also be found
on this layer, e.g., JavaScript apps embedded in webpages or
touch apps for mobile devices. For those, an API may be
provided on the playout level that gives access to different
services of the other components.
B. Personalization
By means of personalization, the documents and services
that are delivered are individualized for speciﬁc users. Target-
ing is the approach to this that is found is practice most often.
The component interplay for general personalization is shown
in Figure 3.
Personalization can be applied on the level of content, as
well as on the level of content representations. Content person-
alization is built into some CMS products. The personalization
Presentation
Content Mgmt
Webpage
Content 
Editing
Playout
Document 
Delivery
Quality 
Assurance
Web Browser / 
Device
Customer Data
Tracking Data
Customer 
Journeys
Contact Data
Payment 
Information
Support 
History
Buying
History
Personaliza-
tion Rules
Figure 3. Components involved in personalized document delivery.
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-782-5
CONTENT 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

Presentation
Transaction
Management
Content Mgmt
Customer Data  
Ordering
Document 
Rendering
Tracking Data
Customer 
Journeys
Contact Data
Buying 
History
Sales Rep 
App
Web Browser / 
Device
Figure 4. Components for the management of customer data.
of representations can also be fulﬁlled by a service that is
provided outside the CMS.
On both levels, personalization is normally performed by
evaluating rules on the basis on a classiﬁcation of customers
that is derived from their behavior [13].
Tracking is the most basic way to observe users’ behavior.
For content personalization, the utilization of pieces of content
during document rendering is monitored. Accesses to web
pages are typically recorded for document personalization.
Tracking is performed by some (web) tracking or tag man-
agement service.
C. Consumer Data Management
One of the pillars of the digital transformation is the
involvement of clients. Therefore, it is obvious that a company
needs to know its customers and, therefore, collect data on
them. This is done for two reasons: Firstly, the data is of value
in itself, e.g., to be able to identify customers and prospects
that might be interested in offers. Secondly, the data is used
to fulﬁll services better.
An excerpt of an architecture for the management of cus-
tomer data is shown in Figure 4.
There are multiple components available that collect in-
formation on users. The previous subsection already named
tracking services as a source of data on customer behavior.
Also, the commerce functions allow to access historical data,
e.g., on past purchases. Customer Relationship Management
(CRM) systems are the primary class of systems for customer
data. These allow to structure customer information in order to
record contact information, purchases and other interactions,
the communication history, etc. A CRM is typically main-
tained by sales personnel.
In a digitalization scenario, a CRM system needs to be
extended with the other sources of data about customers, and
in particular the collection of information that originates from
all channels the customers use. The increased user database is
also called a Customer Data Platform (CDP).
The sales rep app depicted in Figure 4 represents a typical
client-side software application that is used in sales talks,
product presentations, etc. It uses material that is delivered
by, e.g., a CMS, and it is typically used to create and update
records in a CRM.
Another potential use of customer information lies in the ex-
tension of personalization and recommendations, often called
Customer Journey Orchestration. It relies on the aggregated
Advertising
Content
Mgmt.
SSP
Content 
Editing 
(Advertising)
Playout
Document 
Delivery
Quality 
Assurance 
(Advertising)
Customer Data
ERP
Contact Data
Pricing
Interaction
Campaign 
Management
Email
DSP
Figure 5. Retargeting components.
information collected on different channels, and it is used to
personalize whole customer journeys, i.e., series of interac-
tions at different touchpoints.
D. Retargeting
A customer journey may lead a user away from the digital
touchpoints of a company (or some other institution), for
example, to get information from somewhere else. Companies
want to keep the users’ focus user on their customer journey
and to encourage the users to return to one of their touchpoints
once they feel informed. The process of re-attracting customers
is called retargeting.
One common means for retargeting on the web are adverts
on foreign websites. For example, when a customer leaves a
company’s website and visits another one, a banner ad placed
on that other one leads the user back to the company’s website.
In the best case, the ad is personalized for the customer [14].
The URL underlying the ad might, e.g., direct the user to a
landing page for recurring users that displays a personalized
offer.
Components and data ﬂows for retargeting are shown in
Figure 5. Ad servers choose an ad to be displayed on a
webpage that offers ad space. They operate on a marketplace
for ads on which companies register ads, and from which
websites fetch one.
A service for the management of registered ads is called
a Demand Side Platform (DSP). A company might use its
content management systems (CMS and DAM) to manage
publicity material and to hand it over to the DSP. Further
information might include, also indicated in the ﬁgure, a
rebated price for a personalized offer to be made by an ad,
and a campaign key, so that the campaign management tool
can measure the success of a retargeting campaign.
Websites that include ads retrieve them from a Supply
Side Platform (SSP) service that chooses and delivers ads on
demand. The SSP retrieves the ads from the DSP.
Another common tool for retargeting is email. This is also
sketched in Figure 5. The campaign management tool triggers
email delivery when retargeting is appropriate. The email body
may come from a CMS, the recipient’s email address from the
customer data management system.
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-782-5
CONTENT 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

Customer 
Data Platform
User Interaction
Document
Processing
Presentation
Playout
Backend /
Data
Digital Asset Mgmt. System
Commerce Platform
Content Management System
ERP
Webpage
Client App
Touch App
Social Media
Quality 
Assurance
Shopping
Basket
Web Tracking
Campaign 
Management
Editing
DAM
CRM
PLM
Catalogue
Stock Quotes
Pricing
Procurement 
Catalogue
Forum and 
Support
Print
Web Server
Template Engine
CDN
API Gateway
Image MAM
Document Personalization
Content 
Personalization
Video MAM
Content 
Tracking
Checkout
Payment
Shipping
Mail
Banner Ads
Content Management
Transaction Management
Streaming 
Server
A/B Tests
Image 
Adaptation
Rating and 
Comments
Figure 6. An exemplary system conﬁguration for a digitalized enterprise.
IV. ARCHITECTURE BUILDING BLOCKS
A logical architecture that describes functionality as out-
lined in the preceding subsection is mapped to concrete
components for implementation. In order to distinguish the
logical view on the architecture from a component view that
describes system implementation, we call the implementation
model a system conﬁguration.
A system conﬁguration mainly consists of a selection of
components and services, parameterizations and customiza-
tions of the components, the communication between the
components, as well as interfaces to the environment.
Figure 6 gives outlines the structure of a high-level system
conﬁguration. The dotted lines outline functional units as they
have been considered in the preceding section. The outer
gray boxes depict software products and services that are
employed to implement functionality. This way, we relate the
two architecture views – abstract functionality and concrete
implementations – in the ﬁgure.
Each implementation unit may be delivered by a single com-
ponent, an assembly of components, or separate components
that work in concert. Therefore, there are lots of integration
tasks for a conﬁguration. This may be one strong argument in
favor of marketing/sales clouds that offer integration out of the
box. Alternative approaches are an integration platform and a
central integration bus. But these solutions are rarely found.
Instead, a lot of point-to-point integrations are found in prac-
tice. These may be implemented in different ways. Through
tight coupling, the systems may use the same data by sharing
storage, by exchanging data, or by one using the other as its
storage. With loose coupling, one component offers services
to another.
There are well-established principles that guide the assign-
ment of functionality to components and the choice of the in-
tegration approach. A prominent example are the principles of
high coherence and low coupling. High coherence is important
to avoid redundancy as much as possible, of both functionality
and data. Low coupling supports non-functional properties so
that, for example, services of a certain kind can be chosen
dynamically, and components can (horizontally) be scaled.
As an example for implementation alternatives, the integra-
tion of a CMS with a DAM has thoroughly been studied in
an earlier publication [15]. In this case, content management
functionality like quality assurance and content transforma-
tions are offered by both kinds of components. Therefore, the
responsibility for the according tasks has to be distributed.
The (independent, but related) lifecycles of structured and
unstructured content are another factor for the choice of the
integration approach.
The CDP is another relevant example. There exist dedicated
products and services for this component that may import data
from the other components that collect data about customers.
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-782-5
CONTENT 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

A CDP may as well be realized by, e.g., importing web
tracking and campaign tracking data into a CRM, or by an
orchestration of the components.
Many systems have a notion of customers: the CMS
through tracking and personalization, the campaign man-
agement through address lists, a commerce system through
commercial transactions, the CRM system by keeping contact
information, Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) systems for
accounts receivable accounting, etc. All these different per-
ceptions of a customer need to be related to each other. If the
related information is materialized in one aggregated record,
this one is sometimes called a golden record. The records are
handled through so-called master data management.
The same holds for the products or services a company
offers. While product data are hosted by a Product Information
Management (PIM) system, prices are calculated by a pricing
engine based on data from the PIM, the ERP, or the commerce
system. Additional product descriptions that are maintained for
marketing reasons may reside in a CMS. Therefore, master
data management is also required at this point.
V. CONCLUSION
The paper concludes with a summary and an outlook.
A. Summary
This paper presents the main requirements to system support
for digitalized institutions. It focuses on commercial interac-
tions between companies and their customers.
Current IT landscapes for digitalized enterprises are typi-
cally assembled from readily available software products and
services. The architecture of the resulting systems often seems
to be motivated by the selected components, not by established
architecture principles. In particular, requirements are often
formulated after the functionality of available components,
and responsibilities are solely assigned on the basis of given
functionality and the characteristics of available components.
This paper constitutes the starting point for a discussion
on architectures for digital systems through which companies
interact with their customers. In order to do so, we enumerate
typical tasks to be performed by such systems, and we take
an architectural view on such systems. By ﬁrst designing the
logical architecture, the system design follows requirements,
not technical constraints. Such architectural considerations al-
low discussing different implementations of the requirements.
Furthermore, non-functional requirements can be covered by
system design.
B. Outlook
This paper presents insights gained from various digital
transformation projects. As a next step, existing reference
architectures have to be analyzed for further input on require-
ments, product and service categories, and solution patterns.
One future result would be an approach to architecture def-
inition for systems for digital enterprises. It may be supported
by checklists, templates for requirements and constraints, as
well as solution patterns.
There are many well-understood cases from which it seems
possible to create a generic pattern library for system constella-
tions that have proven beneﬁcial. This would include architec-
tural building blocks, architecture principles, guidelines for the
selection of products and services, etc. Such pattern libraries
are at least within reach for speciﬁc cases or domains.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author wishes to express his gratitude to numerous
clients, partners, and colleagues for the project work in which
the deep insights that led to this paper were gained. The author
thanks his employer, Tallence, for supporting his research
activities right from the start.
REFERENCES
[1] E. Schreckling and C. Steiger, “Digitalize or drown,” in Shaping the
Digital Enterprise, G. Oswald and M. Kleinemeier, Eds.
Springer,
2017, ch. 1, pp. 3–27.
[2] “Digital
transformation,”
Wikipedia,
[Online].
Available
from:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital transformation 2020.04.27.
[3] “Digitalization,”
Gartner,
[Online].
Available
from:
https://www.gartner.com/en/information-
technology/glossary/digitalization 2020.04.27.
[4] Y. Yoo, K. J. Lyytinen, R. J. Boland, and N. Berente, “The next wave
of digital innovation: Opportunities and challenges,” SSRN Electronic
Journal, June 2010.
[5] C. Matt, T. Hess, and A. Benlian, “Digital transformation strategies,”
Business & Information Systems Engineering, vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 339–
343, 2015.
[6] P.
Daugherty,
M.
J.
Biltz,
and
S.
W.
Kurth,
“Every
business
is
a
digital
business.
accenture
technology
vision
2013,”
Accenture,
2013,
[Online].
Available
from:
https://www.accenture.com/us-en/ acnmedia/Accenture/Conversion-
Assets/Microsites/Documents8/Accenture-Technology-Vision-2013.pdf
2020.04.27.
[7] A. Uhl, M. Born, A. Koschmider, and T. Janasz, “The importance of
technological trends and how to exploit them for business excellence,”
in Digital Enterprise Transformation: A Business-Driven Approach to
Leveraging Innovative IT, A. Uhl and L. A. Gollenia, Eds.
Gower
Publishing, 2016, pp. 18–35.
[8] L. Adams, E. Burkholder, and K. Hamilton, “Micro-moments: Your
guide to winning the shift to mobile,” Google, 2015, [Online]. Avail-
able from: https://think.storage.googleapis.com/images/micromoments-
guide-to-winning-shift-to-mobile-download.pdf 2020.04.27.
[9] R. Friedrich, M. L. Merle, M. Peterson, and A. Koster, “The
next
wave
of
digitization:
Setting
your
direction,
building
your
capabilities,”
booz&co.,
2011,
[Online].
Available
from:
https://www.ﬁfthera.com/perspectives-blog/2014/12/9/the-next-
wave-of-digitization-setting-your-direction-building-your-capabilities
2020.04.27.
[10] B. Dresp-Langley et al., “Occam’s razor for big data? on detecting
quality in large unstructured datasets,” Applied Sciences, Special Issue
on Perception and Communication, vol. 9, no. 15, 2019.
[11] K. Henning, The Digital Enterprise.
Random House, London, 2016,
ch. The Digital Landscape.
[12] “Marketing Technology Landscape Supergraphic (2020): Martech 5000
— really 8,000, but who’s counting?” 2020, [Online]. Available
from: https://chiefmartec.com/2020/04/marketing-technology-landscape-
2020-martech-5000/.
[13] H.-W. Sehring, “An integrated model for content management, topic-
oriented user segmentation, and behavioral targeting,” International
Journal on Advances in Software, vol. 12, no. 3&4, pp. 372–383, 2019.
[14] H.
Beales,
“The
value
of
behavioral
targeting,”
George
Washington
University,
March
2010,
[Online].
Available
from:
https://networkadvertising.org/pdfs/Beales NAI Study.pdf 2020.04.27.
[15] H.-W. Sehring, “On the integration of lifecycles and processes for
the management of structured and unstructured content: A practical
perspective on content management systems integration architecture,”
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol. 9, no.
3&4, pp. 363–376, 2016.
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-782-5
CONTENT 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

