Semantically-driven Competitive Intelligence Information Extraction: Linguistic Model
and Applications
Iana Atanassova, Gan Jin, Ibrahim Soumana, Peter Greenﬁeld and Sylviane Cardey
CRIT - Tesni`ere, Universit´e de Bourgogne Franche-Comt´e
30 rue M`egevand, 25000 Besanc¸on, France
Email: { surname.name } @univ-fcomte.fr
Abstract—In a competitive environment and in the current
context of rapid technological advances, competitive intelligence
is a key strategic need in the private sector and requires
the development of Web content tools capable of robust and
semantically-driven text classiﬁcation. In this paper, we present a
method for the information extraction and semantic classiﬁcation
of text segments. Our approach to text processing makes use of
linguistic clues to populate an ontology of competitive intelligence.
We have developed a method for the automatic identiﬁcation
and classiﬁcation of sentences into predeﬁned semantic classes
by using linguistic models and a knowledge-based approach. This
method has been tested on a dataset of journal articles in horology
and aeronautics, and can be extended to other domains. The
tool that we have developed is part of the WebSO+ platform for
competitive intelligence. We present the overall methodology for
annotation and information extraction, our experimental protocol
and the results obtained from the evaluation.
Keywords–Web content; Information Extraction; Competitive
Intelligence; Sentence Classiﬁcation; Semantic Annotation; Lin-
guistic Model.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Today, innovation in the private sector is conditioned by the
context of a highly competitive international environment and
rapid technological advances. For these reasons, competitive
intelligence has become a key strategic need, i.e., companies
have to monitor constantly the new technologies in their
domains, but also market changes and emerging trends, the
activities of competitors and partners, etc. [1]. In addition
to this, the amount of information generated daily in each
particular domain may lead to information overload. The
traditional information sources have been enriched by new
media such as social networks and customer opinions on the
Web. For these reasons, competitive intelligence is becoming
more and more costly in terms of the time and human effort
to process the information. For example, [2] analyzes recent
practices in European ﬁrms and arrives at the conclusion that
competitive intelligence “has grown well beyond competitors
to include customer related intelligence, technology, market,
etc.”.
Our work tackles the problem of the development of Web
content tools capable of the automatic processing of news
articles and user feedback in order to extract and classify
speciﬁc types of information relevant to competitive intelli-
gence. The major objective is to facilitate and accelerate the
task of competitive intelligence in companies by providing
tools for the efﬁcient monitoring of both published information
sources (e.g., news articles) and also customer feedback. We
have developed a method for the automatic identiﬁcation and
classiﬁcation of sentences into predeﬁned semantic classes by
using linguistic models and a knowledge-based approach.
As observed by [3], the majority of commercial appli-
cations in information extraction make use of rule-based
approaches, while statistical and machine-learning (ML) ap-
proaches are widely used in the academic world. Table I gives
the proportions of the use of various approaches employed
in academic research and in the private sector (vendors of
products for Information Extraction) for the implementations
of entity extraction. These results were obtained by [3] in a
study of conference papers over a 10 year period. Among
the reasons for which the rule-based approaches dominate the
commercial market is their advantage in terms of ﬂexibility and
traceability. The most recent efforts by the research community
in this ﬁeld are directed towards providing standardized rule
languages and rule editing tools [4][5].
TABLE I. TYPES OF APPROACHES USED FOR INFORMATION
EXTRACTION
Rule-based (%)
Hybid (%)
ML based (%)
Scientiﬁc articles
3.5
21
75
Large vendors
67
17
17
All vendors
45
22
33
The problem of text classiﬁcation in general has been the
subject of many studies [6], most of which can be considered
as document retrieval tasks in the sense that they work at the
level of the document. In our approach, we focus on sentence
extraction and sentence classiﬁcation, which better correspond
to the user need, i.e., to identify the exact information related
to the competitive intelligence task, rather than retrieving the
document that contains such information.
In this paper, we describe our approach to text processing
which makes use of linguistic clues to populate an ontology
of competitive intelligence. The module for Information ex-
traction that results from this approach has been implemented
as part of the WebSO+ platform for competitive intelligence
that provides an environment for monitoring various types of
information sources. The textual data is obtained by a separate
module that scrapes lists of web sites and customer review
databases on a daily basis. In this paper, we focus on the
automatic classiﬁcation module that is used for information
extraction and allows ﬁltering relevant text segments amongst
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-707-8
CONTENT 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

the large mass of data retrieved daily, and which are presented
to the end user.
The experiment that we report here has been carried out
on two speciﬁc industrial sectors which are horology and aero-
nautics. These sectors were chosen because they are well de-
veloped and strategically important in the Region of Franche-
Comt´e in France and in Switzerland. The linguistic resources
have been developed speciﬁcally for the processing of news
articles and customer feedback in these two domains. However,
our methodology, which relies on a general approach, can be
applied to other domains after adapting the linguistic resources
to take into consideration the new domains. These resources
consist of linguistic rules that follow a grammar speciﬁcally
designed for this purpose and which make use of lists of
regular expressions.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the
next section, we present the linguistic model and the overall
approach for automatic classiﬁcation of text segments. In
Section III, we give the details of the evaluation that has been
carried out on the classiﬁcation module, and the results. In
Section IV, we discuss some of the difﬁculties in the processing
and give examples of errors and possible solutions. Section V
presents our conclusion and future work.
II.
LINGUISTIC MODEL AND AUTOMATIC CLASSIFICATION
METHOD
In this section, we ﬁrst present the semantic subclasses
that form our ontology of competitive intelligence. These
subclasses are then used for the classiﬁcation of sentences and
information extraction based on our linguistic model.
A. Ontology of Competitive Intelligence
The objective of our method is ﬁrstly to identify sentences
that are relevant to the task of competitive intelligence, i.e.,
that contain explicit information on competitors, market trends,
innovations etc. At the same time, we classify these sentences
into several subclasses, which are presented in Figure 1, where
the names of the subclasses are given in English, and the
French translation is in brackets.
Figure 1. Ontology of Competitive Intelligence: subclasses used for the
classiﬁcation of sentences
Each of the subclasses can be expressed in texts using
various expressions and linguistic structures. The table II
presents examples of sentences that correspond to some of the
subclasses. These examples have been extracted from articles
that belong to the corpus described in the following section.
B. Linguistic Model
To develop the linguistic resources, we have analyzed the
ways in which the subclasses are expressed in texts by studying
a corpus of about 2,000 documents in French of different
types: news articles, scientiﬁc publications, patents, customer
feedback, etc. We then established sets of linguistic structures
that are directly implementable and that allow identifying these
types of information in new texts. This approach uses the
SyGuLAC theory that stems from the microsystemic approach
and discrete mathematics [7] in order to propose tools for
linguistic analyses and their generalization.
The analysis is considered from the point of view of sense-
mining in order to make possible the identiﬁcation of relevant
information in texts. Unlike data-mining systems that search
for keywords in a sentence or in a text, in order to identify
relevant information, we propose working at the level of sense
which is present at all levels of analysis: lexical, syntactic
and semantic and their intersections: morpho-syntax, lexico-
syntactic-semantics, etc. [8]. However, our aim is not to con-
struct a model that describes the language in its entirety with a
global representation of its different levels separately: lexical,
syntactic, mophological, semantic. Rather, we concentrate only
on one speciﬁc objective at a time, which is, in the current
study, the identiﬁcation of information related to competitive
intelligence. Thus, in our approach we consider only the
elements that are necessary and constitutive of the problem
at hand, which can be lexical, morphological, syntactic, etc. in
nature. These elements are represented in linguistic structures
that are directly implementable in terms of sets of regular
expressions or other features that are identiﬁable in strings
[9][10].
C. Implementation
The linguistic structures are represented in our systems as
regular expressions following a grammar that was designed
speciﬁcally for this task. As an example, the structure in Figure
2 represents a part of a subclass ”1. Change of ownership”
of textual segments in French in the domain of horology.
In this structure, several operators are used, e.g., Verbe, opt,
that correspond to abstract representations in our model. The
linguistic structure uses microsystems that are deﬁned in order
to tackle one speciﬁc problem. The speciﬁcations of the
operators and constraints in the grammar are deﬁned as in
[7]. Several hundred such structures are associated with each
of the above subclasses.
This architecture for information extraction has several
advantages:
•
the linguistic resources (structures) are independent of
the processing model and the implementation of the
information extraction engine;
•
this methodology can be adapted and used in domains
that correspond to precise needs in industry, where
machine learning is impossible due to the lack of large
scale corpora;
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-707-8
CONTENT 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

TABLE II. EXAMPLES OF SENTENCES THAT CORRESPOND TO THE SUBCLASSES OF COMPETITIVE INTELLIGENCE
Example
Class
Le groupe horloger hispano-suisse Festina a repris les actifs de la soci´et´e neuchˆateloise Technotime.
1.
Alors que les groupes de luxe n’ont eu de cesse ces derni`eres ann´ees de consolider - quand ce n’est pas poss´eder - leur r´eseau de distribution, ils comptent d´esormais
sur des blogs ou autres sites sp´ecialis´es pour effectuer du e-commerce.
2.
Le suisse Longines pr´esente une montre ´equip´ee d’un mouvement `a pile nouvelle g´en´eration.
3.
Car aujourd’hui, c’est certain, l’amateur n’est plus un collectionneur affectionnant les m´ecanismes comme dans le pass´e, mais un adepte averti de la valeur des choses.
4.
L’ann´ee 2017 devrait bien se pr´esenter pour Tag Heuer, a not´e Jean-Claude Biver, se disant toutefois prudent face aux incertitudes ´economiques et g´eopolitiques du
monde et tablant sur une croissance ”`a un chiffre” pour la marque.
5.
Les exportations horlog`eres suisses ont continu´e de reculer en f´evrier, accusant une baisse de 10% `a 1,5 milliard de francs suisses (1,3 milliard d’euros), a annonc´e mardi
la F´ed´eration de l’industrie horlog`ere suisse (FH).
7.
”Nous avons consolid´e notre quatri`eme position dans l’horlogerie suisse en mati`ere de chiffre d’affaires, derri`ere Rolex, Omega et Cartier”, souligne celui qui entr´e chez
Longines en 1969 et qui dirige la soci´et´e depuis 1988.
8.
listEH/opt(Arg1) + Verbe(v-ach) + opt((listEH)/Arg2) + (...) + opt(Ctxt)
Figure 2. Example of a linguistic structure for the subclass ”1. Change of ownership”
•
the linguistic analysis is based essentially on the
structures that are deﬁned by linguists, unlike in other
approaches that rely on machine learning of keyword
distributions;
•
there is a complete traceability of all the linguistic
structures involved in some task resolution, which
means that the sources of errors can be identiﬁed and
corrected by modifying the erring structures;
•
the modiﬁcation or the improvement of one linguistic
structure can be done independently of the other lin-
guistic structures, which means that the performance
of the system can be incremented fairly easily by
correcting existing structures to improve the precision
or adding new structures to achieve higher recall.
The linguistic analyses take into consideration large context
spans in the textual segments. In fact, from a linguistic point
of view, we know that the presence of words or particles very
far away in the linear representation of a sentence can have
a signiﬁcant impact on the overall meaning. For this reason,
the linguistic structures that we use take into consideration the
entire sentences. This approach to language modeling presents
a considerable advantage for the description of linguistic
phenomena compared to other methods that are inspired by
the ‘bag of words’ model.
III.
EVALUATION
We have performed an evaluation in order to quantify
the capacity of our system to correctly identify and classify
sentences that contain information relevant to the task of
competitive intelligence for French. In this section, we describe
the method that we adopted for this evaluation and the results
obtained.
A. Corpus
We have constructed a corpus of news articles in the two
sectors of horology and aeronautics in French. The corpus
was collected manually by exploring online journals and by
using search engines to identify relevant sources and articles
on the Web. The sources of the articles are of two types:
general newspapers and sites (e.g., Le Monde, Figaro, Le
Parisien, Le Point, Les Echos, Le Temps (CH), Tribune de
Gen`eve), and specialized magazines and sites in the do-
mains of horology, aviation, new technologies, stock exchange
(e.g., www.montres-de-luxe.com, fr.worldtempus.com, www.
meltystyle.fr, www.journal-aviation.com, last access 1/3/2019)
that are published both in France and in Switzerland at the
beginning of 2017. The evaluation corpus contains a total of
45 documents and 1,027 sentences. Table III gives more details
of the size of the corpus.
TABLE III. DESCRIPTION OF THE EVALUATION CORPUS
Domain
Documents
Sentences
Horology
30
745
Aeronautics
15
282
Total
45
1 027
The types of documents and their format in the evaluation
corpus are similar to the real-case use for which we have
designed the information extraction engine.
B. Evaluation Protocol
We compared the results of the automatic classiﬁcation
with a gold standard obtained by manually classifying the
sentences in the corpus. The evaluation was done following
the four stages described below.
Stage 1. Automatic segmentation of the corpus into sentences.
Stage 2. Manual classiﬁcation of all sentences. This was
done by students and researchers in the domain of Natural
Language Processing. Each sentence in the evaluation corpus
was examined and identiﬁed as relevant or irrelevant to the
task of competitive intelligence. Then, all relevant sentences
were assigned one of the 8 subclasses.
Stage 3. Automatic classiﬁcation of the sentences in the corpus
by running our classiﬁcation module.
Stage 4. Calculation of the precision (P), recall (R) and F-
measure (F) [11].
C. Results
Figure 3 shows the number of sentences in the evalua-
tion corpus that were manually classiﬁed into each subclass
considering the two domains of horology and aeronautics.
We observe that the subclass ”3. Innovation” contains most
of the sentences related to horology, and the subclasses ”3.
Innovation” and ”5. Financial situation” contain the largest sets
of sentences in aeronautics.
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-707-8
CONTENT 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

Figure 3. Distribution of the sentences according to the 8 subclasses in the
manual classiﬁcation
Figure 4. Results of the evaluation in the domain of horology
Figures 4 and 5 present the values of the precision, recall
and F-measure calculated by comparing the manually and
automatically classiﬁed sentences.
In Figure 4, we observe that in horology the values for
the precision are high (above 75%) for all subclasses except
for ”1. Change of ownership”. This score is due to the fact
that this ﬁrst subclass is complex as it contains different
types of sentences that express various kinds of merger-
acquisition transactions, as well as liquidations and joint ven-
tures. To improve the system’s performance for this subclass,
the corresponding linguistic structures can be identiﬁed and
corrected. At the same time, the value of the recall for this
subclass is above 90%. Considering the subclass ”4. Change
of commercial environment”, the values of the recall are low
(around 29%) because these kinds of changes can be expressed
in many various ways. A larger number of linguistic structures
should be considered to improve the coverage.
In Figure 5, the values of the precision are also quite
high except for the subclass ”7. Exportations”. In fact, the
manual classiﬁcations for this subclass show that in some
cases a confusion can be made between the subclasses ”7.
Exportations” and ”1. Change of ownership” for sentences
that express large investments or purchases in aircraft com-
panies. The value of the recall for the subclass ”4. Change
Figure 5. Results of the evaluation in the domains of aeronautics
Figure 6. Results of the evaluation in both domains of horology and
aeronautics
of commercial environment” is low and, as in the domain of
horology, this subclass needs a more comprehensive set of
linguistic structures.
Figure 6 presents the results of the evaluation for both the
domains of horology and aeronautics. The overall performance
of the system is satisfactory as the majority of the precision and
recall values are above 70%. As we have noted, the subclasses
of ”1. Change of ownership” and ”4. Change of commercial
environment” still need some improvement.
IV.
DISCUSSION
The results presented above show that the methodology
that we used based on sets of linguistic structures is adequate
for the identiﬁcation and the classiﬁcation for most of the sub-
classes. However, improvements can be made for 2 subclasses.
In this section, we consider some of the typical errors and
discuss the possible improvements that can be made using our
methodology.
Table IV gives some typical examples of errors that were
extracted from the evaluation corpus. We have analyzed all
sources of errors and listed the causes and actions needed
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-707-8
CONTENT 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

TABLE IV. EXAMPLES OF SENTENCES THAT WERE NOT CORRECTLY IDENTIFIED OR CLASSIFIED BY THE SYSTEM
Example
Automatic class
Le si`ege est install´e `a La Chaux-de-Fonds, dans le canton de Neuchˆatel, `a quelques dizaines de kilom`etres de la fronti`ere du Doubs ; elle compte trois usines
dans le Jura suisse et un centre de recherche `a Palo-Alto, en Californie.
1.
Le rythme ultra-cadenc´e des renouvellements de produits, de caducit´e des composants et la chute des prix ont ainsi caus´e la faillite de Pebble, pionnier du
secteur.
not identiﬁed
L’ascension rapide et le potentiel d’ Akrone ont s´eduit Christophe Courtin, qui, avec son fonds Courtin Investment, vient de prendre 25 de son capital.
not identiﬁed
Cela explique, comme le souligne Alain Zimmermann, CEO de Baume & Mercier, pourquoi toutes les marques de luxe recentrent depuis peu leur int´erˆet sur
des mod`eles `a forte identit´e.
not identiﬁed
Et de rappeler que lorsque Tag Heuer a lanc´e sa montre connect´ee en 2015, 4 millions d’impressions Internet ont ´et´e enregistr´ees en deux jours.
4.
Ali Nouri – c’est son nom – mise beaucoup sur cette client`ele potentielle et il ne lancera la production de ses premiers mod`eles, en Chine, une fois seulement
qu’il aura engrang´e sufﬁsamment de commandes.
3.
Dot´e d’un calibre Dior Invers´e et d’une masse oscillante fonctionnelle visible `a l’avant du cadran, le garde-temps ´evoque par sa structure m´ecanique les
tournoiements d’une d´elicate robe de grand soir.
not identiﬁed
D’autant que les acheteurs, en particulier masculins, se projettent ais´ement et font de leur montre une sorte de talisman qui les transforme en h´eros d’une saga
qu’ils ´ecrivent dans leur tˆete.
not identiﬁed
Une relance constat´ee aussi par Swatch Group, dont un tiers de l’activit´e se fait en Chine.
not identiﬁed
L’ascension rapide et le potentiel d’ Akrone ont s´eduit Christophe Courtin, qui, avec son fonds Courtin Investment, vient de prendre 25 de son capital.
not identiﬁed
to improve the performance of the system. These can be
summarized in the following several points:
•
Noise in the automatic classiﬁcation due to some
structures that are ”too general” and identify a large
number of sentences. These structures can be im-
proved in order to identify only relevant sentences by
adding new lists and constraints.
•
Silence in the system due to the presence of rare
words, expressions or neologisms in some sentences.
This problem can be solved by adding new linguistic
structures.
•
Some sentences make use of ﬁgurative language
(metaphors, comparisons, etc.) in the news articles.
This problem is difﬁcult to tackle in general, but the
most frequent cases can be studied and the linguistic
structures can be adjusted to take into consideration
some of these phenomena.
•
Errors related to the sentence segmentation: the limits
of the identiﬁed segments are of crucial importance
for the application of the linguistic structures as they
take into consideration entire sentences. In some rare
cases the segmentation is not correct and this can be
improved.
•
Errors due to the use of negation in the sentences:
negation in French is expressed in most cases by two
words that surround the verb form (ne ... pas, ne
... aucun, ne ... jamais, ...). Such cases need more
constraints.
Our approach has been developed to respond to the speciﬁc
needs of competitive intelligence in the private sector, and
the choice of the classes addresses these needs. While other
methods exist for sentence classiﬁcation, such as machine
learning or neural network approaches using pretrained word
embeddings [12], such methods depend heavily on the avail-
ability of large annotated datasets that are necessary for the
training of the model. Obtaining such datasets with good
quality annotations is expensive. To our knowledge, no such
datasets exist in the ﬁeld of competitive intelligence, and
therefore the use of the latest deep learning approaches in this
contexts is not practically applicable. In the approach that we
propose, the major effort is concentrated on the development
of the linguistic model for the classiﬁer rather than the manual
annotation of a dataset. If the results are satisfactory, this
method could be used as a bootstrap process to produce large
annotated text corpora that could in turn be used as training
datasets for neural network models.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we have presented an overall approach for the
automatic classiﬁcation of sentences based on sets of linguistic
structures and its implementation for the task of competitive
intelligence. We report on the results of the experimentation
on news articles in two speciﬁc domains that are horology and
aeronautics in French. The same methodology can be adapted
to other domains if necessary.
Our classiﬁcation module is part of a comprehensive
platform for competitive intelligence, where the automatic
classiﬁcation helps users rapidly identify relevant information
and thus deal with large volumes of data. In a real case
scenario, hundreds of sources need to be scanned daily by the
user. The capability of the system to highlight automatically
classiﬁed sentences related to competitive intelligence plays an
important role in diminishing the workload and enabling the
user to digest ever larger amounts of information.
Our future efforts will be directed in two directions. Firstly,
we aim to develop Semantic Web APIs, in order to render
the data available through SPARQL requests and build new
interfaces. Secondly, this methodology should be applied and
evaluated on datasets of articles in other domains, such as the
automobile industry and smart cities.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Part of this research has been funded by the FEDER
(Fonds europ´een de d´eveloppement r´egional) and selected by
the French-Swiss programme Interreg V: WebSO+ project.
The authors thank Laurence Gaida and Philippe Payen de la
Garanderie, members of the CRIT laboratory of the University
of Bourgogne Franche-Comte, for their participation in the
evaluation of the linguistic model.
REFERENCES
[1]
C. A. Bulley, K. F. Baku, and M. M. Allan, “Competitive intelligence
information: A key business success factor,” Journal of Management
and Sustainability, vol. 4, no. 2, 2014, p. 82.
[2]
J. Calof, R. Arcos, and N. Sewdass, “Competitive intelligence practices
of european ﬁrms,” Technology Analysis & Strategic Management,
vol. 0, no. 0, 2017, pp. 1–14.
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-707-8
CONTENT 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

[3]
L. Chiticariu, Y. Li, and F. R. Reiss, “Rule-based information extrac-
tion is dead! long live rule-based information extraction systems!” in
Proceedings of the 2013 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, 2013, pp. 827–832.
[4]
P. Kluegl, M. Toepfer, P.-D. Beck, G. Fette, and F. Puppe, “UIMA Ruta:
Rapid development of rule-based information extraction applications,”
Natural Language Engineering, vol. 22, no. 1, 2016, pp. 1–40.
[5]
W. Wang and K. Stewart, “Spatiotemporal and semantic information
extraction from web news reports about natural hazards,” Computers,
environment and urban systems, vol. 50, 2015, pp. 30–40.
[6]
M. Allahyari et al., “A brief survey of text mining: Classiﬁcation,
clustering and extraction techniques,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.02919,
2017.
[7]
S. Cardey, Modelling language, ser. Natural Language Processing
Series.
John Benjamins Publishing Company, 2013.
[8]
S. Cardey et al., “A model for a reliable automatic translation, the
TACT multilingual system, LISE project (Linguistics and Security),” in
Proceedings of WISG’09, Workshop Interdisciplinaire sur la S´ecurit´e
Globale, Troyes, France, 2009.
[9]
G. Jin, “A system for French-Chinese automatic translation in the
domain of global security,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of Franche-
Comt´e, Besanc¸on, France, 2015.
[10]
G. Jin, I. Atanassova, I. Souamana, and S. Cardey, “A model for
multilingual opinion and sentiment mining,” in Conference TOTh
2017, Terminology & Ontology : Theories and applications, Chambery,
France, 2017, pp. 283–287.
[11]
C. J. Van Rijsbergen, “Foundation of evaluation,” Journal of Documen-
tation, vol. 30, no. 4, 1974, pp. 365–373.
[12]
Y. Zhang, S. Roller, and B. Wallace, “MGNC-CNN: A simple approach
to exploiting multiple word embeddings for sentence classiﬁcation,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.00968, 2016.
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-707-8
CONTENT 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

