Multicast Group Management for Users of
Heterogeneous Wireless Networks
Svetlana Boudko and Wolfgang Leister
Norsk Regnesentral, Oslo, Norway
Email: {svetlana.boudko, wolfgang.leister}@nr.no
Stein Gjessing
University of Oslo, Norway
Email: steing@iﬁ.uio.no
Abstract—Today mobile devices are typically equipped with
multiple access network interfaces. Another important issue
is a coexistence of heterogeneous wireless access networks.
The selection of optimal serving mobile networks for multicast
streams is a challenging problem. We consider a network selection
problem for multicast groups of mobile clients that operate in a
heterogeneous wireless access network environment. We identify
several decision makers solving this problem and present our
view on what kind of information is needed to be exchanged
between these decision markers.
Index Terms—Wireless networking, mobile network selection,
decentralized algorithms.
I. INTRODUCTION
The increasing market of mobile devices and mobile ser-
vices, as well as availability of various wireless network
technologies challenge resource limitations of wireless access
networks. According to Cisco [1], global mobile data trafﬁc
grew 2.3-fold in 2011, more than doubling for the fourth
year in a row. It conﬁrms the previous Cisco forecasts from
2010 and 2011 and it is expected that mobile data trafﬁc
will double again in 2012. Mobile video trafﬁc, the quality
of which is particularly sensitive to network conditions, was
52% of the total trafﬁc by the end of 2011. The number of
mobile-connected tablets tripled to 34 million in 2011, and
each tablet generated 3.4 times more trafﬁc than the average
smartphone. It is expected that mobile-connected tablets will
generate almost as much trafﬁc in 2016 as the entire global
mobile network in 2012. In 2016, 4G will be 6 percent
of connections covering 36 percent of total trafﬁc. Monthly
global mobile data trafﬁc will surpass 10 exabytes in 2016.
This growth poses extra challenges both on mobile network
resources and on resources of the backhaul infrastructure that
connects a mobile network to the backbone Internet. This
requires rethinking of how the data is delivered to the users.
Multicast is an efﬁcient method for point-to-multipoint
communications and reduces drastically the usage of network
resources when the same content is sent to a large group of
users. Different types of applications like video conferencing,
ﬁle distribution, live multimedia streaming can beneﬁt from
deploying multicast networking. However, the well-known
complexity of managing multicast makes the deployment of
multicast even more challenging in wireless environments
when mobility issues have to be considered. In this paper,
we consider a solution for network selection problem for
heterogeneous mobile networking as a part of multicast group
management.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. After
presenting an overview of related work in Section II, we
discuss a representative scenario in Section III. We present
the problem formulation and outline a suitable algorithm in
Section IV, before concluding and discussing future work in
Section V.
II. RELATED WORK
To the best of our knowledge, the research ﬁeld concerning
selection of a network in heterogeneous wireless networks
from a perspective of multicast delivery is not well exploited.
Most of the previous works for mobile multicast focus on op-
timal multicast tree construction in multihop ad hoc networks
[2–5].
Ormond and Murphy [6] propose a network selection ap-
proach that uses a number of possible utility functions. The
solution is user-centric and an interplay between different users
and networks is not considered; neither is a multicast scenario.
Ormond and Murphy conclude that the impact of multiple
users operating in the same region need to be further examined.
Gluhak et al. [7] consider the problem of selecting the
optimal bearer paths for multicast services with groups of
heterogeneous receivers. The proposed algorithm selects the
bearer path based on different optimization goals. However,
Gluhak et al. address the problem only for the ideal static
multicast case without taking into account users crossing
different cells. In their work, multicast membership does not
change during the duration of a service, and multicast groups
are not built with consideration of users’ movements. In our
opinion, this is not a realistic case for wireless networks.
Yang and Chen [8] propose a bandwidth-efﬁcient multicast
algorithm for heterogeneous wireless networks that is formu-
lated as an Integer Linear Programming problem that is solved
using Lagrangian relaxation. The algorithm deals only with
constructing optimal shortest path trees for multicast groups.
In this approach, important parameters such as cost of service,
user’s velocity, etc. are not considered.
Jang et al. [9] present a mechanism for efﬁcient network
resource usage in a mobile multicast scenario. This mechanism
is developed for heterogeneous networks and implements net-
work selection based on network and terminal characteristics
and QoS. However, in the proposed mechanism, the network
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-220-2
CONTENT 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

Figure 1.
Multicast streaming scenario for a group of mobile clients served
by several mobile networks before regrouping.
Figure 2.
Multicast streaming scenario for a group of mobile clients served
by several mobile networks after regrouping.
selection is performed purely based on terminal’s preferences,
the network perspective is not considered, and the solution
does not optimize the utilization of network resources.
In our analysis, we recognize that the authors have not
addressed several important aspects related to the network
selection for mobile multicast groups. We need to study how
the users’ movements inﬂuence the optimality of building
multicast groups and how the information needed for network
selection is exchanged between the decision makers. We
think that it is also important to consider how the signaling
infrastructure is built.
III. SCENARIO
To illustrate the yet unsolved challenges for optimal network
selection in multicast networks, we consider a multimedia
streaming scenario for a group of mobile users that concur-
rently receive the same content from the Internet. We assume
that a backbone proxy server (BPS) is placed at the network
edge. The BPS is a member of a content distribution system
(CDN). This scenario is an extension of a scenario that we
previously have considered to illustrate an adaptive multimedia
streaming architecture to mobile nodes [10].
The BPS streams the content that either is hosted on the
server, or resends the streaming content as a part of application
layer multicast. The users of this network are located in
an area with a substantial overlap in coverage of several
mobile networks, and are connected to different networks.
The base stations of the system have multicast capabilities,
implementing, for example, Multimedia Broadcast Multicast
Service [11]. A representative scenario of such networking is
illustrated in Figure 1.
In our scenario, the mobile terminals are capable to connect
to several access networks, and vertical handoffs between these
networks are technically possible. Further, we assume that
these terminals are equipped with GPS receivers, so that their
location information can be transmitted to the BPS. The BPS
can use this information to determine how the users can be
regrouped in multicast groups. Such regrouping is beneﬁcial
as it saves network resources. Hence, the users that get the
same content can exploit the same wireless link because the
content can be broadcasted to them. The resources in the
backhaul network are also better utilized because the content
is now delivered only to one mobile network instead of being
spread to several networks. An example of such regrouping is
depicted in Figure 2.
Technically, to facilitate such a mechanism, the user ter-
minals will have the possibility to switch to other mobile
networks after receiving certain messages from the BPS. Since
users may have different preferences depending on diverse
criteria, for example, power consumption, security, network
cost of service, etc., the interplay between the users’ utilities
and the networks’ utilities is important to consider.
IV. PROBLEM FORMULATION
In this section, we formalize the scenario discussed in
Section III.
A. System Model
We consider a set of networks N = 1, 2, . . . , n, a set
of mobile nodes M = 1, 2, . . . , m and a set of streaming
sessions S = 1, 2, . . . , s. Each session sk is served to more
than one mobile node mj. Therefore, using multicast for data
dissemination is beneﬁcial. For each node mj and network
ni, the following is deﬁned: streaming bitrate requirements
of mobile nodes are denoted by rj; rssi,j is the received
signal strength in network ni for terminal mj, while power
consumption and the cost of service in network ni for node mj
are denoted by pi,j and ci,j, respectively. Location information
for node mj is denoted by lj For each node mj, we deﬁne a
user preference proﬁle that is described by a tuple containing
Thp
i,j, Thc
i,j, and Thrss
i,j . These denote thresholds or user
preferences, for, respectively, power consumption, cost of
service and received signal strength. We deﬁne a time period
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-220-2
CONTENT 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

At Backbone Proxy Server
for each ongoing streaming session sk
deﬁne set of mobile networks Mk receiving sk
for each mobile node mj receiving streaming session sk
using node’s GPS information lj :
deﬁne set of available networks for mj as a subset of Mk
send message to mobile node mj requesting:
node’s preferences for each available network ni
for each network ni from list of available networks
send message containing request about mobile node’s τi,j
wait for response from mobile node mj
wait for response from requested networks
upon reception of response from nodes and networks
partition mobile nodes in multicast groups
for each multicast group
for each mobile node mj in multicast group
send invite message to join multicast group
(a) Backbone Proxy Server View
At Mobile Network ni
upon reception of request from Backbone Proxy Server
deﬁne τi,j for mobile node mj
send τi,j to Backbone Proxy Server
(b) Mobile Network View
At Mobile Node mj
upon reception of request from Backbone Proxy Server
for each mobile network in request deﬁne preferences
send set of preferences to Backbone Proxy Server
wait for response from Backbone Proxy Server
upon reception invite message from Backbone Proxy Server
switch to new mobile network
(c) Mobile Node View
Figure 3.
Algorithm for Building Mobile Multicast Groups
τi,j during which node mj is served by network ni before
performing a handoff and moving to the next cell of this
network. Here, we assume that a mobile network is capable
to predict the residence time of a mobile node inside a cell
of the network based on mobile node velocity, the local area,
movement patterns, and other statistical information. We base
our decision making process on research done by other authors
[12–14]. While the prediction of the residence time of mobile
nodes is ongoing work, we consider this beyond our scope.
For the purpose of this paper, we assume that the prediction
can be performed with acceptable precision.
B. Algorithm
The system model deﬁned in Section IV-A is used to
construct the algorithm for network selection. The purpose
of the algorithm in Figure 3 is to provide the information
exchange between the clients, the networks, and the backbone
proxy. The execution of this algorithm is triggered on the
backbone proxy by detecting several streaming sessions from
the same source to different mobile networks, as shown in
Figure 3(a). The algorithm is capable of handling multisource
situations, i.e., the same content can be received from multiple
sources.
After the networks and mobile clients receive requests from
the backbone proxy, the networks detect the residence time for
requesting mobile clients as shown in Figure 3(b). The clients
determine their preferences about the networks in question,
as shown in Figure 3(c), and send these values to the BPS.
These responses are then used by the BPS as an input for the
partitioning algorithm.
The partitioning problem falls under the class of the inte-
ger programming problem and we consider several heuristic
methods to implement the algorithm. We plan to evaluate ap-
proaches of using Greedy, Vertex Substitution, and Neighbor-
hood Search methods [15]. These methods require a relatively
low number of iterations (approx. 3000), which is important
for real time systems.
C. Simulation Setup
We will implement these methods in the OMNet++ envi-
ronment [16] and evaluate them through multiple simulation
runs. We consider for the simulation a scenario with four, ﬁve
and six wireless networks to be representative, assuming over
1000 mobile users in the system. The simulations will show
in which way the algorithm is susceptible to the number of
mobile users. Further, we divide the users into ﬁve categories
in terms of requested content. The time τi,j for the user j to
stay in the network ni before performing a horizontal handoff,
or a cell residence time, is randomly distributed in the range
[1, 100] time units. The users arrive in the system at a rate of
about 10 users per second. In this experiment, we will evaluate
the total consumed bandwidth for all networks and compare
these results with the results of the algorithm proposed by Jang
et al. [9].
D. Signaling
For signaling between the backbone proxy and mobile
clients, we envisage to use RTCP [17] feedbacks, while session
management will be handled using RTSP [18]. RTSP is also
used for signaling between the backbone proxy and the mobile
networks. RTCP is designed to exchange QoS feedback and
synchronisation between media streams in the form of out-of-
band statistics and control information for an RTP [18] ﬂow.
We intend also to evaluate whether using SIP [19] could have
lower signaling overhead compared to RTSP/RTCP. However,
while SIP is designed for call setup of media sessions, the
exchange of QoS values can only be achieved using addi-
tional, non-standardized features. To encapsulate QoS values
in SIP messages, we envisage to implement the SIP Multicast
Mechanism deﬁned by Yang and Chen [20].
V. CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION
The paper studied the problem of selecting the optimal
network for multicast groups of mobile clients in multi-stream
scenario based on mobile clients’ preferences and location
information.
We deﬁne the information that needs to be exchanged
between the decision makers and the mechanisms for dissem-
inating the information. We intend to continue our work by
implementing and evaluating this solution in the OMNet++
environment [16]. We also intend to compare the solution
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-220-2
CONTENT 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

with the work proposed by Jang et al. [9] that was previously
discussed in Section II.
In this paper, we considered one backbone proxy server
that also operates as a central decision maker for initiat-
ing the network selection operation. However, it is highly
probable that different edge servers can be used as proxies
for different mobile access networks even if these networks
overlap geographically. It is, therefore, important to deﬁne
mechanisms that are capable of functioning in a decentralized
way. Also, we need careful security considerations related to
users’ location information that becomes available to several
entities of the system.
VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The work described in this paper has been conducted as a
part of the ADIMUS (Adaptive Internet Multimedia Stream-
ing) project which is funded by the NORDUnet-3 programme.
REFERENCES
[1] Cisco, “Cisco visual networking index: Global mobile
data trafﬁc forecast update, 2011-2016,” 2012.
[2] M. Gerla, C.-C. Chiang, and L. Zhang, “Tree multicast
strategies in mobile, multishop wireless networks,” Mob.
Netw. Appl., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 193–207, Oct. 1999.
[3] C.-C. Chiang, M. Gerla, and L. Zhang, “Forwarding
group multicast protocol (FGMP) for multihop, mobile
wireless networks,” Cluster Computing, vol. 1, no. 2, pp.
187–196, Apr. 1998.
[4] J. G. Jetcheva, “Adaptive demand-driven multicast rout-
ing in multi-hop wireless ad hoc networks,” Ph.D. disser-
tation, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA,
2004.
[5] J. Yuan, Z. Li, W. Yu, and B. Li, “A cross-layer optimiza-
tion framework for multihop multicast in wireless mesh
networks,” Selected Areas in Communications, IEEE
Journal on, vol. 24, no. 11, pp. 2092 –2103, nov. 2006.
[6] O. Ormond and J. Murphy, “Utility-based intelligent
network selection,” in In Proceedings of the IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Communications, 2006.
[7] A. Gluhak, K. Chew, K. Moessner, and R. Tafazolli,
“Multicast bearer selection in heterogeneous wireless
networks,” in IEEE Int’l Conf. on Communications, ICC
2005, vol. 2, may 2005, pp. 1372–1377.
[8] D.-N. Yang and M.-S. Chen, “Efﬁcient resource allo-
cation for wireless multicast,” IEEE Transactions on
Mobile Computing, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 387–400, Apr. 2008.
[9] I.-S. Jang, W.-T. Kim, J.-M. Park, and Y.-J. Park, “Mobile
multicast mechanism based mih for efﬁcient network
resource usage in heterogeneous networks,” in Proc.
of the 12th Int’l Conf. on Advanced Communication
Technology, ser. ICACT’10, 2010, pp. 850–854.
[10] W. Leister, T. Sutinen, S. Boudko, I. Marsh, C. Griwodz,
and P. Halvorsen, “An architecture for adaptive multime-
dia streaming to mobile nodes,” in MoMM ’08: Proceed-
ings of the 6th International Conference on Advances in
Mobile Computing and Multimedia.
ACM, 2008, pp.
313–316.
[11] G. Xylomenos, V. Vogkas, and G. Thanos, “The multi-
media broadcast/multicast service,” Wireless Communi-
cations and Mobile Computing, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 255–
265, 2008.
[12] B. Liang and Z. J. Haas, “Predictive distance-based mo-
bility management for multidimensional PCS networks,”
IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 718–732,
Oct. 2003.
[13] I. Akyildiz, J. S. Ho, and Y.-B. Lin, “Movement-based
location update and selective paging for PCS networks,”
IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw, vol. 4, no. 4, 1996.
[14] G. Yavas, D. Katsaros, O. Ulusoy, and Y. Manolopou-
los, “A data mining approach for location prediction in
mobile environments,” Data Knowl. Eng., vol. 54, pp.
121–146, August 2005.
[15] M. S. Daskin, Network and Discrete Location: Models,
Algorithms, and Applications.
New Jork, USA: Wiley-
Interscience, 1995.
[16] G. Pongor, “Omnet: Objective modular network testbed,”
in MASCOTS ’93: Proc. Int’l Workshop on Modeling,
Analysis, and Simulation on Computer and Telecommuni-
cation Systems. Society for Computer Simulation, 1993,
pp. 323–326.
[17] H. Schulzrinne, A. Rao, and R. Lanphier, “Real Time
Streaming Protocol (RTSP),” RFC 2326 (Proposed
Standard), Apr. 1998. [Online]. Available: http://www.
ietf.org/rfc/rfc2326.txt
[18] H. Schulzrinne, S. Casner, R. Frederick, and V. Jacobson,
“RTP: A Transport Protocol for Real-Time Applications,”
RFC 3550 (Standard), Jul. 2003. [Online]. Available:
http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3550.txt
[19] J. Rosenberg, H. Schulzrinne, G. Camarillo, A. Johnston,
J. Peterson, R. Sparks, M. Handley, and E. Schooler,
“SIP: Session Initiation Protocol,” RFC 3261 (Proposed
Standard), Jun. 2002, updated by RFCs 3265, 3853,
4320, 4916. [Online]. Available: http://www.ietf.org/rfc/
rfc3261.txt
[20] S.-R. Yang and W.-T. Chen, “Sip multicast-based mo-
bile quality-of-service support over heterogeneous ip
multimedia subsystems,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile
Computing, vol. 7, no. 11, pp. 1297–1310, Nov. 2008.
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-220-2
CONTENT 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

