Open Linked Data in Policy-based Repositories 
 
Chien-Yi Hou 
School of Information and Library Science 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 
Chapel Hill, United States 
chienyi@unc.edu 
Richard Marciano 
School of Information and Library Science 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 
Chapel Hill, United States 
richard_marciano@unc.edu
 
 
Abstract—Since the creation of the World Wide Web and the 
emergence of search engines, the web has become the major 
media for researchers to explore and share data. In 2009, 
Berners-Lee started a movement to encourage researchers to 
put their data on the web. He wanted researchers to open and 
link their data to the public to increase the use and reuse of 
content. However, the lack of proper mechanisms to assist 
researchers publishing data on the web has prevented them 
from effective sharing. We create mechanisms to help 
researchers open and link their data using the integrated Rule-
Oriented Data System, iRODS. iRODS is a data grid software 
that has been widely used to manage research data in large-
scale European, American, and Asian national research 
projects, such as at the "Bibliothèque Nationale de France". 
iRODS comes with a business rule engine which allows 
researchers to create rules to manage and process data. In this 
paper, we show how to configure iRODS rules to transmit and 
open linked data in a distributed data cloud setting. 
Keywords-linked data; policy-based data management. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Publishing research results on the web has become the 
most common approach for researchers to share their 
research findings because with robust search engines, 
everything you put on the web gets revealed to the world 
automatically. That is not necessarily the case though for the 
data that researchers use to analyze and eventually link to 
their publications. These data are usually not available after 
experiments are conducted and might not get retained. The 
main reason is that these data are stored in digital 
repositories that are not exposed to the web. In Berners-Lee’s 
TED talk [1] in 2009, he advocated the idea of sharing “raw 
data now”. He encouraged researchers to share not only the 
study results but also the data to produce the study results. 
The technology created to support this idea is Linked Data 
[2]. Linked Data provides the mechanism for researchers to 
create associations between data or information and other 
related data or information. It creates the relationships 
between data and information. It helps aggregate data and 
information together. Researchers could do a “one-stop 
shop” to find all the relevant data if they were linked 
together. 
Sharing raw data with the public is an important idea to 
bring data to life. The same dataset might be used across 
multiple disciplines and reveal interesting or even 
unexpected findings. However, the last thing researchers 
want to do is further burden their daily research. Opening 
and linking one’s data should be so easy and seamless that 
one almost forgets its existence! In this paper, we would like 
to show how to automate this process by using policy-based 
data management software to manage and publish data. The 
goal is to fit data sharing processes into one’s data 
management cycle seamlessly. In the 2nd section, we will 
introduce the data grid software used in this paper and 
discuss how researchers are using it. In the 3rd section, we 
will show you how to open Linked Data by using rules. In 
the conclusion, we will discuss our findings and next steps. 
II. 
POLICY-BASED DATA MANAGEMENT 
The last four years or so have seen the emergence of 
policy-aware infrastructure. New collaboratives have 
emerged 
with 
a 
focus 
on 
distributed 
preservation 
frameworks 
that 
are 
driven 
by 
community-based 
management policies, comprising auditing, replication of 
content, automatic extraction and association of metadata, 
validation 
of 
checksums, 
format 
migration, 
and 
trustworthiness.  Policies are typically rules describing 
actions that take place in repositories.  This trend was 
highlighted in the 2008 Communications of the ACM 
Magazine [3], where the need for repositories to incorporate 
mechanisms that implement and automate policies and 
regulations was identified.  Emerging data cyber-
infrastructure management environments and systems 
include well-known and widely-used systems such as 
LOCKSS, DSpace, Fedora, and iRODS. 
 
The iRODS approach we focus on and discuss in greater 
detail in this section, supports the notion of extensibility 
with a scalable rule-based engine, allowing the registration 
of new server-side distributed user-defined workflows. 
 
A. iRODS Overview 
iRODS [4], the Integrated Rule-Oriented Data System, is 
a community-driven, open source, data grid software that 
aims to help researchers manage large sets of data. iRODS 
has been used widely by scientists to manage data in large-
scale European, American, and Asian national research 
projects. It is also used as a distributed file system to manage 
and share data across different locations. Researchers will 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-220-2
CONTENT 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

need to have accounts in order to access data stored in 
iRODS. 
B. iRODS Rules 
The rule engine inside iRODS gives researchers the 
capability to specify their data management policies within 
iRODS. The basic components of an iRODS rule are hooks, 
conditions, actions, and recovery actions. iRODS hooks are 
operations that happen during the data manipulation process. 
There are over 70 hooks now in existence. For example, a 
hook named acPostProcForPut will be triggered after you 
upload a file. When the rule is triggered, the rule engine will 
check the conditions of that rule. If the conditions are 
satisfied, the actions in the rule will be executed. The action 
could be a single procedure or a chain of procedures. If the 
actions somehow fail, recovery actions can be executed if 
specified. 
iRODS rules could be executed at three different modes: 
(1) immediate execution, (2) delayed execution, and (3) 
periodic execution. For example, you can specify a rule that 
sends you an email immediately or three minutes after a file 
is deleted. You also can run a rule every month to verify the 
integrity of your data. iRODS provides flexible rule design 
principles and many hooks that span the data management 
lifecycle. These features provide the opportunity to plug data 
sharing processes into researchers’ data management 
processes. 
C. iRODS Metadata 
In order to make Linked Data more useful, it is essential 
to provide rich information to describe the data, e.g., who the 
creator of these data is and what these data are about. iRODS 
provides the capability to create metadata to describe an 
individual object, a collection, a user account, or even a 
resource that is used to store the data. You can define your 
own metadata as AVU (Attribute, Value, Unit) triplets to 
describe your “subjects”. The capability to ingest metadata 
into iRODS is very useful when we need to extract 
information to create relationships for Linked Data. 
D. iRODS Use Cases 
Because of the flexibility to design policies for your own 
digital repository, iRODS has been used in many research 
projects. Hedges [5] implements preservation policies on 
iRODS to manage research data. The SHAMAN project [6] 
also uses iRODS to design polices for preservation. Walling 
and Esteva [7] integrate their procedures into iRODS to 
automate the metadata extraction process while ingesting 
data. The PoDRI project [8] uses iRODS policies to manage 
the interoperability between Fedora, Flexible Extensible 
Digital Object Repository Architecture, and iRODS. 
Integrating open Linked Data processes with iRODS data 
management is a new idea. 
III. 
OPEN AND LINKED DATA BY POLICIES 
Data grids have been used in international research 
projects [9][10] to manage large-scale data, but sharing data 
is mainly restricted within projects or groups. Researchers 
usually only share their research results with the public as 
publications but not as raw data. These raw data are invisible 
to web crawlers and search engines. In order to make these 
raw data accessible and usable by the general public, we 
need a mechanism to publish data to the web and automate 
the open Linked Data process in researchers’ daily data 
management. 
iRODS provides researchers the flexibility to incorporate 
policies and procedures as iRODS rules into their data 
management routine. This feature gives them the opportunity 
to integrate data publishing processes with data management 
processes. The process to publish Linked Data will be 
triggered automatically without further actions after initially 
setting it up and thus it becomes part of the data management 
process. The content to be published as Linked Data is data 
already stored in iRODS or data that will be ingested into 
iRODS. First of all, we need to define the actions to trigger 
the “publish Linked Data” procedure. Let us assume we only 
publish the data when the data is opened to the “public”, then 
data will be opened when the file’s access permission is set 
to “public”. “Public” access permission here means that 
anonymous users have read permission to the data. This kind 
of situation could take place in a couple of different 
scenarios. The first one is when the file’s access permission 
is being changed to “public”. The second scenario is when 
data are ingested to a directory with public access 
permission. Below are the two open linked data usage 
scenarios: 
 
• 
Scenario 1 (Figure 1.): After researchers change the 
access 
permission, 
a 
rule 
named 
acPostProcForModifyAccessControl 
will 
be 
triggered. We add a condition to check the access 
permission. If the permission is set to “public”, the 
rule will initiate the “publish Linked Data” 
procedure. There should also be corresponding rules 
to check the permission while researchers remove 
the public access permission, a “close” Linked Data 
procedure would need to be called to remove the link 
from the web. 
• 
Scenario 
2 
(Figure 
2.): 
A 
rule 
named 
acPostProcForPut will be triggered every time 
researchers upload a file to iRODS. If the access 
permission of the target directory is set to “public”, 
then the access permission of the uploaded file will 
be “public” as well. In this case the “publish Linked 
Data” procedure will be called to publish data to the 
web. 
 
 
Figure 1. Open linked data scenario 1 
 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-220-2
CONTENT 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

 
Figure 2. Open linked data scenario 2 
 
According to Bizer [11], there are three basic steps to 
publish a dataset as Linked Data on the Web. They are: (1) 
assigning URIs to the entities, (2) setting RDF links to other 
data sources on the Web, and (3) providing metadata about 
published data. In order to fulfill these three steps, 
researchers will need to provide enough information to 
describe their data. The information will be stored as iRODS 
user-defined metadata and will be used by the “Publish 
Linked Data” process in Figure 1 and Figure 2. The 
advantage of storing this information as user-defined 
metadata is the flexibility to link data based on user-defined 
metadata. Different datasets might link to different data 
sources on the web. iRODS also provides a unique iRODS 
URI to each individual object that could be used to access to 
the object. Researchers will use the published Linked Data 
information to reveal the data’s existence and use the iRODS 
URI to get the data. Data will be stored in iRODS where we 
will apply other management policies like integrity checking. 
The details of how the “Publish Linked Data” process works 
will be included in future work. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND NEXT STEPS 
We have demonstrated some simple usage scenarios on 
how to publish Linked Data using policy-based data 
management software, but there are still many factors that 
we need to consider when dealing with more complex data. 
For example, data that require IRB (institutional review 
board) approvals might need some pre-processing to remove 
the personal identities or ask other researchers to obtain 
similar IRB approvals. Policies to avoid accidently violating 
the privacy of data will need to be defined. 
Our next step is to identify required information to 
describe data in order for it to be published. Different types 
of data will have different requirements to create 
relationships, but we would like to find a general set of 
information that could be used to describe most of the data 
and create linkages. Additional information could be 
considered as add-on but is not necessary. 
Opening research data to the public is becoming popular 
and it is an important approach to get the best out of the 
investments that are used to generate or acquire these data. 
The technology of Open Linked Data provides researchers a 
mechanism to share data. By using Policy-based Data 
Management systems, we will be able to build policies 
within the system to help researchers publish Linked Data to 
the web. This approach could encourage researchers to share 
more raw data because the sharing procedure has been built 
into data management process and could be modified by 
researchers when needed. It has the potential to save a lot of 
effort, encourage the reuse of research data, and open up the 
field of study. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This work is supported by a Research and Demonstration 
grant from the Institute of Museum and Library Services, 
(IMLS LG-06-09-0184-09) “Policy-Driven Repository 
Interoperability. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Berners-Lee, T. (2009) on the next Web, TED talks, 
2009(Feb). 
http://www.ted.com/talks/tim_berners_lee_on_the_next_web.
html 
[2] Bizer, C., Heath, T., Idehen, K., and Berners-Lee, T. (2008). 
Linked data on the web (LDOW2008). Proceeding of the 17th 
International Conference on World Wide Web WWW 08, 
2008 (September), 1265. ACM Press. 
[3] Berman, F., Got Data? A Guide to Data Preservation in the 
Information Age, Francine Berman, Communications of the 
ACM, December 2008, Vol. 51, No. 12, pp. 50-56, 
http://mags.acm.org/communications/200812/  
[4] Rajasekar, A., Moore, R., Hou, C.-Y., Lee, C. A., Marciano, 
R., De Torcy, A., Wan, M., et al. (2010). iRODS Primer: 
Integrated Rule-Oriented Data System. Synthesis Lectures on 
Information Concepts Retrieval and Services (Vol. 2, pp. 1-
143). 
[5] Hedges, M., Hasan, A., and Blanke, T. (2007). Management 
and preservation of research data with iRODS. Proceedings of 
the ACM first workshop on CyberInfrastructure information 
management in eScience CIMS 07 (pp. 17-22). ACM. 
[6] Innocenti, P., Ross, S., Elena, M., Wilson, T., Ludwig, J., and 
Pempe, 
W. 
(2009). 
Assessing 
digital 
preservation 
frameworks: the approach of the SHAMAN project. MEDES 
09 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
International 
Conference 
on 
Management of Emergent Digital EcoSystems. 
[7] Walling, D., and Esteva, M. (2011). Automating the 
Extraction of Metadata from Archaeological Data Using 
iRods Rules. International Journal of Digital Curation, 6(2), 
253-264. 
[8] Pcolar, D., Davis, D. W., Zhu, B., Chassanoff, A., Hou, C. Y., 
and Marciano, R. (2010). Conceptualizing Policy-Driven 
Repository Interoperability (PoDRI) Using iRODS and 
Fedora. Information Sciences, 25. Morgan and Claypool 
Publishers. 
[9] Hoschek, W., Jaen-martinez, J., Samar, A., Stockinger, H., 
and Stockinger, K. (2000). Data Management in an 
International Data Grid Project. (R. Buyya and M. Baker, 
Eds.) Manager, 1971, 77-90. Springer-Verlag. 
[10] Johnston, W. E. (2002). Computational and data Grids in 
large-scale science and engineering. Future Generation 
Computer Systems, 18(8), 1085-1100. 
[11] Bizer, C., Heath, T., and Berners-Lee, T. (2009). Linked Data 
- The Story So Far. (T Heath, M. Hepp, and C Bizer, Eds.) 
International Journal on Semantic Web and Information 
Systems, 5(3), 1-22. Elsevier. 
 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-220-2
CONTENT 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

