Evaluation of SEMANTIC:  
An Intelligent English Semantic Object-Oriented Dictionary System 
 
Samia Yousif, Mansoor Al Aali 
College of Information Technology 
Ahlia University, Manama, Kingdom of Bahrain 
Emails: {syousif, malaali}@ahlia.edu.bh 
  
 
Abstract—There has been a great deal of research on natural 
language representation and processing, but little or no 
significant research on building intelligent semantic dictionary 
systems. This paper presents research on evaluating our 
intelligent English semantic dictionary system and its 
suitability for teaching English language to school children and 
for its use as a translation system, especially for non-native 
English speakers. SEMANTIC dictionary system is an 
intelligent Object-Oriented (OO) eLearning system based on 
advanced UML. It contains English words, their translation to 
Arabic, associated actions, semantic relationships, inherited 
actions and attributes, special and exceptional relationships 
and 
other 
semantics 
and 
characteristics. 
SEMANTIC 
dictionary system was tested on the 6th class of an elementary 
school for girls in the Kingdom of Bahrain to evaluate its 
effectiveness in teaching English and for its level of 
contribution to students learning. The analysis of experimental 
results are very promising. 
Keywords-eLearning; Semantic; English; Object-Oriented, 
Evaluation. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
eLearning means both teachers and students utilize 
electronic media (text, audio, images, animation and video),  
as well as education and communication technologies [3]. In 
recent years, the use of new teaching methods and 
technology in the classroom has been increasing [6]. 
Teachers have used the Internet for language teaching, as 
well as Computer-Assisted Language Learning (CALL). The 
use of new technologies and teaching methods, such as 
Internet and CALL, enhances and complements traditional 
language teaching. Literature on instructional technology 
shows that the use of the Internet in teaching has the 
potential to motivate students and teachers, increase their 
participation, and interaction in the classroom, allow for a 
deeper integration with the culture of the target language, 
and provide students with a more active role in their learning 
[5][6].  
Nowadays, most countries, where English is not their 
first language, teach English language to their students 
[4][9]. In turn, the traditional language teaching in the 
classroom needs to be integrated and enhanced by applying 
new teaching methods [13], like eLearning [6] and 
information and communication technologies. As a result, it 
will assist English language learners to reduce mechanical 
memorization and develop their English language skills [10]. 
Some researchers applied the ideas from CAL (Computer 
Assisted Language) and language learning, emphasizing 
context for language learning, especially for abstract word 
learning. Some have developed a multimedia web-based 
CAL system which includes 13 abstract words and five main 
modules: Learning Material, Testing, Communication, Help, 
and Extensive English Learning Web Sites [14][15]. They 
conducted CAL in an elementary school in southern Taiwan, 
and they endorse that using CAL for English teaching can 
enhance and improve both the quality and quantity of the 
English language learnt. Other researchers developed 
computer-assisted programs for English language teaching 
[11]. Their researches indicated that pupils who learnt 
English by applying more communicative methods made 
greater progress in vocabulary acquisition than those who 
worked with the more traditional methods [7]. 
Electronic dictionaries contain data in digital form. 
Several types of dictionaries are available electronically. 
There are many types of dictionaries used for different 
purposes. Some are used for language translation [1], while 
others are used for science and technology like medical and 
engineering dictionaries. Dictionaries are developed and 
continuously improved to contain a number of useful and 
practical applications. After thoroughly searching the 
literature and conducting an online dictionaries survey, we 
could not find any similar attempts to develop an 
“intelligent” dictionary to be used especially as a multi-
purpose multi-lingual educational tool for young students 
[2][8][12]. 
SEMANTIC dictionary system is an intelligent web-
based Object-Oriented (OO) eLearning system. Each word in 
it belongs to a class and may have one or more subclasses. 
Subclasses inherit all the public attributes and relationships 
(operations) of their super class and this concept is utilized in 
all types of processing on the SEMANTIC dictionary 
system. For example, consider the following words or phrase 
“girl read cherry” unless Cherry is the name of a book and 
Cherry has already read it. The simple sentence that can be 
composed out of these words is correct grammatically, but in 
a real world’s semantic meaning is impossible. SEMANTIC 
dictionary system rejects this sentence and displays the 
reasons which are: Girl is human, and Cherry is food and 
human cannot read food. Hence, SEMANTIC dictionary 
system creates possible class strings which is human can 
read information media, and selects an object randomly from 
this class such as Newspaper and therefore, it corrects the 
semantic meaning of the simple sentence and becomes: Girl 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-392-6
CONTENT 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

reads Newspaper. Another example: the following words are 
“mother feed son”. SEMANTIC dictionary system accepts 
this simple sentence and presents the explanation which is: 
Mother is human, and Son is human, and human can feed 
human and therefore, Mother feeds Son is semantically 
correct. These are made possible because of the intelligent 
features of the OO techniques [16] and the actions 
(relationships) associated with each word in SEMANTIC 
dictionary system. 
SEMANTIC dictionary system was tested on a 6th class 
of an elementary school for girls in the Kingdom of Bahrain 
to evaluate its effectiveness in teaching English, its level of 
contribution 
to 
students 
learning. 
The 
analysis 
of 
experimental results in this research shows that SEMANTIC 
dictionary system can help non-native young students to 
learn English and English semantics in a much easier 
manner, as well as help very young children construct simple 
sentences and phrases. SEMANTIC supports teachers to 
prepare lessons and quizzes automatically. Furthermore, it 
helps them to enhance the traditional methods of teaching 
English and thus making classrooms more interesting. 
SEMANTIC can also, raise students’ motivation and 
contribution, as well as enabling students to understand the 
meaning of words and assists them to establish sentences 
correctly with semantic meaning. 
Section 2 shows the Unified Modeling Language (UML) 
diagram for SEMANTIC ENGLISH system and how we 
have made enhancements and additions to UML itself. 
Section 3 explains how SEMANTIC dictionary helps 
students to learn some aspects of English language. This 
research presents the results of testing SEMANTIC 
ENGLISH system to test its effectiveness in teaching some 
aspects of the English language and to test its level of 
contribution to students’ learning. The results of such testing 
are shown in Sections 4, 5 and 6. 
II. 
IMPROVING UML DIAGRAM FOR THE SEMANTIC 
DICTIONARY SYSTEM 
The Unified Modeling Language (UML) [17] is the 
industry-standard language for specifying, visualizing, 
constructing, and documenting the artifacts of software 
systems. It simplifies the complex process of software 
design, making a ‘blueprint’ for construction. Figure 1 shows 
a Diagram of our enhanced UML Diagram to demonstrate 
the inheritance, aggregation and relationships of the classes 
in SEMANTIC dictionary system. The public attributes and 
operations are expressed with a plus sign (+). The private 
attributes and operations are expressed with a minus sign (-). 
The exceptional operations are expressed with a less-than 
sign (<). The “Subject-Only” operations are expressed with 
an ampersand (&). The letter “b” is added to these signs (+, -
, < or &) when the type of the operation is “Action By” 
while the letter “o” is added to them when the type of the 
operation is “Action On”. Notice that both “Exceptional” and 
“Subject-Only” operations are not a part of the original UML 
class diagram, but we added them, which means that their 
signs are according to our view, as well as the addition of the 
letters “b” and “o” to the signs. The signs and the letters are 
utilized to distinguish between the actions. In addition, 
Figure 1 presents the following:  
 
Classes: SEMANTIC dictionary system has 
several super classes and many subclasses whereas 
Figure 1 presents three Super classes: Human, 
Vegetarian Food and Information Media. In 
addition, it shows six subclasses, such as (Reading) 
of super class Information Media and (Family and 
People) of super class Human.  
 
Instances: In SEMANTIC dictionary system, each 
subclass has many instances, for example (Man, 
Woman, Boy and Girl) of subclass People. Another 
example: the subclass Fruit has many instances that 
are applied in SEMANTIC dictionary system while 
Figure 1 shows (Apple and Banana) as an example. 
 
Aggregation: A lot of aggregations are applied in 
SEMANTIC dictionary system, for example the 
super class Information Media consists of class 
Reading and the class Reading consists of objects 
or instances (Book, Magazine and Newspaper).  
 
Public 
Operations: 
SEMANTIC 
dictionary 
system has many public operations (Action By): 
for example; buys, sells and browses, for example: 
a girl buys an apple. As well as the public 
operations (Action On) which are generated 
automatically: such as; bought by, sold by and 
browsed by, for example: an apple is bought by a 
girl. 
 
Private 
Operations: 
SEMANTIC 
dictionary 
system has a private operation (Action By): 
“engages” for object Man. For example: a man 
engages a woman and a private operation (Action 
On): “engaged to” for object Woman. For example: 
a woman engaged to a man. 
 
Subject_Only 
Operations: 
SEMANTIC 
dictionary system contains several Subject_Only 
operations (Action By): such as Sits, Grows, 
Sleeps, Swims and Weeps. For example, a boy sits. 
 
Exceptional operations: SEMANTIC dictionary 
system has an exceptional operation (Action By): 
Cooks. For example, a boy cannot cook a cloth. 
Also, an exceptional operation (Action On): 
Cooked by. For example, a football is not cooked 
by a human.  
 
Inheritance: In SEMANTIC dictionary system the 
super 
classes 
inherit 
the 
public 
operations 
(Actions) to its subclasses. For example: the super 
class Human inherits its public operations such as  
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-392-6
CONTENT 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

Human 
People 
Man     
Girl  
Woman 
Boy      
          
*                   
 
          
*                   
 
          
*                   
 
          
*                   
 
Family 
Father 
Daughter 
Mother  
Son     
          
1                   
           
1                   
           
*                   
           
*                   
 
Vegetarian Food 
Fruit 
Banana 
Apple     
          
*                   
           
*                   
 
Information 
Media 
Reading 
Book     
Magazine 
Newspaper 
          
*                   
           
*                   
           
*                   
 
Grain 
Pea       
Rice      
          
*                   
           
*                   
 
Vegetable 
Radish 
Carrot   
          
*                   
 
+b Feeds          
+o Fed by 
          
*                   
 
           
*                   
 
          
*                   
 
      +o Read by 
          
1 .. *                   
 
          
0 .. *                   
 
Figure 1. Example of Enhanced UML Diagram in the SEMANTIC Dictionary System. 
   +o Written by 
          
1 .. *                   
 
          
0 .. *                   
 
+o Browsed by 
          
1 .. *                   
 
          
0 .. *                      
 
    +o Bought by 
          
1                   
 
          
0 .. *                   
 
+o Held by 
          
1 .. *                   
 
          
0 .. *                   
 
          
1                   
 
          
0 .. *                   
 
+o Sold by 
& Grows 
& Sits 
& Sleeps 
& Swims 
& Weeps 
+o Eaten by 
          
0 .. *                   
 
          
1 .. *                   
 
   +b Cooks 
          
0 .. *                   
 
          
1                   
 
    +b Cuts 
          
0 .. *                   
 
          
1                      
     +b Buys 
          
0 .. *                   
 
          
1                   
 
+b Holds 
          
0 .. *                   
 
          
1 .. *                   
 
          
0 .. *                   
 
          
1                   
 
  +b Sells 
& Grows 
-b Engages 
-o Engaged to 
<o Cooked by 
<b Cook 
<b Cook 
+b Eats 
+b Reads 
 +b Writes 
 
    +b Browses 
 +b Buys 
+b Sells 
     +b Holds 
+o Held by 
  +o Sold by 
    +o Bought by 
+o Cut by 
   +o Cooked by 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(eat, cook, read and write) to its subclasses (People 
and Family) and consequently these classes inherits 
these operations to its subclasses or instances like 
(Man, Woman, and Boy).  
 
Multiplicity: Different multiplicities are applied in 
SEMANTIC dictionary system. For example: “a 
man eats an apple”, “Three men eat an apple”, “a 
man eats two apples” and “four men eat five 
apples”. 
 
Normal Association: SEMANTIC dictionary 
system has many normal associations, for example, 
first direction: a boy reads many (zero or many) 
books. Second direction: a book can be read by 
many (one or many) boys. 
 
Recursive Association: SEMANTIC dictionary 
system has a recursive association, first direction:  
(one or many) woman feeds (one or many) sons. 
Second direction: (one or many) son fed by (one or 
many) women. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
III. 
SEMANTIC FOR STUDENT LEARNING 
SEMANTIC dictionary helps students to learn some 
aspects of English language. He can learn these aspects of 
English language through SEMANTIC Dictionary, lessons 
and Checker. SEMANTIC Dictionary contains the English 
words (objects) and their relationships; Action By displays a 
list of actions that the selected word can perform and Action 
On displays a list of actions which can be carried out on the 
selected word. The classification of the word is represented 
by a Tree structure. For example, when the student selects a 
word such as ‘Boy’, SEMANTIC Dictionary displays the 
classification of the word ‘Boy’ which is Thing > Living > 
Human > People > Boy. This helps the student understand 
and recognize the semantic meaning of the word ‘Boy’. 
SEMANTIC dictionary also shows the associated diagram 
and images to provide further illustrations of the word to 
expand the student knowledge. Associated diagrams include 
information on the word in Arabic and English.  The 
information can be plural of the word, gender, and 
description. Read is an action that Boy can achieve (Action 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-392-6
CONTENT 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

By), and fed is the action that can be carried out on him 
(Action On). When an action is selected, SEMANTIC 
dictionary system displays the Arabic translation, the 
corresponding picture and generates simple sentence using 
the selected word and the action. For example, ‘Boy reads’ 
and ‘Boy is fed’. Finally the student can listen to the 
pronunciation of the knowledge relating to the selected word 
by pressing the sound image as demonstrated in Figure 2.  
 
 
 
Figure 2. SEMANTIC Dictionary Tool. 
 
SEMANTIC has three lessons; simple sentences, singular 
& plural nouns and the articles. SEMANTIC dictionary 
system explains the rules of each lesson with picture 
representations and examples of the words. 
Lesson1 - Simple Sentences: This lesson teaches the 
students how to build simple sentences with grammatical 
correctness. Furthermore, it teaches them how to create the 
simple sentences with correct semantic meaning. For 
example, the left side of Figure 3 presents the words utilized 
to build a sentence of type 2; ‘the subject: Man, the verb: 
engage and the object: Woman’, it also presents the 
explanation for the created sentence in the right side. 
SEMANTIC dictionary system accepts this sentence as 
indicated in Figure 3 and its explanation: ‘Man is human’, 
and ‘Woman is human’, and ‘human can engage human’, 
and this action (‘engage’) is special for the man; therefore 
‘Man engages Woman’. SEMANTIC dictionary system 
follows the same manner with type 1, as shown in Figure 4. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. SEMANTIC Dictionary System accepts the created Sentence of 
Type 2. 
 
 
Figure 4. SEMANTIC Dictionary System accepts the created Sentence of 
Type 1. 
 
Another example is that SEMANTIC dictionary system 
rejects the created sentence and generates possible category 
strings to be matched with it as illustrated in Figure 5. The 
words utilized to build a sentence of type 2 are: ‘the subject: 
Woman, 
the 
verb: 
cook, 
the 
object: 
Newspaper’. 
SEMANTIC dictionary system rejects this sentence because: 
‘Woman is human’, and ‘Newspaper is information media’ 
and ‘human cannot cook information media’, and it creates 
possible class string which is ‘Human can cook Vegetarian 
Food’ and selects an object randomly from this class, such as 
‘Potato’, and therefore, it corrects the semantical meaning of 
the sentence and becomes: ‘Woman cooks Potato’. Same 
approach that SEMANTIC deal with the wrong semantic 
meaning for sentences of type 1; see Figure 6. This lesson 
exposes the intelligent feature of SEMANTIC dictionary 
system such as accepting or rejecting the created sentences 
on its semantical meaning, correcting the wrong sentences 
and generating correct sentences randomly. In addition, it 
provides the explanation for accepting or rejecting any 
sentence. 
 
 
 
Figure 5. SEMANTIC Dictionary System rejects the created Sentence of 
Type 2. 
 
 
 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-392-6
CONTENT 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

 
Figure 6. SEMANTIC Dictionary System rejects the created Sentence of 
Type 1. 
 
Lesson2 – Singular and Plural Nouns: This lesson 
teaches the students the comparison between singular and 
plural nouns in English language and presents the rules that 
help them to make the plural of the singular nouns. Further, 
SEMANTIC dictionary system generates four possible 
sentences from the words Subject (S), Verb (V) and Object 
(O) that are exposed in the left side, using singular & plural 
nouns rules i.e. [singular (S) singular (O), singular (S) plural 
(O), plural (S) singular (O) and plural (S) plural (O)]. 
For example: The words; Subject (S): Man, Verb (V): 
Cut and Object (O): Tomato. The sentences that 
SEMANTIC dictionary system creates are:  
 
Singular (Subject & Object): Man cuts Tomato 
 
Plural (Subject) & Singular (Object): Not proper in 
the real world 
 
Singular (Subject) & Plural (Object): Man cuts 
Tomatoes 
 
Plural (Subject & Object): Men cut Tomatoes 
 
This example indicates that only the second sentence is 
not proper in the real world, which means that more than one 
man would not cut one tomato. Therefore, SEMANTIC 
dictionary system gives a message ‘Not proper in the real 
world’. The intelligent part in this lesson is that SEMANTIC 
dictionary system generates sentences from three words 
(Subject, Verb and Object) depending on the singular and 
plural nouns rules as well as make sure that the generated 
sentence is proper in the real world. When the generated 
sentence is not proper in the real world, it shows this 
message ‘Not proper in the real world’. 
Lesson 3 – The Articles: this lesson teaches the students 
the definitions and types of the articles, as well as teaches the 
rules for using the articles with nouns in English. 
SEMANTIC generates four possible sentences from 
(Subject, Verb and Object) by using the singular and plural 
nouns rules, and the articles rules. For example, the 
sentences that are created from the words (Man, cut and 
Eggplant), respectively; the sentences that SEMANTIC 
dictionary generates are: 
• 
Singular (subject) & Singular (object) 
• 
Indefinite (subject) & Indefinite(object): 
A Man cuts an Eggplant 
• 
Definite (subject) & Definite(object):The 
Man cuts the Eggplant 
 
• 
Plural (subject) & Plural (object) 
• 
Indefinite (subject) & Indefinite(object): 
Some Men cut some Eggplants 
• 
Definite (subject) & Definite(object): The 
Men cut the Eggplants 
This lesson has some intelligence; for example, 
SEMANTIC dictionary system selects the appropriate article 
and produces sentences with grammatical correctness and 
semantical meaning. 
Checker Tool: this tool checks the phrase semantics of 
simple sentences (type 1 and type 2) that entered by the 
student. In addition, it checks the spelling of words and when 
any word is misspelt, SEMANTIC will display the possible 
correct words for it and this will assist students to correct 
their sentences before checking the semantics meaning of 
these sentences. For example, the entered words: ‘girl, read 
and cherry’ respectively as illustrated in Figure 7. The simple 
sentence composed of these words is correct grammatically 
but in the real world meaning (semantics meaning) it is 
impossible. Therefore, SEMANTIC dictionary system rejects 
this sentence and displays the reasons which are: ‘Girl is 
human’, and ‘Cherry is vegetarian food’ and ‘human cannot 
read vegetarian food’. SEMANTIC creates possible class 
string which is ‘human can read information media’, and 
selects an object randomly from this class such as 
‘Newspaper’ and therefore it corrects the semantical 
meaning of the simple sentence and becomes: ‘Girl reads 
Newspaper’. Moreover, it demonstrates the corresponding 
pictures and presents the Arabic translation. 
 
 
 
Figure 7. SEMANTIC Rejects the Entered Sentence (General 
Relationship). 
 
Another example, the entered words: ‘man, feed and 
boy’, respectively. SEMANTIC dictionary system accepts 
this sentence and presents the explanation, as indicated in 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-392-6
CONTENT 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

Figure 8: ‘Man is human’, and ‘Boy is human’, and ‘Human 
can feed Human’. Therefore, ‘Man feeds Boy’. It also 
demonstrates the corresponding pictures and displays the 
Arabic translation. 
 
 
Figure 8. SEMANTIC Accepts the Entered Sentence (General 
Relationship). 
IV. 
EVALUATING SEMANTICS DICTIONARY SYSTEM 
This research presents the Object-Oriented technique as a 
new approach for the development and evaluation of an 
Intelligent Multi-Lingual (English - Arabic) dictionary 
system called SEMANTIC. SEMANTIC dictionary has a 
number of added features like Tree structures, words 
classification, simple semantic checks, pictures and voice 
pronunciation. The SEMANTIC dictionary was evaluated 
through a large scale case study conducted on elementary 
schools for girls in the Kingdom of Bahrain to test it for 
teaching some aspects of English language and to test its 
level of contribution to students learning. Two groups of a 
sixth grader (experimental and control) were selected as the 
subjects of the study. These students were classified into two 
groups: the first group (Control group) was taught the 
lessons only under the supervision of a teacher without using 
the SEMANTIC dictionary system, whereas the second 
group (Experimental group) was taught the lessons through 
the SEMANTIC dictionary system under the supervision of a 
teacher. 
Control group: contains 16 students and those who taught 
SEMANTIC dictionary system tools under the supervision of 
a teacher without using the SEMANTIC dictionary system.  
Experimental group: includes 16 students and those who 
were taught the same tools as the first group and under the 
supervision of a teacher but the SEMANTIC dictionary was 
used.  
Sixteen hours of learning time were allotted for the 
experimental and control groups. The same words and 
teaching materials (dictionary, lessons, semantic checker, 
etc.,) were introduced to both groups. The couple of groups 
did three quizzes that generated by using SEMANTIC 
dictionary system. The control group answered the quizzes 
on paper while the experimental group answered it on the 
computers through the website of SEMANTIC dictionary 
system. 
Finally, students in the experimental group and their 
English teacher have been asked about their opinions of the 
SEMANTIC dictionary system. 
The achievement test includes three quizzes; quiz 1 
(simple sentences), quiz 2 (singular & plural nouns) and quiz 
3 (the articles).  
Quiz 1 – Simple Sentences: This quiz tests the students’ 
understanding and their ability to create simple sentences. It 
has two types of questions. Four grades for each question. 
Quiz 2 – Singular and Plural Nouns: This quiz examines 
the students’ understanding of singular and plural nouns as 
well as testing their ability to create sentences. It has two 
types of questions. Four grades for each question. 
Quiz 3 –The Articles: This quiz examines the students’ 
understanding of the articles and singular and plural nouns as 
well as examines their ability to create sentences. It has one 
question and eight grades for it. 
V. 
RESULTS ANALYSIS 
The results of students’ achievement test of the 
SEMANTIC dictionary system indicated that the students in 
the experimental group gained higher grades in the quizzes 
than the students in the control group. 
Figure 9 shows the average grades for the couple of 
questions of quiz 1 for the students in both groups 
(experimental and control). This figure indicates that 
students in the experimental group on average obtained high 
grades in quiz 1 (simple sentences) especially in the first 
question. As illustrated in Figure 9, students of the control 
group on average increased 0.56 on question 2, while 
students of the experimental group on average decreased by 
0.38. However, students of the experimental group on 
average gained higher grades in this question than students 
of the control group suggesting that the SEMANTIC 
dictionary system could help students effectively learn 
English words and create simple sentences. 
 
 
 
Figure 10 exposes the average grades for the couple of 
questions of quiz 2 for students in both groups (experimental 
 
Figure 9. Average Grades of Quiz 1 (Simple Sentences). 
Average Grades of Quiz 1 for the Couple of Groups
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Control
Experimental
Control
Experimental
Question 1
Question 2
Students' Groups & Questions
Average Grades
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-392-6
CONTENT 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

and control). This figure indicates that students of the 
experimental group on average acquired high grades in quiz 
2 (singular & plural nouns) especially in the first question. 
As demonstrated in Figure 10, students of the control group 
on average decreased by 0.06 on question 2 and students of 
the experimental group on average decreased by 0.69. Even 
so, students of the experimental group on average achieved 
higher grades in this question than students of the control 
group suggesting that the SEMANTIC dictionary system 
could help students effectively learn singular & plural nouns, 
and generate sentences that has singular & plural nouns. 
 
 
 
Figure 11 presents the average grades for question 1 of 
quiz 3 for students in both groups (experimental and control). 
This figure indicates that students of the experimental group 
on average gained high grades in quiz 3 (the articles). In this 
quiz, students of the experimental group obtained on average 
around 5 and students of the control group on average 
acquired about 3. These results are low because of the time 
spent for teaching the two groups “The Articles” lesson score 
is less than other lessons suggesting that the SEMANTIC 
dictionary system could help students effectively learn the 
articles, and organize sentences that contains the articles, as 
well as the singular & plural nouns. 
 
 
VI. 
SURVEY RESULTS 
The 
survey 
of 
students' 
opinions 
towards 
the 
SEMANTIC dictionary system deduced that students of the 
experimental group responded positively towards the 
SEMANTIC dictionary system; the majority of them enjoyed 
learning with this system, and would like to learn with this 
system again. In addition, they suggested publishing this 
system online because it helps them to learn and understand 
some aspects of English language easily and in a better way, 
as well as they can repeat the lessons and testing their 
understanding any time they want. Moreover, SEMANTIC 
dictionary system increases their cognitive semantic meaning 
of words and sentences and assists them to create correct 
simple sentences grammatically and realistically. 
When the English teacher of students have been asked 
about her opinions towards the SEMANTIC dictionary 
system (students page), she said that “The SEMANTIC 
dictionary system is very useful for students especially the 
beginners and the young learners, because it enables them to 
understand the meaning of words and at the same time it 
helps to organize simple sentences and build them with 
grammatical correctness and semantical meaning. Displaying 
the classification of the word by Tree structure and covering 
the words with corresponding pictures makes the process of 
writing sentences and remembering the meaning easily and 
helpfully. Also, the pictures attract the students’ attention so 
they go on learning without getting bored. Accordingly, 
SEMANTIC dictionary system raises their writing skills. 
Presenting an attractive story with animation and providing 
voice pronunciation of the words and sentences enhance the 
reading skills for students, as well assist their acquiring 
vocabulary.” 
The above results of achievement test and the survey 
support the significance and the advantage of the 
SEMANTIC dictionary system on learning English 
language. If the SEMANTIC dictionary system is used in 
elementary schools, both the teaching and learning quality 
should be improved and students should have greater 
enjoyment and success in language learning. 
VII. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper presented a new approach for the 
development and evaluation of an intelligent Object-
Oriented dictionary system called SEMANTIC. The work in 
this research is the first to effectively use the OO concept 
and enhance UML to deal with English language semantics 
for simple phrases. SEMANTIC dictionary system was 
tested on a 6th class of an elementary school for girls in the 
Kingdom of Bahrain to test its effectiveness in teaching 
some aspects of the English language and to test its level of 
contribution 
to 
students 
learning. 
The 
analysis 
of 
experimental results is very promising. 
Complex structures: sentences consisting of more than 
one structure or phrase or simple sentence with one verb. 
This will test the adaptability of sentence to handle multiple 
structures and how these structures can be integrated   
semantically, grammatically and structurally as one part with 
one objective. For example, now students can handle the 
 
Figure 10. Average Grades of Quiz 2 (Singular & Plural Nouns). 
Average Grades of Quiz 2 for the Couple of Groups
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Control
Experimental
Control
Experimental
Question 1
Question 2
Students' Groups & Questions
Average Grades 
 
Figure 11. Average Grades of Quiz 3 (The Articles). 
Average Grades of Quiz 3 for the Couple of Groups
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Control
Experimental
Question 1
Students' Groups & Question 
Average Geades
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-392-6
CONTENT 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

simple sentences ‘man reads newspaper’. However, the 
sentence ‘A man reads the newspaper with drinking a cup of 
coffee in the afternoon’, consists of a number of structure 
with complex semantics and inter-relationships. Future work 
can focus on developing the approach to handle such 
complexities.     
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to thank Ahlia University for providing 
the support and our students and their English teacher for 
working on developing and testing some of our research 
ideas. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Al-A'ali 
Mansoor, 
“Pre-editing 
and 
Recursive-Phrase 
Composites for  a Better  English-to-Arabic Machine 
Translation”, 
Journal 
of 
Computer 
Science, 
Science 
Publishers, USA, 2007, pp. 1-11. 
[2] Al-A'ali Mansoor, “An Efficient Technique for Identifying 
and Storing Syntactic and Semantic English Natural 
Language Sentence Patterns”, WSEAS Transactions On 
Systems, vol. 6, issue 1, 2007, pp. 173-178. 
[3] Asil Oztekina, Dursun Delenb, Ali Turkyilmazc, and Selim 
Zaimd, A machine learning-based usability evaluation method 
for eLearning systems, Decision Support Systems, vol. 56, 
2013, pp. 63–73. 
[4] Bonnie Piller and Mary Jo Skillings, “English Language 
Teaching Strategies Used by Primary Teachers in One New 
Delhi”, India School, TESL-EJ, vol. 9, 2005, pp. 1-23. 
[5] Haytham S. Al-sarrayrih, Lars Knipping, and Erhard Zorn,  
“Evaluation of a MOODLE Based Learning Management 
System Applied at Berlin Institute of Technology Based on 
ISO-9126”, Hasselt, Belgium, 2010, pp. 880-887. 
[6] Huiwei Cai, “E-learning and English Teaching. IERI 
Procedia”, vol. 2, 2012, pp. 841-846.  
[7] Jaspers, J.G.M., Kanselaar, G. Kok, and W.A.M, “Productive 
language use with IT'S ENGLISH, Computers & Education”, 
vol 21, issue 1-2, 1993, pp. 67-75. 
[8] Mansoor Al-Aali and Samia Yousif, “An Intelligent Multi-
Lingual Object Oriented Dictionary System”, Proceedings of 
the 11th WSEAS International Conference on SYSTEMS, 
Agios Nikolaos, Crete Island, Greece, July 23-25, 2007, pp. 
468-473. 
[9] Masoud Hashemi and Masoud Azizinezhad, “Teaching 
English To Children: A Unique, Challenging Experience For 
Teachers, Effective Teaching Ideas”,  Procedia - Social and 
Behavioral Sciences, vol. 30, 2011, pp. 2083-2087. 
[10] Purva Chhabra, “Use of E-Learning tools inteachingEnglish”, 
International Journal of Computing & Business Research 
ISSN (Online): 2229-6166, 2012. 
[11] Sally Wu, “Knowledge based approaches for English-Chinese 
interpretation teaching and learning”, Procedia Social and 
Behavioral Sciences, vol. 2, 2010, pp. 2383-2387. 
[12] Samia Yousif and Mansoor Al-A'ali, “Object Oriented 
Techniques 
for 
an 
Intelligent 
Multi-Purpose 
English 
Language Dictionary System”, 9th ICEIS – NLPCS 2007, 
Funchal-Madeira/Portugal, 2007, pp. 246-255. 
[13] Shehdeh Fareh, “Challenges of teaching English in the Arab 
world: Why can’t EFL programs deliver as expected”,  
Procedia Social and Behavioral Sciences, vol. 2, 2010, pp. 
3600–3604. 
[14] Shulamit Kotzer and Yossi Elran, “Learning and teaching 
with Moodle-based E-learning environments, combining 
learning skills and content in the fields of Math and Science 
& Technology”, Heraklion, Crete-Greece, 2012, pp. 122-131. 
[15] Wenli Tsou, Weichung Wang, and Hung-yi Li (). “How 
computers facilitate English foreign language learners acquire 
English abstract words”, Computers & Education, vol 39, 
issue 4, 2002, pp. 415-428.   
[16] Xueyun Ji, “Analysis and Design for Object-oriented Multi-
tier Architecture of Public Opinion Survey System Based on 
UML”, Procedia Engineering, vol. 15, 2011, pp. 5445-5449. 
[17] Hassan Gomaa, Designing Concurrent, Distributed, and Real-
Time Applications with UML, ISBN: 9780321951816, Jan 
2014. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-392-6
CONTENT 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

