Energy Balance:
A web-based Visualization of Energy
for Automotive Engineering using X3DOM
Werner Sturm, Ren´e Berndt, Andreas Halm, Torsten Ullrich, Eva Eggeling
Fraunhofer Austria Research GmbH, Visual Computing
Graz, Austria
{werner.sturm, rene.berndt, andreas.halm, torsten.ullrich, eva.eggeling}@fraunhofer.at
D. W. Fellner
Fraunhofer IGD and TU Darmstadt
Darmstadt, Germany
dieter.fellner@igd.fraunhofer.de
Abstract—Automotive systems can be very complex when
using multiple forms of energy. To achieve better energy
efﬁciency, engineers require specialized tools to cope with
that complexity and to comprehend how energy is spread
and consumed. This is especially essential to develop hy-
brid systems, which generate electricity by various available
forms of energy. Therefore, highly specialized visualizations of
multiple measured energies are needed. This paper examines
several three-dimensional glyph-based visualization techniques
for spatial multivariate data. Besides animated glyphs, two-
dimensional visualization techniques for temporal data to allow
detailed trend analysis are considered as well. Investigations
revealed that Scaled Data-Driven Spheres are best suited for
a detailed 3D exploration of measured data. To gain a better
overview of the spatial data, Cumulative Glyphs are introduced.
For trend analysis, Theme River and Stacked Area Graphs
are used. All these visualization techniques are implemented
as a web-based prototype without the need of additional web
browser plugins using X3DOM and Data-Driven Documents.
Keywords-scientiﬁc visualization; spatio-temporal multivari-
ate; glyph based; trend analysis; web-based.
I. INTRODUCTION
Scientiﬁc visualization is a growing ﬁeld of research in
computer graphics. The enormous amount of measured and
calculated data has rapidly grown. To make fast decisions
based on the data, scientists and engineers need to interpret
valuable information efﬁciently. The complexity of this data
constantly increases and therefore highly specialized and
individual visualization methods are needed [1].
Especially automotive engineering encounters the need to
develop more efﬁcient energy saving systems to provide
longer duration with a given amount of energy. Thus,
automotive engineers require specialized tools that support
them to achieve this goal. An increasing research ﬁeld of au-
tomotive engineering are hybrid vehicles (e.g., combination
of combustion engine and electric propulsion system). As
electricity is used for propulsion, several forms of energy
can be used to generate electricity [2] (e.g., heat, kinetic
energy or sun light). A hybrid vehicle that uses multiple
forms of energy can be a very complex system. Every
single component that outputs or consumes energy must be
considered to ensure highest efﬁciency. To cope with such
complex systems, engineers need to be able to understand
the global behavior of such hybrid systems.
In this paper, several multivariate visualization techniques
(two- and three dimensional) are evaluated (see Section
II). In addition to that, a prototypical implementation us-
ing X3DOM [3] and Data-Driven Documents (D3) [4]
technology is discussed (see Section III). This interactive
prototype demonstrates two glyph-based three-dimensional
(3D) visualization methods including Scaled Data-Driven
Spheres (SDDS) and three different two-dimensional (2D)
visualization methods called ThemeRiver [5], Stacked Area
Graph and Stacked Cumulative Percent Plots [6] (see Section
IV and V). The conclusion in Section VI complete this
paper.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Data Visualization
There exist many visualization techniques for multivariate
data like Geometric Projection, Pixel-Oriented Techniques
and Hierarchical Display [1]. The given data model is not
only a general multivariate data set, but it also has temporal
and spatial components, which play an important role.
Temporal or so-called time-oriented data has become
a separate research ﬁeld. There are various visualization
techniques for temporal data and different purposes (e.g.,
ThemeRiver, TimeWheel) [7]. Generally, they have in com-
mon the depiction of the change over time.
On the other side, previous research also found multiple
visualization methods for spatial-multivariate data, which are
mostly used for scientiﬁc visualizations. These techniques
include surface based rendering, direct volume rendering
and glyph based techniques [8]. A large ﬁeld of applica-
tion for visualization methods for spatial-multivariate data
are medical data visualizations (e.g., data from Nuclear
Magnetic Resonance (NMR)). In the next section several
related visualization techniques are presented, which have
been considered for visualizing various forms of energy for
automotive engineering.
Quantitative Texton Sequences (QTonS) is a bivariate
visualization technique. It maps one dimension to a spec-
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-275-2
CONTENT 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

(a)
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 1.
ound supertorus.
arious thickness.
using superquadrics. Cornered super-
ones represent positive values (a).
ess of glyph (b).
pheres of different size.
v−vmin
max−vmin
n of glyphs
using Scaled Data-Driven Spheres
SDDS’ size.
s, there is no need to struggle
ces like OpenGL provided by
to its observer architecture,
M changes which effect an
M runtime content. X3DOM
b standard, but like XML3D
r it.
NDITIONS
ons are tailored for speciﬁc
o know the underlying data
a spatio-temporal multivariate
energy type, the 3D position
where the data was collected, the data acquisition time
and the measured value itself. The value can be positive
or negative. A single measurement represents a period and
consists of various value sequences. As illustrated in Figure
5, a single value sequence represents the recording of a
single sensor (measuring point). All values are measured
parallel and it can be assumed that all sensors have been
synchronized. Hence, the nth value of every value array
represents the same time.
The multivariate data has 6 dimensions:
• form of energy
• value
• time
• 3D position (one scalar for each dimension)
B. Visualization
The visualization must be capable to display ﬁve distinct
forms of energy and an arbitrary number of sensors in an
explorable way. These forms of energy should be easy to
interpret, to distinguish and to compare. In addition, the
trend over time must be easy to investigate to satisfy the
requirements of automotive engineers. To achieve that,
both 2D and 3D visualization techniques will be considered.
Summing
up,
an
optimal
visualization
fulﬁlls
these
requirements: topsep=0pt
• displaying at least ﬁve distinct forms of energy mea-
sured by several hundred sensors
• easy exploration of data, especially considering spatial
and temporal dimensions
• opportunities to compare measuring points and different
forms of energy
• gives a global overview about the data
• opportunities for detailed trend analysis
IV. EXAMINATION
Basically, the human’s perception capabilities are limited
to a 3-dimensional spatial sense plus a perception of
time. This results to a 4D world, in which we live in.
This limitation also narrows the possibilities of beneﬁcial
(b)
Figure 1.
(a) QToS with both negative and positive values (b) from top to
bottom: Example of a Quantitative Texton Sequence - Cornered and round
supertorus - Supertorus of various thickness - Scaled Data-Driven Spheres
of different size.
trum color sequence and the other to a QTonS sequence
(see Figure 1(b)). These two corresponding dimensions are
distributed over an 2D area [9]. Fundamentally, values are
mapped to individual Textons. The higher the absolute value
is, the bigger the Textons surface will be. To differentiate
negative and positive values, black and white Textons are
used. In this case, black Textons represent negative values
(see Figure 1(a)).
Superquadrics are a category of geometrical shapes, which
basically are derived from ellipsoids and quadrics. Their
appearance can be changed by changing their parameters
(e.g., roundness of corners, size, color, etc.). This property
can be exploited to map values to the glyphs appearance
resulting in a glyph-based visualization (as illustrated in
Figure 1(b) and 1(b)). Thus, Superquadric Glyphs can be
used to visualize up to four dimensions in addition to the
glyphs position.
Scaled Data-Driven Spheres (SDDS) is another glyph
based visualization technique, which extends the 2D Data-
Driven Spots [10] to 3D. SDDS use spheres as glyphs and it
implies the properties of superquadrics like color and size.
In addition to that, they are easier to interpret due to their
simple shape and viewing angle independence. A previous
user based evaluation of superquadrics and SDDS revealed
that SDDS result to a lower error rate in value estimation
and relationship identiﬁcation [11].
Theme River is a two-dimensional visualization technique
designed for trend analysis over a serial dimension (e.g.,
time) [5], [12]. Theme River enables users to compare
different identities, which occur parallel. Every identity is
represented by a colored current within the river (see Figure
2(a)). The higher a value is, the wider the corresponding
current will be. If a value changes along the serial dimension,
the currents width will proportionally change to it. Hence,
abrupt changes and long term trends can be recognized
easily. If a value equals zero, the appropriate current will
disappear until it changes its value again.
Stacked Area Graph represents serial values as areas.
The x-axis represents a serial dimension and the y-axis
Figure 2.
(a) Illustration of Theme River with three currents. The
width of current represents the corresponding value. It is primarily used
to identify trends. Thus, labels indicating the exact value are not essential.
(b) Illustration of Stacked Area Graph with three elements. The height of
stack element expresses the corresponding value.
represents the corresponding value. When values change
over a serial dimension, the height of the corresponding area
will change as well. If multiple values are depicted, areas
are not overlapping. They are arranged as a stack. Thus, the
total sum of all depicted values is represented by the total
height of the stack (see Figure 2(a)).
Stacked Cumulative Percent Plot (SCPP) is another graph-
ical method for visualizing trends [6]. In contrast to Theme
Rivers and Stacked Area Graphs, SCPP depicts the percent-
age instead of the value as stacked areas. The total graph is
always stacked up to 100%.
B. Web Technology
As these visualization techniques have to be implemented
with the aid of current web technologies, X3DOM is used
to render all 3D visualizations. Generally, X3DOM is a
new approach to enable web browsers to render 3D content
without the need of further plugins [3]. The current HTML5
standard deﬁnes X3D (derived from VRML97) to be used
to provide 3D content, but it does not deﬁne how this 3D
content has to be handled. For that, X3DOM has been
approached to connect the web browsers Document Object
Model (DOM) containing the X3D data, with the internal
X3D runtime. The X3D runtime does all 3D tasks, which
are needed to render the scene deﬁned by the X3D data.
Using X3DOM there is no need to struggle with low-level
graphics interfaces like OpenGL provided by WebGL [13].
Due to its observer architecture, it also supports dynamic
DOM changes, which effect an analogous update of the
X3DOM runtime content. X3DOM has not been declared
as a web standard, but like XML3D [14], it runs for it.
III. PRECONDITIONS
A. Data model
Problem-speciﬁc visualizations are tailored for speciﬁc
data. Thus, it is important to know the underlying data
structure. In our case, we have a spatio-temporal multivariate
data. The data consists of the energy type, the 3D position
where the data was collected, the data acquisition time and
the measured (positive or negative) value itself.
The multivariate data has 6 dimensions:
• form of energy (one dimension)
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-275-2
CONTENT 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

• value (one dimension)
• time (one dimension)
• 3D position (three dimensions)
Each value sequence represents the recording of a single
sensor (measuring point). All values are measured parallel
and it can be assumed that all sensors have been synchro-
nized. Hence, the nth value of every value array represents
the same time.
B. Visualization
The visualization must be capable to display ﬁve distinct
forms of energy and an arbitrary number of sensors in an
explorable way. These forms of energy should be easy to
interpret, to distinguish and to compare. In addition, the
trend over time must be easy to investigate to satisfy the
requirements of automotive engineers. To achieve that, both
2D and 3D visualization techniques will be considered.
Summing up, an optimal visualization meets these re-
quirements:
• displaying at least ﬁve distinct forms of energy mea-
sured by several hundred sensors
• easy exploration of data, especially considering spatial
and temporal dimensions
• opportunities to compare measuring points and different
forms of energy
• gives a global overview about the data
• opportunities for detailed trend analysis
IV. EXAMINATION
Basically, the human’s perception capabilities are limited
to a 3-dimensional spatial sense plus a perception of
time. This results to a 4D world, in which we live in.
This limitation also narrows the possibilities of beneﬁcial
visualization methods, while the perception of time can
only be used via animations. Thus, a single image can
not exploit the perception of time. Regarding this fact,
properties of geometrical shapes (glyphs) (e.g., color, size,
roundness, pattern and orientation) can be used to gain
the feasibility to visualize even more dimensions. This is
needed to display multi-dimensional data.
An investigation of existing techniques revealed that a
combination of 2D- and 3D visualization techniques lead
to a better global insight into the measuring data. Moreover,
this allows the user to investigate the data from different
points of view.
A. 3D visualization
If the data has a spatial component and it is important
to know its location, it is common to use a visualization
technique that retains this spatial information. The drawback
of this decision is, that every visualized dimension consumes
a single dimension in the visualization space. For our
problem, all three dimensions of the spatial variable are used
because the cognition of the energy’s location is essential.
Therefore, no spatial dimension for visualizing time is left.
Three-dimensional visualizations also allow more freedom
to explore the spatial data in a natural way.
QTonS are considered to be used as a render mode of
the three-dimensional space to represent the two dimensions
value and form of energy. While exploring the 3D-space,
the view is updated by the QTonS technique to represent
the amount of energy in the viewed region. The mapped
colors represent the form of energy and the texons represent
the value of the data (see Figure 1). The drawback of this
approach is, that the location of the visualized energies
is not clearly evident. The user can only perceive how
much energy occurred in a speciﬁc direction calculated from
the viewpoint. Therefore, it is not possible to investigate
a single location. This results to an ineffective explorable
visualization. Moreover, it is rather suitable for data sets of
high spatial density. Such a high density might be reached
by some measurements but this is not the common case. It
is assumed that common measurements have up to several
hundred measuring points distributed over the vehicle.
Torus-based Superquadric Glyphs can be used to encode
up to four dimensions using only their shape [15]. A possible
setup would map the form of energy to the glyphs color;
contrasting colors should be chosen [16], [17]. The absolute
energy value is mapped to its thickness. To indicate if a
value is either positive or negative, the roundness of the
superquadric is used. However, when glyphs are placed
densely, it is difﬁcult to differentiate the glyphs and to
identify patterns [11].
Scaled Data-Driven Spheres can be described as a point-
cloud with the energy value modifying the radius of the
spheres. To be able to display negative energy values,
different colors are used (dark color for negative, light
color for positive value). As humans perception struggles
to differentiate more than 12 color values [17], ten colors
remain, which is enough to visualize ﬁve energy forms
(leaving out black for captions and white for background).
To illustrate change of values over time, a key frame
animation is used, which interpolates between the radius of
the spheres and its color (if the sign changes).
Due to the ease of interpreting SDDS, their low error rate
in value estimation and relationship identiﬁcation, SDDS are
the most suitable visualization technique to display detailed
measuring data spatially.
For large amounts of data points it may not be feasible to
display all data, but to partition the data set into regions
instead. This approach makes it easier to keep track of
behavior and dependencies. The Cumulative Glyph (CG)
visualization can be used to display the energy emission in
these regions. A single glyph consists of several discs with
each disc representing one energy form in such a region.
These discs are usually depicted using icons identifying
those energy forms. The color of each of those discs
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-275-2
CONTENT 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3.
(a) Cumulative Glyph with only positive values (b) Cumulative
Glyph with both negative and positive values (c) Color scale used for
mapping energy values to colors
shows how much energy of one form is emitted (green) or
consumed (red) in total in that region (see Figure 3).
B. 2D visualization
Due to Theme River’s properties, it is suitable to depict
the trend of measured values. While the serial dimension
is the time component of a measurement, every sensor is
represented by one current within the river. Currents that
represent sensors measuring the same form of energy are of
the same basic color and are placed side by side. As a result,
these sensors together generate a wide current representing
the total amount of one form of energy. Additionally, the
total width of the river describes the total amount of energy.
This allows users to compare trends of different forms of
energies and various sensors at once. A drawback of Theme
River is the difﬁculty of estimating values. Without any
labels, users can hardly guess what value is represented
by a given width. Moreover, Theme River works only with
positive values. Thus, either absolute values should be used
(where negative values are represented by darker colors) or
two graphs, one for positive and the other one for negative
values might be a solution. The latter solution should be
preferred, because the former one treats positive and negative
equally, which leads to a wrong representation of the total
energy occurrence.
Stacked Area Graphs can also be used to examine the en-
ergies trend over time. Every measuring point is represented
by an area. As implemented in Theme River, measuring
points representing the same form of energy are placed next
to each other. In addition, they are of the same base color
to represent the overall occurrence of that speciﬁc form of
energy as a cumulated area. This enables users to investigate
the trend and to identify the entire amount of energy in an
area (e.g., engine or front wheel). Negative values are repre-
sented by stacks below the x-axis. To navigate through time,
controls for setting the displayed interval should be provided.
Possibilities to set start time and end time independently
allows users to zoom within the dimension of time.
Stacked Cumulative Percent Plots are very similar to
Stacked Area Graphs. Due to the depiction of percentages
instead of values, users can easily recognize which energy
contributes the most.
V. PROTOTYPE
The aim of this prototype is to test all chosen visualization
techniques and to provide a data explorer based on X3DOM
and Data-Driven Documents. The resulting web-based appli-
cation is shown in Figure 5.
A. Architecture
Measuring data
Web Server
Database
Preprocessing data
X3D car model
Web Browser
RESTful Web Service
HTML5
CSS
JavaScript
X3DOM
AJAX
DOM manipulation
Figure 4.
General architecture of prototypal implementation. Original
and reduced approximated values are stored in database. Web server
provides HTML content and data to the client. Client performs complete
visualization using X3DOM and Data-Driven Documents.
The main parts of the prototype (see Figure 4) are a
database, a web server and a client (a web browser support-
ing 3D within web sites). The major part of the applications
logic is run within the client’s web browser to provide
dynamic visualizations, which respond quickly to user inter-
actions. The web browser requests needed measuring data
from the web server via RESTful web services and maps
it into a data format that can be visualized by X3DOM
or D3. Hence, the web server primary has to provide the
requested data and further visualization-speciﬁc calculations
are performed client-side.
B. Data Preprocessing
Transferring all data to the client would be very time-
consuming. Thus, the data is preprocessed to reduce network
trafﬁc. Generally, a measurement with n measuring points
and t value acquisitions results to a data complexity of
O(n·t). As the amount of measuring data can be massive, the
Douglas-Peucker algorithm is used to to reduce the number
of values [18]. This algorithm has an expected complexity
of Θ(nt · log(nt)); worst case is O(n2t2). After applying
this geometric algorithm, the reduced approximation of the
original measurement curve will still preserve the overall
structure. In other words, this algorithm ﬁlters all non-
distinctive values. As users want to navigate through the
data using different time-zoom levels, different degrees of
approximations are needed, which are stored into the server’s
database after the preprocessing step.
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-275-2
CONTENT 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

MeasuringPoints
RadHintenRechtsForce1
Animation
Start
End
Speed
Energies
Temperature
Voltage
Light
Force
Kinetic energy
View
detail
glyph
flat mode
Transparency
Energy Balance
Timeline
by Werner Sturm (2012)
2D plot
60
10
30
60
80
100
animate
80%
0
25
50
75
100
reset view
0
0
6919
13838
20757
27676
34595
41514
48433
55352
62271
69192
142.86 fps
anim: 1
traverse: 0
sort: 1
render: 4
#Tris: 114559
#Pnts: 258747
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
MeasuringPoints
Values
Seperate
Cumulative
Sample count
Energy Balance
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
0
69190
−1,000.00
0.00
1,000.00
2,000.00
3,000.00
4,000.00
5,000.00
6,000.00
7,000.00
8,000.00
9,000.00
−2,016.00
9,927.00
RadVLTemp1
RadHRVolt1
DachLicht2
Stacked
Stream
Expanded
Timeline
by Werner Sturm (2012)
back
750
50
300
500
750
1000
0
69,190
0
6919
13838
20757
27676
34595
41514
48433
55352
62271
69192
(c)
(a)
(b)
(d)
(e)
Figure 5.
left Prototype displaying detailed data using Scaled Data-Driven Spheres. Real time 3D window provided by X3DOM (a). Timeline to
navigate through time (b). Possibility to switch between detailed mode (SDDS) and overview mode using Cumulative Glyphs (c). Animated glyphs within
speciﬁed period for three-dimensional trend analysis (d). 2D plot of values measured by selected measuring points for detailed trend analysis (e). right
2D representation of the data using Stacked Area Graphs. Graph is created using Data-Driven Documents library. Plot area for displaying the graph (a).
Timeline to select a period to plot (b). Option to switch between Stacked Area Graphs (selected), Streamgraph (very similar to ThemeRiver) and Stacked
Cumulative Percentage Graph (c). Possibility to select if measuring point is included in current graph (d). Switch between seperate and cumulative mode
(d).
C. Web Server
Basically, the web server provides HTML content includ-
ing a static 3D car model (for orientation and navigation
purposes) in X3D format, which can be understood by
X3DOM. However, the servers main task is to provide
measuring data to the client. For that, it offers several
RESTful web services, which provide the data in JavaScript
Object Notation (JSON). Of course, clients do not receive
all data at once. For both 3D visualizations (SDDS and
Cumulative Glyph) the client commonly requests only data
of a single moment. But all time-oriented, two-dimensional
visualizations and animations of SDDS and Cumulative
Glyphs, used for depicting the trend over time, need a data
set of the desired time span. If users select a long period,
which would cause a huge amount of data to be transferred
to the client, the web server selects and sends the best
approximation of the data. This allows the client to request
any time span without overloading.
D. 3D using X3DOM
The observer architecture of X3DOM, which connects the
web browsers DOM with the internal X3D runtime, allows
to modify the 3D scene via the DOM itself. Moreover, X3D
predeﬁnes simple objects like box, sphere, cone and cylinder.
Therefore, a SDDS can be created easily by using a sphere
object (see listing in Figure 6).
Cumulative Glyphs can be created analogously using
cylinders arranged circularly as depicted in Figure 3(a), (b).
To animate glyphs to depict the values change over time,
X3DOM implements TimeSensors, Interpolators and Routes
deﬁned by the X3D standard. TimeSensors provide a timer
to trigger steady events within a deﬁned period. Posi-
tionInterpolators are connected to TimeSensors via Routes,
which provide a 3D vector interpolated between two deﬁned
<scene id="scene" pickMode="box">
...
<transform id="sdds1" class="sdds"
translation="0 0 0" scale="10 10 10">
<shape id="sphere1">
<sphere class="sphere"></sphere>
<appearance>
<material id="material1"
transparency="0.2" diffusecolor="#FF6666">
</material>
</appearance>
</shape>
</transform>
...
</scene>
Figure 6.
Listing with X3D tags deﬁning a Scaled Data-Driven Sphere.
vectors depending on the timers progress. These output
vectors are passed to the spheres attribute scale (which
expects a 3D vector) resulting a smooth animation showing
a growing or shrinking sphere. Colors of glyphs also have
to be changed during an animation. For that, X3D offers
ColorInterpolators, which works analogously. This concept
also supports long lists of key frames and therefore, any
animation can be deﬁned.
E. 2D using Data-Driven Documents
An investigation of multiple graphing libraries revealed
that D3 performs very well even with bigger data sets.
Moreover D3 can handle non-equidistant data points, which
is needed to depict approximated data (as discussed before)
without interpolating them explicitly.
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper investigates two- and three-dimensional vi-
sualization techniques to be used to visualize consumed
and emitted energies, which have been measured within
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-275-2
CONTENT 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

a vehicle, to support automotive engineers. In addition
to that, a web-based prototypal implementation of chosen
visualization techniques based on Data-Driven Documents
for 2D and X3DOM to perform real-time 3D client-side is
introduced.
Besides the measured value and its type of energy, the
multivariate data includes spatial and temporal components.
It revealed that Scaled Data-Driven Spheres are most suitable
for a detailed 3D visualization of energy. This contributes
to this research ﬁeld that SDDS are also suitable for other
scientiﬁc visualizations than medical visualizations. In addi-
tion to that, Cumulative Glyphs are presented to provide a
better overview of the detailed data.
Both 3D-based techniques only visualize a single moment
of the measurement period at once. Despite animations can
represent the change over time, engineers want to analyze the
trend in a more convenient way. Therefore, two-dimensional
visualizations for time-oriented data are investigated in de-
tail. Depending on the engineers requirement, Theme Rivers,
Stacked Area Graphs and Stacked Cumulative Percentage
Graphs support engineers to get a better understanding of
the trend.
A successful implementation of a prototype shows, that
all techniques can be implemented as a web-enabled ap-
plication without the need of installing third-party browser
plugins. It revealed some issues with X3DOM like web
browser incompatibilities, but most of them exist because
X3DOM does not implement all speciﬁed functionalities
deﬁned by X3D standard. Despite that fact, web developers
beneﬁt from both X3DOM and Data-Driven Documents,
which enables them to implement interactive visualization
applications without the need to struggle with low-level
graphics operations like OpenGL or drawing single lines for
2D graphs. This certainly leads to lower development costs
as well.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Parts of this work is funded by the FFG program
“FEMtech” (grant no. 840017). Furthermore, we would
like to thank the Institute of Automotive Engineering Graz
(FTG), which provided this interesting use case and corre-
sponding measurement data.
REFERENCES
[1] W. Chan, “A survey on Multivariate Data visualization,”
Technical Report – Department of Computer Science and En-
gineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology,
2006.
[2] G. M. Fields and R. G. Metzner, “Hybrid car with electric
and heat engine,” 1982, US Patent 4,351,405.
[3] J. Behr, P. Eschler, Y. Jung, and M. Z¨ollner, “X3DOM: a
DOM-based HTML5/X3D integration model,” in Proceedings
of the 14th International Conference on 3D Web Technology,
ser. Web3D ’09, 2009, pp. 127–135.
[4] M. Bostock, V. Ogievetsky, and J. Heer, “D3; Data-Driven
Documents,” Visualization and Computer Graphics, IEEE
Transactions on, vol. 17, no. 12, pp. 2301 –2309, dec. 2011.
[5] S. Havre, B. Hetzler, and L. Nowell, “ThemeRiver: visualiz-
ing theme changes over time,” in Information Visualization,
2000. InfoVis 2000. IEEE Symposium on, 2000, pp. 115 –123.
[6] T. Gilligan, “Stacked Cumulative Percent Plots,” 2009.
[7] W. Aigner, S. Miksch, W. Muller, H. Schumann, and
C. Tominski, “Visualizing time-oriented data–A systematic
view,” Computers & Graphics, vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 401–409,
2007.
[8] T. Ropinski, S. Oeltze, and B. Preim, “Survey of glyph-based
visualization techniques for spatial multivariate medical data,”
Computers & Graphics, vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 392 – 401, 2011.
[9] C. Ware, “Quantitative Texton Sequences for Legible Bivari-
ate Maps,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 1523–1530, 2009.
[10] A. A. Bokinsky, Multivariate data visualization with data-
driven spots.
The University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, 2003.
[11] D. Feng, Y. Lee, L. Kwock, and R. M. Taylor, “Evaluation
of glyph-based multivariate scalar volume visualization tech-
niques,” in Proceedings of the 6th Symposium on Applied
Perception in Graphics and Visualization (APGV), 2009, pp.
61–68.
[12] L. Byron and M. Wattenberg, “Stacked Graphs, Geometry
and Aesthetics,” Visualization and Computer Graphics, IEEE
Transactions on, vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 1245 –1252, 2008.
[13] Khronos, “WebGL,” 2009, http://www.khronos.org/webgl/,
accessed 05/15/13.
[14] K. Sons, F. Klein, D. Rubinstein, S. Byelozyorov, and
P. Slusallek, “XML3D: interactive 3D graphics for the web,”
in Web3D ’10: Proceedings of the 15th International Confer-
ence on Web 3D Technology, 2010, pp. 175–184.
[15] T. Ropinski, M. Specht, J. Meyer-Spradow, K. Hinrichs,
and B. Preim, “Surface Glyphs for Visualizing Multimodal
Volume Data.” Proceedings of the Vision, Modeling and
Visualization Workshop (VMV), pp. 3–12, 2007.
[16] M. Stone, “Choosing Colors for Data Visualization,” 2006.
[17] C. G. Healey, “Choosing effective colours for data visualiza-
tion,” Proceedings of Visualization ’96, pp. 263 –270, 1996.
[18] D. H. Douglas and T. K. Peucker, “Algorithms for the reduc-
tion of the number of points required to represent a digitized
line for its caricature,” Cartographica: The International
Journal for Geographic Information and Geovisualization,
vol. 10, pp. 112 –122, 1973.
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-275-2
CONTENT 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

