Development of Soft Skin of Digital Hand in Real Time Operation 
 
Hiroshi Hashimoto 
Industrial Technology Graduate Course 
Advanced Institute of Industrial Technology 
Tokyo, Japan 
hashimoto@aiit.ac.jp 
Kaoru Mitsuhashi 
Department of Mechanical Engineering 
Tokyo University of Technology 
Tokyo, Japan 
mitsuhashi@stf.teu.ac.jp
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents a development of soft skin of a 
digital hand which mimics human hand and is able to show 
dexterous operation of an object in real time. In the operation, 
soft skin as shown in human skin plays an important role in 
the contact with objects. To develop it, design methods of the 
soft skin as a model of human skin and of enabling real time 
operation are described. 
Keywords-digital hand; soft skin; real time operation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This paper presents a development of soft skin of a 
digital hand which mimics human hand and is able to show 
dexterous operation of an object in real time. 
Human hand performs various difficult tasks in daily life 
and shows dexterous operation to use tools or equipment as 
object, because it has numerous degree of freedom (DoFs) 
of finger joints more than 22 DoFs [1][2]. There are many 
types of grasp such as power grasps, precision grasps and 
miscellaneous grasps, and each types is also divided into 
many various hand postures [3]. These hand postures can be 
made by the hand’s DoFs; basically the posture of holding 
and arch ensure the various hand posture. However, a study 
on dynamical operation of hand grasping objects has not 
been made in the field of anatomy, but only on grasping 
which shows static situation to fix objects. 
In the related studies on Computer Graphics (CG), 
considering muscular, freedom of joints or tendons, a precise 
digital hand to mimic human hand has been tried to be made  
[4]-[7]. The purpose of these studies are merely to simulate 
hand motion or evaluate product designs when it grasps an 
object. They conduct only static grasping, do not show 
dynamic operation.  
 The dynamic operation of the digital hand has been 
slightly considered in [8][9]. In the researches, the body of 
the digital hand was made of rigid body. On the other hand, 
human hand is covered with soft skin which is deformable. 
While hand operates an object, the contact region between 
soft skin and the object is area but not point as seen in rigid 
skin, so the dynamic relationship on the contact region 
becomes complex. This means the real time operation of the 
digital hand requires numerous computational load and is 
hardly realized. Furthermore, manipulating the digital hand 
dynamically has numerous patterns of the digital hand 
posture for each operation cases. This leads to that the 
programming to realize all the patterns of hand motion by 
using a certain computer language is very troublesome.  
This paper proposes a novel design method of making 
soft skin to be suitable for real time operation of the digital 
hand, and this is an unprecedented study.  
The platform of the system is on Panda3D [10], and the 
software to make soft skin is Blender [11] which fits for 
both Panda3D and Python language. To realize the real time 
operation of the digital hand, Bullet Physics which is a 
physics engine in Panda3D and has a function of collision 
detection is used. The collision detection can enable the 
digital hand to grasp and operate an object. The Leap 
Motion Controller (LMC) [12] is introduced as a hand-
posture sensor. A number of applications using another type 
of digital hand is presented in the Web site of LMC, but all 
of them does not have soft skin and the collision detection in 
real time. 
The paper is organized as follows; the skeleton model of 
digital hands is described in Section II. In Section III, the 
design of soft skin is discussed. In Section IV, our idea to 
realize the real time operation is explained. And the 
demonstrations of real time operation of the digital hand are 
presented. In the last, the paper is concluded.  
II. 
SKELETON MODEL OF DIGITAL HAND 
The hand skeleton model is shown in Fig.1 based on 
anatomical and medical hand investigation [2]. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Hand skeleton structure. 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-464-0
CONTENT 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

In Fig.1, abbreviated label for joints have following 
meanings (arranged in order from proximal to distal 
extremity). CMC stands for the carpometacarpal joint, MCP 
for the metacarpo-phlangeal joint, PIP for the proximal 
interphalangeal joint, and DIP for the distal interphalangeal 
joint. Other joint labels of thumb are: TMC for the 
trapeziometacarpal joint, MCP for the meta-carpophlangeal 
joint, and IP for the interphalangeal joint. 
Each finger (not including the thumb) is composed of 
three 
bone 
links, 
called 
phalangeal 
bones. 
Each 
neighbouring pair of bone links are connected with a joint, 
i.e., a constraint that restricts relative translational motion of 
bone links in dynamics simulation. The DIP, PIP and IP has 
one DoF, the MCP has two DoFs, the CMC has two DoFs 
and the TMC has three DoFs. So, the total DoFs of human 
hand is 30.   
It is very difficult to realize to operate a digital hand with 
such tremendous DoFs. Here, the joint of hand model of the 
LMC  does not depend on DoFs, just on positions in three-
dimensional Cartesian coordinate. From this, we designed 
that the joint of the digital hand are just connected each 
other. The rigid parts of the digital hand consists of the 
bones as rigid body and the joints, its structure is shown in 
Fig.2. 
III. 
DESIGN OF SOFT SKIN 
A. Design Method 
There are two types of the soft skin for thimbles and 
fingertips, because a soft skin covering the entire digital 
hand makes the design and calculation load very complex. 
To overcome it, we designed that the soft skin covers the 
digital hand partially, and its design should be made to 
ensure the sufficient contact area between soft skin and 
object. 
The configuration of soft skin is made by Blender, 
cylinder for thimbles and hemisphere with cylinder for 
fingertips. To give elasticity property to soft skin and 
convertibility to format used in Panda3D, the double 
structure for both is introduced. Fig.3 (a) shows a thimble 
which consists of two cylinders as double structure with 
different radius and both connected along with both edge, 
Fig.3 (b) shows a fingertip which consists of two couples of 
a hemisphere and a cylinder as double structure. 
The number of mesh that makes up part of the thimbles 
and the fingertip will become too large, then the calculation 
time required for collision detection will be enormous, so it 
is difficult to achieve real time operation. Based on the 
trade-off of computational load and feasibility of the real 
time operation, the selection of the number is determined by 
trial and error. 
The figure of the soft skin is introduced into soft body of 
Bullet Physics, and some parameters shown in TABLE I of 
soft body should be defined to set up it. However, the 
effective way to identify them have not shown yet, so  we 
investigated that 
human 
hand played 
a 
dexterous 
 
 
Figure 2. Skeleton model with bones and joints. 
 
(a) Double structure of thimble 
 
 
(b) Double structure of fingertip 
 
Figure 3. Soft skin for thimbles and fingertips. 
TABLE I.  
PARAMETERS OF SOFT SKIN IN BULLET PHYSICS. 
kDP 
Damping coefficient; damps forces 
acting on soft body nodes to reduce their 
oscillation over time. Imagine a mass 
hanging on a spring. Range [0,1]  
kDG and kLF 
Drag and Lift coefficient; relating to 
aerodynamics (Wikipedia_Lift,2015, 
NASA,2015),  Range [0,
]
   
kDF 
Dynamic friction coefficient; just friction 
of nodes against surfaces, as with rigid 
bodies. Range [0,1] 
kMT 
Pose matching coefficient; be used with 
setPose(bool, bool). Range [0,1] 
kCHR, kKHR 
and kSHR 
Rigid, kinectic and Soft contacts 
hardness; controling how strict any 
overlap between the soft body and other 
types is treated.  Range[0,1] 
 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-464-0
CONTENT 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

manipulation by using the high-speed camera (1000 fps) as 
shown in Fig. 4. Observing the situation of the deformable 
skin by investigating the movie, the parameters are adjusted 
to show the similar situation of the deformable soft skin. 
B. Connection between Softskin and Rigid Body 
A finger consists of three cylinder rigid body and the 
joint described in the previous section. Fig.5 shows one 
finger conducted by the design described above by using 
Panda3D. In Fig.5, the rigid bone and the partial soft skin 
are connected with anchors. Fig.6 shows the extending this 
configuration to the five fingers.  
IV. 
REAL TIME OPERATION SYSTEM 
A. Hand Posture Sensing 
To realize the digital hand to mimic human hand 
operation in real time, a sensor which is able to sense the 
hand posture and also the position of hand is required, then 
the LMC is suitable for the requirement. The LMC observes 
a roughly hemispherical area, to a distance of about 1 meter, 
and can get 3D position data of all joints of fingers and palm 
within sampling rate 150-295 fps ( USB 3.0 connection ), 
this is made possible by the skeleton model of hand of the 
LMC. Then, the position data is sent through a USB cable to 
the host computer. 
B. Implementation 
A demonstrative application has been developed to 
evaluate the digital hand in operation by the postures. The 
goal is to set up the digital hand in real time operation. The 
software application is executable on the CPU (Core i7-
4900MQ, 2.8GHz) and the GPU (Nvidia Quadro K4100M, 
1152 Cuda processors). In the system, the roles of CPU and 
GPU are assigned separately as following 
 
 
(a) t = 0.0 sec 
 
 
(b) t = 0.1 sec 
 
Figure 4. Scene of dexterous operation (1000 fps) 
 
 
Figure 5. Digital finger with partial soft skin and rigid bone. 
 
 
(a) Front view 
 
 
 
 
(b) Overhead view 
 
Figure 6. Digital hand, five fingers with rigid bones  
and partial soft skin.  
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-464-0
CONTENT 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

Finger Callback : CPU 
Graphics Thread : GPU 
Physics Simulation : GPU 
These processing assigned to CPU and GPU  is enable to 
use PyCUDA [13], because Panda3D is built in Python and 
the assigned has been developing in the present 
circumstances.  
C. Experiment 
The user operated the digital hand to mimic the human 
hand in real time processing, using the LMC as the input 
device of the human hand posture is shown in Fig.7. Fig.7(a) 
shows the scene to get the human hand posture using the 
LMC. Fig.7(b) shows the scene that the digital hand change 
its own posture synchronously with human hand motion. 
We have succeeded in the real time operation. According 
to the movement of human figures and palm of the hand, the 
digital hand change its posture to mimic the hand. And when 
the digital hand grasp an object in the virtual physic space in 
which the collision detection between the digital hand is 
automatically calculation then the digital hand can grasp it 
according to the varying hand posture in real time. However, 
this computational load becomes tremendous, so the real 
time operation is not able to attain smooth execution. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper proposed a novel design procedure of the 
partial soft skin of the digital hand, and shows the 
connection approach with rigid bone and real time operation 
system.  The design of soft skin and rigid body is regular 
way in CG creation, but the connection approach is devised 
because the collision detection of each body shows different 
phases. This approach relates on the shape of the soft skin. 
The reason why the partial soft skin is conducted is to 
reduce the computational load, but the real time operation 
has not shown the sufficient operation. 
The real time operation is considered about the digital 
hand by using the LMC. The applicable demonstration in 
real time operation is able to be realized by tuning PyCUDA, 
and it will be shown in the conference stage. In the future 
work, the authors will strive to improve the design procedure 
of the soft skin and the processing time in real time 
operation of the digital hand. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant 
Number 25280125.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] E. Y. Chao, K. N. An, W. P. Cooney and R. L. Linscheid, 
“Biomechanics of the Hand”, World Scientific Publishing, 
1989. 
[2] A. I. Kapandj, “The Physiology of the Joints Vol.1-3”, 
Churchill Livingstone, 2008. 
[3] S. I. Edwards and D. J. Buckland, “Development and 
Functional Hand Grasps”, SLACK Incorporation, 2002. 
[4] J. Lee and T. Kunii, “Model-Based analysis of Hand Posture”, 
IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, vol.15, 1995, 
pp.77-86. 
[5] S. Sueda, A. Kaufman and D. K. Pai, “Musculotendon 
Simulation 
for 
Hand 
Animation”, 
Proc. 
of 
ACM 
SIGGRAPH2008, vol.27, issue3, 2008, pp.1-8. 
[6] Y. Endo, S. Kanai, N. Miyata, M. Kouichi, M. Mochimaru, J. 
Konno, M. Ogasawara and M. Shimokawa, “Optimization-
Based Grasp Posture Generation Method of Digital Hand for 
Virtual Ergonomic Assessment”, SAE Intl J. of passenger 
cars-electronic and electrical systems, vol.1, issue1, 2008, 
pp.590-598. 
[7] S. Mulatto, A. Formaglio and D. Prattichizzo, “Using Posture 
Synergies to Animate a Low-Dimensional Hand Avatar in 
Haptic Simulation”, IEEE Transactions on Haptics, vol.6, 
2013, pp.106-116. 
[8] H. Hashimoto, A. Sasaki, S. Yokota, Y. Ohymama and C. 
Ishii, “Bar Spinning as Dexterous Manipulation of Digital 
Hand Based on Human Hand, IASTED Intl Conf. on 
Modelling and Simulation, 2012, pp.413-418. 
[9] H. Hashimoto, A. Sasaki, S. Yokota, K.Mitsuhashi and Y. 
Ohymama, “A Structure and Soft Finger Model of Digital 
Hand for Real Time Dexterous Manipulation”, IASTED Intl 
Conf. on Modelling, Identification and Control, 2014, 
pp.265-270. 
[10] Panda3D, https://www.panda3d.org/, 2015 
[11] Blener, https://www.blender.org/, 2015 
[12] LeapMotion, https://www.leapmotion.com/, 2015 
[13] PyCUDA, http://mathema.tician.de/software/pycuda/, 2015 
 
(a) Scene to get the humand hand posture using Leap Motion 
Controller  
 
 
(b) Digital hand chage its own posture synchronously with human 
hand motion. 
 
Figure 7. Digital hand system with LMC to obtain hand posture 
in real time operation. 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-464-0
CONTENT 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

