Subjective Assessment for Text with Super Resolution on Smartphone Displays 
 
Aya Kubota† 
Seiichi Gohshi‡ 
†‡Department of Information Science 
Kogakuin University 
Tokyo, Japan 
e-mail: †em17008@ns.kogakuin.ac.jp, ‡gohshi@cc.kogakuin.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract— Smartphones appeared on the market only a 
decade ago. However, the market has since grown rapidly, 
and people of all ages now use smartphones. In many cases, 
people read text on their smartphones, but depending on the 
design of a website, it may be difficult to read its text. By 
improving the resolution of the text, the readability of text can 
be improved. One research area for increasing the resolution 
is super resolution (SR), which includes nonlinear signal 
processing super- resolution SR (NLSP), a method that can be 
implemented on smartphones. However, NLSP has never 
been applied to text in order to improve readability. We 
applied NLSP for text displayed on liquid crystal display 
(LCD), and verified its effectiveness. Thus, in this paper, the 
assessment results for text on LCD are discussed.  
Keywords- Nonlinear signal processing; Super-Resolution; 
Subjective assessment. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Smartphones have become daily necessities in modern 
society. In addition to processing communication functions, 
such as telephone and e-mail, it is possible to obtain 
information in real time via the Internet. When used for the 
above functions, text must often be read, which could be on 
operation buttons or explanatory text. Support functions to 
make text easier to read, such as changing the font size are 
set in the application that is preinstalled in the operating 
system (such as mail, smartphone settings, etc.). However, 
there are websites that do not have a font size larger than a 
certain size even if the text is enlarged, and sites where the 
color of the background and the texts is not very different. 
Problems, such as these can therefore make it difficult to 
read text.  
Improving the resolution of the images can make it 
easier to read text. Super-resolution (SR) technology is one 
method to improve resolution. Most 4K TVs are equipped 
with SR. Nonlinear signal processing SR (NLSP) is a SR 
technology that can be embedded into smartphones [1]. The 
algorithm is simple and fast: hence, processing with 
software is possible, and smartphones with NLSP are 
already being sold in the market [2]. The effectiveness of 
NLSP is higher than that of other SR technologies [3][4], 
and NLSP is effective even in smartphone videos [5].  
However, the effectiveness of NLSP for text on 
smartphone display has not been verified. In this study, we 
verify the effectiveness of using smartphone with NLSP 
compared one without NLSP.  
Images processed with NLSP are introduced only to the 
display of the smartphone and there is no electric output of 
the processed image. Therefore, it is impossible to use an 
objective assessment because the objective assessment 
requires electric image signal with and without NLSP. 
Subjective assessment is the only way to assess the 
difference between the displays. However, subjective 
assessment is only a reflection of how we feel. It is difficult 
to ensure the reproducibility of the subjective assessments. 
The subjective assessments also requires observers and time 
to assess the image quality. 
Although there are issues about the subjective 
assessment, ITU-R standardized subjective assessment 
methods. ITU-R BT.710 recommends experimental 
conditions to obtain reproducible results in subjective 
assessment experiments [6]. However, BT.710 does not 
mention practical quantitative scoring assessment which is 
defined in BT.500. They are the double stimulus continuous 
quality scale (DSCQS) and the double stimulus impairment 
scale (DSIS). In our case we need to compare five 
smartphones and they are different manufactures products, 
BT.500 and BT.710 do not meet our requirements. One of 
our authors developed an subjective assessment for multiple 
displays [6][14]. It applies best-worst method and statistical 
analysis is introduced to analyze reproducibility. It shows 
good results if the images/videos are selected appropriately. 
This paper is organized as follows. In Section Ⅱ the 
subjective assessment for multiple displays is explained. In 
Section Ⅲ NLSP is explained. In Section Ⅳ test images are 
presented and experiments are explained. In Section Ⅴ the 
statistical analysis is adapted to the assessment results and 
in Section Ⅵ the analyzed result is discussed. Section Ⅶ 
is the conclusion of the paper.  
II. 
ASSESSMENT METHOD 
Objective assessment and subjective assessment are 
evaluation methods. Objective assessments analyze the 
signal and expresses high and low of image quality by a 
numerical value. However, results of objective assessment 
do not always match with how we feel. For example, an 
original image is given in Figure 1(a), and the degraded 
image is given in Figure 1(b). The peak signal to noise ratio 
(PSNR) of the degraded image in Figure 1(b) is 40.1112dB. 
A PSNR 40dB is generally said to be a high image quality 
[7], but Figure 1(b) contains degradation in the form of a 
black square in the center of the image. When images  
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-611-8
CONTENT 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

 
 
(a) Original image 
(b) Degraded image 
(PSNR: 40.1112dB) 
Figure 1. Objective assessment by PSNR 
include local degradation, the results of PSNR sometimes 
deviate from our feeling.  
Thus, objective assessments cannot accurately reflect 
image quality. In addition, objective assessments require 
comparing the assessment image with the original image. 
As discussion the previous section, signals processed inside 
the smartphone cannot be output anywhere outside the 
display. Therefore, assessment by signal analysis is 
impossible, and thus the experiment is conducted using 
subjective assessment.  
The best–worst method was adopted as the assessment 
method using multiple displays. Normalized ranking 
method and paired comparison method are other assessment 
methods. Experimental stimuli are ranked at once in the 
normalized ranking method. The process of the method is 
simple, but when differences between the stimuli are small, 
sometimes the differences cannot be detected because of 
large differences between stimuli influences. In the paired 
comparison method, stimuli are compared one on one and 
ranked. Two stimuli are selected, and observers evaluate the 
stimuli based on the other. Thus, differences between 
stimuli can be obtained in detail. However, evaluation is 
performed for all stimulus combinations, which places a 
heavy burden on the observers. In the best–worst method, 
observers select the best stimuli and the worst stimuli. After 
excluding the selected stimuli, observers again select the 
best and the worst from the remaining stimuli. The best–
worst method can detect differences more accurately than 
the normalized ranking method, and the best–worst method 
is a smaller burden for observers than the paired comparison 
method. Therefore, the best–worst method is adopted in this 
paper.  
In this study, an assessment experiment was conducted 
using five smartphones. The test images are screenshots of 
a website containing text. 
III. 
NLSP 
NLSP is a simple and fast SR technique. The process is 
similar to enhancer that it increases resolution by 
emphasizing edges; however, NLSP emphasizes high-
frequency components extracted from the input image using 
a nonlinear function [8]. The nonlinear function can 
generate high-frequency components that are not included 
in the original image. These high-frequency components 
express edges and details of the image. An example 
nonlinear function is the cubic function (f(x) = 𝑥3).  The 
function can amplify the high-frequency components by as 
much as three times. Figure 2 shows an example of NLSP 
processed image. Figure 2(a) is an original image. Figure 
2(b) is a NLSP processed image. Figure 2(b) has more 
details, such as edges of mountain and the surface of it than 
the original image.   
Super-resolution image reconstruction (SRR) and 
learning-based super resolution (LBSR) are the current 
mainstream SR technologies. SRR is a technology that 
generates a high-resolution image from multiple degraded 
images [9], but the processing requires iteration. When the 
input image and output image have the same resolution, the 
technique is not very effective [10]. LBSR is a method that 
increases 
resolution 
using 
a 
database 
[11]. 
The 
effectiveness is affected by the database, and the processing 
requires both an expensive database and iteration. Thus, 
both the above technologies require complex processing. In 
addition, their effectiveness is lower than that of NLSP 
[12][13].  
IV. 
EXPERIMENT 
The effect of image processing differs, depending on the 
images. We adjusted NLSP for text; hence, it was necessary 
to verify the effect of NLSP for text. A smartphone with 
NLSP and one without NLSP were compared. The result of 
the comparison indicates the effects of using NLSP. In 
addition, the experiment was conducted using smartphones 
from different manufacturers and verifies the effect of 
NLSP in comparison with other technologies. 
A. 
Experimental equipment 
Five smartphones were used in this experiment. To 
ensure that the results are not caused by display differences, 
two of the five smartphones featured the same terminal. One 
was a smartphone with NLSP (smartphone A), and the other 
was one without NLSP (smartphone B). The remaining 
three smartphones were smartphones from different 
manufacturers (smartphone C–E). The display resolution of 
smartphone A and B was WQHD (2560 × 1440), whereas 
that of the others was full HD (1920 × 1080). The brightness 
was adjusted to be close to the same brightness. 
B. 
Test images 
Five screenshots of websites containing text were used 
as experimental images. The images are websites browsed 
by many people (a site for smartphones, a PC, a map). The 
site for smartphones are enlarged and viewed when the site 
has small texts, so an unenlarged site image and two 
enlarged site images were used. One of the two enlarged 
images contained text with only small differences in color 
from the background color. The images are shown in Figure 
3. The resolution of all the images is WQHD. 
C. 
Observers 
At least 20 observers are required for adequate statistical 
analysis. In this experiment, 23 observers participating in 
the experiment had normal visual acuity and color vision. 
Non-experts who do not work in the image industry cannot  
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-611-8
CONTENT 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

 
 
(a) Original image 
(b) NLSP processed image 
Figure 2. Example of NLSP processed image 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) Map 
(b) Route 
(c) TV 
(d) Airport 
(e) Ticket 
Figure 3. Test images 
always distinguish image quality differences, even if 
experts can distinguish them. If there is a significant 
difference in the experiment using non-experts, the 
difference of image quality is large. Therefore, all observers 
were non-experts.  
D. 
Experimental method 
Observers evaluated the image quality of the test image 
and ranked the five smartphones by resolution. The best-
worst method was used in the experiment. First, observers 
select the best (1st rank) and the worst (5th rank) 
smartphones from the five smartphones. Second, the next 
best (2nd rank) and the next worst (4th rank) smartphones 
are selected in the same way from the remaining three 
smartphones. The remaining smartphone was ranked 3rd.  
Observers were instructed on the experimental 
procedure, the meaning of resolution and the point of 
evaluation. Explanation of the resolution was conducted 
using training images to make observers understand 
correctly. In addition, the observers were instructed not to 
consider the color, the brightness or noise of the image. 
When the observers purchase a smartphone, the viewing 
distance is different for each observer. Thus, the observers 
could freely adjust the viewing distance. After evaluation, 
we investigated points where the observers gazed to judge 
whether observers correctly evaluated differences in 
resolution. 
V. 
RESULTS 
The assessment results were analyzed, and the presence 
or absence of significant differences was identified. The 
assessment results were quantified, and the average scores 
representing the image quality of each stimulus were 
calculated [14]. The calculation requires a normalized 
score 𝐾𝜀𝑙 which can be calculated using 𝑃𝑙 and 𝜀𝑙. 𝑃𝑙 is the 
average of each segment of the range from 0 to 100 
separated into the number of stimuli. In this experiment, 
the number of stimuli, i.e., the number of smartphones (n), 
equals 5. The value 𝜀𝑙 is the median of each segment of the 
standard normal distribution separated into n segments. 𝐾𝜀𝑙 
is the percentile of the standard normal distribution. Thus, 
𝐾𝜀𝑙 is the distance from the average of the standard normal 
distribution. The values of 𝐾𝜀𝑙 were given as a normalized 
score according to rank. The average scores of the total 
score are the evaluation values for each stimulus.  
The aggregate results of “Map” (Figure 3(a)) are shown 
in Table 1. The rows represent rank, and the columns 
represent stimuli (smartphones A–E). The values of 
intersection (𝑓𝑘𝑙) are the number of observers for stimulus 
k for rank l. Thus, 𝑓1𝐴 indicates that 22 observers ranked 
the smartphone with NLSP (smartphone A) 1st.  
First, rank is converted to a value. The higher the 
ranking, the higher the 𝑟𝑙 value of the smartphone, where 𝑟𝑙 
is calculated as follows: 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-611-8
CONTENT 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

TABLE I. ASSESSMENT RESULTS (Figure 3(a) Map) 
 
 
 
𝑟𝑙 =  n − l + 1 
(1) 
The percentile values 𝑃𝑙  are calculated using 𝑟𝑙  as 
follows: 
 
Pl =  𝑟𝑙 − 0.5
𝑛
100 
(2) 
The calculation results are shown in each row 𝑟𝑙, 𝑃𝑙 of 
Table 1. Next, 𝜀𝑙 is calculated using (3) or (4). If the value 
of 𝑃𝑙 is larger than 50, formula (3) is used. If the value of 
𝑃𝑙 is 50 or less, formula (4) is used. This is because the 
values of 𝜀𝑙  are calculated based on the point of the 
variance 0 of the standard normal distribution.  
 
𝜀𝑙 = 
1 − 𝑃𝑙
100   (𝑃𝑙 > 50) 
(3) 
 
𝑃𝑙
100       (𝑃𝑙 ≤ 50) 
(4) 
The calculation results are shown in row 𝜀𝑙 of Table 1.  
𝐾𝜀𝑙 is calculated using 𝜀𝑙 from the normal distribution 
table. The values of 𝐾𝜀𝑙 shown in Table 1 were given to 
each stimulus according to the ranking. The average scores 
(𝑅𝑙) of the total scores (∑(𝑓𝑘𝑙 × 𝐾𝜀𝑙)) are the evaluation 
values of the stimulus. For example, the average score 𝑅𝐴 
is calculated as follows: 𝑅𝐴 = 28.72 23
⁄
≒ 1.25 . The 
average scores and total scores are shown in Table 1. The 
average scores of “Map” (Figure 3(a)) are shown in the 
yardstick graph in Figure 4. The horizontal axis indicates 
the average score. The marks on the axis (oval, triangle, 
square, rhombus, and x) indicate the average scores of each 
stimulus (smartphone A, smartphone B, smartphone C, 
smartphone D, and smartphone E, respectively). The 
higher the average score, the higher the evaluation. In 
Table 1, the average score of smartphone A is the highest, 
which indicates that smartphone A has the highest 
resolution.  
 A t-test was used to verify the significant difference 
between the stimuli. The variance of the average score (𝑆𝑘
2) 
and the statistical quantity 𝑡0 are calculated as follows:  
 
𝑆𝑘
2 =  𝛴{𝑓𝑘𝑙 × (𝐾𝜀𝑙)2}
√𝛴(𝑓𝑘𝑙)
− 𝑅𝑘
2 
(5) 
 𝑡0 =
𝑅𝑥 − 𝑅𝑦
√∑(𝑓𝑘𝑙) (𝑆𝑥2 + 𝑆𝑦2)
√∑(𝑓𝑘𝑙) ∑{(𝑓𝑘𝑙) − 1} (6) 
The value ∑(𝑓𝑘𝑙) indicates the number of observers. x 
and y are stimuli. The calculation results are shown in 
Table 1. The values of t are calculated using the degree of 
freedom (DoF) from t distribution. In this experiment, the 
DoF is DoF = 2 ∗ ∑(𝑓𝑘𝑙) − 2 = 46 − 2 = 44. The t value 
of 1% significant level is 𝑡1% = 2.414134  and that 
corresponding to a 5% significant level is 𝑡5% = 1.68023. 
If the value of 𝑡0 is larger than the value of 𝑡5%, there is a 
significant difference between stimuli.  
Here, smartphone A is the highest, and smartphone D 
is the second highest. The 𝑡0 value between smartphones A 
and D (𝑡0(𝐴, 𝐷)) and the result of the t-test is as follows:  
 
𝑡0(A,D) = 10.33 > 𝑡1% 
(7) 
In (7), 𝑡0(𝐴, 𝐷) is larger than 𝑡1%. This result indicates 
that smartphone A has a higher resolution than smartphone 
D and has a significance value of 1%. The results of the 3rd 
rank (smartphone C), 4th rank (smartphone B), and 5th 
rank (smartphone E) are as follows:  
 
𝑡0(D,C) = 4.13 > 𝑡1% 
(8) 
 
𝑡0(C, B) = 0.53 > 𝑡1% 
(9) 
 
𝑡0(B,E) = 2.77 < 𝑡5% 
(10) 
𝑡0(𝐷, 𝐶) and 𝑡0(𝐶, 𝐵) are larger than 𝑡1%. Therefore, 
there are significant differences of 1% between 
smartphones D and C, and smartphones C and B. 𝑡0(𝐵, 𝐸) 
is less than 𝑡1% and 𝑡5%, which indicates that there is no 
significant difference between smartphones B and E. The 
arrows indicate significant differences in the graph in 
Figure 4. The asterisks represent the level of significant 
difference between stimuli. “**” represents a significant 
difference of 1%, and “*” represents a significant difference 
of 5%. The analysis results of images [b–e] are shown in 
Figure 3 (b–e). Smartphone A has the highest resolution and 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-611-8
CONTENT 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

significant differences of 1% between other smartphones in 
all the images. On the other hand, smartphone E has the 
worst resolution in all images and significant differences for 
four out of five images with the other smartphones. 
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
Smartphone A (with NLSP) has the highest score and a 
significant difference of 1% between the other smartphones 
(which are either without NLSP or from different 
manufacturers) in all the images. The results indicate that 
NLSP is valid for text on smartphone displays. The same 
results were obtained for all the images. Thus, NLSP is 
valid for images other than the five images used in this 
paper. 
There 
are 
significant 
differences 
between 
smartphones without NLSP. It is assumed that the results 
were influenced by the internal processing differences.  
In this experiment, a gazing point was not specified for 
the observers. In addition, there are significant differences 
in all the images when all the observers are non-experts. 
From the above, there are clear differences of image quality 
between images with NLSP and those without NLSP. 
VII. CONCLUSIONS 
Subjective assessments using smartphones with NLSP 
and those without NLSP were conducted to verify the 
effectiveness of NLSP for texts. The results of experiments 
using five smartphones indicated that the image quality of a 
smartphone with NLSP is the highest, and there are 
significant differences between the other smartphones.  
Statistical analyses indicate that the experimental results 
are reproducible. The conclusion that a smartphone with 
NLSP has the highest image quality was obtained for all 
images, therefore, both the assessment using the best-worst 
method and the analysis method in this experiment were 
valid as subjective assessment methods. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Gohshi, “A new signal processing method for video: 
reproduce the frequency spectrum exceeding the Nyquist 
frequency,” MMsys ’12 Proceedings of the 3rd Multimedia 
Systems Conference, pp.47-52, Sep. 2012. 
[2] http://www.fmworld.net/product/phone/f-
02h/display.html?fmwfrom=f-02h_index. [retrieved: Mar. 
2017] 
[3] H. Shoji and S. Gohshi, “Subjective Assessment for 
Resolution Improvement on 4K TVs:Analysis of Learning-
Based Super-Resolution and Non-Linear Signal Processing 
Techniques,” The Eleventh International Multi-Conference 
on Computing in the Global Information Technology 
(ICCGI2016), pp.10-15, Nov. 2016. 
[4] M. Sugie, S. Gohshi, H. Takehisa, and C. Mori, “Subjective 
Assessment of Super-Resolution 4K Video using Paired 
Comparison,” , 2014 International  
[5] Symposium 
on 
Intelligent 
Signal 
Processing 
and 
Communication Systems (ISPACS 2014), pp.42-47, Dec. 
2014. 
[6] C. Mori and S. Gohshi, “Image Quality of a Smartphone 
Display with Super-Resolution,” Proceedings of the ISCIE 
International Symposium on Stochastic System Theory and 
its Applications, Vol.2016, pp.340-344, 2016. 
 
(a) Analysis result “Map” 
 
(b) Analysis result “Route” 
 
(c) Analysis result “TV” 
 
(d) Analysis result ”Airport” 
 
(e) Analysis result “Ticket” 
Figure 4. Analysis results 
 
[7] Rec. ITU-R BT.710-4, “Subjective Assessment Method for 
Image Quality in High-Definition Television,” Nov, 1998. 
[8] Manisha and P. Ahlawat, “Enhanced DNA Based 
Cryptography,” International Journal of Advance Research 
in Computer Science and Management Studies, vol.3, Issue 
6, pp.452-455, Jun. 2015. 
[9] S. Gohshi, “A  new signal processing method fo video: 
reproduce the frequency spectrum exceeding the Nyquist 
frequency,” MMSys ’12 Proceedings of the 3rd Multimedia 
Systems Conference, pp.47-52, Sep. 2012. 
[10] S. Farsiu and M. Dirk Robinson, “Fast and Robust Multi-
Frame Super-Resolution,” IEEE Trans Image Process 2004, 
Vol.13, no.10, pp.1327-1344, Oct. 2004. 
[11] S. Gohshi and I. Echizen, “Limitation of Super Resolution 
image Reconstruction,” The Journal of The Institute of Image 
Information and Television Engineers, Vol.36, No.48, 
ME2012-125, pp.1-6, Nov. 2012. 
[12] W.T. Freeman, T.R. Jones, and E.C. Pasztorm “Example-
Based Super-Resolution,” IEEE Computer Graphics and 
Applications, Vol.22, no.2, pp.56-65, Mar. 2002. 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-611-8
CONTENT 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

[13] M. Sugie, S. Gohshi, H. Takeshita, and C. Mori, “Subjective 
assessment of super-resolution 4K video using paired 
comparison,” 2014 International Symposium on Intelligent 
Signal Processing and communication Systems (ISPACS 
2014), pp.17-22, Dec. 2014. 
[14] H. Shoji and S. Gohshi, “Subjective Assessment for 
Learning-Based Super-Resolution and Non-Linear Signal 
Processing Techniques,” The Eleventh International Multi-
Conference on Computing in the Global Information 
Technology (ICCGI 2016), pp.10-15, Nov. 2016. 
[15] T. Fukuda and R. Fukuda, “Ergonomics handbook,” 
ISBN978-4-86079-036-3, Scientist press co.ltd, pp.41-71, 
Tokyo, 2009. (in Japanese) 
 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-611-8
CONTENT 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

