idAnimate: A General-Purpose Animation Sketching Tool for Multi-Touch Devices 
J. Quevedo-Fernández and J.B.O.S Martens 
Department of Industrial Design 
Eindhoven University of Technology 
Eindhoven, The Netherlands 
{j.quevedo.fernandez, j.b.o.s.martens}@tue.nl 
 
 
Abstract— Creating animations is a complex activity that often 
requires an expert, especially if results need to be obtained 
under time pressure. As animations are potentially relevant in 
many different contexts, it is interesting to allow more people 
to use them for communicating ideas about time-varying 
phenomena. Multi-touch devices create opportunities to 
redesign existing applications and user interfaces, and new 
classes of animation authoring tools that use gestural 
interaction have therefore started to appear. Most of them 
focus on specific applications, such as cartoon and puppet 
animation. In this paper, we present idAnimate, a low-fidelity 
general-purpose animation authoring system for sketching 
animations on multi-touch devices. With idAnimate, the user 
can intuitively manipulate objects with his fingers, while the 
system records the trajectories and transformations and uses 
them to build animations. Next to describing idAnimate, we 
also present a comparison study with an alternative state-of-
the-art 
animation-sketching 
tool, 
called 
K-Sketch. 
The 
experimental results lead us to conclude that idAnimate is 
easier to understand and learn, and that it is significantly 
faster for certain types of scenarios, at the cost of a reduced 
precision and detail in the outcome.  
Keywords-Animation; 
Multi-Touch; 
Creativity-Support-
Tools; User-Study; Design 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
If a picture is worth a thousand words, then a movie is 
worth a thousand pictures. Compared to static images, 
animations and motion pictures more explicitly illustrate the 
course of actions and reactions that constitute an inherently 
dynamic situation. This can lead to improvements in 
communication and understanding [[3], especially when 
describing complex concepts that involve a chain of events 
[5]. As animations are of interest in a variety of contexts, 
from education to business, and can support both 
information transfer and artistic expression, it is worthwhile 
to explore how they can become more widespread.  
Despite the potential interest, it turns out that non-expert 
animators hardly ever use animation-authoring tools. A 
number of animation tools exist today, the most popular one 
being Adobe Flash [4]. However, as argued more explicitly 
in the next section, for many contexts and users, such 
professional 
animation 
tools 
lack 
two 
important 
characteristics; (1) they are not easy to learn and use, and 
hence only adopted by expert animators who can afford the 
initial investment, and (2) they are insufficiently sketch-like, 
requiring an effort and commitment to detail that is quite 
substantial and often not needed. 
In an attempt to bridge this gap between existing tools 
and user requirements, a number of animation tools and 
techniques that feel more natural and intuitive in the hands 
of non-expert animators have been developed. Recent 
developments in input devices, in particular the increasing 
popularity of multi-touch interfaces, have opened up new 
opportunities to develop easier to learn and faster to use 
animation techniques, but there is as yet no consensus on 
what is the most effective approach.  
In order to explore and test how animation tools could 
profit from the benefits that multi-touch interfaces have to 
offer, we have developed a specific animation tool, named 
idAnimate, for them. To better understand the consequences 
of the design trade-offs adopted in idAnimate, we have 
conducted a small experimental study to compare idAnimate 
with an existing state-of-the-art animation-sketching tool, 
called K-Sketch. This latter application was developed for 
tablet devices and hence does not incorporate multi-touch. 
This paper first describes the related work and the 
idAnimate tool. The description of the tool includes the 
design goals and the main characteristics of the user 
interface and animation technique. The paper continues 
presenting the comparison study, which includes a brief 
description of K-Sketch. The paper subsequently presents 
and discusses the experimental results, and draws lessons 
for the future. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In 1969 Ronald M. Baecker presented Genesys [17], the 
first computerized animation system that recorded dynamic 
changes in the position, orientation and shape of visual 
objects as they were applied by the animator (usually with 
the help of a stylus). Since then, many systems have 
followed, introducing a variety of additional animation 
techniques. Using the flipbook metaphor, GIF animations 
grew popular during the 90’s, partly because they could be 
easily distributed digitally. Adobe Flash and Director 
popularized the key-frame technique, in which the animator 
creates two frames and the system interpolates in between. 
Another important technique that is commonly used in video 
games and film production is procedural animation, where 
computer algorithms define the motion and position of visual 
objects over time [2]. However, while obviously very useful 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-275-2
CONTENT 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

in the hands of skilled animators, these tools do not explicitly 
address novice (or infrequent) users.  
Some newer systems have focused on developing 
techniques that feel more natural and intuitive to non-
experienced users. Two specific examples are: a) articulating 
3D figure animations based on 2D figure sketches [9] and b) 
sketching the motion of a character [14]. While non-expert 
animators can use such tools, they offer interaction 
mechanisms that are tuned to a specific application, i.e., 
articulating the motion of a character, and are therefore not 
necessarily suitable for general-purpose animation.  
More interesting in view of general-purpose animating is 
the motion-by-example technique described by Moscovich. 
This technique, in which the user can drag an object around 
the screen while the system records the location trajectory as 
a function of time, has been widely adopted in animation 
tools that target novice animators, such as K-Sketch [16], 
Sketch-n-Stretch [8], or Sketchify [19]. Sketchify (which was 
co-developed by the second author) is primarily intended for 
quickly creating prototypes with real-time input from a 
diversity of sensors, and therefore its interface is simply too 
sophisticated and complex for rapidly sketching animations. 
The tool idAnimate that we present in this paper shares 
similarities with K-Sketch and Sketch-n-Stretch, as it extends 
the motion-by-example technique, which tracks an object’s 
position, to also include orientation and size. The extension 
to multi-touch devices (specifically, the iPad) can potentially 
speed up an animation process, as the user can transform 
multiple properties at a time instead of consecutively. An 
additional advantage of multi-touch devices is that multiple 
users can potentially cooperate on a single animation, 
although the full potential of this idea is only likely to 
emerge on multi-touch surfaces that are larger in size than 
the iPad that we used in the current case study.  
Ceylant and Capin [6] developed a multi-touch interface 
for animating 3D Meshes that produced a sense of movement 
in objects by deforming and reshaping visual objects through 
the fingers, which is similar to the multi-touch technique by 
Takayama and Irigarashi [11] for manipulating the shapes of 
2D characters. While both techniques share some features 
with our own prototype, mostly due to the common use of a 
multi-touch interface, they are mainly intended for character 
animation, and are hence fairly specialized. To the best of 
our knowledge, the most similar existing tools to idAnimate 
are Toontastic [1] and Photopuppet HD [15], which use 
multi-touch gestures for creating animations. The latter tool 
is mostly intended for cartoon animation in a professional 
studio, as it offers many sophisticated and dedicated features, 
while Toontastic has a very specific application domain, i.e., 
storytelling for children. 
III. 
IDANIMATE 
A. Overview 
The primary goal of idAnimate is to allow users to 
rapidly author simple but expressive animations. The 
concept of idAnimate was inspired by a series of studies that 
were carried out within the design teams of diverse 
companies. These studies aimed more generally at collecting 
requirements for tools and methods that can support design 
communication [7, 10]. The need to author dynamic 
visualizations in a sketch-like way emerged quite naturally in 
this context study.  
As the aim was to create a tool that could support 
creativity, discovery and innovation, we drew inspiration 
from the design guidelines proposed by Shneiderman [20] 
and Resnicks [21], to assist us in mapping the general 
objective of sketch-like animations into more specific design 
goals that can potentially also be verified in subsequent 
observational studies. 
B. Design Goals 
1) Low Threshold 
In order to make the process of creating animations easily 
accessible to non-experienced animators, the threshold for 
using the tool should be extremely low. This means that 
novice users, including those using the tool for the first time, 
should be able to create simple animations with no or 
minimal instruction. 
2) Speed 
The tool should allow users to rapidly create animations. 
Ideally, the cost of creating an animation should be similar to 
that of creating static sketches, so that they can just as easily 
be discarded and replaced by alternatives. 
3) Support Exploration  
The tool should allow users to try out different 
alternatives and examples, and should make it easy to roll 
back to past situations.  
4) Flexibility and wide walls 
The tool should not limit its users to a predefined set of 
patterns or prescribed scenarios. The tool should ideally 
allow the majority of users to describe most ideas that they 
can think of, within the reasonable boundaries of what 
animations can describe.  
5) Simplicity 
Besides having a low threshold, the tool should feel 
simple and intuitive to use after a prolonged period of time. 
Instead of providing an extensive set of highly configurable 
features, the tool should provide only those that are strictly 
necessary to achieve the desired flexible outcome. 
C. Tool design 
The aforementioned design goals led us to select tablet 
devices as the platform for the prototype, mainly due to their 
form factor, portability, and the affordances that such multi-
touch devices provide.  
Multi-touch interaction paradigms such as resizing and 
rotating make it possible to extend the existing motion-by-
example method [18] to the more general transformation-by-
example method that is at the heart of idAnimate. This latter 
technique essentially allows users to freely manipulate 
objects using a multi-touch surface while recording the 
changes in position, size and orientation over time.  
Commonly accepted multi-touch gestures are generally 
perceived as highly intuitive thanks to the direct 
manipulation of objects through the tip of the fingers, which 
effectively maps the finger movements to the geometric 
parameters that are being controlled by the system.  
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-275-2
CONTENT 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

Since our technique complies with common practice, it 
should be perceived as easy to learn and easy to use. As 
stated before, next to being engaging and inviting, multi-
touch gestures are potentially faster, as three different 
transformations can be applied simultaneously.  
 
The projects produced with the tool are called Animated 
Sketches. An Animated Sketch consists of a group of visual 
elements (objects) and their associated transformations 
(position, orientation, size) over time. It is possible to import 
visual elements from different sources into the application, 
including attachments in emails, images resulting from 
internet searches (Bing, Google or Flickr images), 
photographs taken with the built-in camera (if the device has 
one), or images already available in the users library. The 
tool also includes a simple sketching application that can be 
used to create new visual objects, or to modify existing ones. 
Figure 1 shows a screenshot of the animation editor. 
Mark 1 shows the list of objects that are contained in the 
current animation. By modifying the order of objects in the 
list, they move in front or behind each other. Mark 2 shows 
the controls for adding a new object, editing the images 
associated with an object, duplicating, inspecting, deleting or 
clearing the animations of the selected object. Mark 3 shows 
the animation controls including the timeline and the play, 
pause, record and rewind buttons. Mark 4 shows the canvas 
where the objects are displayed and where the user interacts 
to define the animations. Mark 5 shows the inspector, which 
allows users: 1) to change between the different images that 
an object can display, 2) to manage the geometrical 
properties of an object that can be transformed, and 3) to 
specify when an object is visible or invisible. 
D. The animation technique 
Animated Sketches are composed of one or more visual 
elements called Animated Objects. An Animated Object is a 
region of varying position, size and orientation that can at 
any instance display one of a set of possible images, where 
most often the image reflects the state of the object 
concerned. This way an object can be moved, rotated and 
scaled while its visual appearance (image) changes. 
 
1) Transforming through gestures 
Multi-touch gestures are the key to intuitively defining 
the transformations on Animated Objects. In order to 
animate an object, the user has to select it from the list of 
available objects in a scene. Using two fingers, a user can 
translate, rotate and scale simultaneously the selected object 
in a single action. While recording, all of the transformations 
performed on the device are registered and time-stamped 
relatively to the animation start time. When the user initiates 
the record action, a three second countdown is displayed to 
give him time to prepare the position of the fingers. 
In order to provide control over small objects, despite the 
limited size of the tablet display (9.7 inches in diagonal), the 
user does not necessarily need to touch the actual object, but 
instead he can interact anywhere on the device. This way the 
user can also avoid blocking his view on the selected object. 
However, the consequence of this design choice is that it is 
currently not possible to animate two or more objects 
simultaneously, which is something that will probably need 
to be reconsidered when migrating to large-sized multi-touch 
displays that are operated by several users at a time.  
2) Synchronization and Concatenation  
Complex animations are accomplished by adding new 
object transformations to existing animations, effectively 
concatenating transformations. In order to coordinate the 
animations of different objects, we use the record-while-
playback technique. The user can replay a previously created 
animation, and meanwhile new transformations can be 
applied on other objects. These additional transformations 
are recorded, time-stamped and synchronized with the 
existing animation. 
THE IDANIMATE TOOL  
The objective of idAnimate is to allow users to rapidly 
author simple but expressive animations to support 
communication and creativity.  As the aim is to support 
creativity, discovery and innovation, we used the design 
guidelines proposed by Snheiderman [18] and Resnicks et 
al. [17] to assist us in mapping the above general objective 
into more specific design goals. 
Design goals 
Low threshold 
In order to be able to draw more people into the process of 
using animations to describe their ideas and stories, the 
threshold for using the tool must be as low as possible. This 
means that novice users, even those that are using the tool 
for the first time must be able to create simple animations 
with no or minimal instruction. 
Speed 
The tool must allow users to rapidly create animations. 
Ideally, the cost of creating an animation should be similar 
to that of creating static sketches, so that they can just as 
easily be discarded and replaced by alternatives. 
Support Exploration  
The tool must allow users to try out different alternatives 
and examples, and should make it easy to roll back to past 
situations.  
Flexibility and wide walls 
The tool must not limit its users to a predefined set of 
patterns or prescribed scenarios. The tool should ideally 
allow the majority of users to describe most ideas that they 
can think of, within the reasonable boundaries of what 
animations can describe.  
Simplicity 
Besides having a low threshold, the tool should feel simple 
and intuitive to use after a prolonged period of time. Instead 
of providing an extensive set of highly configurable 
features, the tool should provide only those that are strictly 
necessary to achieve the desired flexible outcome. 
Encourage collaboration 
The tool should allow users to easily share and discuss the 
outcome with others, hence promoting dialogue between 
participants of co-located activities. This implies that users 
should also be able to easily modify animations created by 
others.  
Fit into existing workflow 
The tool should provide mechanisms to easily exchange 
material with existing libraries or repositories. The tool 
should provide interconnectivity with existing design tools. 
Tool design 
The aforementioned design goals lead us to select tablet 
devices as the platform for the prototype, mainly due to 
their form factor, portability, and the affordances that multi-
touch devices provide. Popular multi-touch interaction 
paradigms such as resize and rotate are for instance applied 
in idAnimate to extend the existing motion-by-example 
method [13] to a more general transformation-by-example 
method (see the animation technique section  for details). 
The projects produced with the tool are called Animated 
Sketches. An Animated Sketch consists of a group of visual 
elements (objects) and their associated transformations 
(position, orientation, size) over time. Each visual element 
may have one or more images associated with it, and the 
sequence in which these images are displayed may also be 
animated over time. This way an object can be moved, 
rotated and scaled while its visual appearance (image) 
changes. 
It is possible to import visual elements from different 
sources into the application, including attachments in 
emails, images resulting from internet searches (Bing 
Figure 1 – idAnimate Screenshot being used to animate a game concept. Mark 1 shows the list of objects, mark 2 shows the possible 
actions on an object, Mark 3 the record and playback controls, mark 4 the canvas and Mark 5 the object inspector 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Figure 1. idAnimate being used to animate a game concept (Angry Birds). Mark 1 shows the list of objects, mark 2 shows the possible actions on an object, 
Mark 3 the record and playback controls, mark 4 the canvas and Mark 5 the object inspector. 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-275-2
CONTENT 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

If a user animates an object that was already animated 
previously, all existing object transformations, from the 
moment that he starts to interact, are overwritten. Therefore 
the user can easily and intuitively refine or redo part of the 
animation of an object without compromising earlier parts.  
3) States 
The user can dynamically change the image associated 
with a visual object. In order to change states, the animation 
can be replayed, and during the playback, the user can select 
the desired state from a menu, and consequently the image to 
be displayed. The changes in the state are recorded and time-
stamped with the rest of the animation. An alternative way is 
to change the states not while recording, but while the 
animation is stopped, which allows for more time and 
precision. Specifically, users can navigate to a particular 
point on the timeline and select the desired state at that time.  
Switching states allows to change the visual appearance 
of a region, for instance changing the color of a light from 
red to green, the text displayed on a screen, or the different 
expressions of a character. Flipbook animations can easily be 
constructed in this way. 
E. Implementation 
A 
software 
prototype 
of 
idAnimate 
has 
been 
implemented for iPad multi-touch devices, using the 
Objective-C programming language and the Cocoa Touch 
Framework.  
IV. 
COMPARISON STUDY 
In order to increase our understanding of the trade-offs 
incorporated in the aforementioned animation system, we 
have conducted a comparison study between idAnimate and 
K-Sketch, a state-of-the-art general-purpose animation-
sketching tool that relies on a similar technique (motion-by-
example), but that does not require or use multi-touch. 
A. MATERIALS AND METHODS 
B. The Tools 
1) idAnimate 
Please refer to the idAnimate section of this paper for 
more details, as well as figures 1 and 3 for the interface. 
2) K-Sketch 
K-Sketch (see Figure 2) is a general-purpose animation-
authoring tool for Windows computers that is intended to be 
used with a keyboard and mouse or stylus. K-Sketch starts 
with an empty canvas where objects can be drawn. Objects 
are selected by drawing a loop around them while holding 
down the Alt key. When an object is selected, a manipulator 
(see figure 2) is displayed on top of it.  
The 
manipulator 
allows 
users 
to 
apply 
distinct 
transformations on the object, such as translation, scaling, 
rotation or skewing, or to modify the orientation of the 
object relative to the movement direction. The manipulator 
can be repositioned on the object, effectively changing the 
center of rotation. To record, the user has to hold down the 
Alt key while transforming one of the above properties, and 
the system records the changes over time. K-Sketch also 
supports flipbook animation. At any moment in time the 
user can erase or draw something new, or decide to show or 
hide an object. 
To record simultaneous motions of two or more objects, 
the user has to rewind and record new motions while the 
existing ones are playing. The user can add various 
transformations to a single object, such as a translation and 
rotation (like a spinning ball). In order to accomplish this, 
he has to first record the translation, rewind and 
subsequently record the rotation. By default the system 
overwrites the old motion with the new one. Alternatively, 
the user can select the “Fix Last Motion”. This option shows 
a menu with the different alternatives for combining the 
existing motion with the new one. For example, if we first 
translate and then rotate an object, K-Sketch will show three 
different ways to combine them: (1) overwrite, (2) translate 
Figure 3. The idAnimate animation tool, with the object selector displayed 
on the left, the object inspector on the right, the canvas in the center and 
the animation and playback controls at the bottom. 
Figure 2.The K-Sketch animation tool, showing a selected figure together 
with its manipulator. The different tools are at the top, while the animation 
and playback controls are at the bottom. 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-275-2
CONTENT 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

and rotate around the center of the object, or (3) translate 
and rotate around the initial center. The user can preview all 
three options and make a choice. Last but not least, K-sketch 
supports recursion or animating of subparts (called Move 
Relative). To accomplish this, the user needs to select a 
subpart of an object that is already animated, and animate it 
with its independent handler. Unlike other features, this 
latter one is not available in idAnimate. 
C. Study Approach 
Two representative animation tasks were selected (see 
more details ahead) to allow for an explicit comparison. Each 
participant was asked to perform both tasks with both tools, 
randomizing the order across participants of which tool to 
use first. Before using each tool, participants were given a 
brief tutorial. The tutorials followed a script that was based 
on a slightly extended version of the car-exploding example 
[12] in the demonstration videos of K-Sketch. During the 
tutorial, participants were allowed to ask clarifying questions 
to the experimenter.  
After the brief tutorial, the participants were shown a 
static image of the scene to create, and were explained 
verbally the script and details of the animation. The choice to 
use a static image instead of an actual animation was 
motivated by our objective to direct participants towards a 
specific outcome, while allowing them freedom to decide 
what exactly to create and which features to use. 
The participants were given a tool with a blank canvas, 
and were asked to sketch the visual objects and animate 
them. They were encouraged to not spend time on creating 
good-looking and detailed graphics, but to create sketchy 
looking ones instead. Once a participant had finished 
completing both tasks with one of the tools, he or she would 
be given the brief tutorial on the second tool, and would be 
asked to repeat the same tasks but with this second tool. 
D. Surveys and Interview 
After completing the tasks with one of the tools the 
participants were asked to fill out a slightly modified 
Usability Satisfaction Questionnaire [13] (see more details in 
the results section). Upon having completed both tasks with 
both tools, participants were asked to complete a final 
survey. In this third survey, they were asked to directly 
compare the two animation techniques by specifying their 
preference (for various aspects of the techniques) on a scale 
from -3 (idAnimate) to +3 (K-Sketch), including 0 as the 
neutral or no preference. The aspects on which to compare 
included intuitiveness and playfulness (see the Results 
section for more details).  
A five to fifteen minute semi-structured interview 
concluded the experiment. Subjects were asked to 
characterize the differences between the two tools, starting 
from the attributes used in the comparison survey.  
Up to now, the quality of the animations that were 
produced has not yet been explicitly graded by either the 
participants themselves or an external reviewer. We are still 
considering whether or not this is worthwhile doing. Instead, 
within the comparison survey and post-session interview, 
participants were asked to argue why they would choose one 
or the other tool to create better quality animations, or to 
create them in less time.  
E. Data collection 
The participants were video-taped during the execution 
of the tasks, their responses to the questionnaires were 
collected on paper, and the semi-structured interviews were 
audio-recorded. As the focus of the study was on comparing 
both animation techniques, the participants were encouraged 
to answer mostly in terms of the animation techniques 
themselves and less in terms of the user interfaces of the 
tools (which were obviously different). 
F. Subjects 
Twelve subjects participated in the study, 4 female and 8 
male. The age of the subjects ranged from 21 to 34 years. Six 
participants were PhD students, one an assistant technician in 
an immunology laboratory, while the rest were bachelor, 
master or recently graduated students. Table I provides 
detailed background information on the participants. None of 
the participants were expert animators, nor did they create 
animations on a regular basis. Two of the participants with a 
background in industrial design had minimal experience with 
Adobe Flash, while one had used Adobe After Effects (video 
special effects software) once. One of the Computer 
Scientists had created stop-motion animations in the past, 
while another had used Flash occasionally.  
Background 
Current Position 
Participant 
count 
Computer 
Science 
PhD Candidate (3), Postmaster 
Student (1), Bachelors Student (1) 
5 
Bio molecular 
Sciences 
Laboratory technician (1) 
1 
Pharmacy 
PhD Candidate (1) 
1 
Industrial 
Design 
PhD Candidate (1), Bachelors 
Student (1), Masters Student (1), 
Recent Masters Graduate (1) 
4 
Mechanical 
Engineering 
PhD Candidate 
1 
Figure 4. Scene for the sailing boat animation task. 
TABLE I.  PARTICIPANTS 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-275-2
CONTENT 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

G. The tasks 
Unlike in other fields of research, there is no agreement 
or standardization in the domain of animations on what 
constitutes a representative task for comparing animation 
techniques or systems. For the purpose of the study we 
looked at common tasks as identified in the preliminary 
studies conducted by Davis et al. for K-Sketch (specifically, 
Translate, Scale, Rotate, Set Timing, and Move Relative), 
and selected two representative tasks.  
1) Task 1 – Angry Birds Game 
The scene is composed of three objects, an angry bird, 
and two rocks or blocks. The bird has to fly towards the first 
block and hit it. As a result of the collision, the bird flies 
away modifying its original trajectory, and the first block 
falls down. While falling down, the falling block hits the 
second block, which in turn falls down, like a falling 
domino. See figure 1 for more details.  
2) Task 2 – Sailing boat  
There is a boat on the sea that has to travel from point A 
to point B. Point A is in the bottom-left corner, close to the 
observer. Point B is in the top-right corner of the screen, 
closer to the horizon. The boat has to travel from point A to 
point B. Because point B is further away, the boat has to 
become smaller as it progresses along the path. Since it is a 
boat floating on water, the boat has to rock slightly as it 
moves. Finally, the flag on the boat has to wave. See figure 4 
for more details. 
 
H. Devices 
K-Sketch runs on Windows and idAnimate on an iPad. 
To compare both tools in the most similar way possible, we 
used a Fujitsu-Siemens Stylistic ST-6012 Tablet PC 
equipped with a stylus for K-Sketch. The Tablet PC had 
buttons around the display, one of which was mapped to the 
Alt key, since K-Sketch requires frequent use of this key. For 
idAnimate, an iPad 2 was used.  
V. 
RESULTS 
A. Task Analysis 
1) Data Analysis 
The time spent by each participant in each of the tasks was 
divided into the time used for drawing graphics and the time 
actually used for animating, both measured in seconds. For 
the purpose of the study only the time used for animating 
was considered. As the distributions of the observed times 
were clearly skewed, we used the logarithm of the observed 
times in the statistical analyses, as they more closely 
followed a normal distribution, which is required by 
traditional statistical procedures such as the t-test. Although 
the original intention was to include measurements of error 
rates, we found this too difficult to operationalize, as it was 
too hard to decide on what constituted an error and what did 
not. It was not straightforward to determine if a user was 
correcting an error, refining an animation, or just playing 
around. Asking them explicitly would obviously have 
disturbed their process. 
2) Task 1 – Angry Birds 
 All of the participants were able to complete the Angry 
Bird task with both tools. Table II and Figure 5 show that the 
animation times were very similar on average. Some subjects 
performed faster with idAnimate than with K-Sketch, while 
for other subjects it was just the other way around.  The 
participants obviously did not perform as a homogeneous 
group.  
 
Tool 
Min/Max 
Std. dev. 
Mean 
Std. Error 
of the 
Mean 
K-Sketch 
147/344 
69.335 
243.0 
20.015 
idAnimate 
80/410 
123.327 
208.916 
35.601 
 50
 100
 150
 200
 250
 300
 350
 400
 450
 0
 0.5
 1
 1.5
 2
 2.5
 3
model value (+/- CI)
idAnimate = 1, kSketch = 2
Angry Birds 95% confidence Interval
Figure 5. Observed times for the Angry Birds and Sailing Boat tasks 
Figure 6. Overlapping 95% confidence intervals for the time to complete 
the Angry Bird task for both tools. 
TABLE II.  
TIMING STATISTICS FOR THE ANGRY BIRDS TASK. 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-275-2
CONTENT 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

Assuming unequal variance and performing a T-test, we 
obtained: T(21) = 1.4108 (p=0.171326). There is hence 
insufficient evidence to reject the null hypothesis that both 
tools require the same time to complete the task. Figure 6 
shows the estimated 95% confidence intervals for the 
untransformed average times. Note that the intervals are not 
symmetric since they were determined on the logarithm of 
the time, and then reverted to actual seconds. We observe 
that both intervals overlap, which agrees with the fact that 
the difference in average performance is not significant. 
 
3) Task 2 – Boat Animation 
All participants were able to complete the boat animation 
with both tools, except for one participant who after trying a 
number of times to merge two motions with K-Sketch, 
needed help from the experimenter to do so. Table IV shows 
the descriptive statistics, while the individual times are 
plotted in Figure 5. Figure 9 displays the 95% confidence 
intervals for the average times, while Figure 8 shows the 
95% confidence interval for the time difference. We observe 
that the average times are considerably different in this case, 
being smaller for the multi-touch tool. Assuming unequal 
variance we performed a T-test on the transformed times 
with the following result: T(21) = 5.1248 (p=3.89654e-05), 
with |T| > 2.0748 (p=0.05), indicating a significant 
difference. Because of the size of the effect, and the 
agreement between the subjects, the power of the test was 
estimated at β = 0.999, despite the small number of 
participants. The multi-touch tool is significantly faster for 
this task. After reverting the time back to seconds, we find a 
95% confidence interval for the time difference between 
116.5 until 404.9 seconds (see Figure 8). 
B. Analysis of Subjective Ratings 
1)  Standard Usability Questionnaire 
 
 Figure 10 shows a summary of the results of the 
modified Usability Satisfaction Questionnaire, including the 
mean, the standard error of the mean, and the questions 
asked.  
We performed non-parametric repeated measures Wilcoxon 
Signed Rank Tests on the observed ratings in order to 
identify significant differences (see Table V). We observe 
that users have a preference for the multi-touch technique in 
terms of Intuitiveness, Overall Easiness, Satisfaction, 
Playfulness, and Pleasantness of the interface.  There are 
some trends mentioned in Table V that cannot be decisively 
concluded based on our limited experiment, more 
specifically, idAnimate tends to be preferred in terms of 
Comfort and Learnability, while K-sketch tends to be 
preferred in terms of Efficiency and Recovery from 
Mistakes. The observed differences for the subjective 
attributes that are not included in the table were not 
significant.  
 
2) Comparison Questionnaire 
 The comparison questionnaire asked users to indicate for 
a number of aspects which tool they preferred. If they 
selected -3 that would mean they had a strong preference for 
idAnimate for such an aspect, while +3 would imply a 
similar preference for K-Sketch. The 0 was included as 
neutral or no particular preference for any of the tools.  As 
shown in Figure 7, idAnimate was preferred over K-Sketch 
on all attributes except one, i.e., Precision. All participants 
but one would use the multi-touch technique to animate 
something rapidly, but when judging precision there was no 
clear agreement. Eight out of the twelve users would select 
K-Sketch for animating something with precision, two would 
Aspect 
Mean 
Difference 
Significa
nce 
95% confidence 
interval (min/max) 
User 
Satisfaction 
-1.25 
0.009 
(Yes) 
 
-2.112/-.387 
Pleasant 
Experience 
-1.33 
0.020 
(Yes) 
-2.067/-.599 
Easiness 
-1.750 
0.000 
(Yes) 
-2.522/-.9778 
Intuitiveness 
-1.916 
0.000 
(Yes) 
-2.704/-1.128 
Playfulness 
-2.000 
0.000 
(Yes) 
-2.605/-1.394 
Animate 
Rapidly 
-1.666 
0.009 
(Yes) 
-2.826/-0.506 
Animate 
Precisely 
0.667 
0.255 
(No) 
-.555/1.888 
Dimension 
Significance 
Positive / 
Negative / 
Ties. 
Standardized 
test statistic 
Overall Easiness 
Satisfaction 
0.046 (Yes) 
1/9/2 
-1.996 
Intuitiveness 
0.043 (Yes) 
2/8/2 
-2.019 
Learnability 
0.070 (No) 
2/8/2 
-1.813 
Playfulness 
0.007 (Yes) 
0/9/3 
-2.687 
Comfortable 
0.088 (No) 
2/5/5 
-1.709 
Simplicity 
0.117 (No) 
1/7/4 
-1.567 
Pleasantness of 
the interface 
0.026 (Yes) 
1/9/2 
-2.228 
Recover from 
Mistakes 
0.454 (No) 
6/3//3 
.749 
Efficiency 
0.796 (No) 
3/4/4 
.258 
Tool 
Min/Max 
Std. dev. 
Mean 
Std.Error 
of the Mean 
K-Sketch 
220/11260 
227.703 
425.250 
80.166 
idAnimate 
59/291 
63.981 
145.833 
18.469 
TABLE V. WILCOXON SIGNED RANK TEST RESULTS FOR THE SUS 
QUESTIONNAIRE. 
TABLE IV.  
TIMING STATISTICS FOR THE BOAT TASK. 
TABLE III. T-TESTS FOR THE RESULTS OF THE COMPARISON SURVEY 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-275-2
CONTENT 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

select idAnimate, and two did not have a preference.  See 
Figure 7 and Table III for additional details. 
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
A. Speed versus Accuracy 
The quantitative data allows to conclude that the multi-
touch technique (idAnimate) is significantly faster then K-
Sketch in case of the Boat animation, but not in case of the 
Angry Birds animation. This is due to the fact that the latter 
task mainly required users to synchronize the animations of 
different objects, while the required animations for each 
object individually were rather basic In most cases, users 
only moved the bird, and barely changed it’s orientation as it 
flew through the air. Most subjects used only a single 
rotation of the boxes to make them fall down. Therefore, this 
task did not reveal differences in performance between both 
animation techniques. The observed differences in animation 
times can be attributed largely to the differences in user 
interfaces, and to how easily objects could be selected.  
The sailing boat task, on the other hand, discriminated 
very well been the two tools. In this task at least three 
parameters of the boat had to be animated, including the 
location, the orientation and the size. In this task participants 
performed significantly faster with the multi-touch animation 
tool. This was due to the fact that it was possible to animate 
these three parameters simultaneously, as opposed to having 
to change these parameters individually and in succession. 
This task posed different challenges for both techniques.  
With the multi-touch tool users had to act out a complex 
movement with one hand, and they would not always get it 
right the first time. In fact they would normally perform an 
initial attempt just to see how it looked, and then refine it on 
a second or third attempt. Using a single hand to move, scale 
and rotate an object simultaneously in a controlled way is 
quite difficult, and very often the accuracy suffered, which 
had an evident influence on the quality of the output.  This 
was described in the following way by one of the 
participants during the interview: 
“It’s definitely a downside of the iPad app, you have to 
do everything in one go… …three things at a time can be 
quite challenging.”  
“With idAnimate you can do it more fluently, but you 
have to practice your movements… … to act out something 
with your fingers is something new and you have to get used 
to it”. 
“idAnimate felt more easy to drag things, especially to 
make the boat. The multi-touch was easier even though it 
didn’t create the exact result that I wanted because it was 
less precise” 
Despite this drawback, the technique proved to be 
sufficiently accurate for “quick and dirty” animations.  
Participants were slower with K-Sketch but in general 
more accurate. There are two factors that influence this 
tradeoff. First, the stylus is simply more accurate than the 
finger, as the finger gets in the way, is thicker, and 
essentially provides less fine control, both for sketching and 
for animating. But also the animation technique itself had an 
effect. With K-Sketch the user animates each property 
successively, building the animations step by step. 
Consequently, the user has more precise control over each of 
the independent gestures. 
“The quality was certainly higher with the second 
application (K-Sketch), because of the pen especially, and 
because of the complexity of the movements” 
“With K-Sketch you have all the gestures, like the resize, 
the scale or the rotation separately, and you can control 
them also independently, and that also gives you a little bit 
more control” 
“Your expressive power with K-Sketch is finer. You can 
combine the movements better, you can make more 
movements at a time, and be more precise, but especially 
because you can do it step-by-step”. 
But this can also backfire. When animating a particular 
property, it was not possible to observe the animation of the 
previous property, implying that users had to act blindly. To 
assist in such a task, K-Sketch displays the trajectory of the 
previous motion path that gets filled up as the time goes by, 
showing the time-varying position of the object. This was 
often found hard to interpret. Additionally, when a user had 
completed the animation of a particular property, he had to 
-200
 0
 200
 400
 600
 800
 1000
 1200
 0
 0.5
 1
 1.5
 2
 2.5
 3
model difference (+/- CI)
idAnimate = 1, kSketch = 2
Boat 95% confidence Interval Difference
Figure 8. Sailing boat task 95% confidence intervals difference. 
Figure 7. Results from the comparison questionnaire between 
idAnimate (on the negative side) and K-sketch (on the positive side)  
(mean and standard error of the mean). 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-275-2
CONTENT 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

merge it with the previous one by selecting an option from a 
number of alternatives, for example with different centers of 
rotation. Users often felt unsure of which option matched 
their expectations best. As more and more motion paths and 
transformations were applied, the process became more and 
more difficult to predict. This was found overwhelming to 
some novices, especially those without a design-related 
background. Furthermore, in some cases the expected choice 
was not even there, and participants had to undo and try 
again because they could not figure out what went wrong.  
 
“The frustrating part of K-Sketch is that when you want 
to combine animations, the more you make the more 
scenarios you get, and that is a bit confusing” 
K-Sketch also offers the possibility to animate a subpart 
of an animation. This feature was found really useful, and 
most participants used it to animate the flag on the boat. 
With idAnimate most participants used the flipbook 
technique instead of animating the flag as an independent 
object. 
However, 
sub-animating 
with 
K-Sketch 
was 
sometimes also found confusing, due to the fact that the 
larger animation moves continuously as you animate the 
subpart, and you do not follow it with the stylus, but instead 
remain in the same place as where you begun animation as if 
the object was not actually moving.   
“With the pen there is a moment that you are animating 
and the object continues moving and this is a little bit 
chaotic.”  
B. Intuitiveness and Playfulness  
Certainly, animation-sketching tools are all about making 
animations quickly, and about minimizing the trade-off 
between quality and speed. The threshold for embarking on 
the task and the simplicity to achieve it, how funny and 
engaging the overall experience is, are also important. This 
can be particularly influential in certain contexts, such as 
using animations to facilitate workshops or brainstorms, and 
for certain users such as children, seniors, or non-animators 
in general. 
Participants found the multi-touch technique to be 
significantly more intuitive and easy to use. This was 
because the underlying conceptual model was easy to 
understand and very direct, a result of the mapping between 
the multi-touch gestures and the properties of the objects. 
Such mapping resembles object manipulation in the physical 
world. By manipulating objects with the hands directly, users 
are able to very easily prepare a plan of actions to achieve a 
desired result.  
“With the multi-touch tool you make the entire movement, 
it’s easier, as you do not have to think, you just let yourself 
go”.  
Furthermore, the multi-touch tool was significantly more 
playful and more fun. In fact, it was so playful, that three out 
of the twelve participants created additional content in the 
animations, such as flying birds around the boat, or making 
the floating buoy move as if it was actually floating. 
“I animated the floating buoy with idAnimate because it 
was attractive, it was like a game, it facilitated the act.”  
“idAnimate felt easier, more fun, more like a game. You 
can start to do silly things with your own fingers, while the 
other one feels more professional”.  
We believe that this perception of playfulness was due to 
the combination of how tactile and physical the multi-touch 
interface feels, together with the simplicity of the technique, 
its immediate feedback and the attractive graphical design of 
the tool.  
In the case of K-Sketch, users had to decompose their 
actions into a series of steps that the system supported in 
order to carry out their goal. They had to think ahead which 
motion path they were going to apply, which transformation 
would follow, how they would be combined, etc. This 
required more cognitive effort, and relied on a good 
understanding of the underlying conceptual model. This 
model was difficult to understand and operate by some users.  
“The interaction style of K-Sketch was more complex, 
(SUS) Usability Survey (Lower is better)
Overall, I am satisfied with how easy it is to use this system
It was simple to use this system
I was able to quickly complete the tasks and scenarios
I felt comfortable using this system
It was easy to learn to use this system
The interface of this systems was pleasant
I like using the interface of this system
Overall, I am satisfied with this system
The animation technique of this system was intuitive
The animation technique of this systems felt playful
Overall using this system was a pleasant experience
I was able to efficently complete the tasks and scenarios 
I could recover easily and quickly from mistakes
I could become productive quickly using this system
2
3
4
5
Strongly Agree
Question
Subject Ranking
Multi-Touch (idAnimate)
WIMP (kSketch)
Figure 10. SUS results, mean and SEM. 
 0
 200
 400
 600
 800
 1000
 1200
 0
 0.5
 1
 1.5
 2
 2.5
 3
model value (+/- CI)
idAnimate = 1, kSketch = 2
Boat 95% confidence Interval
Figure 9. Non-overlapping 95% confidence intervals 
for the time to complete the Sailing boat task with both 
tools 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-275-2
CONTENT 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

less direct or so… …I had to think more often with it.” 
However, for experienced users this may actually be an 
advantage. If you are able to plan the actions based on this 
decoupling of transformations, the technique provides more 
control.  
C. Different contexts 
In summary, we argue that the preference for either tool 
depends on the context. idAnimate is most suited in case 
animations must be created and discarded quickly, if the 
details are not important, and has the potential to be extended 
to a situation where multiple people work simultaneously on 
a single animation. K-Sketch is better suited for individual 
activities, where the level of detail and control required is 
more substantial (although still significantly below that 
required of professional animation tools). Both techniques 
can support novice users with minimal instruction, although 
idAnimate appears to have a lower threshold since its 
underlying conceptual model is easier to understand.  
“I would pick the second one (K-Sketch) if I had to make 
an application for a corporate setting or something like 
that… …For a brainstorm the iPad application is more 
convenient. You just draw it and move it.”  
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we have presented a general-purpose 
animation-sketching system for multi-touch devices, called 
idAnimate. We have presented a comparison study aimed at 
increasing our understanding on what trade-offs and 
differences this multi-touch animating system poses when 
compared to system that does not rely on multi-touch. The 
experiment supports the conclusion that the multi-touch 
animation-sketching system (idAnimate) is perceived as 
significantly more intuitive, playful and easier to learn. 
Additionally, we have observed that idAnimate may be 
significantly faster in cases where the user has to apply 
multiple simultaneous transformations on objects, and that in 
comparison to K-Sketch it generates animations with lower 
precision. 
These results and observations are being used to guide 
the next iteration of the tool. From the study we have learned 
that it is really difficult to isolate specific aspects of the tool 
in order to benchmark the technique, which has lead us into 
using for the follow up study a longitudinal approach, 
focused more on qualitative aspects of the experience. 
VIII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The work presented was made possible through a grant 
from the Dutch Government under the IOP-IPCR Program. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Russell. 2010. ToonTastic: a global storytelling network 
for kids, by kids. In Proceedings of the fourth international 
conference on Tangible, embedded, and embodied interaction 
(TEI '10). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 271-274 
[2] A. Watt and M. Watt. 1992. Advanced Animation and 
Rendering Techniques, Theory and Practice. Addison-Wesley 
Professional. 
[3] A. Wong, N. Marcus, P. Ayres, L. Smith, G.A. Cooper, F. 
Paas, and J. Sweller. Instructional animations can be superior 
to statics when learning human motor skills, Computers in 
Human Behavior, Volume 25, Issue 2, March 2009, Pages 
339-347, ISSN 0747-5632, 10.1016/j.chb.2008.12.012 
[4] Adobe Flash Technologies . Retrieved March 2013. 
http://www.adobe.com/products/flash.html 
[5] B. Tversky. J. Bauer Morrison, and M. Betrancourt. 2002. 
Animation: can it facilitate?. Int. Journal of. Human-
Computer. Studies. 57, 4 (October 2002), 247-262. 
[6] D. Ceylan and T. Capin. A Multi-Touch Interface for 3D 
Mesh Animation. Bilkent University. 
[7] D. Ozcelik, J. Quevedo-Fernandez, J. Thalen, and J. Terken. 
2011. On the development of electronic design tools and 
associated guidelines for supporting the early stages of the 
design process. In Proc. of the Second Conference on 
Creativity and Innovation in Design (DESIRE '11), ACM, 
New York, NY, USA, 115 – 126. 
[8] E. Sohn and Y.C. Choy. Sketch-n-Stretch: sketching 
animations using cutouts. IEEE Computer Graphics and 
Applications, IEEE , vol.32, no.3, pp.59,69, May-June 2012. 
[9] J. Davis, M. Agrawala, E. Chuang, Z. Popovic, and D. 
Salesin. 2003. A sketching interface for articulated figure 
animation. 
In 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
2003 
ACM 
SIGGRAPH/Eurographics 
symposium 
on 
Computer 
animation (SCA '03). 320 – 328. 
[10] J. Quevedo-Fernández and J.B.O.S. Martens. A User-
Centered-Design Perspective on Systems to Support Co-
located Design Collaboration. Proceedings of the 15th 
International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction. In 
Press. Springer LNCS. 2013. In Press.  
[11] K. Takayama and T. Igarashi. 2007. 2d Animation Authoring 
System with FTIR Multi-touch Table. Interactive Tokyo. 
[12] K-Sketch Car exploding video tutorial. Retrieved March 
2013. 
K-Sketch 
car 
exploding 
tutorial 
- 
http://youtu.be/UYLR5Nf4mWs 
[13] J.R. 
Lewis. 
IBM 
computer 
usability 
satisfaction 
questionnaires: Psychometric evaluation and instructions for 
use. International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction. 
1995, Volume 7, 57-58. 
[14] M. Thorne, D. Burke, and M. Van de Panne. Motion doodles: 
an interface for sketching character motion. In Proc. of ACM 
SIGGRAPH 2004. ACM, New York, NY, USA. Article 24. 
[15] PhotoPuppet HD iOS Application. Retrieved March 2013. 
http://itunes.apple.com/us/app/photopuppet-
hd/id421738553?mt=8  
[16] R.C. Davis, B. Colwell, and J.A. Landay. 2008. K-sketch: a 
'kinetic' sketch pad for novice animators. Proc. Of Human 
factors in Computing Systems (CHI '08). ACM, New York. 
413-422. 
[17] R.M. 
Baecker. 
1969. 
Picture-driven 
animation. 
In 
Proceedings of the May 14-16, 1969, spring joint computer 
conference (AFIPS '69 (Spring)). ACM, New York, NY, 
USA, 273-288. 1969J. Clerk Maxwell, A Treatise on 
Electricity and Magnetism, 3rd ed., vol. 2. Oxford: Clarendon. 
[18] T. Moscovich. 2007. Principles and Applications of Multi-
touch Interaction. PhD Dissertation. Department of Computer 
Science at Brown University. 
[19] Z. Obrenovic and J.B.O.S. Martens. 2011. Sketching 
interactive systems with Sketchify. ACM Trans. Comput.-
Hum. Interact. 18, 1, Article 4, 2011. 
[20] B. Shneiderman. Creativity support tools: accelerating 
discovery and innovation. Commun. ACM 50 (2007), 22-32. 
[21] M. Resnick, B. Myers, K. Nakakoji, B. Shneiderman, R. 
Pausch, T. Selker, and M. Eisenberg. Design Principles for 
Tools to Support Creative Thinking. Institute for Software 
Research. Paper 816. (2005) 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-275-2
CONTENT 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

