Visual Perception, Speech and Play in the Current Social Tools
On Interactive Technological Device Interfaces
Myzan Binti Noor
MIIT (Malaysian Institute of Information Technology)
University of Kuala Lumpur
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
E-mail: myzan@unikl.edu.my
Abstract—The new media interfaces are the visualization
that provide text, layout, format, design, user interaction
factors and give measurable benefit to the user. That said, the
ultimate results are implied through the user’s perceptual
understanding with the use of the new media devices. This
paper emphasizes Vygotsky’s work to the present-day use of
social tools; i.e. the interactive mobile technology devices. The
social tools; interface design - visual communications are
children’s perception and understandings of learning. The use
of the social tools also relate to the constructivism and
connectivism
over
humans
instructional
instruction
with
technologies. Therefore, this paper is also interested to examine
the link between these theoretical frameworks to Vygotsky’s
theory of children’s speech, play and the zone of proximal
development (ZPD) in learning. These fields are important to
be examined for children’s learning attainments with the
technological mediums.
Keywords-new media interface; visualization understanding;
social tools; Vygotsky’s theory; children’s speech; play and the
zone of proximal development.
I.
INTRODUCTION
This paper examines the relationship of sociocultural
activities, such as the use of social tools, to perception,
speech, play and social interactions to human learning. The
theory of social interactions, speech and the use of social
tools was originated by L. S. Vygotsky, (1930) [1]. Back in
1920s of the Soviet Union’s era, Vygotsky’s work for
children’s learning included the use of social tools, social
interaction, play and educational attainments. His works are
mentioned in the learning of theoretical and philosophical
related fields in the educational technology literature. The
literature
environments
of
children’s
behaviourism,
cognitivism, constructivism, connectivism and instructional
instruction and technologies have been presented in today’s
learning literature. This field has developed tremendously in
recent years as part of the social psychology literature
related
to
technology-based
learning
activity
and
methodology.
This paper emphasizes Vygotsky’s work to the present-
day use of social tools; i.e. the interactive mobile technology
devices. These social tools; interface design - visual
communications
are
children’s
perception
and
understandings of learning.
The use of these social tools
also relate to the constructivism and connectivism over
humans instructional instruction with technologies.
Therefore, this paper is also interested to examine the
link between these theoretical frameworks to Vygotsky’s
theory of children’s speech, play and the Zone of Proximal
Development (ZPD) in learning. These fields are important
to be examined for children’s learning attainments with the
technological mediums.
II.
THE STATE OF ART
The new media interfaces are the user-generated content
that is shared. The research on the new media is focused
now
on
collaboration,
connections,
emotion
and
communication [2]. Hence, the focus is on understandings
people’s
needs,
i.e.,
learners’
preferences,
likings,
techniques and the different requirements for learning and
support. Moreover, with the use of tablet PCs in the
classrooms, sharing of information and so on, children and
teachers collaborate in learning via wireless networking [3].
This paper focuses on these preferences which are still
lacking. The importance of the new media technology
devices is undeniable to the learners. The urges for this
paper
is
timely
in
upholding
the
notions
of
social
interactions theory of Vygotsky that learning is a concept of
guidance
and
interaction,
the
ZPD
concepts,
and
conversation and play.
III.
THE RESEARCH PROBLEM
The new media technological devices are the digital-age
social tools. The medium connects a human user to
electronic
information
of
any
kind.
The
new
media
interfaces are the visualization understandings that provide
text, layout, format, design, user interactions factors that
yield measurable benefit to the user. That said, the ultimate
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-342-1
CONTENT 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

results
are
implied
through
the
user’s
perceptual
understandings with the use of the new media devices.
Therefore, it is important that this paper stresses the
instruction of the interface design with the theory of
perception
and
speech
when
children
learn.
The
instructional requirements are the HCI (Human–Computer
Interactions) factors that contribute to the human cognitive
process involved and cognitive limitations. Besides, human
needs supply theories; interface designs, modelling tools,
guidance and methods that can lead to the design of better
interactive products [4]. Diana Laurillard [5], for example,
highlights the importance of the academic goal rather than
just imparting knowledge. A teacher’s skill of providing
knowledge is crucial, that is his or her higher aim for
learners to achieve the acquired knowledge.
The results show that learners are lacking on the subject
of specific experience, access needs, motives for learning,
expectations, prior experience and preferred approach, and
many more [6]. So far, research has been done so much on
the task performances, statistical software, etc. But, the
aspects on the accessibility and inclusion for learners-
centred approach to support individual needs are lacking.
This research stresses the considerations to learners are
underpinned over the interfaces usability, messages and
interpretations that contribute to children’s understandings
with the teachers help with speech, teaching guidance and
the use of the internet tools. The technological tools are such
as the interactive white boards, the wikis, the blogs and the
RSS feeds. These technological tools are the medium that
this generation has been upholding contentedly for their
knowledge. They acquire the new media like the ‘bread and
butter’ in gaining knowledge and other interests in almost
everything they do.
IV.
THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE STUDY
Learners’ perception, visual communications and new
media
The social contexts are important in determining how
technology might influence teaching and learning. This
statement is argued by Roy Pea, director of the SRI Center
for Technology in Learning in Menlo Park, California. The
technology is crucial to be used in understanding learning
must consider on the strategies that relate to the social
contexts. Special attention should be paid to the teaching
strategies used both "in" the software and "around it" in the
classroom, and to the classroom environment itself.
It is a recurrent finding that the effects of the best
software, visual message and narrative can be neutralized
through improper design, or use, in learning outcomes.
Learners and instructors’ speech
In mentioning the children’s learning achievements,
Vygotsky believes human speech is the most important
sign-using behaviour in children’s development. He claims
that children free themselves through speech from many of
the immediate difficulties that they are facing. With speech,
children are able to prepare, plan, order and control their
own behaviour as well as others for future activities (Cole,
et al., 1978) [7]. In an experiment, Vygotsky recorded that a
child achieved their goals just by using speech. A child’s
speech and actions go on simultaneously; thus, he or she
provides commentary after speaking about what they are
doing. The commentary describes how a child engages in a
number of initial acts, as well as mediated methods such as
asking questions to the people standing nearby them. At the
same time, the child solves his or her problems as their
speech reacts to their complex psychological functions of
perception, attention and social interaction. Hence, this
paper relates the children’s social interaction through the
‘external stimuli’ of the technological devices. Children use
the devices as their source of operating learning activity.
The child speech is an activity of their external activity that
develops their inner organization of thought from the new
media/technological devices.
The speech is the inner
organization of thought which stimulates, mediates and
regulates the child’s daily activity, including learning. In
turn, those thoughts mediate the meaningful signs of their
speech and actions. Speech and actions, Vygotsky claims,
mediate the child’s thinking to a much higher level of
intellectual. This means, the child is able to develop,
engage, respond and produce intellectually productive
learning, work in the classroom, house and society. He
asserts that the greater the child’s action, the more they rely
on speech. Vygotsky wrote:
“They are characterized by a new integration and
co-relation of their parts. The whole and its parts
develop parallel to each other and together. We
shall call the first structures elementary; they are
psychological
wholes,
conditioned
chiefly
by
biological determinants. The latter structures which
emerge in the process of cultural development are
called
higher
structures...
The
initial
stage
is
followed
by
that
first
structure’s
destruction,
reconstruction, and transition to the structures of the
higher type. Unlike the direct, reactive processes,
these latter structures are constructed on the basis
of the use of signs and tools; these new formations
unite
both
the
direct
and
indirect
means
of
adaptation” [8]. (Vygotsky, 1930)
Thus,
how
does
the
speech
relate
to
children’s
perception and visual communications then contributes to
their learning development? Vygotsky argued that the
higher psychological functions of human development are
such
as
perception,
attention,
speech;
sensory-motor
operations and memory will eventually form the unity of
children’s goals and adaptation. For example, his student, A.
R.
Luria
stated
that
the
unitary
functions
of
these
components
are
formed
during
each
individual’s
development and are dependent upon the social experiences
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-342-1
CONTENT 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

of interactions in the child’s environment and culture. Then,
the functional systems of an adult are shaped essentially by
his or her prior experiences as a child, as well as the social
aspects (Cole, et al., 1978) [9]. The basic functions are
integrated into new functional learning systems. At the same
time, the child’s higher psychological functions are not
being usurped by the basic processes. They represent a new
psychological system in the child that leads to their
intellectual understandings.
The role of Play in Children’s Development
Vygotsky claims that play advances the development of
a child. Play is important to children – they satisfy certain
needs in play by using their imaginations and acting out
their desires immediately. Vygotsky argued that children
perform as an adult character during play. They act out the
activities of their culture and rehearse any future roles and
values that they admire. Vygotsky explained [10]:
“The child sees one thing but acts differently in
relation to what he sees. Thus, a condition is reached
in which the child begins to act independently of what
he sees”. (Cole, et al., 1978, p. 97)
Vygotsky asserts here that everyday situations in a
child’s behaviour are the opposite of his behaviour in play.
He
claims
that
during
play,
a
child’s
actions
are
subordinated to meaning, but in real life, action dominates
meaning. In play, a child always behaves beyond his or her
age, above himself or herself. All children’s developmental
tendencies are condensed and contained in play. So, in play,
children’s development can be compared to instruction.
Vygotsky further claims that play provide a much wider
background
for
changes
in
needs
and
consciousness.
Children’s action in play is their imaginative sphere of the
world where they create the voluntary intentions, i.e. they
act as a doctor, a teacher or someone they looked-up to.
The
creation
of
voluntary
intentions
such
as
those
mentioned, could affect the formation of their future real-
life plans and desirable motives. Desirable motives are the
imagination of the roles that they play. For example,
children play with the doctor’s first aid kit, one of them acts
as a patient, and the doctor is looking after the patient, and
so on. Vygotsky claims that play, moves children forward
significantly and is the highest level of their preschool
development. Therefore, play is considered a leading
activity that determines the child’s development (Cole, et
al., 1978) [11].
Vygotsky argued that human activity transforms both
nature and society. During preschool and school years, the
conceptual abilities of children are stretched through play
and the use of their imagination. The play-development
relationship is not like an instruction - development
relationship. Play gives a broader background for changes in
needs and consciousness to children [12]. By the early age
of human development, they have already experienced the
tension between desires that can be fulfilled only in the
future and is something that demands immediate enjoyment.
Through play this contradiction is explored and temporarily
resolved. Here, Vygotsky places imagination as representing
a specifically human form of conscious activity. It arises
from the action in play.
V.
THE RESEARCH QUESTION
Our research question is focused on: 1. How do the
child’s perception, speech, play and the use of social tools
relate to their visualization understandings? 2. What type of
consideration
the adults/teachers should
look into
in
helping them?
This research deals with the approaches in helping
children visualization with new media by the adults; i.e.
teachers, parents, peers can help children’s learning. For
example, Vygotsky emphasised the role of learning in
facilitating and supporting people in society. In the societal
context, children’s learning and behaviour development
require interaction and support by their guardian, teacher,
more capable peers or parents. Interaction, engagement and
participation are the major factors that are critical for
children’s learning process. Children learn from teachers,
more capable peers or parents. Vygotsky included the
specification of the societal context in which the child’s
behaviour developed, such as children’s action or reaction
through their involvement with society that develops the
quality of humans and relationships.
VI.
THE RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
Research
has
shown
that
the
human-computer
interactions field has not been led to a specific textbook
[13]. Thus, teaching and learning instructional methodology
that put emphasis on the HCI and ZPD concepts in the
classrooms with the technological devices has yet been
pioneered. This paper proposes a few research questions that
help
underpin
the
research
contribution
to
children’s
learning.
Preece,
Rogers
and
Sharp
[14],
claim that
attention, perception and recognition, memory, reading,
speaking
and
listening,
problem-solving,
planning,
reasoning and decision-making learning are important.
These are the core cognitive aspects. Moreover, learners’
preferences are important to be recognised and examined.
Dagger, Wade and Conlan [15] discussed about learners
preferences such as different concerns, likings, techniques
and different needs for learning and support.
For
example,
this
paper
highlights
the
children’s
developmental process of perception, speech, play and the
use of social tools with the technological mediums relate to
the children’s perceptual understandings. A few case studies
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-342-1
CONTENT 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

will be examined based on the learning activity programs
that children and teacher have developed in the classrooms
in the European countries. A detail of the case studies will
be presented to show the documentation of the learning
activity concerning visual communications field studies.
This includes the principle and elements of the arts, i.e.,
colours,
lines,
space,
contrast,
etc.
The
methodology
includes observation, test, questionnaire and interview
sessions with school children. The targeted children are
between 10-15 years old.
This research proposes the adults, i.e. parents, teachers
and peers to help children’s learning. Children’s cognitive
development process, Vygotsky argued, is a process of
‘telescopes changes’. Telescope changes are observing the
process of children’s actions and reactions (Cole, et al.,
1978). Therefore, a special program for children’s learning
approach will be set to examine children’s learning styles in
the classrooms. At home, the task is for the parents to
monitor and record. Thus, the results of the teacher/parent
monitoring will be documented and examined to formulate
the outcomes. Vygotsky’s concept of ZPD emphasises the
various sociocultural structures and their impact on the
interactions between individuals, artefacts, technology and
environment. Vygotsky asserts that teaching is stimulated
by insightful development and subsequent learning. He
argues that teaching means providing advancement to the
learner, socially elaborated human knowledge and cognitive
development. Cognitive development is something for
which learners must put their own reflective and internal
strategies
to
work.
Vygotsky
named
the
“actual
developmental
levels”
which
characterise
mental
development retrospectively. Simply put, if a child can do
such-and –such independently it means the functions have
already matured in the child. And, the ZPD is the assistance
provided to the child when he or she cannot do such-and-
such independently.
VII.
THE CONTRIBUTION TO KNOWLEDGE
This research is about the perception, speech, and the
use of social tools in children’s development. Vygotsky's
research shows that there is a link of mediated activity in
between the goal and the reaction in children. He claims that
children’s
higher
psychological
processes
of
memory
require children’s reaction in order to produce something.
Vygotsky considers perception, attention and speech as the
children’s reaction. Thus, these functions help promote their
learning. With these functions, children produce action
reaching their goals. Vygotsky argued that through such
stimuli, a child would be able to see the immediate situation
and react upon it. Vygotsky describes it as ‘active human
intervention’ (Cole, et al., 1978) [16]. Vygotsky claims that
these supporting stimuli are for children a means of active
adaptation. The supporting stimuli are highly diverse and
include the tools of the child’s culture, the language of those
who relate to the child and the ingenious means produced by
the child himself, including the use of his own body (Cole,
et al., 1978) [12].
VIII.
CONCLUSION
As such, high levels of engagement can in turn affect the
cognitive
distribution
of
children’s
perception,
understanding and confidence for educational achievements.
Their attention, inquisitiveness and reflection are developed
in this context. The arguments have sustained many of the
examples made by scholars of social interaction - using
intellectual development as
the factors of stimuli in
children’s cognitive growth. Vygotsky uses the example of
play
by poor
children
who
do
not
have
access
to
manufactured toys but whom, nevertheless, are able to play
house, train, and so on with whatever resources are available
to them. Theoretical explorations of these activities in a
developmental context are a recurrent theme of this thesis.
Similarly, cognitive development in children’s perception,
understanding and confidence for learning should be looked
into.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
I wish to acknowledge my appreciation to the dean of MIIT,
Prof. Dr. Roslan Ismail, the University of Kuala Lumpur President
Prof. Dato’ Dr. Mazliham Mohd Su’ud and the staff of UniKL for
their help and support.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Cole, V. John-Steiner, S. Scribner, and E. Souberman, “L.S.
Vygotsky,
Mind
in
Society:
the
development
of
higher
psychological processes”, Cambridge MA: Harvard University
Press, London, England, 1978.
[2] L. Jonathan, J. Feng, and H. Hochheiser, “Research Methods in
Human – Computer Interaction”, John Wiley & Sons Ltd, 2010.
[3] D. Dagger, V. Wade, and O.
Conlan, “Personalization for all:
making adaptive course composition easy”, Educational Technology
and Society: Special Issue on Authoring of Adaptive Hypermedia, 8
(3), pp. 9-25, 2005
[4] J. Preece, Y. Rogers, and H. Sharp, “Interaction Design: Beyond
Human Computer Interaction”, John Wiley & Sons, 2002.
[5] D. Laurillard, “Rethinking University Teaching – A framework for
the effective use of learning technologies”, 2nd edition, London:
Routledge/Falmer, 2008.
[6] H. Beetham and R. Sharpe “Rethinking Pedagogic for a Digital Age,
Designing and Delivering e-learning, an Introduction to Rethinking
Pedagogy”, Routledge Taylor & Francis Group, London and New
York, 2007.
[7] M. Cole, V. John-Steiner, S. Scribner and E. Souberman, “L.S.
Vygotsky,
Mind
in
Society:
the
development
of
higher
psychological processes”, Cambridge MA: Harvard University
Press, London, England, 1978.
[8] Ibid, pp. 102.
[9] Ibid, pp. 19-30.
[10] Ibid, pp. 97.
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-342-1
CONTENT 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

[11] Ibid, pp. 92-104.
[12] Ibid, pp. 38-51
[13] L. Jonathan, J. Feng, and H. Hochheiser, “Research Methods in
Human – Computer Interaction”, John Wiley & Sons Ltd, 2010.
[14] J. Preece, Y. Rogers, H. Sharp, “Interaction Design: Beyond
Human Computer Interaction”, John Wiley & Sons, 2002.
[15] D. Dagger, V. Wade and O.
Conlan, “Personalization for all:
making
adaptive
course
composition
easy”,
Educational
Technology and Society: Special Issue on Authoring of Adaptive
Hypermedia, 8 (3), pp. 9-25, 2005
[16] This passage is from the unedited translation of “Tool and
Symbol”,
1978.
“L.S.
Vygotsky,
Mind
in
Society:
the
development of higher psychological processes”, edited by M.
Cole, V. John-Steiner, S. Scribner and E. Souberman, Cambridge
MA: Harvard University Press; London, England, 1978.
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-342-1
CONTENT 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

