Future Illustrative and Participative Urban Planning 
Developing Concepts for Co-creation 
Virpi Oksman, Antti Väätänen, Mari Ylikauppila 
VTT Technology Centre of Finland 
Tampere, Finland 
e-mails: {virpi.oksman, antti.vaatanen, mari.ylikauppila}@vtt.fi 
 
 
Abstract – The starting point of this paper is to develop and 
experiment with new participatory web-based design services 
to visualize future urban environments with mixed reality and 
other content technologies. We have created new visualizations 
and virtual environments by mixing panoramic imaging and 
architectural drawings of future urban plans. In order to 
involve citizens in urban planning projects, we have also 
implemented user-centred interactions such as questionnaires 
and commenting tools. In this paper, we discuss how new visual 
web-based service concepts using mixed reality technologies 
can be used for future participatory urban planning. To ensure 
political, economic and social relevance of the developed urban 
planning service concepts, we have conducted an interview 
study that clarifies qualitatively, how political decision-makers 
and other stakeholders perceive the new digital concepts. In 
addition, we have piloted our participative urban planning 
demo with users. In the political decision-making processes, the 
new tools were expected to bring certainty and eliminate 
uncertainty. New participatory design tools for urban planning 
should also be efficient at collecting and processing user 
feedback and other data. 
Keywords-visualization; 3D graphics; urban planning; 
panoramic imaging; co-creation; participatory design 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In recent years, many cities and communities have started 
to pay attention to openness and transparency of decision-
making for citizens. For instance, when planning new 
important urban environments, such as public buildings, 
energy systems and traffic solutions, different kinds of 
collaborative workshops are organized for residents to share 
information on the plans and discuss their impact on the 
environment. Opening complex urban planning processes 
and using participatory design or open innovation tools can 
generate new ideas and change the decision-making to make 
it more interactive and integrate company representatives and 
citizens [1][2][3]. 
In this paper, we discuss how new visual web-based 
service concepts using mixed reality technologies can be 
used for participatory urban planning. With mixed reality we 
refer to the merging of real and virtual to produce new 
environments and visualizations. Our aim is to develop new 
mixed 
reality 
solutions 
to 
visualize 
future 
urban 
environments by, for instance, mixing panoramic imaging 
and architectural drawings and sketches of future city 
building projects. With these mixed reality services, we aim 
to make the plans more visual and understandable to different 
stakeholders. Our aim is to be able to visualize and discuss 
the impacts of future building projects and traffic solutions 
on their environment at the early stages. 
Recently several mixed reality technologies including 
smart phone augmented reality systems have been developed 
to open up and support stakeholders’ participation in urban 
planning 
[4][5][6][7][8]. 
However, 
mixed 
reality 
technologies for urban planning are often developed 
separately from web-based open innovation and advanced 
user interaction tools. Our aim is to develop these both under 
the same service so that up-to-date, visual information should 
be easy to find and leaving comments would be possible for 
citizens and other stakeholders. The developed service can be 
used to promote communication between stakeholders and 
make decision processes more efficient. By producing easy-
to-understand visualizations, it will be possible to view and 
compare alternative plans and involve citizens and other 
stakeholders in the planning of the ecology, functionality and 
quality of their living environments. In addition, we are 
interested in to find out, what kind of set of participatory 
concepts support co-creation and stakeholders’ participation 
in urban planning. In what kind of digital environments and 
public places they should be situated so that users will notice 
them? What kind of devices and interactive user-interface 
concepts support participation? 
As many new approaches and procedures demand 
political and social acceptance, in this paper, we will first 
explore 
qualitatively 
how 
political 
decision-makers, 
municipal officials and companies perceive new visual and 
participatory 
urban 
planning 
service 
concepts. 
We 
interviewed these stakeholders during 2013. The central 
theme in these interviews was how these new digital tools 
support decision-making processes and citizen participation 
in urban planning and how digital urban planning products 
and services should be developed. In addition, we have 
conducted preliminary user studies with participation in a 
small local community in Western Finland, where several 
environmental urban planning projects are taking place. 
These projects include, for instance, international airport area 
development, supplementary construction, green design and 
planning of noise barriers. Through interviews, queries, 
demos and case pilots we gained an understanding of how 
users perceived this kind of participatory mixed reality 
services in real urban planning projects and how to develop 
the service further for massive, large-scale participatory 
projects. 
This paper proceeds as follows. In Section II, we discuss 
the participatory approach to urban planning. In Section III, 
we describe our research setting. In Section IV, we present 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-342-1
CONTENT 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

the three different co-creation concepts to urban planning 
which were used in the interviews of political decision 
makers In Section V, we look over the feedback from 
political decision makers and other stakeholders. In Section 
VI, we present our participatory urban planning service 
demo. Section VII describes citizens’ feedback on 
participatory urban planning demo. Section VIII presents our 
conclusions regarding the role of participatory services in 
urban planning and we also discuss our future work. 
 
II. 
PARTICIPATORY APPROACH TO URBAN 
PLANNING 
In many research fields, such as human-centred design, 
marketing and service design, the emphasis on user 
involvement has shifted from treating customers, users and 
citizens only as passive research objects to taking them into 
the design process as active co-creators, thinkers and 
partners. This view has been given a different name and a 
slightly different emphasis in definitions. Two widely 
adopted perspectives have been participatory design and the 
user-centred approach. Participatory design has often been 
defined as a shift in attitude from designing for users to one 
of designing with users. However, it is quite difficult to draw 
the line between user-centred design processes and 
participatory experiences. Participatory design is not simply 
a method or set of methodologies but more of a mind-set and 
attitude to people. The belief is that all people have 
something to offer to the design process and that they can be 
both articulate and creative when given the appropriate tools 
with which to express themselves. Moreover, participatory 
design is an approach in which potential end-users have a 
critical role in the outcome [9][10]. 
According to service business research, organizations and 
companies can compete through co-creation, innovating 
value with customers or user communities instead of just 
doing things for customers [11]. 
In addition, service business is different from simply 
providing goods or products. In service business, the value 
comes, especially, from the ability to act in a manner that is 
beneficial to the other party. “Value is subjective and always 
ultimately determined by the beneficiary, who in turn is 
always a co-creator of value.” [11] 
In urban planning, reaching out and engaging citizens and 
other stakeholders in making plans is a cornerstone of good 
practice. Moreover, the collaboration between all the 
stakeholders in the process – citizens, planners and decision-
makers – is the context in which plans are made. The final 
outcome and plans emerge from the interaction between all 
the involved stakeholders. The Open innovation approach, 
which comes from the business strategy field, can therefore 
add valuable insights into service development and enrich a 
company’s or organization’s knowledge [12]. In addition, the 
crowdsourcing method can be used with web-based solutions 
to create the best solution when widespread experimentation 
and large-scale feedback is needed. Yet, attracting a diverse 
group of citizen participants can be challenging, since citizen 
involvement is often a leisure-time activity and competes 
with other ways of spending time. Developing new visual 
tools, such as smart-phone augmented reality for public 
participation in urban planning, can increase users’ 
willingness to participate in urban planning events. At least 
new AR visualisations can help people to visualise the 
intention of the design better than with traditional drawn 
plans [6][4]. Moreover, digitizing services and publishing 
them on-line makes them more visible to citizens and allows 
them to participate any time they want. Participatory services 
should, above all, provide a shared environment for 
productive, collaborative development [13]. 
Social media and social applications have been used for 
open innovation in land use and urban construction projects. 
A visualized map enables to collect citizens’ comments and 
development proposals. The growing knowledge and power 
of end users, sustainability requirements and financial 
restrictions create challenges for traditional urban planning 
methods. Many industry examples have demonstrated that 
open innovation and social media extend the traditional data 
with citizen participation feedback [14]. Web-based public 
participation and proper technologies can help to involve 
new groups of citizens in the planning process [15]. 
Participatory design approach in urban planning can use 
different set of technologies and methods to create a shared 
vision of an urban project. For instance a portable lab, called 
MT –Tent, using Mixed Reality has been used for 
participatory design on site [3]. 
All the above-discussed approaches – participatory 
design, user-centred approach, co-creation, open innovation 
and crowdsourcing – are relevant and add value to the 
development of our web-based participatory urban planning 
design service. However, it is still unclear how critical 
numbers of representative citizen groups can be encouraged 
to participate in urban planning and be motivated to make 
important contributions. 
In the next section, we will discuss in more detail our 
approach to participatory urban planning and how decision-
makers and other stakeholders can acquire these new service 
models and concepts. 
 
III. 
THE RESEARCH SETTING 
The aim of the interviews was to find out how local 
political decision-makers, municipal officials and companies 
perceive the need to develop current urban planning methods. 
The participating political decision-makers were members of 
environmental or technical boards with a central role in 
organizing services related to urban planning. The political 
decision-makers were selected from all the parties presented 
at these boards. We selected both genders, as well as 
experienced and new decision-makers who were in their first 
term on the Board of Governors. We also interviewed five 
companies, which represented building, architecture and 
visual Internet-based services. 
We used half-structured theme interview method to 
discuss and collect feedback from new digital visualization 
and participatory design tool concepts. The interviews took 
approximately two hours and they were taped and transcript. 
At the beginning of the interviews we discussed the recent 
urban planning practices and their challenges. 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-342-1
CONTENT 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

The central theme in these interviews was how these new 
digital tools and services should be developed to support 
decision-making processes and citizen participation in urban 
planning. 
In the interviews, we presented three future urban 
planning service concepts (described in Section IV). Our aim 
in the interviews was to place the urban planning concepts in 
order of importance so that we can choose the kinds of digital 
urban planning concepts that should be developed in the near 
future. The services should inspire users and arouse interest 
in developing better and more versatile living environments. 
We also aim, through visualizations, to produce better 
material for decision-making so that it will be possible to 
view and compare different options. 
Moreover, we conducted our first user pilot in a small 
local community in Western Finland. We wanted to ascertain 
how to support citizens and other stakeholders in involving 
them planning of the sustainability and quality of their living 
environments through digital services. We wanted to find out 
how our demo service suited this purpose, and how to 
develop it further, especially trying to understand user 
values, needs and preferences in participative urban planning. 
We first conducted a user study in a small village near the 
highway where a new noise barrier is planned to protect 
inhabitants from noise pollution. There are only town houses 
in this area, and residents of the village consisted mainly of 
families with children and older people. Our aim was to 
reach residents living near the noise barrier to respond to our 
inquiry, so we published an online questionnaire link in a 
municipal community web portal, community Facebook site 
and in a local newspaper. The query was available over a 
period of a few weeks in March and in April 2014. 
The questionnaire included both multiple choice and 
qualitative open-ended questions. The survey included basic 
background information questions, and focused on topics 
such as clarifying requirements for a future community 
planning, perceptions on visualisation and participation 
services, and most preferred places and information channels 
and devices for utilising a future participatory urban planning 
service. Users were also asked to try out the web-based pilot 
service, which mixed panoramic imaging and architectural 
drawings of the planned noise barrier near their homes. The 
demo illustrated noise barrier building stages and the area 
five and twenty years later. 
 
IV. 
THREE APPROACHES TO PRESENTING 
FUTURE URBAN PLANS  
In the beginning of the interviews, examples of three 
different ways of demonstrating future urban plans were 
introduced. The examples helped in figuring out the idea of 
new visual approaches to community planning and aimed to 
facilitate feedback and ideas related to the different 
approaches. Finally, the participants were asked to prioritize 
the three approaches and state reasons for their preference 
order. 
 
A. On-site mixed reality mobile tools 
We aimed to describe possibilities of visualizing urban 
planning solutions with smartphones and tablet devices. The 
idea is for users to be able to move around the surroundings 
under development and see merged virtual 3D objects and a 
camera view on a handheld device (Figure 1). The virtual 
building objects will be located in their intended locations. 
The demonstrated mobile mixed reality tool for architectural 
sites has been described and evaluated in earlier studies 
[4][5]. 
 
 
Figure 1. On-site augmented reality solution 
B. Interactive public screens 
The other presented approach was interactive public 
screens with mixed reality features (Figure 2). The screen 
shows 
areas 
under 
development, 
and 
new 
digital 
visualizations are embedded into the views. Users can 
manipulate the views and community plan options using their 
gestures or the touch screen input method. Gesture 
recognition would be implemented with the help of depth 
camera sensors. This kind of public screens can be located 
next to the area, in shopping centres or in municipal office 
buildings. 
 
 
Figure 2. Concept of an interactive public screen with AR features 
C. Off-site interactive design tables 
Thirdly, the users can explore urban planning solutions 
using interactive and multiuser design tables (Figure 3). The 
tables can be a combination of tangible objects or 3D printed 
building 
models, 
projected 
information 
and 
camera 
recognition systems. The users are able to browse different 
urban planning options or manipulate objects on a table, and 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-342-1
CONTENT 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

they can receive more information using, e.g., pointing, 
touching or gestures. 
Dalsgaard and Halskov have developed and studied a 
tangible 3D table-top system in which physical objects on a 
table can be recognized [7]. The same kind of table-top 
systems in urban planning include the Spatial Design Table 
and the Bionicle Table [8][16]. They both enable 3D 
visualizations showing how different buildings look in their 
environments. The user moves and indicates building options 
using AR markers on the table. 
 
 
Figure 3. Visualization on an interactive design table 
V. 
FEEDBACK FROM POLITICAL DECISION-
MAKERS 
Altogether, 13 political decision-makers and municipal 
officials took part in the interviews. All the interviewed 
decision-makers attached great importance to developing 
methods to illustrate urban plans and support citizen 
participation in future urban planning. According to the 
interviews, the recent urban planning approaches could be 
improved by paying more attention to the availability of 
information and inclusion of citizens at the right time in the 
urban planning processes. 
Recent participatory methods in urban planning projects 
cannot be applied to all citizens as such. For instance, public 
workshops are connected to a certain time and place, and 
busy working families and younger age groups, in particular, 
are often left out. Young segments have showed more 
interest in on-line surveys, but reaching younger age groups 
and getting them to become actively involved and to 
participate in urban planning presents a clear challenge. 
The interviewed politicians perceived the development of 
information processes and increasing awareness of on-going 
projects and statements as especially important so that all 
citizens would have the opportunity to obtain up-to-date 
information on important projects if they wanted to. The 
information on on-going urban planning projects is usually 
available on the city net portal or in paper format at the 
municipal office. However, not all citizens are capable of 
acquiring the necessary information. Participation requires 
personal interest, activity and information seeking to be 
possible. Versatile information channels can support 
information seeking, sharpen communication and lower the 
threshold for participation. 
Presenting alternative plans through visualizations would 
also be important, and plans that are too detailed and 
complete should be avoided. Overall, the proliferation of new 
technologies in participatory urban planning is affected by, 
among other things, the maturity of the technological 
solutions, implementation expenses, acceptability and ease of 
use. 
When citizens and other stakeholders are asked for 
feedback and comments on urban plans through, for instance, 
on-line surveys, the response material needs to be processed, 
analysed and reported carefully to urban planning officers, 
planners, decision-makers and citizens. Through on-line 
surveys, it is easy to access large populations. However, 
analysing large-scale survey material takes time, work and 
recourses. Processing large-scale material also demands good 
and suitable tools. 
Of the three presented technology approaches, the 
decision-makers appeared to prioritize lightweight, web-
based mobile solutions, which are suited to illustrating 
different alternative options in urban planning. Other 
presented solutions, such as the interactive design table and 
public screens, were also seen as viable in the long run. They 
were seen as suitable for large urban planning projects and as 
tools for both decision-makers and citizens. Public screens 
were seen as effective attention grabbers and information 
channels: they were considered a good way of spreading 
knowledge of urban planning projects. However, screens 
were seen as less suitable for collecting feedback and ideas 
from the general public. It was assumed that people would be 
hesitant to use a technical device that was for public use. The 
actual participation and feedback would happen via a 
personal mobile or other personal device, or in a more closed 
facility organized by the city or community. User interfaces 
that recognize gestures were seen as better suited to public 
spaces than touch screens. The interactive design table was 
thought suitable for concretizing urban plans by decision-
makers and active citizens who wanted to participate in urban 
planning. 
 
VI. 
PARTICIPATORY URBAN VISUALIZATION 
SERVICE: ILCO CITIES  
Based on the interview results and concept design 
outcomes, two demonstrators were developed. These ILCO 
Cities demonstrations illustrated different community plans. 
Encouraging residents and other stakeholders to 
participate in urban planning is a fruitful approach in many 
ways. When the architectural sketches are presented in 
illustrative and visual ways, the projects are especially likely 
to proceed fluently with fewer complaints to slow down the 
processes. When possible problems can be detected at an 
early stage and costly changes avoided, the final outcome of 
the urban planning is usually of better quality. 
The stakeholders in urban planning and the users of the 
new community planning approach can be categorized into 
three groups: 1) decision-makers, 2) companies, and 3) 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-342-1
CONTENT 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

citizens (Figure 4). Companies are counted as actors in the 
building industry, e.g., architectural and construction 
business. Local politicians and city officials are decision-
makers who prepare initial plans and processes of 
community 
development 
programmes 
and 
activities. 
Citizens can be called end-users of local community plans. 
They live and work in the planned environments. All these 
groups should have transparent, real-time and equal 
communication of commonly shared living environment 
design solutions. We have divided the process into three 
main areas that should be taken into account when creating 
and implementing the future community plan. The first 
phase is visualization. The citizens and decision-makers are 
not usually urban planning business professionals and do not 
have the capabilities to perceive 2D architectural community 
or building plans and conceive their effects on the 
surroundings. On the other hand, building industry actors 
need to have impressive, cost-effective and easy-to-use tools 
to represent their plans or ideas. The participation step 
should offer equal and real-time ways to analyse, prioritize 
and comment on plans. Citizens, in particular, need to be 
encouraged and motivated to give their feedback, which 
requires open information sharing via commonly used media 
channels and technologies. The final outcome, influence, 
meaning democratic decisions and diverse possibilities to 
affect plans, can be achieved. It may enable or demand 
changes to existing community plan processes. In an ideal 
case, this kind of advanced operational model can streamline 
ways to consider, effectively and transparently, the needs 
and feedback of different stakeholders, and in this case 
officials proceed faster in municipal decision phases. 
 
 
Figure 4. The ILCO Cities service model shows collaboration between 
different stakeholders in participatory urban planning processes 
Two ILCO Cities service demonstrators were developed 
to 
concretize 
the 
presented 
service 
concept. 
Both 
demonstrators are related to real on-going community 
planning cases in two municipalities in Finland. Technically, 
the demos run on web browsers of different devices such as 
tablet devices and PCs. 
First, the ILCO Cities demo included options for a new 
congregation building in a small municipality, Lempäälä in 
Western Finland (Figure 5). The original building was a flat 
single-layered white building from the 70s, and the future 
options included two modern, higher and multi-layered 
architectural plans. The users were able to investigate the 
following alternatives:  
• 
Current building  
• 
Building model with dark wooden walls and a 
copper roof 
• 
Building model with white plastered walls and a 
painted roof 
 
The building models are integrated into the panoramic 
images of the surroundings close to the congregation 
building and the user can change view freely in panoramic 
images. Overall, three panoramic images were taken and 
used in the demo. 
The users change building options by selecting the 
required model from the menu on the right (see Figure 5). 
Panoramic image viewpoints can be changed using the eye 
icons on the screen. Questionnaires are available on the left 
side, and the user can show or hide the on-line 
questionnaire. The existing congregation building is 
architecturally protected, and ILCO Cities aims to generate a 
discussion on alternatives for the current situation. 
 
 
Figure 5. ILCO Cities building options visualization 
The second, ILCO Cities demo visualized noise barrier 
plans between a highway and a field in Pirkkala 
municipality in Western Finland (Figure 6). The main goal 
of the demo is to illustrate the following phases of the 
upcoming work: 
• 
Recent surroundings  
• 
Drawings of noise barriers 
• 
Computer graphics of ready-made noise barriers 
• 
Situation after twenty years when plants such as 
trees have grown up 
 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-342-1
CONTENT 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

The panoramic views were taken from four locations 
around the planned noise barrier, and the user can change 
the viewpoints. 
 
 
Figure 6. ILCO Cities noise barrier plans illustration 
Questionnaires, a map and extra information on the noise 
barrier can be seen on the left side of the user interface. The 
user can also see the viewpoints and noise barrier drawings 
on the map. 
 
VII. CITIZENS’ FEEDBACK ON PARTICIPATORY 
URBAN PLANNING DEMO 
In all 25 respondents (12 males, 13 females) completed 
the questionnaire. Most of them belonged to the age group 
from 35 to 44 year olds. Their attitudes towards 
environment-related development activities were mainly very 
positive. 
Respondents were mainly interested in the projects that 
are linked to their neighbourhood area, somehow reflect their 
everyday lives or projects that are supposed to have large, 
revolutionary influences not only geographical but also at the 
societal level. At present the information of ongoing projects 
is sought mainly from municipal’s websites (76%) and from 
the local newspaper (80%), which both are listed as 
municipal official communication channels. Only three out 
of 25 have visited an official bureau or participated in an 
event organised by municipal to inform citizens about new 
projects. 
The results of the survey were very much in line with the 
issues discussed with decision makers. In open-ended 
questions urban planning information was complained of as 
being difficult to find, and the participation process is 
perceived as being too complex. Opportunities to interact and 
be heard were claimed to be very challenging. It was even 
said that citizens are given an opportunity to give their 
feedback, but that feedback is rarely really taken into 
consideration. Respondents demanded involvement at an 
earlier phase of the planning process, more alternative 
solutions to be compared, clear timetables and information 
on how the process is progressing. 
General attitude toward presented demonstration was 
very positive. The service was found to be interesting, useful, 
easy to use, and it was thought to bring something new into 
urban planning and citizen participation. Despite of positive 
attitude, a common concern related to new participatory 
methods used in urban planning was, how the results will be 
used and will there be a real impact. 
Participants were asked how the visualisation service 
succeeded in visualising the example case. Figure 7 indicates 
respondents’ 
feedback 
related 
to 
how 
well 
future 
visualization and participation tools are applicable for 
different 
municipalities’ 
environmental 
development 
domains. 
 
 
Figure 7. How well does the service suit different environment and 
sustainability projects? 
People are willing to search information and explore the 
material at home or other private premises. Public spaces 
such as shopping mall or railway station were seen the most 
unlikely contexts to take part in urban planning. Lack of 
privacy and office hours were mentioned as major barriers. 
Figure 8 shows more detailed, how users would like to have 
access to participatory urban planning service. They 
preferred mobile devices as a convenient way of using the 
services in local environments. However, users reflected that 
they would be quite unlikely to use it from a municipal 
service point and also municipal public events and notices in 
public transport were quite uncertain or unlikely places to 
access and use these services. In open-ended questions, 
users reflected that it would be problematic to give their 
opinions in such public places, if they wanted to maintain 
their privacy. 
 
 
Figure 8.  Where would users like to have an access to participatory urban 
planning service? 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-342-1
CONTENT 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

 
VIII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we have discussed how new visual web-
based service concepts using mixed reality technologies can 
be used for participatory urban planning and co-creation of 
future living environments with different stakeholders. The 
new tools were expected to bring certainty and eliminate 
uncertainty 
in 
the 
decision-making 
processes. 
The 
interviewed decision-makers reflected that they often receive 
urban plans that are too prepared just to accept or reject. 
They wanted real team play instead and more open 
discussions with different stakeholders. Illustrating and 
visualizing urban plans was thought to enhance the quality of 
the 
decision-making 
materials. 
The 
new 
web-based 
visualization services were seen as furthering the perception 
of entireties, complex dimensions, measures and impacts, 
which were seen as difficult to figure out at present. The new 
tools were expected to make it possible to illustrate and 
compare different options and their direct and indirect 
impacts on the environment. In addition, they would offer 
users the option to give feedback and share their ideas at any 
time of the day they wanted. This would be useful, especially 
in trying to target younger age groups that rarely participate 
in workshops organized by communities. 
A good option to demonstrate future urban plans to 
different stakeholders is lightweight mobile solutions, which 
can be taken to different places and situations at any time and 
used to illustrate alternatives. More demanding approaches, 
such as interactive design tables could also be useful, 
especially for large urban planning projects. They were seen 
as suitable co-creation tools for decision-makers and active 
citizens. The public display boards were seen as effective 
marketing methods for new urban plans. However, as long as 
the system is located in a public place and close to people 
flows, it will have an effect on participation by shy or 
privacy-oriented people. The actual participation, e.g., 
responding to surveys, sharing ideas and feedback, would 
happen most conveniently with a personal mobile or other 
personal device. Citizens in general are interested in 
commenting on and participating in urban planning projects, 
which are related to their everyday lives and their own 
neighbourhood. New participatory design tools for urban 
planning should also be efficient at collecting and processing 
user feedback and other data. Currently, data processing and 
analysis of surveys take a large amount of resources. 
Afterwards, citizens should be informed, for instance, that 
answering the survey was useful and that their feedback has 
been taking into consideration in the urban planning. There 
are currently no proper tools for this.  
However, there are many open questions regarding the 
development of visual, web-based participatory design tools. 
What kind of things do citizens want to comment on and 
influence in their living environments? What kind of public 
projects 
arouse 
interest? 
Are 
citizens 
interested 
in 
commenting on renewable energy solutions such as the 
placement of solar panels on public buildings? How can 
these new tools be used for sustainable urban planning? 
Should comments and feedback be collected from all 
possible user segments or mainly or only from the users who 
are involved in the project in their everyday lives? 
In the near future, the ILCO Cities demonstrators will be 
piloted and used to involve citizens in large-scale urban 
planning projects. We will proceed to end-user trials in real 
use situations and compare the way citizens and other 
stakeholders perceive the demonstration system. The piloting 
phase will also provide an opportunity to analyse differences 
between 
on-site 
and 
off-site 
utilization 
approaches. 
Technically, the system could be developed to be more 
location- and augmented-reality-oriented, which means that 
the architectural 3D models could be automatically adapted 
to the real-time camera views. The objects on the screen 
could also be interactive, and users could add comments or 
fill out questionnaires by selecting preferred design solutions 
in the view. Moreover, land use planning projects are often 
so complex and extensive that using new participatory tools 
would probably not always impact on their length but on the 
quality of planning. Digitizing information and increasing 
on-line channels are the most powerful way to facilitate 
access to information and make the recent closed urban 
planning processes more open and participative. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
M. Arnold and V. Barth, “Open Innovation in Urban Energy 
Systems,” Energy Efficiency, vol 5, no. 3, pp. 351-364, Aug. 2012, 
doi:10.1007/s12053-011-9142-6. 
[2] 
J. Noujua & L. Soudunsaari, L.,and H.-L. Lentilä, “Boosting Web-
based Public Participation in Urban Planning with a Group of Key 
Stakeholders”, 11th Biennial Participatory Design Conference (PDC 
'10), IXDA, Dec. 2010, pp. 239-242, ISBN: 978-1-4503-0131-2. 
[3] 
I. Wagner, M. Basile, L. Ehrenstrasser, V. Maquil, J-J. Terrin and M. 
Wagner, “Supporting Community Engagement in the City: Urban 
Planning in the MR-Tent”, Fourth International Conference on 
Communities and Technologies (C&T '09), Penn State University, 
Jun. 2009, pp. 185-194, ISBN: 978-1-60558-713-4. 
[4] 
T. Olsson. A. Savisalo  M. Hakkarainen, and  C. Woodward, “User 
Evaluation of Mobile Augmented Reality in Architecture”, eWork and 
eBusiness 
in 
Architecture, 
Engineering 
and 
Construction, 
G.Gudnason and R. Scherer, Eds. Taylor & Francis Group, London, 
pp. 733–740, 2012. 
[5] 
C. Woodward and M. Hakkarainen M, “Mobile Mixed Reality System 
for Architectural and Construction Site Visualization”, Augmented 
reality – Some Emerging Application Areas, A. Yeh Ching Nee (Ed.), 
InTech, Dec. 2011, ISBN 978-953-307-422-1. 
[6] 
M. Allen, H. Regenbrecht, and M. Abbot,”Smart-Phone Augmented 
Reality for Public Participation in Urban Planning”, The 23rd 
Australian Computer-Human Interaction Conference (OzCHI ’11), 
ACM, Dec 2011, pp. 11-20. ISBN: 978-1-4503-1090-1. 
[7] 
P. Dalsgaard and K. Halskov, “Tangible 3D Tabletops: Combining 
Tabletop Interaction and 3D Projection”, 7th Nordic Conference on 
Human-Computer Interaction: Making Sense Through Design 
(NordiCHI’12), ACM, Oct. 2012, pp. 109–118, ISBN: 978-1-4503-
1482-4. 
[8] 
H. Ishii, E.  Ben-Joseph, J. Underkoffler, L. Yeung, D. Chak, Z. 
Kanji, B. Piper, E., E. Ben-Joseph, and L. Yeung, Z. Kanji, 
“Augmented Urban Planning Workbench: Overlaying Drawings, 
Physical Models and Digital Simulation”, International Symposium 
on Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR’02), IEEE Computer 
Society, 2002, pp. 203 – 211, doi: 10.1109/ISMAR.2002.1115090.  
[9] 
E. 
Sanders, 
“From 
User-centered 
to 
Participatory 
Design 
Approaches”, Design and the Social Sciences, Making Connections, J. 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-342-1
CONTENT 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

Frascara (Ed.), CRC Press, 2002, pp. 1–8, eBook ISBN: 978-0-203-
30130-2. 
[10] D. Schuler and A. Namioka, “A Participatory Design: Principles and 
Practices”, Routledge, 1993. 
[11] R. Lush, S.Vargo and M. O’Brien, “Competing through Services: 
Insights from Service-dominant Logic”, Journal of Retailing, Elsevier, 
vol. 83, nro. 1, 2007, pp. 5–18, doi:10.1016/j.jretai.2006.10.002. 
[12] E. Selzer and D. Mahmoudi, “Citizen Participation, Open Innovation 
and Crowdsourcing: Challenges and Opportunities for Planning”, 
Journal of Planning Literature, 2012, vol. 28, nro. 1, pp.  3-18, 
10.1177/0885412212469112. 
[13] C. Skelton, M. Koplin, and V. Cipolla, “Massively Participatory 
Urban Planning and Design Tools and Process: the Betaville Project”, 
12th Annual International Digital Government Research Conference: 
Digital Government Innovation in Challenging Times, ACM, Jun. 
2011, pp. 355-358, ISBN: 978-1-4503-0762-8. 
[14] J. Porkka, N. Jung, J. Päivänen, P. Jäväjä, and S. Suwal, “Role of 
Social Media in the Development of Land Use and Building 
Projects”, EC PPM Conference proceedings, 2012, pp. 847-854.  
[15] J. Noujua, “WebMapMedia: A Map-based Web Application for 
Facilitating Participation in Spatial Planning”, Multimedia Systems, 
2010, vol. 16, nro. 1, pp. 3-21, Online ISSN: 1432-1882. 
[16] R. Nielsen.J. Fritsch, J., K. Halskov, and M. Brynskov. 2009. “Out of 
the Box – Exploring the Richness of Children’s Use of an Interactive 
Table”, 8th International Conference on Interaction Design and 
Children (IDC), ACM, Jun. 2009, pp. 61-69, ISBN: 978-1-60558-
395-2.  
 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-342-1
CONTENT 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

