VASCO - Mastering the Shoals of Value Stream Mapping
Ren´e Berndt, Nelson Silva, Christian Caldera,
Ulrich Krispel, Eva Eggeling
Fraunhofer Austria Research GmbH
Visual Computing
Email: {rene.berndt, nelson.silva, christian.caldera
ulrich.krispel, eva.eggeling}@fraunhofer.at
Alexander Sunk, Thomas Edtmayr, Wilfried Sihn
Fraunhofer Austria Research GmbH
Production and Logistics Management
Email: {alexander.sunk, thomas.edtmayr, wilfried.sihn}
@fraunhofer.at
Dieter W. Fellner
Institute of ComputerGraphics and KnowledgeVisualization (CGV), TU Graz, Austria
GRIS, TU Darmstadt & Fraunhofer IGD, Darmstadt, Germany
Email: d.fellner@igd.fraunhofer.de
Abstract—Value stream mapping is a lean management method
for analyzing and optimizing a series of events for production
or services. Even today the ﬁrst step in value stream analysis -
the acquisition of the current state - is still created using pen &
paper by physically visiting the production place. We capture a
digital representation of how manufacturing processes look like
in reality. The manufacturing processes can be represented and
efﬁciently analyzed for future production planning by using a
meta description together with a dependency graph. With our
Value Stream Creator and explOrer (VASCO) we present a tool,
which contributes to all parts of value stream analysis - from data
acquisition, over planning, comparison with previous realities, up
to simulation of future possible states.
Keywords–Value stream mapping; lean management; content
authoring.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Value Stream Mapping (VSM) is an abstract lean manufac-
turing technique for optimizing the material and information
ﬂows from production up to the delivery of products to the
customers. Usually, this is done by drawing current and future
state maps by hand, allowing the optimization of production
by identifying bottlenecks and wastes. Figure 1 shows a typical
hand-drawn board template for data acquisition at the ”shop-
ﬂoor”. The concepts of VSM are usually represented by a set
of standard symbols, which got various properties attached.
Typical properties, e.g., for a VSM process (which represents a
production step like welding or assembly) include information
about the process time, scrap rate, workers involved in the
production, but can also contain data about published enhance-
ments of traditional VSM, e.g., space useage for production
and logistics, transport distance and transport time [1].
The history of designing process maps and ﬂowcharts to
represent the ﬂows of materials and information in a factory
can be traced at least back to 1915, where in a book by Charles
E. Knoeppel entitled ”Installing Efﬁciency Methods” we can
ﬁnd interesting graphical representations about the processes
and routings in a manufacturing plant [2].
Nowadays, value stream mapping with traditional pen &
paper method faces new challenges in practical utilization [3].
To prevent incorrect application, it is necessary to have com-
pany wide standards for drawing, data collection and analyzing
Figure 1. Typical hand-drawn VSM diagram created during a shop ﬂoor
acquisition in a production facility.
current state maps. Therefore, VASCO was established to close
this gap for enabling the planning of successful future state
value stream maps in a digital manner.
The next section will give an overview of the related work
and programs which inspired the creation of VASCO. Section 3
shows the main functionalities of VASCO, how VSM diagrams
are modelled within the system and and how the automatic
calculations are handled. The last section concludes our work
and will give an outlook of further features.
II.
RELATED WORK
VSM was originally developed as a method within the
Toyota Production System [4][5] and introduced as a distinct
methodology by Rother & Shook [6]. VSM is a simple, yet
very effective, method to gain a holistic overview of the con-
ditions of the value streams within a production environment.
Based on the analysis of the current state maps, ﬂow-oriented
future state maps are planned and implemented [6][7][8].
A value stream includes all activities, i.e. value adding,
non-value adding and supporting activities that are necessary
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-464-0
CONTENT 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

100.0 
%
100.0 
%
100.0 
%
100.0 
%
100.0 
%
100.0 
%
100.0 
%
100.0 
%
100.0 
%
100.0 
%
100 %
MES
ERP
Supplier
Customer
10.00_8.50_45.00
1
#LOp          0.0
Ran ge        5.00 fac tory days  
(fd)
Sto ck      460 0.0 par ts
Stamping
1
#POp          1.0
Lis t Shi ft m odel 
10.00_2.00_8.50_50.00
PT            1.0 s
2
#LOp          0.0
Ran ge        7.61 fac tory days  
(fd)
Sto ck      700 0.0 par ts
Welding 1
2
#POp          1.0
Lis t Shi ft m odel 
10.00_2.00_8.50_50.00
PT           39.0 s
3
#LOp          0.0
Ran ge        1.85 fac tory days  
(fd)
Sto ck      170 0.0 par ts
Welding 2
3
#POp          1.0
Lis t Shi ft m odel 
10.00_2.00_8.50_50.00
PT           46.0 s
4
#LOp          0.0
Ran ge        2.66 fac tory days  
(fd)
Sto ck      245 0.0 par ts
Assembly 1
4
#POp          1.0
Lis t Shi ft m odel 
10.00_2.00_8.50_50.00
PT           62.0 s
5
#LOp          0.0
Ran ge        2.00 fac tory days  
(fd)
Sto ck      184 0.0 par ts
Assembly 2
5
#POp          1.0
Lis t Shi ft m odel 
10.00_2.00_8.50_50.00
PT           40.0 s
6
#LOp          0.0
Ran ge        4.50 fac tory days  
(fd)
Sto ck      414 0.0 par ts
Shipping
6
#POp          0.0
Lis t Shi ft m odel 
10.00_2.00_8.50_50.00
PT           15.0 s
Daily Order
Daily Shipping
6 Wk Preview
1xWk Order
6 Wk Preview
1xDay Order
Flow Rate:
Advanced KPIs
---
Space Ratio / Flächenverhältnis (P/(P+L))
76
95
30
Production / Produktion
Logistics / Logistik
Buffer costs / Kapitalbindung in Lagerstufen
130
Transport distance / Transportweg
180
Costs  / Direkte Stückkosten
28.03
60
[€/part]
[€]
[%]
[m²]
[m²]
[m]
Transport time / Transportzeit
[s]
Flow Rate:
VASCO KPIs
---
Total number of employees / Anzahl Mitarbeiter ges. 106.1
105
1.1
Production / Produktion
Logistics / Logistik
Lead time / Durchlaufzeit
23.62
Processtime / Prozesszeit
3.38
Flow rate / Flussrate
0
Employee productivity / Mitarbeiterproduktivität
8.67
[%]
[fd]
[#/day]
[#/day]
[#/day]
[parts/pers.]
[min]
OBC
Process No.
Time [s]
1
ATT: 51,2 s
2
ATT: 60 s
3
ATT: 48,3 s
4
ATT: 60 s
5
ATT: 60 s
6
ATT: 60 s
5.00 fd
 
1 s
 
7.61 fd
 
39 s
 
1.85 fd
 
46 s
 
2.66 fd
 
62 s
 
2.00 fd
 
40 s
 
4.50 fd
 
15 s
 
LT: 23.6 fd
TPT: 203 s
Figure 2. A typical VSM diagram, describing the value chain in production from the supplier to the customer.
to create a product (or to render a service) and to make
it available to the customer. This includes the operational
processes, the ﬂow of material between the processes, all
control and steering activities and also the ﬂow of information
[3]. In order to assess possible improvement potential, VSM
considers, in particular, the entire process time (sum of time
of all production steps) compared with the overall lead time
(time from the customer ordering to the moment of delivery).
The greater the distinction between operating time and lead
time the higher the improvement potential [7].
Value stream simulation can be used in lean manufacturing
to support the optimization of production. It allows an early
stage insight into productivity, effectiveness and service level
without the need of creating very detailed and time consuming
simulation models. This means that a simulation in lean
management workshops can now be done by lean experts
instead of relying in simulation experts. Traditionally VSM
is a pen & paper tool that captures the state of the system
at the state it was drawn. Component based modeling divides
the simulation into a set of simulation blocks [9]. These blocks
can be used to create value stream maps that are generic and
reusable. In our application VASCO, we also support several
reusable blocks that allow the user to easily create value stream
diagrams that are reusable in a standardized way. By utilizing
standard simulation building blocks one can easily know the
state of the system under different circumstances allowing for
better decision making. Another important aspect of using
value stream maps and specially in a digital form, is that
the production and delivery processes are optimized from the
customers’ point of view [6].
VSM is also seen as a tool to show the outcomes in a
shorter period of time at minimal costs. The lean consultants
can now represent and capture the current state of the process
at a certain state and time and start projecting the future
proposed state of the value stream. Based on lean concepts
the two states can be simulated and key measurements are
assessed. These simulation results can easily demonstrate the
improvements [10]. In manufacturing, there are three types of
operations that are undertaken to represent a type of waste
that might occur: non-value adding, necessary but non-value
adding and value-adding operations [11]. The ﬁrst type is pure
waste with unnecessary actions that should be completely elim-
inated. The second type involves actions that are necessary but
might be wasteful. The third type are value-adding operations
representing processes that convert raw materials into ﬁnished
products.
The capture of information to a digital form is often not suf-
ﬁcient. From the point of view of using a digital tool to capture
the state of a process, there are several applications that can
be used and are available. However, in their paper, Shararah
et al. [9] introduce the Value Stream Map Simulator using
ExtendSim (VSMSx) as a powerful tool designed to facilitate
the implementation of lean manufacturing by simulating the
value stream map through standardized simulation building
blocks. The company Siemens created as part of their Product
Lifecycle Management - PLM product line, an optional ex-
tension library called Plant Simulation Value Stream Mapping
Library [12]. The company immediately reported productivity
increases by as much as 20 percent and improvements of 60
percent related with the reduction of inventories and cycle
time. Other beneﬁts such as investment risk reduction (through
early feasibility analysis capabilities), better line planning and
allocation and signiﬁcant increases in the resource utilization
were also highlighted. The capability of being able to deﬁne
what-if scenarios without disturbing existing production sys-
tems during the planning process is pointed as one of the most
important features of any VSM planning tool. Plant simulation
is also referred as an important feature of such systems,
because it facilitates the comprehension of complex production
systems and processes. Resource utilization, material ﬂows
and supply chains maybe therefore optimized. The question
of ”Why perform value stream mapping in Plant Simulation?”
is also debated in this technical report. Factors such as the
reduction of cost for data collection by reducing the number of
objects describing the processes (by utilizing pre-deﬁned logic
blocks) or the reduction in analysis effort through automated
analysis modules have an important role in deciding to use
VSM. In order highlight the dynamic effects (which remain
hidden in the static paper based mapping of the value chain),
a digital representation (through computer simulation) of the
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-464-0
CONTENT 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

value stream is required.
According to Nash & Poling [13], the value stream map-
ping has some disadvantages associated with it. It points to the
fact that originally, VSM did not include any signiﬁcant mon-
etary measure for value. It is the stakeholders responsibility to
determine determine which activity can be marked as value as
well as which activity can be marked as waste. The task of
decision-ﬁnding may take a lot of valuable time.
Another important challenge arises from the fact that there
is the need to not only capture data and information about
the processes and the information ﬂows involved, but also
it is beneﬁcial to have a digital representation of how these
processes look like in reality [14], in fact ultimately we would
like to achieve what is sometimes called ”The Digital Twin
Concept Model” [15]. Similarly, in our approach we are taking
the steps necessary to provide this type of vision. When we
analyze the current arrangement of an assembly line and we
capture this information on a VSM diagram (current state). At
a later stage we do not want to come back to the production
area to visual re-check the arrangement of machines, workers,
to discover how are the parts actually delivered and stored or to
know what are the space constrains to be able to describe and
demonstrate how the actual work of the existent implemented
processes is being performed. To have a better view of what
should be improved when preparing the future state VSM, it
is desirable that the new digital tool for the creation of VSMs
can allow the users to capture and then to ﬁnd annotations in
the form of pictures, videos or 3D representations of the past,
current and future reality of the production sites. Therefore,
every time a user is handling a VSM diagram, he will be able
at any step of the process to access these digital catalog of
the different processes, that are now linked to the VSM digital
representation.
A ﬁeld research on available standard software tools
showed a lack in possibility of detailed analysis. While some
tools just provide basic drawing aids for creating value stream
maps (e.g. Microsoft Visio [16]), other tools like iGrafx [17],
Plant Simulation [18] or SmartDraw [19] also support lead
time calculations and basic simulation. None of them considers
the availability of data in production lines, which is a big deal
nowadays in order to cope with all the complexity and achieve
transparency. Nevertheless, detailed analysis and transparency
of value streams are needed to reveal improvement potentials.
To address the challenges in mastering the increasing
complexity in the VSM data models, we are developing a
highly customizable tool for authoring and managing value
streams. The next section gives an insight on the key features
of VASCO.
III.
VASCO MAIN FUNCTIONALITES
VASCO is implemented as a Microsoft Visio Plugin. This
allows to reuse the drawing and connecting shapes functional-
ity already provided by Visio. A VASCO value stream diagram
can be combined with other shapes and features included by
Visio or other 3rd-party AddIns. One important aspect in the
design of the VASCO focuses on the user experience. Figure
3(a) shows the ribbon toolbar for VASCO. All available control
elements are optimized for the fast creation of VSM diagrams,
especially adding and positioning process or buffer symbol.
Typical repeating tasks are automated like the adding of serial
process/buffer symbols, where VASCO already connects the
(a) The Vasco ribbon which offers a support for fast generation of VSM
diagrams.
(b) Drawing a simple VSM.
Figure 3. With minimum user interaction the drawing process in Figure 3(b)
can be achieved with our Vasco toolbar shown in Figure 3(a)
two symbols using an internal ﬂow connector. The inserted
process/buffer stays selected, so that the user can immediately
use the commands ”Add serial process”/”Add serial buffer”
multiple times. Figure 3(b) shows how to create a VSM
diagram. From (1) to (4) using only mouse clicks - or if you
are on a touch device, then only 4 touch events are needed,
which is much faster then a hand-made drawing. Therefore, the
usual manual steps of transforming the hand-made drawings
into digital documents is now completely obsolete when using
VASCO.
A. Deﬁnition of VASCO symbols
As seen in ﬁgure 2 a value stream consists of a variety of
standardized shapes and information. VASCO adds properties
and the calculation logic to the VSM shapes to the main VSM
symbols:
Supplier
Customer
Process
1
#POp          0.0
List Shift model
PT            0.0 s
1
#LOp          0.0
Ran ge         NaN  fact ory days 
(fd)
Sto ck         NaN  part s
100 %
Figure 4. The standard VSM symbols (from left to right): Supplier,
Customer, Process, Buffer, External ﬂow, Internal ﬂow.
•
The supplier is the manufacturer which ships the
goods into the factory.
•
The customer is a company, merchant or another en-
tity who orders goods and requires them to be shipped
regularly. The customer determines the demand and
the resulting takt time, which is a key value driving
almost all calculations within a value stream.
•
The process is a step, which adds value to goods by
altering or modifying it.
•
The buffer is an intermediate step where the factory
goods are stored. This storage might be an input for
the next process, a general depot for delivering goods
to the customer or from the supplier.
•
The external ﬂow connects a supplier or a customer
with a buffer or a process.
•
The internal ﬂow connects buffers and processes with
each other. The main difference between an external
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-464-0
CONTENT 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

(a) The complete property model of the stamp-
ing process.
(b) Selected attributes of
the property model dis-
played below the process
symbol. 5(a).
Figure 5. The properties of the stamping process and how the process is
displayed on the VASCO sheet.
and an internal ﬂow is that a internal ﬂow might
connect a process with multiple buffers or processes.
This means that the internal ﬂow is augmented with a
property called material spreading which deﬁnes how
many percent of material spreads from one process or
buffer to their successors.
A valid value stream graph consists of one supplier at
the start, one or more customers at the end, one or multiple
processes, and zero or multiple buffers. Each of the processes
and buffers are connected with internal ﬂows and two external
ﬂows connecting the supplier and customer with the network.
B. Intelligent Symbols
One of the signiﬁcant features of VASCO is that all
symbols deﬁned in Section III-A, are fully customizable by
a conﬁguration ﬁle. This conﬁguration ﬁle deﬁnes which
properties are added to the symbol. These properties can be
classiﬁed into two major categories: manual input values or
calculated values. The manual values are entered by the user,
whereas the calculated values depend on a formula consisting
of manually entered or other calculated values. The formula
deﬁnition is also part of the conﬁguration ﬁle and can be
modiﬁed even at run-time.
For example, let’s have a process which drills a hole into
a plate. This process has two manual input values. The value
adding time which is the time period when the drill actually
drills the hole and the setup time. The setup time is the
time period needed for positioning the drill and the time the
assembly line needs to bring the plate into position. With these
two values in the process it is possible to add a third value,
the process time which automatically calculates the sum of the
setup time and the value adding time. This automatic calculated
value can be displayed on a databox in the process shape (see
Figure 5). If a value of these properties changes, all dependent
values are updated immediately (see Figure 5(a)).
One special case of calculated values is when the values
not only depend on the local process, like in the example
above, but also in other places from other symbols, like
the following processes. These special calculations are called
graph calculations. The graph calculations are also deﬁned
in the conﬁguration ﬁle, but require a complete value stream
graph in order to perform their calculations. For this, VASCO
has two different modes. The ﬁrst mode, is the design mode.
In this mode, the user can add processes, buffers and connect
them with each other. The calculations which are only local
are calculated in this mode. The second mode is the calculation
mode, where all graph calculations calculate their value. In this
mode it is not possible to add, remove or connect symbols with
each other.
To get a better picture about the calculation mode consider
a customer who requires 100 items. We have 3 processes which
are connected in series. Each process has a scrap rate of 10%.
Now each of the processes has to accommodate the scrap rate
of the following processes and produce more goods. That in the
end the customer gets his 100 items. Therefore, in our example
the ﬁrst process requires 139 items. This example can become
arbitrarily complex with parallel processes and the material
spreading in internal ﬂows. In the calculation mode all values
are live updated and displayed. So if the customer requests that
the factory delivers more items, it is then immediately visible
how many more raw material the ﬁrst process requires. This is
also the reason why it is not allowed to edit the path, remove
or add further processes during the calculation mode, as all
values would be invalid with a unﬁnished value stream graph.
When a user adds a new intelligent symbol to a diagram,
e.g., a buffer, this symbol becomes now automatically the
current selected symbol. This allows the automation of the
possible next choices for symbols that can be added to the
diagram (connected to the current symbol). In this way, when
the user looks to the application main toolbar, only symbols
that are possible to be connected to the previous symbol, are
available for a next drop in the diagram. When the user intent
is to connect two symbols, e.g., the user wants to connect a
buffer with a process, the user pre-selects these two symbols.
After this step, the application automatically highlights the
possible connections that can be added between the selected
symbols. The users reported that these methods signiﬁcantly
improve the productivity and the usability of our application
interface. These and other improvements will be the target of
future studies, where we will access the overall usability of
the tool and compare it with other existent VSM applications.
C. Key Performance Indicators and Data Lines
As referred in the related work section, an important
aspect in the analysis of VSM diagrams is the extraction and
automatic calculation of Key Performance Indicators (KPI).
Key performance indicators can be calculated local, e.g.,
for a single process (e.g. OEE rate) or buffer (e.g. local lead
time)
but also for the whole graph /value stream (e.g. total
lead time). These values are calculated automatically and are
visualized in several data lines below the drawn value stream.
As an example for the several supported data lines in VASCO,
the time line consisting of total process time and lead time is
shown in Figure 2.
When discussing with the main key holders (manufacturing
and production consultants or VSM and processes simulation
owners) involved in the event of capturing processes and
information ﬂows (as well as many other related information
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-464-0
CONTENT 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

Figure 6. The Comments plugin allows to annotate VSM symbol with
photos and videos taken from the camera of a tablet.
captured now in a digital form), one of the most desired fea-
tures is the capability of calculating improved business metrics.
These metrics allow the evaluation of factors that are critical
to the success of an organization. In our tool, we calculate and
present metrics that are related with human resources, costs,
performance and workload balancing management. These are
essential to the reduction of costs and to the improvement of
performance of processes and persons.
We present results to the users in a concise way through
resume maps in each step of the calculations procedures. This
is a realistic and simple way to digitally represent the past,
current and future reality inside all manufacturing sites.
D. Extensibility
One key-feature of VASCO is extensibility. While self
being an Microsoft Visio addin, it can be customized by
plugins itself. The basic version of VASCO is already shipped
with three plugins, extending the basic functionality of the tool:
•
Comment-Plugin VASCO was designed to make the
acquisition and calculation of a new value stream
easier and to replace the pen & paper acquisition.
With the pen & paper method it is always possible
to add different comments to the different symbols.
In order to give the VASCO user a similar feature
during the acquisition a comment plugin was created.
This comment plugin enhances every symbols on a
VASCO page with a comment tab (see Figure 6).
When we observed during the data acquisition process
that users sometimes only copied key ﬁgures from a
machine into this comment tab, we further enhanced
the comment-plugin with a snapshot ability. With this
snapshot ability the user doesn’t need to copy the
values himself. The user only has to take a snapshot
with the tablet. It is also possible to record a video
with the comment plugin. This can be done to record
different views of the machine or to record the voice of
the person who does the acquisition so that there is not
even the need to write textual facts in the comments
box.
•
KPI-Plugin The KPI-Plugin adds an additional visual
features (see Figure 7) to the Visio page. This shape
displays the key performance indicators of the factory
in a clear fashion. Once a VASCO graph is complete
Figure 7. The Key Performance Indicator giving an overview of the
operating numbers in the factory.
Figure 8. OBC showing the process time in relation to the takt time.
and VASCO itself is in calculation mode, the values
are calculated and automatically updated when a value
in the graph changes.
•
OBC-Plugin The operator balance chart (OBC) vi-
sualizes the total amount of work of each process
compared to the takt time. An OBC supports the
critical task of redistributing work elements among
operators. This is essential for minimizing the number
of operators needed by making the amount of work for
each operator very nearly equal to, but slightly less
than, takt time [20]. Figure 8 shows the OBC chart of
the given example.
E. Data Model and Calculations
This section describes the data model used in VASCO, and
discusses some implementation aspects of the evaluation.
1) Graph Structure: Naturally, the elements of a value
stream map can be represented using a graph structure. A
graph G = (N, E) consists of a set of nodes N together with
a binary relation E on the set. Each concept of a VSM (e.g.
a process or a ﬂow) is represented by a node n ∈ N in the
graph, connections between VSM concepts are represented by
a directed edge e ∈ E between the corresponding nodes.
Each node, or concept, contains a set of named properties.
These properties can either be set to a constant value, or can
be calculated from other properties.
2) Evaluation of Calculated Values: Our key observation
was that the dependencies of calculated values need to be
represented in the data model of the system for an efﬁcient
evaluation. Therefore, VASCO contains a second graph struc-
ture that represents the dependencies of calculated values. This
allows an efﬁcient re-evaluation if the user changes a property
value, as only dependent values will be recalculated.
A calculated value may depend on values from other
nodes in the graph, in this case the concrete dependency
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-464-0
CONTENT 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

Buffer
Flow
Property A
Process
Property A
Property A
Property B
Property B
Property B
Figure 9. The data model of VASCO captures the structure of the VSM
graph.
graph depends of the VSM neighborhood of the concept node
containing the calculated value, therefore changes in the VSM
graph structure also entail changes in the dependency graph.
An example of this graph structure can be seen in Figure 9.
In this example the connection between Buffer, Flow and
Process are shown with black dashed lines. Furthermore, the
dependencies of calculated Properties are represented by a
second graph (blue dotted lines), e.g. property A of Buffer
depends on property B of Flow and property A of Process.
VASCO contains a meta-representation of VSM objects and
the dependencies of their calculated properties such that the
dependency graph will be automatically created from the VSM
graph.
IV.
FUTURE WORK & CONCLUSION
With VASCO it is possible to use only one tool throughout
the complete work-ﬂow of value stream analysis. It dramat-
ically simpliﬁes the data acquisition at the shop-ﬂoor and
offers a large tool set for analyzing and improving the pro-
duction/logistic value chain.
Also the extraction of production metrics can be done at
any stage of the work-ﬂow creation, allowing the users to im-
mediately have calculations feedback about the impact of their
changes when designing future state maps. Lastly, by using our
tool the users can capture information along the entire value
stream analysis process, starting with visits to the production
sites, where the users can capture images and videos of the
working processes as side annotations, up to the creation of a
new diagram based on previous processes workﬂow states with
comparisons between multiple state realities of the existent
manufacturing processes, where the users can still access all
the annotated information about old and current manufacturing
processes.
Future work will concentrate on combining and integrating
VASCO with other professional simulation tools. This allows
to simulate various combinations and new arrangements for
the future state of the VSM. Another important aspect is the
integration of sustainability criteria within a VSM, that will
signiﬁcantly help manage and reduce the amount of waste,
resulting from the manufacturing processes. This will also
provide new metrics and KPI’s that help to capture each
company production reality in a digital way.
User experience is always a primal focus in all industrial
applications. We are planning experiments where the users will
perform fundamental tasks with our tool. With the help of an
eye tracker equipment, we will record data about the way users
perform their tasks and about their individual preferences.
It is our intention to assess how our tool is used in reality
by the ﬁnal users and to study its usability. We expect to be
able to use this data to improve the overall experience of the
users and as a way to boost the productivity of the users when
working with our tool.
REFERENCES
[1]
P. Kuhlang, T. Edtmayr, and W. Sihn, “Methodical approach to increase
productivity and reduce lead time in assembly and production-logistic
processes,” CIRP Journal of Manufacturing Science and Technology,
vol. 4, no. 1, 2011, pp. 24–32.
[2]
C. E. Knoeppel, Installing efﬁciency methods.
New York, The
Engineering Magazine, 1915.
[3]
A. J. D. Forno, F. A. Pereira, F. A. Forcellini, and L. M. Kipper,
“Value Stream Mapping: a study about the problems and challenges
found in the literature from the past 15 years about application of
Lean tools,” The International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing
Technology, vol. 72, no. 5-8, Feb. 2014, pp. 779–790.
[4]
T. Ohno, Toyota Production System: Beyond Large-Scale Production.
Productivity Press, Mar. 1988.
[5]
J. K. Liker, The Toyota Way: 14 Management Principles from the
World’s Greatest Manufacturer.
Munich: McGraw-Hill, 2004.
[6]
M. Rother and J. Shook, Learning to see: value stream mapping to add
value and eliminate muda. Cambridge: Lean Enterprise Institute, 2003.
[7]
K. Erlach, Wertstromdesign.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2010.
[8]
T. Klevers, Wertstrom-Mapping und Wertstrom-Design. Verschwendung
vermeiden - Wertsch¨opfung steigern, 1st ed.
Landsberg am Lech: mi-
Fachverlag, Jan. 2007.
[9]
M. Shararah, K. El-Kilany, and A. El-Sayed, “Component based mod-
eling and simulation of value stream mapping for lean production
systems,” Proc. of FAIM Conference, 2010, pp. 881–888.
[10]
M. Ravesh, “Conﬁrming lean transformation outcomes by using sim-
ulation,” Proceedings of the Asia Paciﬁc Industrial Engineering &
Management Systems Conference, 2012, pp. 1732–1736.
[11]
Y. Monden, Toyota Production System: An Integrated Approach to Just-
In-Time, 4th Edition.
CRC Press, 2012.
[12]
SIEMENS, “Tecnomatix plant simulation: Value stream mapping,”
SIEMENS, Tech. Rep., 2012.
[13]
M. A. Nash and S. R. Poling, Mapping the Total Value Stream: A
Comprehensive Guide for Production and Transactional Processes, 1st
Edition.
CRC Press, 2008.
[14]
T. Rohrlack. A bentley solution paper for automobile manufacturers:
The digital factory from concept to reality. [Online]. Available:
http://ftp2.bentley.com/dist/collateral/whitepaper/DFWhitepaper.pdf [re-
trieved: January, 2016]
[15]
M. Grieves. Digital twin: Manufacturing excellence through virtual
factory replication. LLC. (2014)
[16]
Microsoft Corporation, “Professional Flow Chart and Diagram Software
— Microsoft Visio,” www.visiotoolbox.com, 2016, [Online; retrieved:
January, 2016].
[17]
iGrafx, LLC, “iGrafx Flowcharter,” http://www.igrafx.com/, 2016, [On-
line; retrieved: January, 2016].
[18]
Cards PLM Solutions B.V., “Tecnomatix Plant Simulation,” http://www.
cardsplmsolutions.nl/en/plm-software/tecnomatix/plant-simulation-6,
2016, [Online; retrieved: January, 2016].
[19]
SmartDraw, LLC, “SmartDraw Value Stream Mapping,” http://www.
smartdraw.com/value-stream-map/, 2016, [Online; retrieved: January,
2016].
[20]
Lean Lexicon 5th Edition.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Lean Enterprise
Institute, Inc., 2010.
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-464-0
CONTENT 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

