Subjective Assessment of Face Photographs by Best-Worst Method 
How Contracdictive Factors are Evaluated When We See Images 
 
Kyosuke Shimada, Hirohisa Takeshita and Seiichi Gohshi 
Department of Informatics 
Kogakuin University 
Tokyo, Japan 
E-mail: em15009@ns.kogakuin.ac.jp, takeshita1312@gmail.com, gohshi@cc.kogakuin.ac.jp
 
 
Abstract— Human faces are commonly photographed. We 
know from experience that we are attracted to faces when we 
appreciate personal photographs. Therefore, it is clear that 
personal photographs have a different type of interest from 
landscape photographs in subjective assessment. Finding 
interesting aspects of such photographs can improve the 
conditions of taking photographs. These conditions provide a 
significant guideline for developing digital cameras that 
capture high-quality photographs. Investigation of interesting 
factors requires image assessment considering noise and 
resolution because those are the most important factors of 
image quality determining in the assessment. This study 
reports important factors of image quality assessment based on 
the investigation of processes assessed by resolution and noise 
on human face photographs. 
Keywords- Subjective assessment; Human face; Noise; 
Resolution. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
A. Background 
Imaging technology has enabled video equipment 
including digital cameras to capture high-resolution images 
in inferior lighting conditions and printed photographs of 
such images have been high quality. Luminance of images is 
determined by the sensitivity of the complementary metal-
oxide semiconductor (CMOS) image sensor [1] and lighting 
conditions. Resolution depends on the number of image 
sensors. The International Standards Organization (ISO) [2] 
number is an international standard for sensitivity of image 
sensors. Recent digital cameras can select a wide range of 
sensitivities from ISO 100 to ISO 6400 for taking images.  
The image quality is changed by setting the ISO sensitivity 
and the F-number in the same lighting condition. The F-
number affects the luminance of an image. The image 
quality differences due to setting fluctuations appear on 
images as resolution and noise. It is difficult to evaluate 
images taken with changing F-number and ISO sensitivity 
because the difference in the photographic quality is too 
small.  
The conditions for high quality are high-resolution and 
low-noise. Various noise reduction methods have been used 
to reduce noise. However, noise and resolution are 
contradictory factors because resolution decreases with 
reduction in noise. 
Noise is an essential issue for images because it degrades 
image quality. Even though sensitivity of imaging devices 
has dramatically improved in recent years, all images taken 
with imaging devices contain certain levels of noise.  
Resolution, which is a contradicting factor with relation to 
noise, is also an important element when assessing the image 
quality. Noise and resolution are composed with high 
frequency elements and it is impossible to divide them with 
digital signal processing. Due to this reason, we have to 
assess image quality in accordance with the balance of noise 
and resolution.  
There are two methods to assess image quality. They are 
objective assessments and subjective assessments. Although 
the objective assessment is reproducible and reliable, it is 
difficult to apply it to images with noise and high resolution. 
In contrast the subjective assessment is a practical method to 
assess image quality. However, the subjective assessment 
has not yet been applied to assess the image quality that has 
contradictory factors, noise and resolution. The subjective 
assessment comes with advantage of reproducibility. It can 
be guaranteed with statistical analysis. We have proposed the 
Best-Worst Method (BWM) to assess images that have high 
resolution and noise [6].   In this paper we propose BWM to 
assess human face photographs that have noise and high 
resolution. When we see an image, our attentions are 
automatically drawn to human faces. In this paper the 
assessment results based on our natural instinct are discussed.  
B. Previous work 
Digital cameras became a commodity and our daily lives 
are filled with digital images. In this environment, image 
assessment became an interested research field [3][4][5]. 
However, any study focusing on evaluation of printed 
photographs has yet to be reported. One study indicated that 
observers paid more attention to image quality marks [3] but 
the details of the evaluation were not shown. Therefore, 
image quality assessment for printed photographs must 
develop an evaluation method and investigate evaluation 
tendencies. 
In our previous study, subjective assessment BWM in 
still life photographs achieved a good result [6]. BWM can 
evaluate images of slight quality differences, but it is 
impossible to use typical subjective assessment methods on 
such images.  As an example of typical methods, the 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-464-0
CONTENT 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

normalization ranking method [7] is not reproducible 
because the quality difference of the images is too small. At 
another example, the Double-Stimulus Impairment Scale 
(DSIS) method [8], was used to evaluate slightly different 
images, but it is not a method for evaluating several images. 
Printed photographs of images taken with digital cameras are 
often compared to another. Therefore, the evaluation method 
requires considering the conditions, such as several images 
and slight differences. BWM in previous study performed 
well under these conditions. 
The results of our previous study also showed the 
effectiveness of BWM. Furthermore, the surveys found 
specific evaluation areas regarding noise and resolution. 
Noise was evaluated in a flat dark area.  Resolution was 
evaluated in an area of fine pattern. In addition it is possible 
to get reproducibility results when evaluable noise and 
resolution area exist separately in the same image. 
 In many cases people take personal images. Humans 
focus on the faces in these images. This property affects the 
processes of the image quality evaluation. However, the 
processes of such images have not been elucidated. The 
photographs of faces have the same properties as the 
photographs of still-life. In general, noise of images 
increases with ISO sensitivity increment and resolution 
increases with image sensors. In other words noise and 
resolution are the most important factors when assessing the 
quality of taken images. Evaluation of the image quality 
factors and the evaluated areas vary with the amount of noise. 
Therefore, subjective assessment must consider three things 
when human face images are evaluated.  The first one is to 
use images taken with varied ISO value. The second one is 
the investigative processes when evaluating noise and 
resolution. The last one is the usage of an experimental 
method such as BWM for evaluating images differences. 
This study investigates evaluation processes in human 
face images. Then subjective assessment using BWM will 
produce reproducible results for evaluation processes. 
This paper is organized, as follows. In Section 2, the 
subjective assessment materials, the evaluation method and 
the experiment procedures are explained.  In Section 3, the 
experiment results are presented. In Section 4, the results are 
analyzed and discussed. In Section 5, we conclude our report. 
II. SUBJECTIVE ASSESSMENT METHOD 
This section explains necesary elements of subjective 
asessment. The elements are experimental photographs, 
evaluation method, and experimental procedure. 
A. Photographs used 
The photographs for assessment are shown in Figures 1-4. 
These photographs were named Entrance, Side by Side, Two 
Rows and Group, respectively. The size of all photographs is 
297  ×210 mm (almost letter size) and they are printed with 
high resolution images of 4.048 ×  3,048 pixels. These 
images were taken with varied ISO values. The ISO values 
are ISO 100, 200, 400, 800, 1600, 3200, and 6400. The 
camera was operated in full auto-mode. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Entrance 
Figure 2.  Side by Side 
 
 
Figure 3.  Two Rows 
Figure 4.  Group 
B. BWM 
 
Firstly, observers select the highest and lowest quality 
images. These images are then disqualified. Then, the 
process is repeated on the remaining images until there is 
only one photograph left. Finally, the observers give higher 
and lower ranks to disqualified photographs, and give middle 
rank to the last selected photograph. 
C. Experimantal procedure 
 
Observers for this study are 21 men and women of 20 
years of age. The number of observers was set in accordance 
with 
International 
Telecommunication 
Union 
recommendation ITU-R BT.500-13 [8]. The observers 
evaluate the experimental photographs using the BWM and 
assign the quality ranks. The ranks are used to get evaluation 
scores.  Range of the scores is from 7 to 1 because the 
photographs of seven different ISO values are evaluated at 
one time. The larger scores mean higher quality. The ISO 
100 photograph of Figure 3 was excluded from the 
experimental photographs because it appeared to be severely 
degraded. Therefore, photographs of Figure 3 have the 
scores from 6 to 1 according to the image quality. 
 
Observers received a training session because this 
experiment targets people without any knowledge of images. 
The training session was used to explain noise and resolution. 
A still-life photograph that was not evaluated was used for 
descriptive 
purpose. 
Items 
of 
the 
description 
are 
determinable noise or resolution areas and strength of the 
factors. The observers were trained while looking at the still-
life photograph. The determinable noise areas and the non-
edge flat areas. In the description of the noise, the observers 
were explained to recognize the presence of noise in various 
areas of the photograph. In the description of the resolution 
the observer focused on fine-edged areas after that they 
were told that non-blurry areas were high resolution. 
This experiment focuses on evaluation process of face 
images. After the experiments observers were questioned 
about the areas in each image that were interesting in the 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-464-0
CONTENT 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

evaluation aspects. There were two main areas of interest. 
The first one was the observer’s ability to pick out the areas 
of each image, which were interesting in terms of evaluating 
the noise and the resolution. The other one was which areas 
in each photo the observers chose to focus on first. 
III. RESULTS OF EXPERIMENT 
Subjective assessment results are shown in Figures 5-8. 
Diamond points on the scale are the average of the scores 
and the bars are deviations. The horizontal axis shows the 
ISO values. The values of standard deviations are 
represented on the right-hand side of the diamond points. 
These figures indicate the quality differences in each image. 
In the Figures 5-8, the quality differences can be guaranteed 
statistically if there is not overlap of the bar between images. 
The statistical difference is explained by the probability 
density function regarding the normal distribution. The state 
without overlap of the bars represents the sufficiently small 
probability that the evaluation scores of each image are too 
similar. The probability is calculated by the probability 
density function. If the probability is sufficiently small, 
image quality difference is sufficiently significant. In Figures 
5-8, the images without the lowest ISO value indicated 
quality difference because there were no overlaps of the bars 
between them. Therefore, this experiment was in obtaining 
the quality differences. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Result of  Figure 1 
 
Figure 6.  Result of  Figure 2 
 
Figure 7.  Result of  Figure 3 
 
Figure 8.  Result of Figure 4 
TABLE I.  
INTERESTING AREAS IN TERMS OF NOISE AND RESOLUTION 
Name 
Noise 
Resolution 
Figure 1 
Wall of building, 
Cheek 
Hair, Outline of face 
Figure 2 
Cheek, Forehead 
Hair, Eye 
Figure 3 
Cheek, Forehead 
Hair, Eye 
Figure 4 
Curtain, Cheek 
Hair, Outline of face 
TABLE II.  
NUMBER OF PEOPLE INTERESTED IN THE FACE AREAS 
Name 
Noise(Unit: people) 
Resolution(unit: people) 
Figure 1 
12 
6 
Figure 2 
21 
14 
Figure 3 
21 
19 
Figure 4 
10 
9 
 
The results of questions regarding interesting areas are 
shown in Table 1 and 2. Table 1 represents the interesting 
areas for evaluation of noise and resolution. From the areas, 
specific features regarding evaluation of noise and resolution 
were acquired. The features of noise evaluation were that the 
areas which contained flat component. The resolution is 
evaluated fine-edges in each image. The flat areas are walls 
of building and cheeks. The fine-edged areas are hair, eye 
and outline of face. A few observers evaluated the areas 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-464-0
CONTENT 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

other than those listed in Table 1. These areas also had the 
same features. 
Table 2 shows number of the observers evaluating the 
face areas. A face has hair, cheeks, eyes, etc. The numbers 
were counted independently. The presence or absence of 
evaluation in the face areas is shown in Table 2. All 
observers evaluated noise in the face areas of Figure 2 and 3. 
However, Figures 1 and 4 were not evaluated in certain area. 
Therefore, in Figure 2 and 3 existence of the face evaluation 
was acquired. Although the experimental images had many 
differences of subject conditions, only Figures 2 and 3 have 
the common feature. The feature is the larger face than in 
Figures 1 and 4. 
The results regarding the first choice evaluating areas are 
shown as following. All observers selected the face areas for 
evaluating at first in Figures 1-4. This result was the same 
regardless of the areas chosen for evaluating the quality. 
 
The results regarding evaluation noise and resolution 
were acquired from the questions after the assessments. The 
results showed that noise becomes visible in the photographs 
over ISO 800. It was verified such evaluation according to 
the results that 20 observers evaluated noise in the images. 
IV. DISCUSSION 
The results are discussed to indicate effectiveness of 
BWM in this section. In addition they are analyzed to perfect 
the evaluation processes. 
A. Effectiveness of BWM 
The effectiveness of the BWM is shown by accurate and 
reproducible results. In Figures 5-8, the evaluation score 
decreases with increase of ISO value. It means that these 
experimental results are accurate. The accurate results prove 
that each photograph is given correct evaluation score. In 
order to verifying this method, we have to compare the 
experimental results with general image quality evaluations. 
In general, the images taken with high ISO value contain 
high levels of noise. Because the images with high levels of 
noise are low quality, the images of high ISO values should 
be evaluated at low scores. In Figures 5-8, these 
experimental results are consistent with the general image 
quality evaluations. Therefore, experiment of this study 
obtained accurate results. 
The reproducibility is the most important things in 
subjective assessments. In Figure 5-8, each mean of scores 
are separated beyond the deviations. It means that the 
subjective assessment results have high reproducibility. The 
images were taken at the same place with camera in auto-
mode. Only ISO values are different. Although some images 
looked similar, observers were able to assess them with 
reproducible results. It means that BWM can be applicable to 
the evaluation of images with slight different image quality. 
The similar assessments for still life with BWM were 
successful. The difference between still life photographs and 
personal one is just one thing whether the people were 
present in them. That difference is the interesting point when 
it comes to the observers watching the images. If there are 
men in the images, observers watch human faces. The first 
areas of focus strongly affect the assessment results. This is 
according to our experience. 
B. Variations of evaluation areas by face size 
Figures 2 and 3 were evaluated in face areas. These 
figures had larger face areas than Figures 1 and 4. Therefore, 
this section will show numerical values of face size to 
indicate a criterion of evaluation processes. In addition 
variation of the processes due to changing face size will be 
discussed.  
The size of face area was calculated to acquire numerical 
criterion in each figure. The size means the ratio of the face 
area to the entire image. The areas that were used for 
calculating are shown as square areas in Figure 9.  Width of 
the squares was decided according to the contour lines of 
cheeks. Height of the squares was selected by distance from 
the forehead to the chin. These face areas were named Area 
A, B, C, and D. Number of pixels of the each area was used 
for calculating the ratio. The calculating results of face size 
are shown in Table 3.  The ratio of Area A means that Figure 
1 contains the face areas of 1.0% size. The values of 
centimeter in Table 3 represent the size of face area in 
printed photographs. In case of Figure 1, actual size of 1.0% 
means area of 6.237 cm2 because the area of photograph in 
this experiment is 623.7 cm2. 
By these results, existences of face evaluation were 
shown in areas of 1.5% face size or more. Only Figures 2 
and 3 contained such face size. In experimental results, the 
figures were evaluated in face areas. Therefore, the numeric 
values are consistent with the experimental results. It means 
that the numeric value of necessary face size for evaluation is 
1.5% or more. 
 
Figure 9.  Cut face areas 
TABLE III.  
RATIO OF FACE AREA 
Name 
Ratio (%) 
Area (cm2) 
Printed Photograph  
(297  ×210 mm) 
100 
623.700 
Figure 1: Area A 
1.0 
6.237 
Figure 2: Area B 
1.5 
9.356 
Figure 3: Area C 
4.4 
27.443 
Figure 4: Area D 
0.4 
2.495 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-464-0
CONTENT 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

In other words the observers evaluate face areas if an image 
contains face size of 1.5% or more. The face size represents 
area of 9.356 cm2 in printed photographs. It means that face 
area of 9.356 cm2 in photographs are required for face 
evaluating. The size of 9.456 cm2 is area of approximately 
3.6 cm × 2.6 cm.  
C. Image quality factor by changing physical amount of 
noise 
 The experimental results showed that noise areas are 
evaluated in images above ISO 800. This section confirms 
the accuracy of these results by calculating a physical 
amount of noise in the evaluation area. 
In general, calculating noise requires flat areas of 
luminance, but it is difficult to find such areas in image. In 
this study, areas containing ramp of luminance were 
selected to compare noise amount with evaluation results. 
Actually, calculated results matched subjective scores. 
Figure 10 shows selected areas for noise calculation as the 
areas in the frames. These areas are 100 × 100 pixels and 
were selected based on experimental results.  
Noise amounts were calculated using (1) and (2) in each 
ISO value images. The noise amount was required as the 
decibel (dB) value that each ISO value compared to ISO 
100. The large dB value means that the image contains 
much noise. The equation to get the values is shown as 
following. 
MSEISO = 1
N2 ∑ ∑(YISO − AVEISO)2 
(1) 
ANSISO = 10 log MSEISO
MSE100
 
(2) 
There are two calculation processes. They are mean square 
error (MSE) and logarithm. The equation of MSE is shown 
in (1). MSE represents the differences between pixel values 
and mean of the values. The value of MSE is acquired in 
each ISO value. The dB value is calculated by MSE. The 
equation is shown in (2). 
The calculated noise results amounts are shown in Figure 
11-14. The horizontal and vertical axes represent the amount 
of noise and the means of evaluation scores respectively.  
ISO value is shown at the top of circle plots. The existence 
of noise evaluations in each image is shown by the calculated 
noise results amounts. Confirmation of the existence needs to 
refer to the relation between the evaluation scores and the 
noise amounts. In the calculated results if the amount of 
noise increases with decreasing evaluation score of the image, 
it indicates such images are evaluated by noise. The reason is 
that the amount of noise in the evaluation areas affects the 
evaluation scores. According to Figures 11-14, noise is 
major factor to determine the image quality over ISO 800. 
This result matches the observers comments after the 
assessments of Figures 1-4. In Figure 12, the score of ISO 
200 is higher than that of ISO 100. This is caused by the 
resolution. It means that noise levels of these photos were 
assessed similar, and that the resolution of the photo of ISO 
200 was evaluated higher than that of ISO 100.  
 
Figure 10.  Cut area to calculate noise level 
 
Figure 11.  Results of noise calculation: Figure 1 
 
Figure 12.  Results of noise calculation: Figure 2 
 
Figure 13.  Results of noise calculation: Figure 3 
 
Figure 14.  Results of noise calculation: Figure 4 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-464-0
CONTENT 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

 
Overall results of noise amount are discussed. The scatter 
points of ISO 800 or greater showed decreasing evaluation 
scores in accordance with increasing amounts of noise in all 
images. Furthermore, survey results regarding image quality 
factors required that ISO 800 or greater images are evaluated 
by noise. Therefore, these calculated results indicated that 
there is noise evaluation in ISO 800 or greater images. 
D. Overall evaluation by noise and resolution 
Resolution and noise are high frequency components that 
appear as texture or noise on images. It is extremely difficult 
to separate these components using signal processing. 
However, human vision can evaluate such images by 
separating them. The experiment of this study considered 
noise and resolution as the factors of image quality and 
investigated the evaluation processes of these components by 
human subjectivity. This section discusses how to evaluate 
noise and resolution in image quality assessment of human 
vision. 
Contradictory factors (noise/resolution) are evaluated in 
photographs with different ISO sensitivity value. The overall 
evaluation process is as follows. First, the observers try to 
evaluate noise in face area. If they cannot evaluate the face 
area, they evaluate noise in area other than face. Second, 
when they cannot evaluate noise, resolution of face area is 
evaluated. In the same way as the noise, if evaluation of 
resolution of face is impossible, the observers evaluate areas 
other than the face. In other words, if they cannot evaluate 
the face area, the evaluation is done in the area around the 
face. At evaluating time, noise is preferentially evaluated. 
V. CONCLUSION 
In this paper the subjective assessment for noise and 
resolution in photographs with human faces is proposed. It is 
our nature that we try to find human faces when we see an 
image. Because of this, observers try to evaluate the image 
quality in human face areas. However, it is not easy to 
evaluate the contradictive factors, noise and resolution in 
face areas. BWM was applied for observers to recognize the 
difference in noise levels and resolution. The BWM 
assessment results are theoretically analyzed and the 
statistical differences are obtained. BWM is effective when 
evaluating the contradictive factors and minor level 
differences. The following facts are also shown in our 
experiments.  Face areas in an image are initially evaluated. 
If the observers are not able to find image quality differences 
in the face areas, they shift their attention to the background 
in order to evaluate noise. In the evaluation, noise preceded 
the resolution. Furthermore this study indicated that the 
certain size of face area is required for the face evaluation. 
The optimal size is 1.5% or more of the entire image.  
The results in this paper could contribute to the future 
digital camera solutions. In the future it will become 
necessary to evaluate images with changing photography. 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Das, H. J. Mills, and S. Collins, “A wide dynamic range 
CMOS image sensor with the optimum photoresponse per 
pixel”, IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and 
Systems (ISCAS), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, May 15-18 2011, 
pp.1560-1563. 
[2] ISO 5800:197, “Photography – Colour negative films for still 
photography – Determination of ISO speed”, November. 
1984. 
[3] A. E. Boberg, “Subjective vs Objective Image Quality”, 
XVIIth ISPRS Congress Technical Commission 1: Primary 
Data Acquisition, August, 1992, pp.73-78. 
[4] Y. He, Y. Xuan, W. Chen, and X. Fu, “Subjective Image 
Quality Assessment: a Method Based on Signal Detection 
Theory”, IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man 
and Cybernetics, 2009(SMC 2009), San Antonio, USA, Oct. 
2009, pp.4915-4919. 
[5] R. K. Mantiuk, A. Tomaszewska, and R. Mantiuk, 
“Comparison of Four Subjective Methods for Image Quality 
Assessment”, COMPUTER GRAPHICS FORUM Volume 
31, August. 2012 pp.2478-2491. 
[6] H. Takeshita and S. Gohshi, “Subjective Assessment for 
Digital Images”, IEEJ International Workshop on Image 
Electronics and Visual Computing 2014 (IEVC2014), 
October 7-10 2014, 3C-3. 
[7] T. Fukuda and R. Fukuda, “Guide of Human Engineering: 
How to scientific sensibility”, 2009, pp.73-123.  
[8] ITU-R Recommendation BT.500-13,“Methodology for the 
subjective assessment of the quality of television pictures”, 
Jan.2012. 
[9] Digital Image Processing Compilation Committee, “Digital 
Image Processing”, CG-ARTS Society, 2004, pp.79-80. 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-464-0
CONTENT 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

