 
 
 
Development of an Interactive Puppet Show System 
 for the Hearing-Impaired People 
 
 
Ryohei Egusa 
Graduate School of Human Development and 
Environment 
Kobe University 
Kobe, Hyogo, Japan 
126d103d@stu.kobe-u.ac.jp
Kumiko Wada 
Master’s Degree Course 
Tama Art University 
Hachioji, Tokyo, Japan 
viscount-ff@hotmail.co.jp 
 
 
Miki Namatame 
Faculty of Industrial Technology 
Tsukuba University of Technology 
Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan 
miki@a.tsukuba-tech.ac.jp
 Fusako Kusunoki 
Department of Information Design 
Tama Art University 
Hachioji, Tokyo, Japan 
kusunoki@tamabi.ac.jp 
 
Hiroshi Mizoguchi 
Faculty of Science and Technology 
Tokyo University of Science 
Noda, Chiba, Japan 
hm@rs.noda.tsu.ac.jp 
 
Shigenori Inagaki 
Graduate School of Human Development and 
Environment 
Kobe University 
Kobe, Hyogo, Japan 
inagakis@ kobe-u.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract—In this study, we developed Interactive Puppet 
Theater. Interactive Puppet Theater is a puppet show 
system that is designed for appreciation by hearing-
impaired people. This system has two features to allow the 
hearing-impaired people to enjoy a puppet show. First, to 
ensure that aural information is conveyed, we project the 
dialogues (textual data) onto the background of the puppet 
show. Then, using Kinect, we allow the audience to 
participate in the story through physical movements. Thus, 
the audience is allowed to influence the story’s progression. 
Similar to gestures and sign language, physical movement is 
a relatively easy way for the hearing-impaired people to 
express themselves. Therefore, we aimed to create a system 
that would make it relatively easy for them to facilitate the 
progression of a story using means that they are most 
familiar with. We believe that these features will assist the 
hearing-impaired people in enjoying a puppet show. 
Keywords-Inclusive 
Design; 
Puppet 
Theater; 
Digital Storytelling; Interactive; Hearing-impaired 
People 
I. 
PURPOSE OF THIS STUDY 
The research field targeted at providing support for 
the hearing-impaired people has received growing 
attention in recent years [1-3]. In this study, we 
developed Interactive Puppet Theater (hereafter simply 
Puppet Theater). Puppet Theater is a puppet-show system 
meant for the hearing-impaired people. A normal puppet 
show is difficult for the hearing-impaired people to 
appreciate. This is because everything in a puppet show, 
from the dialogue to the narration and effects, relies on 
sound. 
To this end, we implemented two features in Puppet 
Theater so that the hearing-impaired people could easily 
watch and enjoy a puppet show. First, we projected the 
dialogue (textual data) on the background of the puppet 
show to supplement the aural information. Next, we 
added the feature for the audience to participate in the 
story by using physical movement. Egusa et al. [4] 
conducted a preliminary evaluation experiment using 
university students with normal hearing	 as subjects to 
evaluate the effectiveness of the audience with respect to 
participation in the story without any physical movement. 
In this paper, we describe in detail the feature to 
participation in Puppet Theater using physical movement． 
Physical movement is a relatively easy way for 
hearing-impaired people to express themselves. This is 
because, for many hearing-impaired people, the most 
common method of communication is that involving the 
use of language based on physical movements such as 
gestures. In addition, since communication using 
physical movement is a common practice, it would be 
easy for the hearing-impaired people to understand the 
situation by seeing other people’s physical movements. It 
can be expected that stress for the hearing-impaired 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-220-2
CONTENT 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

 
 
people would be lowered more easily through physical 
movement rather than through writing or speech. By 
using a range image sensor (Xbox360 Kinect sensor 
developed by Microsoft Corporation, i.e., Kinect sensor), 
the viewer can watch Puppet Theater presentation 
without having to worry about the operation of the 
terminal．By becoming a facilitator in the story, the 
viewer can actively participate in and thus enjoy the 
puppet show. Hence, we added the feature for the 
audience to participate in the story through physical 
movement. 
We can measure the physical movement of a person 
by using the Kinect sensor. Several studies have been 
conducted using a Kinect sensor, owing to its attractive 
advantage [5-6]. Its depth sensor is beneficial for Puppet 
Theater. The depth sensor can function accurately and 
capture a human body in a dimly lit room. This function 
is effectiveness for measuring the physical movement of 
a person during a performance of Puppet Theater. This 
can be attribute to the fact that it is necessary to keep the 
room dimly lit to be able to project the animation clearly. 
Moreover, the Kinect sensor can be reasonable to be 
installed with ease Puppet Theater. Therefore, we use the 
Kinect sensor to measure the physical movement of a 
person in Puppet Theater. 
II. 
PUPPET THEATER DESIGN 
A. System Configuration 
	 Puppet Theater takes the form of a paper puppet show. 
Figure 1 shows the framework of a basic Puppet Theater 
system. Flash animation is projected onto the background 
screen with a projector. Puppets are then manipulated in 
front of the screen. The stage is composed of a 180-inch 
screen, paper puppets, a short-focus projector, and a 
Kinect sensor. The Flash animation is operated through 
use of a notebook PC. Interference between the puppets 
and the background is avoided with the help of the short-
focus projector.  
Figure 2 shows the characters as puppets. Puppets are 
used for lending a sense of reality to the show a sense of 
reality, as it is believed that viewers are more likely to be 
interested in a story if the character “exists” in the real 
world. Furthermore, as puppets are relatively simple 
constructions, they can be easily handled by anyone. 
Figure 3 shows the system composition of the Kinect 
sensor. The notebook PC connected to the Kinect sensor 
is connected via a network to another notebook PC 
connected to a projector in order to reproduce Flash. The 
Kinect sensor and a physical operation are used for 
choosing a subsequent story. The Kinect sensor functions 
as a reader of the position and the gesture of a person’s 
hand.	 In order to select a story, one viewer is chosen 
from among the audience. This viewer then stands in a 
predetermined spot. The spot is located approximately    
Figure 1.  Framework of the system.   
Figure 2.  Puppets. 
Figure 3.  System composition of the Kinect sensor.  
2 meters in front of the Kinect sensor. Then the viewer 
points a palm toward the screen.  In response to the hand 
position detected by the Kinect sensor, the cursor moves 
in the background. To choose a story, the viewer 
performs a	 gesture to push the palm forward when the 
cursor is placed on an icon. 
B. Presentation of Dialogue 
All of the show’s dialogues are visually expressed 
through Flash animation. Since the area where the 
dialogue is displayed is transparent, the background  
 
 
 
 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-220-2
CONTENT 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

 
 
Figure 4.  Selection point of branches of the story. 
illustration is not masked. Performers can determine the 
timing of all the texts through a simple operation. 
C.  Participation in the Story through Physical 
Movement 
In Puppet Theater, the performers and the audience 
carry the story. During the puppet show, a scene from 
which the story branches is shown to the audience. 
Figure 4 shows an example of the scene presented to 
show the branches of the story. The relevant icons and 
the cursor are displayed on the screen. These icons are 
then used for choosing from multiple possible subsequent 
stories. If the viewer chooses a favorite icon, the story 
corresponding to that icon begins to develop. Through 
this approach, the viewers can not only appreciate the 
show in a unilateral way but also manipulate the story.  
The chosen individual then operates the cursor to 
choose a favorite icon from among the many options. 
When the cursor is placed on an icon, the icon’s 
animation begins to play. Figure 5 shows how the viewer 
chooses an icon. 
D. Contents 
The Puppet Theater system is composed of Flash 
animation and puppets. Therefore, in some cases we can 
change the animation’s content. The content adopted here 
was composed of five scenes corresponding to five tasks. 
First, as an introduction, the audience watches the scene 
in which water is drawn. Then, the various branching 
paths are displayed, presenting the remaining four 
choices. The viewer chooses his/her favorite from among 
the remaining scenes. Whenever the scene is over, the 
story returns to the branching point. The viewer then 
chooses the scene he or she wants to see next. After the 
viewer has seen all the available scenes, the ending of the 
story is initiated through the operation of a notebook PC. 
III. 
CONCLUSION & FUTURE WORK 
This paper demonstrates that the Puppet Theater is an 
effective aid for hearing-impaired people in enjoying 
Figure 5.  Attempting Kinect operation. 
experience of watching puppet shows. In the future, we 
intend to evaluate Puppet Theater in cooperation with the 
hearing-impaired people to determine the system’s 
effectiveness and to discuss any problems encountered. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This research was supported by JSPS the Grants-in-
Aid for Scientific Research (B) (No. 23300309). 
REFERENCES 
[1] Lee, S., Henderson, V., Hamilton, H., Starner, T., Brasher, 
H., and Hamilton, S., “A Gesture-Based American Sign 
Language Game for Deaf Children”, In Proceedings of 
CHI2005 Extended Abstract, Portland, Oregon, pp. 1589-
1592, April 2-7 2005. 
[2] Gentry, M. M., Chinn, K. M., and Moulton, R. D., 
“ Effectiveness of Multimedia Reading Materials When 
Used with Children Who Are Deaf”, American Annals of 
the Deaf , 149 2005, pp. 394-403. 
[3] Namatame, M., and K, Muneo., “Suitable Representations 
of Hyperlinks for Deaf Persons: An Eye-tracking Study”, 
In 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
10th 
International 
ACM 
SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and accessibility , 
Canada, Nova Scotia, Halifax, pp. 247-248, October 13-15 
2008. 
[4] Egusa, R., Wada, K., Namatame, M., Kusunoki, F., 
Mizoguchi, H., and Inagaki, S., “Learning Support System 
Based 
on 
Inclusive 
Design 
Method 
for 
Story 
Comprehension”, In Proceedings of the 35th Annual 
Meeting of JSSE, Japan, Tokyo, pp. 456-457, August 23-
25 2011. 
[5] Shotton, J., Fitzgibbon, A., Cook, M., Sharp, T., Finocchio, 
Mark., Moore, R., Kipman, A., and Blake, A., “Real-Time 
Human Pose Recognition in Parts from Single Depth 
Images”, In Proceedings of the 24th IEEE Conference on 
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, USA, Colorado 
Springs, pp. 1297-1304, June 20-25 2011. 
[6] Xu, D., Chen, Y., Wu, X., Ou, Y., and Xu, Y., “Integrated 
Approach 
of 
Skin-color 
Detection 
and 
Depth 
Informationfor 
Hand 
and 
Face 
Localization”, 
In 
Proceedings of the 2011 IEEE International Conference 
on Robotics and Biomimetics, Thailand, Phuket, pp.952-
956, December 7-11 2011. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-220-2
CONTENT 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

