Improving Large Image Viewing in the Crisis Management System SécuRéVi 
 
Mehdi Tahan, Jean Vareille, 
Laurent Nana 
Laboratoire des Sciences et 
Techniques de l’Information, de la 
Communication et de la 
Connaissance 
Brest, France  
e-mail: {Mehdi.Tahan, 
Jean.Vareille, 
Laurent.Nana}@univ-brest.fr
 
Olivier Danjean 
Inovadys 
Brest, France 
e-mail: 
Olivier.Danjean@inovadys.com
 
Hervé Mahoudo, Gilles Cloarec 
SDIS29 & EDF 
Brest, France 
e-mail: Herve.Mahoudo@sdis29.fr, 
Cloarec_Gilles@hotmail.com 
 
 
 
Abstract— This paper deals with the processing and 
integration of images in SécuRéVi platform, a crisis 
management system, with an emphasis on large images whose 
handling leads to specific difficulties. Indeed, in the domain of 
crisis management, images are key elements for understanding 
and taking proper decisions. Images of different nature (map, 
aerial view, 360 ° view, etc.) are helpful and adequate solutions 
that need to be provided in case of sinister. After describing the 
SécuRéVi platform, we shortly present its images processing 
approach and establish some design constraints and criteria 
for the development of a large image viewer. Then, we present 
our proposal for improving large image handling and its 
implementation in the SécuRéVi platform. The paper ends by 
conclusion and future works. 
Keywords-crisis management; image processing; large 
image; image segmentation 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Crisis management requires a good understanding of the 
sinister environment for adopting necessary attitudes for the 
resolution of incidents. Different prevention measures are 
provided for this purpose, such as emergency planning. 
The SécuRéVi [1] platform is inscribed in this process. It 
is based on the Global Safety Plan (GSP), which is a 
knowledge base aimed at gathering all the information 
needed by preventive approaches dedicated to crisis 
management. The understanding of a situation is a major 
challenge for crisis resolution and images are key elements 
for such understanding (like in geospatial imagery, scientific 
visualization or immersive application [2]). It is therefore 
important for a crisis management tool, to provide adequate 
solutions for images handling. In the context of crisis 
management, images can come from various sources (such 
as satellite [3], camera [4] or industrial plan) and are 
incorporated before or during crisis management. They are 
extracted from camera shots or shots assembling [5]. The 
size of the used images goes from tens to hundreds of 
millions of pixels. The image generation systems offer 
increasingly higher resolutions, but often, visualization tools 
do not allow their full restitution because the screen 
resolution is most often lower than that of camera sensors. 
Given the large size of images generated, the use of 
conventional tools quickly becomes problematic and they 
can't be used by any type of computer [6]. Therefore, we 
decided to develop a tool allowing a better use of these 
images. 
We start by describing the SécuRéVi Platform (section 
2). Then, we show the importance of images for crisis 
management and explain their handling in the SécuRéVi 
platform (section 3). Thereafter, we present our proposal for 
image processing and precise the key elements for a 
successful implementation (section 4). Afterwards, we 
describe the implementation of this process and its evolution 
to obtain better performance (section 5). Finally, we 
conclude and propose some lines of thought for future works 
(section 6). 
II. 
SÉCURÉVI PLATFORM 
The SécuRéVi Platform [7] is a platform dedicated to 
communication and understanding, as well as decision 
making and the workmanship (see Figure. 1). It allows 
different actors from various professions to communicate 
and collaborate for a crisis resolution. It is based on the GSP 
integrated into a Geographic Information System (GIS), as 
well as various sources of external data (measurement tools, 
camera, business oriented computer tools, etc.). 
The whole interacts with a monitoring and events 
forecasting 
system 
(accident, 
incident, 
etc.) 
with 
commitment of resources (staff and equipment) in which 
each object, event or staff, can index data (e.g., description 
sheet, procedure, user manual, etc.) . 
SécuRéVi allows an approach in both space and time. It 
provides real time monitoring which makes it possible to 
create recording for replays that will feed the "lessons 
learned" database associated (feedback). Finally, in the 
platform, a 2D world can be associated with a 3D world, and 
this makes it possible to go from the virtual world to the real 
world and inversely. 
SécuRéVi works with a standard computer which can be 
enriched with other tools (video projector, interactive 
whiteboard, etc.). 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-342-1
CONTENT 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

It is used during crisis management operations, during 
which the in-situ data and GSP allow a better understanding 
of the context. Any intervention concludes with a feedback 
that can enrich the knowledge base for future operations. 
Training will take advantage of the platform which makes it 
possible to use virtual information while maintaining 
realistic working framework. 
The initial concepts and methodologies of the SécuRéVi 
platform were developed at the Research and Development 
Expertise Service (Direction Expertise Recherche et 
Développement, DERD) of the Departmental Office of Fire 
and Rescue of Finistère (Service Départemental d'Incendie et 
de Secours du Finistère, SDIS29) by Colonel Hervé 
Mahoudo and engineer Gilles Cloarec of SDIS29, and 
engineer 
Olivier 
Danjean, 
head 
of 
the 
company 
INOVADYS. 
This platform is used by Colonel Hervé Mahoudo and 
Gilles Cloarec for courses offered at the National School of 
Firefighters Officers (ENSOSP, Ministry of Interior), in the 
following areas: 
 
Classified Installations for the Protection of the 
Environment 
 
Chemical hazards (internships RCH4) 
 
Emergency Planning [8], 
 
Crisis management. 
The platform and the concepts it includes are also the 
subject of education provided by Colonel Hervé Mahoudo 
and Gilles Cloarec, during courses at the University of 
Western Brittany (UBO), at the University of South Brittany 
(UBS), at the University of Bordeaux (in the QHSE field) 
and at the University of Rennes 2 (in master of GIS). 
On-site implementation consists in achieving the 
institution's 
GSP, 
installing 
tools 
for 
management, 
monitoring and forecasting of situations and deploying 
hardware interfaces. 
SécuRéVi 
constitutes 
a 
multidisciplinary 
and 
multiservice digital knowledge database for daily operations, 
training, intervention and communication. It is usable by the 
rescue operations commandant, the leader of internal 
operations, site safety manager, trainers and all other internal 
persons authorized by the company. 
In the next part, we show the importance of images for 
crisis management and explain their handling in the 
SécuRéVi platform. 
III. 
IMPORTANCE OF IMAGES IN CRISIS MANAGEMENT AND 
THEIR HANDLING IN SÉCURÉVI PLATFORM 
The decision making in crisis management needs 
different types and amount of information depending on the 
complexity of the situation. Usually, a rapid-mapping is the 
first task needed to understand the overall situation. More the 
Figure 1.  The SécuRéVi platform (crisis management system). 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-342-1
CONTENT 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

decision process progresses, more the need of detailed 
information is important. 
Images are certainly the most appropriate media for these 
tasks. For example, satellite images can provide a rapid and 
overall comprehension of a site, plans allow to see the 
structure of the building and 360° view help to understand 
the reality of a room including its content. The use of high 
definition images improves these tasks. 
Therefore, the SécuRéVi platform allows intensive use of 
visual representations as images: 8 large images (as satellite 
views, plans and aerial views) and 130 pictures of 360° 
views were required for a supermarket whose surface is 
about 21 000 m². 
The general working principle of image handling in 
SécuRéVi is shown in Figure 2. Image sources range from 
camera to GIS and the formats of the images generated are 
varied. JPEG has established itself in the field of digital 
photography while there are several commonly used file 
formats, such as ECW format, in the domain of GIS. The 
integration of original image files in the Information System 
(IS) was the process in place before the work presented in 
this paper. In this initial process, the user connects to the IS 
and displays the file directly. The IS is typically local to the 
machine but may be incorporated within a remote storage 
area. The “processing” part of Figure 2 represents the 
processing incorporated for large images, which will be 
discussed in the next section. 
IV. 
PROPOSAL OF A TOOL FOR LARGE IMAGES HANDLING 
The hope in decision making in crisis management is to 
get all the data instantaneously. Obviously, this is not 
possible in practice due to hardware and software 
constraints. Moreover, the handling of large images adds 
new constraints (storage, processing). 
The design challenge is then to manage the contradiction 
between the hope and the reality and to find an acceptable 
solution in terms of delay, despite the huge size of images. 
In this section, we start by presenting the design 
constraints of the tool, then we precise our design criteria. 
The solution proposed is then described, as well as its 
implementation. 
A. Design constraints 
In the context of crisis management, the machines used 
for image visualization have various processing capacities. A 
machine with a limited performance x86 processor (as Intel 
Atom), 1 GB of RAM and a hard drive's capacity of 200 GB 
was defined as the minimum hardware requirement. A 400 
Megapixel JPEG (common for a GIS document) uses several 
GB of RAM and becomes difficult to use on this type of 
machine. However, on a machine with sufficient memory, 
the opening time of a file remains problematic. 
The tool must accept files from different sources and 
optimize the use of available resources. 
There are different means, like the conversion to a 
specific format. For example, the use of a wavelet image 
compression format has been considered as one of the 
possibilities. It has not been adopted because the conversion 
with existing tools needs too many resources. 
B. Design criteria 
For our process, we define an Ideal Final Result (IFR) [9] 
as a target. This IFR needs to take into account user and 
computer. We define 3 measuring elements: display time, 
memory usage and CPU time. These elements need to be as 
lower as possible. The display time is the time between the 
user request and the display of the image on the screen. A 
value less than 100 ms can be considered as a coherent value 
with the human physiology. We determine the memory 
usage value like the product between the total number of 
pixels of the screen and the color depth. The CPU time needs 
to be near 0%. 
Other criteria have been taken into account, including: 
 
no disturbance of the working of the other parts of 
SécuRéVi, 
 
the friendliness when using the tool proposed. 
C. Proposed solution 
The proposed image processing tool has two parts, one 
for the pre-processing of images and the other for their 
visualization. The pre-processing is inserted at the beginning 
of the restitution chain. Visualization transparently replaced 
Figure 2.  From integration to viewing. 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-342-1
CONTENT 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

the tool previously used. So, the integration of the new tool 
does not disturb the working of the other modules of the 
SécuRéVi platform. 
The pre-processing aims at optimizing the use of 
resources. It relies on the use of cutting tiles which is a 
known technique with different implementations [10]. It is 
popularized by online mapping services [11]. It minimizes 
the memory use: only visible tiles are loaded (which are used 
to generate a new image by assembling and extracting the 
final visualization). However, when viewing the whole 
image, the entire tile need to be loaded in memory and the 
video card need to downscale it before the display. So in this 
case, the gain is zero in comparison to the initial viewer. In 
order to improve the gain, we have integrated the 
management of multi-resolution into the process. This allows 
to display only the paving tiles whose resolution is directly 
above the output's display resolution (see Figure. 3). Data 
formats such as JPEG2000 [12] allow this type of cutting but 
neither their production nor their return meet our 
requirements as far as memory use is concerned.  
From the pixel array, we generate new images (tiles) 
organized in predefined zoom level. This data tree is 
packaged in an archive. The viewer selects the tiles to be 
displayed according to their level of zoom and resolution. It 
loads tiles on the fly and releases the useless ones when 
necessary.  
The resolution of a tile was defined empirically: the 
longest side must have a size of 512 pixels, the value of the 
second one keeps the ratio of the original picture. Different 
values were tested. Multiples of 2 show the best performance 
in terms of processing, but less than 512 pixels value 
generates too many files (which can be problematic in a 
FAT32 file system) while a higher value will not make 
optimal use of memory visualization module (in the "worst 
case" a display resolution lower than 512x512 pixels will 
require an image of 2048 x 2048 pixels where our choice 
divides by 4 the resolution required). In practice, an image of 
12100 per 6050 pixels (and weighted 10,8MB in Jpeg), 
needs the generation of 510 tiles (for a weight of 23,5 MB). 
Regarding performance, the software (processing and 
visualization) needs less than one hundred MB (before it was 
necessary to have several GB). The CPU load is maximum 
during processing but minimal during playback. When the 
processing is done beforehand, the minimum required 
configuration can be used in good conditions. Finally, one of 
the 
consequences 
of 
pre-processing 
is 
the 
almost 
instantaneous loading compared with the tens of seconds of 
the old loading method (on the minimum performance 
machine). 
V. 
IMPLEMENTATION 
Two versions of the image processing software have 
been developed. The first version has been tested and 
integrated into the SécuRéVi Platform. The second version is 
an optimized version of the first one. We start by presenting 
the first version software and tackle its testing, then we 
present its second version. 
A. First version of the image processing software 
1) Principles and working 
In this version, before any use of an image, its entire pre-
processing is done and an archive of the result is created as a 
single file. This use matches a company specific request: 
generate spherical view. Generating a spherical view consists 
in assembling photographic images each having a different 
rotation around a central point. These views are rectified and 
merged according to specific criteria. The integration of the 
initial photographic views directly into the IS is maladjusted 
and the addition of the pre-processing is not detrimental. In 
contrast, pre-processing does not match the dynamic 
integration of new data during use (for example, for a crisis 
management). This problem was solved by storing the 
images/archives on external transportable disks, such as to be 
able to use them on the intervention site. Nowadays, data 
transport by external device is less used and replaced by an 
access through the network. As a consequence, it is no more 
interesting to use a single archive. Indeed, the entire file must 
be downloaded before viewing. Since the archive is heavier 
than the original file, the interest is therefore diminished. For 
these reasons, two main changes have been done: 
 
Archives have been replaced by simple data trees. 
This change limits the network use negative impact 
(the amount of data transferred is smaller). 
 
The pre-processing has been replaced by a 
processing on request: the pre-processing is only 
called if the tiles required are not available. 
The generation on request allows to optimize storage: 
only image sections needed are generated and stored. This 
feature opens a new possibility for analyze like the detection 
of point of interest [13]. 
For example, more than 3,5 GB were generated for all of 
the 360° views (with the pre-processing process) and about 
80MB for the large images (with the on request process) for 
the supermarket site mentioned in section 3. 
2) Testing and results 
The table below (Table 1) is used to compare the 
processings. The measurements were performed on a 
machine equipped with a i5-2520 M processor and 8 GB of 
RAM and the processed image resolution was 16384 x 8192. 
After several on-site deployments, we have chosen to 
accept only JPEG format as input. Third-party software can 
often export to this file format, otherwise screen printing can 
be used (at the expense of resolution).This allows to exploit 
their expertise in their respective fields but also allows great 
flexibility of workflow for users, and this is very useful in 
dynamically changing settings [14] as it is the case in a crisis 
context. 
However, we encounter limitations due to software that 
allow the export of pictures. High resolutions (over 20 000 x 
20 000 pixels) are poorly supported. JPEG format accepts a 
Figure 3.  Multi-resolution tiles organization. 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-342-1
CONTENT 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

maximum resolution of 65535 in width and height. Format 
as JPEG2000 would achieve higher resolutions as input. The 
tiles format seems not to need to evolve: the JPEG covers all 
needs and viewing, despite the loss of information during 
processing (rasterization, compression, etc. ). The data 
produced were not intended to return to their original 
business domain so, the loss of information doesn’t have any 
consequence. 
One of the services made possible by the use of the 
network is the unsupervised distributed computing. One of 
the conditions of its implementation would be a reasonable 
network throughput. The current algorithm is not optimized 
for this type of use. However, this operation is already 
operational but not optimal. 
B. Optimized version 
The optimized version generates a tile by the assembly of 
4 tiles of the lower level (the first method uses the original 
image for every tile). It reduces the time needed by 20 
compared with the original pre-processing method. The limit 
is the need to generate all of the tiles of the lower levels 
before visualizing the highest level tile. It is not optimized 
for our on request process but we are working on the 
integration of intermediate operation in order to reach better 
performance. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we have proposed a solution for the 
handling of large images in a crisis context. The solution 
proposed has been integrated in the crisis management 
platform SécuRéVi. Existing tools such as JPEG2000, were 
not adapted to our needs due to some constraints such as 
restricted resources (memory, CPU rate, display time), 
dynamic integration of images (on the fly). 
The solution proposed has been tested and evaluated 
according to 3 criteria: image display time, memory usage 
and CPU time. The result shows that the new software tool 
has good performances. After the first viewing, the image 
display time has been divided by twelve and the CPU time is 
lower in comparison to that of initial tool. The percentage of 
memory used has decreased from 100% to 14%. 
In operation, the major contribution to the business 
experts is the ability to update the IS by adding image during 
planning or operation. The new process allows to use new 
data very quickly and updating data is a very important 
feature in a crisis management system [15]. 
Our industrial partners (EDF, Total, Jeddah airport, 
industrial and port area of Le Havre, etc.) frequently use our 
viewer and their returns are positive. 
An optimization of the tool has been proposed in order to 
reduce the time needed for tiles generation by a coefficient of 
20. We plan to integrate it in the SécuRéVi platform. This 
will be helpful especially for tasks needing complete 
generation like 360° view. 
It is very important to take into account the evolution of 
the technological environment (such as a GPU integration 
[16], the use of an UHD display or new services like 
indexing files) to respond quickly and efficiently to users 
requirements. One of the future works is the investigation of 
the use of innovative methods such as TRIZ to adapt our 
solution accordingly. 
We also plan to study the use of grid computing to fasten 
the tiles generation process and to formalize the 
determination of the size of tiles (currently defined 
empirically). 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Tahan, J. Vareille, L. Nana, O. Danjean, H. Mahoudo, and 
G. Cloarec , "Systèmes Complexes et Plan Global de Secours 
(P.G.S.): vers un plan global Qualité, Hygiène, Sécurité et 
Environnement (Q.H.S.E.)" [Complex System and Global 
Safety Plan (G.S.P) : towards a global plan for Quality, 
Health, Security and Environment (Q.H.S.E.)], CNRIUT, 
Tours, France, Jun. 2012. 
[2] T. Ni et al., "A Survey of Large High-Resolution Display 
Technologies, Techniques, and Applications", Alexandria, 
Virginia, USA, Mar. 2006, pp.223-236 
[3] L. Montoya, "Geo-data acquisition through mobile GIS and 
digital video: an urban disaster management perspective", 
Environmental Modelling & Software, vol. 18, Mar. 2003, 
pp.869-876. 
[4] N. Tholey et al. , "Utilisation de l'imagerie satellitaire pour la 
gestion de crise type "risques naturels", inondations et risques 
littoraux" [Using satellite imagery for crisis management of 
"natural hazards", flood and coastal risks type], 7iemes 
journées scientifiques et techniques du CETMEF, Paris, Dec. 
2008.  
[5] J. Kopf, M. Uyttendaele, O. Deussen, and M. F. Cohen, 
"Capturing 
and 
Viewing 
Gigapixel 
Images", 
ACM 
Traansactions on Graphics, vol. 26, Jul. 2007, pp.93-102. 
[6] E. C. Shenchang, "QuickTime VR – An Image-Based 
Approach to Virtual Environment Navigation", SIGGRAPH 
'95 Proceedings of the 22nd annual conference on Computer 
graphics and interactive techniques, 1995, pp.29-38. 
[7] H. Mahoudo, "Ne pas être déconnecté du monde réel" [Not to 
be disconnected from the real world], Face au risque, vol. 
488, Dec. 2012, p.13. 
[8] H. Mahoudo and G. Cloarec, "Préparation à l'opération. 
Conceptions 
des 
plans 
d'établissements 
répertoriés" 
[Preparing operation. Design of classified institutes plans], 
ENSOSP prévision, Tome 6bis, 2011.  
[9] G. S. Altshuller, "The innovation algorithm TRIZ: systematic 
innovation and technical creativity", Technical Innovation 
Center Inc., 1999. 
[10] N. R. Pal and S. K. Pal, "A review on image segmentation 
techniques", Pattern Recognition, vol.26, no.9, 1993, 
pp.1277-1294. 
[11] C. De Souza Baptista et al. , "On Performance Evaluation of 
Web GIS Applications", DEXA’05, Database and Expert 
Systems Applications, Copenhagen, Aug. 2005, pp.497-501. 
[12] ISO/IEC, ISO/IEC 15 444-1, "Information Technology - 
JPEG 2000 Image Coding System", 2000. 
[13] J. Laflaquière, Y. Prié, and A. Mille, "Ingénierie des traces 
numériques 
d'interaction 
comme 
inscriptions 
de 
connaissances" [Digital traces engineering of interaction as 
knowledge inscriptions], 19èmes Journées Francophones 
d'Ingénierie des Connaissances, Nancy, Jun. 2008, pp.183-
195. 
[14] W. M. P. Van Der Aalst, and M. Weskez, "Advanced Topics 
in Workflow Management: Issues, Requirements, and 
Solutions", Journal of Integrated Design and Process Science, 
vol. 7, 2003, pp.49-77. 
[15] M. Turoff, M. Chumer, B. Vand De Walle, and X. Yao, "The 
design of a dynamic emergency response management 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-342-1
CONTENT 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

information system (DERMIS)", Journal of information 
technology theory and application, vol. 5, 2004, pp.1-35. 
[16] B. Fulkerson and S. Soatto, "Really quick shift: Image 
segmentation on a GPU", European Conference on Computer 
Vision, vol. 6554, Heraklion, Crete, Greece, Sep. 2010, 
pp.350-358.
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE I.  
COMPARATIVE PERFORMANCE VISUALIZATION LEVEL 
 
Initial method 
Pre-processsing 
Processing on request 
 
1st viewing 
Next viewing 
1st viewing 
Next viewing 
1st viewing 
Next viewing 
Display 
time 
6 s 
6 s 
> 20 min. 
< 0.5 s 
30 s < t < 70 s 
< 0.5 s 
Memory 
usage 
580 MB 
< 20 MB 
80 MB 
80 MB 
CPU time 
100 % 
100 % 
100 % 
<15% 
100 % 
< 15 % 
 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-342-1
CONTENT 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

