At the Intersection between the Design Culture and Music: How to Co-Design 
Lyrical and Audio Contents 
Stefania Palmieri 
Design Department 
Politecnico di Milano 
Milan, Italy 
e-mail: stefania.palmieri@polimi.it 
Alessandro Ianniello 
Design Department 
Politecnico di Milano 
Milan, Italy 
e-mail: alessandro.ianniello@polimi.it 
Mario Bisson 
Design Department 
Politecnico di Milano 
Milan, Italy 
e-mail: mario.bisson@polimi.it 
Marco Di Noia 
Italian Order of Journalists 
Milan, Italy 
e-mail: marco@marcodinoia.it 
Abstract— Within the framework of knowledge correlation, 
disciplinary 
specificities 
come 
into 
play 
with 
diverse 
contributions at various scales and according to different 
thematic areas, although they persist and operate in a 
conscious manner. The research stems from the intention to 
creatively experiment, intersecting design and music, to 
develop a complex project. It is a cultural operation that 
enhances the communication between designers and artists, 
and that wants to combine the tradition of Italian Commedia 
dell'Arte with the changing contemporaneity of the peninsula; 
the methodological basis used belongs to co-design approach. 
Using design as a point of observation and a lens, the lyrics of 
the song narrate the local context of Milan to provide a 
complete snapshot of the city.  
Keywords— 
design 
practice; 
co-design; 
music; 
digital 
technologies; new cultures 
I.
INTRODUCTION
    Within the framework of knowledge correlation, 
disciplinary specificities come into play with diverse 
contributions at various scales and according to different 
thematic areas, although they persist and operate in a 
conscious manner. This is achieved through an integration 
that is configured as an articulated condition of synergy and 
collaboration. Alongside, or going beyond the logic of 
knowledge transfer processes, cognitive and operational 
processes, which are based on transdisciplinary approaches 
to knowledge sharing and circulation, are now being 
consolidated. The project presented in this contribution 
results from the intention to creatively experiment, uniting 
and intersecting the disciplines of design and music, in order 
to 
realize 
and 
develop 
a 
complex 
project.  
    First of all, it is a cultural operation that enhances the 
communication between designers and artists as a 
fundamental aspect of a musical performance and that, 
specifically, wants to combine the tradition of Italian 
Commedia dell'Arte with the changing contemporaneity that 
characterizes the main cities of the Italian peninsula; the 
methodological basis used is the co-design, which has 
involved various actors. Using design as a point of 
observation and a lens, the lyrics of the song narrate the 
context of Milan to provide a snapshot of the city, for 
example, in terms of its colors, materials, sounds, lifestyles 
and architectural styles.  
    The common thread, which sews together design, music, 
and urban landscape, has been identified in the Commedia 
dell'Arte: a colorful world of characteristic costumes, which 
mark the evolution of lifestyles and urban contexts. Another 
element that characterizes this collaboration can be found in 
the combination of the creative and technological spheres: it 
is possible to guide artistic creativity towards innovative 
forms of representation and use of content by processing the 
potential of digital technologies related to the area of 
Industry 4.0 through the application of a design perspective. 
Section 2 is dedicated to the background of the project, 
while the third one is used to analyze the process applied. 
Section 4 is instead focused on the development of a 
theoretical framework for further research and the last one 
addresses the conclusion. 
II.
THE BACKGROUND OF THE PROJECT
    The culture of design germinates and finds its origins in 
the relationship between art and technology. What becomes 
fundamental is to understand whether, even today, design 
can play an artistic role, as it certainly happens with music. 
If we look at design as an institution, there is no doubt that 
this is not the case: it is a profession, a professional activity 
just like lawyers, engineers and doctors. From this point of 
view, it appears to be a profession that is more difficult and 
less comprehended than others that are considered more 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-952-2
CONTENT 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

structured, more coherent and more easily framed in today's 
panorama. 
    In order to understand if design can be considered a form 
of art, on a par with music and painting, it is necessary to 
observe whether design activities present, within their own 
professionalism, the requisites that all human activities that 
take on the name of art do have. It is also necessary to 
comprehend whether design also may allow the expression 
of human feelings to take shape (rather than purely technical 
specifications or those aimed at selling a particular product). 
Furthermore, it must be understood if it is capable of 
producing symbolic forms, namely, an image of what is felt 
and perceived: Design, therefore, becomes a partner with 
and integral part of music, blending with it, taking on the 
role of a means to create and make tangible the symbolic 
form of the artistic act. 
    In order to achieve a coherent and defined result, the 
design process has been contaminated by the technology of 
design and, therefore, can be portrayed as a technological 
process (in the Greek sense of the term: 'a systematic 
process and treatise on an art'). Furthermore, the project 
aims to define the relationship between design culture and 
music, through a transdisciplinary approach supported by 
partners, who are able to contribute with a wide range of 
complementary technical and scientific expertise: research 
facilities and infrastructure, market knowledge, music 
knowledge, design knowledge and approach to design 
thinking, 
and 
finally, 
communication 
for 
public 
engagement: it is a complex process which has been based 
on what can be outlined as the language of design.  
    It should be considered that the process that one follows 
to give form to any kind of artefact occurs in the same way 
that language originates. Of course, language is made up of 
words, whereas the creation of a mask, of a musical 
composition consists of other elements (matter, notes, etc.) 
which, like words, are only tools, means of communication 
of thoughts. Like every word, each constructive element of a 
form has its own meaning, and, at the same time, it goes to 
make up the overall meaning of the discourse. Thus, 
language, whether verbal or visual, can be considered a 
system of symbols that, by using the meanings of the 
individual component parts and by following grammatical 
rules, is articulated into sentences, periods, discourses, by 
means of materials, notes, structures. Like spoken language, 
it is an articulated form of expression: while maintaining 
their own autonomous existence (a shoe is always a shoe, a 
G note is always a G note), its parts blend together to form a 
larger entity, which is not a mixture or sum of parts, but an 
articulated integration that we comprehensively and 
aesthetically perceive. Therefore, the artifact is a language: 
it aims at the integration of words (the construction 
elements) whose purpose, as with any language, lies in the 
discourse, which never exists, because it is shaped as 
communication of thought and feelings; it is what validates 
and makes tangible the symbolic form [1]. Similarly, the 
technique of design does not exist in itself: it is the means of 
realising and making tangible the symbolic form of design.  
    Technique is a discursive form, and, like language, it is 
capable of realizing a significant and expressive form and 
verifying it in order to give it a concrete body. As much as 
we can study the technique of design, we can study 
grammar and syntax, but, in practice, the technique of 
design is always heteronomous in relation to the ability of 
design to verify, modify, invent, and give it life, just as 
speech invents and makes thoughts communicable. In any 
case, there is always an intimate and reciprocal relationship 
(or interaction) between the idea of design as art, its thought 
or spatial conception, and the means and language that are 
adopted to realize the idea. It can be stated, therefore, that 
from a cultural and philosophical point of view, design and 
music meet and mix themselves in a discourse that is 
articulated on the theme of semiotics: in the semiotics of 
design, as in that of music, interpretation, according to 
Plato's texts, is the process that leads to understand what is 
presented to the mind as obscure and capable of generating 
surprise [1]. As Peirce stated [2], the meaning of a sign must 
be sought in the effects and consequences to which the 
production of that sign may lead: from this perspective, the 
meaning of any designed artifact (by design or music, or by 
the joint action of the two disciplines) resides in the way in 
which the consequences of that act are considered, which, in 
turn, arises from a process of observation and navigation in 
reality [3]. Interpretation, as a founding action of a design 
process, can therefore be considered the very activity that 
aims at the creation of an artifact, which, in turn, generates 
an interpretative process, that becomes the stimulus for the 
next semiosis. 
    This contribution adopts the method of complexity 
management, focusing on an approach which is based on the 
pillars of design culture and its values: anthropological 
value [4], value of the semiotic component and its semantics 
[5], psychological and cognitive value [6], functional value 
[7], technological value [8] and perceptive value [9]. The 
aim of the activities is to design, build, test and distribute a 
musical product grounded on research and identification, of 
the profile of the "typical citizen" we can find in the 
Milanese city, which hosts a large community of young 
designers, through the analysis of their characterizing traits. 
By means of an acquired sensitivity towards the human 
beings, their ways of living and being part of a community 
[10], they have the ability and the tools to define the profiles 
(social and cultural) to be then translated into an iconic 
synthesis, which can outline the contemporary mask, 
recovering the historical references of the Commedia 
dell'Arte and actualizing a new model of the citizen of the 
21st century. 
    The mask is nothing more than a Pirandellian 
mystification, an alienating symbol, an index of the 
depersonalization and shattering of the ego into multiple 
identities, and a form of adaptation in relation to the context 
and social situation in which the person lives [11]. The 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-952-2
CONTENT 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

anthropological value of this experimentation is to capture 
and synthesize the differences that can be configured in 
restricted societies, such as, paradoxically, cities: the work-
image relationship, the man-social group relationship, 
language and expression become binomials that need a 
figurative and perceptible representation [12]. Design (form, 
colors, content) and music (interpretation, perception, 
emotional sensations) become the tools for transmitting and 
narrating these images, and thus for representing an era with 
its diversity, the values and non-values of a society in 
continual change, that acts as a synaesthetic photograph of 
the moment in which we live. 
    The initial core of the project was the desire to conceive a 
musical performance in collaboration with a physical 
environment: the idea was to design a concert where the B2 
building of the Durando campus of Politecnico di Milano 
would be made to perform, through the recording of the 
typical sounds of the structure, and the insertion of 
vibrational sensors on the different floors, to allow listeners 
to interact with the songs played. This aim falls within the 
domain of the Internet of Musical Thing (IoMusT), a 
research field that is positioned at the intersection of Internet 
of Things (IoT), new interfaces for musical expression, 
computer-human interactions, artificial intelligence and 
participatory art [13]. The term has recently been used to 
indicate different views on the possible declination of 
applications in this field: musical instruments to which a QR 
code is applied in order to provide additional information; 
ubiquitous 
music; 
shared 
music 
production. 
Other 
interesting waves of innovation in this transdisciplinary 
field are represented by AI and robot-based music creation 
and digital art [14]. From this incipit, as it usually happens 
during collaborations with different actors, the project has 
been expanded, involving the University not only at an 
environmental and functional level, but also as a research 
hub, extending the collaboration to a group of young people 
from the School of Design. This is a co-design initiative 
involving young designers, with the aim of devising and 
applying a shared process of highly innovative musical 
composition; it is also a sociological operation aimed at 
painting Milan through the eyes of the new generations who 
live there. 
III.
THE PROCESS
    This section describes the process used to reach the 
desired output, which can be divided into four phases, 
namely Meta-design, Co-design, Workshops, and, finally, 
Song creation. 
A.
Meta-design 
    For several decades, the Commedia dell'arte was the form 
of artistic expression closest to the Italian people and their 
traditions. It is a cultural heritage that survives to this day in 
a locally rooted way, making a comeback in the celebrations 
of the most popular and traditional festival of all: Carnival. 
If the Neapolitan mask of 'Pulcinella' has succeeded in 
transcending its theatrical role to become an icon of 
histrionic Neapolitan culture, the Nordic 'Harlequin', with 
his rainbow costume, is still, in the years of Industry 4.0, the 
first thought associated to Carnival. Like them, Palermo's 
Peppe Nappa, Turin's Gianduia, Rome's Rugantino or 
Milan's Meneghino are still alive today, and the fact that 
they have not managed to emancipate themselves from their 
medieval genesis, maintaining the same prerogatives and 
social roles associated with their birth, is a true testament to 
the customs and sense of irony and satire of our ancestors. 
    In the centuries in which the Commedia dell'Arte has 
been developed, the masks have widely worn the clothes of 
cunning servants, swindlers or gullible people, peasants and 
masters rich in money, but easily coerced. It is precisely the 
staging of these stereotypes and the mask-city association 
that have inspired this cultural operation, born from a 
question: what would Italian city masks look like in the new 
millennium? This first phase is generally defined as a Meta-
design [15] and can be divided into two sub-phases: 
analytical, which concerns the temporal, spatial, social and 
character research regarding the project; conceptual, which 
aims at elaborating the basic concepts of the project and its 
formal identity, taking advantage of the research carried out 
[16]. 
B.
Co-design 
    The research attempts to answer the above question 
through the interpretation of young Italian designers, 
residing, from time to time, in the cities under study, to 
validate design as a subject strongly linked to art in its 
greatest multidisciplinary sense. By accentuating the 
binomial "personal stereotype-Italian city" with respect to 
the traditional Commedia dell'Arte, the aim is to capture a 
socio-cultural snapshot of our new traditions. The 
involvement of the young designers in the activities helps to 
redefine the project goals, by deciding that they would 
produce the suggestions necessary for the writing of the 
piece, through the construction of the cultural and Meta-
design scenario of reference. In this sense, it can be said that 
the project methodology followed has been co-design, 
which allows the co-participation of different groups of 
actors in the genesis and development of the creative 
process.  
    Co-design refers to the application of collective creativity 
in all phases of the design process; it is, therefore, a specific 
instance of co-creation, which refers to the collaboration 
between a structured form of creativity, typical of the 
designer, and its less designed form, which is instead 
possessed by people untrained in the design process [17]. 
Kleinsmann and Valkenburg [18] define it as a process in 
which different actors, from different disciplines, share their 
knowledge about the design process and content creation, to 
form a shared understanding and development of a new 
product. There are several benefits of following such an 
approach, such as the improvement of the idea generation 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-952-2
CONTENT 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

process and the development of products or services, the 
promotion of creativity and cooperation, and user’s 
satisfaction over a long period of time [19]. Thus, in co-
design the roles are mixed: the users become experts in their 
own experience [20] and plays a central role in knowledge 
development, ideas and concept generation. The role of 
designers becomes providing the tools to accompany users 
in the creation of content, although they maintain a critical 
function in translating ideas into formal concepts [21]. In 
the case of the research presented, the three macro-groups of 
actors involved played multiple functions: from a design 
point of view, the team composed of researchers and senior 
designers acted as facilitators [22] of the whole process, 
trying to contribute with targeted interventions to support 
the different activities; the group of young designers played 
the role of director of the operations [23], using and sharing 
tools from different areas of design. These operations were 
useful in order to involve the team of artists in the meta-
design moments with the aim of generating ideas and 
concepts useful for the creation of the musical piece. When 
entering the creative-musical phase, the roles were reversed: 
the team made up of the songwriter, the musicians and the 
technicians engaged the design team in the creation of a part 
of the musical product, providing, albeit in a more naïve 
way, the tools and knowledge to achieve their objectives. 
C.
Workshops 
    In line with the theme chosen for the album, after several 
reflections, the designers were asked to think of a new 
Milanese mask, which, starting from a cultural analysis of 
the historical meanings of the traditional one, would reflect 
the attitudes, behaviours, habits and traits of the 
contemporary Milanese citizen.  The launch of the brief was 
followed by three workshops involving around 20 people, 
including young designers, professors and researchers from 
the School of Design, creative people and music 
technicians. The conference calls and meetings with the 
artistic staff helped the designers in the creation of a graphic 
work widely used in the design process (mood board), 
represented by means of a video and a document 
accompanied by textual parts, keywords and images, 
resulting from an in-depth analysis and reinterpretation of 
the various researched, analyzed and connected contents. 
    From the mood board, a dynamic and multi-faceted Milan 
emerged; a metropolis enveloped by a fluid with an intense 
centripetal force and thrust, which acts on the city and its 
inhabitants, subdivided into nine different archetypes, 
described on the basis of character, clothing and manners, 
each associated with emblematic locations in the city and a 
symbolic object/material: the “Old Lady” with her perfume 
bottle; the “Cool People”, who wears fashionable glasses; 
“Pride People”, wrapped in glittering sequins; the 
“Influencers”, constantly absorbed by their smartphone; the 
“Suburbs People” and their cubic zirconia earring; the 
“South People” who inhabits the Navigli and Darsena areas; 
the “Hedonist People”, who captures the soul of the city 
with their camera; “Fast People”, who are always snappy 
and completely devoted to their profession; and finally, the 
“Artistoid” who has been depicted using the “ultra-fragola” 
filter (from Ultra-fragola mirror by Ettore Sottsass).    
    Elaborated by young researchers, this embryo of a local 
ethnographic study reflects a city heterogeneously inhabited 
and colored by different social groups, characterized by 
different lifestyles, behaviors, values and aspirations, which 
meet, mix and clash in those border territories between the 
typical spaces of belonging and recognition, constantly 
transforming the skin and fabric of the city. In order to 
investigate this chameleon-like and cosmopolitan aspect of 
the Lombard metropolis in greater depth, and to succeed in 
their aim of depicting these complex social and cultural 
aspects, the young designers involved created a mask, made 
up of the main attributes of the archetypes, with the name 
Camillevolt, derived from the dialect expression “Ca' mille 
volt”, which means “which has a thousand faces”, but also 
“which is there a thousand times”, that acts as a forge for 
opportunities. Another image that has been associated with 
Milan, following the research carried out, is the one of a 
large circle and a set of other rotating and intersecting 
circles, as a kaleidoscope, representing the crossroads of 
people and events; but also, it represents the urban 
conformation of a metropolis characterized by two 
concentric ring roads.  It is precisely this sense of circularity 
that gave the musicians the inspiration for the first chord 
sequence of the piece and for some of the guitar parts.  The 
dynamism associated with Milan, on the other hand, 
determined the fast pace of the piece, with a modern style 
and sound, in tune with a city that is in step with the times. 
The strong association of Milan with the world of fashion 
and production was then rendered through the sampling of 
the recorded sounds, in stereo and binaural mode, of some 
machinery of the tailoring, photography and carpentry 
laboratories of the Politecnico di Milano. 
D.
Song Creation 
    The song “Camillevolt and Milan” was composed on a 
twofold interaction with Politecnico. The song -in terms of 
lyrics, melody, harmony, structure and speed- was 
developed, as stated above, from the creative input of the 
designers from the School of Design, while the soundtrack 
was enriched with environmental recordings of some of the 
laboratories in the B2 building at the Durando Campus. The 
song's lyrics and melodies were composed by the 
songwriter, the music by two professional performers, 
benefiting from the collaboration of a former artistic 
director of Italian EMI, now an independent producer. One 
of the performers also recorded the electric guitars, while 
the other artistically produced and arranged the song, also 
recording transverse flute parts. The entire artistic staff took 
care of the sound recordings of the machinery in the 
tailoring, photography and carpentry laboratories in B2 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-952-2
CONTENT 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

building; among the sounds recorded, there were the danger 
signal for the activation of the overhead crane, the circular 
saw, the vacuum cleaner, the sander, the knitting looms, the 
multiple clicks of the cameras and the loading of the flashes. 
The creative contribution of the designers was even more 
decisive in the writing of the song's lyrics, for which the 
author tried to stick as closely as possible to the images and 
terminology proposed through the mood board and the other 
representation tools used. In fact, the verse of the song 
mentions some of the traits traceable to the identified 
archetypes and the city places associated with them, in a 
play of mirrors in which the city of Milan is reflected in 
Camillevolt mask, and vice versa. The refrains, on the other 
hand, are dedicated to the image of the dynamic and circular 
city that "like a kaleidoscope turns, turns, turns" (citation 
from a song verse). Some young designers were also 
involved in the production of the song, through the 
recording of choral parts. 
IV.
THE PROJECT AS A CASE STUDY AND A FRAMEWORK 
FOR FURTHER RESEARCH AND POSSIBLE FUTURE 
DEVELOPMENTS
    The expected impact of the proposal is to verify the 
relationship between design and music both from an 
anthropological and a social point of view. It is necessary to 
understand its scope and, therefore, its method of 
dissemination, which has to take place both on an initial 
push through innovative communication/marketing systems, 
and through the widening of consensus on its own, the so-
called 'word of mouth'. It must also be understood whether 
this proposal could become a tool for disseminating a 
culture of coexistence at national and international level. 
Beyond the possible traditional exploitation of the results, 
the proposal can become a powerful promotional tool for the 
cities who want to be involved and for the country. The 
presence of scientific communities in the working group 
brings 
content 
to 
various 
disciplines 
including 
communication design, product design, ethnography, 
anthropology, music and many others directly or indirectly 
related to the content developed.  
    Knowledge is no longer involved according to a linear 
sequence, but as a large horizontal network, which operates 
on several dimensions, even with different approaches. In 
fact, the network makes it possible to bring together 
humanistic and technical heterogeneity, synergic and 
complementary souls of the new culture of knowledge, with 
the sole aim of exploring the future and hypothesizing 
solutions to improve collective well-being, which enhance 
and give meaning to mankind, his history, and his context. 
Also, this guarantees the possibility of disseminating the 
results through workshops and meetings in schools, at 
various levels, from primary schools to universities, as well 
as participation in national and international conferences. 
Through the whole process, it was possible to elaborate an 
operational framework and a series of design guidelines 
applicable to the development of the songs by the other 
design universities. At the time of writing this contribution, 
the song dedicated to the mask of Milan has been completed 
and we have entered a phase of communication design of 
the product, using different techniques of representation. 
    The next steps concern the realisation of the cover and the 
videoclip of the song, once again co-designed by the 
designers and the musicians, and the presentation of the 
song through different media (digital and non-digital), 
including a live performance at the B2 building of the 
Durando campus of Politecnico di Milano, which will 
become the co-protagonist of the performance in the 
interactive mode outlined in the introduction of the 
contribution. The project, once completely framed and 
disseminated, can become a replicable model for other 
Italian cities which, as Milan, host a design scientific 
community, to map the new local traditions which oppose 
the global context. Following the framework designed 
during the Milan experience, the suggestions regarding 
lyrics and sounds must be born from brainstorming sessions, 
in which the singer, his artistic staff, the staff of the design 
schools involved, and, above all, the young designers have 
to participate. Also, in these cases, starting from the 
brainstorming, a visual elaboration must be realized, that 
places the revisited mask in an articulated city stage, which 
must provide guidelines for the song development. Finally, 
the song must be produced through the recording and the 
rendering of the sounds produced by the design school 
building and typical of the host city. 
    The character traits typical of the masks must be again the 
basis for modelling new modern characters placed or acting 
in a current city context, described using terms related to 
design and its culture and images depicting what emerged 
from the brainstorming sessions. The works developed by 
the young designers should become, as in the case of Milan, 
the covers and booklets of the album and of the different 
tracks, as well as constitute further dissemination and 
communication material about the project.  The results of 
the project must be made accessible to potential users 
through a wide range of dissemination activities. As a 
general guideline, the results must be made open and 
available to reach as many people as possible. This will 
concern technical results, which have to be published on 
relevant digital platforms, as well as scientific publications. 
V.
CONCLUSION
    The project aims to demonstrate how a transdisciplinary 
attitude [24], between apparently different knowledge and 
skills, can become an added value in processes characterised 
by 
complexity, 
evolving 
the 
multidisciplinary 
and 
interdisciplinary approach that has been applied to date to 
projects requiring such contamination. The transdisciplinary 
approach aims at overcoming and blurring the boundaries 
between different disciplines: in this sense, it differs from 
multidisciplinarity, which is defined as the integration of 
different knowledge, and from interdisciplinarity, which 
refers to programmes, models, projects and analyses that 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-952-2
CONTENT 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

involve more than one knowledge in order to carry out the 
activated processes. The goals of the project and research 
presented are manifold and consciously directed towards 
answering different questions and needs. From a socio-
cultural point of view, it is essential to map the 
characteristic lifestyles the city examined, in order to define 
the features of the reference mask.  
    Ethnographic studies have to be conducted, using 
different techniques and methods such as observation or 
interviews, in order to better understand the rites, rituals, 
norms, values, behaviours and artifacts of the subcultures 
examined. Music and 
musical experiences play 
a 
fundamental role in defining these specific community 
traits, their formation and their affirmation at a social and 
cultural level. It is therefore essential to highlight the 
necessity and importance of the establishment of a 
relationship between design and music, which favours the 
management of the growing complexity of the music sector, 
due to the impact of new technologies, new ways of 
communicating, disseminating and enjoying such a product: 
processes and tools of the design disciplines can give a 
substantial contribution to the field of action. The 
application of innovative technologies, for example the ones 
ascribable to the area of IoMusT, allows to conceive, 
hypothesis, and design innovative experiences of fruition of 
musical contents and, by implementing the potentialities of 
the framework, to build new experiences. Therefore, a 
dialectical reasoning is necessary to define the purposes of a 
phenomenon that embraces, at the same time, the individual 
and the collective spheres and that implies an activity, at the 
same time, natural and artificial, instinctive and disciplined, 
physical and intellectual.  
    This is a phenomenon that certainly has the function of 
organising and supporting social activities, of inducing and 
coordinating 
sensory-motor 
reactions, 
of 
facilitating 
expression [23]. Therefore, the role of young designers is 
vital and represents an interesting innovative approach to 
social lifestyles analysis and research: although they could 
be naïve researchers who are not experienced with the use 
of techniques, methods, and tools, they can provide actual 
points of view due to their active sociality and immersion in 
social life. Different questions remain open and could 
become source for further research: how can design and 
music cross fertilize each other resulting in new approaches 
to music production and in transdisciplinary areas of 
research for design studies and practices? In which way a 
naïve, but fresh point view can be integrated and mediated 
in ethnographic discourses, as a source for radical analysis?  
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Zingale, Interpretation and Project. ITALY: Franco 
Angeli, 2012. 
[2]
C. S. Peirce, “How to Make our Ideas Clear”, in Popular 
Science Monthly, vol. XII, pp. 286-302, 1878. 
[3]
T. Maldonado, Real and Virtual. ITALY: Feltrinelli, 
1992. 
[4]
E. F. Moran, The Ecosystem Approach in Anthropology: 
from Concept to Practice. USA: The University of Michigan Press, 
1997. 
[5]
R. D. Coyne and J. S. Gero, “Semantics and the 
Organization of Knowledge in Design”, in Design Computing, vol. 
I, pp. 68-89, 1986. 
[6]
N. Cross, “Designerly Way of Knowing” in Design 
Studies, vol. IV, pp. 68-89, 1972. 
[7]
N. C. Goodwin, “Functionality and Usability”, in 
Computing Practices, vol. XXX, pp. 229-233, 1987. 
[8]
S. Petrina, “The Political Ecology of Design and 
Technology Education: an Inquiry into Methods”, in International 
Journal of Technology and Design Education, vol. X, pp. 207-237, 
2000. 
[9]
S. Glynn, “Science and Perception as Design”, in Design 
Studies, vol. VI, pp. 122-126, 1985. 
[10]
J. Noyes and C. Baber, User-centred Design of Systems, 
UK: Springer, 1999. 
[11]
F. A. Bassanese, Understanding Luigi Pirandello, USA: 
University of South Carolina Press, 1997. 
[12]
M. Suwa and B. Tversky, “Constructive Perception: a 
Metacognitive Skill for Coordinating Perception and Conception”, 
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science 
Society, vol. XXV, pp. 1140-1145, 2001 [23rd Annual Meeting of 
the Cognitive Science Society, Scotland, 2001]. 
[13]
L. Turchet, F. Fischione, G. Essl, D. Keller, and M. 
Barthet, “Internet of Musical Things: Vision and Challenges”, 
IEEE Access, vol. VI, pp. 1994-2007, 2018.   
[14]
S. Palmieri, M. Bisson, A. Ianniello, M. Di Noia, 
“Human 2 Artificial: From Duets with Robots to a New Model of 
Relationship”, in Proceedings of the 13th International Conference 
on Creative Content Technologies, Valencia, Spain, 18-22 April 
2021, pp. 1-5. 
[15]
A. Van Onck, “Metadesign”, in Edilizia Moderna, vol. 
LXXXV, pp. 1-6, 1964.  
[16]
G. Fischer and E. Giaccardi, “Meta-Design: A 
Framework for the Future of End User Development”, in End User 
Development: Empowering People to Flexibly Employ Advanced 
Information and Communication Technology, H. Lieberman, F. 
Paternò, and V. Wulf Eds. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer 
Academic Publishers, pp. 427-457, 2006.
[17]
 E. B. N. Sanders and P. J. Stappers, “Co-Creation and 
the New Landscapes of Design”, in International Journal of Co-
Creation in Design and Arts, vol. IV, pp. 5-18, 2008. 
[18]
M. Kleinsmann and R. Valkenburg, “Barriers and 
Enablers for Creating Shared Understanding in Co-Design 
Projects”, in Design Studies, vol. XXIX, pp. 369-386, 2008. 
[19]
M. Sten, “Co-Design as a Process of Joint Inquiry and 
Imagination”, in Design Issues, vol. XXIX, pp. 16-28, 2013. 
[20]
F. S. Visser, P. J. Steppers, R. Van der Lugt, and E. B. N. 
Sanders, “Contextmapping: Experience from Practice”, in 
International Journal of Cocreation in Design and Arts, vol. I, pp. 
119-149, 2005. 
[21]
E. Manzini, Design when Everybody Designs, USA: 
MIT Press, 2015. 
[22]
D. A. Norman and R. Verganti, “Incremental and 
Radical Innovation: Design Research vs. Technology and Meaning 
Change”, in Design Issues, vol. XXX, pp. 78-96, 2014. 
[23]
B. Nicolescu, “Methodology of Transdisciplinarity”, in 
The Journal of New Paradigm Research, vol. LXX, pp. 186-199, 
2014. 
[24]
G. Giuriati, “Italian Ethnomusicology”, in Yearbook for 
Traditional Music, vol. XXVII, pp. 104-131, 1995. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-952-2
CONTENT 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

