Congress and Meetings Tourism and Destination Brand 
 
Sara Ficarelli, Sandra Sendra, Lorena Parra, Jaime Lloret 
Universidad Politécnica de Valencia 
Camino Vera s/n, 46022, Valencia, Spain 
sara.ficarelli22@gmail.com; sansenco@posgrado.upv.es; loparbo@epsg.upv.es, jlloret@dcom.upv.es  
 
 
Abstract— Congress tourism has been enforcing its presence in 
global industry despite recent years of economical hardship 
and it is becoming more and more important. This tourist field 
is a high level sector, which involves a lot of people and money. 
In fact, it is a kind of tourism that requires organization, 
intermediary, high capacity destinations and high territorial 
and human resources. Destination management is increasing 
as a professional way to study congress destination 
characteristics, 
meetings 
requirements 
and 
customer 
satisfaction in order to optimize the hosting process and 
promote destination brand. The tourism sector offers benefits 
and impacts in many different ways and completely changes 
the way we understand tourist destinations. Firstly, we are 
going to consider this kind of tourism as a tourist segment. 
Secondly, we are going to focus on what are the factors that 
influence the choice of a congress destination. Finally, we are 
going to analyze the demand and the offer in Spanish tourism 
industry to understand the reason why it is so well located in 
global ranking. 
Keywords- Congress tourism; Destination management; 
Congress requirements and impacts. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Congress tourism is a subset of the larger field of 
business tourism. “Business tourism is the provision of 
facilities and services to the millions of delegates who 
annually attend meetings, congresses, exhibitions, business 
events, incentive travels and corporate hospitality” [1]. In 
this definition, ICCA gives a general perspective of this 
segment in the tourism industry. In fact, there is no official 
definition of Congress and Meeting tourism.  
From an anthropological point of view, tourist experience 
is always a special event in the ordinary life of people. The 
travelers abandon daily life to enter in a different circle of 
activities and way of life. In fact, tourists change their usual 
context and experience a new environment organized for 
leisure time or for other purposes [2]. Actually, event 
tourism refers to marketing and creating special events that 
become a way of living the tourism experience itself [3]. In 
general, event tourism aims to increase the attractiveness of 
one tourist destination with the purpose of creating tourism 
demand and satisfy tourist requirements. Another goal is to 
localize the destination in the marketing field [2]. Generally, 
events are  propulsion factors to create tourism or to enforce 
tourist destinations and they are preeminent elements in a 
destination marketing plan. In fact, planned events are a 
force-factor for destination competitiveness [3].  
Events are useful occasions to renew the urban planning 
of a city and to develop the cultural aspects of destinations. 
Congress tourism is included in the more general  
perspective of event tourism and it is one of the level in 
which tourism and events are connected in a strict relation 
[2]. Planned events are nowadays a consolidate field of 
research and study. D. Getz [3] defines 8 fields: (1) Cultural 
Celebrations, (2) Political and State, (3) Arts and 
entertainment, (4) Business and Trade, (5) Educational and 
scientific, (6) Sport competition, (7) Recreational, (8) Private 
Events. Congress tourism is included in the Business and 
trade subset, which refers to: meetings and conventions, 
consumers and trade shows, fairs, and markets.  
In this paper, we analyze the element of competitiveness 
and image promoting of a congress destination brand. We 
also look at essential characteristics a place must have to be 
considered as a congress destination and analyze how tourist 
offer and incoming services are essential in the selecting 
process. This work helps us understand what are the 
motivations behind a congress destination choice and why 
this type of organization requires such a high level quality.  
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. In Section 
2, we present some works that have analyzed the creation of 
a congress tourist destination and look at requirements and 
impact on the branding process. Section 3 explains the 
different parts a congress is composed of. We discuss both 
the immaterial and materials parts of the congress process, 
analyzing destination management activities and tourist 
requirements. In addition, we analyze the global impact of 
congress tourism in the tourism industry. The research will 
be focused on Spain for its qualities and its position in global 
ranking. The results of this analysis are shown in Section 4. 
Finally, we discuss these results in Section 5. Conclusions 
are shown in Section 6. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
This section shows several works on the connection 
between congress tourism, meetings, events planning and 
destination requirements. 
G. Del Chiappa [4] inquiries into the process in which a 
congress destination is built as a complex brand, with 
different kinds of qualities and characteristics. This analysis 
reveals that a destination is not only a set of goods and 
services but also includes symbolic images and immaterial 
qualities. The consequence is that, in this sector, the role of 
the mark territory has become essential to organize a place in 
a competitive way. In Del Chiappa’s work, the tourist who 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-275-2
CONTENT 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

uses this kind of travels gives more importance to the 
previous period of time. In Destination Branding optic, the 
most important period of time in congress tourism is the 
selection part. In this, the territorial mark is what tourists and 
business look at.. Del Chiappa analyzes the main 
destinations and investigates the process, which concerns the 
mark creation. 
Following this philosophy, D. Getz shows us the 
destination perspective on event tourism [3]. His work is 
built on an anthropological point of view, in which he 
analyzes typologies of event tourism and requirements 
needed for each one. D. Getz also identifies patterns and 
processes related to this aspect and tries to identify possible 
research methods to study how to obtain knowledge about 
the creation process. The author focuses his work on 
outcomes and impacts on event tourism by identifying three 
fields of research: temporal, policy and spatial. D. Getz 
concludes that congress tourism, in a social and cultural way, 
can be understood as including a real effort behind 
organization, a very strong impact on communities and way 
to live. In his opinion, for this field, “event management” 
professions are important.  
This is a fast growing professional field focused on 
destination management and marketing of customers’ 
behaviour. This way, it is possible to look at event tourism as 
a set of actions, with each one of them having a planned 
work and a predictable effect on the host territory. In Sicily 
Convention Bureau report, it is possible to see how congress 
tourism can be a positive resource for an already confirmed 
tourist destination. This association gives importance to the 
high costs received from delegates who attend congresses 
and makes a list of favorable effects in this kind of tourism, 
which brings visibility outside the simple tourist season. We 
talk about this work because it is a summary of a critic view 
of the Sicily territory. The important thing in this work 
clarifies that the offer needs to unify a territory: a congress 
destination has to be integrated within a context in which it is 
located and communicated with other national congress 
centers [5]. These elements help us identify how we should 
organize a country’s congress destinations. Spain, for 
example, shows a complex and integrated offer that should 
be compared with requirements included in Sicily 
Convention Bureau work. 
III. 
CONGRESS TOURISM AND DESTINATION BRANDING 
In this section, we are going to consider some research 
and literature which can show congress destination 
requirements and impacts. Spain is taken as a model for its 
congress destination offer and its tourism demand. 
A. Incoming offer requirements in congress tourism 
We can identify a few elements of strengths for meetings 
and conventions, namely:  
 
High capacity cost of participant (big spenders). 
 
Destination congress and leisure image promotion. 
 
Brands enforcement. 
To understand how these elements characterize this kind 
of tourism we can see the complexity in demand and offer 
meeting. Demand and offer in congress tourism organization 
create a meeting which involves different kinds of actors. 
From the demand side, professional associations, scientific 
associations, enterprises and organizations are looking for a 
possible congress experience. They also represent the 
advertising recipients and it is possible to see them as 
customers of the tourism industry. From the other side, the 
offer is composed on incoming services, food and beverage 
agencies, entertainment agencies, transports companies and 
public entities [4].  
Managing a congress destination means creating a system 
with different elements, which are connected to each other in 
order to satisfy customers requirements. The whole 
phenomenon of acting congress tourism can be resumed in a 
circle way: Motivation of choice - Planning and managing 
the event – Tourism - Destination aspects - Impact and effect 
on territory - Brand and Economic incomes. It is clear that 
the process can be improved by knowing every element and 
by connecting events feedback with motivation of choice of 
future participants [6].  
The entire process of planning, organizing events and 
promoting a congress experience looks like a tourism 
system. Tourism studies identify a set of economic and 
social inputs [7]. Distinguishing a pre-congress and a post-
congress period, it is possible to look at many sub-factors 
which are strictly related, such as transport and technical 
services. Furthermore, it is possible to identify the 
differences between immaterial procedures and material 
procedures.  
Facilities required in the material part of congress 
tourism are [6]: 
 
Conference rooms, offices and exhibition areas and 
multifunction halls. 
 
Translation equipment and technological instrument 
(sound 
systems, 
projectors, 
etc.) 
to 
satisfy 
audiovisual and video requirements. 
 
High quality hotels (and high quality personnel) 
 
Protocol events, 
formal event 
and activities 
(excursions and tours) 
 
Food and beverage related to different countries to 
satisfy international needs. 
Involving local people can help increase the motivation 
of possible tourists in choosing a destination, by, for 
example, meetings translators, which are intermediaries with 
the place. This can encourages congress members to 
participate actively to the life congress. From another point 
of view, translators are useful to avoid languages barriers. 
English is a spread and common language but, in some 
destinations, different languages are needed and here the role 
of translators becomes much more important. 
These requirements are confirmed by Del Chiappa’s 
survey research [8]. Results data show that different kinds of 
meetings require different kinds of structure, despite a 
common need of large incoming space. For example, the 
availability of large convention centers is important because 
of the high number of participants. Incentive travels need an 
informal location to create socialization. The common 
necessity to achieve spaces has also been evaluated with the 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-275-2
CONTENT 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

purpose to give delegates the possibility to cooperate. The 
accessibility, in Del Chiappa’s opinion, is one of the most 
important elements. The survey gives importance to 
destination 
branding 
which 
improves 
destination 
management with the aim to achieve conference kick-off [8]. 
This is known as the immaterial part of a congress. The 
immaterial part of congress tourism includes pre-organizing, 
monitoring and getting congress feedbacks. 
We have to distinguish two kinds of destinations: 
 
Affirmed tourist destination brand. 
 
Non-affirmed tourist destination which wants to 
improve it. 
These two kinds of tourist destinations are involved in 
congress tourism because both of them have to increase or 
change something in their brand to adapt their offer on 
congress demand. In the first case, we have to change in 
image promoting: here, we already have activities such as 
hotel offer and attractions which can satisfy a particular 
segment of demand. But now, congress destinations have to 
be prepared to be as multifunctional as possible. In tourist 
places which have an affirmed brand, the possibility to 
change their brand consists in performing communication 
between public and private structures to unify as much as 
possible the different elements that are included in the tourist 
destination itself.  
Looking at new tendencies and the utilizing of resources 
to show the destination in different ways, it is important to 
add congress demand in an already confirmed destination. 
Furthermore, a non-affirmed destination which wants to 
get an attractive perspective to host congress, has to make 
strong efforts to create structures and optimize territorial 
characteristics to create a new demand. This kind of reaction 
includes the possibility to study new tendencies about 
business travel and to adapt the territory to specific needs. 
Sometimes, it could be useful to include this kind of 
destination in a bigger context to show an integrated variety 
of spaces. In the first case, the offer of the tourist destination 
is already confirmed, the brand is famous and people have an 
idea before going there. 
The destination management in pre-congress period has 
to study how to satisfy the pull factors [9]: 
 
Geographic 
accessibility: 
good 
transport 
and 
simplicity to arrive. 
 
Social-political aspect (affordability): condition in 
which tourists can live the experience. 
 
Economical: the entire cost for traveling to a 
destination and staying there. 
Another important thing is to study membership 
tendencies and their needs. Delegates move the entire 
congress economy by using economical components such as 
transports 
and 
accommodations, 
registration 
fees, 
entertainments and tours fees, extensions in accommodations 
and paying for being accompanied [7]. In the last few years, 
the studies of customers behavior improved the knowledge 
about congress participants as a social group and we can 
identify three categories of participants[10]: 
1) Functional participant: he/she participates in the 
congress by professional motivations, for the cultural 
exchange and for increasing  his/her own knowledge. 
2) Relational participnat: he/she participates in the 
congress for getting professional relations and generally 
interpersonal relationships. He/she also participates in the 
tourist excursion and leisure offer. 
3) Symbolic 
participant: 
he/she 
participates 
to 
congresses to reach visibility, notoriety and image. He/she 
wants to find a high-level revenue, a prefect organization 
and a good level of representation. 
The congress tourist customer has an exigent and 
informed profile with a middle-high cost and education. The 
congress tourist customers are keen on travels. In 
comparison with the leisure tourist, congress tourists look for 
a different quality of host system and wants a high level of 
incoming services. The sojourning time is less flexible than a 
leisure tourist and he/she usually thinks less in prices and 
costs [10]. 
It is important to design a planned marketing valuation in 
the pre-congress phase and it is also interesting to study 
future memberships needs. The marketing of congress 
destinations works on four levels [10]: 
 
Delighting demand market. 
 
Identifying objective attractions which can attire this 
sector-aim. 
 
Defining a positioning strategy and prove destination 
brand. 
 
Acting tactics and operations. 
Thanks to these points of organization, organism like 
Conventions Bureaux are using more and more often 
previous studies to identify congress users and knowing the 
demand. Firstly, it is necessary to identify the social group 
which should participate in the congress and try to design a 
customer’s satisfaction line. After this, it is possible to adapt 
the structure and create an inventory of material components 
needed to reach this goal. It is possible to define the 
economical impact even as a function of the listing operating 
cost and the number of expected participants [10]. 
We have to distinguish another kind of segmentation in 
this offer. It is related to the difference between hosts and 
guests. The organizers and the delegates in the congress 
tourism have a different systemic role. Firstly, organizers 
have to guarantee services (like food and beverage) which 
have to be available before conference starts. They also have 
to prepare documentation (promotion materials, congress 
announcements, etc.) and have to rent equipment and 
instruments to support the correct operation of the congress 
[4]. 
From the organization point of view, we find connections 
with the field of information. Communication connections 
between exterior market and incoming market allows us to 
plan the visit. It is also important to improve the revenue 
system. The integrated system of revenue allows guiding and 
reaching the hospitality in the destination [10].  
The process of organizing meetings is a complex work of 
people but there are different ways to plan this kind of event. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-275-2
CONTENT 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

Firstly, a meeting can change its way to be organized from 
the temporal point of view. 
Using a structured approach, it is possible to create a list 
of congress requirements to give a congress image for a 
destination. Firstly, it is necessary to connect delegate 
numbers and create a relation with the destination. The 
location becomes important for the offer that gives people 
who come in the country (or region) and it is important to 
calculate the impact on size attendance. Local speakers are 
important from the organization point of view because they 
are intermediary between organizers and delegates and if 
they are local, they can be also a guide which permits to give 
importance to the geographical context. 
A destination has to be supported by exhibitors and 
sponsors. So, it is important to connect the destination choice 
and the sponsors feedback in order to know in which way the 
location can be useful to support the congress. The value 
exchange is important to ensure the success in travel 
organization and customers’ behavior. People prefer to have 
a tourist experience where they can spend a lot time thanks 
to a favorable value [7]. 
Finally, we can build a scheme about the entire process 
of organizing a congress where destination, congress and 
brand are related. 
We should distinguish primary service relationships 
which are services at the core of the brand experience, such 
as hotels and hotel associations. This segment communicates 
with consumers (residents and employee, internal customers 
and non-conflicting target markets) and communication 
media (functional communication from one side and induced 
marketing communications and advertising from the other). 
These elements are built on brand infrastructure relationship 
which are composed of access services (external and internal 
transports), hygiene facilities (car parks and open spaces) 
and BrandScape. These elements work together and the final 
result is that Destination Brand is characterized by 
personality, positioning and reality of place [4]. 
B. Congress tourism in global scenery 
In global situation, congress tourism represents one of the 
fastest developing sectors which are increasing in the tourism 
industry. This element has been developed very recently and 
tourist companies are approaching to this segment in 
different ways, giving to the global scenery a complexity in 
offer and demand. 
In Fig. 1, we can see where Europe is placed in global 
raking. These observations are strictly related to Europe 
tourist characteristics which can be derived in this paper and 
discussed at the end of our research. 
A recent survey about congress tourism of future global 
situation reveals that, in the 2012-2020 period, this tourist 
sector will have different external factors which will impact 
it. 
Firstly, 71% of industrial managers opinions say that the 
economic uncertainty would impact this sector strongly. For 
49% of respondents, new technologies, including the 
possibility of pushing on virtual conferences, can be another 
important element. 47% of respondents think that the most 
important factor is the economical aspect while 46% think 
that Asian policy influences the development of conferences. 
91% of respondents say that those industries have to 
demonstrate a return of investments (ROI) tangible for their 
customers (first choice for the 76% of  respondents). 
Meanwhile, 59% think that is more important to create 
personalized events and 51% say that they will assist on a 
development in interactive-learning experiences. New online 
Social 
Networks 
are 
strongly 
considered. 
63% 
of 
respondents think that social networks such as Facebook, 
Twitter, Linkedin, etc.  will be key elements to promote an 
event. For 60%, these factors will allow an instantaneous 
feedback during congresses and events [11].  
This survey let us thinking about the importance of ICT 
in congress tourism. Congress participants need fast 
connection to the Internet and better access to new 
technology than other kind of tourists. Consumers’ 
expectations are changing parallel to invention of new 
technologies and congresses have to be prepared for new 
applications and innovations. Keeping in mind these factors, 
we should highlight two words. The first one is 
“connectivity”. A business meeting is a work place which 
hosts several workers in a period of time. The Internet 
connection has become important because it allows us to 
communicate outside the congress context.. Moreover, it is 
necessary to ensure that participants get information every 
time they need. The second word is “presentation”. The 
formality and quality are the most important requirements in 
congress tourism. In fact, a well presented congress and good 
services will guarantee the presence of high level ICT. The 
“technological solution” will not replace the real presence of 
participants. ICT would just strengthen visibility of 
congresses and give more eases to delegates [12]. Hotels and 
congress planners have to build connections which allow 
creating networks between participants. In this context, it is 
necessary that event planners and hotels look at new 
technologies in order to be prepared to reach new 
applications. Lack of these kind of services can create 
problems in organizing congresses and can decrease the 
quality of the incoming process. A recent survey about 
perception of new technologies in convention context reveals 
that congress palaces managers find Wi-Fi and audiovisual 
streaming essential, but for 64% of them, organizers and 
participants have to look at these services in a more realistic 
way. In fact, providing a speed and free connection is a 
critical point of discussion in this context. For 76%, the 
pricing offer should be diversified by different customers. 
For 54% of respondents, free Wi-Fi access should be 
sponsored by the event hosted and for 42% of them,  
connection has to be free only in public spaces. Only  25% of 
respondents think that Wi-Fi should be free in all of the 
building spaces. The survey shows us how high is the 
customers’ expectation and how important free Wi-Fi service 
has become for the participants. In fact, 86% of respondents 
are interested in having a permanent signage system in the 
common areas of the congress site and 56% of respondents 
think that it can give more value to the event, especially if 
they want to localize the event, advertise and build 
information [13]. 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-275-2
CONTENT 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

The event web page has to be well planned and with all 
the information customers need, that is, tourist information, 
incoming information and congress contents. In experts’ 
opinion, a convention promotion takes 6 steps strictly 
connected with ICT: (1) not excluding  use of social network 
like Facebook or Twitter to produce a publicity effect; (2) 
using traditional internet instruments like main listing  and 
social media to collect participants feedbacks after the 
congress and to stimulate their opinion on the event; (3) 
utilizing twitter during the congress with the hashtag (#name 
event, for example) to promote the event and suggesting to 
the event followers to retweet; (4) creating a Facebook event 
page and inserting the “I like” in the congress website page 
to show the event to people who are not directly connected 
with the event; (5) publishing the event in on online 
calendars, hosted by many websites and publishing it on 
Foursquare or Gowalla; (6) creating a live connection during 
the event publishing news on real time and photos, for 
example on Flickr [14]. 
Another important element is the use of geo-localization. 
It is an application given to participants due to the necessity 
of speed and commodity requested by delegates. ICT are 
also important to promote the congress itself. 
Congress planners also have to procure applications 
which can be downloaded on the new high-tech mobile 
phones. This is important because enterprises often give to 
participants these new instruments. An example of this 
importance is the IPhone and IPad  application called 
ITCongress 2.1 (the reviewed version), presented by 
Tecnoconference – TC Group in occasion of BTC, the 
Rimini event-fairy. This kind of application allows 
visualizing videos and abstracts of the papers, geo-
localization, the building map and the event description [15].  
Mobile phone are more and more connected on real time 
and if they are connected on real time (and here, we can see 
the importance of connectivity) it allows us to communicate 
outside the congress building, promoting the event and 
increasing the customers’ satisfaction. 
C. Spain as an increasing congress destination model 
Spain Convention Bureau was created in 1984 and it is 
composed by 55 destinations. This association works with 
the Spanish tourism institute (TURESPAÑA) in order to 
organize events, international faeries, marketing studies, 
workshops and destination promotion [16]. Nowadays, Spain 
congresses have a big impact on the economy of incoming 
tourism. Spain occupies the third position in ICCA global 
ranking in number of congresses [17]. In 2011, Spain hosted 
463 international congresses. 
Fig. 2 shows the main external factors which have impact 
on congress tourism. 
Fig. 3 shows the number of meetings per country in the 
world in 2011. Fig. 4 shows the top ten cities which have 
organized the major amount of conferences in 2011. As we 
can see, Barcelona and Madrid appear in this top ten list of 
cities. 
56.19%
4.03%
4.41%
17.17%
5.12%
13.08%
Europe
Africa
Australia
N. America
S. America 
Asia
 
Figure 1.  Congresses global distribution in 2011. 
71%
49%
46%
47%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Economic 
uncertainty
New 
technologies
Asia 
Influence
Shorter cycle 
of trading 
 
Figure 2.  External factors which influence congress tourism. 
759
577
463
434
428
363
304
302
291
267
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
Number of Meetings
 
Figure 3.  Number of meetings per country in the world in 2011. 
181
174
150
147
142
130
115
114
113
111
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
Number of Meetings
 
Figure 4.  Global ranking: number of meetings per City in 2011.  
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-275-2
CONTENT 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

84.31%
7.19%
1.43%
4.75%
2.16%
Leisure
Congresses and faires
Study
Personal
Other motivation
 
Figure 5.  Motivation of travelling in international Spanish tourism. 
150
130
39
19
16
16
9
9
8
7
6
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Number of Meetings
 
Figure 6.  Number of meetings in the main cities of Spain in 2011. 
The annual economic impact is about 11% of tourist 
international introit in 2011. In Fig. 5, we can see the 
position of this kind of tourism in the international 
motivation of travelling. The middle-cost for a single-travel-
person is about 332 €.  
Turespaña joined the second IMEX AMERICA Edition 
in Las Vegas with 31 Spanish expositors aiming to promote 
the Spanish offer regarding congress tourism. Other 
associations participate this year in specialized visits as 
SITE, ASAE or MPI, in Madrid, Pamplona and Tenerife, 
setting up the platform Spain Meetings & Events 
Community @i-Meet [18]. 
Speaking about the rising importance of congress 
tourism, it is important to mention the case of 
Farmaindustria. The farm industry has gained a relevant 
position within the thematic congress sector which brought 
5335 events in Spain in 2011, with an increase of 5% 
compared to 2010. Nevertheless, this industry has been into a 
radical change this year. In 2011, the new Farmaindustria 
code (Codigo de Buena Prácticas) observes that congresses 
and events related with this industry cannot include leisure 
activities and according to the new auto-regimentation [19], 
it cannot reserve Golf hotels and Thematic Hotels. This point 
has brought us to think about the important relation among 
hotel offer, theme congress and event purpose. In this case, 
the enterprise seeks to find reasonable locations and adequate 
sojourns to the quality of scientific program with a hosting 
place suitable to the new austerity level. 
An enterprise prefers to choose a 4-5 stars hotel. 
However, lots of places mean to start a reclassification. In 
fact, the 5335 events in 2011 respected this code. In MPI 
opinion every year more and more enterprises decide to auto-
regulating themselves in order to defend their reputation. The 
consequence is that the whole congress organization is 
regulated in different ways connected with the political 
sector. In fact, we can observe the strength of the relation 
between demand and offer and how a destination can change 
their brands or their tourist structure. These changes have the 
aim of satisfying congress customers and participants 
without damaging the destination brand of the congress [19]. 
Fig. 6 shows the ten spanish cities which have organized 
the most meetings throughout 2011. Madrid and Barcelona 
play an important role as most important congress cities in 
Spain. In ICCA ranking, these destinations occupy third and 
sixth position, respectively [17]. The Spanish offer is 
complex and includes a lot of destinations. The Spain 
Convention Bureau (SCB) unifies 38 congress cities and 
there are several other places not federated into SCN which 
show us how Spain is a consolidated congress country [14]. 
Nowadays, Barcelona is living an important moment of 
prosperity in this kind of sector. In 2011 (See Fig. 6), the 
segment increased by 5% in participant numbers compared 
to 2010 [20]. The positive trend is also referred to meeting 
numbers which these years have increased by 6.8% in 
relation to 2010 with the total of 2,283 meeting and 647,693 
participants (80% of them are foreigners). In particular, the 
courses and daily meeting subsets increased by 50% more 
(64.612 delegates) than meetings in 2010. This fact implied 
2,523,937 reservations (almost a 2.6% more than 2010) in 
the Catalan capital. Hence, we can see Barcelona as a perfect 
model of congress destination city. The Barcelona region 
presents an important role in ICCA. Barcelona is the second 
place with the highest number of hotel capacity system. It is 
also important  to consider how this city is well-seen. In 
many reviews and in many famous newspaper readers 
opinion (Askmen, Forbes, Monocle’s, Time Out) Barcelona 
appears as a one of the best cities to live in [21]. 
Despite all these important attributions, the most 
important seems to be the big capacity of reception. 
The high dimension of the incoming offer located in a 
rich tourist region, amounts on a big set of establishments 
(more than 1000 spaces which can host meetings, 38 golf 
camps, high level sport installations and the presence of city) 
account for the fact that Barcelona (which has a great 
position in global ranking) would be considered as a strategic 
position in Mediterranean sea and Europe. 
We cannot forget the important role of transport and 
infrastructures which makes possible reaching the territory 
by train and plane.  Barcelona airport grows every year more 
and every year it improves its connections with USA, South 
America and south-east Asia. 29% of the intercontinental air 
traffic is attributed to this city which means 40% of Spanish 
traffic to middle-orient and Asia [20]. 
Catalonia does not include only Barcelona as a city 
congress. We can identify different places which are 
important in this sector, for example, Girona. Another place 
is Lleida which grows itself like a “smart city” and finds its 
force in its location and in recent years has seen a positive 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-275-2
CONTENT 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

increase of congresss tourism thanks to infrastructures, new 
technologies and tourist equipment. Congress activities 
generated in 2010 7,32 millions of euro in the city economy 
[21]. Fig. 7 shows the origin of participants in Barcelona 
congresses. 
18.30%
81.00%
0.70%
Spain
International
N.D.
 
Figure 7.  Barcelona congress participants origin in 2011 [16]  
The second most important city in Spanish congress 
tourism is the capital, Madrid. In 2012, this city has enforced 
its presence in global congress market by participating in 
many thematic meetings Meedex (París), IMEX (Frankfurt), 
AIBTM (Baltimore), CIBTM (Pekín), IMEX América (Las 
Vegas), MICE Place International (París) and EIBTM 
(Barcelona). The promotional strategy that Madrid Visitors 
& Convention Bureau is trying to improve the city aspect 
showing this city as a prefect destination model, opening the 
market to international demand like China or USA [23]. 
Another important congress destination which must be 
included in this research is the Andalusia Region. It presents 
strength characteristics such as favorable climate and 
geography (seaside, natural protected spaces), a good golf 
fields offer, sportive ports, good gastronomy and very-well 
organized hotel offer (big conference halls and audiovisual 
technologies). It is important the role of the particular mark 
called “Asociacion de Palacios de Congresos de Andalucia” 
which demonstrate the importance of destination promoting. 
In comparison with Catalonia region, we can identify some 
points of weakness which have to be considered in a 
destination management study. Firstly, Andalusia region 
does not have good airport connection and its infrastructures 
have not been built with the purpose to create trade meetings. 
They are old-aged and so it is not possible to increase the 
incoming market.  
These weakness elements do not allow an incoming offer 
evolution and a re-qualification of buildings and transports 
would be necessary to improve the incredible territory offer 
[10]. There are many cities in Andalusia that can host a 
congress such as Sevilla, Córdoba, Granada, Cádiz and 
Málaga, capital of the Costa del Sol. This last destination is 
requested for its hotel offer and for its sophisticated resort 
area fruit of 30 years of tourism development.. Places like 
Torremolinos, Marbella, Fuengirola and Estepona are good 
for sports and activities thanks to a very good climate. The 
point of strength is also the presence of a high nnumber of 
high-level hotels and restaurants. Costa del Sol is also a 
strategic point for its perfect position for daily excursions to 
other cities of Andalusia. Cadiz and Sevilla are also congress 
destinations very well positioned. Seville in particular has an 
airport and it is well connected by train with Madrid. 
In the North of Spain, Basque Country is strategically 
positioned in the transport network which includes 
boundaries with the south eastern areas of France. We can 
find high-level infrastructures and its tourist offer is oriented 
to natural and cultural activities thanks to the presence of 
museums and parks very well known. Outside Iberian 
Peninsula, the Canarias Islands represent another part of 
Spanish congress tourism offer. The force-point of Canarias 
is the natural landscape and the hotel offer which works all 
the year thanks to favorable climate and the presence of golf 
fields [23]. 
Another important congress destination is Valencia, the 
third largest metropolitan city in Spain. Fig. 6 shows that 
Valencia hosted 39 conferences in 2011. With 39 meetings, 
Valencia is positioned as third national destination. In 2010, 
the city also occupied the third position in ICCA Europe 
cities ranking and the tenth position in global ranking. 
Unfortunately, its position changed in 2011 because of 
strong competiveness in congress destination branding and 
European keen competition. Despite this data, we can look at 
this city and observe qualities which it presents. In fact, from 
1998, Valencia has seen a growth rate of 600%. Turismo 
Valencia approved 2012-2015 strategic plans giving an 
important role on convention and congress incoming 
tourism. In these three years, the aim will be to maintain its 
position in national ranking and include it in the first 25 
European positions and in the first 50 in global position. 
Looking at the permanence of international arrivals to the 
city, we can understand why the first aim of Turismo 
Valencia is oriented on international congress demand. In 
fact, the capital of autonomous community of Valencia is 
getting importance of the international tourist demand in 
Spain thanks to its tourist offer and the improvements of 
choice in last years. As we saw before, facilities 
requirements as conference rooms, offices and exhibition 
areas and multifunction halls are essential in destination 
brand promotion [24]. A strong promotion incoming factor is 
certainly the Valencia Conference Center, which was 
designated as “World's Best Convention Centre” at Apex 
Award 2010 by AIPC (International Association of Congress 
Centre) in Liverpool [25]. This conference keeps on giving 
the city an improving image. In 2010, the center hosted 114 
events with 89,304 participants and in 2011, it  hosted 19 
international congresses. The conference center is starting up 
a process of improvement which will be completed on 2014 
through the opening of a more multifunctional congress 
building in order to host a major number of people [24]. 
Furthermore, Valencia-Manises International Airport is a 
hub between northern Europe and the Mediterranean 
countries. In Valencia region, tourism is of essential 
importance and its airport made possible international 
arrivals to Costa Blanca beaches. In the last few years, 
Valencia brand has been growing after having built City of 
the Arts and Sciences. In autonomous community of 
Valencia, it is also important to mention Alicante as a new 
congress destination.  
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-275-2
CONTENT 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

In 2011, congress tourism brought to the city of Alicante 
70 events including meetings, conventions and daily 
congresses. The presence of “Ciutat d’Elx” and the 
Alicante’s conference center, is certainly a pull factor. The 
ACB (Alicante Convention Bureau) is oriented to host a 
major number of participants thanks to new incorporations in 
the conference center structure [24]. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
After this research and these statistics, we can talk about 
the field of congress tourism. Organizing meetings and 
congresses is a part of business tourism and events tourism. 
This activity involves a plurality of actors and resources.  
We have identified the main elements which are referred 
to the component in material part of this tourism. In the 
immaterial part, we have talked about destination branding 
and its goals. In this part, we have included the analysis of 
the demand and the offer where we have defined the services  
in a congress which should have to be very-well positioned 
in international destination marketing. The most important 
thing seems to be the accessibility and the high-quality hotel 
offer. In this sense, there are more and more important 
modern commodities related with new technologies. We 
have also distinguished two kinds of destinations. One of 
them is a destination already famous and confirmed in 
international scenery. The others are places which want to be 
considered congress destination but before this, they have to 
improve many elements. Both of these kinds of destinations 
are present in Spain and are presented as a great model in 
global congress demand. In fact, Spanish cities and regions 
satisfy all the elements which have been considered in these 
researches.  
We have also talked about weakness point in Spain 
country. We made a critical review about some element, like 
one present in Andalusia region. As we can see in ICCA 
statistics, Europe is very well positioned in global ranking. 
The most important thing, we can achieve thanks to this 
paper is that congressional tourism has to be included in 
general tourist offer for its mix of business and leisure. 
When a territory is a complex kind of tourist offer, it can 
automatically become a potential congress destination. This 
is because, in this segment, the pre-congress moment is the 
most important element. Brands are becoming the motivation 
of choicefor congress organizers and participants. Spain and 
the other European countries present a tourist image, a 
destination brand which is generally already famous and 
confirmed. This is a point of strength and secondary 
destinations can be used to increase the incoming services by 
destination 
management 
studies 
and 
re-qualification 
activities. We can conclude saying that the role of ICT 
(Information 
and Communication 
Technologies) 
will 
increase in importance. As a consequence, ICTs are essential 
for the congress Spanish tourism deal with the ICT and the 
role played by Spain in regards to this field of study [26]. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
We have shown that congress tourism is a complex way 
of travelling and it creates a very particular relation between 
demand and offer. In the more general field of event tourism, 
planning is the most important moment. In most parts of the 
hosting congresses work, the act of managing becomes a 
priority process which involves every part of the destination 
and the membership expectations. Furthermore, this segment 
does not impact only in the place where a meeting is hosted. 
Talking about a congress destination means that we should  
consider the entire context in the place where the meeting is 
located. A set of elements motivate the choosing process and 
most of them are often related with the more general 
destination location. 
The conclusions drawn from this study can be used to 
mitigate/harmonize the regional tourist requirements. It can 
also be used to adapt and improve existing portals and web 
services to new demands of customer needs considering their 
comments. We believe that this document can help creators 
and researchers of tourism websites. This work has helped us 
achieve a better understanding of new ways to understand 
tourist destinations. In fact, the more general business 
tourism requires different kinds of quality and necessities. 
The difference between leisure travel and business travel are 
essential to understand the selection of destination. 
Moreover, studying the new business tendencies and 
customers behavior in working place and meeting aim can 
help the destination brands to became more attractive not 
only in this sector but also in every part of its economic 
offer. 
Challenge between destinations will be more competitive 
and destination management will be a universal useful 
recognized field to improve or create more attractive 
destinations. Analyzing Spain as a well-positioned country in 
global ranking allows us to take it as a model of reference. In 
this country, general tourist offer and fame have met 
congress tourism requirements in a very interesting way. 
When a country has a great diversified offer and high hosting 
potential, it lets us understand how a congress destination 
can be built. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Authors would like to thank Carola Giannino and Laura 
di Lorenzo for their help in improving this paper. 
REFERENCES 
[1] ICCA-International Congress and Convention Association, 
“FAQ’s”, 2012. Available at: http://www.iccaworld.com/ 
[2] A. Simonicca, Antropologia del turismo. Strategie di ricerca e 
contesti etnograf ici. Roma: La Nuova Italia Scientifica, 1997. 
[3] D. Getz, “Event tourism: Definition, evolution, and research”, 
Tourism Management, Vol.29, Issue 3, 2008, pp. 403-428.  
[4] G. Del Chiappa, “The brand building process of a convention 
destination”. In proccedings of the 7th International  
Conference Marketing Trends, Venice (Italy), January 25-26, 
2008. 
[5] Sicilia Convention Boreau, “Il turismo congressuale come 
risorsa per lo sviluppo economico del territorio”, (2009). 
Available 
at: 
http://www.siciliaconvention.com/cms/docs/TurismoCongress
uale.pdf. (Last access: January 20, 2013) 
[6] MCI 
Building 
Community, 
“Succesfull 
Conference 
Management: choosing the right destination”. Available at: 
http://www.mci-
group.com/Country_Navigation/Countries/Ireland/~/media/M
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-275-2
CONTENT 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

CI/LocalFiles/Ireland/PressReleases/choose_destination.ashx, 
(Last access: January 20, 2013) 
[7] M. Manente, “Destination management and economic 
background: 
defining 
and 
monitoring 
local 
tourist 
destinations” In proccedings of UNTWO Conference of 
Tourism: Knowledge as value advantage of tourism 
destinations, Malaga (Spain), October 29-31, 2008.  
[8] G. Del Chiappa, “ How do meeting organisers choose 
convention sites based upon different types of  meetings? An 
empirical analysis of the Italian Meeting Industry”, Event 
Management, Vol. 16, Issue 2, April 1, 2012, pp. 157-170 
Available at: htt://www.ingentaconnect.com  
[9] M. Cerquetti, “Il territorio come destinazione turistica. Lo 
sviluppo turistico del territorio in chiave sistemica”. Available 
at: 
http://docenti.unimc.it/docenti/mara-
cerquetti/organizzazione-e-gestione-delle-imprese-
turistiche/modulo-ii-gestione-e-marketing-delle-
destinazioni/il-territorio-come-destinazione-turistica 
(Last 
access: January 20, 2013). 
[10] D. Jiménez and M. Sánchez, “El Marketing del turismo de 
negocios: Los Convention Bureau como herramienta 
promocional”, Journal of Investigación y Marketing, vol. 87, 
2005, Pp. 56-63,. 
[11] X. Canalis, (June 12, 2012), “El futuro del turismo de 
reuniones en los próximos diez años”, in Hosteltur web site. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.hosteltur.com/191560_futuro-turismo-
reuniones-proximos-diez-anos.html (Last access: January 20, 
2013) 
[12] E. Hirt, “Meetings technology: threat or enhancement?” 
Available 
at: 
http://www.aipc.org/mediacoverage/308_MICE%20Italy%2008.10%
20Tecnologia%20per%20congressi.pdf (Last access: March 12, 
2013) 
[13] Smart City Networks, (August 25, 2012) “releases findings of 
telecommunications and technology survey”, smart City 
Network 
web 
site. 
Available 
at: 
https://www.smartcitynetworks.com/media/pr.aspx?newsid=1
27 (Last access: March 12, 2013) 
[14] S. Pesarini, “Promuovere un evento online con i social 
media”. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.italiaconvention.it/it/magazine-
articoli/promuovere-un-evento-online-con-i-socialmedia.html 
(Last access: March 12, 2013) 
[15] Event Report web site, (July 4, 2011), “Dal web al mobile, 
Tecnoconference TC Group presenta le novità tecnologiche 
per 
i 
congressi”. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.eventreport.it/stories/agenzie/582_dal_web_al_m
obile_tecnoconference_tc_group_presenta_le_novit_tecnologi
che_per_i_congressi/ (Last access: March 12, 2013) 
[16] Spain 
Convention 
Bureau 
web 
site. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.scb.es/ (Last access: January 20, 2013) 
[17] International Congress And Convention Association (ICCA). 
“Country and city rankings report 2011.” Available at: 
http://www.iccaworld.com/dcps/doc.cfm?docid=1364&ei=G1
3LUPalO4mI0AXZjoCwDA&usg=AFQjCNHQFKpz7AWV
pHeP5_nAbMkPMIHIpg&sig2=57K74r8ubJodSBDPdKf3aA
(Last access: January 20, 2013) 
[18] Hosteltur, (October 10, 2012),“El turismo MICE representa 
un 11% del gasto turístico extranjero”, Hosteltur web site. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.hosteltur.com/196300_turismo-mice-
representa-11-gasto-turistico-extranjero.html (Last access: January 
20, 2013) 
[19] X. Canalis, (April 7, 2012), “La nueva austeridad de 
Farmaindustria redefine el turismo de congresos”. Hosteltur 
web site. Available at: http://www.hosteltur.com/176560_nueva-
austeridad-farmaindustria-redefine-turismo-congresos.html 
(Last 
access: January 20, 2013) 
[20]  Barcelona Turisme, (March 6, 2012) “El turismo de 
reuniones crece en Barcelona un 5% durante 2011.” Available 
at: 
http://professional.barcelonaturisme.com/files/8684-841-
pdf/NP-060312.cas.pdf (Last access: January 20, 2013) 
[21] Interview to Xavier Espasa i Añoveros, “Cataluña es el primer 
destino de Reuniones”, hosteltur web site. Available at: 
http://static.hosteltur.com/web/uploads/2011/12/La_capital_d
e_Cataluna_lidera_los_listados_mundiales_del_sector.pdf 
(Last access: January 20, 2013) 
[22] Hosteltur web site, (May 10, 2012), “Madrid gana una 
veintena de nuevos congresos y eventos internacionales”, 
Hosteltur 
web 
site. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.hosteltur.com/183270_madrid-gana-veintena-
nuevos-congresos-eventos-internacionales.html (Last access: 
January 20, 2013) 
[23] Spain 
Incentive 
and 
Meeting 
Association 
(SIMA). 
“Destinations”. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.sima.es/destinations.html (Last access: January 
20, 2013) 
[24] Hosteltur web site, “Valencia se consagra como el tercer 
destino de España para el turismo de congresos”. Available at: 
http://static.hosteltur.com/web/uploads/2011/12/Una_tercera_
parte_de_las_4_millones_de_pernoctaciones_de_2011_corres
ponden_a_este_sector.pdf  (Last access: January 20, 2013) 
[25] MC ONLINE, (July 14, 2010), “Valencia Conference Center 
premiato 
da 
AIPC”. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.mconline.it/news/3792/valencia_conference_centr
e_premiato_da_aipc.htm (Last access: January 20, 2013) 
[26] S. Ficarelli, S. Sendra, L. Ferrando, and J. Lloret, “Effects of 
Web Technologies on Tourism Industry in some Southern 
European Countries”, The First International Conference on 
Building and Exploring Web Based Environments (WEB 
2013), January 27 - February 1, 2013, Seville (Spain). 
 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-275-2
CONTENT 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

