Enduring Cultures – A Socio Cultural Toolkit 
 
Shweta Verma 
Industrial Design Centre 
Indian Institute of Technology Bombay 
Mumbai, India 
shweta1089@gmail.com 
Schubert Foo, Natalie Pang 
Centre of Social Media Innovations for Communities 
Nanyang Technological University 
Singapore 
sfoo@ntu.edu.sg, nlspang@ntu.edu.sg
 
 
 
 
Abstract – In the mad rush of modernization and the blind 
aping of Western manners, the East Indians (Roman 
Catholic ethnic group from the west coast of India) are 
slowly but steadily losing count of some of their most 
cherished customs and conventions, and are at the risk of 
being lost forever. ‘Enduring Cultures’ is an approach to 
cultural heritage preservation and protection of indigenous 
knowledge 
with 
an 
emphasis 
on 
local 
community 
participation and collaboration via social media. This paper 
presents a design recommendation of a work-in-progress 
system that aims at engaging the community together while 
creating a platform for generating and broadcasting content 
that is central to the community’s cultural identity.  
Keywords – social tools; community; cultural computing; 
preservation; collaborative; culture; web; mobile; user 
generated content; East Indians; Mumbai. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION - THE EAST INDIANS AND THEIR 
CULTURE 
The East Indians are indigenous to the west Konkan 
coast of India and owe their nomenclature not to natural 
growth but to a change of religion. Under the Portuguese 
rule in the 16th century, several villages were evangelised 
and many accepted the Catholic faith [1]. 
Much later, by the adoption of the name `East Indian’ 
they wanted to impress upon the British Government of 
Bombay that they were the earliest Roman Catholic 
subjects under the British Crown in this part of India [2].  
This conversion was the main foundation of this 
Marathi Christian community making it a culturally rich 
amalgamation of pre-christian traditions and adaptations 
from Christianity. Their manners, customs and social 
mores rendered them a community absolutely apart from 
all the other Indian communities and have unique daily 
practices ingrained in their religion, villages, language, 
dressing, 
cuisine, 
music, 
matchmaking 
and 
their 
occupation.  
Figure 1 shows a series of photographs from the 
community depicting worship, costume, family and living. 
 
Figure 1.   The East Indians of Mumbai, India. 
II. 
OPPORTUNITIES AND NEED GAPS 
Although cultures themselves are dynamic and 
evolving, they are fragile when faced with political, social 
and economic changes [3]. For example, large-scale 
migration patterns of communities moving out from rural 
into urban areas have resulted in many social practices 
being eroded and lost. 
For generations, oral tradition kept the elaborate social 
mores and traditional practices of the East Indians alive. 
With modernisation, communities are now faced with 
difficulties in maintaining their own culture and 
encouraging the newer generations to recognise their own 
cultural heritage as being worthy of preserving and passing 
on to future generations. 
Today, as their coastal villages get increasingly 
urbanised, the small community is struggling to preserve 
their oral traditions in religion, matchmaking, dressing, 
cuisine, music and other unique cultural identities that 
rendered them a community in the first place. 
Need gaps are critical in the face of information 
sourcing, dilution of cultural roots due to migration and 
 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-220-2
CONTENT 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

fragmentation of the community leading to loss in 
collective identity. 
III. 
ISSUES WITH CURRENT INITIATIVES 
Currently there are very few social media initiatives 
available for culture preservation or to shape and impart 
cultural practices. At best, only traditional portals like 
Facebook and Youtube to upload and share information 
amongst community members are in use. Some initiatives 
have been taken by the East Indian Association to create 
an online system for social interaction and general 
community awareness [4]. Figure 2 is a screenshot of the 
home page of the East Indian Community system. 
Most East Indians belong to the middle of the pyramid 
economic group.  They generally lack the resources or the 
knowledge to access and participate in such portals. The 
most familiar mode of communication is the mobile phone 
(that are usually feature phones or entry level smart 
phones), which is primarily used for voice calls or SMS. 
Being in close vicinity to more urban localities, the 
community is also equipped with Internet facilities. 
Despite the availability of infrastructure, there is still a 
lack of participation from the majority of the community 
due to the preference of in-person communication and lack 
of digital media devices that can address the needs of the 
community. 
There is also another section of the younger generation 
of the community, which, under the influence of education 
and modernisation, is now adapting popular media. The 
varied technological adoptions within the community and 
the generation gaps are the critical reasons for the 
obliteration of cultural identity.  
IV. 
DESIGN FOR DIALOGUE 
Culture preservation is presently dominated by the 
documentation of tangible forms of culture. ‘Enduring 
Cultures’ addresses more than material preservation and 
incorporates the vital elements of everyday experiences in 
living culture. 
Using traditional means of communication and 
technology readily available to the villages belonging to 
the middle of the pyramid, the concept aims at creating a 
multi-local society bridging the gap between the local 
villages and the migrants to the much modern localities. 
The concept also aims at creating tangibility on the web so 
as to reach to a wider global audience. 
It allows indigenous people take the lead in data 
collection as well as utilization by choosing what they 
perceive as important, wish to preserve and pass on.  
Figure 3 provides an overview of the concept model.  
In this model, the main goal is to first encourage the 
contribution of community information by users in various 
forms and formats.  Information contributed are tagged, 
organized and stored in a culture repository that support 
the key functions for the community to learn, pass on and 
sustain themselves.  The model’s second thrust is to 
engender community interaction through co-creation and 
collaboration.   
V. 
DETAILS OF THE SYSTEM 
The idea proposed is that of a web application that 
extends onto mobiles, desktops and public displays 
 
 
Figure 3.   Concept Model 
 
 
 
Figure 2.   Home page of the East Indian Community website 
(www.east-indians.com)  
 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-220-2
CONTENT 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

creating a self-authored and sustaining culture repository 
that allows users to capture, collaborate and co-create. 
The system consists of four distinct segments that work 
together to give a holistic experience to the users. 
A. Contribution of Content 
Users may upload any content they consider unique to 
their cultural identity. For this purpose, users may use any 
medium most preferred by them like voice, text, video, 
photo, online link, and others. 
B. Tagging of Uploaded Content 
Any content contributed by a user undergoes a process 
of smart tagging so as to identify and distinguish the key 
characteristics of the content. Moreover, users may 
manually input additional tags to their content to facilitate 
data aggregation. These user-generated tags make the 
system more robust and flexible. 
C. Self Organisation of Data 
The next step is that of self-organisation of tagged 
content into media rich (audio, video, stills and text) sets 
called ‘Frames’ of common topics. Dynamic organisation 
of data helps users navigate through the culture repository 
more effectively thus allowing exploration and discovery 
of new information. 
D. Sharing Consolidated ‘Frames’ 
Users may interact with this self-authored culture 
repository by browsing, sharing, printing or posting 
individual sets of related topics while gaining and sharing 
culture rich information.  Figure 4 shows the use of the 
bulletin board concept for organizing information for 
viewing, browsing and interacting.  The display changes as 
new information is contributed and as more hits to popular 
information artifacts are accumulated.  
The above-mentioned functions take place over an 
ecosystem comprising of three components described as 
follows (see Figure 5): 
A. Mobile and Desktop - A mobile application (which 
works as a layer on the in-built applications) and a 
desktop widget (with offline support) for tagging and 
uploading content on the go.  They are essentially 
used for reporting anything happening in the 
community that will be of interest to or considered 
worth noticing by the other members of the 
community. 
B. Web Interface - A web repository for viewing and 
using the consolidated content. With this interface the 
users may: 
- 
Receive SMS notifications about happening in 
and around their locality. 
- 
View a live map of tags and uploads and identify 
cultural hotspots based on the nature of the 
content being uploaded by the members of the 
community of a particular neighbourhood. 
- 
Promote and collaborate on upcoming events, 
broadcast announcements and raise concerns. 
- 
Create ‘tag shortcuts’ for the particular sets or 
‘Frames’. This way when the user chooses to 
upload new content, they can quickly use the 
shortcut to automatically add the tags to the 
content. 
C. Public Display - This is envisaged to be a touch 
screen interface with interactive support through SMS 
facility to be put up at community centres. The public 
display targets users without the necessary resources 
to access content on the web and acts as a trigger for 
in-person interaction and an evidence of their varied 
cultural identities. 
In addition to display of information the interactive 
screen can also be wirelessly connected for printing 
the content that the system generates using individual 
contributions of the members of the community. Users 
may alternatively choose to receive a link to the 
content of interest via SMS or email for future use. 
 
 
Figure 4.   An Illustration of Data Contribution and Consolidation 
 
 
 
Figure 5.   Three components – Mobile, Web and Public Display 
 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-220-2
CONTENT 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

Moreover, the screen may also be transformed into 
one large monitor for viewing movies, live events and 
videos of community interest during community 
meetings, social gatherings or cultural events. 
VI. 
TAGGING PROTOCOL FOR DATA ORGANISATION 
To allow seamless data aggregation and retrieval, the 
tagging system has been defined using the following tag 
types: 
A. Category - Pre-defined tag sets of cultural identities. 
Allow broad categorisation of content while placing in a 
Frame. 
B. Keyphrase - A phrase describing the contribution.  
Smart words within the phrase act as the primary tag 
during retrieval. 
C. Variable - Secondary tags that boost content 
aggregation. 
Multiple 
variables 
foster 
meaningful 
predictions while displaying content. 
By allowing certain pre-defined categories and certain 
user-generated variables, the system attempts to create a 
balance, giving the users adequate amount of freedom to 
share their thoughts and support for assuring their content 
falls in the right set or Frame. The system uses these tags 
to dynamically organize data by combining, rearranging 
and replicating uploaded content into various Frames and 
exhibit the same as per the demand of the user. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The proposed idea defines a standard protocol for 
contribution of content that can be most easily adopted by 
majority of the users, taking into consideration the varied 
levels of technological know-how amongst the users. The 
system also allows for seamless user-content interaction 
and viewing of the user generated content in different 
contexts (eg. view according to time, media, locality, tags 
or other variables).  
While the platform provides assistance in observing, 
collecting, recording, and using data, it gives the members 
of the community freedom to choose and select the 
information, expressions and rituals that they perceive as 
important. This in-turn promotes a true sense of belonging 
while encouraging the people to recognise the significance 
of their own cultural heritage. 
This social application is accessible to the masses, yet 
functional enough to address the social needs of 
communities that are at risk of quickly disappearing. 
In order to further refine the concept, high fidelity user 
interfaces were designed and detailed for the various 
components of the system keeping in mind the varied 
levels of technical know-how amongst the users of the 
system (see Figure 6). 
A focus group session with six participants from the 
community aged 35-50 years conducted in the contextual 
environment on this aspect of the work suggests that the 
system encourages the users to notice their surroundings 
from a culture preservation point of view. People were 
more conscious of aspects of their daily life pertaining to 
their culture, which otherwise go unnoticed. Few users 
requested to see a list of tags and keywords used by others 
so as to trigger imagination while uploading new content. 
Variable tags were used as means of providing additional 
information about the content as opposed to describing the 
content. Users were also interested in viewing their 
contribution placed in different Frames with different 
interpretations. 
We are currently developing a prototype of the system.  
As part of user studies and follow on work, we will carry 
out a series of iterations and refinements to gauge the 
usability and user interactions of the system in order to 
evolve the system into a highly intuitive system to serve 
the multi-local yet traditional community. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The data discussed in this paper is part of a research 
project funded by the National Research Foundation 
(NRF) and managed through the multi-agency Interactive 
& Digital Media Programme Office (IDMPO) hosted by 
the Media Development Authority of Singapore (MDA) 
under 
Centre 
of 
Social 
Media 
Innovations 
for 
Communities (COSMIC). 
 
REFERENCE 
[1]  Gazetteer or India, Maharashtra State, Volume I, II & 
III -
http://www.maharashtra.gov.in/pdf/gazeetter_reprint.
html [Retrived: January, 2012] 
 
[2]  Baptisa, E. (1967). The East Indians: Catholic 
Community of Bombay, Salsette and Bassein. 
Mumbai: Bombay East Indian Association 
  
[3]  Czermak, K., Delanghe, P., & Weng, W. (n.d.). 
Preserving intangible cultural heritage in Indonesia.  
 
[4]  Bombay East Indian Association – 
http://www.eastindians.com/beia.htm [Retrieved: 
February, 2012] 
 
Figure 6.   Interface design of the system - Frame 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-220-2
CONTENT 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

