GR-Media: Spatial Reference Model for Geo-Referenced Media
(Work-in-progress paper)
Taehoon Kim, Joon-Seok Kim, Azamat Bolat, Dongmin Kim, Ki-Joune Li
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Pusan National University
Busan, Korea
Email: {taehoon.kim, joonseok, azamat.bolat, dongmin.kim, lik}@pnu.edu
Abstract—Recently, the size of digital media contents is growing.
Most of the media content is made to reﬂect the real world. In
particular, media created by reﬂecting the location of the real
world is called Geo-Referenced media. However, the media is
divided into various types, such as photographs, videos, games
and novels. So, it is complicated to make this media as a Geo-
Referenced media. The purpose of this study is to deﬁne a model
that provides location references of various media, and to provide
a way to connect real-world and various Geo-Referenced media
types. In this paper, media types include photography, painting,
video, animation, comics, and novels.
Keywords–Geo-Referenced Media; Spatial Reference Model.
I.
INTRODUCTION
A variety of contents, such as images, multimedia, and
novels directly or indirectly express and relate objects, places,
and locations existing in the real world. For example, the
village of Hobbiton, which appeared in The Lord of the Rings
movie is shot in places of the Waikato town of Matamata in
the real world. This place has become one of the places, which
was visited with curiosity by people who received indirect
experience through the movies. Such Geo-Referenced media is
related to real-world through various type of media, and this
association affects other ﬁelds like tourism industry and the
content industry.
The model connecting the media and the real world is an
important requirement for the utilization of contents and the
diffusion of new industries. The problem of connecting the
media and the real world is classiﬁed into three stages as shown
in Figure 1:
1)
How do you create a model that connects the media
and the real world?
2)
How do you author data by using authored reference
models?
3)
What services will you use for your data?
Therefore, in this paper, we propose a spatial reference model
for constructing Geo-Referenced media for contents that are
closely related to the real world for the ﬁrst step. The pro-
posed model needs to reﬂect the existing standard model that
expresses indoor and outdoor space and place. In addition, we
propose a model considering the reference method depending
on the type of Geo-Referenced media.
This paper is organized as follows. In section II, we
introduce related research and derive the speciﬁc require-
ments of the GR-Media model. Section III explains the types
Figure 1. Problem deﬁnition for Geo-Reference media
and characteristics of media. Section IV describes the media
contents of the proposed model. Section V summarizes the
research contents and discusses future research.
II.
RELATED WORK
A. Geo-Reference Media
This section introduces the research about combining mul-
timedia and spatial reference information. First, MediaQ[1][2]
is a service that makes easy to ﬁnd media taken from outdoor
space based on location. MediaQ manages the media based on
the ﬁeld-of-view (FoV) information shown in Figure 2.
Figure 2. Illustration of camera ﬁeld-of-view (FOV)
(a) in 2D (b) in 3D
In addition, there have been studies to add spatial infor-
mation to media, created in indoor space instead of outdoor
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-611-8
CONTENT 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

space[3][4]. These studies use the same FoV as MediaQ’s FoV,
but present FoV reﬂecting the characteristics of the room. In
order to manage the indoor location information of the media,
the indoor network of the building and the location information
of the media are connected.
However, all these studies manage information based on
the information of the camera that generates the media. In
other words, there is no consideration for the object taken by
the camera has taken. However, many objects in the media are
closely related to the real world. In order to match the media
with the real world, a spatial reference model for objects in
the media is needed.
B. Spatial Data and Spatial Reference Model
For the link between media and the real world, it is
necessary to link the spatial reference model for media with
the existing spatial data model and the spatial reference model.
This section introduces representative indoor and outdoor
spatial data model and coordinate reference system.
IndoorGML[5] is an international standard for the repre-
sentation and exchange of indoor spatial information in the
Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC), which includes a data
model for representing indoor space. In IndoorGML, a cell
space is deﬁned as a unit space constituting an indoor space,
and an indoor space is represented as a set of cell space.
IndoorGML also has an indoor network graph. The node of
this graph correspond to the cell space and is represented
by a state. And the edge of this graph means connectivity
between cell spaces and is expressed as a transition. In case of
media generated indoors, connection with the real world can
be expressed through matching with the indoor network. In
this case, the type of indoor network is the connectivity graph
as shown in Figure 3.
Figure 3. Example of connectivity graph in IndoorGML
CityGML[6] is an international standard established by
OGC to represent urban models and includes data models for
expressing road, building, tunnel, etc. There are various mod-
ules in the document, but
BoundarySurface most commonly
used to express geometry. Therefore, in the case of media
generated outdoors, the connection with the real world can
be expressed by matching with the
BoundarySurface.
ISO 19111[7] is a standard document describing a coor-
dinate reference system, which has a model for the coordi-
nate reference system as shown in Figure 4. The coordinate
reference system consists of datum and coordinate system.
The datum describes the relationship between the object and
the coordinate system. The SC SingleCRS has only one
coordinate system. If more than one coordinate system is
required, the SC CompoundCRS can be used. Since there
is a CRS already deﬁned as shown in Figure 4, we deﬁne the
necessary coordinate system to refer to the objects inside the
media using the predeﬁned CRS.
Figure 4. SC CoordinateReferenceSystem package in ISO19111
As a result, the spatial reference model for Geo-Referenced
meida needs to link IndoorGML for indoor media and
CityGML for outdoor media. In addition, it is necessary to
deﬁne the coordinate reference system for expressing the
objects inside the media using ISO19111. Finally, we can
create a spatial reference model for Geo-Referenced meida
using classiﬁcation according to the characteristics of the
media.
III.
GEO-REFERENCED MEDIA CLASSIFICATION
In this paper, we design a spatial reference model for
contents such as novel, painting, photography, video, movie,
cartoon, and animation. The target contents are all digital
media. Media is divided into text media, image media, and
video media due to it’s characteristics. Table I shows the
contents classiﬁed according to the classiﬁed media types.
Novel is classiﬁed as text media. Contents that are targeted to
one image, such as painting or photographs, are classiﬁed as
an image media. Cartoons are classiﬁed as multi-image media
because they are having multiple images classiﬁed in cut units.
Finally, content whose image changes over time, such as video,
movie, and animation, is classiﬁed as a video media.
In media, objects that require spatial information are di-
vided into two types. One is the camera object that create the
media, and camera objects have FoV information and their
presence is determined by the type of media. The other is an
object inside the media. The objects inside the media have the
following two kinds of information according to the types of
the media.
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-611-8
CONTENT 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

TABLE I. CLASSIFICATION OF CONTENT ACCORDING TO MEDIA TYPE
Text media
Image media
Multi-image
media
Video media
Content
Novel
. . .
Painting
Photography
. . .
Cartoon
. . .
Video
Movie
Animation
. . .
•
For text media:
◦
The location of the object in the text
◦
The spatial information of objects in the cor-
responding real world
•
For image(or video) media:
◦
Boundary geometry information for objects in
images
◦
The spatial information of objects in the cor-
responding real world
Finally, objects inside the media have two pieces of spatial
information together: reference information about the media
and spatial information of the real world. Therefore, a con-
nection between two pieces of information is required.
IV.
GEO-REFERENCED MEDIA MODEL
Based on the spatial information standard introduced in
Section II and the classiﬁcation according to the media charac-
teristics deﬁned in Section III, the GR-Media model as shown
in Figure 5 was constructed.
FIGURE 5. GEO-REFERENCED MEDIA MODEL
The characteristics of the GR-Media model are as follows.
All media inherit Content class. Content class has
MD Content
class
indicating
metadata
including
refer-
ence space information. Media is divided into GR Image,
GR ImageSequence, GR Video and GR Text class depend-
ing on the type.
GR Image class may have GR ImagePatch class for the
representation of objects in an image and uses ImageCon-
tentCRS class as the coordinate reference system. ImageCon-
tentCRS basically use SC ImageCRS class.
In the case of GR ImageSequence class, it consists of
a sequence of GR Image. GR ImageSequence is required
for content with multiple images. For example, in the case
of cartoons, it belongs to GR ImageSequence because it is
composed of several cut images.
In the case of GR Video class, it is composed of sev-
eral frame images(GR Frame class). GR Frame can have
GR FramePatch class for the representation of the objects
in the frame image, and VideoContentCRS class is used
as the coordinate reference system. VideoContentCRS uses
SC ImageCRS class to refer to an object in the frame image,
and uses TM TemporalCRS class to represent the time. That
is, SC CompoundCRS class with two coordinate reference
systems is used.
In the case of GR Text class, various types of media exist
depending on contents, and there are various reference meth-
ods. Therefore, the reference model is designed to have only
TextContentRS class to be extensible, and is not described
in this model. In addition, GR Text provided in this model
assumes a text-only media.
GR Camera class stores FoV information when media is
created. Only media with one image are designed to have FoV.
Patches for representing objects inside each media inherit
GR Patch class. GR Patch has the geometry of the object as
Surface and is mapped to CityGML´s BoundarySurface class.
In the case of media representing indoor space, media such
as GR Image, which do not have a temporal relationship be-
tween media, correspond to the State class of the IndoorGML.
On the other hand, media such as GR Frame, which have
temporally continuous relationship with media, correspond to
the Transition class of IndoorGML.
FIGURE 6. EXTENDED CONTENT MODEL
Figure 6 shows the extended model using the GR-media
model for the content deﬁned in Section III. First, text-
based media, such as ﬁction inherits the GR text class.
Second, media consisting of a single image, such as paintings
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-611-8
CONTENT 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

and photographs, inherits the GR Image class. Third, media
composed of multiple images, such as cartoons, inherits the
GR ImageSequence class. Finally, for video media, such as
movies, animations, the GR Video class is inherited.
An example using the GR-Meida model is shown in Figure
7. GR Video class has basic information about video (title,
length, etc. of video). For example, Figure 7 depicts PSY´s
Gangnam Style music video. In this case, when the Trade tower
appears in 32 seconds, information about the frame image
is expressed by GR Frame class. Then, make a polygon
for the area corresponding to the Trade tower in the frame
image, and express it using GR FramePatch class. Finally,
the 3D model of CityGML is mapped with the corresponding
BoundarySurface class to express the connection between
the media and the real world.
FIGURE 7. EXAMPLE OF GR VIDEO
V.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we design a spatial reference model for
connecting various types of digital media contents and real
world.
However, there is a lack of consideration for content with
complex situations. For example, it is difﬁcult to use the
proposed model in the case where a movie have information
about the real world and the virtual world. Also, there is a
limitation in covering media content like games, music, etc.
In the future, we plan to design a model that considers more
diverse content and matches with virtual worlds or multiple
worlds.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by BK21PLUS, Creative Hu-
man Resource Development Program for IT Convergence and
Ministry of Culture, Sports and Tourism(MCST) and Korea
Creative Content Agency(KOCCA) in the Culture Technol-
ogy(CT) Research & Development Program 2017.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Kim, Y. Lu, G. Constantinou, C. Shahabi, G. Wang, and R. Zimmer-
mann, “MediaQ: Mobile media management framework,” in Proceedings
of ACM International Conference on Multimedia System.
ACM, 2014.
[2]
S. H. Kim, S. A. Ay, and R. Zimmermann, “Design and implementation
of geo-tagged video search framework,” Journal of Visual Communica-
tion and Image Representation, vol. 21, no. 8, 2010, pp. 773–786.
[3]
K.-J. Li, S.-J. Yoo, and Y. Han, “Geo-coding scheme for multimedia
in indoor space,” in Proceedings of the 21st ACM SIGSPATIAL Inter-
national Conference on Advances in Geographic Information Systems.
ACM, 2013, pp. 424–427.
[4]
J.-S. Kim, S. H. Kim, and K.-J. Li, “Automatic geotagging and querying
of indoor videos,” in Proceedings of the Fifth ACM SIGSPATIAL
International Workshop on Indoor Spatial Awareness.
ACM, 2013, pp.
50–53.
[5]
J. Lee et al., “OGC IndoorGML,” Open Geospatial Consortium standard,
2014.
[6]
G. Gr¨oger, T. H. Kolbe, A. Czerwinski, and C. Nagel, “OpenGIS
city geography markup language (citygml) encoding standard,” Open
Geospatial Consortium Inc, 2008, pp. 1–234.
[7]
E. ISO, “19111–iso 19111 spatial referencing by coordinates,” Interna-
tional Organization for Standardization, vol. 200, 2003.
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-611-8
CONTENT 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

