Scientific Gateway: Grid and Cloud-based Visualization 
 
Eva Pajorová  
Institute of Informatics  
Slovak Academy of Sciences 
 Bratislava, Slovakia 
utrrepaj@savba.sk 
Ladislav Hluchý 
Institute of Informatics  
Slovak Academy of Sciences 
 Bratislava, Slovakia 
l.hluchy@savba.sk 
 
 
Abstract - The science gateway is important component of 
many large-scale Earth, astronomical, environmental and 
natural disasters science projects. Developing the sciences 
portals and the science gateways looks for us coverage of 
requirements  of large scale sciences such as,  Earth science, 
astronomy and all sciences  which are using grid, cloud or 
cluster 
computing 
and 
high-performance 
computing 
infrastructure.  We participate on designing and developing an 
e-Science Environment for Astronomy and Astrophysics. The 
paper describes  the main visualization  facilities for 
Visualization Tool  (VT) to qualify them for Scientific  
Gateway, which have been apply for our design of astronomy 
Visualization Tool. 
 
Keywords-visualization; grig; cloud; gateway.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Through user-friendly web interfaces such as  e-Science 
gateway integrated into the same environment, researchers 
and scientists can securely and transparently access  
computational and data sources, services, tools, sensors, etc. 
Science gateway is a computational web portal that includes 
a community-developed set of tools, applications, and data 
customized to meet the needs of a targeted community. It 
can hide the complexity of accessing heterogeneous Grid 
computing resources from scientists and enable them to run 
scientific simulations, data analysis and visualization 
through their web browsers [5]. Scientific gateways are able 
to provide a community-centric view, workflow/dataflow 
services and a strong support in accessing to the cyber 
infrastructure including grid and cloud based resources. In 
each of science contexts, scientific gateways play a key role 
since they allow scientists to transparently access to 
distributed data repositories (across several domains and 
institutions) and metadata sources to carry out search & 
discovery activities, as well as visualization and analysis 
ones, etc. Finally, scientific gateways can play an important 
role in training students (at the academic level) in the 
different scientific disciplinas, attract new users and 
representing a relevant centralized knowledge repository in 
the sciences context. Our paper deals with the position of 
visualization as one of the main components of scientific 
gateway. The scientific web portal - gateway cumulate all 
types of visualization.  
Since 2004 numerous scientific gateways have been 
developed. Lot of scientific gateways were funded by the 
TeraGrid Science Gateways program [1]. The gateway 
paradigm requires gateway developers to compile and install 
scientific applications on a variety of HPC clusters available 
from the resource providers in TeraGrid, to build service 
middleware for the management of the applications, and to 
develop web interfaces for delivering the applications to a 
user’s web browser. Consequently many web-service 
frameworks [2][3] have been designed and applied in 
building domain-specific science gateways. Some of them 
enable workflow based on the web services [4], but they 
commonly don’t provide solutions to support web interface 
generation. Developers was usualy hindered. Usualy they 
need to spend a lot of time learning web programming, 
especially JavaScript and AJAX Technologies to implement 
a user-friendly and interactive web interface to these 
services.  
Developed visualization tools by us take acces on 
properties to include them to the Scientific gateway. For 
example our design propose a new web based application 
framework for astronomy and asttrophysics environment. 
We start from rich experimences in lot of grid and cloud 
based project in e-Sciences environment. We start with 
proposing 
new 
framework 
enables 
astronomy 
and 
astrophysic science gateway dewelopers based on last one 
web resources. Visualization tool is part of gateway and 
proposes a new based application framework for astronomy 
and astrophysics environment. The framework including the 
can import the astronomy specific workflow scripts easily 
can generate web appliance for running astronomical 
applicationworkflows and visualization the outputs results 
directly from workflow execution, online visualization 
through their web browsers. 
. 
II. 
VISUAL REPRESENTATIONS OF DATASETS WHICH 
ENABLED SCIENCE GATEWAY  
There are some reasons why scientists, including 
astrophysics, are using visual representations of datasets 
 
• 
for  a visual control of the execution proces 
• 
for know-how discovery and for  presentations the 
academics research results 
• 
for formal publication of research results 
• 
for  a directly visual education form 
86
CONTENT 2011 : The Third International Conference on Creative Content Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-157-1

A. VT architecture, and  visual control of the execution 
process  
Simulation and execution with a huge date usually spend 
long execution time. Good solution for execution   is 
represented by grid and actually on cloud computing. In 
both infrastructures get visualization has the main position 
as a way to control the execution process. Visual control has 
in all infrastructure very useful position. The modal 
parametric studies applications include, for example, 
astronomical simulations on 
which we tested our 
submission tool as on-line visualization tool. The simulation 
was realized as a sequence of parameter studies, where each 
sub-simulation was submitted to the grid as a separate 
parameter study. The job management was rather time 
consuming due to the analysis of failed jobs and to their re-
submission.  
Visualization is included as a visual control process. The 
visualization tool is designed as a plug in the module. Client 
asks for visualization is as a “visualization client”. Output 
data on the storage element are the inputs data for 
visualization jobs. Visualization workers are to modify data 
to the formats, which can be visualized but also to prepare 
the typical visualization scenes. Client can render such 
scenes on the browser, can make the visual control and 
modify executions. For example, to immediately understand 
immediately the evolution of the investigated proto-
planetary disc we have developed a Visualization Tool 
(VT). The VT is composed of several modules, which are 
responsible for creating scenes and converting data to the 
the “visualize” format. The VT is designed as a plug-in 
module. The components generating rendering scenes are 
easy to exchange, according to the requirements of the given 
application. In case of our “gridified” application the output 
data of the simulation located on the SE can be used directly  
as the input for the VT. The final product of the VT includes 
a set of files containing data in the VRML (Virtual Reality 
Modeling Language) format. These output files can be 
rendered by many available VRML web-browsers. The 
whole visualization process is maintained through a 
visualization script, whose basic function is invoking the 
individual VT components in successive steps, transferring 
data, and handling error events. The script is written using 
the Bourne shell scripts and all VT modules are 
implemented in the C++ language. The VT can be 
embedded into the framework described above, or can be 
used separately as a stand-alone program. By using the on-
line VT the client can stop the execution process, change the 
input parameters and restart the execution process ones 
again. In grid environment. such architecture can be used for 
all applications from different sciences spheres which have 
the character of a parametric study.  
Actually the research community needs not only 
“traditional” batch computations of huge bunches of data 
but also the ability to perform complex data processing and 
this requires capabilities like on-line access to databases, 
interactivity, fine real-time job control, sophisticated 
visualization and data management tools (also in real-time), 
remote control and monitoring. The user can completely 
control the job during execution and change the input 
parameters, while the execution is still running. Both tools, 
the tool for submission designed before and continued 
sequential visualization tool - provided complete solution of 
the specific main problem in Grid environment. The 
position of the visualization tool as a visual control process 
is shown in Figure 1. Astrophysics scientists are able to run 
scientific simulations, data analysis, and visualization 
through the web browsers. Through astronomical science 
gateway can scientists to import they sofisticated scripts by 
which the VT he can activated as well, as the output from 
workflow executions without writing any web related code 
[6]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Example On – line visualization – the main position in grid 
based applications. Example when is visualization using as a control of 
execution process 
87
CONTENT 2011 : The Third International Conference on Creative Content Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-157-1

 
B. VT as a new discovery for presenting academic 
research results 
 In 
order 
to 
demonstrate 
the 
practicalities 
of 
interchanging multi-dimensional data, we consider the case 
of cosmological visualization: representation of the three 
dimensional spatial structure of the Universe, including both 
observational 
and 
simulation 
datasets. 
Where 
such 
information exists, we extend this definition to include time-
evolving datasets (e.g., evolution of structure formation or 
the hierarchical merging of galaxies), and derived data 
products such as catalogues and merger trees. A modern, 
fully-digital cosmological visualization allows the user to 
rotate, zoom, pan and even interactively select from 
datasets. 
Advance in sciences and engineering results in high 
demand of tools for high-performance large-scale visual 
data exploration and analysis. For example, astronomical 
scientists can now study evolution of all Solar system on 
numerous astronomical simulations. These simulations can 
generate large amount of data, possibly with high resolution 
(in three dimensional space) and long time series. Single-
system visualization software running on commodity 
machines cannot scale up to the large amount of data 
generated by these simulations. To address this problem, a 
lot 
of 
different 
developed 
grid-based 
visualization 
frameworks 
have 
been 
developed 
for 
time-critical, 
interactively controlled file-set transfer for visual browsing 
of spatially and temporally large datasets in a grid 
environment. To address the problem, many frameworks for 
grid and cloud based visualization are used.. We can go 
through evolution of sophisticated grid based visualization 
frameworks with actualized functionality. For example: 
Reality Grid, “UniGrid” and “TerraGrid”. 
All of the frameworks have been included in the 
visualization. Frameworks were created during grid based 
projects and create new features for presentations the 
academic research academic results in visualization. 
Visualization resources enabled by a astronomical science 
gateway the  top of researches experiences. 
C. VT and its formal research results 
Multiple visualizations generated from a common model 
will improve the process of creation, reviewing and 
understanding of requirements. Visual representations, when 
effective, provide cognitive support by highlighting the 
most relevant interactions and aspects of a specification for 
a particular use. The goal of scientific visualization is to 
help scientists view and better understand their data. This 
data can come from experiments or from numerical 
simulations. Often the size and complexity of the data 
makes them difficult to understand by direct inspection. 
Also, the data may be generated at several times during an 
experiment or simulation and understanding how the data 
varies with time may be difficult. Scientific visualization 
can help with these difficulties by representing the data so 
that it may be viewed in its entirety. In the case of data, 
varying in time animations can be created that show this 
variation in a natural way. Using virtual reality techniques, 
the data can be viewed and handled naturally in a true three 
dimensional environment (e.g. depth is explicitly perceived 
and not just implied).  All these techniques can allow 
scientists to better understand their data. Viewing the data in 
this way can quickly draw the scientist's attention to 
interesting and/or anomalous portions of the data. Because 
of this, we encourage scientists to use scientific 
visualization from the beginning of their experiments and 
simulations and not just when they think they have 
everything operating correctly. This also allows the 
scientists to develop a set of visualization tools and 
techniques that will help them understand their data as their 
research matures. For example, depending on of our 
astronomical example in order to understand immediately 
the evolution of the investigated proto-planetary disc we 
have developed a Visualization Tool (VT) for astronomers.   
VT  for the astronomical application provides pictures 
from simulation of the evolution of proto-planetary disc 
from 1Myr to 1000 Myr. Specifically, Figure 2. shows the 
evolution of proto-planetary disc in the time of 1 Myr. We 
can see that during the 1000 Myr time that the particles were 
replaced from inside to outside of the spheres. Figure 2 show 
the result of dynamical evolution of Oort- Cloud as a part of 
Proto-planetary disk after its evolutionary stage which was 
the first Gyr (giga year) [7]. 
 
 
 
 
88
CONTENT 2011 : The Third International Conference on Creative Content Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-157-1

 
Figure 2.  Example On – line visualization – the main position in grid 
based applications. Example when is visualization using as a control of 
execution process 
 
D. Directly visual education form 
Educational visualization uses a simulation normally 
created on a computer to develop an image of something so 
it can be taught about. This is very useful when teaching 
about a topic which is difficult to see otherwise see, for 
example, .protoplanetary disk., its  evolution or evolution in 
Solar system. It can also be used to view past events, such 
as looking at  the Solar system during its evolution stage, or 
look at things that are difficult.For astronomers, the VT has 
in education roles well.  
 
III. 
CONCLUSION 
  
The goal of the paper was to describe the VT 
architecture  and to support the visualization as essential 
component in new portals - gateways technologies and to 
show some examples. For the  future we want to extend the 
use of the VT for other scientific disciplines in addition to 
astronomy, but also for Earth Sciences with all visualization 
aspects. For the future, we plan to participate in a project in 
which the main activity will be to create and operating a 
pan-European e-Science Support Centre as a global 
astronomical environment in which  portals such as 
gateways with visualization included will be as part of 
essential requirements. In the future we want instead of grid 
infrastructure to use the cloud resources. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by Slovak Research and 
Development Agency under RPEU-0024-06 project, and by 
VEGA project No. 2/0211/09, as well as by EGEE III EU 
FP7 RI project: Enabling Grids for E-science III (2008-
2010) FP7-222667 and by the project RECLER ITMS: 
26240220029 and SMART II ITMS: 26240120029. 
. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Wilkins-Diehr, N.,Gannon, D., Klimeck, G., Oster, S., and 
Pamidighantam, S., 2008. TeraGrid Science Gateways and Their 
Impact on Science, IEEE Computer 41(11):32-41, Nov 2008. 
[2] Kandaswamy, G., Fang, L., Huang, Y., Shirasuna, S., Marru, S., and 
Gannon,D. 2006. Building Web Services for Scientific Grid 
Applications. IBM Journal of Research and Development 50(2-3), 
2006. 
[3] Krishnan, L. et al. 2006. Opal: Simple Web Services Wrappers for 
Scientific Applications. IEEE International Conference on Web 
Services (ICWS 2006), Sep 18-22, Chicago. 
[4] Oinn,T. et al. 2004. Taverna: A tool for the composition and 
enactment of bioinformatics workflows. Bioinformatics Journal, 
20(17), 3045-3054. 
[5] Wenjun Wu,  Thomas Uram, Michael Wilde, Mark Hereld, Michael 
E. Papka.  Accelerating Science Gateway Development with Web 2.0 
and Swift. http://www.mcs.anl.gov/uploads/cels/papers/P1765.pdf. 
[6] Paulech T., Jakubík M. Neslušan L., P. A. Dobczynski, and G. Leto 
Extended modeling of the Oort cloud formation from the initial 
protoplanetary disc. On 4th International Workshopon Grid 
Computing for Complex Problems. Oct. 27-29 2008 pp 142-150. 
[7] Astalos Jan. Experiences from porting the astrophysical simulation 
“The unified theory of Kuiper-belt and Oort-cloud formationi” to 
EGEE grid. The 3rd EGEE UF .Egee user forum Viena 2009.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
89
CONTENT 2011 : The Third International Conference on Creative Content Technologies
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-157-1

