Estimating the Mood of Paintings from Color Combinations using Machine Learning
Dongwann Kang and Kyunghyun Yoon
School of Computer Science & Engineering
Chung-Ang University
Seoul, Korea
Email: {dongwann,khyoon}@cglab.cau.ac.kr
Abstract—A color image scale is a useful tool that enables
designers to express mood through color combinations. This
paper proposes a method for estimating the mood in color image
scales from three-color combinations using machine learning.
First, we ﬁnd the relation between the mood and the properties of
the color combinations. Then, we extract the three most dominant
colors from the image. Finally, we estimate the mood of the
painting via the properties of the three dominant colors extracted.
Keywords–color image scale;mood; color combinations; paint-
ing.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Color is psychologically perceived by humans. Certain
colors intuitively evoke certain moods or feelings in many
people. Most artists even intentionally use color to convey its
own meaning. In numerous studies, the colors in images have
been determined to be an important factor that affects mood
[1].
A Color Image Scale [2] is used extensively as a tool for
selecting colors while considering mood in various ﬁelds, such
as product design and cloth coordination. A color image scale
consists of two axes: warm/cool and soft/hard. The positions of
single color, color combinations, paintings, potteries, buildings,
and moods on color image scales have been determined from
user studies. For example, Figure 1 shows the positions of
various three-color combinations on a color image scale. In
this paper, we assume that an item in one position on the
color image scale is strongly related to any other in the same
position. The objective of this paper is to ﬁnd moods from
paintings by considering this underlying assumption.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In
Section II, we explain our approach for ﬁnding the corre-
lation between colors and mood. In Section III, we present
our proposed method for estimating the mood of a painting
using correlation and discuss the results obtained. Finally, we
conclude this paper with a summary of our ideas and an outline
of future work in Section IV.
II.
ESTIMATING MOOD FROM THREE COLOR
COMBINATIONS
In our estimation of moods from paintings, we use three-
color combinations surveyed by Kobayashi [3]. Kobayashi
provides three-color combinations tagged as moods, such that
the mood of a painting can be estimated via three-color combi-
nations extracted from it. The name of each color combination
and the position of the corresponding mood in the color
image scale are also provided. Because the positions of mood
Figure 1. Three-color combinations on a color image scale.
keywords are graphically represented in [3], we estimated the
position each mood by acquiring the center position of text
in a graph, also obtained from [3]. Consequently, we obtained
three-color combinations, with the names of the three colors,
the name of each mood tagged onto each combination, and the
position of the moods in the color image scale.
Although Kobayashi provided a number of three-color
combinations, each tagged with its own mood, not all the
three-color combinations available in paintings are represented.
Thus, in order to be able to estimate mood from any three
random colors, determination of the relation between each
color in Kobayashis three-color combination is very important.
To estimate this relation, we employed a machine learning
technique. First, we extracted features from the colors in each
combination, such as the hue/saturation/luminance difference
between two colors and the average hue/saturation/luminance
value of the three colors. Consequently, we obtained a 12-
dimensional feature for each three-color combination. Next, we
generated data pairs, with the features and the two-dimensional
position of the mood tagged onto the data, for each three-color
combination. Finally, we derived a prediction function that is
able to estimate the coordinates of the mood of random three-
color combinations using linear regression [4].
We then conducted an experiment using 936 three-color
combinations and 174 moods. In order to ignore the order
of colors in a combination, we generated all possible combi-
nations of the given 936 three-color combinations, resulting
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-392-6
CONTENT 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

in six combinations being generated from each three-color
combination. The range of both coordinates of each color
image scale was [−3 : +3]. In our experiment, the prediction
error magnitude was recorded as 0.64. In further analysis, the
signiﬁcant factors appeared to be average hue, hue difference,
average saturation, and intensity.
III.
ESTIMATING MOOD FROM DOMINANT COLORS OF
IMAGE
In the previous section, we discussed and predicted moods
from three-color combinations. Consequently, we hypothesized
that if we obtained three-color combinations from a painting,
then we should be able to estimate the mood of that painting.
In this paper, we assume that the three colors that are most
dominant in a painting affect the mood of the painting in a
manner similar to the three-color combinations. Thus, we used
the three colors most frequently used in a painting to estimate
its mood.
In general, a digital color image has a color depth of 24
bits. Such an image has too many discrete colors, resulting in
attempts to ascertain the most frequently used color being a
meaningless exercise. For this reason, we ﬁrst normalize an
image by enforcing a limited number of colors. Kobayashi [3]
used the Hue & Tone 130 system to construct a three-color
combination image scale. We utilized the same color system
to normalize the colors of the image.
After normalizing the colors, we estimated the coordinates
of moods in the color image scale from the image of a
painting by using the prediction function acquired in Section II.
Kobayashi indicated the coordinates of 16 famous paintings in
[3] (Figure 2(a)). To conduct a similar activity for the name of
moods, we acquired the coordinates of paintings by calculating
the center position of each painting on the ﬁgure in [3]. For
16 paintings with ground truth mood, we estimated each mood
as coordinates in the color image scale (Figure 2(b)). In our
experiment, the magnitude of the mean error was recorded as
2.08.
In our experiment, mood estimation performance from
paintings was lower than that of mood estimation from three-
color combinations. In general, the colors in digital images of
the same painting differ slightly, such that prediction depends
primarily on the color of the each image in isolation. In
our experiments, we did not utilize the same exact images
that were employed by Kobayashi; thus, the predicted mood
differed from Kobayashis ground truth. Moreover, we obtained
our three-color combinations from an image via the na¨ıve ap-
proach; hence, there was no guarantee that the extracted three-
color combination precisely represented the image. Therefore,
a more robust approach for obtaining three-color combinations
from an image is required.
IV.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we estimated the mood of paintings using the
three-color combinations color image scale. First, we deﬁned
the features of a three-color combination as several properties
of each color. Then, we established a mood prediction function
from feature-mood pairs using linear regression. Finally, we
extracted three dominant colors from images of paintings, and
estimated moods by using the prediction function.
Our experiment depended predominantly on Kobayashis
data. However, for the same painting and colors, the mood
(a) Ground truth provided by Kobayashi
(b) our results
Figure 2. Mood estimation results.
evoked varies according to the era, age, culture, type of
education, and types of color blindness. In future work, we will
survey the mood of more paintings and colors in relation to
todays society. In addition, we will consider various individual
conditions, such as age, education, and cultural area.
In addition to color, several other factors affect the mood of
a painting. We plan to determine those other factors and reﬁne
our prediction function by incorporating them in our analysis.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This
research
is
supported
by
Ministry
of
Culture,
Sports and Tourism(MCST) and Korea Creative Content
Agency(KOCCA) in the Culture Technology(CT) Research &
Development Program 2014.
REFERENCES
[1]
D. Joshi, R. Datta, E. Fedorovskaya, Q.-T. Luong, J. Wang, J. Li,
and J. Luo, “Aesthetics and emotions in images,” Signal Processing
Magazine, IEEE, vol. 28, no. 5, Sept 2011, pp. 94–115.
[2]
S. Kobayashi, “The aim and method of the color image scale,” Color
Research & Application, vol. 6, no. 2, 1981, pp. 93–107. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/col.5080060210
[3]
——, Color Image Scale.
Kosdansha International, 1991.
[4]
G. A. Seber and A. J. Lee, Linear regression analysis.
John Wiley &
Sons, 2012, vol. 936.
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-392-6
CONTENT 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Creative Content Technologies

