A Method for Analyzing Improper Driving  
 Using Passenger’s Danger Perceptions 
 
Kensho Nishizawa 
Graduate School of Engineering and Science 
Shibaura Institute of Technology 
Tokyo, Japan 
Email: ma21111@shibaura-it.ac.jp 
Tsuyoshi Nakajima 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering 
Shibaura Institute of Technology 
Tokyo, Japan 
Email: tsnaka@shibaura-it.ac.jp
 
 
Abstract—One of the main causes of traffic accidents is 
"improper driving", such as driver's carelessness and 
operation mistakes. To prevent traffic accidents, it is necessary 
to detect the occurrence of improper driving, point it out to the 
driver, and advise improvement. However, the driving 
behavior analysis method, which analyzes the driving itself 
from 
several 
sensor 
data, 
cannot 
accurately 
and 
comprehensively detect improper driving because it cannot 
consider the traffic situation related to the road, the other 
vehicles and so on. This paper proposes a method that 
combines the driving behavior analysis method and the danger 
perception by passengers. This method enables us to detect 
improper driving comprehensively and correctly because 
passengers objectively see both the driving and traffic situation. 
We conducted experiments of applying this method and 
confirmed its usefulness. 
Keywords-Drive Analysis; Heart Rate; Passenger. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Traffic accidents caused by automobiles are one of the 
many serious problems in the modern society. One of the 
major causes of traffic accidents is the driver's improper 
driving [1], including driver’s operational errors and 
carelessness. 
To prevent traffic accidents caused by such improper 
driving, a support system that points out its occurrence and 
provides advice for improvement will be useful for the driver. 
Driving behavior analysis uses sensors to measure the 
behavior of a car caused by driving to detect abnormal 
driving patterns, such as rapid acceleration and meandering 
as improper driving. However, the driving behavior analysis 
does not have a high degree of accuracy because only a few 
driving patterns can be analyzed without traffic conditions in 
which the driving takes places. Therefore, it is often the case 
where the driving behavior analysis wrongly determines 
improper driving or even misses improper driving altogether. 
This problem can be a major drawback for the support 
system to give appropriate advice to the drivers. 
To solve this problem, we propose a method that utilizes 
the passenger's danger perception on the traffic situation in 
addition to the driving behavior analysis. The proposed 
method analyzes the variation of the passenger's heart rate to 
detect the passenger's danger perception. Next, the detected 
danger perceptions are compared to the abnormal driving 
patterns detected by the driving behavior analysis. If they are 
matched, the detected patterns are considered improper 
driving. In addition, there are many cases of improper 
driving that cannot be detected by driving behavior analysis 
because they are strongly dependent on the traffic conditions. 
The method analyzes the passenger’s danger perceptions that 
do not match the abnormal driving patterns to extract such 
cases. This makes it possible to detect improper driving 
comprehensively and correctly. 
To implement the proposed method, we firstly devise a 
way to detect passenger’s danger perceptions by analyzing 
his/her heart rate variability based on some experiments. The 
experiments consist of a measurement method and judging 
criteria for heart rate abnormalities.  
We secondly conduct an experiment to show that our 
method works as expected. The results of the experiment 
show that the passenger’s danger perceptions are useful to 
improve the accuracy of detecting the improper driving, and 
the passenger’s danger perceptions that do not match the 
abnormal driving patterns, called danger-perception-only 
data, include many cases of improper driving. However, 
some of the abnormalities detected in the passenger's heart 
rate are not related to improper driving, and so it is necessary 
to exclude them from the danger-perception-only data to 
utilize them.  
Section Ⅱ of this paper describes the existing methods 
for detecting improper driving and its problems; Section Ⅲ 
proposes our method in detail; Section Ⅳ  describes an 
experiment and its results, and Section Ⅴ discusses them, to 
show the validity and remaining issues of the proposed 
method; Section Ⅵ concludes this paper. 
II. 
EXISTING METHODS FOR DETECTING IMPROPER 
DRIVING 
A. Driving behavior analysis 
Driving behavior analysis is an analysis method that 
detects dangerous driving patterns by collecting and 
analyzing sensor data on the motion state of a vehicle while 
driving [2][3]. The sensor data includes speed, acceleration, 
and angular velocity. These data are used to detect dangerous 
driving patterns, such as sudden braking, sudden steering, 
sudden acceleration, and unsteady handing. This method has 
been already used in many cars to analyze the driver's 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-926-3
CORETA 2021 : Advances on Core Technologies and Applications

driving to provide cautions and advices to the driver on the 
occurrence of improper driving. However, this method has a 
problem that it cannot detect improper driving accurately due 
to the following reasons: 
 
• 
The information that can be obtained from existing 
sensors is too little to cover all the abnormal driving 
patterns to analyze. 
• 
Because of no consideration of traffic conditions, the 
analysis often results in incorrect judgment of 
improper driving. 
 
Concerning the latter, this is because the criteria for 
judging whether a certain driving is improper or not vary 
depending on the traffic conditions in which it is taken place. 
That is, the improper driving can be correctly determined by 
the combination of driving operations and traffic conditions.  
 
B. Driver’s danger perception 
Another approach to analyzing improper driving is to 
estimate the danger perception while driving from the 
driver's own physiological data. There exist several methods 
to adopt this approach: 
- Detection of the occurrence of danger by using heart rate 
variability while driving [4] 
- Monitoring some visual behaviors that characterize a 
driver’s level of vigilance [5] 
- Estimation of the driver's emotions [6] 
These methods can detect the driver's danger perception 
when capturing external dangers, such as unexpected events 
or unsafe situations.  
Since the driver's perception of danger comprehensively 
captures all the driving situation including driving behavior 
and traffic conditions, it is expected to get more 
comprehensive information the driving behavior analysis 
cannot obtain, such as pedestrians’ sudden crossing or the 
other vehicles’ improper driving.  
On the other hand, this method has the following 
problems: 
• 
There are individual differences in the human heart 
rate and its changes, and these individual differences 
affect the accuracy of hazard detection. 
• 
Since the change in heart rate is not an event that 
occurs only when a danger is recognized, events 
other than danger recognition while driving may be 
detected. 
• 
Because drivers recognize the situation subjectively, 
i.e., they tend not to think their driving has problems, 
the driver’s perception of danger is not suitable to 
use for judging improper driving. 
III. 
PROPOSED METHOD 
A. Approaches 
To solve the problems of the existing methods in the 
previous section, we adopt an approach to use the 
passenger's danger perception. Because the passenger's 
perception of danger is more objective that the driver’s one, 
its combination with the driving behavior analysis is 
expected to work well.  
B. How to determine improper driving 
The proposed method for detecting improper driving 
using the passenger's perception of danger is shown in Figure 
1. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Proposed method for detecting improper driving  
using passenger’s perception of danger 
The method first does the driving behavior analysis using 
sensor data, such as Global Positioning System (GPS) speed 
and angular velocity to detect abnormal driving patterns. 
Next, it analyzes the variation of the passenger's heart rate to 
detect the passenger's danger perception. After that, the 
detected danger perceptions are compared to the abnormal 
driving patterns detected by the driving behavior analysis. If 
they are matched, the detected patterns are considered 
improper driving. In addition, there are many cases of 
improper driving that cannot be detected by driving behavior 
analysis because they are strongly dependent on the traffic 
conditions. The method analyzes the passenger’s danger 
perceptions that do not match the abnormal driving patterns 
to extract such cases. This makes it possible to detect 
improper driving comprehensively and correctly. 
C. Passennger’s danger perception analysis 
The proposed method uses the danger perception analysis, 
which detects human danger perception by analyzing the 
variation of the heart rate to find out the occurrence of its 
abnormalities. Through an experiment, we defined the 
following two types of abnormal heart rate patterns. 
• 
Rapid increase in heart rate: As shown in Figure 2, 
when the amount of change in heart rate increases 
above the specified threshold within a certain period 
of time, it is determined that there is a rapid increase 
in heart rate. The heart rate is measured every second, 
and the threshold of the amount of change is 10 
beats. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Heart rate variability during rapid heart rate increase 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-926-3
CORETA 2021 : Advances on Core Technologies and Applications

• 
High heart rate state: As shown in Figure 3, when 
the heart rate value stays high for a certain period, it 
is judged to be in a high heart rate state. The heart 
rate is judge as high when it is over the threshold of 
the average heart rate plus 10. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Heart rate variability during high heart rate state 
The average heart rate is determined based on the 
measurement in the last three minutes. This makes it 
possible to compensate individual differences in the 
passenger’s heart rate. 
IV. 
EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION  
A. Purpose of the experiment 
The following two hypotheses, which support the 
theoretical basis of the proposed method, are verified by 
actual driving experiments to work as expected. 
 
• 
Hypothesis 1: False positives for improper driving 
will be reduced by looking at the match between 
abnormal driving patterns based on the driving 
behavior analysis and danger perception based on 
the passenger’s danger perception analysis. 
• 
Hypothesis 2: There exist some danger perceptions 
that do not match abnormal driving patterns, which 
include most of all the improper driving that strongly 
depends on the traffic conditions, which cannot be 
detected by the driving behavior analysis. 
B. Experimental methods 
In the driving experiment, the speed and angular velocity 
of the vehicle and the heart rate of the passenger are 
measured every second while driving. The vehicle's speed 
and angular velocity are measured using the smartphone's 
sensors, and the passenger's heart rate is measured using the 
Apple Watch's optical heart rate sensor. One experiment 
consists of one-hour driving. After the driving, the actual 
driving situation was reviewed using video and notes 
recorded during the driving. Figures 4-7 show how the 
experiment took place. 
l 
Figure 4: smartphone sensor that measures the 
vehicle's angle and angular velocity.  
l 
Figure 5: Apple Watch measuring the passenger's 
heart rate.  
l 
Figure 6:  video camera on the windshield recoding 
the vehicle’s forward image.  
l 
Figure 7: Passengers taking notes when they 
perceive a danger.  
In this experiment, we use a prototyping system 
implementing the proposed method in Figure 1, except for 
Situation Analysis, which is performed based on the 
passenger’s own judgement by reviewing the recorded video 
after the experiment.  
The subjects of this experiment are 17 university students 
with different driving experiences, and 50 sets of 
experiments took place. Table 1 shows the breakdown of the 
driving experience of the passengers, and Table 2 shows the 
breakdown of the combinations of driver and passenger by 
driving experience. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Measurement of vehicle speed and angular velocity 
 using smartphone sensors 
 
Figure 5.  Measurement of passenger's heart rate using Apple Watch 
 
Figure 6.  Recording of the vehicle's forward image  
using a video camera 
 
Figure 7.  Passengers taking notes when they perceive a danger. 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-926-3
CORETA 2021 : Advances on Core Technologies and Applications

TABLE I. BREAKDOWN OF PARTICIPANTS IN THE DRIVING EXPERIMENT 
Participants’ driving 
frequency 
Number of 
people 
Number of 
experiments 
Drive on a daily basis 
5 people 
12 sets 
Sometimes drive 
4 people 
10 sets 
Don’t usually drive 
4 people 
13 sets 
No driver’s license 
4 people 
15 sets 
Total 
17 people 
50 sets 
 
TABLE II. BREAKDOWN OF DRIVERS AND PASSENGERS BY DRIVING 
FREQUENCY 
Driver’s driving 
frequency 
Passengers’ driving 
frequency 
Number of 
experiments 
Drive on a  
daily basis 
Drive on a daily basis 
7 sets 
Sometimes drive 
1 set 
Don’t usually drive 
8 sets 
No driver’s license 
4 sets 
Sometimes drive 
Drive on a daily basis 
5 sets 
Sometimes drive 
9 sets 
Don’t usually drive 
5 sets 
No driver’s license 
11 sets 
Total 
50 sets 
 
C. Results of experiments 
1) Hypothesis 1 
A total of 56 abnormal driving patterns are detected by 
the driving behavior analysis. Of these, 9 cases match the 
passenger’s danger perception. Figure 8 shows all the cases 
classified into four danger levels by the review of actual 
situation. 
 
 
Figure 8.  Relationship between abnormal driving patterns  
and passengers’ perception of danger 
Figure 1 shows that the passenger's danger perception 
responds in most situations where the actual danger level is 
high, and in contrast, the passenger's danger perception does 
not respond in most situations where the actual danger level 
is low. In this way, there is a tendency that the group of 
abnormal driving classified in higher danger level have more 
percentage of ones matching with passenger’s danger 
perception. This proves Hypothesis 1 that false positives for 
improper driving in the driving behavior analysis can be 
reduced by using the results of the passenger’s danger 
perception analysis.  
 
2) Hypothesis 2 
Of the results of detecting passenger’s danger perceptions, 
142 cases do not match the abnormal driving patterns. Table 
3 shows the results of categorizing their causes based on the 
review of the actual situation one by one. 
 
TABLE III. CATEGORIZATION OF THE ANALYZED CAUSE OF PASSENGER’S 
HEART RATE ABNORMALITIES 
Dangerous 
driving  
Outside threats 
Emotional 
change 
Unknown 
cause 
18 cases 
43 cases 
62 cases 
19 cases 
 
Details of each item used in the classification and 
examples of actual occurrences are as follows. 
 
a) Dangerous driving: 18 cases 
・ Anxiety or fear felt about the driver’s 
dangerous driving (e.g., accelerating instead of 
stopping at a traffic light change, etc.) 
b) Outside threats: 43 cases 
・ Perceived danger due to external factors, such 
as interruptions by other vehicles or pedestrians 
jumping out (e.g., a driver suddenly getting out 
of a stopped truck) 
・ Anxiety caused by environmental factors, such 
as narrowness of the road and poor visibility 
(e.g., glare from the western sun, thick fog, 
etc.) 
c) Emotional change: 62 cases 
・Excitement or surprise during conversation 
・Drowsiness and fatigue 
 
Hypothesis 2 proves correct, from the fact that many 
improper driving cases are included in the passenger’s 
danger perceptions that do not match abnormal driving 
pattern, and few improper driving cases are seen that are not 
detected by either analysis.  
However, the results showed that there are some cases 
other than improper driving among the passenger’s heart rate 
abnormalities. 
V. 
CONSIDERATIONS 
From the fact that passenger’s heart rate abnormalities 
have a correlation with the actual danger level of abnormal 
driving patterns, we found that our approach to using 
passenger’s danger perceptions to reduce the false detection 
of improper driving is reasonable. In addition, we also found 
that the passenger’s danger perceptions can cover most 
improper driving situations that the driving behavior analysis 
cannot detect. These results show that the proposed method 
can detect improper driving comprehensively and correctly.  
However, the important issue to be settled to establish 
our proposed method is that there are some cases other than 
improper driving among the passenger’s heart rate 
abnormalities, and therefore it is necessary to separate true 
danger perceptions from these cases to utilize them. 
Moreover, we have not yet proved that the passenger’s 
heart rate abnormalities are better than the driver’s ones to 
capture the objective danger perception. We need to conduct 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-926-3
CORETA 2021 : Advances on Core Technologies and Applications

further experiments, in which we collect both driver’s and 
passenger’s heart rate data at the same time. 
Concerning the subjects of our experiments, we used 
almost the same aged university students, but it is necessary 
to use a wider variety of subjects to increase the validity of 
the experiments. Furthermore, to establish the proposed 
method, it is necessary to realize a method to analyze the 
passenger's danger perception that does not match abnormal 
driving patterns. However, it is difficult to do so at this 
moment because it requires a comprehensive understanding 
of the factors that cause the abnormal heart rate patterns to 
devise how to extract only true danger perceptions.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we proposed a method for detecting 
improper driving using driving behavior analysis, combined 
with the passenger’s danger perception. The driving 
experiments showed that the proposed method can reduce 
the number of false positives for improper driving, and that it 
includes most of improper driving that the driving behavior 
analysis cannot detect because it strongly depends on traffic 
conditions. However, the passenger heart rate abnormalities 
include many cases not relating to improper driving, which 
need to be excluded. 
In the future, we will further investigate the method for 
separating heart rate abnormality cases not related to 
improper driving. In addition, we will conduct more 
experiments to clarify the differences of causes of driver's 
and passenger's heart rate abnormalities and the differences 
in heart rate fluctuation due to driving experience. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Injury facts, “Motor vehicle safety issues” , Available from: 
https://injuryfacts.nsc.org/motor-vehicle/motor-vehicle-safety-
issues/improper-driving-and-road-rage/ , [retrieved: 10,2021] 
[2] 
P. Wang et al. “You are how you drive: Peer and temporal-aware 
representation 
learning 
for 
driving 
behavior 
analysis.”, 
 Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on 
Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, pp.2457-2466, 2018 
[3] 
Sompo Japan Insurance Inc. “Portable smiling road navi” , Available 
from: https://www.sompo-japan.jp/kinsurance/smilingroad/pc/ , (in 
Japanese) [retrieved: 10,2021] 
[4] 
I. Kageyama, Y. Kuriyagawa, and A. Tsubouchi, “Study on 
Construction of Driver Model for Obstacle Avoidance Using Risk 
Potential.”, In Proceedings of the 25th International Symposium on 
Dynamics of Vehicles on Roads and Tracks, vol. 48, no. 2, pp.431-
437, 2017 
[5] 
J. Wang, W. Xu, and Y. Gong, “Real-time driving danger-level 
prediction.”, Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence, vol. 
23, no. 8, pp.1247-1254, 2010 
[6] 
I. Watanabe, R. Yoshida, F. Chen, and M. Sugaya, “Human 
Emotional State Analysis During Driving Simulation Experiment 
Using Bio-Emotion Estimation Method.”, IEEE 42nd Annual 
Computer Software and Applications Conference, Vol. 2, pp.589-594, 
2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-926-3
CORETA 2021 : Advances on Core Technologies and Applications

