ShareHandy: Peer Teaching Support System for Online Exercises  
of IoT Prototyping 
 
Shiryu Sekiguchi 
Graduate School of Engineering and Science 
Shibaura Institute of Technology 
Tokyo, Japan 
Email: ma21078@shibaura-it.ac.jp 
Tsuyoshi Nakajima 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering 
Shibaura Institute of Technology 
Tokyo, Japan 
Email: tsnaka@shibaura-it.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract— Peer teaching is said to be one of the most useful 
means for students to learn deeply. However, in online exercises 
for assembling hardware, students cannot easily share their 
hardware assembly status among them, which hinders peer 
teaching among them. To solve this problem, we developed a 
hand-sharing system, ShareHandy, which allows students to 
share video images showing their work in progress hardware 
with their smartphones. This paper proposes the system, 
describing its design and rationales, and verifies the usefulness 
of the system through an experimental exercise of Internet of 
Things (IoT) prototyping. The results show that the proposed 
system can effectively promote peer teaching and improve the 
efficiency of the exercise. 
Keywords-online education; peer-teaching; IoT exercise. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
Peer-teaching is a learning method in which students teach 
each other and is attracting attention to increase the learning 
effectiveness of students [1]. Recently, the COVID-19 
pandemic has increased the number of online classes and 
exercises. However, such online situation also limits the 
interactions among students to online, making it difficult to 
hold peer teaching [2]. One of the major reasons for this is that 
it is difficult for students to share their assembly status of 
hardware with the other students. For example, when students 
are learning electric circuits online, they lose important peer-
teaching opportunities, such as sharing one student's work 
with the teacher and other students, pointing out and giving 
advice to each other interactively, and being able to review the 
points and advice after that. 
To solve this problem, Dorneich et al. clarify the 
classification and criteria for online classes [3]. Kitagami et al. 
propose an exercise method of using a virtual camera to share 
camera images, documents etc. in one screen in a Web 
conference system, in which students watch the screen image 
transmitted by the teacher as they proceed with the exercises 
[4]. However, this method does not allow students to see other 
students’ status while receiving teacher's transmission. 
Hamblen et al. proposed a method for peer teaching of 
hardware assembly in an asynchronous environment using a 
wiki [5]. However, this method does not allow students to 
interact with each other in real-time. 
To solve the above problems, we propose a peer teaching 
support system ShareHandy, which provides the function for 
students to share their assembly status of the hardware with a 
camera, point and draw on the shared images, and save these 
images data. The proposed system allows students to facilitate 
real-time peer teaching within a group. 
This paper first presents the requirements for a peer-
teaching support system, the corresponding design, and its 
rationales, describes the prototype implementation, and 
evaluates its usefulness by applying it to a group exercise of 
Internet of Things (IoT) prototyping held online. The results 
show that the proposed system allows students to understand 
each other's situation quickly and accurately in group work 
exercises. Therefore, the proposed system has proven useful 
in supporting peer teaching. 
In this paper, Section 2 presents the details of our proposal 
system, Section 3 and Section 4 describe the experimental 
evaluation, and their results and discussion, and Section 5 
concludes this paper. 
II. PROPOSED SYSTEM 
To support peer-teaching in IoT prototyping exercises, it 
is necessary to have a support function for the teacher and the 
students to share the hardware assembly status. The basic 
function of the proposed system is to stream live videos of 
students’ at-hands using their own smartphone camera for 
peer-teaching. 
The following subsections describe the assumptions and 
scenarios of using the proposal system, the functions provided 
by the system, and how these functions can be utilized in the 
scenarios. 
A. 
Usage Assumptions and Scenarios 
We assume that the exercises to be supported are designed 
for each student to work in a group and assemble the same 
hardware individually. The group can use the support 
functions to discuss and teach each other within each group. 
The proposed support system works as an auxiliary system for 
the Web conferencing system, which handles document 
sharing and voice communication. This support system helps 
the group members share the video images of their work in 
progress. 
The following scenarios are considered as the major use of 
the support functions. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-926-3
CORETA 2021 : Advances on Core Technologies and Applications

⚫ 
 Students who have successfully completed the 
assembly and those who have not work together to 
review their work each other’s work to find out what 
the problems are. 
⚫ 
A student asks the teacher some question about how 
to proceed with the exercise, and a session is held to 
answer the question. Several students who are 
interested in the questions participate in the session, 
and the session proceeds on a question-and-answer 
basis. 
B. 
Designed functions and their usage scenarios 
1) 
Setting up rooms for group sharing 
The system is designed to set up multiple rooms 
simultaneously so that some group members can easily have 
a space to discuss some topic and other members interested in 
it can participate freely. 
2) 
Real-time video streaming  
Using cameras of smartphones or Web cameras attached 
to laptops, images of multiple students' work-in-progress 
artifacts are streamed in real-time. The system can display 
multiple images at the same time so that the students can see 
each other's at-hand work at the same time. This allows the 
person teaching the session to communicate the correct 
sequence of steps in a work, the changes on the artifact for 
each work step, and the person being taught to communicate 
how his/her work has been progressing so far and what the 
problems are. In addition, the system can convey information 
enabling a three-dimensional recognition of the artifact 
through video, which cannot be conveyed by documents or 
still images. 
3) 
Pausing video and broadcasting still images 
The video being streamed can be paused and streamed as 
a still image. This allows the person teaching to take enough 
time to give a detailed explanation of the work steps of focus 
and their key points, and allows the person being taught to be 
able to stop at his/her problematic work points to ask questions 
to investigate what is wrong. 
4) 
Pointing by participants 
Each participant has a cursor with an individual identifier 
and can point to a certain position on the video image. This 
allows the person teaching to clarify the points of focus, 
explain the situation, and give instructions accurately. It also 
allows the person being taught to clarify the points to ask. 
 
5) 
Drawing by participants 
Participants can use their fingers, pens, mouse, etc. to 
write texts and draw figures on the streaming videos 
(including still images). This allows the person teaching to 
label related locations (e.g., name and number in the image 
locations) and to indicate directions drawing arrows. In 
addition, the person being taught can leave notes to be shared. 
6) 
Saving video captures and drawings as still images 
A still image of an arbitrary video scene with drawing data 
overlaid on it can be stored on the participant's device. This 
allows the person being taught to reflect on the session 
through self-study afterwards. 
C. 
Implementation of the Proposed System  
The proposed system is implemented as ShareHandy, 
which enables easy sharing of the sight at hand. The structure 
of ShareHandy is shown in Figure 1. 
The system is designed to work on any devices such as 
PCs and smartphones. Therefore, this system is built as a Web 
application, which runs on a Web browser and has the 
advantage of being able to support multiple operating systems 
with a single code. Another advantage is that users only 
require access to a web page for using the application and 
there is no need to install additional applications on each 
device. 
As shown in Figure 1, we use WebRTC (Web Real-Time 
Communication), which enables real-time communication of 
video, audio, and general data via a Web browser [6]. 
WebRTC communication allows the users to send and receive 
images, coordinates of drawing and pointing, and other 
control signals in real-time. 
Figure 2 shows an example of using ShareHandy. Two 
people participate in a session, sharing videos showing their 
artifacts. In the left screen, the pointers of the participants 
(shown with a “P” mark) and the drawing data are displayed. 
III. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION 
A. 
Purpose of the Experiment 
We formulate two hypotheses concerning the effects that 
can be achieved by using this system in online exercises. 
 
Figure 1. System Structure of ShareHandy 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-926-3
CORETA 2021 : Advances on Core Technologies and Applications

 [Hypothesis 1] This system makes it possible for the person 
teaching to quickly and accurately covey a set 
of instructions on the artifact at hand to the 
person being taught. 
[Hypothesis 2] This system enables group work to be carried 
out smoothly, and as a result peer teaching 
can be promoted. 
We conducted experiments to test these hypotheses. 
B. 
Method of the experiments 
1) 
Exercises to which the method is applied 
Two exercises on IoT prototyping: 
⚫ 
Individual exercises following a sample procedure, 
where every student belongs to some group, whose 
members can communicate within it. 
⚫ 
Project-based learning style exercises, in which each 
group develops a prototype to solve their problem. 
2) 
Subjects 
10 undergraduate students and 4 graduate school students. 
All subjects were students at Shibaura Institute of 
Technology, and majored computer science and engineering. 
3) 
Experimental procedure 
The subjects formed small groups of three to four people, 
and the groups were asked to use ShareHandy freely during 
the exercises. We did not instruct where and how to use it in 
particular. 
4) 
Evaluation method 
We asked the subjects to answer a questionnaire after 
finishing the exercises. We analyzed their answers to evaluate 
the results of the experiments. The questions in the 
questionnaire are shown in Table 1. In addition to this, we 
directly interviewed the subjects after the exercises. 
C. 
Result of the Experiment 
We receive 14 answers from all the subjects. The results 
of the questionnaire are shown in Table 2. 
⚫ 
Concerning the answers to Q3-1, 86% of the subjects 
answered positively to the question “Was it easy to 
see the other person's hand?” In addition, all the 
subjects felt positive about Q3-2 “The other person 
quickly understood my situation” and Q3-4 “It was 
easy to communicate by pointing with my hand.” 
Furthermore, 86% of the subjects answered 
positively to Q3-5 “I was able to proceed with the 
work efficiently.” From these results, we can confirm 
that our hypothesis 1 is true, that the system achieves 
the targeted effect and allows the subjects to covey 
instructions on artifacts at hand quickly and 
accurately. 
⚫ 
To Q3-5 of " It lowered the barrier for teaching each 
other", all the subjects answered affirmatively. 
In addition, 92% of the students answered affirmatively 
when asked if they would like to use this system again, 
suggesting that using this system is useful. 
From the interviews with the students after the experiment, 
we obtain the following points of their impressions and 
dissatisfaction. 
Positive comments include: 
⚫ 
Because handling the objects can be easily seen, it is 
easy to understand how they are built Because 
objects at hands can be easily seen, how they are built 
can be understood well (from many subjects). 
⚫ 
Because group members can share the view of the 
objects at hand, it is easy to explain them. It can also 
be used to check if the right sensor has been selected. 
The latter comment suggests that we can apply this system 
to much broader things than we originally expected. 
Negative comments include: 
⚫ 
The screen of the smartphone is too small to see the 
screens of other participants. 
⚫ 
Because the camera does not focus well, it is difficult 
to see small characters. 
These negative comments suggest a need for improvement 
on both the system itself and the way to use it. 
IV. DISCUSSION 
We found that the proposed system effectively achieves 
the effects that we targeted in the design of the system from 
the answers of Q3-1 to Q3-4. Therefore, the system allows all 
TABLE I.  
QUESTIONS ON THE QUESTIONNAIRE ADMINISTERED 
AT THE END OF THE EXPERIMENT 
No. 
Questions and Options 
Q1 
What is your position? 
Q2 
In what situations did you use the system? 
 
Teaching each other in the group 
 
Creating something with the group member 
 
Teaching each other with one-on-one 
Q3 
Please answer the following questions in four 
choices: 
Agree, Almost Agree, Almost Disagree, or Disagree 
Q3-1 
It was easy to see the other person's hand. 
Q3-2 
Groupmates understood my situation right away. 
Q3-3 
I was able to work efficiently. 
Q3-4 
It was easy to communicate by pointing at the hand. 
Q3-5 
It lowered the barrier for teaching each other. 
Q3-6 
I would use this system again. 
Q4 
Any other comment (Free text) 
 
 
Figure 2. User Interface of ShareHandy and Demonstration 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-926-3
CORETA 2021 : Advances on Core Technologies and Applications

the participants (including teachers and students) to share the 
status of multiple participants’ hardware in real-time 
(Hypothesis 1). Moreover, directly from the answers to Q3-5, 
we found that the system promotes peer teaching. 
From the results of the questionnaire, the level of 
satisfaction in using this system is high. This is because there 
is no other way for students to see the others’ hands in real-
time. The real-time nature of the system and its pointing 
function may have increased the user’s satisfaction. 
However, the system has not been used very often during 
the exercises, with the usage frequency being lower than we 
expected. Some students commented that: 
⚫ 
The system is easy to use, but we did not have so 
many opportunities to use it. 
⚫ 
We did not have so many problems relating to 
hardware in IoT prototyping. 
The IoT prototyping used in the experiments does not have so 
many complicated tasks relating to hardware which need 
someone’s help. In addition, we guess that online exercises 
may create a sense of emotional distance between students. 
This may be the reason why many students hesitated to ask 
the other group members a question or preferred to research 
the answer on their own instead.  
To overcome such limitations for the validity of the 
experimental evaluation, we need further experiments that 
include giving the subjects a method to decrease the hesitation 
in communicating online or giving them a problem on IoT 
prototyping with a high level of hardware difficulty.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
We developed a web application, ShareHandy, which can 
be used in the context of hardware assembly to share video 
images showing hardware assembly status with the other 
students. Our experiment to confirm its usefulness in 
improving comprehension and peer teaching gave positive 
results from students who used the system. The results of the 
questionnaires and interviews suggest that the system is 
effective enough to support group work and peer teaching. 
Through this study, we found some issues such as the 
search for an effective way to use the system for online 
exercises, the improvement of the accuracy of the system, and 
the evaluation method of the system. 
In future work, we will improve the reliability and 
usability of the proposed system, find an effective way to use 
it in online exercises, and solve the problem of video quality. 
In addition, we will apply and evaluate the system on a larger 
number of subjects and explore better evaluation methods 
through quantitative data measurement. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Ramaswamy, I. Harris and U. Tschirner, “Student Peer 
Teaching: An Innovative Approach to Instruction in Science 
and Engineering Education,”, Journal of Science Education 
and Technology, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 165-171, 2001. 
[2]  S. Baddeley, “Online teaching: a reflection,” The Journal of 
Classics Teaching, vol. 22, no. 44, pp. 109-116, 2021. 
[3] M. C. Dorneich, B. O'Dwyer, A. R. Dolowitz, J. L. Styron and 
J. Grogan, “Application exercise design for team-based 
learning in online courses,” New Directions for Teaching and 
Learning, vol. 2021, no. 165, pp. 41-52, 2021. 
[4] S. Kitagami, K. Hasegawa, H. Koizumi, and M. Inoue, “Online 
Training Environment for IoT Prototype Development”, 
Proceedings of the Symposium on Information Education, 
pp.240-243, 2020. 
[5] J. O. Hamblen, and G. M. E. V. Bekkum, “An Embedded 
Systems Laboratory to Support Rapid Prototyping of Robotics 
and the Internet of Things,” IEEE Transaction on Education, 
vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 121-128, 2012. 
[6] B. Sredojev, D. Samardzija, and D. Posarac, “WebRTC 
technology overview and signaling solution design and 
implementation,” 2015 38th International Convention on 
Information and Communication Technology, Electronics and 
Microelectronics (MIPRO), pp. 1006-1009, 2015. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE II.  
RESULT OF THE QUESTIONNAIRE 
No. 
Question 
Answer 
Q1 
What is your position? 
Undergraduate Student 
Graduate Student 
10 
4 
Q2 
In what situations did you use the system? 
Teaching each 
other in the group 
Creating something 
with the group member 
Teaching each other 
one-on-one 
7 
7 
0 
Q3 
Please answer the following questions 
Agree 
Almost Agree 
Almost Disagree 
Disagree 
Q3-1 
It was easy to see the other person's hand. 
9 
3 
2 
0 
Q3-2 
Groupmates understood my situation right 
away. 
7 
7 
0 
0 
Q3-3 
I was able to work efficiently. 
10 
2 
2 
0 
Q3-4 
It was easy to communicate by pointing at the 
hand. 
8 
6 
0 
0 
Q3-5 
It lowered the barrier for teaching each other. 
7 
7 
0 
0 
Q3-6 
I would use this system again. 
5 
8 
1 
0 
 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-926-3
CORETA 2021 : Advances on Core Technologies and Applications

