A Novel Aggregation Approach Based on
Cooperative Agents and Self-Stabilizing Clustering
for WSNs
Mandicou Ba∗, Olivier Flauzac∗, Raﬁk Makhlouﬁ†, Le¨ıla Merghem-Boulahia‡, Florent Nolot∗ and Ibrahima Niang§
∗ Universit´e de Reims Champagne-Ardenne (URCA), Laboratoire CReSTIC - SysCom EA 3804, France
{mandicou.ba, olivier.ﬂauzac, ﬂorent.nolot}@univ-reims.fr
† Ecole Nationale des Ponts et Chauss´ees (ENPC), Laboratoire CERMICS - SOWG, France
makhlour@cermics.enpc.fr
‡ Universit´e de Technologies de Troyes, Laboratoire ICD - ERA (UMR CNRS 6279), France
leila.boulahia@utt.fr
§ Universit´e Cheikh Anta Diop (UCAD), Laboratoire d’Informatique de Dakar (LID) S´en´egal
iniang@ucad.sn
Abstract—In this paper, we present novel ideas for an intel-
ligent aggregation approach based on cooperative agents and a
self-stabilizing clustering scheme for Wireless Sensor Networks
(WSNs). This aggregation solution aims at optimizing commu-
nications by combining an efﬁcient self-stabilizing clustering
approach and an intelligent cooperative aggregation process. On
the one hand, the clustering approach reorganizes the network
nodes into groups of nodes (i.e., clusters) so that it minimizes
communications between nodes, their cluster-head and the Sink.
On the other hand, the aggregation approach reduces commu-
nications by merging and sending only pertinent information to
the Sink, in a distributed way.
Keywords-Wireless Sensor Networks; Self-stabilizing Clustering;
Aggregation; Cooperative Agents;
I. INTRODUCTION
Due to their good properties and wide applications, Wireless
Sensor Networks (WSNs) have known a growing interest in
both industrial and academic ﬁelds. They are used for many
applications like: medical, scientiﬁc, military, environmental,
security, etc. In a WSN, sensor nodes have a limited energy
in their battery due to their size. This energy is consumed
by three main operations: sensing, communication and pro-
cessing. Communication of messages is the one consuming
the highest quantity of energy for a sensor. Thus, saving
communication power is crucial in a WSN. It is stated in [6]
that the necessary energy power to transmit a 1 KB message
over a distance of 100 meters is approximately equivalent to
the execution of 3 million CPU instructions by a 100 MIPS/W
processor. Consequently, to extend network lifetime it is more
urgent in these networks to optimize communications than
processing. It is also stated in the literature that organizing
the network into groups of nodes enables the control of the
network communications and thus saves energy. From this,
several clustering approaches are proposed. These approaches
are used in the design of energy-aware routing mechanisms
Several clustering approaches are proposed in the literature
and used, for example, in the case of a WSN for routing
collected information to a base station (Sink). However, most
of them are based on state model [10], [11], [13], [14], so
they are not realistic in the context of WSNs compared to
message-passing based clustering ones [7], [8], [17], [18].
Moreover, approaches in the last category are generally highly
costly in terms of exchanged messages, while in the case
of WSNs clustering aims at optimizing communications and
energy consumption. Thus, in Ba et al. [2], we have proposed
a self-Stabilizing Distributed Energy-Aware k-hops Clustering
protocol for ad hoc networks (SDEAC). SDEAC prolongs
the network lifetime by minimizing the energy consumption
involved in the exchanged of messages. Furthermore, in terms
of energy consumption in WSNs, data aggregation has been
presented as a particularly useful capability for routing [1], [6],
[12], [16], [21]. However, existing self-stabilizing clustering
solutions like [7], [8], [10], [11], [13], [14], [17], [18] do not
provide data aggregation mechanisms based on their clustering
algorithms.
Therefore, by considering the fact that in a WSN com-
munication of messages is by far the most important source
of energy consumption, we propose in this paper a novel
aggregation approach that optimizes these communications
by combining an efﬁcient self-stabilizing clustering scheme
proposed in Ba et al. [2] and an adaptation of the intelli-
gent cooperative aggregation process proposed in Sardouk et
al. [19] 1. Thus, on the one hand, the clustering approach
reorganizes the network nodes into groups of nodes (i.e.,
clusters) so that it minimizes communications between nodes,
their cluster head noted CH and the Sink. On the other
hand, the aggregation approach reduces communications (in
terms of number of messages and their size) by merging and
sending only pertinent information to the Sink, in a distributed
1These works [2], [3], [4], [5], [19] are supported by Regional Council of
Champagne-Ardenne and European Regional Development Fund through the
CPER CapSec ROFICA project
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-322-3
CTRQ 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

TABLE I
THEORETICAL COMPARISON OF SDEAC WITH OTHER APPROACHES BASED ON STATE MODEL
Stabilizing Time
Memory space per neighbor
Neighborhood
SDEAC
n + 2
log(2n + k + 3)
1 hop
Datta et al. [11]
O(n), O(n2)
O(log(n))
k hops
Caron et al. [10]
O(n ∗ k)
O(log(n) + log(k))
k+1 hops
way. Thus, collected information about the environment is
processed locally by nodes on the route before it reaches
the Sink. By reducing the amount of information, important
power consumption could be saved. In addition, this strategy
deals with the density of the network around each node by
eliminating redundancy of information.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion II summarizes SDEAC protocol. In Section III, we explain
our ideas for the establishment of an intelligent cooperative
multi-agent aggregation approach by using SDEAC protocol.
Section IV presents the validation framework used to evaluate
performances of our aggregation approach. Finally, Section V
concludes this paper and presents our working perspectives.
II. SDEAC: SELF-STABILIZING DISTRIBUTED
ENERGY-AWARE CLUSTERING
In [2], we have presented SDEAC: a self-Stabilizing Dis-
tributed Energy-Aware k-hops Clustering approach for ad
hoc networks. SDEAC is based on message-passing model
and structures the network into non-overlapping clusters with
diameter at most equal to 2k. This structuring does not require
any initialization. Furthermore, it is based only on information
from neighboring nodes at distance 1 contrary to other self-
stabilizing clustering algorithms. SDEAC uses a unique type of
message to discover the neighborhood of a node at distance
1 and to structure the network into non-overlapping k-hops
clusters.
On the one hand, we have validated SDEAC through a for-
mal proof and simulations in [2]. We have proved that a legal
conﬁguration (i.e., stabilization) is reached after at most n+2
transitions and each node u requires (∆u+1)∗log(2n+k+3)
memory space, where n is the number of network nodes and
∆u is the degree of u. As illustrated in Table I, we have
formally compared SDEAC with self-stabilizing clustering
approaches based on state model [10], [11]. Furthermore, in
Ba et al. [3], we have compared SDEAC with one of the
most referenced papers on self-stabilizing solutions based on
message-passing model [17]. This shows that SDEAC reduces
communication cost and energy consumption by a factor of at
least 2.
On the other hand, in Ba et al. [4], we have proposed an
evaluation study of SDEAC’s cluster-head election criteria in
the context of WSNs with energy constraint. For this, we
consider the most important criteria: node’s identity, residual
energy and degree. SDEAC optimizes energy consumption and
then prolongs the network lifetime by minimizing the number
of messages involved in the construction of clusters and by
minimizing stabilization time. It also offers an optimized struc-
ture for routing. Furthermore, SDEAC is generic and complete.
It can be easily used for constructing clusters according to
multiple criteria in the election of cluster-heads.
Moreover, SDEAC is fault tolerance and adapted to topolog-
ical changes. In fact, in [5], a fault-tolerance mechanism has
been proposed and simulation results have shown that that after
faults occurrence, the re-clustering cost is minimal compared
to the clustering cost.
Therefore, in this work, clusters provided by SDEAC are
used for an intelligent cooperative multi-agent aggregation
approach in order to reduce communications by merging and
sending only pertinent information to the Sink, in a fully-
distributed way.
III. INTELLIGENT CLUSTER-BASED COOPERATIVE
MULTI-AGENT AGGREGATION APPROACH
We propose an intelligent aggregation approach based on the
clustering mechanism SDEAC [2] described above and on a
cooperative Multi-Agent System (MAS) [19]. This aggregation
approach enables the communication of only pertinent sensors
information to the base station (i.e., Sink) in fully-distributed
way.
A. Aggregation scenario
Basically, in this approach, each sensor that collects im-
portant information sends it in the direction of its CH and
then, the CH sends the aggregate in the direction of the
Sink. Each sensor node that receives information from one or
multiple sensors will process it by merging and combining it
with its local information in order to minimizing the amount
of information. Then, it sends the resulting aggregate to its
intermediate node (i.e., relay node that knows the next node
in route to the CH or to the Sink) in the direction of the
Sink. An autonomic agent is installed on each sensor node
in order to control it and to deﬁne its behavior by analyzing
collected information and making decisions. This agent uses
routing information to establish a one-hop situated view (or
situadness) [9] and thus to maintain a knowledge base. Each
agent will decide by itself according to a given strategy if it
cooperates or not with other agents. By using a situated view,
each node reduces the amount of maintained information by
a view limited only to its direct neighbors.
When a sensor collects information about its environment,
its agent decides if this one is important. If so, it initiates
the aggregation process by sending a cooperation request to
its neighboring agents. If a neighbor decides to cooperate,
it sends its local information (i.e., sensed by its sensor) to
the requesting agent. If the node that receives the cooperation
request is the default intermediate node, it does not answer
to the requesting node. But, in order to save time, while
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-322-3
CTRQ 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

Sink
9
3
1
8
Resulting aggregate
Local aggregate
Cooperation request
Cluster−Head CH
Gateway Node GN
Simple Node (SN)
Source
46
4
11
49
44
41
45
29
32
25
21
48
39
33
24
47
51
34
27
43
5
50
42
10
8
26
16
14
38
12
20
33
22
19
18
36
30
28
7
15
31
37
35
23
0
17
40
16
Fig. 1.
Overview of our multi-agent cluster-based aggregation scheme
waiting for the aggregate of the requesting node, the relay
agent directly sends a cooperation request to its neighbors.
Once the requesting node receives local state information
from its neighbors, it merges the given data and eliminates
redundancy before sending the result (aggregate) to its default
intermediate node. The latter merges the received aggregate
with the gathered information of its neighbors to compute a
new aggregate and then it sends the result to its intermediate
node. The aggregation process continues until the sensed
information reaches the Sink.
Figure 1 illustrates one scenario of the proposed cluster-
based aggregation scheme. Here, a simple source node 35
sends its sensed information to its CH (40) through node
17 and the CH sends the resulting partial aggregate in the
direction of the Sink. Each node on the path aggregates data.
B. Cooperative agents
We deﬁne a distributed multi-agent cooperation strategy
considering different parameters in the decision-making pro-
cess [19]. These parameters are: importance level of collected
information (I), level of energy power on sensors (E), position
of nodes in the network (P) and network density (D). For
example, when the battery power on a node is critical (i.e.,
less than a certain threshold) the agent of this node refuses
to cooperate and will use this energy only for sensing and
sending its own information.
Thus, according to the value of these parameters, an auto-
nomic agent selects by itself the best behavior and decides
to cooperate or not in the aggregation process. For this,
it computes a coefﬁcient R that denotes the relevance of
cooperation like shown in equation 1.
R = we × E + wd × 1
D + wp × P + wi × I
(1)
TABLE II
EXAMPLE OF NEIGHBORHOOD TABLE
SN
1
4
2
4
4
34
42
43
4
51
51
51
51
SN
SN
SN
1
1
1
Node_ID
Cluster_ID
Status
Dist_CH
Dist_Sink
Routing table of node 51
where we, wd, wp and wi are the inﬂuence factors (i.e.,
weights) for, respectively, energy, density, position and infor-
mation importance.
C. Communication policy
The communication policy used in our aggregation is an
adaptation of the routing protocol Dynamic Source Routing
(DSR) [15] that limits its communications in the case of
a WSN. Our approach consists in two operations: route
discovery and route maintenance. Note that initially, each
node knows how to reach its CH through the reutilization of
clustering information. Thus, CHs need to know the route to
the Sink. For this, the route discovery phase allows CHs to
obtain information about their direct neighborhood and about
the default intermediate node in the direction of the Sink. Each
node on the path between a CH and the Sink will learn its
intermediate node. Then, the route maintenance phase enables
nodes to have the last updates about their neighborhood.
Table II illustrates an example of a neighborhood table of a
node 51 on the path between CH 40 and the Sink (Figure 1).
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-322-3
CTRQ 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

IV. VALIDATION OF THE PROPOSED APPROACH
In order to validate our aggregation approach, we plan
to carry out a simulation campaign under the OMNeT++
simulator [20] when we have implemented SDEAC protocol.
For this, we implement our intelligent cooperative multi-agent
aggregation approach described in Section III and we validate
it according to three scenarios:
i Fully-decentralized aggregation approach: aggregation is
done on each node on the path to the Sink;
ii Partially-decentralized aggregation approach: aggregation
is done only on cluster-heads;
iii Non-aggregated information: sensed information is di-
rectly sent to the sink without intermediary merging
(aggregation).
Thus, in the case of non-aggregation scenario, during each
sensing cycle, each node in the cluster sends its information
to the Sink through its cluster-head. As soon as a cluster-head
receives an information from a node in its cluster, it forwards
this message directly to the Sink through its path. At opposed,
in the case of aggregation on each cluster-head, the cluster-
head collects all messages from all nodes in its cluster and
aggregates data. Thus, during each sensing cycle, only one
message containing all information from other cluster’s nodes
is send to the Sink by each cluster-head.
To validate these three scenarios ( i.e., (i), (ii) and (iii)),
we plan to evaluate our approach according to the most
used criteria under the same clustering approach and testing
framework:
• Communication cost: in terms of number of messages
and their size;
• Energy consumption: total and distribution of battery
power consumption of sensors;
• End-to-end delay: necessary time to send information
from source nodes to the sink;
• Network lifetime: time until i nodes of the network die
(empty battery), where we vary the value of i.
V. CONCLUSIONS AND PERSPECTIVES
In this paper, we have presented novel ideas for the proposal
of an intelligent aggregation approach based on cooperative
agents and a self-stabilizing clustering for WSNs. The goals
of this intelligent aggregation approach is to reduce commu-
nications by merging and sending only pertinent information
to the Sink, all this in a distributed way.
Currently, we are working on the validation of our protocol
in OMNeT++ simulator in order to evaluate its communication
cost in terms of messages, energy consumption, end-to-end
delay and the network lifetime.
As future work, we plan to compare our aggregation ap-
proach with other existing aggregation solutions.
REFERENCES
[1] K. Akkaya, M. Younis, and M. Youssef. Efﬁcient aggregation of delay-
constrained data in wireless sensor networks.
In Proceedings of the
ACS/IEEE 2005 International Conference on Computer Systems and
Applications, pp. 904–909, 2005.
[2] M. Ba, O. Flauzac, B. S. Haggar, F. Nolot, and I. Niang. Self-stabilizing
k-hops clustering algorithm for wireless ad hoc networks. In 7th ACM
International Conference on Ubiquitous Information Management and
Communication (IMCOM’13), pp. 38:1–38:10, 2013.
[3] M. Ba, O. Flauzac, R. Makhlouﬁ, F. Nolot, and I. Niang. Comparison
between self-stabilizing clustering algorithms in message-passing model.
In 9th International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems
(ICAS’13), pp. 27–32, 2013.
[4] M. Ba, O. Flauzac, R. Makhlouﬁ, F. Nolot, and I. Niang. Evaluation
study of self-stabilizing cluster-head election criteria in wsns. In 6th
International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and
Quality of Service (CTRQ’13), pp. 64–69, 2013.
[5] M. Ba, O. Flauzac, R. Makhlouﬁ, F. Nolot, and I. Niang. Fault-tolerant
and energy-efﬁcient generic clustering protocol for heterogeneous wsns.
International Journal On Advances in Networks and Services, pp. 231–
245, 2013.
[6] S. J. Baek, G. de Veciana, and X. Su. Minimizing energy consumption
in large-scale sensor networks through distributed data compression
and hierarchical aggregation.
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
Communications, pp. 1130–1140, 2004.
[7] A. Bui, A. Kudireti, and D. Sohier.
A fully distributed clustering
algorithm based on random walks. In 8th IEE International Symposium
on pages Parallel and Distributed Computing (ISPDC ’09), pp. 125–128,
2009.
[8] A. Bui, A. Kudireti, and D. Sohier. A random walk based clustering with
local recomputations for mobile ad hoc networks. IEEE International
Symposium on Parallel Distributed Processing, Workshops and Phd
Forum (IPDPSW’10), pages 1–8, 2010.
[9] T. Bullot, R. Khatoun, L. Hugues, D. Ga¨ıti, and L. Merghem-Boulahia.
A situatedness-based knowledge plane for autonomic networking. In-
ternational Journal of Network Management, pp 171–193, 2008.
[10] E. Caron, A. K. Datta, B. Depardon, and L. L Larmore. A self-stabilizing
k-clustering algorithm for weighted graphs.
Journal of Parallel and
Distributed Computing, pp. 1159–1173, 2010.
[11] A. K. Datta, S. Devismes, and L. L. Larmore. A self-stabilizing O(n)-
round k-clustering algorithm. In 28th IEEE International Symposium
on Reliable Distributed Systems (SRDS ’09), pp. 147–155, 2009.
[12] E. Fasolo, M. Rossi, J. Widmer, and M. Zorzi. In-network aggregation
techniques for wireless sensor networks: a survey.
IEEE Wireless
Communications, pp. 70–87, 2007.
[13] C. Johnen and L. H. Nguyen.
Robust self-stabilizing weight-based
clustering algorithm. Theoretical Computer Science, pp. 581–594, 2009.
[14] Colette Johnen and LeHuy Nguyen.
Self-stabilizing construction of
bounded size clusters.
In International Symposium on Parallel and
Distributed Processing with Applications (ISPA ’08), pp. 43–50, 2008.
[15] D. B. Johnson, D. A. Maltz, and J. Broch. Ad hoc networking. chapter
DSR: The Dynamic Source Routing Protocol for Multihop Wireless Ad
Hoc Networks, pp. 139–172. 2001.
[16] R. Makhlouﬁ, G. Doyen, G. Bonnet, and D. Ga¨ıti. A survey and perfor-
mance evaluation of decentralized aggregation schemes for autonomic
management. International Journal of Network Management (IJNM), pp
29p, 2013. To appear.
[17] N. Mitton, E. Fleury, I. G. Lassous, and S. Tixeuil. Self-stabilization in
self-organized multihop wireless networks. In 25th IEEE International
Conference on Distributed Computing Systems Workshops (ICDCS’05),
pp. 909–915, 2005.
[18] N. Mitton, A. Busson, and E. Fleury. Self-organization in large scale ad
hoc networks. In Proceedings of the Mediterranean ad hoc Networking
Workshop (MedHocNet’04), 2004.
[19] A. Sardouk, Rana Rahim-Amoud, L. Merghem-Boulahia, and D. Ga¨ıti.
Power-aware agent-solution for information communication in wsn.
Telecommunication Systems, pp. 329–338, 2011.
[20] A. Varga and R .Hornig. An overview of the OMNeT++ simulation
environment. In Proceedings of the 1th IEEE International Conference
on Simulation Tools and Techniques for Communications, Networks and
Systems (SIMUTools), pp. 60:1–60:10, 2008.
[21] Y. Wen, T. A. F. Anderson, and D. M. W. Powers. On energy-efﬁcient
aggregation routing and scheduling in IEEE 802.15.4-based wireless
sensor networks.
Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing,
2012.
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-322-3
CTRQ 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

