Inter-domain Peering in  
Content-Aware Networks for Multimedia Applications 
 
Eugen Borcoci 
Telecommunication Dept. 
University POLITEHNICA of 
Bucharest 
Bucharest, Romania 
eugen.borcoci@elcom.pub.ro 
Radu Dinel Miruta 
Telecommunication Dept. 
University POLITEHNICA of 
Bucharest 
Bucharest, Romania 
radu.miruta@elcom.pub.ro 
Serban Georgica Obreja 
Telecommunication Dept. 
University POLITEHNICA of 
Bucharest 
Bucharest, Romania 
serban.obreja@elcom.pub.ro 
 
 
Abstract — The Content Aware Networking is an emerging 
architectural solution, responding to the significant increase in 
Internet content orientation. This paper is a continuation of a 
previous work and refines a management framework, for 
inter-domain peering in overlay Virtual Content Aware 
Networks (VCAN), QoS enabled,  built over multi-domain, 
multi-provider IP networks. An overlay inter-domain topology 
service and negotiation protocols are defined in this paper, 
based on cooperation of the CAN Managers belonging to 
network domains. The scalability and efficiency is preliminary 
analyzed. The work is part of the research effort,  inside a FP7 
European Information and Communication Technologies 
(ICT) research project, ALICANTE, oriented to multimedia 
distribution based on CAN approach. 
Keywords — Content-Aware Networking, Network Aware 
Applications, Multi-domain, Inter-domain peering, Management, 
Multimedia distribution, Future Internet. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The current Internet limitations are recognized,  related to 
the needs of today world and the global spread of this 
technology. High research efforts are spent to find enhanced 
architectural solutions or “clean slate” ones,  to solve the 
limitations thus leading to the Future Internet (FI) 
architectures. Sample of works are presented in [1] - [8].  
The work [1] emphasizes the strong orientation of the FI 
towards content and services and shows the importance of 
management. Network virtualization is seen as an important 
“tool” to overcome the ossification of the current Internet 
[2] - [5]. The overview paper [5], identifies the inefficiency 
of the current Internet for time-sensitive multimedia content 
delivery and analyses new solutions based on Content 
Oriented Networking (CON) with decoupling of contents 
from hosts at networking level. A major trend is the shift 
from the traditional TCP/IP stack concepts with agnostic 
network layer to more intelligency in the network layer.  
New network nodes process  the data, based on content type 
recognition or, even more, treating the data objects based on 
their name and not based on location address, [6][7].  Inline 
with this, a new concept is the Content-Awareness at 
Network 
layer 
(CAN) 
and 
Network-Awareness 
at 
Applications layers (NAA). These new solutions  are 
hopefully able  to better support  the development of the 
networked media systems and also the market orientation 
towards content. The approach is claimed by many studies 
to bring new benefits for both, Service and Application 
Layer and Network layer, thus creating a powerful cross-
layer optimization loop between the transport and 
applications and services.  
The European FP7 ICT running research project, “Media 
Ecosystem Deployment Through Ubiquitous Content-Aware 
Network Environments”, ALICANTE, [9][10][11],  adopted 
the NAA/CAN approach.  It targets to define an architecture, 
and then to fully specify, design and implements a Media 
Ecosystem, on top of multi-domain IP  networks, to offer a 
large variety of services for different business actors playing 
roles of consumers and/or providers. 
Architecturally,  ALICANTE is a “middle-way” solution: 
it adopted content-type recognition at network level and light 
virtualization (separation in the Data Plane of the virtual 
networks but a single management and control plane). This 
solution is 
believed to offer seamless deployment 
perspectives and tries to avoid the scalability problems (still 
open research issues) of the full CON approaches. 
Several 
cooperating 
environments 
are 
defined, 
including several business entities/actors: User Environment 
(UE), containing the End-Users; Service Environment (SE), 
containing High Level Service Providers (SP) and Content 
Providers (CP); Network Environment (NE), where a new 
CAN Provider exists (CANP - managing and offering 
Virtual Content Aware Networks- VCANs);  traditional 
Network Providers (NP/ISP) - managing the network 
elements at IP level. By  “environment”, it is understood a 
generic grouping of functions working for a common goal 
and which possibly vertically span one or more several 
architectural (sub-) layers. 
A VCAN can span several network domains, where each 
one is managed independently (a realistic business 
constraint), while  offering different levels of QoS 
guarantees for  media flows needs. Therefore an architectural 
decision have to be taken, on how to manage the peering in 
the Data Plane (including inter-domain routing) and in the 
Management and Control Plane (M&C signaling) in order 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-192-2
CTRQ 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

that they cooperate to the realization of a shared VCAN. This 
is the subject of this paper. Several solutions are analyzed for 
M&C (cascade, hub, mixed) and finally the so called “ hub 
model” has been selected. A M&C negotiation protocol  is 
proposed to run between domain managers. The scalability 
aspects are preliminary discussed. 
 The CANP offers to the upper layers enhanced VCAN-
based connectivity services, unicast and multicast (QoS 
enabled) over multi-domain, multi-provider IP networks. 
The VCAN resources are managed quasi-statically by 
provisioning and also dynamically by using adaptation 
procedures for media flows. The management is based on 
vertical and horizontal Service Level Agreements (SLAs) 
negotiated and concluded between providers (e.g SP-CANP). 
In the Data Plane, content/service description information 
(metadata) can also be inserted in the media flow packets by 
the Content Servers and treated appropriately by the 
intelligent routers of the VCAN. 
The paper continues the starting work on VCAN 
presented in [12] [13]. It is organized as follows. Section II 
presents samples of related work. Section III summarizes the 
overall ALICANTE architecture. Section IV shortly presents 
the content awareness features of the system and QoS 
assurance solutions. Section V is the main one, dedicated to 
the peering solution selected and associated negotiations   
aiming to extend a VCAN over several domains. Section VI 
contains some conclusions and future work outline. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The paper objective is to develop management solutions 
to govern the construction of VCANs,  QoS capable over 
several independent network domains which should be 
peered and  assure guaranteed QoS enabled transport of real-
time and media traffic. 
For inter-domain QoS enabled domain peering, there 
exist basically two kinds of approaches. The first one  [14] 
[15], proposes QoS enhancements for the Border Gateway 
Protocol (BGP). The 
BGP advertises QoS related 
information between network domains – seen at limit as 
autonomous systems (ASes), and then a QoS aware  routing 
table is built. However, the notion of content awareness at 
domains level is absent there. 
Other solutions for inter-domain QoS peering and  
routing are based on the overlay network idea [16] [17] [18]. 
An overlay network is defined, which first, abstracts each 
domain with a node, represented by the domain resource 
manager, or more detailed with several nodes represented by 
the egress routers from that domain. There exist protocols to 
transport QoS and other information between nodes and, 
based on this information, QoS routing algorithms are used 
to choose the QoS capable path. In [16] a Virtual Topology 
(VT) is defined by a set of virtual links that map the current 
link state of the domain without showing internal details of 
the physical network topology. Then  Push and  Pull models 
for building the VT at each node are considered and 
analyzed. In the Push model each AS advertises its VT to 
their neighbor ASes. This model is suited for small 
topologies. In the Pull model the VT is requested when 
needed, and only from the ASes situated along the path 
between given source and destinations; the path itself is 
determined using BGP.  
After routes are found, a negotiation protocol should be  
run [12]-[15] [18], to establish inter-domains Service Level 
Specification (SLS) agreements (SLS is the SLA technical 
part ) containing clauses for QoS guarantees. 
Related to management of inter-domain peering, several 
solutions are examined and compared (cascade, hub, mixed-
mode) [16][17][18]. However, neither solution considers the 
content awareness capabilities of the multiple domain 
infrastructure, nor the virtualization aspects. This paper   
takes these into account. Also, ALICANTE architecture 
realizes parallel Internet planes as in [19], but mapped onto 
VCANs, and additionally achieves cooperation between the 
network layer and applications and services layers, thus 
realizing a traffic  optimization loop (OL), similar to [20]. 
III. 
ALICANTE SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE AND VCAN 
MANAGEMENT 
A. General Architecture 
The general ALICANTE architecture is already defined 
in [9][10][11]. A set of business actors is defined, composed 
of traditional SP, CP, NP - Providers and End-Users (EU). 
New business actors are introduced: CAN Provider (CANP) 
offering virtual layer connectivity services and   the Home-
Box (HB)- partially managed by the SP, the NP, and the end-
user,  located at end-user's premises and gathering 
content/context-aware and network-aware information. The 
HB can also act as a CP/SP for other HBs, on behalf of the 
EUs. Correspondingly, two novel virtual layers exist: the 
CAN layer and the HB layer. The novel CAN routers are 
called 
Media-Aware 
Network 
Elements 
(MANE) 
to 
emphasize their additional capabilities: content and context - 
awareness, controlled QoS/QoE, security and monitoring 
features, etc. 
The CAN layer M&C  is partially distributed; it supports 
CAN customization to respond to the SE needs, including 
1:1, 1:n, and n:m communications and also allow efficient 
network resource exploitation. The interface between CAN 
and the upper layer supports  cross-layer optimizations 
interactions, e.g., offering network distance information to 
HBs to help collaboration in P2P style, [20]. A hierarchical 
monitoring subsystem supervises several points of the 
service distribution chain and feeds the adaptation 
subsystems with appropriate information, at the HB and 
CAN Layers. Figure 1 presents a partial view on the 
ALICANTE architecture, with emphasis on the CAN layer 
and management interaction. The network contains several 
Network Domains (ND), belonging to NPs (they can be also 
seen as Autonomous Systems - AS) and access networks 
(AN). The ANs are out of scope of VCANs. One CAN 
Manager (CANMgr) exists for each IP domain to assure the 
consistency of VCAN planning, provisioning, advertisement, 
offering, negotiation installation and exploitation. Each 
domain has an Intra-domain Network Resource Manager 
(IntraNRM), as the ultimate authority configuring the 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-192-2
CTRQ 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

network nodes. The CAN layer cooperates with HB and SE 
by offering them CAN services.  
B. VCAN Management 
The VCAN Management framework has been already 
defined in [12]. Here only a short summary is recalled for 
sake of clarity. At the Service Manager SM@SP, the CAN 
Network Resources Manager (CAN_RMgr) performs all 
actions needed for VCAN support on behalf of SP. It 
performs, at SP level, VCAN planning, provisioning 
(negotiation with CANP on behalf of the SP)  and then 
VCAN 
operation 
supervision. 
The 
CANMgr@CANP 
performs, at the CAN layer, VCAN provisioning and 
operation. The two entities interact based on the SLA/SLS 
contract initiated by the SP. The interface implementation for 
management is based on Simple Object Access Protocol 
(SOAP)/Web 
Services. 
The 
contracts/interactions 
of 
SLA/SLS types performed in the M&C Plane are shown in 
Fig. 1:  
 
 
AS1 
Intra-NRM 
@NP 
AS2 
Intra-NRMr 
@NP 
CAN 
Manager  
CAN 
Manager 
 
2 
3 
1 
Multi-domain VCAN 
QoS enabled 
NIA 
 
HB + SP 
 Environment 
 
MANE 
MANE 
Service  
 Provider 
5 
CAN RM 
4 
OL 
MANE 
Access 
Network 
Access 
Network 
HB 
MANE 
Home 
Network 
EUT 
 
Service  
Manager@SP 
SLS 
SLS 
HB/CS 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  High level ALICANTE architecture: multi-domain VCANs and 
main management and control interactions 
Notations: RM – Resource Management; HB-Home Box; 
CS- Content Server; EUT- End User Terminal;  
OL - Optimization Loop; NIA-Network Interconnection 
Agreements; SP, NP – Service, Network Providers 
 
Interactions in the Fig. 1 are described as follows:SP-
CANP(1): the SP requests to CANP to provision/ modify/ 
terminate  VCANs while CANP says yes/no; also 
CANPmight advertise existent VCANs to SP; CANP-NP(2) : 
CANP negotiates resources with NP;; CANP-CANP(3) – 
negotiations are needed to extend a VCAN upon several NP 
domains; Network Interconnection Agreements (NIA) (4) 
between the NPs or between NPs and ANPs; these are not 
new ALICANTE functionalities but are necessary for NP 
cooperation.  
After the SP negotiates a desired VCAN with CANP, it 
will issue the installation commands to CANP, which in turn 
configures, via Intra-NRM (action 5), the MANE functional 
blocks (input and output).  
IV. CONTENT AWARENESS AND QOS AT CAN LAYER 
The content awareness (CA) is realized in three ways:  
(i) by concluding a SP - CANP SLA concerning different 
VCAN construction. The content servers are instructed by 
the SP to insert some special Content Aware Transport 
Information (CATI) in the data packets. This simplifies the 
media flow classification and treatment by the MANE; (ii) 
SLA is concluded, but no CATI is inserted in the data 
packets (legacy CSs). The MANE applies packet inspection 
for data flow classification and assignment to VCANs. The 
flows treatment is still based on VCANs characteristics 
defined in the SLA; (iii) no SP–CANP SLA exists and  no 
CATI. The flows treatment can still be CA, but conforming 
to the local policy at CANP and IntraNRM. 
The DiffServ and/or MPLS  technologies support 
splitting the sets of flows in QoS classes (QC), with a 
mapping between the VCANs and the QCs. Several levels of 
QoS granularity can be established when defining VCANs.  
The QoS behavior of each VCAN (seen as one of the parallel 
Internet planes) is established by the SP-CANP. 
Generally a 1-to-1 mapping between a VCAN and a 
network plane will exist. Customization of VCANs is 
possible in terms of QoS level of guarantees (weak or 
strong), QoS granularity, content adaptation procedures, 
degree of security, etc. A given VCAN can be realized by the 
CANP, by combining several processes, while being possible 
to choose different solutions concerning routing and  
forwarding, packet processing, and resource management. 
The definitions of local QoS classes (QC) and extended 
QCs and meta-QoS classes were adopted in ALICANTE, 
[14][15][18][19] to allow capturing the notion of QoS 
capabilities across several domains. Each domain may have 
its local QoS classes and  several local QCs can be combined 
to form an extended QC..The types of VCANs defined for 
different QoS granularities based on QCs are described in 
[12]:  VCANs based on meta-QCs, [14], VCANs based on 
local QC composition and hierarchical VCANs based on 
local QC composition. The last case is the most efficient but 
also the most complex. Inside each VCAN, several QCs are 
defined corresponding to platinum, gold, silver, etc. In such a 
case, the mapping between service flows at SP level and 
CANs can be done per type of the service: VoD, VoIP, 
Video-conference, etc.  
V. CAN  MULTI-DOMAIN PEERING 
A. Horizontal M&C VCAN Negotiation 
A given VCAN may span one or several IP domains. In a 
multi-domain context, one should distinguish between two 
topologies (in terms of how the domains are linked with each 
others): Data plane topology and M&C topology.  The first 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-192-2
CTRQ 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

can be of any kind (depending on SP needs and including the 
domains spanned by a given VCAN). In a general case, one 
may have a mesh/graph of domains. The M&C topology 
defines how the CAN Managers associated to different 
domains inter-communicate for  multi-domain VCANs 
construction. The VCAN initiating CANMgr has to negotiate 
with other CAN Managers. There exist two main models to 
organise this communication at management level: hub 
model  and cascade model [14][15][18][19]. 
The hub model was selected; it has the advantage  that 
initiating CANMgr can know, each VCAN component 
(network)  and its status. A drawback is that each CANMgr 
should know the inter-domain topology (complete graph) of 
network domains. They could be of lower tier grade or be 
Autonomous Systems (AS), involved in a VCAN. Given the 
tiered hirarchy of the Internet, the number of Network 
Domains (ND) involved in an E2E chain is not too high 
(actually is  lower than 10, [8]), scalability problem is not so 
stringent. Two functional components are needed: (1) inter-
domain topology discovery protocol;  (2) overlay negotiation 
protocol for SLA/SLS negotiations between CAN Managers.  
The cascade model, [15], [18] is more advantageous for 
initiating CAN Manager if a chain of domains is to form the 
VCAN. However, for an arbitrary mesh topology of the NDs 
composing the VCAN, and for multicast enabled VCAN, 
this model offers less efficient management capabilities.  
 
 
MANE 
CANMgr n 
NDm 
NDn 
MANE 
CANMgr m 
SP 
1.Initial VCAN request 
2.1.VCAN negotiation 
2.2.VCAN negotiation 
ANm1 
ANm2 
ANn1 
 
HB 
 
HB 
 
HB 
NDk 
CANMgr k 
ANk2 
ANk1 
 
HB 
 
HB 
Resulting 
VCAN 
CS1 
CS2 
CS3 
Traffic Trunks 
 
 
Figure 2 Example of a multi-domain VCAN ( hub model for management plane) 
Fig. 2 shows an example of a multi-domain VCAN. It is 
supposed that the inter-domain discover protocol has already 
produced its results, so each CANMgr knows about the inter-
domain graph and have inter-domain routing information, 
including link capacities and QoS related capabilities.  The 
SP asks for a VCAN to a CANMgr (Initiator) – see action 1. 
It was supposed that the SP knew the edge points of this 
VCAN, i.e. the MANEs IDs where different sets of HB 
currently are, or they will be connected. The initiator 
CANMgr_n determines all network domains (ND) involved 
(from the SP information and its inter-domain knowledge) 
and then negotiate in parallel with all other CAN Managers 
(actions 2.1, 2.2) to establish the VCAN = {VCANn U 
VCANm U VCANk}. The split of the SLS parameters (if it 
is the case) should be done at the initiator (e.g. for delay). In 
a successful scenario, the multi-domain VCAN is agreed and 
then it is later instantiated in the network. 
B. Overlay Virtual Topology 
Constructing VCAN over one or multiple domains is a 
main target of the CAN Manager. Each ND has complete 
autonomy w.r.t its network resources including network 
dimensioning, off-line traffic engineering (TE), and also 
dynamic routing. The CANMgr cooperating with Intra-NRM 
is supposed to know about its network resources.  
Given that in ALICANTE each ND has associated the 
IntraNRM and CANMgr, one could abstract the both under 
the name of NDMgr.  This entity should have an abstract 
view of its network domain and output links towards 
neighbors in a form of a set of virtual pipes (called Traffic 
Trunks). A set of such pipes can belong to a given QoS class. 
As already stated, a multiple domain VCANs should also 
belong to some QoS class and therefore inter-domain QoS 
aware routing information is necessary in order to increase 
the chances of successful SLS establishment, when 
negotiating the multi-domain VCAN. The multi-domain 
VCANs deployment needs knowledge on a virtual multi-
domain topology. 
Each ND can assure QoS enabled paths towards some 
destination network prefixes while implementing its own 
network technology: DiffServ, MPLS, etc. Also, each ND 
can be seen in an abstract way as an Overlay Network 
Topology (ONT) expressed in terms of TTs (traffic trunks) 
characterized by of bandwidth, latency, jitter, etc. One TT is 
belonging to a given QoS class QCi.  
We define an Overlay Network Service (ONS) 
responsible for getting the ONTs related to NDs belonging to 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-192-2
CTRQ 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

a multi-domain VCAN. The CANMgrs will then inter-
negotiate the SLS contracts in order to reserve VCAN 
resources and finally ask installation of them. The overlay 
topology can be hierarchised  on several levels. 
 
 
SP 
NDk 
VCAN 
NDj 
NDm 
NDn 
a 
NDk 
Traffic trunks for 
class QCi 
Ingress 
ONT(NDk
) 
Egress 
CANMk 
CANMn 
Ingress 
NDm 
NDn 
CANMm 
B=5, D=4 
B=6, D=2 
B=6, D=2 
B=3, D=1 
b 
 
Figure 3.  a. Inter-domain level overlay network topology (ONT); b. ONT 
of the domain NDk ( B= bandwidth, D= max delay- generic figures) 
Fig. 3.a presents a first level  (inter-domain) ONT, in 
which, each domain ND is seen as a node. The overlay graph 
of the NDs belonging to the VCAN is composed of the nodes 
NDk, NDn, NDm. Then, a second order ONT can be defined 
for one ND. Figure 3.b shows the ONT for the domain NDk, 
composed of TTs, each one characterized by a bandwidth 
and a delay. If the initiating CAN Manager knows the ONT 
graph of the NDs involved, then provisioning of QoS 
enabled VCANs can be done.  
The ONS can be act in two ways: a proactive (push) 
mode and a reactive (also called pull or on demand) mode in 
order to obtain the overlay (virtual) topologies of other NDs.  
In the proactive case, every ND advertises its ONT to 
other NDs without being requested for. The advantage is the 
same as in IP proactive routing protocols: the ONTs of other 
NDs are already available at a given ND because they are 
periodically or event-triggered advertised among ND 
managers. The the advertisement can  executed at an 
initiative of each ND manager, so this model allows 
promotion of some routes to other domains. This can be 
subject of policies. The dynamicity is high (event driven 
advertisements),  but the complexity is also high. Scalability 
problems exist, because of high control traffic volume and 
also flooding the neighbour NDs with (maybe) not needed 
information.  
In the reactive (on-demand) mode the ONTs are obtained 
on demand by an ND interested to reach a given destination 
prefix. The ND will query each domain of a given path to get 
the ONTs. No advertising mechanism is necessary. The 
scalability is higher because only the ONTs of the chosen 
routes will be obtained. Studies [8] show that the mean End 
to End (E2E) communication in the Internet usually involves  
few domains (less than 8). Therefore, the number of domains 
to be queried to obtain the ONTs is small. The pull model 
latency is higher (need time for queries and calculations). 
The updates of ONT knowledge is not event driven w.r.t 
other NDs, because lack of advertisements. For ALICANTE 
we have chosen the reactive model.  
In ALICANTE case if a CANMgr wants to build an ONT 
it  will query its directly linked (at data plane level) 
neighbour domains ( i.e the corresponding CAN Managers). 
It is supposed that it has the knowledge of such neighbours. 
There two possibilities of a querry: 
a. non-selective querry/demand- the asking CANMgr 
wants to know all neighbourhood of the asked neighbours 
b. selective demand-  the asking CANMgr wants to know 
answers only from those AS neighbours which have paths to 
a given set of destinations. 
In case a. each queried CANMgr can return – in a first 
most simple approach only its list of neighbours. At receipt 
of such information, the interrogating CANMgr updates its 
topology data base.  Then it queries the new nodes learned 
and so on. The process continues until the interrogating node 
CANMgr learns the whole graph of “international” 
topology.The extension of such a zone can be  determined by 
local policies. Because the topology structure changes events 
are not  very frequent (weeks, months), the topology 
construction process could be run at large time intervals 
(once a day, for example). Consequently the amount  of 
messages used to build the ONT will not overload the 
significantly the network. In the case b. the query process is 
similar, but the answers will be selective, i.e., filtered 
conforming the required set of destinations. 
The area of knowledge desired by a given CANMgr can 
be determined by policies and can be enlarged if needed. The  
Fig. 4 shows such an area for two levels of extension.  
We summarize the ALICANTE design decision: on-
demand model based on overlay network topology service; 
based on non-selective and selective queries and simple 
answers (i.e., no internal ONT information of a domain is 
made public). Advantages are: less complexity, higher speed, 
preserving intra-domain information. Drawbacks are: higher 
probability of failures of QoS enabled paths at first attempt. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
The paper proposed a management solution for inter-
domain peering, in Content Aware Networks for a multi-
domain and multi-provider environment. The management is 
based on horizontal SLAs negotiated and concluded between 
CAN providers (represented by CAN Managers) the result 
being a set of parallel VCANs offering different classes of 
services to multimedia flows, based on CAN/NAA concepts. 
The inter-domain approach is to develop an overlay topology 
service to support VCAN construction, thus obtaining 
several parallel QoS planes. A CAN Manager is initiating the 
multi-domain VCAN realization by using the overlay 
topology service. The system is currently under complete 
design and implementation in the framework of the FP7 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-192-2
CTRQ 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

research project ALICANTE. Validation and performance 
evaluation results will be shown in a future work.  
 
 
 
CNDk 
Answer of NDn: 
    1. reachability offered by NDn  
to reach  the destination  
           Dstx=NDz.MANEj 
ONT(NDk) 
Destination CND 
CANMgrk 
 
NDm 
CNDz 
Dstx 
Initial knowledge area of domain 
CANMgr@NDk (Level 0 of extension) 
MANEj 
NDn 
NDp 
 
 
Level 1 of extension 
 
Figure 4 Different areas of ONT knowledge for NDk ( Level 0, Level 1, …) in selective –query mode 
 
 
 
Acknowledgments 
This work was supported partially by the EC in the 
context of the ALICANTE project (FP7-ICT-248652) and 
partially by the project POSDRU/89/1.5/S/62557. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Schönwälder, J., Fouquet, M., Dreo Rodosek,  G., and 
Hochstatter, I.C.,  “Future Internet = Content + Services + 
Management”, IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 47, no. 
7, Jul. 2009, pp. 27-33.  
[2] Baladrón, 
C., 
“User-Centric 
Future 
Internet 
and 
Telecommunication Services”,  in: G. Tselentis, et. al. (eds.), 
Towards the Future Internet, IOS Press, 2009, pp. 217-226.  
[3] Turner, J. and Taylor, D., “Diversifying the Internet,” Proc. 
GLOBECOM ‘05, vol. 2, St. Louis, USA, Nov./Dec. 2005, 
pp. 760-765. 
[4] Anderson, T., Peterson, L., Shenker, S., and Turner, J., 
“Overcoming the Internet Impasse through Virtualization”, 
Computer, vol. 38, no. 4, Apr. 2005, pp. 34–41.  
[5] 4WARD, “A clean-slate approach for Future Internet”, 
http://www.4ward-project.eu/. 
[6] J.Choi, J.Han, E.Cho, T. Kwon, and Y.Choi, A Survey on 
Content-Oriented Networking for Efficient Content Delivery, 
IEEE Communications Magazine, March 2011. 
[7] V. 
Jacobson 
et 
al., 
“Networking 
Named 
Content,” 
CoNEXT ’09, New York, NY, 2009, pp. 1–12. 
[8] W.K. Chai, et.al., CURLING: Content-Ubiquitous Resolution 
and Delivery Infrastructure for Next-Generation Services , 
IEEE Communications Magazine, March 2011. 
[9] FP7 ICT project, “MediA Ecosystem Deployment Through 
Ubiquitous 
 
Content-Aware 
Network 
Environments”, 
ALICANTE, No248652, http://www.ict-alicante.eu/ (last 
accessed: Dec. 2010). 
[10] Borcoci, E., Negru, D. and Timmerer, C., “A Novel 
Architecture for Multimedia Distribution based on Content-
Aware Networking” Proc. of. CTRQ 2010, Athens, June 
2010, pp. 162-168.  
[11] ALICANTE, Deliverable D2.1, ALICANTE Overall System 
and 
Components 
Definition 
and 
Specifications, 
http://www.ict-alicante.eu, Sept. 2011. 
[12] Eugen Borcoci, Mihai Stanciu, Dragoş Niculescu, Daniel 
Negru, George Xilouris, Connectivity Services Management 
in Multi-domain Content-Aware Networks for Multimedia 
Applications, ” Proc. of. INTERNET 2011, Luxembourg, 
June 2011. 
[13] Borcoci, E.  and Iorga, R.,    “A Management Architecture for 
a Multi-domain Content-Aware Network” TEMU 2010, July 
2010, Crete. 
[14] Levis, P., Boucadair, M., Morrand, P., and Trimitzios, P., 
“The Meta-QoS-Class Concept: a Step Towards Global QoS 
Interdomain Services”, Proc. of IEEE SoftCOM, Oct. 2004. 
[15] Howarth, M.P. et al., “Provisioning for Interdomain Quality 
of Service: the MESCAL Approach”, IEEE Communications 
Magazine, June 2005, pp. 129-137. 
[16] Fabio L. Verdi, Maurıcio F. Magalhaes “Using Virtualization 
to Provide Interdomain QoS-enabled Routing”, Journal of 
Networks, April 2007, pp. 23-32. 
[17] 14] Z. Li, P. Mohapatra, and C. Chuah, Virtual Multi-
Homing: On the Feasibility of Combining Overlay Routing 
with 
BGP 
Routing, 
University 
of 
California 
at 
DavisTechnical Report: CSE-2005-2, 2005. 
[18] ENTHRONE, 
End-to-End 
QoS 
through 
Integrated 
Management of Content, Networks and Terminals, FP6 
project, URL: http://www.ist-enthrone.org/. 
[19] Boucadair, M. et al., “A Framework for End-to-End Service 
Differentiation: Network Planes and Parallel Internets”, IEEE 
Communications Magazine, Sept. 2007, pp. 134-143. 
[20] Aggarwal, V., Feldmann, A.,  “Can ISPs and P2P Users 
Cooperate for Improved Performance?”, ACM SIGCOMM 
Computer Communication Review, vol. 37, no. 3, Jul. 2007, 
pp. 29-40.  
 
 
                                                           
 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-192-2
CTRQ 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

