 
 
Performance of Probabilistic Broadcasting of  
Dynamic Source Routing Protocol 
  
Muneer Bani Yassein, S. Al-Rushdan,  
Computer Science Department 
Jordan University of Science and Technology (JUST) 
Irbid 22110, Jordan 
masadeh@just.edu.jo 
 
Wail Mardini, Yaser Khamayseh 
Computer Science Department 
Jordan University of Science and Technology (JUST) 
Irbid 22110, Jordan 
mardini@just.edu.jo, yaser@just.edu.jo
 
Abstract - Blind flooding have been proposed to perform route 
discovery operations in Mobile Ad-hoc Networks as an early 
method, but it suffers from a serious  problem relied to the 
broadcast storm problem. Several probabilistic approaches 
have been proposed to overcome this problem, such as fixed 
probabilistic, adjusted probabilistic and smart probabilistic 
schemes. This paper investigates the use of probability with 
Dynamic Source Routing Protocol (DSR) algorithm to 
overcome the broadcast storm problem. The paper invistigates 
issues regarding the implementation and integration of 
probability in DSR algorithm and how it can be improved. 
Simulation results show that the new scheme provides good 
results in performance levels by taking in consideration the 
status of the network density (sparse versus dense networks). 
Keywords-Source Routing; Probabilistic Flooding; Fixed 
Probability; Broadcasting 
I. INTRODUCTION 
In computer networks, the key functionality is to transmit 
and receive data. Controlling this functionality requires 
routing the data from the source to the destination. In mobile 
ad hoc networks, this is a critical and sensitive issue that has 
to be investigated due to the limitation on such networks, as 
mobile ad hoc network is designed to be robust. The nodes 
in such networks are continuously moving and changing 
there positions, and therefore, the topology of the network 
are changing frequently, the process of finding the route 
from source to destination is a challenging task. 
One of the first route discovery mechanisms used is blind 
flooding [1][2]. In blind flooding, when a node receives a 
Route Request (RREQ) message for the first time, it 
retransmits it to all its neighbors. This approach is costly and 
can cause what is called broadcast storm problem [3]. 
Several schemes have been proposed to overcome this 
problem using probabilistic approaches. For example, using 
fixed probability, in which the node rebroadcast the RREQ 
with a predetermined probability p. Other approaches used 
adjusted or smart probability where the rebroadcasting of 
the RREQ is performed according to a probability calculated 
based on some local information of the node’s neighbors [4]. 
In this paper, we investigate the use of probability with 
DSR algorithm in order to reduce the effects of broadcast 
storm problem and reduce the contention aiming at 
improving the performance of the network. The basic idea is 
to gather useful information about the current status of the 
network and then make the routing decision based on the 
collected data.  
Finally, for further improvements, we propose a 
technique to use a global knowledge about the network 
based on some estimations about the network to enhance the 
accuracy of the routing decisions. 
 
II. RELATED WORK 
One of the earliest techniques used to find a route from a 
certain source node to a destination node is flooding. 
Flooding is the basic technique used and implemented in 
DSR [1] and AODV [2] routing protocols. Flooding is 
performed by broadcasting a RREQ packet from the source 
node to all of its neighbors. If one of the neighbors is the 
destination, it replies by sending a Route Reply (RREP) 
packet, otherwise, it rebroadcast the request to all it 
neighbors. If a node (not the destination) receives a RREQ, 
it will check if the packet has seen before, if so, it will 
discard the packet, else it will rebroadcast it until the 
destination node is reached where RREP packet is sent. The 
concept of flooding is attractive due to its simplicity, 
effectiveness and ease of implementation. 
However, this technique can lead to a serious problem 
called broadcast storm problem [3]. This problem occurs 
because the flooding is likely to happen frequently in ad hoc 
networks. Due to the number of rebroadcast operations, this 
will result in many redundancies in RREQ packets and cause 
a contention in the network.  
Several approaches were proposed to reduce the 
redundancy and control rebroadcasting process. One of the 
earliest techniques is using probabilistic broadcasting in 
which the intermediate nodes rebroadcast the RREQ 
according to a certain probability [6]. 
Bani yassein and Bani Khalaf in [4] used the concept of 
four probabilities (P's) in their smart probabilistic approach 
to calculate the rebroadcasting probability based on local 
information of the neighbors. They choose the value of p's 
such that p1>p2>p3>p4 without specifying initial value for 
p. 
110
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

 
 
A. Overview of Dynamic Source Routing Protocol (DSR) 
The DSR protocol consists of two phases; route 
discovery phase which is a mechanism for finding a route 
from source to destination, and route maintenance phase 
which is the process of discovering the failure or keeping the 
link active [1]. 
When a node creates a packet to be sent to a destination, 
a route path is appended to the head of packet to determine 
which path the packet should move through. The node can 
find this path by searching the route cache for previously 
learned paths. If the path could not be found in route cache, 
then this node sends a route discovery packet to find a path 
to the destination. When a node receives a route discovery 
packet, it returns a route replay packet to the sender, if it is 
the target, containing a copy of accumulated route through 
the network. When the sender receives this message, it put it 
in its cache to be used in later requests. If the node is not the 
target node, it appends its address to the route path 
accumulated in the message and forwards it by a local 
broadcast packet. If the node finds it own address listed in 
the message or the message contains a request id that has 
seen before, it discards this message. The destination node 
when receiving a route discovery packet, it looks in its route 
cache to fine a route to the source, if the path found in 
cache, the destination send pack route replay message 
through this path, otherwise, the destination starts its own 
route discovery process.; However, this operation may cause 
infinite loop, therefore the destination may include the path 
in the route replay message. Also the destination could 
reverse the source route if the network has a bidirectional 
link. The destination saves route replay message in send 
buffer which contains the messages that cannot be 
transmitted and try to retransmit the messages later on. Also 
it can be time stamped so it can be discarded later 
B. Adjusted Probabilistic broadcasting 
The adjusted probabilistic broadcasting [4] depends on 
calculating the average number of neighbors in the network. 
Node’s a neighbors are defined as the nodes that can be 
directly reached by node a. The average number of 
neighbors can be calculated as the following: 
n
N
avg
n
i
i



1
         (1) 
where Ni is the number of neighbors of node I and n is the 
number of neighbors in the network. In [4], the nodes 
estimate the average using the following equation: 
A
N
avg
2
8.0
)1
(



      (2) 
where N is the number of nodes in the network and A is the 
area of the ad hoc network. 
Once a node receives a RREQ, it checks if this is not the 
first time the node receives this RREQ, the node will discard 
the RREQ, else, it will find the number of its neighbors. If 
the number of its neighbor is less than avg, then the node is 
probably in a sparse area and therefore high broadcast 
probability is assigned to the RREQ. On the other hand, if 
the number of neighbors is greater than avg, then the node is 
probably in dense area and a low probability is assigned to 
the RREQ.  
 
C. Smart Probabilistic Broadcasting 
Smart probabilistic broadcasting algorithm [1] defines 
four values of probabilities p1, p2, p3, p4 where 
p1>p2>p3>p4. The algorithm calculates the avg as above 
and calculate the average number of neighbors for the nodes 
whose number of neighbors is less than avg (avg1) and the 
average number of neighbors for the nodes whose number of 
neighbors is greater then avg (avg2) using the following 
equations: 
k
N
avg
n
i
i



1
1
          (3) 
where Ni <avg, k is the number of node satisfying the 
condition, and n is the number of nodes in the network. 
k
N
avg
n
i
i



1
2
         (4) 
where Ni ≥ avg, k is the number of node satisfying the 
condition, and n is the number of nodes in the network. 
Once receiving a RREQ for the first time the node get 
the values of avg, avg1 and avg2 then it calculates  number 
of its neighbors c. Now, if c<avg1, then this node is in low 
sparse area which means high probability is assigned to 
RREQ p=p1. If avg1<c< avg, then the node is in medium 
sparse area and a medium high probability is assigned to 
RREQ p = p2. If avg < c < avg2, then the node is in 
medium dense area and medium low probability is assigned 
to RREQ  p=p3. Finally, if c>avg2, then the node is in high 
dense area and low probability is assigned to RREQ  p=p4.  
III. MOTIVATION 
DSR is one of the earliest routing algorithms that have 
been introduced. It uses flooding technique for route 
discovery operation. However, as mentioned above, 
although blind flooding is simple, effective and easy to 
implement, it can lead to a serious problems like broadcast 
storm problem. 
Many approaches have been proposed to improve the 
route discovery process. One of the most important 
approaches is probabilistic broadcasting using fixed 
probability 
approaches[4], 
dynamic 
probabilistic 
111
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

 
 
approaches, adjusted probabilistic or two-p scheme and 
smart probabilistic of four-p approaches [3][4]. 
The aim of using probability is to reduce the redundancy 
and overlapping in radio signals and hence reduce the 
contention and collision in the network. 
Those 
techniques 
mentioned 
above 
have 
been 
implemented and tested using AODV routing scheme and 
shows a significant improvement and increase in network 
performance with the AODV protocol. 
As stated in [1], typically, AODV performance is close 
to the DSR performance. However, in high mobility 
environments, DSR outperforms AODV because AODV 
spends significant amount of time to expand the search 
range. Search in route discovery phase in both AODV and 
DSR have the same overhead but with a noticeable 
advantage to DSR as DSR performs less route discovery 
operations on control overhead over transmission bytes. 
However, 
with 
respect 
to 
delivery 
bytes, 
AODV 
outperforms DSR due the increased reliability in AODV.  
The probabilistic techniques have not yet investigated 
using DSR algorithms. A significant improvement is 
expected to be achieved when implementing probabilistic 
techniques (fixed, adjusted and smart probabilistic) with 
DSR. 
We propose to use a probabilistic technique in DSR 
routing scheme based on local knowledge about the 
neighbors collected by the nodes. The proposed framework 
will not generate an extra overhead to the network as it will 
uses the “hello” message mechanism to gather this data. The 
“hello” message mechanism is explained later in this paper.  
 
IV. IMPLEMENTATION 
To implement adjusted and smart probability the node 
must have some knowledge about the state of the network 
(its neighbors and their neighbors). Thus, a technique must 
be defined that enable the node to collect this information in 
repeated manner. Hence in this work, we define hello 
message to be used with DSR algorithm since the original 
DSR algorithm was designed to be fully dynamic and did 
not use hello message. Hello message was defined in our 
approach  to be sent periodically by nodes every some fixed 
period of time, each hello message contain a broadcast 
destination address and the originated node source address 
along with the number of neighbors of the sending node so 
any node that receives this message will indicate that the 
sending node is a neighbor and has n neighbors and store 
this information in a local data structure so it can be used 
when needed, also the hello massage must include a Time 
To Live (TTL) value equal to 1 to prevent propagating this 
massage to other nodes other than its neighbors. however 
not receiving a hello massage for some time this will 
indicates that a node is no longer a neighbor and has to be 
discarded from the local data structure, this can be done by 
adding a time stamp that indicates the time of  receiving the 
hello message and add it to the local data structure along 
with the sending node and its neighbors, a periodic check is 
performed based on expiration time property so any 
neighbor that did not send a hello message for some period 
of time is no longer a neighbor and has to be eliminated 
from the local data structure. After collecting information 
sent by all its neighbors any node in the network can use 
this information to calculate the probability of resending a 
route request. 
A. Simulation Environment 
 For the purpose of testing our approach we use NS2 
simulator version 2.33 running under Fedora Linux 
operating system. 
 
B. Simulation Parameters 
We use NS2 simulator to test our approach, the 
simulation area was 250×250 m, 500×500 m, 750×750 m 
and 1000×1000m the node bandwidth is 2Mbps using 
IEEE802.11 MAC layer protocol. Regarding the number of 
nodes the approach was simulated with 25, 50, 75 and 100 
mobile node. Nodes speed was chosen to be 4, 8, 12 and 16 
m/s [5]. And the last parameter is the number of connections 
used the simulation is performed at 5, 10, 15 and 20 
connections.      
In order to test our approach several scenarios must be 
generated to represent different simulation parameters, each 
point at the simulation was tested using 10 deferent 
scenarios to ensure an acceptable degree of confidence, also 
different algorithms was tested using the same scenarios at 
the same point in the simulation, and using different 
scenarios at different points in the simulation to represent 
different simulation parameters. 
C. Evaluation Criteria 
The following metrics where used as an evaluation criteria’s: 
1- Average end-to-end delay: it include all end to end 
delay in data packet sending from source to 
destination which include delay caused by route 
discovery, MAC layer delay and application layer 
delay. 
2- Routing overhead: it is the number of route request 
packets generated through the simulation process to 
find a path for sending a data packet. 
3- Normalized routing load: it is the ratio of routing 
packet transmitted to the data packet delivered 
through the simulation. 
D. Average End to end Delay 
Figure 1 shows the average end-to-end delay for Blind 
Flooding DSR, Fixed Probability DSR, 2P DSR and 4P 
DSR against the simulation area. The results were obtained 
112
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

 
 
for simulation area between 250×250 and 1000×1000 with 
50 node, speed of 16m/s and number of connections 10. It 
can be seen that the for areas below 750x750 the delay is 
under 0.2 whereas the delay is increased rapidly afterwards 
at 1000x1000 to around 1.6. 
0.0000
0.2000
0.4000
0.6000
0.8000
1.0000
1.2000
1.4000
1.6000
1.8000
250
500
750
1000
area
Delay
BF
FP
2P
4P
Figure 1. End-to-end delay against area when n=50, speed 16m/s and 
connections=10. 
At simulation area of 250×250, the results from the four 
algorithms seems to be identical but as the simulation area 
increase the 4P and FP show better performance than BF 
and 2P. 
0.0000
0.0100
0.0200
0.0300
0.0400
0.0500
0.0600
0.0700
25
50
75
100
nodes
Delay
BF
FP
2P
4P
 
Figure 2. End-to-end delay against number of nodes when area= 500×500, 
speed 16m/s and connections=10. 
 
Figure 2 shows the end-to-end delay against the number 
of nodes for the four algorithms at simulation area 
500×500m, a speed of 16m/s and number of connections 
equal 10.  
As can be seen that the 4P algorithm gives better 
performance than the other algorithms because of its 
flexibility in determining different probabilities, while the 
BF still shows a better improvement than 2P and FP.  
Figure 3 shows the end-to-end delay against the speed of 
nodes for the four algorithms at simulation area 500×500m, 
a number of nodes of 50 and number of connections equal 
10.  
 
0.0000
0.0050
0.0100
0.0150
0.0200
0.0250
0.0300
0.0350
0.0400
0.0450
4
8
12
16
speed
Delay
BF
FP
2P
4P
 
Figure 3. End-to-end delay against the speed of nodes when 
area=500×500, n=50 and connections=10. 
 
As the speed of nods increases, the 4P algorithm shows a 
significant 
improvement 
over 
the 
other 
algorithms; 
moreover, FP algorithm performance is better than BF and 
2P.  
 
V. “HELLO” PACKETS 
“Hello” packets are periodically generated by a given 
node in order to know the number of its neighbors. These 
packets are extra control packets sent by nodes to 
successfully accomplish broadcast operations. Each node 
sends a short packet that informs its neighbors of its 
presence. So, a node can know its neighbors by simply 
listening to the medium.  Since nodes obtain neighborhood 
information through “Hello” packets, the information in the 
“Hello” packet varies depending on it usage. Thus it is 
necessary to quantitatively assess the impact of the size of 
the “Hello” packets on the overhead involved and thus be 
able to comment on any possible performance tradeoffs. To 
this end, we have used a “Hello” packet with a size of 12 
bytes for exchanging neighborhood information.    
 
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The paper presented a performance evaluation of using 
probabilistic approach in DSR routing algorithms. It is 
noticeable that the performance of probability approach is 
better than Blind Flooding especially at high number of 
connections and high simulation area. Also it is noticeable 
that at low network area (e.g., 250×250 and 500×500), all 
the four algorithms show relatively close performance. But 
at higher network area (e.g., 750×750 and 1000×1000) 
probabilistic approaches shows a significant improvement 
over the Blind flooding approach.  
The simulation experiments show that our proposed 
scheme significantly outperforms the 2P-based and flooding 
schemes in terms of reducing overhead at low speed of 
nodes (1 m/s). In addition, the 4P algorithm substantially 
outperforms the other algorithms in terms of reducing 
average end-to-end delay for low speed nodes. Regarding 
113
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

 
 
packet delivery ratio, the experimental results show that our 
scheme outperforms the other schemes.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] David B. Johnson, David A. Maltz, and Josh Broch. “DSR: The 
dynamic     source routing protocol for Multi-Hop wireless ad hoc 
networks”. In Ad Hoc Networking, edited by Charles E. Perkins, 
Chapter 5, pp. 139–172, 2001. 
http://www.monarch.cs.rice.edu/monarch-papers/dsr-chapter00.pdf  
(last accessed: Auguest 15, 2010). 
[2] C. E. Perkins and E. M. Royer. Ad-hoc on-demand distance vector     
routing. In Mobile Computing Systems and Applications, 1999.     
Proceedings. WMCSA ’99. Second IEEE Workshop on, pp. 90–100,     
1999. 
[3] Sze-Yao Ni, Yu-Chee Tseng, Yuh-Shyan Chen, and Jang-Ping Sheu.     
The broadcast storm problem in a mobile ad hoc network. In 
MobiCom     ’99: Proceedings of the 5th annual ACM/IEEE 
international conference     on Mobile computing and networking, pp. 
151–162, New York, NY,     USA, 1999. ACM. 
[4] Muneer Bani Yassein, Mustafa Bani Khalaf, and Ahmed Al-Dubai. A     
new probabilistic broadcasting scheme for mobile ad hoc on-demand     
distance 
vector 
(AODV) 
routed 
networks. 
The 
Journal 
of     
Supercomputing, March 2010, pp. 196-211. 
[5] T. Camp, J. Boleng, and V. Davies. A survey of mobility models for 
ad hoc network research. Wireless Communications & Mobile 
Computing (WCMC): Special issue on Mobile Ad Hoc Networking: 
Research, Trends and Applications, 2(5): pp. 483–502, 2002.  
[6] E. M. Royer and Chai-Keong Toh. A review of current routing     
protocols 
for 
ad 
hoc 
mobile 
wireless 
networks. 
Personal     
Communications, IEEE, 6(2): pp. 46–55, August 2002. 
114
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

