Highlights on a Multiobjective Routing Method for Multiservice MPLS Networks with Trafﬁc
Splitting
Rita Gir˜ao-Silva, Jos´e Craveirinha
DEEC-FCTUC, INESC-Coimbra
P´olo II, Coimbra, Portugal
Email: {rita,jcrav}@deec.uc.pt
Jo˜ao Cl´ımaco
INESC-Coimbra
Coimbra, Portugal
Email: jclimaco@inescc.pt
M. Eug´enia Captivo
FCUL, CIO-UL
Lisboa, Portugal
Email: mecaptivo@fc.ul.pt
Abstract—A multiobjective routing model for Multiprotocol
Label Switching networks with multiple service classes and
considering trafﬁc splitting is presented. The routing problem
is formulated as a multiobjective mixed-integer program, and an
exact resolution method based on the classical constraint method
is outlined. Some experimental results on network performance
measures, resulting from the application of the routing method
in a reference test network, are presented. These results conﬁrm
the potential advantages of using a multiobjective optimization
model in this routing problem, as we get a compromise solution
that tries to balance the two considered objectives.
Keywords—Routing
models;
Multiobjective
optimization;
Telecommunication networks; Network ﬂow approach; Trafﬁc
splitting.
I. INTRODUCTION
The routing calculation and optimization problems in mod-
ern multiservice networks are quite challenging, as the per-
formance and cost metrics in these networks are multi-
dimensional and often conﬂicting. There are potential ad-
vantages in formulating routing problems in these types of
networks as multiple objective optimization problems, because
the trade-offs among distinct performance metrics and other
network cost function(s) (potentially conﬂicting) can be ana-
lyzed in a consistent manner. In multiobjective optimization
problems, see e.g. [1], one seeks to ﬁnd non-dominated
solutions (or Pareto solutions), i.e., feasible solutions such
that it is not possible to improve the value of an objective
function without worsening the value of at least one of the
other objective functions.
In a Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) network, pack-
ets are forwarded through Label Switched Paths (LSP). An
important problem in trafﬁc engineering is to distribute the
trafﬁc trunks, i.e., the aggregation of trafﬁc ﬂows of the same
Forwarding Equivalence Class (FEC) on the network by the
possible LSPs. This procedure is known as trafﬁc splitting [2],
as the trafﬁc trunks are split and mapped onto different paths
in the network, satisfying the constraints of the bandwidth
required by the trafﬁc trunk of a given service class. This
procedure is useful to obtain a balanced distribution of the
load in the network and/or a reduction in the routing costs,
but it entails the establishment of more LSPs and an increase
in the complexity of the network management.
We can mention other works concerned with load balancing.
A multiobjective problem formulated in the context of off-line
routing in telecommunication networks is presented in [3].
In [4], it is shown that when multimedia trafﬁc ﬂows char-
acterized as batch Markovian arrival processes, are split, the
network performance (measured in terms of end-to-end delay,
delay variance and cell loss probability) tends to improve. A
survey on several multipath routing techniques in the Internet
is presented in [5]. According to A. Dixit et al. [6], a ﬁne
grained trafﬁc splitting technique used in data center networks
leads to a better load-balanced network, when compared to
techniques using equal-cost multipath routing.
In our work, a global routing problem i.e. involving the si-
multaneous calculation of the LSPs for all node-to-node trafﬁc
ﬂows is considered. In this type of network-wide optimization
approach, the objective functions of the route optimization
model depend explicitly on all trafﬁc ﬂows in the network,
see [7], [8]. Earlier works focused on routing optimization
with trafﬁc splitting are [7], [9]. A bi-objective lexicographic
routing problem is formulated in [7]. The objectives are the
maximization of the Quality of Service (QoS) trafﬁc revenue
and of the Best Effort (BE) trafﬁc revenue. The resolution
method is a lexicographic optimization method. At ﬁrst, only
the QoS trafﬁc is considered; afterwards, the BE ﬂows are
taken into account, considering only the remaining available
bandwidth. A model with three objectives (including the
minimization of trafﬁc splitting) is proposed in [9]. The bi-
objective routing problem includes a constraint on the total
number of paths used in the network. The resolution method is
based on a lexicographic weighted Chebyshev metric method.
A review on multiobjective routing models can be seen in [10].
This short paper presents an overview on current work on a
multiobjective routing model for MPLS with trafﬁc splitting.
We consider a mixed-integer programming (MIP) formulation
of the routing optimization model considering two objective
functions (global routing cost and load cost) and a constraint
on the maximal number of LSPs per ﬂow, as suggested in
[9]. The major contribution of the research work concerns:
the extension of the aforementioned model to a multiservice
case; the development of an exact resolution method for the
calculation of non-dominated solutions, with special features
related to the nature of the model; an experimental study for
evaluation of the results of the method in terms of network
performance measures, using a reference test network.
In this paper we describe the addressed model and its MIP
formulation in Section II, and outline an exact resolution
method (MCC) based on the classical constraint method [11]
in Section III. In Section IV, some results with a reference test
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-263-9
CTRQ 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

network are analyzed. Finally, some conclusions are drawn.
II. MODEL DESCRIPTION
A network (N, A) with unidirectional arcs (or links) is
considered, where N is the set of nodes in the network and
A is the set of links in the network. The capacity of each
network link k is given by uk [Mbit/s], k ∈ A.
Let S be the set of services of the network. Considering
that the point-to-point offered bandwidth matrix Tij [Mbit/s],
i, j ∈ N, and the percentage of bandwidth associated with
each service (qs, s ∈ S, with ∑
s∈S qs = 1.0) are given,
the value of the bandwidth offered by each ﬂow t ≡ (i, j, s)
(corresponding to the trafﬁc from service s ∈ S originating in
node i and destined to node j) is dt = qsTij. The set of all
network ﬂows is T . Let Pt = {p0
t, p1
t, · · · , pLt−1
t
} be the set
of Lt feasible paths for ﬂow t.
For each link k ∈ A, an additive cost per unit of bandwidth,
ck, is considered; Cl
t is the cost of using path pl
t, the l-th
feasible path for ﬂow t; the decision variable xl
t is the part of
the bandwidth offered by ﬂow t which will be carried in the
l-th path, hence specifying the trafﬁc splitting solution.
The ﬁrst objective function is the minimization of the total
cost of carrying the bandwidth of all the ﬂows offered to all
the feasible paths:
min F1 =
∑
t∈T
Lt−1
∑
l=0
Cl
txl
t
(1)
with
Cl
t =
∑
k∈pl
t
ck,
∀l = 0, · · · , Lt − 1, t ∈ T
(2)
Lt−1
∑
l=0
xl
t = dt,
∀t ∈ T
(3)
xl
t ≥ 0,
∀l = 0, · · · , Lt − 1, t ∈ T
(4)
where the constraint (3) guarantees that the total bandwidth
required by ﬂow t is carried by the assigned LSPs.
The second objective function is the minimization of the
load cost in all the network links. In this way, a more balanced
distribution of load in the network may be accomplished, so
as to maximize the possibility of the network accepting more
trafﬁc requests in the future [12]. A piece-wise linear cost
function ϕk is deﬁned for each link k ∈ A (see (6)-(11)) as
in [13], based on its utilization rate fk
uk , where fk is the total
load carried in the link. Hence, the second objective function
is:
min F2 =
∑
k∈A
ϕk
(5)
with
ϕk ≥ fk,
∀k ∈ A
(6)
ϕk ≥ 2fk − 0.5uk,
∀k ∈ A
(7)
ϕk ≥ 5fk − 2.3uk,
∀k ∈ A
(8)
ϕk ≥ 15fk − 9.3uk,
∀k ∈ A
(9)
ϕk ≥ 60fk − 45.3uk,
∀k ∈ A
(10)
ϕk ≥ 300fk − 261.3uk,
∀k ∈ A
(11)
fk ≤ uk,
∀k ∈ A
(12)
fk =
∑
t∈T
Lt−1
∑
l=0
ak
t,lxl
t,
∀k ∈ A
(13)
where (12) guarantees that the link capacity is not exceeded.
The parameter ak
t,l is binary and speciﬁes whether a link k
belongs to path pl
t, i.e., ak
t,l = 1 iff k ∈ pl
t, k ∈ A, l =
0, · · · , Lt − 1, t ∈ T and ak
t,l = 0 otherwise.
A third objective function minimizing the number of used
paths for each ﬂow can also be considered. If the number
of used paths per ﬂow increases, then the network routing
control and management may become increasingly costly and
complex because the signaling and processing tasks increase.
Let yl
t be the binary variable representing whether the path pl
t
is used, i.e., yl
t = 1 iff the l-th path pl
t, l = 0, · · · , Lt − 1 is
used by ﬂow t ∈ T and yl
t = 0 otherwise. Therefore, the third
objective function is
min F3 = max
t∈T
{Lt−1
∑
l=0
yl
t
}
(14)
with
xl
t ≤ dtyl
t,
∀l = 0, · · · , Lt − 1, t ∈ T
(15)
yl
t ∈ {0; 1},
∀l = 0, · · · , Lt − 1, t ∈ T
(16)
A constraint on the maximal number of links Ds for the
paths associated with a service s ∈ S is also considered: for
ﬂows with QoS requirements in real-time, e.g., voice and video
services, Ds is the network diameter (maximal number of links
of the shortest paths for all the network pairs of nodes); for
ﬂows of QoS services without real-time requirements, e.g.,
Premium data services, Ds is the network diameter + 1; for
BE service ﬂows, e.g., plain data services, no technical limits
on the maximal number of links are imposed, so Ds = |N|−1.
The multiobjective routing problem may be formulated as
min{F1, F2, F3}
(17)
subject to:
(3)-(4), (6)-(13), (15)-(16)
(18)
constraint on Ds, ∀s ∈ S
(19)
An important change to this main problem is that the third
objective function F3 will no longer be an objective and will
rather be included in the constraints. The number of used paths
per ﬂow should be limited in practice for technical reasons to
prevent excessive overheads related to control and signaling
costs. Let NL ∈ IN be the maximal value allowed for the total
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-263-9
CTRQ 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

number of paths used by any trafﬁc ﬂow. The new problem
P0 to be addressed will be
min{F1, F2}
(20)
subject to:
Lt−1
∑
l=0
yl
t ≤ NL, ∀t ∈ T
(21)
(18)-(19)
(22)
The total number Lt of feasible paths for each ﬂow t can
now be written as Lt = min{NL, Nt}. The maximal number
of paths in the network for ﬂow t, Nt, satisﬁes a constraint
on the maximal number of links Ds, s ∈ S. This constraint is
usually deﬁned for technical reasons, associated with transmis-
sion or trafﬁc engineering and signaling requirements related
to service type. For the generation of the set Pt for each ﬂow
t, the K-shortest path MPS algorithm [14] was used.
In [9], ck = 1, ∀k ∈ A. We have chosen to consider ck =
α
uk + βlk with α, β > 0 and lk [km] representing the length
of the link. The ﬁrst term reﬂects the economy of scale and
the decrease in transmission times associated with increased
capacity. The second term is related to propagation delays,
which increase with the physical length of the link.
III. RESOLUTION METHOD
For solving P0 we developed an algorithm based on the
constraint method [11], where a feature for the exploration of
a speciﬁc part of the Pareto front was added, allowing for the
choice of an adequate non-dominated solution to the problem.
With the classical constraint method [11], only one objective
is optimized, while all the other objectives are constrained
to some value. The obtained single objective problem can be
solved by conventional methods. The optimal solution to this
problem is a non-dominated solution to the original multi-
objective problem (see [11]). The bounds that are imposed
on the constrained objectives have to be carefully chosen, so
that a single optimal solution to the obtained single objective
problem exists and so as to guarantee that different non-
dominated solutions may be obtained.
In Fig. 1, an example of the application of the MCC
method is presented. We consider a single objective problem of
minimization of the objective function F2, whereas a constraint
is formulated for the other objective function, i.e., F1 ≤ F1lim.
This constraint establishes a new feasible region where we
seek to optimize F2. In this ﬁgure the extreme solutions of
the Pareto front are shown, where X ≡ (F min
1
, F max
2
) and
Y ≡ (F max
1
, F min
2
).
In the resolution method proposed here, problem P0 is
initially solved by the classical constraint method, where we
consider a total of ∆ different constraints. The ∆ solutions
obtained when solving this problem are non-dominated and
constitute an approximation to the Pareto front. In Fig. 2 an
example of the result after the initial resolution of the routing
problem is presented. Note that the proposed algorithm enables
that unsupported non-dominated solutions, i.e., non-dominated
Figure 1. Example of the application of the classical constraint method
Figure 2. Example of the deﬁnition of priority regions in the bidimensional
objective function space
solutions located in the interior of the convex hull of the
feasible solution set, may be found.
Afterwards, an area of the Pareto front that deserves to be
more thoroughly analyzed is chosen, by considering preference
regions in the bidimensional objective function space obtained
from aspiration and reservation levels (preference thresholds)
deﬁned for the two objective functions (see Fig. 2): F req
ϱ
=
F min
ϱ
+F av
ϱ
2
and F ac
ϱ =
F max
ϱ
+F av
ϱ
2
, with F av
ϱ =
F min
ϱ
+F max
ϱ
2
, ϱ =
1, 2.
The ideal optimum is obtained when both objective func-
tions are optimized separately. In the 1st priority region A, the
requested (req) levels are satisﬁed for both objective functions;
in the 2nd priority regions B1 and B2, only one of the
requested values is satisﬁed and an acceptable (ac) value is
guaranteed for the other objective function; in the 3rd priority
region C, only acceptable values are guaranteed for both
objective functions. The least priority region is D. Considering
these priority regions, an area of the Pareto front that will be
looked into with more detail can be chosen. Firstly, region A
will be considered; if there is no possible solution in region
A, then region B1 will be considered; and so on, exploring in
succession, regions B2 and C, if necessary.
After exploring the chosen area of the Pareto front in
more detail (again using the constraint method), a few more
non-dominated solutions will have been obtained. Finally, the
algorithm will proceed to the choice of the most satisfactory
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-263-9
CTRQ 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

Figure 3. Network in [9, Fig.2]
non-dominated solution in the Pareto front. For this purpose,
a Chebyshev weighted metric will be used in the context
of priority regions: the approach chosen to select the “best”
solution in the Pareto front relies on the minimization of a
weighted Chebyshev distance to a reference point, following
a method as in [15]. Therefore, this approach will allow us to
choose the non-dominated solution whose maximum weighted
distance to the reference point is minimum. Notice that the
Chebyshev weighted metric will only be applied to the non-
dominated solutions found in the best possible priority region.
With this approach, we are considering that in the best possible
priority region both objective functions F1 and F2 have equal
importance.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Experimental results for the network in Fig. 3 (given in
[9, Fig.2]), with 10 nodes and 32 unidirectional links, are
presented. The capacities of the links and the offered trafﬁc be-
tween the different nodes are in [9]. We have superimposed the
network on a rectangular grid with 400*240 points where the
mesh space unit corresponds to 10 km, as in [15]. Therefore,
the maximal horizontal distance in the grid is lmax = 4000
km. With this value as reference, we have obtained values for
lk, k ∈ A.
In [9], the link capacity is the same for all the links, so we
have decided not to include it in the link cost ck, as it affects
all the links in the same way. We assumed that c′
k = α + βl′
k,
with a normalized value of lk: l′
k =
lk − minκ∈A lκ
maxκ∈A lκ − minκ∈A lκ
.
The values of network performance measures, relevant from
a teletrafﬁc engineering point of view, for the routing solutions
obtained with the algorithms were calculated. Some of these
performance parameters are ‘standard’ measures of network
performance often used in the evaluation of routing models,
such as the one in [16]: total fraction of used capacity, FUC =
∑
∑k∈A fk
k∈A uk ; sum of the link utilizations, SLU = ∑
k∈A
fk
uk ;
maximal link utilization, MLU
= maxk∈A
{
fk
uk
}
. Other
performance measures allow for a comparison of the ﬁnal
solutions with the ideal solutions that would be obtained if
a single objective problem was considered: relative variation,
TABLE I. NETWORK PERFORMANCE MEASURE VALUES, FOR THE
NETWORK IN [9]
Method
F1
F2
RV1
RV2
FUC
SLU
MLU
S1
368.73
5913.53
446.54%
0.5928
18.9710
0.9960
S2
415.51
1082.00
12.69%
0.5391
17.2500
0.7000
SMCC
378.08
2017.48
2.54%
86.46%
0.5752
18.4073
0.8000
RVϱ =

F sol
ϱ
−F opt
ϱ
F opt
ϱ
 (with ϱ = 1, 2) and where F sol
ϱ
is the
value of Fϱ calculated for a speciﬁc multiobjective solution
and F opt
ϱ
is the optimal value of Fϱ for the same problem.
Different solutions are obtained: S1, the solution obtained
when only F1 is minimized; S2, the solution obtained when
only F2 is minimized; SMCC, the solution obtained when the
algorithm based on the constraint method is used to solve the
multiobjective problem.
A total of |S| = 4 services were considered: s = 0, a
QoS video service with q0 = 0.1; s = 1, a QoS Premium
data service with q1 = 0.25; s = 2, a QoS voice service
with q2 = 0.4; s = 3, a BE data service with q3 = 0.25.
In the expression for c′
k, we have considered α = 0.1 and
β = 1 − α = 0.9. In these experiments, NL = 4 and ∆ = 10.
The results for the considered network are in Table I. The
execution time of the algorithm was 2.08 s using CPLEX 12.3
in a laptop computer with i7 processor, 2.2 GHz clock and 1
GB of RAM, running on a Linux VM over Windows.
These results conﬁrm that F1 and F2 are indeed conﬂicting,
as the minimization of one of them entails an increase in
the value of the other objective function. This conﬁrms the
potential advantages of using a multiobjective optimization
model, rather than a single objective one, in this routing
problem as we get a compromise solution that tries to balance
the cost of carrying the bandwidth and the global effect of the
utilization of the links. When we optimize only F1 (results
identiﬁed by S1) the total cost of carrying the bandwidth of
all the ﬂows is indeed lower, but that is accompanied by
a noticeable increase in the utilization of the links, as the
values of FUC, SLU and MLU tend to be higher than
when only F2 is optimized (results identiﬁed by S2) or when
the multiobjective problem is considered (results identiﬁed by
SMCC). When we optimize only F2, the utilization of the
links is lower, which makes sense as the minimization of the
function F2 tends to minimize the total utilization of the links.
The decrease in the utilization of the links can be conﬁrmed
not only by the lower value of F2 but also by the lower
values of the performance measures FUC, SLU and MLU.
However, the cost of carrying the bandwidth of all the ﬂows
greatly increases, as can be seen by analyzing the value of F1.
When we solve the bi-objective problem, we realize that
the obtained solution has compromise values for functions F1
and F2 and also for the performance measures, as one would
expect. A balance between the two objective functions can be
achieved, so as to guarantee that neither the routing cost is
too high (which would happen if only F2 was optimized) nor
the load is unbalanced (which would happen if only F1 was
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-263-9
CTRQ 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

optimized).
V. CONCLUSIONS AND FURTHER WORK
In this paper, we presented a multiobjective routing model
for MPLS networks with different service types. The routing
problem is formulated as a multiobjective MIP, where the
objectives were the minimization of the bandwidth cost and the
minimization of the load cost in the network links. A constraint
related to the splitting of trafﬁc trunks was considered. An ex-
act method was developed for solving the formulated problem,
the MCC algorithm. Some experiments have allowed us to
obtain results on relevant network performance measures.
The obtained results show that F1 and F2 are conﬂicting
and conﬁrm the potential advantages of using this multiob-
jective routing model, rather than solving a single objective
formulation. In this way, the trade-offs between F1 and F2
can be analyzed and explored.
The proposed routing method can only be applied in a
centralized manner. This type of routing method can be
implemented at a network management level (for example in
a dynamic routing method with a large update routing period),
assuming that the information on the available link capacities
is provided.
Further work includes the development of an alternative
exact method based on the modiﬁed constraint method [17]
and an extensive experimental study using other reference
networks and randomly generated networks.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This
work
was
ﬁnancially
supported
by
programme
COMPETE of the EC Community Support Framework
III and cosponsored by the EC fund FEDER and na-
tional funds (FCT – PTDC/EEA-TEL/101884/2008 and PEst-
C/EEI/UI0308/2011).
REFERENCES
[1] R. E. Steuer, Multiple Criteria Optimization: Theory, Computation and
Application, ser. Probability and Mathematical Statistics.
John Wiley
& Sons, 1986.
[2] F. Le Faucheur and W. Lai, “Requirements for support of differentiated
services-aware MPLS trafﬁc engineering,” Request for Comments 3564,
Network Working Group, Jul. 2003.
[3] J. Knowles, M. Oates, and D. Corne, “Advanced multi-objective evolu-
tionary algorithms applied to two problems in telecommunications,” BT
Technology Journal, vol. 18, no. 4, Oct. 2000, pp. 51–65.
[4] H.-W. Ferng and C.-C. Peng, “Trafﬁc splitting in a network: Split trafﬁc
models and applications,” Computer Communications, vol. 27, 2004, pp.
1152–1165.
[5] J. He and J. Rexford, “Towards Internet-wide multipath routing,” IEEE
Network, vol. 22, no. 2, Mar.-Apr. 2008, pp. 16–21.
[6] A. Dixit, P. Prakash, and R. R. Kompella, “On the efﬁcacy of ﬁne-
grained trafﬁc splitting protocols in data center networks,” in Proceed-
ings of SIGCOMM11, Toronto (Ontario), Canada, Aug. 15-19 2011, pp.
430–431.
[7] D. Mitra and K. G. Ramakrishnan, “Techniques for trafﬁc engineering
of multiservice, multipriority networks,” Bell Labs Technical Journal,
vol. 6, no. 1, Jan. 2001, pp. 139–151.
[8] J. Craveirinha, R. Gir˜ao-Silva, and J. Cl´ımaco, “A meta-model for
multiobjective routing in MPLS networks,” Central European Journal
of Operations Research, vol. 16, no. 1, Mar. 2008, pp. 79–105.
[9] S. C. Erbas and C. Erbas, “A multiobjective off-line routing model for
MPLS networks,” in Proceedings of the 18th International Teletrafﬁc
Congress (ITC-18), Berlin, Germany: Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2003, pp.
471–480.
[10] J. C. N. Cl´ımaco, J. M. F. Craveirinha, and M. M. B. Pascoal, “Multi-
criteria routing models in telecommunication networks – Overview and
a case study,” in Advances in Multiple Criteria Decision Making and
Human Systems Management: Knowledge and Wisdom, Y. Shi, D. L.
Olson, and A. Stam, Eds.
IOS Press, 2007, pp. 17–46.
[11] J. L. Cohon, Multiobjective Programming and Planning, ser. Mathemat-
ics in Science and Engineering.
Academic Press, 1978.
[12] B. Fortz and M. Thorup, “Internet trafﬁc engineering by optimizing
OSPF weights,” in Proceedings of INFOCOM 2000, vol. 2. Tel Aviv,
Israel, Mar. 26-30 2000, pp. 519–528.
[13] J. M. F. Craveirinha, J. C. N. Cl´ımaco, M. M. B. Pascoal and L. M. R. A.
Martins, “Traﬁc splitting in MPLS networks – A hierarchical mul-
ticriteria approach”. Journal of Telecommunications and Information
Technology, no. 4, 2007, pp. 3–10.
[14] T. Gomes, L. Martins, and J. Craveirinha, “An algorithm for calculating
k shortest paths with a maximum number of arcs,” Investigac¸˜ao Opera-
cional, vol. 21, 2001, pp. 235–244.
[15] J. C. N. Cl´ımaco, J. M. F. Craveirinha, and M. M. B. Pascoal,
“An automated reference point-like approach for multicriteria shortest
path problems,” Journal of Systems Science and Systems Engineering,
vol. 15, no. 3, Sep. 2006, pp. 314–329.
[16] S. Srivastava, G. Agrawal, M. Pi´oro, and D. Medhi, “Determining link
weight system under various objectives for OSPF networks using a
Lagrangian relaxation-based approach,” IEEE Transactions on Network
and Service Management, vol. 2, no. 1, 2005, pp. 9–18.
[17] A. Messac, A. Ismail-Yahaya, and C. A. Mattson, “The normalized
normal constraint method for generating the Pareto frontier,” Structural
and Multidisciplinary Optimization, vol. 25, no. 2, 2003, pp. 86–98.
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-263-9
CTRQ 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

