Practical Performance Measurements and Analysis of  IEEE 802.16 Networks   
 
 
Jarmo Siltanen 
JAMK University of Applied 
Sciences 
Jyväskylä, FINLAND 
jarmo.siltanen@jamk.fi 
Kari Luostarinen 
Metso Paper Inc. 
Jyväskylä, FINLAND 
kari.luostarinen@metso.com 
 
Timo Hämäläinen 
University of Jyväskylä 
Jyväskylä, FINLAND 
timo.t.hamalainen@jyu.fi 
 
 
 
Abstract— IEEE 802.16 standard defines the wireless 
broadband technology called WiMAX. When compared 
to other wireless technologies, it introduces many 
interesting advantages at physical (PHY) and media 
access control (MAC) layers. The WiMAX technology 
based on air interface standard 802.16 wireless 
metropolitan area network (MAN) is conﬁgured in the 
same way as a traditional cellular network with base 
stations using point to multipoint architecture to drive a 
service over a radius up to several kilometres. The range 
and the non line of sight (NLOS) ability of WiMAX 
make the system very attractive for users, but there will 
be slightly higher bit error ratio (BER) at low signal to 
noise ratio (SNR). WiMAX networks incorporate quality 
of service (QoS) mechanisms at the MAC layer. The 
problem of assuring QoS is basically that of how to 
allocate available resources among users in order to 
meet the QoS criteria such as delay, jitter and 
throughput requirements and how to achieve the 
optimal usage of resources to maximize throughput and 
to minimize power consumption while ensuring system 
scalability. 
In 
this 
paper, 
we 
make 
practical 
measurements 
of 
the 
WiMAX- 
system’s 
QoS 
performance behaviour of the unsolicited grant service 
(UGS) and real time polling  (RTP) classes. 
 
Keywords- IEEE802.16; WiMAX; Performance; Analysis 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
IEEE 802.16, called also WiMAX, is a basic standard for 
the wireless broadband access network that can support a fast 
speed wireless access to different subscribers [1, 2].  
The main benefit of WiMAX when compared to other 
wireless access network technologies like IEEE 802.11 are 
the longer range and more intelligent QoS support at  the 
Medium Access Control (MAC) level [3]. There are several 
diﬀerent types of applications and services, which can be 
used in the 802.16 networks and the MAC layer is designed 
to support this collaboration. An important feature of 
WiMAX is also that it is connection oriented and this means 
that an SS has to register to the base station before it can start 
to communicate with it. During the registration process, an 
SS asks the initial QoS requirements with the BS. These 
demands can be changed later if needed, and new 
connections can also be set up when needed. For providing 
the QoS guarantees in the WiMAX network the BS uses 
scheduling for both the uplink and the downlink channels. 
For that purpose there is an algorithm in the BS, which 
translates the QoS requirements of SSs into the appropriate 
number of slots [6-9].  
According to the latest WiMAX Forum statistics, IEEE 
802.16-based networks were deployed in 149 countries and 
regions, including 117 in Africa, 117 in Latin America, 109 
in Asia-Paciﬁc region, 86 in Eastern Europe, 76 in Western 
Europe, 53 in North America and 29 in the Middle East [13]. 
Global coverage using WiMAX service back in early 2009 
had reached 430 million, to the end of 2010 more than 621 
million WiMAX service coverage of population, according 
to forum latest estimates, 2011 will be expected to cover 
more than one billion users access to next-generation 
WiMAX networks. 
The aim of this research is to compare the results 
received in WiMAX laboratory environments and in 
conjunction with laboratory exercise tests as well as the 
theoretical results from the mathematical modeling with the 
results received in authentic urban environments.  
II. 
IEEE 802.16 
A. General 
        
      The idea behind providing QoS in WiMAX lies on 
connection-oriented 
MAC 
architecture, 
service 
ﬂow 
management and scheduling. Every time a SS and a BS 
need to communicate with each other, a unidirectional 
logical link is established. Each connection is mapped to a 
WiMAX service ﬂow which works as a transport service for 
packets i UL or DL direction. The service ﬂow deﬁnes QoS 
trafﬁc parameters to be used for a connection. This include, 
for instance, trafﬁc priority, maximum latency, tolerated 
jitter and maximum sustained trafﬁc rate ensuring a speciﬁc 
level of service. Each service ﬂow is identiﬁed by a 32-bit 
service ﬂow identiﬁer (SFID) [2]. 
     Moreover, using adaptive modulation helps to utilize the 
bandwidth efficiently [4, 5]. WiMAX contains five QoS 
classes for the needs of various types of traffic: UGS , RTP, 
NRTP (non-real-time polling), ENRTP (enhanced non-real-
time polling) and BE (best effort). 
 
1
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

B. Different Traffic Types and Applications 
 
       The following scheduling types are applied to service 
ﬂows, affecting the usage of UL bandwidth request 
opportunities.  UGS - the Unsolicited Grant Service grants 
ﬁxed-size UL allocations for an application minimizing the 
need for bandwidth requests, thus eliminating overhead and 
latency. This allows usage of real-time applications like 
VoIP. rtPS - the real-time Polling Service offers support for 
real-time UL transport with variable-size data packets. This 
makes it useful for video transmission. The rtPS optimizes 
data transport efﬁciency with a cost of slight overhead. 
ertPS - similarly to the UGS, in the extended real-time 
Polling Service the BS provides unsolicited unicast grants 
for the SS. Unlike the UGS, the ertPS allows dynamic-size 
UL allocations which makes it good for real-time voice and 
video applications. nrtPS - using the non-real-time Polling 
Service offers user unicast BW request opportunities on a 
regular basis, making it applicable even when the network 
resources are limited due to congestion. BE - the Best Effort 
service type allows SSs to use contention request 
opportunities. It is designed to be used when there is no 
minimum requirements for the connection. This service type 
suits for Web browsing. For each subscriber in the WiMAX 
network a QoS proﬁle is deﬁned and stored in the AAA 
server. This forms a basis for connection-oriented service, 
that is, associations between connections and service ﬂows. 
The QoS proﬁle stores allowable number of service ﬂows, 
their scheduling types and values for other QoS parameters. 
[1][2]. 
     Depending on the QoS proﬁle and network properties the 
subscriber may use service ﬂows provisioned via the 
network management system or dynamically created service 
ﬂows. The provisioned service ﬂows, including the initial 
service ﬂow (ISF), can be created during the registration 
phase of the network entry after a successful authentication 
of the user. At this stage ASN-GW obtains SS´s QoS proﬁle 
from AAA server which it uses to initialize service ﬂow 
creation. Provisioned service ﬂows can be activated or 
deactivated at any time when the SS is connected to the 
network (applicable to both static and dynamic service 
models). The dynamic service ﬂow creation may be 
requested/initiated by the SS or by the network whenever a 
new connection is needed. DSA, DSC or DSD message 
exchange is used for service ﬂow creation, modiﬁcation or 
deletion, respectively [2].       
 
III. 
PHYSICAL AND MAC LAYER QOS PROVISIONING 
A. Physical layer basic concepts for QoS provisioning 
 
Before transmission to the wireless link at the sender 
side, or right after reception at the receiver side, packets go 
through the IEEE 802.16 PHY layer. It performs operations, 
such as channel coding and interleaving, before passing on 
the packet. An adaptive physical layer is required to 
optimize the usage of resources, to accommodate user 
requirements and services and to maximize the spectral 
efficiency. 
An adaptive modulation enables dynamic bandwidth 
allocation to match the current channel conditions. 
Modulation and coding scheme can be changed for each 
burst separately. Different modulation and coding schemes 
offer either robust or efﬁcient network access, thus offering 
stable QoS in varying conditions. Three modulation 
schemes 
are 
are 
64-QAM 
(quadrature 
amplitude 
modulation), 16-QAM, and QPSK (quadrature phase shift 
keying). The 64QAM offers highest bandwidth whereas the 
QPSK modulation is the most robust, therefore offering 
highest distance from the serving station. Also BPSK 
modulation can be used but it is not mandatory for UL or 
DL connections. In addition to different modulations there 
are a few coding rates used also to provide ﬂexible 
networking. Depending on the Carrier-to-Noise Ratio 
(CNR) a coding rate of 1/2, 3/4 or 5/6 can be used. 
The most commonly used technique for error correction 
is called forward error correction (FEC), which is capable of 
detecting and correcting some errors upon reception. This 
technique can reduce latency by cutting down the 
retransmissions, but the FEC requires more bits. The 
addition of FEC to every transmitted block reduces the 
efficiency of the channel and could increase the delay of 
good protocol data units (PDUs), on the other MAC-level 
ARQ can increase the delays in channel with high error rate. 
Many systems support hybrid techniques where a 
combination of FEC and ARQ parameters can be adjusted to 
allow the service requirements to be met under a variety of 
conditions [9]. 
WiMAX supports time division duplexing (TDD), full-
duplex frequency division duplexing (F-FDD) and half-
duplex frequency division duplexing (H-FDD). The usage 
of different duplexing modes affect the data transmission 
convention. In WiMAX user data is transmitted inside 
frames that consist of uplink and downlink subframes 
separated from each other by a TTG guard interval in TDD 
or different frequencies in FDD. Both DL and UL frames 
store user information into bursts which applies for both 
TDD and FDD frame. Depending on the duplexing mode 
being OFDMA/OFDM TDD, F-FDD or H-FDD, the frame 
structure changes. In addition to these, 802.16j deﬁnes a 
new frame format for communication between a multihop 
relay base station (MR-BS) and a RS [3]. 
In TDD the DL subframe and the UL subframe are 
transmitted in the same channel consecutively which is 
useful when working with limited bandwidth resources. In 
addition, TDD´s dynamically adjustable DL/UL ratio allows 
it to be used with both symmetric and asymmetric trafﬁc. In 
FDD the DL and UL subframes are transmitted in separate 
concurrent channels using different frequencies. The 
difference between F-FDD and H-FDD is that in F-FDD a 
user is able to transmit and receive at the same time while in 
H-FDD user can either transmit or receive at given time but 
not do both simultaneously [8]. 
TDD is mostly used where WiMAX network is 
deployed. Main reasons for the popularity of TDD are 
ﬂexibility, cost efﬁciency and high spectral efﬁciency [5]. 
2
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

Taking a closer look into a TDD frame reveals how user 
information is divided within a frame. The smallest time-
frequency divided element in WiMAX is called a slot, 
which constitutes one subchannel and one, two or three 
OFDM/OFDMA symbols. All the data regions in a frame 
are composed from sequential slots. 
      The uplink subframe is the TDMA portion which may 
be used by one or more SSs to transmit information to the 
BS. Unlike the downlink, the UL-MAP grants bandwidth to 
specific SSs. The SSs transmit in their assigned allocation 
using the burst profile specified by the uplink interval usage 
code (UIUC) in the UL-MAP entry granting them 
bandwidth. The uplink subframe may also contain 
contention-based allocations. The number of contention 
slots per UL subframe is determined by the BS [7]. The BS 
assigns burst profiles for a specific connection or subscriber 
based on variety of constraints, including the QoS and 
channel conditions. 
 
B. MAC layer concepts for QoS provisioning  
Since the QoS requirements vary a lot in different 
network situations, WiMAX has many handling and 
transporting mechanisms to handle this. The IEEE 802.16e 
MAC uses a variable length PDU and multiple PDUs can be 
put into a single burst to save physical overhead. The MAC 
has a self-correcting bandwidth request/grant method that 
minimizes the overhead and delay of acknowledgements.  
The MAC layer has three sublayers, which defines the 
access mechanisms and packet formats. These sublayers are 
service specific convergence sublayer (CS), MAC common 
part sublayer (MAC CPS) and MAC privacy sublayer 
(MAC PS). The CPS layer mainly interfaces with higher 
layer protocols, such as IPv4, IPv6 or ATM. The PS handles 
authentication and data encryption issues.  
The IEEE 802.16 has two service-specific convergence 
sublayers that are used to map services to MAC 
connections. The first one is the ATM Convergence 
sublayer and the second is a Packet Convergence sublayer.  
It is used for IP, Ethernet, and virtual local area network 
environments. The goal of Packet Convergence sublayer is 
to classify SDUs and put them at the proper MAC 
connection. This ensures that QoS requirements are met and 
the bandwidth allocation takes place. The QoS requirements 
have the following features [6]: 
a) 
A 
configuration 
and 
registration 
function 
for 
preconfiguring SS-based QoS service flows and traffic 
parameters. 
b) A signaling function for dynamically establishing QoS-
enabled service flows and traffic parameters. 
c) Utilization of MAC scheduling and QoS traffic 
parameters for uplink service flows. 
d) Utilization of QoS traffic parameters for downlink 
service flows. 
e) Grouping of service flow properties into named Service 
Classes, so upper-layer entities and external applications (at 
both the MS and BS) may request service flows with desired 
QoS parameters in a globally consistent way. To meet all 
these requirements, the standard has three main methods: 
service flow QoS scheduling, dynamic service establishment 
and two-phase activation model.  
 
IV. 
MEASUREMENTS IN URBAN ENVIRONMENTS 
     The measurement compared the behavior of the UGS and 
RTP classes upon overloading the link with 40 Mbps 
upstream BE traffic. The best effort traffic was generated 
with a Fluke Optiview analyzer over a WiMAX link. 
Simultaneously, a JDSU MTS-6000A analyzer was used to 
generate 70 VoIP telephone calls (G.729 codec) within the 
measured QoS class to a SmartClass Ethernet remote end. 
This number of phone calls with the above-mentioned codec 
amounts to a traffic flow of approx. 2 Mbps, and it was 
confirmed for both of the measured QoS classes (See Figure 
1). 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Measurement environment. 
 
The MTS-6000A analyzer was used to read the delays, 
delay variations and throughput of the QoS class under 
observation. The measurement was conducted with adaptive 
and forced 16QAM3/4 modulation.  
 
Measurement 1 
      The goal of the measurement was to receive results 
concerning the effect of modulation and channel width on 
data transfer speed in an urban environment. The aim was to 
compare the results with the theoretical results of 
mathematical modeling presented in [10].  
      The measurements were carried out with the base station 
installed on the roof of building 1 in Figure 3 and the 
subscriber station installed on the surrounding environments 
of Jyväskylä on building 2 in Figure 3 with LabraNet 
network active devices. Network topology was as in Figure 
2. JDSU MTS-6000A traffic generator connected to c3750 
switch was used to generate test traffic and the traffic was 
routed to front end of SmartClass Ethernet connected to a 
customer device. JDSU MTS-6000A traffic generator was 
controlled with VNC  application from a NetSpan server 
connected to the control network. 
 
3
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

 
 
Figure 2. Network topology used in the measurements. 
Table 1 shows the most important settings for the WiMAX 
devices. 
 
Settings of the test environment 
Frequency 
5.8 GHz 
Channeling 
FDD 
Transmitting power 
17.00dBm / 22.00 dBm 
Frame duration 
5 ms 
Cyclic Prefix (Ratio G) 
1/16 
Distance of SS and BS devices 
1 km 
Test environment 
City 
 
Table 1 Test environment settings 
 
 
Figure 3 shows the location and direction of the BS and SS 
device. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Location and direction of the BS and SS device. 
 
Table 2 shows the main results of the measurement. 
 
Modulation 
Channel  
width 
Data 
 Transmission 
 speed  
16QAM 3/4 
10 MHz 
18.7 Mbps 
16QAM 3/4 
5 MHz 
7.6 Mbps 
16QAM 3/4 
2.5MHz 
2.2 Mbps 
16QAM 1/2 
10 MHz 
12.5 Mbps 
16QAM 1/2 
5 MHz 
5.1 Mbps 
16QAM 1/2 
2.5MHz 
1.4 Mbps 
QPSK 3/4 
10 MHz 
9.3 Mbps 
QPSK 3/4 
5 MHz 
3.8 Mbps 
QPSK 3/4 
2.5MHz 
1 Mbps 
QPSK 1/2 
10 MHz 
6.2 Mbps 
QPSK 1/2 
5 MHz 
2.5 Mbps 
QPSK 1/2 
2.5MHz 
0.7 Mbps 
BPSK 1/2 
10 MHz 
3.1 Mbps 
BPSK 1/2 
5 MHz 
1.2 Mbps 
BPSK 1/2 
2.5MHz 
0.3 Mbps 
 
Table 2 Measurement results 
 
The theoretical results of mathematical modeling (see Table 
3) presented in [10] were compared with the actual 
measurement results shown in Table 2. A significant 
disparity was found between the theoretical and measured 
results in terms of the effect of channel width to data 
transfer speed per MHz. 
 
 
Modulation 
Channel 
width 
Data 
 transmission 
 speed  
16QAM 3/4 
14 MHz 
34.91 Mbps 
16QAM 3/4 
7 MHz 
17.46 Mbps 
16QAM 3/4 
3.5 MHz 
8.73 Mbps 
16QAM 3/4 
1.75 MHz 
4.36 Mbps 
16QAM 1/2 
14 MHz 
23.28 Mbps 
16QAM 1/2 
7 MHz 
11.64 Mbps 
16QAM 1/2 
3.5 MHz 
5.82 Mbps 
16QAM 1/2 
1.75 MHz 
2.91 Mbps 
QPSK 3/4 
14 MHz 
17.46 Mbps 
QPSK 3/4 
7 MHz 
8.73 Mbps 
QPSK 3/4 
3.5 MHz 
4.36 Mbps 
QPSK 3/4 
1.75 MHz 
2.18 Mbps 
QPSK 1/2 
14 MHz 
11.64 Mbps 
QPSK 1/2 
7 MHz 
5.82 Mbps 
QPSK 1/2 
3.5 MHz 
2.91 Mbps 
QPSK 1/2 
1.75 MHz 
1.45 Mbps 
BPSK 1/2 
14 MHz 
5.82 Mbps 
4
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

BPSK 1/2 
7 MHz 
2.91 Mbps 
BPSK 1/2 
3.5 MHz 
1.45 Mbps 
BPSK 1/2 
1.75 MHz 
0.73 Mbps 
 
Table 3  The theoretical results of mathematical modeling  
 
In the measurements, the data transfer speed per MHz was 
highest at a channel width of 10 MHz. The speed was more 
than two times lower at a channel width of 2.5 MHz when 
measured with every available modulation. In the results of 
the mathematical modeling, the data transfer speed per MHz 
remained constant when the channel width was changed. On 
the other hand, the effect of modulation on data transfer 
speeds was found to be nearly identical between the 
theoretical and measured results. Table 4 shows the most 
important parameters of the mathematical modeling. 
 
Parameters of mathematical modeling 
Channeling 
FDD 
Cyclic exponent 
3 
Frame duration 
20 ms 
 
Table 4 Parameters of mathematical modeling [10]. 
 
1) Measurement 2 
 
     The aim of the measurement was to compare the 
measurement results to the results of measurements 
conducted in a short-distance LOS environment in a 
laboratory. The equipment and topology used in the 
measurement are shown in Figure 2. Table 1 shows the most 
important settings for the WiMAX devices. 
 
Table 5 lists the data transfer speeds achieved with the 
64QAM, 16QAM, QPSK and BPSK modulations.  
 
Modulation 
Coding level 
Bit rate (Mbps) 
64QAM 
¾ 
28.0 
16QAM 
¾ 
18.7 
QPSK 
¾ 
9.3 
BPSK 
½ 
3.1 
 
Table 5 Measurement results for modulations 
 
With 64QAM modulation, the results received in the urban 
environment showed only negligible disparity when 
compared to the measurement results obtained in the 
laboratory: a 28 Mbps downstream speed, as limited by the 
traffic profile, was achieved in both environments.  With 
lower modulations, the laboratory speeds were 13-14% 
higher. The laboratory results are shown in Table 6. 
 
Modulation 
Coding 
level 
Bit rate 
max 
(Mbps) 
Average bit 
rate (Mbps) 
64QAM 
¾ 
28.0 
26.0 
16QAM 
¾ 
21.2 
21.2 
QPSK 
¾ 
10.6 
10.6 
BPSK 
½ 
3.5 
3.5 
 
Table 6 Laboratory results 
 
Table 8 shows the effect of channel width on the data 
transfer speed in an urban environment. The effect of 
channel width on the data transfer speed was nearly 
identical with the laboratory results listed in Table 7.  
 
Channel
width 
(MHz) 
Modulation 
Coding 
level 
Bit 
rate 
(MH
z)
Average  
bit rate 
(Mbps) 
10 
64QAM 
¾ 
28.0 
26,0 
5 
64QAM 
¾ 
14.5 
14,5 
2.5 
64QAM 
¾ 
5,9 
5,9 
 
Table 7 The effect of channel width on the data transfer 
speed 
 
The difference 
between 
the 
laboratory 
and urban 
environments when moving from a 2.5 MHz channel to a 5 
MHz channel is only 0.1 Mbps. The transfer to 10 MHz 
cannot be taken into consideration as the 28 Mbps limit 
imposed by the traffic profile was reached in both 
environments.  
 
Channel 
width 
(MHz) 
Modulation 
Coding 
level 
Bit rate 
 (MHz) 
10 
64QAM 
¾ 
28.0 
5 
64QAM 
¾ 
12.0 
2.5 
64QAM 
¾ 
3.3 
 
Table 8. Measurement results for channel widths 
 
2) Measurement 3 
 
       The measurement tested the effect of direction, line-of-
sight obstructions caused by trees, and transmission power 
on signal noise ratio in an LOS environment. The 
measurement examined downstream SNR values. The 
equipment and topology used in the measurement is as in 
measurement 1. 
      BS and SS device location and direction are shown in 
Figure 2. The SS device was directed to both sides of the BS 
5
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

device at horizontal angles of 15°- 45° in different phases of 
the measurement. Initially, the measurements were 
conducted in three locations in the Harju (Figure 3) 
neighborhood where the line of sight to the BS device was 
obstructed in varying degrees by tree trunks and branches. 
The antenna element was aimed directly at the BS device 
through the obstructions. 
The density of the line-of-sight obstruction caused by the 
tree trunks and branches did not have a significant effect on 
the results. Nearly identical values for downstream SNR 
were measured in all three locations. Only increasing the 
transmission power notably affected the downstream SNR 
values in a partial NLOS environment. We were able to 
increase the SNR value by directing the antenna element 
towards a tall building 15° to the southwest of the BS 
device, which means that the best SNR result was achieved 
by means of reflection. Table 9 shows the effect of line-of-
sight obstructions and transmission power on the SNR 
value. 
 
Coverage of 
the trees 
Transmit power 
(dBm) 
SNR 
Large 
 
17 
 
24 
Mean 
17 
 
24,2 
Small 
 
17 
 
24,4 
Large 
 
22 
 
27,6 
Mean 
22 
 
28,0 
Small 
 
22 
 
28,0 
 
Table 9. The effect of LOS obstructions and transmission 
power on the SNR value 
 
      The subsequent measurements were conducted on the 
terrace of the building 2 in Figure 3 where a perfect LOS 
environment was achieved. When measuring from the 
terrace, the best SNR value was achieved when the antenna 
element was directed significantly to the side of the BS 
device’s beam as this allowed reflections from the 
surrounding metal structures to strengthen the signal. 
Increasing the transmission power notably affected the SNR 
values in a perfect LOS environment, as well. After moving 
from a partial NLOS environment to a LOS environment, 
considerable differences were measured in the SNR values. 
Table 10 lists the SNR values measured in the LOS 
environment. 
 
Transmission power  (dBm) 
SNR 
17 
  
28,5 
22 
  
33 
 
Table 10. SNR values measured in the LOS environment 
V. 
SUMMARY OF THE MEASUREMENT RESULTS 
       The results of the measurement were slightly marred by 
the behavior of the UGS class, for which many remedies 
were tried over several months. Airspan recommends that, 
for the UGS class, the employed VoIP codec’s sample rate, 
which is 30 ms with the G.729 codec, should be used as the 
polling time. The recommendation proved to be sound, as 
the UGS traffic began running without background traffic 
after the polling time was changed even though no VoIP 
traffic was present in the class. However, changing the 
polling time did not resolve the entire problem, as a new 
obstacle presented itself. With the new 30 ms polling value, 
traffic ran even without background traffic, but if BE traffic, 
which overloaded the link, was added to the background, the 
UGS class delay and delay variation decreased while the 
frame loss throughput increased against all logic.  
According to the manufacturer, the UGS class allows for 
reserving a certain amount of bandwidth within the 
framework of a particular polling time, as in the example 
below. Example: 64,000 bits per second (Max Sustained 
Rate and Min Reserved Rate) equals 8,000 bytes per second. 
Therefore, a bandwidth reservation of 800 bytes can be 
made for each polling cycle by setting the polling time to 
100 milliseconds. With these settings, the packet size would 
be 800 bytes, from which overheads must also be 
subtracted. With the PING – lXXX command, the result can 
be confirmed at 601 bytes with headers, which is approx. 
743 bytes over the link [11]. 
We tested the class’ behavior with different polling 
values and found the limit to be 31 ms. After this, the class 
will not function without BE background traffic. However, 
overloading the link with BE traffic does not diminish the 
values of the UGS. In fact, it does the opposite: delays, 
delay variation and packet loss decrease while throughput 
increases.  
VoIP service products should be created in such a way 
that the classifier directs all SIP (session initiation protocol) 
signaling that passes through port 5060 to the BE class, 
whose traffic priority is lower than that of VoIP traffic 
directed to the UGS class. However, in all of the devices 
concerned, signaling over the WiMAX link is assigned to 
predefined, locked control traffic classes whose traffic 
priority is 8 or 9, which is higher than the priority of any 
other traffic class [12]. 
Despite countless attempts, we were unable to get the 
UGS class to function properly independently. At this stage, 
the software on the base station device and subscriber 
stations was updated to its latest versions. In addition, the 
new Netspan server application was updated to its latest 
version. However, the updates did not have any apparent 
effect on the functioning of the classes. An error report 
describing the problem was sent to the manufacturer, but we 
never received a reply. The manufacturer’s suggestion to 
direct the signaling to the BE flow and other VoIP traffic to 
the UGS flow would possibly enable the class to function 
without BE background traffic but it would not solve or 
explain the problems with the class’ other behavior. In the 
absence of a reply from the manufacturer, it remains unclear 
as to why this important signaling should be incorporated 
into the BE flow, which contains no attributes pertaining to 
quality of service, using a lower priority than that of VoIP 
traffic in the UGS class. The manufacturer established a 
6
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

remote connection to the Netspan server, but the problems 
were still not resolved and the solution suggestions were too 
short and ambiguous to be helpful.  
In the earlier stages, when we were struggling with 
throughput problems, the manufacturer provided us with 
default configurations with which the devices were 
supposed to work as well as possible. However, the 
configurations proved to be unusable as, after they were 
implemented, the link functioned even worse than with our 
own configurations and the speeds dropped to a mere few 
hundred kilobits per second. After a more careful scrutiny of 
the manufacturer’s website, we found that the 5.8 GHz 
licence-free frequency devices in our use had not been 
directly tested by Airspan. The test results represented 
similar devices using licensed frequencies.  
Summary 
      In the course of the measurements, it was noted that the 
UGS class does not function without BE traffic in the 
background. Not even PING requests (packet internet 
groper) passed through the link in the UGS class alone 
without any background traffic. The UGS class traffic 
activated immediately after the introduction of 40 Mbps 
background traffic. Therefore, the activity of the class did 
not affect the measurements. 
However, excluding the above-mentioned characteristic, 
the classes functioned properly. When using adaptive 
modulation for the measurements, the UGS class’ delays 
remained approximately at a constant 22 milliseconds, 
whereas the delays of the RTP class rose significantly 
higher to over 90 milliseconds. Moreover, the RTP class 
presented a notably lower throughput – approx. 0.5 Mbps – 
compared to the nearly full 2 Mbps throughput of the UGS. 
This was directly reflected on the RTP class’ frame loss, 
which was measured at 1.6.  
Nevertheless, 
with 
16QAM3/4 
modulation, 
the 
differences between the classes reduced slightly. The delays 
of both classes dropped to below 20 milliseconds, but 
significant spikes occurred in the delay variation of the RTP 
class as opposed to the UGS class, which remained at a 
steady 2 milliseconds throughout the measurement. The 
same disparity was found regarding the frame loss, with the 
UGS class remaining near 0.1 and the RTP class presenting 
repeated spikes as high as 0.7.  
 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS 
      Based on the results of the practical measurements, 
technology utilizing the licence-free frequency range could 
well be used to replace ADSL (asymmetric digital 
subscriber line) connections over copper cables in rural 
areas. At a distance of one kilometer, we reached a 
downstream data transfer speed of 28 Mbps, whereas with 
ADSL2+ technology, the data transfer speed a kilometer 
away from the DSLAM (digital subscriber line access 
multiplexer) is slightly over 20 Mbps, after which the 
speeds begin to drop dramatically as the distance increases. 
Currently, traffic at the 5.8 GHz frequency range is low in 
Finland. Therefore, the technology could also be used in 
urban areas, for instance, to connect two offices of a small 
or medium-sized business with a wireless WiMAX link with 
no monthly charge and with quality of service capability to 
ensure the uninterrupted flow of VoIP traffic, for example. 
After conducting various tests with the devices in a variety 
of environments, we found that the devices were best suited 
for use by businesses for Point-to-Point connections in an 
urban environment or for educational purposes due to their 
price and ease of use. Particularly in cities, businesses could 
replace costly ADSL connections that must be leased from 
operators with their own WiMAX devices. However, using 
the devices for the above-mentioned purposes is hindered by 
the abnormal behavior of the UGS class, which, without an 
update that remedies the problem, presents problems for 
placing VoIP calls and examining QoS classes.  
Our future research will aim at optimizing the problem 
of cost-effective coverage area extension by using relays 
and consider novel resource management algorithms for 
multi-hop WiMAX networks. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
We express our acknowledgements to Aku Aho and Juha 
Kuusenmäki from JAMK University of Applied Sciences 
Jyväskylä, Finland for contributing the practical 
measurements. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Air interface for fixed broadband wireless access 
systems. IEEE Standard 802.16, Jun 2004. 
[2] Air interface for fixed broadband wireless access 
systems - amendment for physical and medium access 
control layers for combined fixed and mobile operation in 
licensed bands. IEEE Standard 802.16e, Dec 2005. 
[3] K. Lu, Y. Qian, H.-H. Chen, and S. Fu. WiMAX 
neworks: from access to service platform. IEEE Network, 
22(3):38–45, May/Jun 2008.  
[4] Air interface for broadband wireless access systems. 
IEEE Standard 802.16 (Rev2 D5), Jun 2008. 
[5] Air interface for broadband wireless access systems: 
Multihop relay specification. IEEE Standard 802.16j (D6), 
Jul 2008. 
[6] IEEE 802.16m evaluation methodology document 
(EMD). IEEE 802.16 Broadband Wireless Access Group, 
Mar 2008. 
[7] WiMAX Forum Mobile System Profile, Release 1.0 
Approved Specification, Apr 2008. Revision 1.6.1. 
[8] WiMAX Forum Network Architecture, Sep 2008. 
Release 1, Version 1.3.0. 
[9] Ohrtman, F. 2005. WiMAX Handbook. Building 802.16 
Wireless Networks 
[10] P. Ritthisoonthorn, PhD dissertation: Designing Cost 
Effective Broadband Fixed Wireless Access Networks 
Through Engineering-Economic Analysis, Asian Institute of 
Technology, School of Engineering and Technology, 
Thailand, December 2009. 
7
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

[11] 
Airspan 
Networks. 
2010b. 
http://www.part-
90.org/equipment/airspan/PIDASMAX36/user%20manual.p
df, 28th of March 2011. 
 [12] 
Airspan 
Networks. 
2010d. 
ProST 
Hardware 
Installation 
Guide 
SR 
6.5. 
http://www.part-
90.org/equipment/airspan/PIDASMAX37/user%20manual.p
df, 28th of March 2011. 
[13] WiMAX Forum, http://www.wimaxforum.org/, 28th of 
March 2011. 
8
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

