Coherent Pre-Distortion of Low-Frequency PLC Carriers
Stan McClellan
Ingram School of Engineering
Texas State University
San Marcos, TX USA
stan.mcclellan@txstate.edu
Michael L. Casey
Ingram School of Engineering
Texas State University
San Marcos, TX USA
mlcasey@txstate.edu
Matthias Chung
Dept. of Mathematics
Virginia Tech
Blacksburg, VA USA
mcchung@vt.edu
Abstract—The use of power lines for communication is a
topic of great practical interest as well as active research and
standardization activities. The introduction of communications
signals onto an energized power line can cause signiﬁcant
distortion of the signal, especially at low frequencies. This
paper describes a form of coherent pre-distortion for such com-
munication signals which reduces the destructive interference.
The approach can be optimized in several ways to mitigate
distortion and achieve more efﬁcient data transfer, and may
be important in cases where low-frequency, low-rate carriers
are used.
Keywords-Power line communications; PLC; pre-distortion;
I. INTRODUCTION
Transmission of data via an active power line is a difﬁcult
task, particularly at carrier frequencies below 2kHz [1]. As
a result, the majority of activity in Power Line Communica-
tions (PLC) for Smart Grid applications has been in higher
frequency bands [2]. At Very Low Frequencies (VLF), the
pre-existing power signal on the line (the 50Hz or 60Hz
“fundamental”) causes a number of problems in the system,
including pseudo-stationary interference from harmonics of
the fundamental and a form of “blowback” into the data
transmitter. However, data communications at low frequen-
cies can be very useful in a number of applications, such
as Automatic Meter Reading (AMR), Advanced Metering
Infrastructure (AMI) and similar command/control and data
retrieval scenarios [1], [3].
Curiously, the structure of the power line network seems
to interact in a speciﬁc fashion with low-frequency commu-
nication signals. This interaction can appear as a form of am-
plitude modulation of the communication signal, where the
modulation envelope is phase-coherent or time-synchronous
with the fundamental. An example of this phenomenon is
shown in the top plot of Fig. 3. When present, this distortion
envelope seems to be imposed on any/all secondary, low-
frequency signals in the channel. We have not found any
reference to this phenomenon in the literature. This type of
channel-induced distortion is problematic for data communi-
cations because amplitude modulation creates harmonically-
related images of the carrier frequency. As image signals
proliferate, the availability of idle or useable spectrum for
additional subcarriers is reduced, and the dynamic placement
of subcarriers becomes difﬁcult.
An approach to counteracting such effects is to pre-distort
the communication signal prior to introducing it to into the
channel. In this fashion, the distortion and pre-distortion
effectively cancel each other out. The concept of pre-
distortion not new. For example, pre-distortion is often used
to counteract nonlinearities in power ampliﬁers for wireless
communications [4]–[6]. However, in the case of VLF PLC,
nonlinearities seem to be introduced by the channel itself,
which is a multi-port, multi-user network with time-varying
characteristics, and so is very difﬁcult to characterize com-
pletely. Pre-distortion techniques are also particularly impor-
tant in channels with several subcarriers, or in systems using
dynamic spectral allocation [7]–[10]. In the case of VLF
PLC without effective pre-distortion, a multi-carrier PLC
transmitter may be prevented from introducing additional
subcarriers because the image signals from each subcarrier
interfere very signiﬁcantly with neighboring spectral bands.
Furthermore, VLF PLC transmissions are very bursty and
have very low data rates, making conventional equalization
or ﬁlter-based pre-distortion difﬁcult. Thus, we require a pre-
distortion system which has a relatively simple formulation,
is instantaneously applicable (no convergence delays), and
effectively mediates spectral imaging due to channel effects.
This paper describes a speciﬁc approach to pre-distortion
of a communication signal prior to introducing it onto
an active power line in a VLF PLC system. The speciﬁc
structure of the pre-distorted signal is important because
it must be estimated very quickly from some functions of
the signals on the channel. In our experimentation with
VLF PLC on a live testbed, we have observed that for
particular types of signals, the channel-induced distortion is
synchronous with the fundamental. Refer to the top plot in
Fig. 3 for an example of this phenomenon. Thus, we derive
the form of the pre-distortion envelope from a model which
is a linear combination of powers of the fundamental. Using
this approach, the pre-distortion function can be computed
instantaneously from observed samples of the fundamental.
Thus, the method observes the extant voltage on the power
network and, using the model of the distortion envelope,
computes a pre-distortion function which can be imposed
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-263-9
CTRQ 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

on the communication signal just prior to introduction to
the power network. In this fashion, we achieve a pre-
distortion envelope which is a very close approximation
to the amplitude distortion envelope imposed by the power
network, and synchronous distortion is signiﬁcantly reduced.
The remainder of this paper presents the approach to
pre-distortion, including some motivating factors as well as
well as experimental results exploring optimization of model
parameters. Section II presents the mathematical formulation
of the proposed channel model and pre-distortion function.
The structure of the model is motivated using important
considerations such as simplicity of form, ease of optimiza-
tion, and synchronization with the fundamental. Section III
presents experimental results using various conﬁgurations of
the model to suppress channel-induced distortion. The effect
of model order is explored using unit-valued coefﬁcients,
and the effect of coefﬁcient optimization is discussed. Sec-
tion IV concludes the paper by proposing extensions of the
work to algorithmic optimization and implementation in a
real-time system. The data used to develop this predistortion
technique was gathered from an experimental powerline
communication system which is being implemented on a
production distribution grid. Simulations were developed to
model the channel effects based on the acquired data, and
were tested on a non-real-time PLC system. Implementation
and optimization of the pre-distortion technique in a real-
time, multi-carrier PLC system is ongoing.
II. MATHEMATICAL FORMULATION
The mathematical formulation of the pre-distorted signal
and the method by which it is derived from observations
of the fundamental are important factors in understanding
the technique. In effect, the process creates a set of basis
functions from an observation of the fundamental. These
basis functions are combined and used to calculate the pre-
distortion envelope, which is then applied to the communica-
tion signal. If the set of basis functions and their combination
are a reasonable model of the unknown process creating
amplitude distortion in the channel, then the two effects will
counteract each other, leaving the communication signal in
the channel undistorted. So, we propose a model based on a
linear combination of functions of the power signal, and we
show via simulation and deployment on a live testbed that
this model effectively suppresses particular types of channel-
induced distortion in VLF PLC.
Let p(t), or simply p, be a power signal in the time domain
with Fourier Transform P(ξ) = F(p). In a perfect channel,
p would be simply a sinusoidal power signal with frequency
50Hz or 60Hz (the fundamental). In a realistic channel, p
is the entire signal observed, which is largely sinusoidal but
may contain some harmonic content, noise, etc. Much of the
nonsinusoidal content is due to the electrical structure of the
channel and the fundamental excitation.
Let x(t), or x, be a communication signal in the time
domain with Fourier Transform X(ξ) = F(x). In the
simplest case, x might be a sinusoid at some frequency
other than 50Hz or 60Hz. In other cases, x might be a more
complex passband carrier, modulated via analog or digital
means to carry a message signal or data bits.
The objective is to transmit communication signal x
through the power line system so that the resulting signal can
be recovered by the receiver without error. Unfortunately,
during transmission the power line system distorts x via an
unknown transfer function Hp(x). Due to the nature of the
system, the transfer function does not affect the power signal
p. In fact, the transfer function Hp seems to depend on p in
some fashion, and although Hp cannot be observed directly,
the structure of Hp can be partially estimated via observation
of p. Since the effect of Hp is similar to conventional
amplitude modulation, appropriate pre-distortion of x via
an inverse-function H−1
p
will approximately account for
the channel’s envelope distortion, thereby suppressing any
unwanted noise or spectral artifacts which are related to the
interaction of x, p, and Hp. Mathematically,
Hp(H−1
p (x)) = x.
(1)
Computing H−1
p
precisely is impossible. Fortunately, we can
estimate the structure of Hp using powers of the fundamental
p. This produces the approximation
ˆH−1
p
and the pre-
distorted signal y = ˆH−1
p (x) so that (1) becomes
Hp(y) = ˆx ≈ x.
(2)
By choosing the structure of ˆH−1
p
carefully (the model),
any errors in the approximation of Hp can be reduced
signiﬁcantly via one of several well-known methods [11]–
[13].
A. Modeling Hp
Although Hp is difﬁcult to model, we have observed that
the channel produces a coherent amplitude modulation of
secondary signals such as x. Refer to the top plot of Fig.
3 for an example of this phenomenon. By analyzing data
acquired from an experimental PLC system which evidences
this behavior, the authors have discovered that the channel-
induced modulation can be partially modeled using a linear
combination of powers of p, or
q(t, α) =
N
X
j=1
αj [p(t)]j ,
(3)
where coefﬁcients α = (α1, . . . , αN)⊤ are initially un-
known and must be optimized for each instance of the chan-
nel or re-optimized over time. A representative p and q are
shown in Fig. 1 where the coefﬁcients α have been estimated
manually, p and q are normalized to unit amplitude, and q
is formulated using only odd powers of p (i.e. αj = 0 for j
even).
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-263-9
CTRQ 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
1100
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Samples
Amplitude (normalized)
Power and distortion signals
 
 
Figure 1.
p (dashed line) and q (solid line).
Using terms familiar to communications systems, the
channel constructs a “false message” which is imposed on
communication signal x as it transits the channel. Here, we
use the unknown transfer function Hp to represent the false
message signal. Estimating Hp via q provides an easily-
constructed relationship given by:
ˆHp(t, α) = − |q(t)| + δ.
(4)
In (4), the false message Hp is estimated by ˆHp, which
depends on q through coefﬁcients α. The false message can
be counteracted by pre-distorting x with ˆH−1
p . As in typical
modulation practices, all envelope functions are normalized
to unit amplitude prior to use. In (4), δ is a constant related to
the modulation depth, as is customary for amplitude modu-
lation envelopes [14]. A representative modulation envelope
Hp recovered from an actual power signal is shown in Fig.
2, along with the estimated inverse envelope ˆH−1
p . In the
ﬁgure, the signals are shown normalized to unit amplitude,
and have not been scaled for correct modulation depth, i.e.
δ = 0.
A representative distorted signal Hp(x) is shown in the
top plot of Fig. 3. In this case, x is a sinusoid with frequency
of roughly 900Hz. Note the subtle amplitude modulation
effects of Hp on x. The amplitude envelope of the modulated
signal has periodic notches which are synchronized with
the peaks of p. These time-domain attributes are implicitly
modeled very accurately and simply by q and hence ˆHp.
Thus, the envelope can easily be translated to an optimized
pre-distortion implementation ˆH−1
p
which does not require
complex feedback loops or phase discrimination/locking
techniques.
B. Coherent pre-distortion
To achieve effective communication, the modulation im-
posed by the channel via Hp must be pre-distorted by
an inverse function. The pre-distortion approach involves
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
650
700
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Samples
Amplitude (normalized)
Distortion envelopes based on q(t)
 
 
Figure 2.
Estimated channel modulation envelope Hp (dashed line) and
corresponding pre-distortion envelope ˆH−1
p
(solid line). Both signals are
normalized to unit amplitude, and are shown prior to scaling for appropriate
modulation depth.
estimating and optimizing the coefﬁcients of q and then
formulating an estimated false message signal ˆHp which can
be applied to x prior to introduction to the channel via ˆH−1
p .
Upon introduction to the channel, the channel transfer func-
tion re-imposes the false message Hp onto the pre-distorted
signal. In this fashion, the distortion due to the channel can
be modeled as in (2), subject to the ﬁdelity of α, q, and
hence ˆHp. The outcome of this process is shown in Fig. 3,
which displays plots of the channel signal Hp(x), the pre-
distorted signal y, and the resulting suppressed signal ˆx ≈ x.
For the ﬁgure, the communication signal x (not shown) was
a low-rate BPSK-modulated carrier at approximately 900Hz,
and the resultant signals are shown offset for clarity and
normalized to approximately unit amplitude.
The optimization of the pre-distortion envelope ˆH−1
p
and
the coefﬁcients α so that ˆx ≈ x is an extremely complex
problem, and the subject of further study. Clearly, when ˆHp
equals Hp exactly, the communication signal x will transit
the channel undistorted by coherent amplitude modulation.
Unfortunately, as mentioned previously, the form of Hp is
unknown, and must be modeled via q, so that determining
an envelope function ˆHp ≈ Hp is not trivial.
The pre-distortion envelope ˆH−1
p
will be used in a con-
ventional double-sideband amplitude modulation (DSB-AM)
[14], and so must be normalized to unit amplitude before
use. Thus, a formulaic representation of ˆH−1
p
is:
ˆH−1
p (t, α) = |q(t)| + ε
c
,
(5)
where α = (α1, . . . , αN)⊤, ε > 0, and c = max{|q(t)|+ε}
to ensure unit amplitude. A representative envelope is shown
in Fig. 2 (solid line), and the effect of applying the envelope
to a communication signal x is shown in Fig. 3 (middle plot).
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-263-9
CTRQ 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
Samples
Amplitude (normalized)
a = [1 0 10 0 10 0 10 0 100 0 100]  [N=11]
 
 
Figure 3.
Top: distorted signal Hp(x) and power signal p(t) (dotted
line); Middle: pre-distorted signal y; Bottom: resulting signal ˆx, which
approximates x. All signals are normalized to unit amplitude, and have
been offset for clear display.
In Fig. 3 the coefﬁcients α have been estimated manually.
However even with non-optimal coefﬁcients, the ﬁdelity of
the pre-distortion process leads to accurate reconstruction of
the signal x, as can be seen from the bottom plot in Fig. 3
(ˆx) and the spectral plot in Fig. 5.
Estimation and inversion of the false message reduces
to an optimization problem which depends on a linear
combination of basis functions and the set of coefﬁcients
α. A number of well-known methods exist for optimizing
coefﬁcients of this form, such as Least Mean Squares (LMS),
Recursive Least Squares (RLS), etc. [15], [16]. However,
optimization of the coefﬁcients α leads to a non-smooth
optimization problem which needs to be targeted either by
direct search methods [11] or by gradient-based optimization
methods after a smoothing process. Note that the signal
p is changing slowly over time, so the introduction of a
windowed or framed approach is likely optimal, but forward-
adaptive or backward-adaptive methods for re-optimizing α
are subjects of further study.
III. RESULTS USING NON-OPTIMIZED PARAMETERS
The optimal form of the pre-distortion problem is impor-
tant, but is also very difﬁcult and the subject of considerable
research effort by the authors using both simulations and
testing on an experimental PLC system. However, even in
the absence of complete optimization we can demonstrate
the utility of the proposed model using manually optimized
parameters. In the case of manual optimization, there are
two primary dimensions in (3) that must be considered:
(a) the values of α, and (b) the order of the model, N.
Following subsections describe evaluation of the parameters
of (3) and the overall predistortion process via model order
and coefﬁcient selection.
A. Effect of Model Order
Important optimizations for the pre-distortion system are
the selection of “best” model order (N) and resulting coef-
ﬁcient structure. We have noticed via both simulation and
experimentation in a live PLC system that the effect of odd-
powers and even-powers of p in (3) and the pre-distortion
envelope in (5) is pronounced and important. Thus, we
brieﬂy examine the effects of model order and coefﬁcient
structure in the formulation of q. To evaluate the noted
effects, we simulate the pre-distortion system using model
conﬁgurations with unit-valued coefﬁcients and odd-only or
even-only powers of p and model orders N < 100. Using
this simulation, we compute the usual zero-mean signal-to-
noise ratio (SNR) between the compensated signal ˆx and the
original signal x according to (6), where x[n] denotes the
discrete-time (sampled) signal x.
SNR (dB) = 10 log10

P x[n]2
P(x[n] − ˆx[n])2

(6)
Fig. 4 summarizes the simulation results for distortion versus
model structure using (3) and the resultant pre-distortion
process. In the ﬁgure, the curve labeled “all coefﬁcients” has
αj = 1 ∀ j, whereas the curve labeled “even coefﬁcients”
has αj = 1 for j even, and αj = 0 otherwise (similarly
for “odd coefﬁcients”). Note from the ﬁgure that although
the combined odd/even model seems to result in reasonable
distortion for lower model orders (N < 10), the effect of
model order is very pronounced. So, for lower model orders
and combined odd/even model construction, the system is
extremely sensitive to variations in model order and input
data. Conversely, for moderate model orders (10 < N <
50) both the odd-only and even-only model constructions
perform better than the combined construction, and exhibit
very little sensitivity to model order. Notably, for moderate
model orders, the odd-only construction ((3) with αj = 1,
j odd) reaches a higher maximum SNR, and evidences a
smoother ascent. As a result, the process of optimizing
odd-only coefﬁcient vectors α may be less prone to local
extrema. Additionally, for large model orders (N > 50),
the differential distortion between odd-only, even-only, and
odd-even model constructions is insigniﬁcant. From this
result, we conclude that the use of odd-only powers of p in
(3) produces harmonic suppression which is more effective
for subbands which are more prevalent in the distortion
characteristic of the channel.
B. Manual Optimization
Illustrative results for manually optimized coefﬁcients α
are shown in Fig. 3, where an approximately sinusoidal
signal x with frequency around 900Hz is introduced to the
channel. The ﬁgure uses data acquired from our VLF PLC
testbed. In the ﬁgure, the effect of the coherent, channel
induced distortion Hp(x) is evident in the top plot, and the
pre-distorted signal y in the middle plot is fed to the channel,
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-263-9
CTRQ 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
Model order (N)
SNR relative to original (dB)
Performance of pre-distortion vs. model order
 
 
Odd coefficients
Even coefficients
All coefficients
Figure 4.
Distortion versus model order for odd-only, even-only, and
odd/even model constructions with unit-valued coefﬁcients.
resulting in the bottom plot where ˆx ≈ x and the distortion
is suppressed.
In the top plot of Fig. 3, note the subtle modulation of
the amplitude of x due to Hp. The periodic notches in the
amplitude of Hp(x) are synchronous with the peaks of p,
which is shown overlaid on the top plot of Fig. 3 with unit
amplitude. In the middle plot, note the corresponding inverse
amplitude modulation of x due to ˆH−1
p . The periodic peaks
in the amplitude of y are aligned with the peaks of p, and
hence are also aligned with the periodic notches in Hp(x).
These time-domain attributes are accurately modeled by q
and hence y, which results in a straightforward pre-distortion
approach. Thus, when the pre-distorted signal y is introduced
to the channel, Hp(y) = ˆx ≈ x as in (2), and as shown in
the bottom plot of Fig. 3.
The effect of this process becomes particularly clear in
Fig. 5 which overlays spectra of the idle channel, the channel
with distorted input, and the compensated signal ˆx, and the
inset, which overlays spectra of the distortion before and
after the pre-distortion process. In the ﬁgures, a low-rate
BPSK signal x is introduced to the channel with a carrier
frequency near 900Hz. When the pre-distortion scheme is
not used, the images or sidelobes of the introduced signal
are clearly evident in both ﬁgures at 120Hz harmonic offsets
from the carrier (i.e. 900Hz ± (n × 120Hz). However, when
the pre-distortion scheme is used, the images of x are
suppressed signiﬁcantly. Also note the roughly 20dB sup-
pression of the image signals nearest the 900Hz carrier (cf.
400-800Hz and 1000-1400Hz). In this case, the differential
distortion between the original communication signal x and
the pre-distorted signal ˆx is less than 0.5dB. Note also that
imperfections due to non-optimal coefﬁcients α results in
two areas which need additional optimization: (a) spurious
peaks at distant 120Hz harmonic offsets from the 900Hz
carrier (cf. 1600-1800 and 100-200Hz), and (b) a slowly
varying spectral envelope. In these tests, we do not compare
end-to-end performance metrics such as bit-error rate (BER)
because the effect of the channel-induced distortion can
easily be mitigated for single-carrier systems via the use of
a high-quality receive ﬁlter. Instead, our VLF PLC system is
targeted for multi-carrier architecture using dynamic channel
selection, and the suppression of coherent images is a critical
ﬁrst-step in the implementation of that architecture.
IV. CONCLUSION
The suppression of image signals in low-frequency, nar-
rowband PLC systems can be important. When optimized
and deployed in a system which continuously re-optimizes
the coefﬁcients α, the near-ﬁeld suppression approach de-
scribed here may yield signiﬁcant beneﬁts for transmission
schemes which rely on large numbers of low-rate carriers,
such as frequency-division modulation (FDM) or computa-
tionally efﬁcient equivalent approaches based on transforms,
such as orthogonal FDM (OFDM).
The pre-distortion model proposed here has been shown
to be efﬁciently realized and capable of instantaneous imple-
mentation with no requirements for phase-locking or delay
due to convergence of an adaptive ﬁlter. These implementa-
tion details are extremely important in a VLF PLC system
with bursty, low-rate transmissions. In initial testing of the
approach using non-adaptive, hand-optimized coefﬁcients,
we have achieved greater than 20dB suppression of channel-
induced distortion in critical subbands, making these areas
of the spectrum available for dynamic allocation by the
transmitter.
The authors are actively pursuing algorithmic optimiza-
tions of critical model parameters, including model order,
coefﬁcient selection, and adaptation rate for implementation
in a real-time, low-frequency PLC communication system
being implemented on a local distribution grid.
REFERENCES
[1] D. Rieken, “Periodic noise in very low frequency power-line
communications,” in IEEE Int. Symp. Power Line Comms and
Appl. (ISPLC), Apr. 2011, pp. 295 – 300.
[2] M. Nassar, J. Lin, Y. Mortazavi, A. Dabak, I. H. Kim, and
B. L. Evans, “Local utility powerline communications in the
3-500 kHz band: Channel impairments, noise, and standards,”
IEEE Sig. Proc. Mag. Special Issue on Sig. Proc. Techn. for
the Smart Grid, vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 116–127, Sep. 2012.
[3] S. Galli, A. Scaglione, and Z. Wang, “Power line communi-
cations and the Smart Grid,” in IEEE Int. Conf. Smart Grid
Comms (SmartGridComm), Oct. 2010, pp. 303 – 308.
[4] Y. Y. Woo, J. Kim, J. Yi, S. Hong, I. Kim, and B. Kim, “Adap-
tive digital feedback predistortion technique for linearizing
power ampliﬁers,” IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory Tech., vol. 55,
no. 5, pp. 932–940, 2007.
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-263-9
CTRQ 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

Figure 5.
Power spectrum of channel before and after pre-distortion process via estimates of q and application of pre-distortion envelope ˆH−1
p
. The error
signal spectra are shown in the inset. The spectrum of the compensated signal ˆx and the spectrum of the stimulus signal x are almost identical, and the
channel-induced distortion is effectively suppressed.
[5] S. Chung and J. L. Dawson, “Digital predistortion using
quadrature ∆Σ modulation with fast adaptation for wlan
power ampliﬁers,” in IEEE Microwave Symposium Digest
(MTT), June 2011, pp. 1–4.
[6] J. X. Qiu, D. K. Abe, T. M. Antonsen, B. G. Danly, B. Levush,
and R. E. Myers, “Linearizability of TWTAs using predistor-
tion techniques,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 52, no. 5,
pp. 718–727, 2005.
[7] J. Shen, S. Liu, Y. Wang, G. Xie, H. Rashvand, and Y. Liu,
“Robust energy detection in cognitive radio,” IET Communi-
cations, vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 1016–1023, June 2009.
[8] P. D. Sutton, K. Nolan, and L. Doyle, “Cyclostationary
signatures in practical cognitive radio applications,” IEEE J.
Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 13–24, 2008.
[9] B. Farhang-Boroujeny and R. Kempter, “Multicarrier commu-
nication techniques for spectrum sensing and communication
in cognitive radios,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 46, no. 4, pp.
80–85, Apr. 2008.
[10] P. Pawelczak, K. Nolan, L. Doyle, S. W. Oh, and D. Cabric,
“Cognitive radio: Ten years of experimentation and devel-
opment,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 49, no. 3, pp. 90–100,
2011.
[11] J. Nelder and R. Mead, “A simplex method for function
minimization,” Computer Journal, vol. 7, pp. 308–313, 1965.
[12] R. Fletcher, Practical Methods of Optimization.
New York,
NY: Wiley, 1987.
[13] H. Matthies and G. Strang, “The solution of non linear ﬁnite
element equations,” Int. J. Num. Methods in Engr., vol. 14,
pp. 1613–1626, 1979.
[14] J. M. Wozencraft and I. M. Jacobs, Principles of Communi-
cation Engineering.
Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press,
1990.
[15] S. Haykin, Adaptive Filter Theory.
Prentice-Hall, 1986.
[16] B. Widrow and S. Stearns, Adaptive Signal Processing.
Prentice-Hall, 1985.
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-263-9
CTRQ 2013 : The Sixth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

