On the Analysis of Packet Scheduling in Downlink 3GPP LTE System
Oana Iosif, Ion Banica
Faculty of Electronics, Telecommunications and Information Engineering
“Politehnica” University of Bucharest
Bucharest, Romania
oana_iosif@yahoo.com, banica@comm.pub.ro
Abstract—This paper investigates the performance of packet 
scheduling in downlink LTE (Long Term Evolution) systems 
using Round Robin strategy in time domain and time and 
frequency domain. Two types of non-real time services are 
considered in the analysis performed, with and without 
priority set, as well as the limitation given by the physical 
downlink control channels (PDCCH) on the number of 
simultaneously scheduled users.  Cell throughput, achievable 
user throughput and system capacity are evaluated in different 
scenarios with two mixed services, two packet scheduling 
approaches and priority impact on the generated traffic. 
Keywords-LTE; OFDMA; PDCCH; packet scheduling; 
Round Robin
I.
INTRODUCTION
Long Term Evolution (LTE) is the name given to a 3GPP 
(3rd Generation Partnership Project) concerning UTRAN 
(Universal Terrestrial Radio Access Network) evolution to 
meet the needs of future broadband cellular communications. 
This project can also be considered as a milestone towards 
4G (Fourth Generation) standardization. The requirements 
set for LTE specified in [1] envisage high peak data rates, 
low 
latency, 
increased 
spectral 
efficiency, 
scalable 
bandwidth, flat all-IP
network architecture, optimized 
performance for mobile speed, etc. In order to fulfill this 
extensive range of requirements several key technologies 
have been considered for LTE radio interface of which the 
most important are: multiple-access through Orthogonal 
Frequency Division Multiple Access (OFDMA) in downlink 
and Single Carrier - Frequency Division Multiple Access
(SC-FDMA) in uplink and multiple-antenna technology. 
Packet Scheduling is one of LTE Radio Resource 
Management (RRM) functions, responsible for allocating 
resources to the users and, when making the scheduling 
decisions, it may take into account the channel quality 
information from the user terminals (UE), the QoS (Quality 
of service) requirements, the buffer status, the interference 
situation, etc. [2]. Like in HSPA or WiMAX, the scheduling 
algorithm used is not specified in the standard and it is 
eNodeB (Evolved NodeB) vendor specific.
In this paper, we evaluate the performance of packet 
scheduling in downlink LTE using the Round Robin strategy 
through the results obtained for the average cell throughput, 
the achieved user throughput and the system capacity. These 
results may be considered in the LTE network design, in 
order to approximate the number of users that can be served 
with a certain throughput in a commercial LTE network.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section II discusses several aspects on scheduling and 
assigned resources in downlink LTE system followed by the 
Round Robin model description for different resource 
assignment approaches in Section III. Section IV depicts the 
results of the simulated scenarios and the conclusions are 
driven in Section V.
II.
SEVERAL ASPECTS ON RESOURCE ALLOCATION IN 
DOWNLINK LTE
The benefit of deploying OFDMA technology on 
downlink LTE is the ability of allocating capacity on both 
time and frequency, allowing multiple users to be scheduled 
at a time. The minimum resource that can be assigned to a 
user consists of two Physical Resource Blocks (PRBs) and it 
is known as chunk or simply Resource Block (RB) [2],[3]. In 
downlink LTE one PRB is mapped on 12 subcarriers (180 
kHz) and 7 OFDM symbols (0.5 ms) and this is true for non-
MBSFN (Multimedia Broadcast multicast service Single 
Frequency Network) LTE systems and for normal Cyclic 
Prefix (CP). Scheduling decisions can be made each TTI 
(Time Transmission Interval) that in LTE is equal to 1 ms.
For non-real time services dynamic scheduling is usually 
used as it provides flexible and even full utilization of the 
resource.This scheduler performs scheduling decisions every 
TTI by allocating RBs to the users, as well as transmission 
parameters including modulation and coding scheme. The 
latter is referred to as link adaptation. The allocated RBs and 
the selected modulation and coding scheme are signaled to 
the scheduled users on the PDCCH (Physical Downlink 
Control Channel). The dynamic packet scheduler also 
interacts closely with the HARQ (Hybrid Automatic Repeat 
Request) manager as it is responsible for scheduling 
retransmissions and it may also take into account the QoS 
attributes and buffer information [4].
The channel conditions may or may not play a role in 
scheduling decisions. An alternative to channel-dependent 
scheduling is Round Robin strategy that serves the users in 
cyclic order, regardless the channel information.
Although OFDMA technology allows the users to be 
multiplexed in time and frequency, the scheduler, according 
to the implemented algorithm, may choose to allocate the 
entire bandwidth to a single user, reducing the scheduling to 
be done only in time domain. The channel-sensitive 
99
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

scheduling done in time domain only is called Non-
Frequency Selective Scheduling (NFSS) and the scheduling 
exploiting the channel variations in both time and frequency 
is known as Frequency Selective Scheduling (FSS) as 
specified in [5]. Fig. 1 illustrates an example of FSS for two 
users [6].
When scheduling is done in time and frequency domain, 
independently if it is channel-aware or not, the number of 
multiplexed users at each TTI is limited by the number of 
PDCCHs that can be configured. This depends on the system 
bandwidth, the number of symbols signaled for PDCCH 
allocation, the PDCCH format number, etc. [3], [4], [7], [8]. 
The PDCCHs are intended to provide both uplink and 
downlink scheduling information and as a PDCCH is 
allocated to each user to be scheduled, the maximum number 
of scheduled users per TTI in downlink LTE is half of the 
number of PDCCHs available. The authors from [4] 
discussed this constraint and proposed a three-step packet 
scheduling algorithm as it is depicted in Fig. 2. 
III.
ROUND ROBIN SCHEDULING MODEL IN DOWNLINK 
LTE
As mentioned in Section II, Round Robin scheduling is a 
non-aware scheduling scheme that lets users take turns in 
using the shared resources (time and/or RBs), without taking 
the instantaneous channel conditions into account. Therefore, 
it offers great fairness among the users in radio resource 
assignment, but degrades the system throughput. Both Time 
Domain Round Robin (TD RR) and Time and Frequency 
Domain Round Robin (FD RR) scheduling models are 
described in this section.
A.
Time Domain Round Robin scheduling
In TD RR the first reached user is served with the whole 
frequency spectrum for a specific time period (1 TTI), not 
making use of  the information on his channel quality and
then these resources are revoked back and assigned to the
next user for another time period. The previously served user 
is placed at the end of the waiting queue so it can be served
with radio resources in the next round. This algorithm
continues in the same manner [9]. Fig. 3 illustrates the 
resource sharing between two users with TD RR algorithm. 
The colors make the difference between the users. In this
Figure 1. Frequency selective scheduling illustration for two users in 
downlink LTE
Figure 2. Illustration of a three step scheduling algorithm framework
example, every user is allocated 100% of the RBs and 50% 
of the time resource, so each gets 50% of the global resource.
Let us suppose a CBR (Constant Bit Rate) service of 250 
kbps and a SNR (Signal to Noise Ratio) throughput per RB 
given by the radio conditions of 500 kbps. Assuming that 
there is one static user making the service and the same SNR 
is experienced in each RB and in all TTIs, the maximum 
amount of data that can be sent during one TTI per RB is 0.5 
kb. Considering the system bandwidth of 20 MHz which 
consists of 100 RBs, the user needs to be allocated all 
resources for five TTIs to reach his service throughput. 
Therefore the user must be allocated 1/200 of the total 
resource in order to be served.  This ratio is equal to service 
throughput / (SNR throughput*total number of RBs given by 
the system bandwidth). This represents the main idea in the 
TD RR model.
B.
Time and Frequency Domain Round Robin scheduling
The FD RR allows multiple users to be scheduled within 
one TTI in cyclic order. Keeping in mind the PDCCH 
limitation discussed in Section II, the scheduling framework 
from Fig. 2 can be applied. The TDPS (Time Domain Packet 
Scheduling) may select N users in RR fashion to be 
scheduled in one TTI, but the PDCCH resources (M) must be 
checked in order to see if all users selected by the TDPS can 
be simultaneously scheduled. M users at most can be the 
input of FDPS (Frequency Domain Packet Scheduling), 
which schedules each user with RR strategy across different 
RBs. In the next TTI the users that were not selected in the 
previous one will be scheduled in the same manner and so on. 
The FD RR is briefly presented in [10] where PDCCH 
constraint is not considered. The authors propose that all 
users be allocated one RB before reallocating to the same 
user. If the number of users waiting to be scheduled is less 
than the number of PDCCHs per TTI, this approach is 
correct. But if the users selected within one TTI are greater 
than the PDCCHs and if the idea of allocating one RB to 
each user is maintained, the result will be a waste of 
resources.
The resource sharing between two users with FD RR,
assuming a hypothetical system bandwidth of two RBs, is 
depicted in Fig. 4. As in Fig. 3, each user is allocated 50% 
of the global resource. Taking the example given in Section 
III.A, but considering the limitation of 20 PDCCHs per TTI 
Figure 3. Resource sharing between two users with TD RR
100
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

Figure 4. Resource sharing between two users with FD RR
for downlink LTE as it is concluded from [4], [7] and [8] 
and 40 users having the same radio conditions and making 
the same service, one user needs to be allocated 1 RB for 
500 TTIs. The global resource in this case is reduced due to 
PDCCH constraint i.e. the maximum throughput given by 
the radio conditions * number of PDCCHs. The radio 
resource ratio assigned to each user is 1/40, higher than in 
TD RR example, so the capacity will be smaller. A solution 
to address this problem would be the allocation of more RBs
at once to each user in order to exploit all transmission 
bandwidth. Knowing that for 20 MHz band in downlink 
LTE 20 users can be simultaneously scheduled at most, each 
user can be allocated 5 RBs before assigning resources to 
another one. In this case, the FD RR cell throughput will be 
the same as for TD RR, with the only advantage of being 
more suited to services with small packets and some delay 
requirements.
IV.
SIMULATION SCENARIOS AND RESULTS
A computer simulation using C++ platform is conducted 
to evaluate the performance of RR scheduling in downlink 
LTE. For the simulations performed a single cell eNodeB is 
considered, with a carrier frequency of 2.6 GHz FDD
(Frequency Division Duplex) and a system bandwidth of 20 
MHz. The antenna configuration used in all scenarios is
SISO (Single Input Single Output) which leads to category 
1 terminal with ~10Mbps for all users. In order to reduce the 
complexity of the system simulations, we assume that equal 
downlink transmit power is allocated on each RB and all 
transmitted packets are received correctly. Moreover, the 
users are static and experience the same SNR values for all 
RBs allocated for all the simulation period (they are all 
located in the same bin).
The downlink SNR values used in this paper, resulting
from the pathloss, shadow fading, multipath fading, eNodeB 
transmit power and thermal noise, are listed in Table I, 
along with the corresponding modulation and coding 
schemes and data rates. 
The following sub-sections present the simulation results 
for cell throughput, average user throughput and system 
capacity in downlink LTE with RR scheduling. There are 
two categories of users considered: the first makes a CBR 
streaming service with 2 Mbps expected throughput (under
this value the users cannot be served) and the second makes 
a VBR best effort service with 2 Mbps minimum accepted 
throughput, but it can reach more . The maximum best effort 
throughput reached is limited by the minimum between the 
data rate corresponding to the SNR experienced and the 
maximum throughput given by the user terminal category.  
TABLE I. 
DOWNLINK SNR TO DATA RATE MAPPING
Minimum 
downlink
SNR values (db)
Modulation and coding 
scheme
Data rate 
(kbps)
1.7
QPSK (1/2)
138
3.7
QPSK (2/3)
184
4.5
QPSK (3/4)
207
7.2
16 QAM (1/2)
276
9.5
16 QAM (2/3)
368
10.7
16 QAM (3/4)
414
14.8
64 QAM (2/3)
552
16.1
64 QAM (3/4)
621
A.
Cell throughput results
Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 show the cell throughput with TD RR 
and FD RR for streaming users and best effort users.
The dependence of the cell throughput on the SNR values 
with 30 users in the cell is depicted in Fig. 5. An interesting 
evolution is shown by the cell throughput in FD RR for
streaming service, where the cell saturation is reached. The 
explanation lies in both PDCCHs limitation of 20 per TTI 
and the CBR service of 2 Mbps. Despite the PDCCH 
limitation in FD RR for best effort users, cell saturation is 
not reached due to their capability of achieving a higher 
throughput compared to their service throughput. All 30 
users are served only in TD RR for the last SNR throughput 
value.
When comparing TD RR with FD RR based on the 
results illustrated in Fig. 6 it can be concluded that for best 
effort users they show the same cell throughput evolution, 
This is not the case for streaming users because in TD RR 
the cell throughput is higher due to a higher number of users 
served. From the cell throughput saturation it can also be
seen that in TD RR there are 31streaming users served, while 
in FD RR only 20 users reach their service requirements.
B.
Average user throughput results
Fig. 7 shows the evolution of average user throughput 
with the number of users in the cell. For streaming service 
the user throughput is constant at 2 Mbps, while for best 
effort users it varies until the cell saturation is reached, the 
saturation point being the maximum number of users served.
The maximum best effort user throughput is limited by the
terminal category. The achievable best effort user throughput 
is higher in FD RR than in TD RR for more than 20 users in 
the cell because there are fewer users served and the cell 
resource is shared between a smaller number of users.
Figure 5. Cell throughput vs. SNR for TD RR and FD RR
101
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

Figure 6. Cell throughput vs. the number of users in the cell                   
for TD RR and FD RR
Figure 7. Average user throughput vs. the number of users                            
in the cell for TD RR and FD RR
C.
System capacity results
Fig. 8 and Fig. 9 show for both scheduling strategies how 
many users are served from the total number of users in the 
cell and the impact of the priority set for streaming service 
on the number and types of users scheduled. Half of the users 
in the cell are best effort users. The cell saturation is reached 
for 31 users served in TD RR and 20 in FD RR. When no 
priority is set, the number of served streaming users is equal 
to that of best effort users. For 50 users in the cell and 
priority set, in TD RR there are 6 best effort users and 25 
streaming users served, while in FD RR there is no best 
effort user served and 20 streaming users served.
V.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
This paper illustrates the performance of Time Domain 
Round Robin and Time and Frequency Domain Round 
Robin scheduling in downlink LTE in what concerns the 
cell throughput, the average user throughput and the system 
capacity, in the assumption of two types of services with the 
possibility of applying a higher priority to one of them, 
having an impact on which number and type of users are 
served. The constraint of PDCCHs on the number of users 
scheduled each TTI has also been outlined and depicted in 
the simulation results, making FD RR less efficient when 
the number of users in the cell is higher than the PDCCHs. 
These results may be considered when designing a real LTE 
network. Future work will focus on the analysis of packet 
scheduling in uplink LTE system.
Figure 8. Number of users served vs. number of users                                     
in the cell w/o priority in TD RR
Figure 9. Number of users served vs. number of users                               
in the cell w/o priority in FD RR
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Oana Iosif is POSDRU grant beneficiary offered through 
POSDRU/6/1.5/S/16 contract.
REFERENCES
[1]
3GPP TR 25.913v8.0.0 Release 8,“Requirements for evolved UTRA 
(E-UTRA) and evolved UTRAN (E-UTRAN)”.
[2]
3GPP TS 36.300v8.12.0 Release 8, “Evolved universal terrestrial 
radio access (E-UTRA) and evolved universal terrestrial radio access
network (E-UTRAN); Overall description; Stage 2”.
[3]
3GPP TS 36.211v8.9.0 Release 8,“Evolved universal terrestrial radio 
access (E-UTRA); Physical channels and modulation”.
[4]
H. Holma and A.Toskala, “LTE for UMTS: OFDMA and SC-FDMA 
based radio access”, 2009 John Wiley & Sons, pp.181-212.
[5]
F. Khan, “LTE for 4G mobile broadband”, Cambridge University 
Press 2009.
[6]
D. Astély, E. Dahlman, A. Furuskär, Y. Jading, M. Lindström, and S.
Parkvall, 
“LTE: 
The 
evolution 
of 
mobile 
broadband”, 
Communications Magazine, IEEE In Communications Magazine, 
IEEE, Vol. 47, No. 4. (05 May 2009), pp. 44-51.
[7]
R.Love, R. Kuchibhotla, A. Ghosh, R.Ratasuk, B. Classon, Y. 
Blankenship, “Downlink control channel design for 3GPP LTE”, 
Wireless Communications and Networking Conference, 2008. 
WCNC 2008. IEEE, pp.  813-818.
[8]
D. Laselva, F. Capozzi, F. Frederiksen, K. I. Pedersen, J. Wigard and 
I.Z. Kovács, “On the impact of realistic control channel constraints on 
QoS provisioning in UTRAN LTE”, Vehicular Technology 
Conference Fall, 2009 IEEE 70th, pp. 1-5.
[9]
S. Hussain, “Dynamic radio resource management in 3GPP LTE”, 
Blekinge Institute of Technology 2009.
[10] C. Han, K. C. Beh, M. Nicolaou, S. Armour, A. Doufexi, “Power 
efficient dynamic resource scheduling algorithms for LTE”, 
Vehicular Technology Conference Fall, 2010 IEEE 72nd, pages 1-5.
102
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

