Resource Allocation Method Based on QoE for
Multiple User Types
Tatsuya Yamazaki
Graduate School of Science and Technology
Niigata University
Niigata, Japan
Email: yamazaki@ie.niigata-u.ac.jp
Takumi Miyoshi
Graduate School of Engineering and Science
Shibaura Institute of Technology
Saitama, Japan
Email: miyoshi@shibaura-it.ac.jp
Abstract—Both of Quality of Service (QoS) and Quality of
Experience (QoE) are deﬁned to specify the degree of service
quality. In some sense, QoE includes subjective evaluation from
the users as an extension of QoS. Therefore, feedback from QoE
to QoS control might realize user-oriented resource allocation
in network services. Utility functions are sometimes used to
assign a bridging role between QoS and QoE. Although the user
characteristic has variety, a single utility function was used in
previous studies in most cases. Moreover, the QoS control, i.e.,
the resource allocation, by making use of the utility functions
are hardly studied yet. In this paper, multiple user types which
have respective utility functions are considered. Respective utility
functions are acquired from real experiments. Then a resource
allocation method is proposed to reﬂect each user type satisfaction
based on the utility functions. The simple case is studied and the
resource allocation method is derived analytically.
Keywords—Quality of Experience, Quality of Service, utility
function, resource allocation, user type.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Network infrastructure is a requisite for our business and
ordinary life and it provides us Web service, video stream-
ing, Social Network Service (SNS), video meeting, and so
on. Available network throughput is increasing owing to the
progress of technologies, while user demand for network
capability is also growing year in and year out. Therefore,
adequate network resource allocation is one of the problems
that network operators consider [1], where maximization of
the user satisfaction with minimum cost is a goal.
In order to attain this goal, a quality of experience (QoE)
based approach is regarded as a promising way to introduce
the user satisfaction [2]-[4]. Compared with quality of service
(QoS), QoE includes more subjective factor and presents more
comprehensive evaluation. In other words, concept of QoE
is suitable to reﬂect the degree of user satisfaction, since it
is deﬁned as “the overall acceptability of an application or
service, as perceived subjectively by the end-user” in [5].
A popular way to obtain QoE evaluation is a subjective
experiment such as the mean opinion score (MOS).
Several studies use utility functions in order to imple-
ment QoE factors [2]-[4],[6],[7]. The term “utility” is initially
deﬁned as the total satisfaction received from consuming a
good or service in economics. Its concept can be extended
to the network service and it is used to allocate resources in
connection with economic approaches from the viewpoint of
the users. Schroeder et al. [4] used the game theory, where
they proposed an auction algorithm to determine the resource
allocation. Ogino et al. [6] deﬁned user terminal utility func-
tions and allocated terminal resources by negotiation regarding
QoS. These previous studies, however, assume the same utility
function for all of the users and the application case of this
assumption is considered to be rare.
Reference [3] categorized the users into three types and
proposed the utility function that estimates the user satisfaction
for different applications. Simulations were carried out to com-
pute the user satisfaction. Application of the utility function to
the resource allocation problem is still an open issue. Yamazaki
et al. [8] also presented categorization of the users into four
groups. The categorization seems to be realistic and credible
because it is based on the real experimental data. The QoS
control, i.e., the resource allocation, by the utilization of QoE
factors remains as a future study.
In this paper, it is assumed that there are multiple user
types, which have respective utility functions for a particular
service. QoE evaluation differs from each other for differ-
ent utility functions. A novel resource allocation method is
proposed to reﬂect each user type satisfaction based on the
utility functions. The simple case is studied and the resource
allocation method is derived analytically.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
introduces the notation used in this paper and the problem
setting. In Section III, the utility function is deﬁned as the
function mapping QoS parameters to the degree of user satis-
faction and concrete utility functions are presented. In Section
IV, two types of users are considered as a simple case and
analyzed solutions are derived for such a case study. Section V
presents computation results in order to evaluate the analyzed
solutions and Section VI concludes this paper.
II.
NOTATION AND PROBLEM STATEMENT
The symbols and variables used hereafter are explained in
this section.
The situation considered in this paper is that the users
are at the same task requiring the same trafﬁc on a network
segment. The number of all users is

to the user type
.

as the relax type. Moreover, the utility functions in Section III
can be applied for the busy and relax types.
The utility functions in Fig. 1 are expressed as follows,








Fig. 4.
Computation results (
Fig. 8.
Computation results (
[10]
O. Huber and U. Kunz, ”Time pressure in risky decision making: effect
on risk defusing,” Psychology Science, vol. 49, no. 4, pp. 415-426, 2007.
[11]
ITU-R Recommendation: BT.500-11, ”Methodology for the subjective
assessment of the quality of television pictures,” 2002.
[12]
R. Jain, D. Chiu, and W. Hawe, ”A quantitative measure of fairness and
discrimination for resource allocation in shared systems,” DEC, Tech.
Rep., 1984.
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-322-3
CTRQ 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

