Enabling QoS in the Internet of Things 
 
Marie-Aurélie Nef, Leonidas Perlepes, Sophia 
Karagiorgou, George I. Stamoulis 
Department of Computer & Communication Engineering 
University of Thessaly 
Volos, Greece 
e-mail: {manef, leperlep, sokaragi,georges}@inf.uth.gr 
Panayotis K. Kikiras 
AGT Germany 
Darmstadt, Germany 
e-mail: pkikiras@agtgermany.com
 
Abstract—With the emergence of the Internet of Things (IoT), 
it is necessary to define service models, which can categorize 
IoT applications and determine the Quality of Service (QoS) 
factors necessary to satisfy the requirements of those services.  
On the other hand, as Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN) 
constitute a main component of the IoT, they become a key 
factor concerning QoS provision.  In this perspective, we focus 
our analysis on the possible WSNs integration approaches in 
the IoT while providing QoS and which best practices to adopt.  
Furthermore, regarding QoS requirements, we also define 
service models for the IoT and expose their feasibility through 
a categorization of IoT applications.  
Keywords-Internet of Things; Wireless Sensor Network; 
QoS; Service Models; MAC 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The Internet of Things (IoT) will likely be one of the 
most important technological breakthroughs of the years to 
come. IoT could be conceptually defined as a dynamic 
global network infrastructure with self configuring 
capabilities 
based 
on 
standard 
and 
interoperable 
communication protocols where physical and virtual things 
have identities, physical attributes, and virtual personalities, 
use intelligent interfaces, and are seamlessly integrated into 
the information network [1].  
In the IoT, smart things/objects are active participants in 
business, information and social processes where they are 
enabled to interact and communicate among themselves and 
with the environment by exchanging data and information 
sensed about the environment, while reacting autonomously 
to the real/physical world events and influencing it by 
running processes that trigger actions and create services 
with or without direct human intervention [1].  In this 
perspective, it is necessary to define service models, which 
can categorize IoT applications and then determine which 
Quality of Service (QoS) factors are necessary to satisfy the 
requirements of those services.  
Smart objects are lightweight devices with a sensor or 
actuator and a communication device. These devices are 
capable of sensing various types of incidents/parameters and 
communicating those with other devices. They can be 
battery-operated, and typically have three components: a 
CPU (8, 16 or 32-bit microcontroller), memory (a few tens 
of kilobytes) and a low-power wireless communication 
device (from a few kilobits/s to a few hundreds of 
kilobits/s). The size of these devices is very small [2][3].  
These devices can work together, forming for example a 
wireless sensor network (WSN).  As a main component of 
the IoT, WSNs become a key factor concerning QoS 
provision and therefore should be integrated in the IoT in 
the best possible way.  
In this paper, based on the analysis of the current QoS 
MAC solutions in WSNs and simulation results, we focus 
our QoS analysis on the possible WSNs’ integration 
approaches in the IoT.  Then, regarding QoS requirements, 
we also define service models for the IoT and expose their 
feasibility through a categorization of IoT applications.  
The remainder of this article is organized as follows. 
Section II focuses on a review of current QoS MAC 
solutions in WSNs.  In Section III, we provide a summary 
of different service models and performance analysis of the 
IEEE 802.15.4 from [4].  The fourth Section describes a 
WSN integration approach in the IoT providing QoS.  Then 
we propose best practices to adopt when using the IEEE 
802.15.4 
protocol 
for 
WSNs 
while 
providing 
the 
aforementioned service models.  In the Section V, we 
extend the service models described in Section III to the IoT 
and we present a categorization of IoT applications 
according to them.  Finally, conclusions are presented in 
Section VI. 
II. 
MAC SOLUTIONS FOR QOS IN WSNS 
Many aspects of WSNs such as routing, preservation of 
battery power and topology control have been studied in 
previous papers [5], [6], [7]. However, the area of QoS in 
WSNs remains largely open. The main reason is that WSNs 
are quite different from traditional wired and wireless 
networks from several points of view (e.g. energy, 
processing and memory constraints, heterogeneous and 
unevenly distributed traffic, network’s dynamic changes and 
scalability problems). 
In the following paragraphs, a summary of current QoS-
aware MAC solutions for WSNs is provided.  Two complete 
surveys of QoS-Aware MAC protocols and Real Time (RT) 
QoS support can be found in [8] and [9] respectively.  The 
main characteristics of each protocol are described below: 
1) Implicit prioritized access protocol (I-EDF) [10] and 
dual-mode MAC protocol [11]: they adopt a cellular 
backbone network and thus they are topology-dependent.  
They use Frequency Division Multiple Access (FDMA) and 
Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA) to guarantee 
bounded delay (HRT).  Energy efficiency is not considered. 
2) PEDAMACS [12]: this TDMA-based protocol that 
aims to achieve both energy efficiency and delay guarantee  
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-192-2
CTRQ 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

TABLE I.  
A COMPARISON OF MAC PROTOCOLS 
Name 
MAC type 
RT type 
Topology dependent 
Energy efficient 
Scalability 
I-EDF, Dual-mode 
MAC 
FDMA-TDMA 
HRT 
Cell structure 
N/A 
Moderate 
PEDAMACS 
TDMA 
HRT 
No 
High 
Low 
IEEE 802.15.4 
Slotted CSMA/CA, GTS 
Best effort/HRT 
No 
Moderate 
Good 
Saxena et al. 
CSMA 
Best effort /Low-Latency 
No 
High 
Good 
PQ-MAC 
TDMA /CSMA 
Best effort/Low-Latency 
No 
Moderate 
Low 
I-MAC 
TDMA /CSMA 
Best effort/Low-Latency 
No 
High 
Moderate 
Diff-MAC 
CSMA 
Best effort /Low-Latency 
No 
Moderate 
Good 
EQ-MAC 
TDMA /CSMA 
Best effort/Low-Latency 
1-hop cluster based 
High 
Moderate 
Suriyachai et al. 
TDMA 
HRT 
Data gathering tree 
Moderate 
Low 
 
(HRT).  However, in order to accomplish this, it requires 
powerful access point (AP).  This requirement has reduced 
its practical application and attractiveness.  
3) IEEE 802.15.4 standard [13]: it basically uses 
CSMA/CA.  In the beacon-enabled synchronized mode, it 
provides guaranteed time slots (GTS) and thus, in this case, 
HRT. It also provides energy saving. 
4) Saxena et al. [14]: the autors propose a CSMA/CA 
protocol designed to support three types of traffic: streaming 
video, non-real-time and best effort.  The device adjusts the 
duty cycle depending on the dominating traffic received in 
order to achieve energy saving.   
5) PQ-MAC [15]: it uses both CSMA and TDMA.  
Energy saving is handled by an advanced wake up scheme, 
while prioritization is handled by a doubling scheme for 
high priority data. 
6) I-MAC [16]: this protocol is based on Z-MAC [17] 
and defines three priority levels.  It uses both CSMA and 
TDMA. 
7) Diff-MAC [18]: it is a CSMA/CA based protocol, 
which 
provides 
differentiated 
services 
and 
hybrid 
prioritization very useful in multimedia applications.  Its 
dynamic adaptation brings higher complexity. 
8) EQ-MAC [19]: it uses both CSMA and TDMA.  It 
achieves good energy saving and provides service 
differentiation but only works for bluster based single hop 
networks and cannot handle multi-hop transmissions. 
9) Suriyachai et al. [20]: it is a TDMA based protocol, 
which can provide deterministic bounds for communication 
between two devices.  Although, as it is based on a data 
gathering tree, its scalability is quite low. 
Table II summarizes the QoS support and the major 
differences of the 10 protocols described in this section. 
III. 
SERVICE MODELS AND PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 
OF IEEE 802.15.4 
A complete description of service models and 
performance evaluation of the IEEE 802.15.4 standard is 
presented in [4].  In this section, we provide a summary of 
this analysis. 
A. Service Models 
The three service models are based on three factors: 
interactivity (yes/no), delay (Non Real-Time, Soft Real 
Time (SRT) and Hard Real Time (HRT)) and criticality 
(yes/no).  The first model is the Open Services Model.  It is 
interactive as it is based on user’s queries, non-RT and non 
mission-critical.  The second model is the Supple Services 
Model.  This model is sometimes interactive, sometimes 
not, depending on the user’s subscription, it is SRT and 
mission-critical.  The third model is the Complete Services 
model.  It is not interactive as there is a continuous flow of 
data, it is SRT or HRT depending on the application and is 
mission-critical. 
B. IEEE 802.15.4 Performance Analysis  
In order to provide the services described above in a 
WSN, we want to be able to provide services, which 
includes both best effort and HRT, to take into account 
energy saving while not being dependent of a certain 
topology in order to offer a solution practically applicable.  
From this perspective, we can conclude that the 802.15.4 
standard offer the best compromise of the aforementioned 
characteristics and in this optic, the following performance 
analysis was conducted [4]. 
The simulations were performed with ns-2 simulator 
[21], using the IEEE 802.15.4 extension developed at City 
College of New York [22]. 
In our simulations we consider an 802.15.4 wireless 
network with one PAN coordinator and N reduced-function 
devices, with the nodes located close in a communication 
distance of 25 meters.  This assumption prevents hidden 
terminal problem which results in data collisions.  Wireless 
nodes are organized in star and random topologies (Fig. 1). 
  
 
Figure 1.  Simulation topologies (Adopted from [4]). 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-192-2
CTRQ 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

TABLE II.  
TRAFFIC PARAMETERS (ADOPTED FROM [4]) 
Parameter 
Single user category 
Multiple user categories 
Service 
Type 
No 
Guaran-
tees 
Mobile 
Services 
No 
Guarantees - 
Guarantees 
Real-time - 
Guarantees 
Traffic 
Type 
Poisson 
Constant 
Bit Rate 
(CBR) 
Poisson – 
File Transfer 
Protocol 
(FTP) 
Constant Bit 
Rate (CBR) – 
File Transfer 
Protocol 
(FTP) 
Number of 
Nodes 
25, 50, 100 
25, 50, 100 
Number of 
Flows 
1/4, 1/2, 3/4 and 4/4 
number of nodes 
¼ Poisson – 
¾ FTP 
¼ CBR – ¾ 
FTP 
½ Poisson – 
½ FTP 
½ CBR – ½ 
FTP 
¾ Poisson – 
¼ FTP 
¾ CBR – ¼ 
FTP 
Node 
Position 
Star / Random 
Star / Random 
Traffic 
Direction 
Node to Coordinator 
Node to Coordinator 
Packet Size 
40 Bytes 
40 Bytes 
20 Bytes – 40 
Bytes 
 
Traffic flows are generated in one-hop transmitting data 
directly to the coordinator, either in distributed or constant 
bit rate depending on the simulation model.  Moreover, for 
each model, we distinguish two categories: no traffic 
differentiation (Single User) and traffic differentiation 
(Multiple User).  A summary of traffic characteristics are 
presented in Table II.  Additionally, multi-hop scenarios are 
evaluated in the random topology.  Each simulation runs for 
500 s and 15 times. 
 
1) Single User Category: In a star topology with no 
guarantees, the power consumption does not exceed 0.35 
and the worst case limit reaches 80% in packet delivery 
ratio for a loaded network.  In a star topology with mobile 
services, better performance metrics are achieved: 2.5 times 
greater throughput and 5% better packet delivery ratio.  In a 
random topology with no guarantees, we have better 
network performances compared to the star topology: 83% 
better in power consumption and doubled network lifetime.  
In a random topology with mobile services, the network 
behavior is similar compared to the star topology and better 
performance metrics are achieved: 17% greater throughput, 
40% lower average delay and 75% lower power 
consumption. 
2) Service Differentiation for Multiple User Categories: 
In a star topology, a grade of service differentiation can be 
achieved with packet delivery ratio reaching 87% and 83% 
for non guaranteed/guaranteed services and 83% for RT and 
guaranteed services respectively.  There is no difference in 
throughput and average delay between the classes of 
services.  In a random topology, there are no major 
discrepancies in network behavior.  The throughput is 30% 
greater and average delay is 6% better compared to star 
topology metrics.  The power consumption is reduced by 
about 80% compared to a large scaled star network. 
3) Priority Based Service Differentiation: Provision of 
multi-level priority based services by tuning properly the 
size of the CW.  In a star topology, priority services can be 
achieved with the throughput metric ranging from 4% to 
20% depending on the service differentiation provided and 
the network load.  Affected by the same factors, energy 
consumption ranges between 0.6% and 15%.  The worst 
case in packet delivery ratio reaches 85% of successful 
delivery.  In a random topology, a better delivery ratio is 
achieved and the gain in power consumption reaches 72%. 
IV. 
WSNS INTEGRATION APPROACH IN THE IOT 
PROVIDING QOS AND BEST PRACTICES 
A. WSNs Integration Approach in the IoT Providing QoS 
In fact, one of the most important components in the IoT 
paradigm is WSN. The benefits of connecting both WSN 
and other IoT elements go beyond remote access, as 
heterogeneous information systems can be able to 
collaborate and provide common services. However, 
deploying WSNs configured to access the Internet raises 
novel challenges, which need to be tackled before taking 
advantage of the many benefits of such integration. 
There are a lot of approaches to connect WSNs to the 
Internet. According to [23] and [24] the most effective, 
flexible and scalable approach is inspired for current  WLAN 
structure and forms a dense 802.15.4 access point network, 
where multiple sensor nodes can join the Internet through the 
network’s gateway (Fig. 2). 
With gateways acting only as repeater and protocol 
translators, sensor nodes are also expected to contribute to 
QoS management by optimizing the resource utilization of 
all heterogeneous devices that are part of the future Internet 
of Things. 
B.    Proposed Best Practices 
From Figure 3 [4] and the analysis presented in Section 
III, we can suggest some best practices about topology and 
traffic type, based on each application’s priorities 
concerning quality factors. 
If nor differentiation of traffic neither a strict delay 
bound is to be provided, the best topology is the random 
topology as it assures much better energy saving (83%), 
throughput (19%) and packet delivery ratio (6%) than the 
star topology.  This approach mostly fits the Open Services 
model and in some cases the Supple Services model and 
Complete Services model. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Integration of WSN in the IoT. 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-192-2
CTRQ 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

 
Figure 3.  Simulation models statistics for traffic parameters described in 
Table II (Adopted from [4]). 
On the other hand, in order to support RT applications 
without traffic differentiation, the star topology achieves 
better delay than the random topology, but as mentioned 
above, costs more energy (75%).  This could be the case 
while providing Complete Services model. 
When different types of traffic are required, as for the 
two previous cases, again the star topology consumes 
dramatically much more energy (Non-RT: 78% and RT: 
86%) than the random topology and performs worse in 
terms of throughput (Non-RT: 24% and RT: 48%) and 
delivery ratio (RT: 10%).   This scenario is more likely to fit 
the Supple Services Model and the Complete Services 
model.   
We can conclude that the only reason to use the star 
topology is when no other topology is feasible with the 
specific lightweight devices or when the delay provided by 
the random topology is not satisfactory.  Again, this could 
be the case while providing Complete Services model when 
traffic differentiation is required. 
V. 
APPLICATIONS AND SERVICE MODELS IN THE IOT 
In [25], the authors present numerous applications made 
possible by the IoT.  Each of these applications has different 
requirements in terms of QoS.  Based on the three service 
models for WSNs described in Section III, we extend those 
services to the IoT and demonstrate their feasibility 
categorizing the applications described in [25] according to 
these services’ characteristics. 
In the next paragraphs, for each domain of application 
described in [25], that is to say Transportation & Logistics, 
Healthcare, Smart environment, Personal & Social and 
Futuristic, we categorize each specific application in one of 
the three services based on their characteristics. 
A. Transportation & Logistic  
1) Logistics: this is either interactive or non-interactive, 
in many cases it requires a SRT guarantee and is mission-
critical, thus it belongs to the Supple Services model.   
2) Assisted driving: this is obvious that this application 
is mission-critical and requires a continuous flow of data 
with HRT guarantee, for these reasons it can ben classified 
into the Complete Services model.   
3) Mobile ticketing:  if the application’s purpose was 
only to provide information about transportation services, it 
would be classified into the Open Services model as it is 
interactive, without requirements of synchronous data.  As 
the oportunity to buy the related tickets is provided, it 
belongs to the Supple Services model as there is a need of 
SRT guarantee and the application is now mission-critical. 
4) Monitoring 
environmental 
parameters: 
the 
application is non RT or SRT, it provides periodically 
collected data and thus is not interactive and is mission-
critical as this will influence the measures to be taken.  This 
application can be classified in the Supple Services model. 
5) Augmented maps: this application belongs to the 
Open Services model as it is based on interaction, doesn’t 
require RT and isn’t mission-critical. 
B. Healthcare 
1) Tracking: requiring a continuous flow of data, SRT 
or HRT guarantees and being mission-critical, this 
application is another example of a Complete Services 
model’s application. 
2) Identification and authentication: this application is 
interactive, it requires no RT or only SRT guarantees but the 
security provided makes it mission-critical.  Therefore, the 
application belongs to the Supple Services model. 
3) Data collection: interactive or not, it requires a SRT 
guarantee and is mission-critical.  The application can be 
classified into the Supple Services model. 
4) Sensing: as for tracking, it is mission-critical, 
requires HRT guarantees and a continuous flow of data and 
thus belongs to the Complete Services model. 
C. Smart environments 
1) Comfortable homes and offices: this application is 
interactive or not, it requires no RT or only SRT guarantees 
but as it can be used for monitoring and alarm systems, it 
becomes mission-critical.  The best classification is thus the 
Supple Services model. 
2) Industrial plants: the application is interactive or not, 
it requires SRT guarantees, it is mission critical and belongs 
therefore to the Supple Services model. 
3) Smart museum and gym: this is another classic 
example of Open Services model, it is interactive, does not 
require RT guarantees and is not mission-critical. 
D. Personal and social 
1) Social networking: this application is interactive, it 
doesn’t require RT guarantees and isn’t mission-critical, 
therefore it can be categorized into the Open Services 
model. 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-192-2
CTRQ 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

TABLE III.  
APPLICATIONS IN IOT AND THEIR CORRESPONDING 
SERVICE MODEL 
Application 
domain 
Application 
Model 
Transportation 
& Logistic 
Logistics 
Supple 
Assisted driving 
Complete 
Mobile ticketing 
Supple 
Monitoring environmental parameters 
Supple 
Augmented maps 
Open 
Healthcare 
Tracking 
Complete 
Identification & Authentication 
Supple 
Data Collection 
Supple 
Sensing 
Complete 
Smart 
Environments 
Comfortable homes and offices 
Supple 
Industrial plants 
Supple 
Smart museum and gym 
Open 
Personal and 
Social 
Social networking 
Open 
Historical queries 
Open 
Losses & Thefts 
Supple 
Futuristic 
Robot taxi 
Complete 
City information model 
Supple 
Enhanced game room 
Complete 
 
2) Historical queries: as for social networking, it 
belongs to the Open Services model for the same reasons. 
3) Losses & Thefts: this application is interactive; it 
requires no RT or only SRT guarantees but is mission-
critical, so the best classification is the Supple Services 
model. 
E. Futuristic  
1) Robot taxi: enhanced form of assisted driving, it is 
obvious that this application belongs to the Complete 
Services model for the same reasons. 
2) City information model: this set of applications is 
interactive or not, it is mission-critical and requires SRT 
guarantees, therefore it can be categorized into the Supple 
Services model. 
3) Enhanced game room: this application belongs to the 
Complete Services model as it requires continuous flow of 
data, HRT guarantees and is mission-critical. 
Table III summarizes the above analysis. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
As a main component of the IoT, WSNs contribute to 
the management of QoS by optimizing the resource 
utilization.  In this perspective, we first presented a review 
of current QoS-aware MAC protocols in WSNs, and then 
we summarized the service models and the performance 
analysis of the IEEE 802.15.4 from [4].  Afterwards, we 
presented one of the best ways to integrate WSNs in the IoT 
providing QoS, using a dense IEEE 802.15.4 access point 
network, where multiple sensor nodes can join the Internet 
through the network’s gateway.  We proposed best practices 
to adopt when using this protocol in order to provide service 
models in WSNs.  Finally, we demonstrated the feasibility 
of extension of those service models to the IoT and we 
categorized different IoT applications according to them. 
REFERENCES 
[1] O. Vermesan et al., “Internet of Things Strategic Research 
Roadmap”, European Research Cluster on the Internet of 
Things, Cluster Strategic Research Agenda 2011. 
[2] A. Dunkels Adam and J.P. Vasseur, “IP for Smart Objects”, 
Internet Protocol for Smart Objects (IPSO) Alliance, 
Sepember 2008. 
[3] I. F. Akyildiz, W. Su, Y. Sankarasubramaniam, and E. 
Cayirci. 2002. Wireless sensor networks: a survey. Computer 
Networks, vol. 38, no. 4, March 2002, pp. 393-422, 
doi=10.1016/S1389-1286(01)00302-4 
[4] M.-A. Nef,  S. Karagiorgou, G. Stamoulis, and P. Kikiras, 
"Supporting Service Differentiation in Wireless Sensor 
Networks," Proc. 15th Panhellenic Conf. on Informatics, Sept. 
2011,  pp. 127-133, doi: 10.1109/PCI.2011.49. 
[5] W. Heinzelman, J. Kulik, and H. Balakrishnan, “Adaptive 
Protocols for Information Dissemination in Wireless Sensor 
Networks, ” Proc. 5th ACM/IEEE Mobicom Conf., August 
1999, pp. 174-185, doi: 10.1145/313451.313529. 
[6] N. Bulusu, D. Estrin, L.Girod, and J. Heidemann, “Scalable 
Coordination for Wireless Sensor Networks: Self-Configuring 
Localization Systems, ” Proc. 6th International Symposium 
on Communication Theory and Application (ISCTA 2001), 
July 2001. 
[7] D. Estrin, “Comm’n Sense: Research Challenges in 
Embedded Networking Sensing, ” Presented at the UCLA 
Computer Science Department Research Review, April 2001. 
[8] M. A. Yigitel, O. Durmaz Incel, and C. Ersoy, “QoS-aware 
MAC protocols for wireless sensor networks: A survey,” 
Comput. Netw., 2011, doi: 10.1016/j.comnet.2011.02.007. 
[9] Y.J. Li, C.S. Chen, Y.-Q. Song, and Z. Wang, “Real-time 
QoS support in wireless sensor networks: a survey, ” Proc.  
7th IFAC Int Conf on Fieldbuses & Networks in Industrial & 
Embedded Systems (FeT'07),  Nov. 2007. 
[10] M. Caccamo, L.Y. Zhang, L. Sha, and G. Buttazzo, “An 
implicit prioritized access protocol for wireless sensor 
networks, ” Proc. 23rd IEEE RTSS, 2002, pp. 39-48. 
[11] T. Watteyne, I. Augé-Blum, and S. Ubéda, “Dual-mode real-
time MAC protocol for wireless sensor networks: a 
validation/simulation approach, ” Proc. InterSense, 2006. 
[12] S. C. Ergen and P. Varaiya, “PEDAMACS: Power Efficient 
and Delay Aware Medium Access Protocol for Sensor 
Networks, ” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, vol.5 
no.7, pp.920-930, July 2006. 
[13] IEEE Std 802.15.4, “Part 15.4: Wireless medium access 
(MAC) and physical layer (PHY) specifications for low-rate 
wireless personal area networks (WPANs), ” IEEE-SA, 2006. 
[14] N. Saxena, A. Roy, and J. Shin, “Dynamic duty cycle and 
adaptive contention window based QoS-MAC protocol for 
wireless multimedia sensor networks,” Comput. Netw., 2008, 
doi: 10.1016/j.comnet.2008.05.009. 
[15] H. Kim and S.-G. Min, “Priority-based QoS MAC protocol 
for wireless sensor networks, ” Porc 2009 International 
Symposium on Parallel & Distributed Processing, IEEE 
Computer 
Society, 
2009, 
pp. 
1-8, 
doi: 
10.1109/IPDPS.2009.5161184. 
[16] I. Slama, B. Shrestha, B. Jouaber, and D. Zeghlache, “A 
hybrid MAC with prioritization for wireless sensor networks, 
” 33rd IEEE Conference on Local Computer Networks, 2008, 
pp. 274-281, doi: 10.1109/LCN.2008.4664180. 
[17] I. Rhee, A. Warrier, M. Aia, and J. Min, “Z-MAC: a hybrid 
MAC for wireless sensor Networks, ” Proc. ACM Sensys, 
2005, pp. 90-101. 
[18] M.A. Yigitel, O. Durmaz Incel, and C. Ersoy, “Diff-MAC: a 
QoS-aware MAC protocol with differentiated services and 
hybrid 
prioritization 
for 
wireless 
multimedia 
sensor 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-192-2
CTRQ 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

networks,” Proc. 6th ACM workshop on QoS and security for 
wireless and mobile networks, 2010, pp. 62-69, doi: 
10.1145/1868630.1868642. 
[19] B. Yahya and J. Ben-Othman, “Energy efficient and QoS 
aware medium access control for wireless sensor networks,” 
Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience, 
2010, pp. 1252-1266, doi: 10.1002/cpe.1579. 
[20] P. Suriyachai, U. Roedig, and A. Scott “Implementation of a 
MAC protocol for QoS support in wireless sensor networks, ” 
Proc. 2009 IEEE International Conference on Pervasive 
Computing and Communications, 2009, pp. 1-6, doi: 
10.1109/PERCOM.2009.4912839. 
[21] K. Fall, K. Varadhan, The ns Manual, The VINT Project, A 
Collaboration between researchers at UC Berkeley, LBL, 
USC/ISI, and Xerox PARC, 22 May 2008. 
[22] J. Zheng and M. J. Lee, “A comprehensive performance study 
of IEEE 802.15.4, ”  Sensor Network Operations, IEEE Press, 
Wiley Interscience, Chapter 4, 2006, pp. 218-237. 
[23] R. Roman and J. Lopez, “Integrating Wireless Sensor 
Networks and the Internet: a Security Analysis,” Internet 
Research: Electronic Networking Applications and Policy, 
vol. 19, no. 2, 2009. 
[24] D. Christin, A. Reinhardt, P. S. Mogre, and R. Steinmetz, 
“Wireless Sensor Networks and the Internet of Things: 
Selected Challenges,” Proc. 8th GI/ITG KuVS Fachgespräch 
Drahtlose Sensornetze, 2009. 
[25] L. Atzori, A. Iera, G. Morabito, “The Internet of Things: A 
survey, 
” 
Comput. 
Netw., 
2010, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.comnet.2010.05.01. 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-192-2
CTRQ 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

