Quality of Service Modelling  
for Federated Wireless Sensor Network Testbeds Gateways 
 
Syarifah Ezdiani Syed Nor Azlan and Adnan Al-Anbuky 
Sensor Network  and Smart Environment Research Centre 
Auckland University of Technology (AUT), Auckland, New Zealand 
{ssyednor, adnan.anbuky}@aut.ac.nz 
 
 
Abstract— The federation of WSN testbeds has brought 
forward the requirement for a QoS implementation, in order to 
ensure efficient and reliable end-to-end communication between 
testbeds' users and testbeds' facilities. Nowadays, the Internet 
has become the de facto standard for establishing remote 
connectivity between these testbeds. However, as the mechanism 
of QoS support in WSNs may be very different from that in the 
Internet, it is necessary to address the differences between the 
QoS employed in the Internet and the QoS required in WSN 
testbeds for the purpose of QoS provisioning. Hence, our work 
focuses on generating a QoS model for testbed gateways by 
merging the QoS perspectives from both networks. Moreover, 
this research will also focus on validating the modelled QoS 
through 
QoE measurements, 
as the network-level QoS 
parameters can be translated into user-level QoE perception. 
 
Keywords-QoS modelling; WSN testbed; federation; gateway 
I. INTRODUCTION 
In the recent years, there has been an increasing trend to 
develop wireless sensor network (WSN) testbeds which aims 
at providing the environment for researchers to conduct 
experiments [1-3]. Moreover, these testbeds which enable 
researchers to evaluate and validate their WSN-related work 
are integrated to the Internet to allow remote access to its 
users. Although these testbeds provide tremendous benefit to 
researchers, they are usually limited in size due to hardware 
costs. Thus, there exists a growing trend to interconnect small 
testbeds to provide federated testbeds with large-scale testing 
facilities [4]. However, while a good deal of research and 
development has been carried out in testbed architectural 
design, there is a glaring lack of studies on network 
performance in the environment of federating WSN testbeds.   
One of the major challenges in federation of testbeds is to 
provide 
reliable 
and 
efficient 
connection 
between 
interconnected testbeds.  Therefore, network performance 
indicator such as Quality of Service (QoS) must be taken into 
account in federating these testbeds, in order to ensure reliable 
and efficient real-time experimentation for testbed users. 
Traditional QoS, such as employed in the Internet, mainly 
results from the rising popularity of end-to-end bandwidth–
hungry multimedia applications, and are defined using certain 
parameters such as packet loss, delay, jitter and bandwidth. 
On the contrary, the metrics concerned such as available 
bandwidth and delays may not be pertinent in most WSN 
environment as some WSN applications could be latency-
tolerant or transmitting very small packets. Moreover, in some 
WSNs, it is typical that the amount and quality of information 
is more important in WSNs [5].  
The touching point between a testbed and the Internet is the 
gateway. Thus, it could become the main element in 
contributing to the performance of the federation. In order to 
allow for greater capabilities of fixed and simple gateways, 
there has been an increasing trend to turn the gateways into 
ones with greater capabilities. Research concerning smart 
gateways [6] or modular gateway may benefit the QoS 
significantly.   
Furthermore, open federated testbeds usually allow access 
to multiple users to testbed resources for real-time experiment 
and observation. Consequently, testbeds operator’s main 
interest would also include the way users perceived the 
testbeds usability, reliability, quality and time-worthiness. 
Hence, a further step beyond provisioning QoS is observing 
its users’ Quality of Experience (QoE). 
Therefore, in this research, we are inspired by two major 
goals; (1) to provide a solution for QoS mechanism to run on 
top of testbed gateways that satisfies stringent QoS 
requirements of an environment of federated testbeds, and (2) 
to devise a scheme for validating and verifying the network 
performance under the modelled QoS. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section 2 will give an overview of the research problem 
domains. Next, the design of our study is presented in Section 
3. Finally, Section 4 concludes the paper.  
II. PROBLEM STATEMENT – QOS FOR TESTBEDS FEDERATION  
Due to the significant differences between WSN and the 
Internet, the QoS requirements generated by both networks 
may be very different. Indeed, existing  research has 
concluded that the end-to-end QoS parameters employed in 
traditional data networks such as the Internet are not sufficient 
to describe the QoS in WSN [7, 8]. 
In this section, we distinguish the QoS requirements in 
WSN from the QoS requirements in the Internet, followed by 
an overview of integration QoS on the gateway device. This is 
followed with an overview of QoE for testbed users.  
 
A. QoS Support in WSN 
The two perspectives of QoS in WSNs were described in [7] 
to focus on the way the underlying network can provide the 
QoS to different application: 
 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-192-2
CTRQ 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

Application-specific QoS 
In terms of application-specific QoS, the QoS parameters 
are chosen based on the way an application imposes specific 
requirements on sensor deployments, on the number of active 
sensors, or on the measurement precision of sensors. These 
attributes are all related to the quality of applications. The 
following QoS parameters may be considered to achieve the 
quality of applications: coverage, exposure, measurement 
errors, and number of active sensors. 
Network QoS 
From the perspective of network QoS, the QoS parameters 
are chosen based on how data is delivered to the sink and 
corresponding requirements. The main objective is to ensure 
that the communication network can deliver the QoS-
constraint sensor data while efficiently utilizing network 
resources. The QoS parameters from this perspective include 
latency, delay, and packet loss, which are similar to traditional 
end-to-end Qos metrics. However, since WSNs is envisioned 
to be employed in diverse applications, a number of works in 
the literature suggested that every different application 
imposes different QoS requirements.  
 
B. QoS Support in the Internet 
RFC 2368 [9] definition on QoS-based routing in the 
Internet characterizes QoS as a set of service requirements to 
be met when transporting a packet stream from the source to 
its destination. QoS support in the Internet can generally be 
obtained by means of over-provisioning of resources and/or 
traffic engineering. While traffic bursts in the network could 
cause congestion, the default approach of over-provisioning 
which treats users at the same service class may not always 
provide an acceptable solution. As a QoS-enabled network 
should be able to handle different traffic streams in different 
ways, this necessitates traffic engineering approach which 
classifies users into classes with different priority.  
IntServ model and DiffServ model are the typical QoS 
models employed in the Internet, which employs reservation-
based and reservation-less approach, respectively. While 
network resources are assigned according to an application’s 
QoS request and subject to bandwidth management policy in 
IntServe, QoS in DiffServe is achieved via some strategies 
such as admission control, traffic classes, policy managers, 
and queuing mechanism. 
 
C. Integration QoS 
Several studies have demonstrated network performance 
testing and QoS measurements of WSN-Internet integration. 
The performance is typically measured using several 
predominant 
QoS 
metrics, 
focussing 
on 
the 
QoS 
implementation on the gateway side of WSN integrated to the 
Internet. 
The QoS is commonly provided by an integration controller 
which runs software modules and able to reconfigure the QoS 
parameters on the network edge router. In this typical 
application-level gateway approach, the performance is 
evaluated in terms of inter-arrival time (the time between 
adjacent packets), packet delay, latency or round-trip rate 
(RTT, the time taken by a packet to travel from the source to 
destination) and cumulative distribution function of the RTT.  
Moreover, in a non-trivial network, a packet will be 
forwarded over many links via many gateways. Gateways will 
not commence forwarding the packet until it has been 
completely received. In such a network, the minimal latency is 
the accumulation of the minimum latency of each link, the 
transmission delay of each link and the forwarding latency of 
each gateway. In practice, this minimal latency is further 
augmented by processing and queuing delays. Whereas 
processing delay occurred while a gateway determines what to 
do with a newly received packet, queuing delay occurs when a 
gateway receives multiple packets from different sources 
heading towards the same destination.  
 
D. QoE for Testbed Users 
Ideally, in order to provide unifying testbed facilities for 
experimentations, federated testbeds allow access to multiple 
users over the Internet at any given time. The main objective 
and other major attributes of a testbed pose certain critical 
questions: a) how could the network ensure good users’ 
experience? b) how does the network manage its resources to 
do so? c) how does the network maintain reliable connection 
for users’ real-time experimentation?  d) how does the 
network cope with the demand from the testbed users for a 
large number of nodes for their experiments? This calls for 
QoS mechanism that takes into consideration the QoE; tying 
together user perception, experience and expectation to the 
application combined with the network performance [10]. 
 
III. DESIGN OF THE STUDY 
In this section, we discuss the tasks involved in designing 
the QoS model. Primarily, the QoS modelling will be carried 
out using a network modelling simulation tool, namely 
OPNET Modeler. In order to provide a means of validation, 
we propose that the network performance measurement under 
the modelled QoS shall be conducted over physical federated 
WSN testbeds linked to an Internet testbed.  
 
A. QoS and QoE Requirement Analysis 
The QoS and QoE mechanisms discussed in the previous 
section are mainly employed in separation. To the best of our 
knowledge, there is no precedent work that has considered 
merging the aforementioned QoS and QoE perspectives into 
one. Hence, we target to develop a solution for QoS 
provisioning in an environment of federated WSN testbeds by 
consolidating Internet QoS, WSN QoS and testbed user's QoE. 
Therefore, we first conducted a QoS and QoE requirement 
analysis by taking into account various characteristics from 
the networking and users’ perspectives. In this task, we map 
our findings on the requirement analysis from both network 
and users perspectives [11], in order to identify the dominant 
QoS and QoE metrics that are crucial for the federation.  
Hence, the requirement analysis includes the following 
network characteristics: 
1) End-to-end: In general, WSN testbeds offer resource 
reservation to their users. This implies that one end of the 
application is a testbed user, and the other end is a single 
node within the testbed. A QoS implementation is needed 
to ensure end-to-end network performance throughout an 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-192-2
CTRQ 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

experimentation session and any connection issues should 
not jeopardize the validity of the experiments in any way. 
In addition, the network’s requirement on end-to-end 
performance also implies strict QoS requirements in both 
WSN and the Internet.  
2) Criticality: Experiments on testbeds should be achieved 
with high information reliability. Thus, this also suggests 
that packet losses cannot be tolerated in any extent. 
3) Bandwidth 
Requirements: 
Although 
bandwidth 
availability is not the main concern in most WSN 
applications, it is of great importance in the Internet. 
Furthermore, bandwidth may be an important factor for a 
group of sensors with the bursty nature of sensor traffic. 
Thus bandwidth plays a vital role in provisioning QoS in 
the testbed environment. 
4) Interactivity: Testbed environments typically are based on 
query-driven approach, i.e., queries are made to 
reconfigure sensor nodes and manage resources. These 
commands require high reliability from the network, thus 
implying QoS requirements in terms of timely and reliable 
response from the testbed side. 
5) Delay Tolerance: The network tolerance of delay may be 
based on the models of experiments offered by the testbed. 
However, in an environment of federated testbed, the end-
to-end delay might be a critical factor due to the best-effort 
nature of the Internet.  
6) Network Dimensions: When building testbeds federations 
for scale, the interconnection of testbeds can be of closely 
located testbeds, or it could expand to be of large 
intercontinental federations.  The Internet’s capability to 
deliver packets from one end to another plays a huge 
factor in the overall network performance.  In addition, the 
total number of nodes may affect network performance as 
the volume of traffic is more likely to increase as the 
number of nodes grows. 
 
B. Federation Network Model 
Figure 1 shows the reference architecture for the federation 
WSN testbeds, whereby gateway devices reside in the 2nd-tier 
of sensor network testbeds level.   
 
Figure 1: Reference architecture of federated WSN testbeds 
 
Testbed server, which represents a single testbed, forwards 
application for users from the Internet to the gateway for node 
access. On the other hand, the gateway that serves as the 
interface between a testbed server and the sensor nodes, 
mainly responsible for packaging high-level user queries to 
network specific directives and returning filtered portions of 
the data to users. Therefore, being in a unique position as 
having the full knowledge of and control over both WSN 
testbed and the Internet, the gateway plays a vital role for the 
QoS provisioning purpose. 
The main challenge concerning the interconnection between 
Internet and a WSN testbed is the requirements to provide 
access to each sensor nodes through the TCP/IP based 
network. Hence, we focus on distinguishing the QoS factors 
from various network levels, and identify those pertinent to 
the gateways that act as the main interface between an the 
Internet and a testbed.  The QoS factors involves in an event 
of sending or receiving messages [12] over the network 
include the different levels as depicted in Figure 1, which may 
include:  
1. The application on the sending/receiving sensor nodes 
to/from 
the 
gateway 
device 
(gateway 
lookup, 
encoding/decoding, interrupt handling, propagation) 
2. Processing delay inside the gateway device (interrupt 
handling, propagation LAN/WLAN, packet translation)  
3. Processing delay inside the testbed server (packet 
translation, address lookup) 
 
C. Our Proposed Federation QoS Solution 
We propose to employ a system capable of differentiating 
traffic classes.  Different priority traffic placed in different 
queues could contribute greatly to the success of the QoS 
solution. Hence, to be able to place the traffic into a specific 
queue, we need to classify the traffic. Hence, classification is 
one of the basic functions performed on a packet when it 
arrives at a QoS enabled gateway, which is then followed by 
remarking of packet. We propose that the traffic classification 
is implemented on various basic testbed functionalities and 
experimentation tools typically offered by WSN testbeds, 
which may include user registration, resource/node reservation, 
topology selection, job scheduling/management/cancellation, 
files uploading, data retrieval, and nodes programming. 
Classification and remarking are the basic building blocks 
for the QoS. Therefore, we will test the network performance 
by looking into test cases with combination of these two 
aspects, for example by implementing priority for retrieval of 
data and remarking for node reservation.  
 
D. Network Modelling and Simulation on OPNET 
In our preliminary testing, we have generated a network 
model and simulated the federation model using OPNET 
Modeler [13]. We have conducted simulations of testbed 
networks under different loads to three different scenarios: 
Isolated Testbed -This configuration represents a single 
testbed in isolation. Local users gain direct connection to the 
sensors through the gateway, which obtains access to the 
wireless network through an access point.  
Testbed Integrated to the Internet - This configuration 
represents a single testbed connected to the Internet.  
Federation of Two Testbeds - This configuration represents 
two testbeds interconnected to the Internet.  
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-192-2
CTRQ 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

The main objective of the simulation is to compare the 
network’s 
performance 
for 
isolated 
and 
integrated 
environment. Although this simulation did not involve any 
direct QoS implementation, we believe our finding from the 
simulation activities give an important insight pertinent to 
QoS 
provisioning, 
hence 
facilitates 
for 
further 
experimentation for our federation QoS modelling. We 
evaluated the network performance based the following QoS 
parameters: packet received against packet sent (reflects 
packet loss) and end-to-end delay. 
 
Received Traffic: Figure 2 depicts the amount of traffic 
received (in packets/sec) against the amount of traffic sent (in 
packets/sec), for all three testbed scenarios. In both cases of an 
isolated testbed and a testbed integrated to the Internet, as 
expected, the amount of traffic received proportionally 
increased as more traffic is sent to the network. However, 
there was a point in the graph where the amount of traffic 
received flattened, despite having a continual increase of the 
traffic sent. Most importantly, at a particular point, the amount 
of traffic received in a WSN-Internet integrated testbed tend 
not to increase as rapidly as those in an isolated WSN testbed. 
A way to interpret this is to presume that the network has 
reached its full capacity in terms of link bandwidths, traffic 
queues or devices’ processing power; therefore, it could not 
deliver any more traffic to its destination. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Traffic Received as a function of Traffic Sent 
On the other hand, we have observed a major difference in 
the resulting graph of the federated testbed scenario. The 
number of packet received within the federated testbed started 
to decrease at a certain amount of packet sent. This could be 
explained by the fact that single gateway or QoS-enabled 
gateway node may create a bottleneck over the network. 
Furthermore, since network capacity and number of hops are a 
major concern in the Internet, there is a higher probability of 
having packet losses as more and more packets transit on the 
Internet. 
End-to-End Delay: Next, we run a simulation on the end-to-
end delay for both scenarios, against traffic sent. Once again, 
the result obtained showed a significant difference between 
federated testbed scenario and the other two testbed topologies. 
It was observed that the federated testbed scenario by far 
demonstrate a very high end-to-end delay. In addition, as per 
our expectation, the testbed integrated to the Internet tend to 
record slightly higher delays, as compared to isolated WSN 
testbed. The ensuing graph is depicted in Figure 3. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3:  End-to-End Delay as a function of  Traffic Sent 
 
Our results have shown that due to its size, and particularly 
its unpredictable nature, the Internet does introduce a level of 
service degradation (i.e., higher packet losses and delays)  
when it is subjected to high traffic load. This could pose a 
problem for mission-critical WSN applications where there is 
a need for predictable performance. Similarly, this must be 
taken into account especially when the notion of federating 
WSN testbeds featuring several thousands of nodes and 
multiple users is of interest. Hence, the introduction of an end-
to-end QoS, which ensures that packets are being delivered in 
a reliable and timely manner in both the  WSN testbed and the 
Internet, could be a solution to this matter. 
 
E. Testbed Experimentation – Linking together WISEBED 
and PlanetLab 
One of the primary goals of this research is to assess the 
QoS model in a real wide area network. Hence, there is a need 
to analyze the performance of the QoS in a real world scenario 
by conducting necessary network traces and measurements. 
Therefore, once we have implemented the QoS on the 
gateway, we want to evaluate the model in a bigger, real-
world environment. We need a tool to read incoming packets 
from the live-traffic Internet to test how well our QoS model 
handle users’ traffic. An Internet testbed such as PlanetLab is 
an ideal testbed for this purpose due to its dispersion.  
Therefore, in order to complete our modeling architecture, 
we aim to generate a federation across an open federated 
WSN testbed, namely WISEBED [14], and PlanetLab [15], 
hence providing the platform for real-time traffic simulations. 
WISEBED offers extension to its originally nine-federated 
testbeds, as WISEBED-compatible testbed can be established 
by researchers by employing Wisebed Runtime [11, 16]. 
End-to-End Delay (sec) 
 
Traffic Sent (packets/sec) 
Traffic Received (packets/sec) 
 
Traffic Sent (packets/sec) 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-192-2
CTRQ 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

Therefore, we propose to utilise Wisebed Runtime to be able 
to interconnect our network to WISEBED facilities.  
As shown in Figure 4, we will devise the framework for the 
interconnection that will serve as the main platform to test our 
QoS modelling. The technical challenge is to construct the 
tunnelling mechanism [17] using tunnelling protocol such as 
Generic Routing Encapsulation (GRE) [18], to allow 
communication between our testbed gateway to the PlanetLab 
node.  
 
Figure 4: Network Architecture: the tunnelling communicating testbed 
gateway and PlanetLab node 
 
F. QoS Model Performance Evaluation and QoE Verification  
The QoS measurements will be based on the dominant QoS 
metrics which will be defined from the QoS and QoE 
requirement analysis. The measurement will be conducted on 
the tunneling platform between the PlanetLab nodes and WSN 
testbeds over various traffic scenarios. 
Whereas in our QoS model, we propose to employ a system 
capable of differentiating traffic classes, we will select a 
specific WSN application, such as indoor/outdoor and mobile 
applications, for the purpose of validation and verification 
using objective QoE [10, 19]. In this objective QoE 
mechanism, we will endeavour to find a QoE solution 
applicable to federated testbed environment.  Specifically, we 
expect that the investigation on the impact of QoS on QoE 
will present a unified formula to express dependency of 
federation QoS and testbed user’s QoE, hence allowing for 
adjustment to our QoS model.   
 
IV. CONCLUSIONS 
This paper provided an overview of a work in progress of 
QoS modelling for federated WSN testbeds. We have 
presented the significant differences between WSN QoS and 
Internet QoS, and will conduct a thorough QoS and QoE 
requirement analysis to formulate a QoS model for the 
federation. We advocate that gateways should run QoS 
mechanism that merges the network-level QoS perspectives 
from both WSN and the Internet, as well as the user-level QoE. 
In order to study the proposed model performance, we utilize 
OPNET Modeler as the modelling and simulation software. 
Furthermore, to complete our modelling architecture, we plan 
to federate PlanetLab and the open federated WSN testbed, 
i.e., WISEBED, to serve as the case to our study.   
REFERENCES 
[1] G. Werner-Allen, P. Swieskowski, and M. Welsh, “Motelab: A 
Wireless Sensor Network Testbed”, in the Proc. of the Fourth 
International Symposium on Information Processing in Sensor 
Networks, IPSN 2005, 25-27 April 2005, California, USA, pp. 483-488. 
[2] R. N. Murty, et al., “CitySense: An Urban-Scale Wireless Sensor 
Network and Testbed”, in 2008 IEEE Conference on Technologies for 
Homeland Security, May 2008, pp. 583-588, 2008.  
[3] M. Gunes, B. Blywis, and J. Schiller, “A Hybrid Testbed for Long-
Term Wireless Sensor Network Studies”, International Workshop on 
Sensor Network Engineering (IWSNE ’08), Santorini, Greece, 11 June 
2008. 
[4] I. Chatzigiannakis, S. Fischer, C. Koninis, G. Mylonas, and D. Pfisterer, 
"WISEBED: An Open Large-Scale Wireless Sensor Network Testbed," 
in SENSAPPEAL, 2009, LNICST 29, N. Komninos, Ed., ed: Institute 
for Computer Science, Social-Informatics and Telecommunications 
Engineering, 2010, pp. 68 -87. 
[5] J.-F. Martinez, A.-B. Garcia, I. Corredor, L. Lopez, V. Hernandez, and 
A. Dasilva, "Modelling QoS for Wireless Sensor Networks," in IFIP 
International Federation for Information Processing. vol. 248, Wireless 
Sensor and Actor Networks ed Boston: Springer, 2007, pp. 143-154.  
[6] D. Bimchas et al., “Middleware for Smart Gateways Connecting 
Sensornets to the Internet,”5th International Workshop on Middleware 
Tools, Services and Run-Time Support for Sensor Networks 
(MidSens'10), Bangalore, India, pp. 8-14, 2010. 
[7] D. Chen and P. K. Varshney, "QoS Support in Wireless Sensor 
Networks: A Survey " in International Conference on Wireless 
Networks 2004 (ICWN '04), Las Vegas, Nevada, USA, 2004. 
[8] B. Bhuyan, H. K. D. Sarma, N. Sarma, A. Kar, and R.Mall,  “Quality 
of Service (QoS) Provisions in Wireless Sensor Networks and Related 
Challenges”, Scientific Research, Computer and Communications 
Journals, Vol. 2 No. II, Nov. 2010, pp. 861 – 868, 2010. 
[9] E. Crawley, et al., “A Framework for QoS-based Routing in the 
Internet,” RFC 2386, http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2386.txt, August 1998, 
<retrieved: February, 2012>. 
[10] M. Fiedler, T. Hossfeld, and P. Tran-Gia, “A Generic Quantitative 
Relationship between Quality of Experience and Quality of Service”, 
IEEE Network, vol. 24, no. 2, Mar./Ap. 2010, pp. 36-41 
[11] H. Hellbruck, M. Pagel, A. Kroller, D. Bimchas, D. Pfisterer, and S. 
Fischer, "Using and Operating Wireless Sensor Network Testbeds with 
WISEBED," in The 10th IFIP Annual Mediterranean Ad Hoc 
Networking Workshop (Med-Hoc-Net 2011), Favignana Island, Sicily, 
Italy, 2011, pp. 171 -178. 
[12] T. Baumgartner, et al., “Virtualising Testbeds to Support Large-Scale 
Reconfigurable Experiment Facilities,” EWSN 2010, LNCS 5970, pp. 
210-223, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heildelberg 2010.  
[13] OPNET Official Website, http://www.opnet.com, <retrieved: February, 
2012>. 
[14] WISEBED Project Website, http://www.wisebed.eu/, <retrieved: 
February, 2012>. 
[15] PlanetLab, An Open Platform for Developing, Deploying, and 
Assessing 
Planetary-Scale 
Services, 
http://www.planet-lab.org/, 
<retrieved: February, 2012>. 
[16] The WISEBED Consortium, “Testbed Runtime wiki and bug tracker,” 
2010, 
https://www.itm.uni-luebeck.de/projects/testbed-runtime/, 
<retrieved: February, 2012>. 
[17] J. Lischka and H. Karl, "RiaS - Overlay Topology Creation on a 
PlanetLab Infrastructure," in 2nd ACM SIGCOMM Workshop on 
Virtualised Infrastructure Systems and Architectures VISA 2010, New 
Delhi, India, 2010, pp. 9 - 15. 
[18] D. Farinacci, T.Li, S. Hanks, D. Meyer, and P. Traina, “Generic 
Routing Encapsulation (GRE),” RFC 2784, March 2000. 
[19] P. Brooks and B. Hestnes, "User Measures of Quality of Experience: 
Why Being Objectives and Quantitative is Important " IEEE Network, 
vol. 24, pp. 8 -13, March/April 2010.  
 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-192-2
CTRQ 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

