Sensitivity Analysis of Availability of Redundancy in Computer Networks
Rubens de S. Matos J´unior∗, Almir P. Guimar˜aes∗†,
Kadna M. A. Camboim∗, Paulo R. M. Maciel∗
∗Center of Informatics
Federal University of Pernambuco
Recife, Brazil
Email: {rsmj,apg2,kmac,prmm}@cin.ufpe.br
†Campus Arapiraca
Federal University of Alagoas
Arapiraca, Brazil
Email: almir@arapiraca.ufal.br
Kishor S. Trivedi‡
‡Dept. of Electrical & Computer Eng.
Duke University
Durham, USA
Email: kst@ee.duke.edu
Abstract—In this paper, we investigate the availability modeling
of computer networks with redundancy mechanisms. Sensitivity
analysis is applied in order to ﬁnd the bottlenecks of system
availability. We use Markov chains for the analytical evaluation
of complex scenarios. We apply our proposed modeling approach
in a case study to evaluate how sensitive dependability is to failure
and recovery times of different components in an enterprise
network. The inﬂuence of network topologies is also considered
in our case study.
Keywords—Availability; Markov Chains; Sensitivity analysis;
Computer networks
I. INTRODUCTION
Over the last few years, the use of data networks has
signiﬁcantly increased. This considerable growth is some-
what related to the convergence of many different services
on the same transmission technology. These services should
be continuously provided even when events like congestion,
link failures, routing instabilities, sabotage, natural disasters,
hardware or software failures happen. The design, deployment
and management of communication network infrastructure
ought to meet such requirements. The possibility of identifying
points where the unavailability or downtime of these networks
may put the business at risk is an interesting track to be
followed by organizations.
Recently, much has been done to deal with issues relating
to the availability of computer networks. Researchers have
used different approaches to deal with these problems, in-
cluding sensitivity analysis techniques and the development
of advanced redundancy mechanisms.
Zou et al. [1] discusses algorithmic methods to compute
network availability for a given topology and presents two
tools for computation of network availability in large and
complex networks. Semaan [2] discusses different issues re-
lated to network availability. First, the paper presents some of
the elements that impact the availability of a solution. Then,
it discusses how network designers can calculate the exact
availability of their solution and provides means to determine
the optimal level of availability. Trivedi et al. [3] presents
a new classiﬁcation of dependability and security models
for systems and networks. It also presents several individual
model types such as availability, conﬁdentiality, integrity, per-
formance, reliability, survivability, safety and maintainability
models. Furthermore, it is shown that individual model types
can be combined to form composite dependability model
types. The dependability/security models can be represented
as combinatorial models, state-space models, and hierarchical
models.
In this paper, we focus on the availability of data networks,
including redundancy mechanisms. Several scenarios are eval-
uated through analytic-numeric solution of Markov chains [4].
The model parameters used were obtained from manufacturers
of network elements, as also from experimental measurements.
We evaluate the impact of different component parameters
on the overall system availability, by means of differential
sensitivity analysis.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II
presents basics of availability of computer networks and sen-
sitivity analysis. Section III describes the proposed availability
models. Section IV presents the evaluation of availability and
its sensitivity for all the proposed models. Finally, Section V
discusses the results of this study and introduces ideas for
future research.
II. FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS
A. Dependability Requirements for Voice and Data Networks
Standard IP applications trafﬁc is characterized by bursti-
ness. However, such applications are not highly sensitive to
delay and jitter. On the other hand, voice applications run
continuously and steady, they could thus be strongly affected
by long delays and jitter [5]. Providing high quality voice
service on IP networks is one of the most pressing issues
faced by the VoIP community [6].
Critical services, such as VoIP, have strict QoS requirements
for both performance tolerance and service dependability.
Dependability of a computer system must be understood as
the ability to avoid service failures that are more frequent and
more severe than is acceptable [7]. Dependability attributes
115
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

include the concepts of availability, reliability, safety, integrity
and maintainability [7].
Inputs to availability models include component Mean
Times to Failure (MTTF) and Mean Times To Repair (MTTR).
The hardware component MTTFs are generally supplied by the
manufacturer. The MTTRs are tightly related to the mainte-
nance policy adopted by the organization.
B. Parametric Sensitivity Analysis
Sensitivity analysis is a method of determining the most
inﬂuential factors on model results [8], [9]. The effect of
changes in data distribution function and the impact of changes
in parameter values are examples of study subjects for sen-
sitivity analysis. When dealing with analytic models such as
Markov chains, parametric sensitivity analysis is a particularly
important technique for assessing the effect of changes in the
rate constants on the measures of interest. This approach may
be used to ﬁnd performance or availability bottlenecks in the
system, thus guiding an improvement and optimization [10].
There are many ways of conducting sensitivity analyses.
The simplest method is to repeatedly vary one parameter
at a time, while keeping the others ﬁxed. When applying
this method, the sensitivity ranking is obtained by noting the
corresponding changes in the model output. Other techniques
include factorial experimental design [11], correlation analysis,
regression analysis and perturbation analysis (PA). Differential
analysis, also referred to as parametric sensitivity analysis
or the direct method, is the backbone of nearly all other
sensitivity analysis techniques [9]. This method is chosen in
this paper, as it can be performed in an efﬁcient computational
manner on analytic models commonly used in performance
and availability analyses.
Parametric sensitivity analysis is performed by computing
the partial derivatives of the measure of interest with respect
to each input parameter. For instance, the sensitivity of a given
measure Y , which depends on a parameter λ, is computed as
in Equation (1), or (2) for a scaled sensitivity.
Sλ(Y ) = ∂Y
∂λ
(1)
S∗
λ(Y ) = ∂Y
∂λ
 λ
Y

(2)
A number of researchers have already demonstrated how
to perform parametric sensitivity analysis in a variety of
analytic models. In [10], the basics of transient sensitivity
analysis in continuous time Markov chains (CTMC) are pre-
sented. Sensitivity functions for Markov chains were recently
implemented in the SHARPE package [12], making use of
the techniques described in the papers we have just cited.
Since the reduced reachability graph of a Stochastic Petri Net
(SPN) is a Markov chain, this kind of model may also be
analyzed, by following the steps indicated in [13]. Their work
includes the implementation of sensitivity analysis features
in the SPNP package [14]. Queueing systems are another
example of analytic models whose sensitivity analysis has been
described in [15].
III. PROPOSED AVAILABILITY MODELS
Traditional
evaluation
techniques
for
availability
use
Markov chains and Markov reward models. In this section,
we present three CTMC (Continuous Time Markov Chain)
availability models (Figures 4, 5 and 6). The ﬁrst one rep-
resents a system without any redundancy. The second one
represents a system with aspects of fault-tolerance based on
link redundancy (see Figure 2). Then, the last one represents
a system with aspects of fault-tolerance based on warm-
standby redundancy (see Figure 3). This approach is char-
acterized by fault detection and recovery mechanisms. The
dependability models can be evaluated using tools such as
SHARPE (Symbolic Hierarchical Automated Reliability and
Performance Evaluator) [12].
A. Platform Description
The following three scenarios were used as a basis for the
availability analytic models presented in this paper. They also
served as experimental testbeds, from which some failure and
recovery parameters were obtained, as well as to validate the
analytic results obtained from the respective Markov chains.
1) First and Second Scenarios: In the ﬁrst scenario, the
testbed is composed of two machines, a switch and two routers
that are connected by a single link (see Figure 1). In the second
scenario, the testbed is composed of two machines, a switch
and two routers that are connected by redundant links (L0 and
L1 - see Figure 2). When the main link (L0) fails, the spare
link (L1) assumes the role of the main one. After main link
restoration, the system returns to the initial condition.
Figure 1.
Test Bed - Scenario 1.
Figure 2.
Test Bed - Scenario 2.
2) Third Scenario: In this scenario, the testbed is composed
of two machines, a switch and three routers (see Figure
3). The system uses fault-tolerance based on warm-standby
redundancy. When one of the primary components (R0 or L0)
fails, the spare components (R1 and L1) assume the role of
the primary components. This switchover process takes time
for the spare components to start operation, named Mean
Time to Activate (MTTA). After restoration of the primary
components, the system returns to the initial condition.
B. CTMC Availability Model without redundancy
In Figure 4, the Markov chain represents the ﬁrst scenario,
which is the simplest one, with no redundancy. There is only
116
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

Figure 4.
Markov chain for the availability of non-redundant network
Figure 3.
Test Bed - Scenario 3.
TABLE I
STATES OF CTMC MODEL WITH LINK REDUNDANCY
State
Description
UUU
The System is UP
DUU
Down state, Router R0 failed
UDU
Down state, Router R1 failed
UUD
Down state, Link L0 failed
one link, named L0, connecting router R0 and router R1. In
this model, the normal operation of a component is denoted
by the label U (up), and a failed component is represented by
label D (down). A state in the Markov chain is deﬁned by
a sequence of labels, representing router R0, router R1 and
link L0, respectively. We assume the failure and repair time
of each component are exponentially distributed. λR0, λR1
and λL0 are the respective failure rates of R0, R1 and L0.
In a similar notation, µL0, µR0 and µR1 are the respective
repair rates of each system component. Once any component
(R0, R1, or L0) has failed, the overall system is in a down
state and subsequently no additional failures occur until the
component is repaired, so that the expansion of state space
stops at the ﬁrst down state. In Table I, a description of each
state is given. For this model, the system is up and running
only in the state UUU. All the other states are shaded gray in
Figure 4, representing the system down states.
C. CTMC Availability Model with link redundancy
In Figure 5, we consider a system that has redundancy
only at the link level, as illustrated in Figure 2. The normal
operation of a component is denoted by the label U (up),
and a failed component is represented by label D (down).
A state in the Markov chain is also deﬁned by a sequence
of labels, representing router R0, router R1, link L0, and
TABLE II
STATES OF CTMC MODEL WITH LINK REDUNDANCY
State
Description
UUUU
The System is UP
DUUU
Down state, Router R0 failed
UDUU
Down state, Router R1 failed
UUDU
The System is UP, Link L0 failed
UDDU
Down state, R1 and L0 failed
DUDU
Down state, R0 and L0 failed
UUDD
Down state, L0 and L1 failed
UUUD
The System is UP, L1 failed
DUUD
Down state, R0 and L1 failed
UDUD
Down state, R1 and L1 failed
link L1, respectively. The ideal condition for this system is
denoted by state UUUU, in which all components are in non-
failed condition. Failure transitions have rates λX, and repair
transitions have rates µX, where X ∈ {R0, R1, L0, L1},
representing each system component. In states shaded gray,
the system has failed, due to a failure in one of the routers,
or a failure in both links. We assume that in those states no
additional failures occur in the remaining components, since
they are in an idle condition. Another assumption for this
model is that there is a repair policy, that prioritizes the repair
of link L0 over link L1 when both are failed. We do not
consider any priority in the repair of routers because it is
not possible in this model to have both routers down, since
a failure in any of them brings the overall system to a down
state. In Table II, a description for each state is given.
D. CTMC Availability Model with router redundancy
We present in Figure 6 a Markov chain that represents the
system illustrated in Figure 3. The failure and repair rates
of each component are represented by λX and µX, where
X ∈ {R0, R1, R2, L0, L1}. Rates αR and αL are the inverse
of mean time to activate the spare router and the spare link,
respectively.
For simplicity, we have made some simpliﬁcations that do
not signiﬁcantly affect the results we obtain from the analysis.
One of the assumptions for this model is that there is a priority
in the repair of components. Router R2 has the higher priority,
followed by router R0, link L0, router R1, and link L1, in
descending order. We also consider that no failure is possible
117
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

Figure 5.
Markov chain for the availability of link-redundant network
when a component is in waiting condition.
The nomenclature used for the states in this model is based
on the current condition of each system component, in the
following order: router R0, link L0, router R2, router R1, link
L1. A letter U indicates the up condition, when component is
active. Letter D denotes a down condition for that component,
meaning that it has failed, and that a repair is needed. Letter
W represents a waiting condition, in which the component
is not being used, but is ready to enter in active mode, as
soon as it is needed. Therefore, state UUUWW denotes router
R0, link L0, and router R2 are active, router R1 and link
L1 are on waiting condition. For an active state, the system
must present one of the following combinations: UUUWW,
DWUUU, WDUUU, UUUDW or UUUWD (see Figure 6).
Particularly, in the DWUUU state, router R2 with spare router
and link (R1 and L1) are active, while R0 is in down state and
L0 is waiting, since it only works together with R0. A similar
situation happens in WDUUU state, where R2, R1 and L1 are
active, but L0 is down, leaving R0 in a waiting condition.
Figure 6 shows the initial state of the system, UUUWW.
With rate λR0 a failure happens and brings the system to down
state (DUUWW). Similarly, with rate λL0 a failure happens
and brings the system to down state (UDUWW). Likewise,
with rate λR2 a failure happens and brings the system to down
state (UUDWW). In this case, the repair with rate µR2 brings
the system back to state (UUUWW).
After detecting a failure, a switchover occur making the
spare components (R1 and L1) active. In the states DUUWW
and UDUWW, the system activates the spare components with
rates αR and αL corresponding to router R0 and link L0
failures, respectively. After switch-over, the standby compo-
nents are able to take over the failed components, bringing
the system to and active state (DWUUU or WDUUU). The
repair with rates µR0 and µL0 bring the system back to
initial state. Before a repair happens, another failure with
rate λR1, λL1 or λR2 may bring the system to a down
state (DWUDU, DWUUD, DWDUU, WDDUU, WDUDU,
WDUUD). From states DWDUU and WDDUU, with rate
µR2, the system comes back to active states (DWUUU and
WDUUU). Similarly, from states DWUDU and DWUUD, with
rate µR0, the system comes back to active states (UUUDW
and UUUWD). Likewise, from states WDUDU and WDUUD,
with rate µL0, the system return to active states (UUUDW and
UUUWD). From the active states, the repair with rate µR1 or
µL1 brings the system to initial state. Finally, from UUUDW
and UUUWD, the system can return to down state with rate
λR0, λL0 or λR2. The repair with rate µR0, µL0 or µR2 brings
the system back to active states (UUUDW and UUUWD).
In Table III, we see the system availability condition for
each state of this Markov chain. Note that only on 5 states
the system is operational: UUUWW, DWUUU, WDUUU,
UUUDW, UUUWD.
IV. CASE STUDY
We concentrate our attention on parametric sensitivity anal-
ysis, as a technique to compute the effect of changes in
the rate constants of a Markov model on the measures of
interest. Parametric sensitivity analysis helps: (1) to guide
system optimization, (2) to ﬁnd availability, performance, and
performability bottlenecks in the system, and (3) to identify
the model parameters that may produce signiﬁcant modeling
errors. In this paper, (1) and (2) are the main purposes,
although the identiﬁcation of errors in the early versions of
the proposed models was also possible through such analysis.
We consider the testbed shown in Section III-A to perform
a parametric sensitivity analysis using the proposed depend-
ability CTMC models. The MTTFs of components used in this
work are respectively: 131,000 hours for routers and 11,988
118
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

UUUWW
DUUWW
UDUWW
UUDWW
State= R0L0R2R1L1
R0={U,W,D}
R1={U,W,D}
L0={U,W,D}
L1={U,W,D}
R0
R2
R0
WDDUU
DWUUU
R0
R1
WDUDU
WDUUD
UUUDW
System is up
System is down
DWUDU
DWUUD
DWDUU
UUUWD
WDUUU
DUUWD
UDUWD
UUDWD
DUUDW
UDUDW
UUDDW
L0
L0
R2
R
L0
R2
L0
R0
L0
R2
R2
L0
R0
R0
R0
L0
R2
R2
R2
R1
L1
L1
R2
R2
R1
L1
L0
R0
L
Figure 6.
Markov chain for the availability of router-redundant network
TABLE III
STATES OF CTMC MODEL WITH ROUTER REDUNDANCY
State
Description
UUUWW
The System is UP
DUUWW
Down state, Switchover Started
UDUWW
Down state, Switchover Started
UUDWW
The System is Down
DWUUU
The System is UP
WDUUU
The System is UP
DWUDU
The System is Down
DWUUD
The System is Down
DWDUU
The System is Down
WDDUU
The System is Down
WDUDU
The System is Down
WDUUD
The System is Down
UUUDW
The System is UP
UUUWD
The System is UP
DUUDW
The System is Down
UDUDW
The System is Down
UUDDW
The System is Down
DUUWD
The System is Down
UDUWD
The System is Down
UUDWD
The System is Down
hours for links. We use a mean time to repair (MTTR) equal to
12 hours, for all components. Those values shall be considered
as the base case throughout this section, unless another value
is speciﬁed in each speciﬁc analysis. Notice that all λi in
the models of previous section are equal to 1/MTTFi, and
all µi are equal to 1/MTTRi. Sensitivity analysis of steady-
state availability is carried out by computing S∗
MT T Fi(A) as
the scaled sensitivity of availability with respect to MTTFi,
and S∗
MT T Ri(A) as the corresponding measure with respect
to MTTRi.
In the base case, using the values we have just men-
tioned, the steady-state availability for the ﬁrst scenario is
0.998817194. The second scenario, in which link redundancy
is added, presents an availability of 0.999815827. In the third
scenario, which has redundant router, the availability increases
to 0.999906968.
Initially, we consider the sensitivity analysis regarding the
third scenario, in Section III-A2. The values for S∗
k(A),
where A is the system steady-state availability and k is
each of the components’ MTTF and MTTR, were computed
using sensitivity analysis features developed for the SHARPE
package. In Table IV, we see that parameters MTTFR2 and
MTTRR2 assume the greatest importance in system steady-
state availability, since they have the highest sensitivity values.
Any change in these parameters will have a major impact on
system availability, but in opposite directions. Sensitivity with
respect to MTTFR2 is positive, since the availability increases
when this parameter increases. In contrast, S∗
MT T RR2(A) is
negative, because a smaller repair time of R2 implies an
increased availability. In Table IV, we can also notice that time
to repair spare components (MTTRR1 and MTTRL1) are
the ones with smallest impact on the system availability. This
result matches the results from the established repair policy,
since failed spare components are repaired only after main
components have returned to normal operation.
Figure 7 depicts a plot for the system availability, in which
the MTTF parameters for the system links (L0 and L1) were
changed one at a time, and the analytic model of Figure 6 was
solved. This plot conﬁrms that efforts in expanding the time
to failure of link L0 have more impact on system availability
than increases in MTTFL1 do. Figure 8 also validates the
119
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

TABLE IV
SENSITIVITY OF AVAILABILITY FOR SCENARIO WITH ROUTER
REDUNDANCY
Parameter k
S∗
k(A)
MTTFR2
9.15946628e-05
MTTRR2
-9.15946627e-05
MTTRL0
-2.18237573e-06
MTTFL0
1.31711540e-06
MTTFL1
1.09121018e-06
MTTRR0
-1.99712368e-07
MTTFR0
1.20531140e-07
MTTFR1
9.98582261e-08
MTTRL1
-1.19080014e-09
MTTRR1
-1.08971849e-10
Figure 7.
Effect of each link MTTF on system availability (scenario 3)
results from sensitivity ranking. If we make MTTFR2 bigger
the beneﬁts will be much higher than that resulting from
enhancements on either R0 or R1 MTTFs.
MTTR is an important factor for system availability since
it will affect the downtime of network elements. For a re-
dundant topology (third scenario), Figure 9 shows the system
availability as a function of each component MTTR. Router
R2 is the component whose time to repair causes the biggest
effect on the steady-state availability, followed by link L0. This
information can also be obtained comparing the corresponding
values for each MTTR in Table IV.
Then, we will analyze the impact of R0 and L0 MTTFs on
the system availability in each proposed scenarios. The idea
is to observe the real impact of these parameters with respect
Figure 8.
Effect of each router MTTF on system availability (scenario 3)
Figure 9.
Effect of each component MTTR on system availability (scenario
3)
to system availability in different redundancy schemes (i.e.
different scenarios).
Comparing Tables V and VI - also obtained through
SHARPE’s sensitivity analysis features - we see that the
redundancy mechanism makes the system availability less
sensitive to failures of primary link (L0), while the sensitivity
with respect to MTTFR0 is almost the same. The results
from differential sensitivity analysis can also be conﬁrmed
by comparing, in a scatter plot, the effect of changes in
MTTFL0 and MTTFR0 for each one of our three scenarios.
In Figures 10 and 11, we see that in second and third scenarios
availability is less affected by increases in MTTFL0 and
in MTTFR0. As in the previous plots, those values were
obtained by repeatedly varying the value of each parameter at
a time, and solving the Markov chain for that conﬁguration.
It is important to state that this comparison using scatter
plots becomes more difﬁcult as the number of parameters in
the model increases. The ranking obtained from differential
sensitivity analysis allows a direct view of the importance
order of all parameters.
The reduction of main router impact on availability is
conﬁrmed in Table IV, that shows a higher sensitivity with
respect to the failure of spare link (MTTFL1) than with
respect to main router failure (MTTFR0). So, actions to
increase the MTTF of link L1 should be considered more
important than additional efforts to enhance the MTTF of
router R0. This kind of decision could not be easily made
without an accurate sensitivity analysis, as we have performed
in this case study.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed Markov chain models to evaluate
several dependability aspects of computer networks in different
scenarios. The models support the analysis of system avail-
ability along with its services, based on different topologies,
redundancy mechanisms and network elements. Sensitivity
analysis was applied in order to guide system optimization
in terms of steady-state availability.
For future work, we plan to extend these models to include
network availability with redundant topologies, different re-
120
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

TABLE V
SENSITIVITY OF AVAILABILITY FOR SCENARIO WITH LINK REDUNDANCY
Parameter k
S∗
k(A)
MTTFR0
9.15861826e-05
MTTFR1
9.15861826e-05
MTTRR0
-9.15861826e-05
MTTRR1
-9.15861826e-05
MTTFL0
1.00081664e-06
MTTRL0
-1.99963265e-06
MTTFL1
9.99815827e-07
MTTRL1
-9.99815827e-10
TABLE VI
SENSITIVITY OF AVAILABILITY FOR SCENARIO WITH NO REDUNDANCY
Parameter k
S∗
k(A)
MTTFL0
9.99817011e-04
MTTRL0
-9.99817011e-04
MTTFR0
9.14947048e-05
MTTRR0
-9.14947048e-05
MTTFR1
9.14947048e-05
MTTRR1
-9.14947048e-05
Figure 10.
Availability Vs. MTTFL0
Figure 11.
Availability Vs. MTTFR0
covery strategies as well as taking into account different failure
modes.
REFERENCES
[1]
W. Zou, M. Janic, R. Kooij, and F. Kuipers, On the availability of
networks, in Proc. of BroadBand Europe 2007, Antwerp, Dec. 2007.
[2]
G. Semaan, Designing networks with the optimal availability, in National
Fiber Optic Engineers Conference, Optical Society of America, pp. 1–6,
2008.
[3]
K. Trivedi, D. Kim, A. Roy, and D. Medhi, Dependability and security
models, Proc. DRCN, pp. 11–20, 2009.
[4]
Kolmogorov, A. ¨Uber die analytischen Methoden in der Wahrschein-
lichkeitsrechnung (in German). Mathematische Annalen. Springer-
Verlag, 1931.
[5]
C. Hoene, B. Rathke, and A. Wolisz, On the importance of a VoIP
packet, In Proc. Of ISCA Tutorial and Research Workshop on the
Auditory Quality of Systems, 2003.
[6]
H. Sze, S. Liew, J. Lee and D. Yip, A multiplexing scheme for h.323
voice-over-ip applications, IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 20, no.
7, pp. 1360–1368, 2002.
[7]
A. Avizienis, J. Laprie, B. Randell, and C. Landwehr, Basic concepts
and taxonomy of dependable and secure computing, IEEE Transactions
on Dependable and Secure Computing, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 11–33, 2004.
[8]
P. Frank, Introduction to System Sensitivity Theory.
Academic Press
Inc, Sept. 1978.
[9]
D. Hamby, A review of techniques for parameter sensitivity analysis of
environmental models, Environmental Monitoring and Assessment, pp.
135–154, 1994.
[10] J. Blake, A. Reibman, and K. Trivedi, Sensitivity analysis of reliability
and performability measures for multiprocessor systems, in SIGMET-
RICS ’88: Proceedings of the 1988 ACM SIGMETRICS conference on
Measurement and modeling of computer systems.New York, NY, USA:
ACM, 1988, pp. 177–186.
[11] R. Jain, The Art of Computer Systems Performance Analysis: Techniques
for Experimental Design, Measurement, Simulation and Modeling, John
Wiley, 1991.
[12] K. Trivedi and R. Sahner, Sharpe at the age of twenty two, SIGMET-
RICS Perform. Eval. Rev., vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 52–57, 2009.
[13] J. Muppala and K. Trivedi, GSPN models: sensitivity analysis and
applications, in ACM-SE 28: Proceedings of the 28th annual Southeast
regional conference.New York, NY, USA: ACM, 1990, pp. 25–33.
[14] C. Hirel, B. Tu, and K. Trivedi, SPNP: Stochastic Petri Nets. version 6.0,
Mar. 2010. [Online]. Available: http://www.ee.duke.edu/∼chirel/PAPER/
paperSpnp.pdf
[15] B. Yin, G. Dai, Y. Li, and H. Xi, Sensitivity analysis and estimates of
the performance for M/G/1 queueing systems, Performance Evaluation,
vol. 64, no. 4, pp. 347–356, 2007.
121
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

