Reliability and Quality of Service of an Optimized Protocol for Routing in VANETs
Samira Harrabi
ENSI University/COSMOS laboratory
Mannouba, Tunisia
Email: samira.harrabi@gmail.com
Ines Ben Jaffar
ESCT University
Mannouba,Tunisia
Email: ines.benjaafar@gmail.com
Khaled Ghedira
ISG University
Tunis, Tunisia
Email: khaled.ghedira@anpr.tn
Abstract—Vehicular Ad hoc NETworks (VANETs) are a special
kind of Mobile Ad hoc NETworks (MANETs), which can provide
scalable solutions for applications such as trafﬁc safety, internet
access, etc. To properly achieve this goal, these applications
need an efﬁcient routing protocol. Yet, contrary to the routing
protocols designed for the MANETs, the routing protocols for
the VANETs must take into account the highly dynamic topology
caused by the fast mobility of the vehicles. Hence, improving
the MANET routing protocol or designing a new one speciﬁc
for the VANETs are the usual approaches to efﬁciently perform
the routing protocol in a vehicular environment. In this context,
we previously enhanced the Destination-Sequenced Distance-
Vector Routing protocol(DSDV) based on the Particle Swarm
Optimization (PSO) and the Multi-Agent System (MAS). This
motivation for the PSO and MAS comes from the behaviors seen
in very complicated problems, in particular routing. The main
goal of this paper is to carry out a performance evaluation of the
enhanced version in comparison to a well-known routing protocol
which is the Intelligent Based Clustering Algorithm in VANET
(IBCAV). The simulation results show that integrating both the
MAS and the PSO is able to guarantee a certain level of quality
of service in terms of loss packet, throughput and overhead.
Keywords–VANET; MAS; PSO; Routing; Quality of service;
Routing protocol.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In recent years, the progresses in wireless mobile networks
have permitted the emergence of a new type of networks,
named Vehicular Ad hoc NETworks (VANETs). The VANETs
arose from a special form of Mobile Ad hoc NETworks
(MANETs) [1]. This particular kind of networks is developed
as a main component of Intelligent Transportation Systems
(ITS) in order to enhance driving, passengers safety and
comfort [2].
The VANETs are formed by vehicles equipped with On
Board Units (OBU), and a ﬁxed infrastructure called Road Side
Units (RSU). Both units have wireless communication abilities.
In fact, the OBUs can communicate with each other as well
as with the RSUs in an ad hoc way. Principally, as depicted
in Figure 1, there are two types of communications modes in
vehicular networks which are: Vehicle-to-Vehicle (V2V) and
Vehicle-to-Infrastructure (V2I).
Although the VANETs have a lot of similarities with the
MANETs as their low bandwidth, their short radio trans-
mission range, and their omni-directional broadcast in most
scenarios, they differ from ad hoc networks in numerous ways.
Indeed, the vehicular networks are characterized by the rapid
changes in communications links.
In addition, frequent disconnections between nodes can
Figure 1. Communications mode in vehicular networks.
occur due to low density [3]. Therefore, designing an efﬁcient
protocol for routing in vehicular networks seems to be a key
challenge created by the above properties [4][5]. Moreover,
applying the MANETs routing protocols in vehicular envi-
ronments is inefﬁcient [6], since these approaches do not
take the above-mentioned characteristics into account. Thus,
modifying these methods or proposing new protocols speciﬁc
for the VANETs are the usual solutions to efﬁciently resolve
the routing challenge in the VANETs.
Aiming to solve the
routing problem in vehicular networks, we formerly enhanced
in [7][ 8] the DSDV protocol based on the PSO and the MAS.
The improved version is called PSO-C-MADSDV.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. The
Section II underlines and describes the challenge in routing for
the VANETs. Besides, it proves the limitation of applying the
MANETs protocols for vehicular scenarios. The Section III
presents some related works that deal with routing in vehic-
ular networks. Also, it sums our proposed PSO-C-MADSDV
routing method. Finally, in Section IV, we present the simu-
lations results obtained regarding packets losses, throughput
and overhead. There is a comparison between the PSO-C-
MADSDV and the IBCAV protocols. At last, the section V
gives conclusions and future works that may arise.
II.
ISSUES OF ROUTING IN VANETS
Routing is deﬁned as the task of forwarding a data packet
from a source node to its destination. Sometimes, this process
requires multi-hop forwarding nodes. To this end, ﬁnding the
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-550-0
CTRQ 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

routes to deliver the packets to their destination is the role and
the responsibility of routing protocols. In general, an efﬁcient
routing protocol is one that is able to forward packets with a
short rate of dropped packets and provide a minimal amount
of the overhead.
Unlike the routing protocols designed for the MANETs, the
routing protocols for the VANETs must principally take into
consideration the highly dynamic topology [9]. Consequently,
applying traditional MANET routing protocols in vehicular
networks is inefﬁcient. Hence, modifying or improving the
MANET protocols is the usual requirement to resolve ex-
peditiously the routing challenge in the VANETs. In fact,
to better understand this challenge brought by the VANETs,
it is necessary ﬁrst to analyse the speciﬁc features of these
networks.
The VANETs are a very dynamic environment since they
are formed with vehicles that join and leave the network all
the time. Even though they have many similarities with the
MANETs, like their short radio transmission range and their
low bandwidth, they possess some particular characteristics
making them different from the ad hoc networks in several
aspects.
Actually, the VANETs are characterized ﬁrstly by their
quick changes in network topology. Secondly, the link between
vehicles may be interrupted frequently mainly because of the
low density of vehicles. Finally, out of the networking aspects,
the different applications that are expected to run over the
VANET make it a unique environment. Also, they pose inter-
esting questions related to the protocol design. Consequently,
in the literature there are different ways to address the routing
challenges in the VANETs.
III.
RELATED WORK
Recently, numerous studies reported in the literature have
dealt with routing in the VANETs. As discussed above, the
speciﬁc characteristics make routing a big challenge that
requires to be solved in the vehicular environments. Indeed,
the MANETs protocols have proved that their performance is
poor in the VANETs [10][11].
The key problem with these routing methods ( (Ad hoc
On-demand Distance Vector (AODV)[12], Dynamic Source
Routing(DSR)[13], etc.) in VANETs scenarios is the route
instability. In fact, due to the high mobility of vehicles, the
paths that have been established as ﬁxed succession nodes,
can be interrupted frequently. As a result, this interruption
increases overhead, minimizes the rate of delivery ratios, and
growths as well the delays of transmission data.
As illustrated in Figure 2, when the vehicle V1 moves out
of the transmission range of the source node, the path (Vs, V1,
Vd) created at time t will be broken at the instant t+Dt. To
solve this problem, an alternative solution is given by the ge-
ographical routing protocols (e.g., Greedy Perimeter Stateless
Routing (GPSR)[14]). This category does not establish routes,
but it utilizes the geographical position of the destination node
and its neighbor to deliver data.
Differently from the node-centric routing, the geographical
routing approaches have the advantage that any mobile node
ensuring progress to the given destination can be applied to
forward data.
Thus, in Figure 3, to deliver data to the destination node
Vd, the node V2 can be used instead of the node V1. Even
with a better route stability, the geographical routing methods
Figure 2. Mobility problem in VANETs.
do not perform well in scale scenarios [10][ 15]. In this case,
their main problem is that many times are needed to look for a
next hop (i.e., a node closer to the destination than the current
node).
Accordingly, since in the VANETs the vehicle movements
are more constrained on roads rather than a geographical
region [10], the wrong road routes that do not lead to the des-
tination can be selected. In addition, packets can be transferred
to dead ends providing unnecessary and extra trafﬁc overhead
in the network as well as longer delays for packets.
Instead of routing data on the dotted route, geographical
forwarding delivers data to V1 and V2, following the shortest
geographical route from Vs to Vd on a dead path, as shown
in Figure 3.
Figure 3. Drawback of geographical forwarding approach.
To address this limitation, numerous road-based routing
protocols [10][ 11][ 15][16] have been proposed. These meth-
ods forward packets based on the shortest road path between
the source node and destination. However, [10][ 16] did not
take into account the vehicular trafﬁc ﬂow.
As demonstrated in Figure 3, it is possible that the
paths segments on the shortest roads are empty or have
network fragmentations. To alleviate this issue, other routing
approaches were given in [15][17][18][19]. The purpose of
these projects was to use some historical data concerning
average daily/hourly vehicular trafﬁc ﬂows.
Unfortunately, this data was not an accurate indicator of
the actual road trafﬁc conditions, as events such as road
constructions or trafﬁc redirection were not rare. In order to
solve the routing challenge in the VANETs, other studies were
published [20][ 21][ 22][ 23]. The idea of those related works
was to improve the MANETs protocols to make them suitable
in a vehicular environment. In this context, we focused in
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-550-0
CTRQ 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

[7][8] on enhancing the DSDV protocol.
In fact, during the process of designing and deploying
a VANET, various questions must be answered that pertain
to protocol performance and usefulness. For instance, when
designing a routing protocol, a key question is: How can we
integrate the VANETs features (road topology, real-time road
trafﬁc ﬂow, presence of building, etc.) for better performance?
What is the best way to integrate them? All these questions
and many more require knowledge of the topological charac-
teristics of the VANET, which are addressed in [7].
The responses have been given based on a multi-agent
system approach. A MAS is composed of a collection of
autonomous software agents which are capable of completing
desired goals cooperatively. The basic attributes of an agent
that are considered typical are autonomy, learning and coop-
eration [24]. These properties imply that agents are capable
of executing independently from any other control and pos-
sibly asynchronously, discover relevant knowledge from the
environment and other agents that may help in attaining the
desired goals, and work cooperatively and competitively with
other agents. In addition, when performing message routing, a
key question is: Which are the highest-quality vehicles? The
forwarding process would lead to an optimal communication
cost with a minimal number of rebroadcasts so as to reduce
latency and packet loss.
Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) [25] is a stochastic
optimization technique, inspired by the idea of a ﬂock of birds
moving towards a ﬁnal goal through cooperation as well as
independent exploration. The underlying phenomenon of PSO
is that knowledge is optimized by social interaction in the
population. The PSO searches for the optimal solutions by
updating the velocity and the position of each particle.
Motivated by the performance of the PSO algorithm, in
[8], our published research work mainly concentrated on
optimizing the routing quality of service. Therefore, we have
made an attempt to enhance the routing performance in terms
of throughput, packet loss and overhead based on the clustering
approach [26]. This technique helps the protocol to minimize
the messages count and to increase the network connectivity.
It also makes the communication more secure and more stable.
Nevertheless, the previous paper did not compare the PSO-
C- MADSDV to any routing protocol speciﬁcally designed for
the VANETs to see which manner (modifying the traditional
methods or proposing new protocols) is the most efﬁcient to
deal with the routing issue.
IV.
STUDY AND PERFORMANCE COMPARISON
In this section, we investigate the routing protocols for
the VANETs. To evaluate the performance of our proposed
approach and to demonstrate the usefulness of the agent
technology, as well as the PSO algorithm, we chose to compare
our method with the Clustering Algorithm in the VANET
(IBCAV) [27].
The IBCAV seeks to enhance the routing performance in
the VANETs by employing inter-layered methods, as well as
the awareness of the network trafﬁc ﬂow. It combines several
factors using a smart method on the basis of an artiﬁcial neural
network. The clustering technique was also applied. In fact, the
cluster size, speed and density of vehicles are the metrics taken
to form a cluster. For a header selection, the IBCAV combines
the factors utilizing the Genetic Algorithm (GA)[28].
The selected protocols were evaluated through simulation
using some performance metrics. Hence, in this part, we ﬁrst
present the used metrics. Second, we analyze the obtained
results.
A. Analyzed Metrics
In a highly mobile environment as the VANETs, character-
ized by frequent topology changes, the major routing problem
is the breaking of links, which can cause packet loss. The
metrics used to assess the performance are the following:
• Rate of dropped packet: It presents the number of the
data packets having failed to reach the destination.
• Throughput: It sums the data packets produced by each
source node, counted by kbit/s.
• Routing overhead: This metric is utilized to measure
the effectiveness of the routing protocol. Indeed, it is
determined as the total number of additional routing
packets per the number of unique data packets received
at destinations. Moreover, this parameter counts the extra
trafﬁc produced by the protocol for successfully transmit-
ted packets.
B. Simulation Results
This section makes an attempt to evaluate the performance
of the PCO-C-MADSDV and the IBCAV over low, medium
and high density with a node mobility speed of 30m/s. The
evaluation is done using the DARS simulator ( Dynamic Ad-
Hoc Routing Simulator)[29]and the JADE framework [30].
The simulation parameters are listed in Table 1.
TABLE I. simulation parameters.
Parameter
value
Transmission rate
54Mbps.
Simulation time
50s.
Playground Dimensions
1300m x 700m.
Routing protocols
PSO-C-MADSDV and IBCAV.
Transmission range
150m.
Number of nodes
30.
Mobility Model
Random Waypoint Model[31]
MAC layer
8012.11p
We ﬁrst present the obtained results in terms of dropped
packet rate. After that, we analyze the performance of both
routing methods in terms of throughput. Finally, we demon-
strate the impact of nodes density on previous protocols
according to the routing overhead.
•
Rate of dropped packet: The graph in Figure 4
demonstrates the obtained results regarding the average of
packet loss ratio. As it can be seen, the number of dropped
packets in both approaches with low density (10 to 20) is
nearly the same and slightly goes up with the increase in
vehicles density. However, in medium and high density
the IBCAV protocol drops much more packets compared
to the PSO-C-MADSDV.
For example, at 30 vehicles, the IBCAV suffers a loss of
8.12%, whereas our approach suffers a loss of 5.2%.
In addition, the best behavior of the PSO-C-MADSDV
is more noticeable when the number of vehicles grows
to reach 50 nodes. In this scenario, the IBCAV protocol
drops about 21% of the delivered packets while the PSO-
C- MADSDV is more efﬁcient and loses 17%.
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-550-0
CTRQ 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

Figure 4. Analysis of dropped packet rate.
To sum up, for all scenarios, the PSO-C-MADSDV
outperforms the IBCAV protocol. This is thanks to
the PSO algorithm which converges quickly to the
best and optimal solution. As a consequence, the
probability of producing path breakages decreases. This
increase is also guaranteed by the beneﬁts of the agent
paradigm, more particularly the autonomy that makes it
possible to establish a link despite the topological change.
•
Throughput
:
Figure
5
depicts
the
correspond-
ing throughput obtained for both IBCAV and PSO-C-
MADSDV protocols. From the plotted results, we can ob-
serve that the PSO-C-MADSDV achieves greater through-
put compared to the IBCAV scheme, especially with high-
density scenarios.
Figure 5. Analysis of throughput.
The main reason for this behavior is that the PSO-C-
MADSDV does not require extra time to look for the
paths. Whereas, for the IBCAV, there is some spent
time in which the protocol does not forward packets.
Consequently, the throughput declines.
•
Routing overhead: Considering the obtained results
indicated in Figure 6, we can see that the IBCAV pro-
tocol produces the highest rate of routing trafﬁc into
the network compared to the PSO-C- MADSDV. This
observation is valid for all density levels.
Figure 6. Analysis of overhead.
The reason for this superiority is the cluster technique
used by the PSO-C- MADSDV, which can it more stable
against the link failure compared to the IBCAV. This
makes it more efﬁcient as it avoids sending unnecessary
packets.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Thanks to the advances in wireless technology, it is possible
to form a network using vehicles, called VANET. It is a
particular class of the MANET. Nevertheless, the high dynamic
nature of the vehicular network, caused by the high speed of
vehicles, makes it different from the MANET and various
challenges arise, especially the routing issue. Therefore, to
solve this problem, it is essential to design a new protocol
taking the mobility model into account or to improve the
MANETs routing protocols to suit the VANETs nature.
In this paper, an attempt has been made to provide a
comparative analysis of two routing protocols, which are the
PSO-C-MADSDV and the IBCAV. The ﬁrst one is an enhanced
version of the traditional MANETs protocol, whereas the
IBCAV is a speciﬁc routing scheme designed for the VANET.
The key aim of our comparative study is to identify the way
that has a better performance, taking place in highly mobile
environment of the VANET.
For the simulation results, we can observe that our pro-
posed PSO-C-MADSDV approach outperforms the IBCAV in
terms of throughput, packet drop and routing overhead. Hence,
considering the obtained results, we can conclude that the
designed protocols for routing in the VANETs need to be
improved to adapt well in some real-time scenarios.
As a future plan, we envision to evaluate the PSO-C-
MADSDV in different scenarios (i.e., city, urban, rural, etc.)
to test the impact of varying the communication environment
on its performance.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Youseﬁ, M. Siadat Mousavi, and M. Fathy, Vehicular Ad Hoc
Networks (VANETs): Challenges and Perspectives,
6th International
Conference on ITS Telecommunications Proceedings, 2006, Pp 761-766.
[2]
H. H. Hartenstein and K.P. Laberteaux, A tutorial survey on vehicular
ad hoc networks”, IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 46, no. 6, June
2008, pp. 164-171.
[3]
Y. Kim, Security Issues in Vehicular Networks,”pp.468-472,IEEE 2013.
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-550-0
CTRQ 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

[4]
J. J.Blum , A.Eskandarian, and L. J. Hoffman, ” Challenges of interve-
hicle ad hoc networks, IEEE Trans. Intelligent Transportation Systems,
Vol. 5, No. 4, 2004, pp.347-351.
[5]
S. Harrabi, I. Ben Jaafar, and K. Ghedira, Routing Challenges and
Solutions in Vehicular Ad hoc Networks, Sensors and Transducers (ISSN:
2306-8515, e-ISSN 1726-5479), Vol. 206, Issue 11,November 2016,
pp31-42.
[6]
P. Ranjan and K. K. Ahirwar, Comparative Study of VANET and
MANET Routing Protocols, in Proceedings of the International Confer-
ence on Advanced Computing and Communication Technologies (ACCT
11), January 20-22, 2011, pp. 517-523.
[7]
S. Harrabi, W.Chainbi, and K.Ghdira, A multi-agent proactive routing
protocol for Vehicular Ad-Hoc Networks. Proc.of The 2014 Interna-
tional Symposium on Networks, Computers and Communications (IS-
NCC 2014 ) , Hammamet- Tunisia, 17-19 June 2014. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1109/SNCC.2014.6866523.
[8]
S. Harrabi, I. Ben Jaafar, and K. Ghedira, Novel Optimized Routing
Scheme for VANETs, The 7th International Conference on Emerging
Ubiquitous Systems and Pervasive Networks (EUSPN-2016), September
19-22, 2016, London, United Kingdom.
[9]
Ch. S. Raju, M. Sailaja, Ch. Balaswamy, Adaptability of MANET
Routing Protocols for VANETS, International Journal of Advanced
Research in Computer and CommunicationEngineering, 2, 7, July 2013,
pp. 2823-2829.
[10]
C. Lochert et al. A routing strategy for vehicular ad hoc networks in
city environments, in Proceedings IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium,
Columbus, OH, USA, June 2003, pp. 156-161.
[11]
V. Naumov and T. Gross, Connectivity-aware routing (CAR) in ve-
hicular ad hoc networks, in Proceedings IEEE International Conference
on Computer Communications, Anchorage, AK, USA, May 2007, pp.
1919-1927.
[12]
C. E. Perkins and E. M. Royer, Ad hoc on-demand distance vector
routing, in Proceedings 2nd IEEE Workshop on Mobile Computing
Systems and Applications, New Orleans, LA, USA, February 1999, pp.
90-100.
[13]
D. B. Johnson and D. A. Maltz Dynamic source routing in ad hoc
wireless networks, Mobile Computing, vol. 353, no. 5, pp. 153-161, 1996.
[14]
B. Karp and H. T. Kung, GPSR: greedy perimeter stateless routing
for wireless networks, in Proceedings 6th International Conference on
Mobile Computing and Networking, Boston, MA, USA, August 2000,
pp. 243-254.
[15]
T. Li, S. K. Hazra, and W. Seah, A position-based routing protocol
for metropolitan bus networks, in Proceedings IEEE 61st Vehicular
Technology Conference VTC-Spring, Stockholm, Sweden, June 2005,
pp. 2315-2319.
[16]
J. Tian, L. Han, K. Rothermel, and C. Cseh, Spatially aware packet
routing for mobile ad hoc inter-vehicle radio networks, in Proceedings
IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems, Shanghai, China, October 2003,
pp. 1546-1551
[17]
M. Jerbi, R. Meraihi, S.-M. Senouci, and Y. Ghamri-Doudane, GyTAR:
improved greedy trafﬁc aware routing protocol for vehicular ad hoc
networks in city environments, in Proceedings 3rd ACM International
Workshop on Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks (VANET), Los Angeles, CA,
USA, September 2006, pp. 88-89.
[18]
H. Wu, R. Fujimoto, R. Guensler, and M. Hunter, MDDV: A Mobility-
Centric Data Dissemination Algorithm for Vehicular Networks, in Pro-
ceedings 1st ACM International Workshop on Vehicular Ad Hoc Net-
works (VANET). Philadelphia, PA, USA: ACM, October 2004, pp. 47-
56.
[19]
J. Zhao and G. Cao, Vadd: Vehicle-assisted data delivery in vehicular
ad hoc networks, IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 57,
no. 3, May 2008, pp. 1910-1922.
[20]
T. Kaur and A. K. Verma, Simulation and Analysis of AODV routing
protocol in VANETs, International Journal of Soft Computing and
Engineering (IJSCE) ISSN: 2231-2307, Volume-2, Issue-3, July 2012,
pp. 293-301.
[21]
C. Perkins, E. Belding-Royer, and S. Das, RFC 3561-ad hoc on-demand
distance vector (AODV) routing, Internet RFCs,2003 pp. 138.
[22]
A. Moravejosharieh, H. Modares, R.Salleh, and E. Mostajeran, Perfor-
mance Analysis of AODV, AOMDV, DSR, DSDV Routing Protocols in
Vehicular Ad Hoc Network, International Science Congress Association,
Vol. 2(7), July (2013),pp.66-73.
[23]
H. Saini and R.Mahapatra, Implementation and Performance Analysis
of AODV Routing Protocol in VANETs, International Journal of Emerg-
ing Science and Engineering (IJESE) ISSN: 23196378, Volume-2, Issue-
3, January 2014, pp. 24-29.
[24]
M. Wooldridge and N.R.Jennings, Intelligent agents: Theories, Ar-
chitectures and Languages, January 1995. Lecture Notes in Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, vol. 890, ISBN 3-540-58855-8.
[25]
R. C. Eberhart and J.Kennedy, Particle Swarm Optimization, In Proc.
of IEEE International Conference on Neural Networks, 1995, pp. 1942-
1948.
[26]
T. Priyanka and T. P. Sharma, A Survey On Clustering Techniques Used
In Vehicular Ad Hoc Network, Proceedings of 11th IRF International
Conference, 15th June-2014, Pune, India, ISBN: 978-93-84209-27-8
[27]
M. Mottahedi, S.jabbehdari, and S.Adabi, IBCAV: intelligent based
clustering algorithm in vanets, IJCSI International Journal of Computer
Science Issues, Vol. 10, Issue 1, No 2, (January 2013), pp. 538-543.
[28]
D.Goldberg, Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization and Machine
Learning, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1989, pp. 1-25.
[29]
DARS,
URL
:
http://dynamic-ad-hoc-routing-simulator-
dars.soft112.com/ [accessed: 2017-01-14.
[30]
F. Bellifemine, A. Poggi, and G. Rimassa,Developing multi- 365 agent
systems with a FIPA-compliant agent framework. Software-Practice and
experience. Vol. 31 Issue 2, Pp 103-128, February 2001.
[31]
J. Broch, D. A. Maltz, D. B. Johnson, Y.-C. Hu, and J. Jetcheva, A
performance comparison of multi-hop wireless ad hoc network routing
protocols, in Proceedings of the Fourth Annual ACM/IEEE International
Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking(Mobicom98), ACM,
October 1998.
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-550-0
CTRQ 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

