FTAM: A Fuzzy Trafﬁc Adaptation Model for
Wireless Mesh Networks
Ali El Masri, Lyes Khoukhi, and Dominique Gaiti
ICD/ERA, Troyes University of Technology
12 rue Marie Curie, 10010 Troyes Cedex , France
Email: {ali.el masri, lyes.khoukhi, dominique.gaiti}@utt.fr
Abstract—Wireless mesh networks (WMNs) are considered as
the next step towards providing a high-bandwidth network over
a speciﬁc coverage area. Because of their advantages over other
wireless networks, WMNs are undergoing rapid progress and
inspiring numerous multimedia applications such as video and
audio real-time applications. These applications usually require
time-bounded service and bandwidth guarantee. Therefore, there
is a vital need to provide Quality of Service (QoS) support in
order to assure better quality delivery. However, providing QoS
support for real-time trafﬁc in WMNs presents a number of
signiﬁcant technical challenges. In this paper, we focus on one of
the most critical technical issues in QoS support, by proposing a
novel QoS trafﬁc adaptation model based on fuzzy logic theory,
named FTAM, which is capable of supporting real-time trafﬁc
such as video and voice services. By monitoring the rate of change
in queue length in addition to the current length of the queue,
FTAM is able to provide a good measurement of the future
queue state, and then to achieve the convenient trafﬁc adaptation
according to the network state.
Index Terms—Wireless Mesh Networks; QoS; Trafﬁc Adpta-
tion; Fuzzy Logic;
I. INTRODUCTION
The last few years have witnessed a wealth of research ideas
on Wireless Mesh Networks (WMNs) that are moving rapidly
toward implemented standards. Although WMN research is a
relatively new ﬁeld it is gaining more popularity for various
new applications. For instance, multimedia application that
opens up for converged services and new purposes is quickly
becoming a key focus area for wireless mesh communications
[1]. With the increase in both the bandwidth of wireless chan-
nels and the computing power of mobile devices, it is expected
that video and audio services will be offered over WMN
in the future. However, enabling multimedia communications
over such networks is remaining a challenging task for both
academic and industrial communities. Video and audio real-
time services typically require stringent bandwidth and delay
guarantees. This makes the deployment of Quality of Service
(QoS) mechanisms a vital need for the satisfaction of user’s
requirements. Real-time applications generate trafﬁc at varying
rates and usually require the network to be able to support
such a changing rate. Therefore, providing QoS guarantees is
crucial for supporting disparate services envisioned for future
wireless mesh networks [2].
Despite the efforts made to alleviate this issue, there still
exist a number of barriers to the widespread deployment of
real-time applications. The most prominent one is how to en-
sure the trafﬁc adaptation in the case of heavy congestion case.
It is important to note that the existing solutions developed for
wired networks can not be deployed directly within WMNs.
Difﬁculties with these models lie in the fact that they are
not adapted to different node states and resource variation, as
in mesh environments the available bandwidth for each node
varies with time since the medium is shared [3].
In this paper, we introduce a novel QoS model for trafﬁc
adaptation based on fuzzy logic that is capable of support-
ing real-time trafﬁc such as video and voice services. A
major factor behind using fuzzy logic theory to ensure the
trafﬁc adaptation, is its adequation to the uncertainty, the
heterogeneity and the information incompleteness of WMN
environment characterized by dynamic trafﬁc changes. Our
proposed model, build on both MAC and network layers,
will bring about the beneﬁts of the advances in the areas of
artiﬁcial intelligence and wireless networking. The evaluation
of the model performances will be studied under different
trafﬁc and network conditions. The balance between network
performances and reliability when transmitting multimedia
trafﬁc is an important issue to consider too.
The remaining of the paper is organized as follows. A brief
description of Fuzzy Logic theory is provided in Section II.
Section III gives a state of the art regarding QoS fuzzy models
in WMN. Section IV presents our proposed model. In Section
V, we discuss the performance evaluation of FTAM, while
Section VI concludes the paper.
II. FUZZY LOGIC
In this section, we give a brief overview of the Fuzzy Logic
theory to help the unfamiliar reader to understand the rest
of the paper. Exhaustive description can be founded in the
literature [4] [5].
A. Fuzzy Sets
Fuzzy sets represent a modernization of traditional crisp sets
where the membership of an object x in a set A is evaluated by
1 (true) or 0 (false). True signiﬁes that x is member of A and
false signiﬁes that x is non-member of A. Fuzzy sets allow the
partial membership of x in A. The degree of membership has
a real value in [0, 1], where 0 and 1 correspond respectively
to the full non-membership and the full membership of x in
A. If A is a fuzzy set in a universe U, the membership of x in
A is evaluated by the membership function µA as following:
84
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

µA : U → [0, 1].
(1)
Each u∈U has a degree of membership in A equal to µA(u).
An object x is deﬁned as a linguistic variable such as distance
or speed, and a fuzzy set A is deﬁned as a linguistic term such
as far or high.
B. Fuzzy Logic Controllers
A Fuzzy Logic Controller (FLC) is a tool used to compute
the value of an output based on several inputs having between
them a complex relation which cannot be solved via traditional
mathematical tools such as weighted sum. The structure of a
FLC is shown in Figure 1. To compute the value of the output
of a FLC, the following steps must be applied.
Fig. 1: Fuzzy Logic Controller
First, we compute or measure from the external environment
the value of each input. Second, these values are converted
by the fuzziﬁer into fuzzy variables ready to be used by the
inference engine. This step is called fuzziﬁcation and it is
executed based on the membership functions of each input.
An example of membership functions is shown in 1. Third,
the inference engine applies each rule of the fuzzy rule base to
the input fuzzy variables to compute an output fuzzy variable.
An example of fuzzy rule base is shown in Table I. The rules
of the fuzzy rule base have the following form: IF (input 1 is
X1 and input 2 is X2 and input 3 is X3) THEN (output is Y ).
Fourth, the output fuzzy variables of all the rules are connected
to compute the ﬁnal output fuzzy variable. Finally, the ﬁnal
output fuzzy variable is converted by the defuzziﬁer into a
crisp output ready to be used in the external environment.
III. FUZZY LOGIC IN WIRELESS MULTIHOP NETWORKS
Fuzzy logic has been successfully applied to resolve prob-
lems that are either difﬁcult to tackle mathematically or where
the use of fuzzy theory provides improved performances [6]. In
what follows, we present some relevant QoS models proposed
in the literature.
In [7], we proposed an integrated stateless cross-layer
QoS protocol FuzzyQoS based on fuzzy logic for wireless
mobile ad hoc networks. The choice of using fuzzy logic
is justiﬁed by the fact that fuzzy logic is well adapted to
systems characterized by imprecise states, as in the case of
ad hoc networks. The fuzzy approach aims to improve the
control of trafﬁc regulation rate and congestion control of
multimedia applications. FuzzyQoS uses fuzzy thresholds to
adapt the trafﬁc transmission rate to dynamic conditions. The
performance evaluation has shown that FuzzyQoS can achieve
low and stable end-to-end delay, and high throughput under
different network conditions.
In [8] a fuzzy logic based cooperative MAC protocol
(FLCMAC) is proposed to cooperate amongst network ﬂows
and dynamically adjust access probability of each low pri-
ority ﬂow affecting the high priority ﬂows to satisfy their
QoS requirement. The simulation results have indicated that
compared to the enhanced distributed channel access (EDCA)
scheme of 802. 11e, the FLCMAC gives better performances
in terms of throughput and delay under moderate and heavy
background trafﬁc both in single-hop and multi-hop scenarios.
This work addresses the problem of spatial reference estima-
tion in mobile scenarios.
In [9], the authors proposed a new model to investigate
the use of fuzzy logic theory for assisting the TCP error
detection mechanism in an ad hoc network. An elementary
fuzzy logic engine was presented as an intelligent technique
for discriminating packet loss due to congestion from packet
loss by wireless induced errors. The results have shown that
the fuzzy engine may distinguish congestion from channel
error conditions, and consequently assist the TCP error de-
tection [9]. Reznik et al. in [10] have investigated the issues
for improving the reliability and accuracy of the decisions
in wireless ad hoc networks. They proposed an approach
that offers a way of integrating wireless units measurement
results with association information available or priori derived
at aggregating nodes. This approach is used for describing
both wireless units results and association information with
consideration given to both Neuro-Fuzzy and probabilistic
models and methods. The information sources available in
the system are classiﬁed according to the model (fuzzy or
probabilistic), which seems more feasible to be applied [10].
IV. FUZZY TRAFFIC ADAPTATION MODEL
An efﬁcient network congestion control has to prevent the
packets losses, which are caused by unexpected trafﬁc bursts.
Thus, it has to estimate the dynamic behavior of the trafﬁc
in the nodes buffers and to send sources the congestion
notiﬁcations early enough. Therefore, due to the dynamic
nature of buffer occupancy and congestion at a node, we
expect that applying a fuzzy logic control seems to be a very
interesting issue.
In this section, we propose a fuzzy logic controller FLC-
FTAM (Figure 2), which is designed to offer a better adapt-
ability under varying network conditions by better tuning of
rules without intervention of operators.
The proposed model is conceived as a nonlinear controller in
which the input-output relationship can be expressed by using
a small number of linguistic rules or relational expressions.
The goal of our proposal is to make rate control decisions
based on the instantaneous queue length and the variation rate
of the queue length at each wireless node. By monitoring the
rate of changes in queue length (variation rate) in addition to
the queue length, the model is able to provide a measure of
queue state, and by using explicit rate congestion notiﬁcations
85
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

Fig. 2: FTAM model
we can make source nodes more responsive to sudden changes
in the network trafﬁc volume.
Let’s consider that the current queue length of a node is
around the half of the queue size and the rate changing of the
queue length is during an increasing phase, then the queue will
be ﬁlled in the near future. Hence, a congestion may occur and
future arrival packets may be dropped. To prevent congestion,
the incoming ﬂow rate should be immediately decreased. In
the other case, when the current queue length of a node is close
to zero and the rate changing of the queue length is during
a decreasing phase, then the ﬂow rate should be increased to
fully optimize the utilization of radio resources and to fully
maximize the overall throughput of the wireless network.
To illustrate well this concept, we use the following rule
(all rules used by our model to achieve the trafﬁc adaptation
process are shown in Table I):
”If the rate changing in the buffer is rising fast and the
buffer is ﬁlled, then the ﬂow rate should be very-little”.
In this expression, ”buffer”, ”rate changing” and ”ﬂow
rate” are called linguistic variables which accept values among
the words of a natural or synthetic language such as ”ﬁlled”,
”rising fast” or ”very-little”. Usually, the values related to
the linguistic variables are modeled by means of fuzzy sets.
In most cases, this way of representation offers both a good
description of systems and a natural behaviour of any inherent
non linearity in the control process. The design of FTAM in-
volves the selection of suitable mathematical representation of
fuzziﬁcation and defuzziﬁcation operators, fuzzy implication
functions, and forms of membership functions among a set of
candidates. Particular choice of these functions and operators
may affect the behavior of the trafﬁc adaptation controller.
Figure 2 illustrates the structure of the proposed fuzzy logic
controller FLC-FTAM. FLC-FTAM uses two input parameters
to compute an explicit trafﬁc rate: queue length (QL) and
its growth rate (GR). The value of GR is computed as the
difference between the current queue length and the queue
length from the previous control interval (i. e. queue growth
rate). Based on the values of GR and QL parameters, and
the information stored in the trafﬁc rules base, FTAM can
calculate the required change in the session rate and store
this information in a ﬁeld named Explicit Rate ”ER” in a
newly created congestion notiﬁcation packet (CNP). Within
the present control interval, the congested node sends a CNP
packet that will travel to the upstream nodes along the route.
In order to obtain the ﬂow correction rate, we deﬁne the
fuzzy Rule Base shown in Table I. This table is a proposal for
the FLC-FTMA determined via the analysis in the previous
section but also by observations during simulations. Note that
the rule base is malleable enough so that other researchers can
argue and propose different rules for different reasons.
TABLE I: FTAM Fuzzy Rule Base
IF
THEN
n
Growth Rate
Queue Length
Flow Rate
1
Negative
Very Small
Increase sharply
2
Negative
Small
Increase sharply
3
Negative
Medium
Increase moderately
4
Negative
Big
Do not change
5
Negative
Very Big
Do not change
6
Acceptable
Very Small
Increase sharply
7
Acceptable
Small
Increase moderately
8
Acceptable
Medium
Do not change
9
Acceptable
Big
Decrease moderately
10
Acceptable
Very Big
Decrease sharply
11
Positive
Very Small
Do not change
12
Positive
Small
Do not change
13
Positive
Medium
Decrease moderately
14
Positive
Big
Decrease sharply
15
Positive
Very Big
Decrease sharply
Note that in the implementation phase of FTAM model,
the choice of trafﬁc rules is performed depending on the
manner how the system should behave to ensure the trafﬁc
adaptation process. After classiﬁcation of the appropriate rules,
the membership functions associated to each parameter’s rule
are identiﬁed. For that aim, a variety of membership functions
may be applied to ensure the adaptation process such as
triangular, Gaussian, and trapezoidal functions. In FTAM, we
have chosen triangular and trapezoidal functions because of
their simplicity in computation. After that, the rule base is
ﬁne tuned by observing the progress of simulation in order to
achieve a suitable balance between a tolerable average end-to-
end delay and increase the throughput.
V. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
A. FTAM Analysis
Before simulating our proposal by computer-based sim-
ulation, we should ﬁrst validate the effectiveness of using
the fuzzy logic within the proposed trafﬁc adaptation model.
Since our model is based on IF-THEN rules rather than on
mathematical equations, we need to show how the trafﬁc
adaptation changes as function of fuzzy inputs.
Figure 3 shows the relation function between the output
(ﬂow correction rate) of the model and its two inputs (queue
length and growth rate). We observe that when the queue is
86
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

Fig. 3: Correction Flow Rate as a function of Queue Length
and Growth Rate
full or empty, the ﬂow correction rate is less dependent on the
growth rate. For instance, if the queue is full, then the ﬂow
rate should be decreased except if the growth rate is negative.
However, when the queue is empty, the ﬂow rate should be
increased except if the growth rate is positive. In the other
case, we observe that when the queue length is middle, the ﬂow
rate is more dependent on the growth rate. If the growth rate
is positive, acceptable or negative, then the ﬂow rate should
be decreased, not changed or increased, respectively.
The previous results typically express the relation between
the queue length and the growth rate. As explained above,
the target queue length in our model is equal to the Medium
value of queue length (here equal the half of the buffer size).
For instance, when the queue is empty, the ﬂow rate should
be increased until the half of the buffer size will be ﬁlled.
The degree of the rate increasing is function of the distance
between the current queue length and the half of the buffer
size. However, when the queue length is equal to the half of
the buffer size and the growth rate is positive, the ﬂow rate
should be decreased moderately to save the queue length in
this range.
This example shows again the ﬂexibility provided by the
fuzzy logic to control carefully the trafﬁc adaptation. Such
results cannot be obtained using a traditional weighted sum
models.
B. Simulation Results
In what follows, we present some preliminary simulation
results of the proposed model using GlomoSim simulator.
Throughout the simulation, each wireless node has a trans-
mission range of 250 meters and shares an 11 Mbps radio
channel with its neighboring nodes. The source and destination
nodes associated with ﬂows are distributed among the nodes
in the wireless mesh network. The simulated environment has
a square shape of 1000m x 1000m where all wireless nodes
share a single radio channel of 11 Mbps. The performances
of FTAM are compared with IEEE 802.11 and SWAN-AIMD
[11]. During the simulation, real time voice and video ﬂows
are active and monitored. Voice and video trafﬁc are modeled
as 80 Kbps and 200 Kbps constant rate, respectively.
Figure 4a shows the buffer size variations at a source node at
the beginning of the simulation. This ﬁgure shows clearly that
the buffer size in FTAM is always limited. At the beginning
of the simulation, the buffer size may go up to 30%, this
is due essentially to the fact that there is no much trafﬁc in
intermediates nodes; hence it is possible to send additional
packets over these nodes. Figure 4a illustrates also that buffers
in AIMD remains almost full for a longer period of time
waiting for successive messages losses. It is clear that FTAM
improves exponentially the performance of 802.11 in terms
of QoS. Therefore, it would be more signiﬁcant to compare
FTAM to an enhanced and well known approach as SWAN-
AIMD.
Figure 4b is a capture of the buffer size variation at an
intermediate node. We can observe clearly that FTAM attempts
to reach the maximum tolerable throughput; which means that
the buffers in intermediate nodes will be ﬁlled as rapidly as
in SWAN-AIMD. Nevertheless, a best value of throughput is
reached more quickly. Thus, the buffer size in intermediate
nodes will take a small value which can help to reduce the
congestion and to decrease the time delivery of trafﬁc packets.
Regarding the buffers in AIMD, they are ﬁlled gradually upon
the detection of packets lost problem.
Figure 4c illustrates the impact of the buffers variations at
intermediate nodes on the end-to-end delay. We observe that
AIMD increments gradually the throughput upon the detection
of congestion problem, and packets will wait longer in buffers
in intermediate nodes. However, our model, FTAM, maintains
the size of buffers as low as possible; thus the trafﬁc packets
do not lose much time, waiting in the intermediate nodes.
(a) Buffer size at a source node
(b) Buffer size at a intermediate node
(c) Delay
Fig. 4: Buffer size and delay variations
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper explored the usage of artiﬁcial intelligent (Fuzzy
Logic) technique in order to control the rate adaptation of
multimedia real time trafﬁc in WMNs. The proposed model,
FTAM, uses the queue length variation rate in addition to
the current queue length in order to predict and control the
87
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

network congestion. One of the beneﬁts of FTAM is that
the regulation rate is predicted as soon as the congestion
is expressed in the nodes. Moreover, FTAM ensures that
best-effort trafﬁc coexists well with real-time trafﬁc in the
multimedia applications.
Future works include extensive simulations using Glo-
moSim underboth the single-hop and multi-hop environment
and compare the performances of FTAM with the standard
IEEE 802.11. and SWAN-AIMD
REFERENCES
[1] M. Natkaniec, “Ad Hoc Mobile Wireless Networks: Principles, Proto-
cols, and Applications,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 47, no. 5,
pp. 12–14, May 2009.
[2] I. Akyildiz and X. Wang, “A Survey on Wireless Mesh Networks,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 43, no. 9, pp. S23–S30, 2005.
[3] X. Xiang, X. Wang, and Y. Yang, “Stateless Multicasting in Mobile Ad
Hoc Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Computers, vol. 59, no. 8, pp.
1076–1090, 2010.
[4] A. Kaufmann, Introduction to Theory of Fuzzy Subsets.
New York:
Academic, 1975.
[5] W. Pedrycz and F. Gomide, An Introduction to Fuzzy Sets: Analysis and
Design.
MIT Press, 1998.
[6] L. Zadeh, “Fuzzy Logic = Computing with Words,” IEEE Transactions
on Fuzzy Systems, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 103–111, May 1996.
[7] L. Khoukhi and S. Cherkaoui, “Intelligent QoS Management for Multi-
media Services Support in Wireless Mobile Ad Hoc Networks,” Com-
puter Networks, vol. 54, no. 10, pp. 1692–1706, 2010.
[8] Z.-X. Wang, H.-L. Xia, and W. Ding, “A Fuzzy Logic Cooperative
MAC for MANET,” The Journal of China Universities of Posts and
Telecommunications, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 55–60, May 2008.
[9] R. de Oliveira and T. Braun, “A Delay-based Approach using Fuzzy
Logic to improve TCP Error Detection in Ad Hoc Networks,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE WCNC Conference, vol. 3, 2004, pp. 1666–
1671.
[10] L. Reznik and V. Kreinovich, “Fuzzy and Probabilistic Models of
Association Information in Sensor Networks,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE Fuzzy Systems Conference, vol. 1, 2004, pp. 185–189.
[11] G. Ahn, A. T. Campbell, A. Veres, and L. H. Sun, “SWAN: Service
Differentiation in Stateless Wireless Ad Hoc Networks,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE INFOCOM Conference, vol. 2, 2002, pp. 457–466.
88
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

