Quality of Services Assurance for Multimedia 
Flows based on  Content-Aware Networking  
 
Eugen Borcoci, Mihai Stanciu, Dragoş S. 
Niculescu 
Telecommunications Dept. 
University POLITEHNICA of Bucharest 
Bucharest, Romania 
e-mails: {eugenbo, ms, dniculescu}@elcom.pub.ro 
George Xilouris 
NCSR Demokritos 
 Institute of Informatics and Telecommunications 
Athens, Greece 
e-mail: xilouris@iit.demokritos.gr
 
 
Abstract—This paper proposes a new architectural solution to 
support  Quality of Services (QoS)  for real time media flows in 
a multi-domain system based on new concepts as Content-
Aware Networks (CAN) and Network Aware Application 
(NAA). The system described, based on coupling between 
network and applications is focused, but not limited to, on 
multimedia services, with content aware processing in the 
network, including QoS assurance. The architecture actually 
parallelizes the Internet in virtual CAN networks, spanning 
multiple domains and assigning specific quality of services 
classes to different CANs. This work is a part of the starting 
effort inside of a new European FP7 ICT research project, 
ALICANTE. 
Keywords— Quality of Service; Content-Aware Networking; 
Network Aware Applications; Multimedia distribution; Future 
Internet 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
A new trend in the Future Internet (FI) [1-6] is to 
increase the coupling between the transport architectural 
stratum and application layer, the result being that one has 
content awareness at the network layer and network aware 
applications at the higher layer. The new concepts are called 
Content-Aware Networks (CAN) and Network-Aware 
Applications (NAA). This approach is supposed to support 
richer processing of media flow at the network level. The 
solution is investigated by many groups, given the general 
accepted vision, stating that [10][11] the FI will be strongly 
service-content oriented and media oriented. The CANs can 
be constructed as overlays, on top of traditional IP networks 
using network virtualization (note that this is seen as a main 
way to make the Internet more flexible [8][9][12]). CAN 
routers are optimized for additional tasks (with respect to the 
traditional ones) such as content/context-based filtering, QoS 
processing,  routing/forwarding, adapting  and transforming 
the packet flows.  
This work is a starting activity, performed in the 
framework of a new European FP7 ICT research project, 
“Media 
Ecosystem 
Deployment 
Through 
Ubiquitous  
Content-Aware Network Environments”, ALICANTE, [15] 
[16][17].  Inter-working environments are defined, to which 
different 
cooperating 
business 
actors 
belong: 
User 
Environment (UE), to which some End-Users belong; 
Service Environment (SE), to which Service Providers (SP) 
and Content Providers (CP) belong; Network Environment 
(NE), to which the Network Providers (NP) belong. The 
“Environment”, is a generic name for a grouping of 
functions defined around the same common goal and which 
possibly vertically span one or more several architectural 
(sub)layers. By Service, if not specified differently, we 
understand here high level services, as seen at the 
application/service layer. The above environments are 
actually present in current deployments, but there is 
insufficient collaboration between them. The neutral network 
service, considered many years as a basic and good principle 
(despite that there are large discussions to preserve it or not 
in FI), proves nowadays to be a weak solution, especially if 
one considers the new multimedia communications and their 
increasing importance in the FI.  
This paper proposes an enhanced solution for guaranteed 
QoS assurance in a multi-domain CAN network context. It is 
organized as follows. Section 2 presents samples of related 
work. Section 3 summarizes the overall ALICANTE 
architecture. Section 4 is focused on the CAN solutions for 
QoS assurance. Section 5 contains some conclusions. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Nowadays a higher coupling between the Application 
and Network layers is investigated, targeting to better 
performance 
(for 
multimedia) 
but 
without 
loosing 
modularity of the architecture. The CAN (i.e., adjusting 
network layer processing based on limited examination of 
the nature of the content) and NAA (i.e., processing the 
content based on limited understanding of the network 
condition) are studied in the framework of re-thinking the 
architecture of the FI. 
The work [13] considers that CAN/ NAA can offer a way 
of evolution of networks beyond IP. The capability of 
content-adaptive network awareness is exploited in [1] for 
joint optimization of video transmission. The CAN/NAA 
approach can naturally lead to a user-centric FI and 
telecommunication services as described in [3][8][9]. The 
work in [9] discusses the content adaptation issues in the FI 
66
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

as a component of CAN/NAA approach. The CAN/NAA 
approach can also offer QoE (Quality of Experience) and 
QoS capabilities of the future networks, [4][6]. The 
architecture can be still richer if we add context awareness to 
content awareness [7]. The CAN approach, on the other side, 
requires a higher amount of packet header processing in the 
CAN elements similar to deep packet inspection techniques; 
therefore, new methods are needed to minimize this 
processing task. The CAN/NAA approach can also help to 
solve the current networking problems related to the P2P 
traffic overload of the global Internet [14]. The application 
layer traffic optimization (ALTO) problem studied by IETF 
can be solved by the cooperation between the CAN layer and 
the upper layer.  
III. 
ALICANTE SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
The 
ALICANTE 
architecture 
includes 
network-
awareness at the service/application level and content-
awareness at the network level. In [15][16][17] the main 
concepts of ALICANTE are fully introduced. 
A flexible business model is defined, composed of 
traditional SP, CP, NP - Providers and End-Users (EU). A 
new actor is the CAN Provider (CANP) which is the virtual 
layer connectivity SP, offering content-aware network 
services. A new entity is also defined: Home-Box (HB)- 
which  can be partially managed by the SP, the NP, and the 
end-user. The HB is a physical and logical entity located at 
end-user's premises and gathering content/context-aware and 
network-aware information. The HB can be also seen as a 
CP/SP for other HBs, on behalf of the End User (EU). The 
HBs cooperate with SPs in order to distribute multimedia 
services (e.g., IPTV) in different modes (e.g., native 
multicast or Peer to Peer -P2P).  
The 
architecture 
is 
composed 
of 
four 
layers/environments: 
User 
Environment, 
Service 
Environment plus HB layer, CAN layer and traditional 
network layer. Two novel virtual layers exist [16][17],  
(CAN layer for network level packet processing and HB  
layer for the actual content delivery, in the user proximity) 
working on top of IP.  The virtual CAN routers (CANR) 
perform the CAN processing. They are also called Media-
Aware Network Elements (MANE) to emphasize their 
additional capabilities: content and context - awareness, 
controlled QoS/QoE, security and monitoring features, etc., 
in cooperation with the other elements of the system.   
The SE [17] uses information from the CAN layer to 
enforce NAA procedures, in addition to user context-aware 
ones. Per flow adaptation can be deployed at both HB and 
CAN layers, as additional means for QoS, by making use of 
scalable media resources.  
In the Data Plane, CAN concepts are applied in order to 
perform 
network/transport 
intelligent 
content-aware 
processing (QoS, based on provisioning and dynamic 
adaptation, 
routing/forwarding, 
security, 
etc.). 
The 
management and control of the CAN layer is partially 
distributed; it supports CAN customization as to respond to 
the upper layer needs, including 1:1, 1:n, and n:m 
communications, and also allow efficient network resource 
exploitation. The rich I/F between CAN and the upper layer 
allows cross layer optimizations interactions, e.g., including 
offering distance information to HBs to help working in P2P 
style. At all levels, monitoring is performed in several points 
of the service distribution chain and regulates a two fold 
adaptation action, at the virtual HB Layer and at the virtual 
CAN Layer. 
Figure 1 presents the overall architecture and emphasizes 
the CAN layer and physical perspective of the system. The 
UMgr, SMgr, CANMgr, NRMgr – are respective managers 
at user, service, CAN and network levels. 
The network infrastructure contains several NP domains 
(e.g., autonomous systems - AS) and access networks (AN). 
Each domain has an Intra-domain Network Resource 
Manager 
(Intra-NRMgr), 
as 
the 
ultimate 
authority 
configuring the network nodes. The CAN layer cooperates 
with HB and SE layers, seen as users of the CAN services 
and using network-aware information delivered by the CAN 
layer.  One CAN Manager (CANMgr) exists for each IP 
domain to assure the consistency of CAN planning, 
provisioning, advertisement, offering, negotiation installation 
and exploitation. However, autonomous CAN-like behavior 
of the MANE nodes can be offered also in a distributed way 
based on processing individual flows, content-related 
metadata, and verification of content-related predicates. 
The upper layers HB, UE, SE elaborate together network 
-aware and context-aware applications. The HB layer hosts 
the service adaptation, service mobility, security, and overall 
management of services and content. Service Provider(s) 
may request CAN construction to CANP.   
All CAN operations are performed in MANE nodes, 
installed at the edges of the domains (for scalability). One or 
several CANs with different capabilities can be defined, 
installed and offered by each domain. They also can be 
chained in order to obtain multi-domain spanned CANs. The 
MANEs perform processing according to the content 
properties (described by metadata or packet headers or 
derived by on-fly content-type analysis) also depending on 
network properties and its current status. The MANE basic 
set of functions are [16][17]: content-aware intelligent 
routing, flow adaptation, QoS and resource allocation, 
filtering and specific security functions, data caching. The 
CAN/MANE approach offers advantages over conventional 
routing but raises several challenging open research aspects, 
given more tasks to be performed by MANE in comparison 
with traditional routers. 
The SP can offer (via CAN layer) QoS guaranteed 
services, realized at CAN level, by constructing appropriate 
virtual (unicast or multicast) single or multiple-domain pipes 
in the network, with or without resource reservations, based 
on Service Level Agreements (SLA) contracts. Then, as a 
second level of actions, adaptation actions will be performed, 
e.g., adapting flows proactively if we have Scalable Video 
Codec sources. 
IV. 
CAN LAYER AND QOS ASSURANCE  
This section presents several aspects related to (V)CANs 
and QoS; the approach adopted is that one CAN is associated 
to a given QoS class. Actually one may have several levels 
of granularity when defining CANs. However, irrespective to 
67
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

the granularity, the main common idea is preserved:  that the 
CAN layer offers to the SP “Parallel Internets” specialized at 
different types of applications content. We consider below 
the definitions related to QoS classes (QC), in order to 
establish the relationship between CANs and QoS classes. 
These classes should be combined when a CAN (represented 
for instance by a “QoS plane”) is spanned over multiple 
domains. 
 
 
 
  
VCAN 1  
multiple 
domain plane 
User 
Terminal 
Conten
t 
server 
AS2 
Service/Content Environment 
 
Home 
Box 
RMgr 
@ANP 
Umgr 
@HB 
Access 
Networks  
 
CPE 
 
AS1 
AS3 
CANMgr@NP 
Intra-
NRMgr@NP 
Intra-
NRMgr@NP 
CANMgr@NP 
Intra-
NRMgr@NP 
SMgr 
@SP 
UMgr 
@SP 
User Environment 
UMgr 
@CP 
Content 
Provider 
Service 
Provider
 
SMgr 
@HB 
 
Transport 
layers 
@HB 
SMgr 
@CP 
P2P 
User 
Terminal 
User 
Terminal 
CAN1 
CAN1 
CAN1 
SR 
SR 
Content Aware Network  
(CAN) layer 
CANMng@NP 
Content 
Server 
SDB 
Media  flow 
Management and  
control flows 
(V)CAN 
May also be 
Content Providers 
Content aware routing, QoS, 
multi-domain multicast, etc. 
 
  
Figure 1.  The ALICANTE Overall Architecture 
 
A. QoS Classes Definitions 
A (well known) QoS class is a QoS transfer capability 
[18][19] represented by a set of attribute-value pairs, 
expressing various packet transfer performance parameters 
such as one-way transit delay, packet loss, jitter.  A provider 
domain’s supported QCs can be divided  [18][19][22] into 
local QoS classes (l-QCs) and extended QoS classes (e-
QCs), to allow us to capture the notion of QoS capabilities 
across domains. From a service offering perspective, QoS 
classes correspond to the performance (transfer quality) 
guarantees expressed in contracts as SLSs. From a service 
provisioning perspective, the QCs classes split the network 
QoS space into a number of distinct classes, and hence set 
the traffic-related objectives of traffic engineering functions: 
• 
QoS class (QC): a basic network-wide QoS transfer 
capability of a single provider’s domain. It is defined 
(in DiffServ but not only) as a set of parameters 
expressed in terms of {Delay, Jitter, Latency}.  
• 
Local QC (l-QC): a QC that spans a single AS. This 
is a notion similar to Per Domain Behavior (PDB) –
in DiffServ technology. 
• 
Extended QC (e -QC): a QC that spans several ASes. 
It consists of an ordered set of l-QCs. The 
topological scope of an e-QC usually extends outside 
the boundaries of the local domain. 
An abstract and flexible definition is the Meta-QoS-
Class, MQC [18]. It captures a common set of QoS ranges of 
68
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

parameters spanning several domains. It relies on a 
worldwide common understanding of application QoS needs 
(e.g., VoD service flows need similar QoS characteristics, 
whatever the transited AS is). The MQC concept offers the 
advantage that the existence of “international” well known 
classes greatly simplifies the inter-domain signaling in the 
sequence of action to establish domain peering in the multi-
domain context. 
A Meta-QoS-Class can be defined with the following 
attributes, such as [18]: a list of services (e.g., VoIP) for 
which the MQC is particularly suited; boundaries for QoS 
performance attribute (one-way transit delay, one-way transit 
variation delay –jitter, loss rate); constraints on the ratio: 
resource for the class - to traffic for the class. 
The attributes could depend on AS diameter (e.g., a 
longer delay could exist in a large AS, and performance 
attributes can be weighed in order to prioritize those ones to 
which the service is more sensitive). A given MQC in an AS 
followed by the same MQC in the next AS should equal the 
same MQC (invariance). 
There is a flexible relationship between a MQC and l-QC 
of a domain (i.e., not one-to-one relationship) : 
• 
several MQCs (defined by different values of 
DiffServ DSCP codes), can be mapped onto the 
same l-QC,  
• 
vice-versa: one can define several l-QC which 
belong to the same MQC (this means that any such l-
QC could be composed with any l-QC of a neighbor 
domain if the latter l-QC belongs to the same MQC). 
If for the same service (e.g., VoD) several qualities 
are wanted, then a hierarchy of MQCs should be 
defined.  
The MQC concept is useful in practice only if a limited 
set of Meta-QoS-Classes are defined. Each AS classifies its 
own l-QCs based on Meta-QoS-Class. An l-QC from an AS 
can be bound only with a neighbor l-QC that refers to the 
same Meta-QoS-Class. A Meta-QoS-Class typically bears 
properties relevant to the crossing of one and only one AS. 
However, this notion can be extended in a straightforward 
manner to the crossing of several ASes, as long as we 
consider the set of ASes as a single super-AS. 
B. CANs and Network Planes 
In ALICANTE, a concept of Parallel Internets (PI) [20] 
will be adopted, but modified and enriched with content 
awareness. A PI enables end-to-end service differentiation 
across multiple administrative domains. The PIs can coexist, 
as parallel logical networks composed of interconnected, per-
domain, Network Planes (NPl). In ALICANTE, generally a 
one-to-one mapping between a CAN and NPl will exist.  
A CAN Network is an overlay seen as a network plane 
(NPl) + content awareness. Specialization of CANs may 
exist in terms of QoS level of guarantees (weaker or 
stronger), QoS granularity, content adaptation procedures, 
degree of security, etc. 
A given NPl is defined to transport traffic flows from 
services with common connectivity requirements. The traffic 
delivered within each NPl receives differentiated treatment 
both in terms of forwarding and routing, so that service 
differentiation across NPls is enabled in terms of edge-to-
edge QoS, availability and also resilience. 
A given NPl/CAN can be realized by the CANP, by 
combining several processes [17], while being possible to 
choose different solutions concerning some “dimensions”: 
• 
Routing: different paths can be implemented for 
individual 
CANs/NPls 
in 
order 
to 
support 
heterogeneous 
service 
requirements. 
Routing 
differentiation can be realized at several levels, e.g., 
one can define dedicated topologies to get several 
routing 
adjacencies 
towards 
the 
destination; 
dedicated paths selection to achieve multiple path 
(based on different routing metrics in different 
NPls). 
• 
Data plane forwarding and packet processing: 
different classification, metering and drop policies, 
different packet scheduling behavior by configuring 
different policies in a common scheduler, assigning 
dedicated scheduling resources, etc. 
• 
Resource management: Data packets can be treated 
differentially in terms of policing, shaping, degree of 
multiplexing, over-provisioning factor, queuing, etc. 
The CAN granularities from the QoS point of view can 
be as follows (classified from a lower degree to higher 
degree): 
C. Multi-domain CANs based on Meta-QoS-classes  
This is the simplest implementation of CANs. Each 
(V)CAN, spanning one or more domains, has associated  a 
given MQC. The resulting Internet appears as a set of PIs or 
equivalently CANs, or MQC planes. Each Internet consists 
in all the l-QCs bound in the name of the same MQC. If an l-
QC maps several Meta-QoS-Classes, then it belongs to 
several Internets. The SP can define several CANs 
represented as PIs. The metadata inserted in the data packets 
allow ingress MANE to select the VCAN that is the closest 
to its needs (the “best match” principle is preserved), as long 
as there is currently a path available for the destination. 
In a MQC plane, all paths are considered (to a reasonable 
extent) as equal. Therefore, the problem of path selection 
amounts to find one best path, for the selected MQC plane. 
This principle is similar to the traditional IP routing 
approach. So, for the inter-domain part, one can rely on a 
BGP-like protocol doing the path inter-domain selection 
process.  
The DiffServ concept of Per-Domain Behavior (PDB) is 
not identical with the MQC concept. The two concepts both 
specify some QoS performance values, but they differ in 
their purposes. The PDB objective is to help implement QoS 
capabilities within a network, while the MQC definition 
objective is to help agreement negotiation between 
CANPs/SPs. Actually, a PDB is closer to an l-QC than to a 
MQC. The main advantage of the MQC concept is that it 
simplifies the horizontal negotiations between CAN 
Managers to chain the single-domain CANs into multi-
domain CANs. 
Examples of CANs associated each to one of the four 
MQCs can be: Premium MQC; Gold MQC for TCP-friendly 
(elastic) traffic; Gold MQC for non TCP-friendly (non-
69
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

elastic) traffic; Best effort MQC. Examples of basic 
groupings can be: the overall network organized as an 
Internet with four Meta-QoS-Classes and an Internet with 
only the last three Meta-QoS-Classes. 
For each MQC one should define parameters. An 
example for a Premium MQC could be: Usage: real time 
flows, needing constant bandwidth guarantees; Performance: 
Delay, Jitter, Loss – very low (qualitative); Constraints: 
admission control will be applied and possibly shaping to 
enforce the resource requirement; Resources: on each output 
interface, the traffic for the class is always much smaller than 
the bandwidth reserved for the class (EF based). The 
resources must always absorb the traffic with no loss, even 
with burst aggregates. 
Mapping of high level services on such CANs has a low 
granularity. For instance, if one adopts the TISPAN 
taxonomy [21], the TS 23.107 document identifies four QoS 
classes: conversational class, streaming class, interactive 
class, and background best effort. In such a case VOIP and 
Video conference will be included in the first class, given 
their interactivity. 
The ALICANTE mapping of service flows on CANs 
based on MQC approach could be done by defining four type 
of CANs each one having its well-known MQC. Therefore 
the four CANs expose decreasing QoS capabilities 
irrespective to what the type of the service is (video, audio, 
data). The content awareness of the system means to classify 
the flows according to their QoE class (gold, silver, etc.) and 
assign them to be transported over the appropriate 
CAN/MQC-plane. 
D. Multi-domain CANs based on local QC composition  
This case is more complex than the previous one. Each 
domain may have its local QoS classes. Several Local QCs 
(l-QC) can be combined to form an Extended QC (e-QC). 
Composition rules for QoS classes should be defined. The 
granularity is greater than in the MCQ approach, in the sense 
that a greater number of parallel CANs can be defined. Still, 
a CAN plane offers a single resultant QoS class. 
E. Multi-domain hierarchical CANs based on local QC 
composition  
This case is the most efficient but also the most complex. 
Each domain may have its local QoS classes. Several Local 
QCs (l-QC) can be combined to form an Extended QC (e-
QC). The difference from the previous solution is that inside 
each CAN several QOS classes are defined corresponding to 
platinum, gold, silver, etc. In such a case, the mapping 
between service flows at SP level and CANs can be done per 
type of the service: VoD, VoIP, Video-conference, etc. – if 
SP wants to do it. Additionally to the required QC, a priority 
indicator can be considered (this is a figure established by 
the SP), indicating the current priority seen from the business 
point of view by the SP; e.g., for an emergency situation, a 
video service flow may have a greater priority than for a high 
definition entertainment video flow. The granularity is 
greater than in the MCQ approach, in the sense that a greater 
number of parallel CANs can be defined. Still, a CAN plane 
offers a single resultant QoS class. 
F. CAN provisioning and content aware processing of 
service flows 
Figure 2 shows an example of two provisioned multi-
domain CANs, spanning respectively: CAN1: AS1, AS2; 
CAN2: AS1, AS2, AS3; based on the implementation in 
AS1, 2, 3 of the MQC1, 2 as shown.  
It was supposed that a functional block CAN-NRMgr 
exists at SP to initiate the CAN construction conforming to 
the needs of SP (e.g., based on forecast traffic data). It is 
shown in a simplified way how the CANs are realized and 
how the QoS based on content classification is realized in the 
first MANE of AS1. The following actions are performed: 
• 
CAN 1,2, have been requested (negotiation)  by 
CAN 
NRMgr@SP, 
to 
CANMgr@AS1. 
The 
topological data and QoS needs are delivered by the 
CAN NRMgr@SP (action 1 in Figure 2). 
• 
CANMgr@AS1 
negotiates 
resources 
with 
IntraNRM@AS1 (action 2). 
• 
Multiple 
domain 
CANs 
are 
needed, 
so 
CANMgr@AS1 negotiates SLAs (actions 3.1, 3.2) 
with CANMgr@AS2, CANMgr@AS3 (hub inter-
domain peering model is supposed here).  The inter- 
CANMgr negotiations are not visible at SP level. 
• 
CAN1, 2 are  installed in the network at SM@SP 
request (actions 4, 4.1 and 4.2) 
• 
MANE1 is instructed  how to classify the data 
packets, based on information as: VCAN_Ids, 
Content description metadata, headers to analyze, 
QoS class information, policies, PHB – behavior 
rules, etc. obtained from CAN NRMgr@SP via 
CANMgr@AS1 and IntraNRM@AS1. Also, the 
output part of the MANE1 is configured for queuing 
and scheduling as to realize the QoS classes.  
• 
Service Management at SP instructs the SP/CP 
server how to mark the data packets. The 
information 
to 
be 
used 
in 
content 
aware 
classification can be composed of high level headers 
(e.g., RTP); content description metadata (including 
optionally an explicit VCAN_Id to simplify the 
MANE analysis task 
The implementation of the QoS classes in the network 
can be done based on known QoS technologies like MPLS + 
DiffServ. The mapping of the (V)CAN onto actual paths is 
performed by the Intra NRMgr. Applying the above 
procedures, the data flows are classified by the MANE, 
assigned to the appropriate CAN and processed according to 
the QoS class associated to that CAN. 
A data packet is analyzed by the classifier and assigned 
to one of the CANs, depending on: MANE classification 
information and policies; data packet high-level protocol 
headers and/or metadata and/or VCAN_Id contained in the 
packet. Consequently, the packet is forwarded to the 
appropriate logical CAN for further processing. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
The paper proposed an architectural solution supporting 
QoS in a virtualized network environment, based on content 
awareness at network level, in the framework of a complex 
70
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

system for media distribution. The approach is to map the 
QoS classes on virtual data CANs, thus obtaining several 
parallel QoS planes. The system can be incrementally built 
by enhancing the edge routers functionalities with content 
awareness features. Further work is going on to fully validate 
the concept and then to design and implement the system in 
the framework of the FP7 research project ALICANTE. 
 
  
AS2 
AS1 
AN 
 
SP/CP 
server 
AS3 
CAN1/MQC1 
CAN2/MQC2 
Classif 
MANE 
CAN Mgr  
NRMgr 
2 
3.1 
CAN NRMgr  
Service Provider 
CANMgr 
NRMgr 
CANMgr 
NRMgr 
Q+S 
 
 
AN 
HB 
3.2 
1 
4.2 
4 
4.1 
5 
6 
Figure 2.  Example of multi-domain CANs based on MQCs
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work was supported partially by the EC in the 
context of the ALICANTE project (FP7-ICT-248652) and 
partially by the project POSDRU/89/1.5/S/62557. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Martini, M.G., Mazzotti, M., Lamy-Bergot, C.,  Huusko, J., and 
Amon, P.,  “Content Adaptive Network Aware Joint Optimization 
of Wireless Video Transmission”, IEEE Communications 
Magazine, vol. 45, no. 1, Jan. 2007, pp. 84-90. 
[2] Baladrón, 
C., 
“User-Centric 
Future 
Internet 
and 
Telecommunication Services”,  in: G. Tselentis, et al. (eds.), 
Towards the Future Internet, IOS Press, 2009, pp. 217-226. 
[3] Zahariadis, T., Lamy-Bergot, C., Schierl, T., Grüneberg, K., 
Celetto, L., and Timmerer, C., “Content Adaptation Issues in the 
Future Internet”, in: G. Tselentis, et al. (eds.), Towards the Future 
Internet, IOS Press, 2009, pp.283-292. 
[4] Liberal, F., Fajardo, J.O., and Koumaras, H., “QoE and *-
awareness in the Future Internet”, in: G. Tselentis, et al. (eds.), 
Towards the Future Internet, IOS Press, 2009, pp. 293-302. 
[5] Baker, N., “Context-Aware Systems and Implications for Future 
Internet”, in: G. Tselentis et. al. (eds.), Towards the Future 
Internet, IOS Press, 2009, pp. 335-344. 
[6] Huszák, Á. and Imre, S., “Content-aware Interface Selection 
Method for Multi-Path Video Streaming in Best-effort Networks”, 
Proc. of 16th International Conference on Telecommunications, 
Marrakech, Morocco, Jul. 2009, pp. 196-201. 
[7] Kodeswaran, S. B. and Joshi A., “Content and Context Aware 
Networking Using Semantic Tagging”, Proc. of 22nd International 
Conference on Data Engineering Workshops (ICDEW'06), 
Atlanta, Georgia, USA, Apr. 2006,  pp. 67–77. 
[8] Anderson, T., Peterson, L., Shenker, S., and Turner, J., 
“Overcoming the Internet Impasse through Virtualization”, 
Computer, vol. 38, no. 4, Apr. 2005, pp. 34–41. 
[9] Turner, J. S. and Taylor, D. E., (2005), “Diversifying the Internet”, 
Proc. GLOBECOM ‘05, vol. 2, St. Louis, USA, Dec. 2005, 
pp.760-765  
[10] Schönwälder, J., Fouquet, M., Rodosek, G.D., and Hochstatter, 
I.C.,  “Future Internet = Content + Services + Management”, IEEE 
Communications Magazine, vol. 47, no. 7, Jul. 2009, pp. 27-33. 
[11] Networked European Software and Sevices Initiative (NESSI) 
Strategic Research Agenda, Vol. 3. FP7-2.exec, NESSI Roadmap, 
Feb. 2008. 
[12] Chowdhury, N. M. and Boutaba, R., “Network Virtualization: 
State of the Art and Research Challenges”, IEEE Communications 
Magazine, vol. 47, no.7,  Jul. 2009, pp. 20-26. 
[13] Kourlas, T., “The Evolution of Networks beyond IP”, IEC 
Newsletter, 
vol. 
1, 
Mar. 
2007. 
Available 
at 
http://www.iec.org/newsletter/march07_1/broadband_1.html (last 
accessed: Mar. 2010). 
[14] Aggarwal, V. and Feldmann, A., “Can ISPs and P2P Users 
Cooperate for Improved Performance?”, ACM SIGCOMM 
Computer Communication Review, vol. 37, no. 3, Jul. 2007, pp. 
29-40.  
[15] FP7 ICT project, “MediA Ecosystem Deployment Through 
Ubiquitous  Content-Aware Network Environments”, ALICANTE, 
No248652, http://www.ict-alicante.eu/ (last accessed: Mar. 2010). 
[16] Borcoci, E., Negru, D. and Timmerer, C., “A Novel Architecture 
for Multimedia Distribution based on Content-Aware Networking” 
Proc. of. CTRQ 2010, Athens, June 2010, pp. 162-168 
[17] ALICANTE, Deliverable D2.1, ALICANTE Overall System and 
Components 
Definition 
and 
Specifications, 
http://www.ict-
alicante.eu, Sept. 2010 
[18] Levis, P., Boucadair, M., Morrand, P., and Trimitzios, P., “The 
Meta-QoS-Class 
Concept: 
a 
Step 
Towards 
Global 
QoS 
Interdomain Services”, Proc. of IEEE SoftCOM, Oct. 2004. 
[19] Howarth, M.P. et al., “Provisioning for Interdomain Quality of 
Service: the MESCAL Approach”, IEEE Communications 
Magazine, June 2005, pp. 129-137 
[20] Boucadair, M. et al., “A Framework for End-to-End Service 
Differentiation: Network Planes and Parallel Internets”, IEEE 
Communications Magazine, Sept. 2007, pp. 134-143 
[21] 3GPP TS 23.107 version 9.0.0 Release 9, 2010 
[22] MESCAL D1.2: “Initial Specification of Protocols and Algorithms 
for Inter-domain SLS Management and Traffic Engineering for 
QoS-based IP Service Delivery and their Test Requirements”, 
January 2004, www.mescal.org (last accessed: Dec. 2010). 
71
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

