The Impact of Control Information Prioritization on QoS Performance Metrics 
 
Jasmina Baraković 
BH Telecom, Join Stock Company 
Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina 
e-mail: jasmina.barakovic@bhtelecom.ba 
Sabina Baraković 
Ministry of Security of Bosnia and 
Herzegovina 
Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina 
e-mail: sabina.barakovic@msb.gov.ba 
Himzo Bajrić 
BH Telecom, Join Stock Company 
Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina 
e-mail: himzo.bajric@bhtelecom.ba 
 
 
 
Abstract— Real-time protocols such as Real-time Transport 
Protocol (RTP) and its companion protocol Real-time 
Transport Control Protocol (RTCP) are the solution for 
customers who have progressively come to desire real-time 
services. The characteristics of RTP and RTCP packets differ 
since they carry different content types, i.e., real-time data and 
control data, respectively. The standard approach assumes 
that RTP real-time data packets and RTCP control packets are 
classified into the same media-oriented service class. That 
might impact the Quality of Service (QoS) for real-time 
services with regard to network status. Therefore, this paper 
proposes an idea of QoS enhancement by efficiently 
transmitting user control information and establishing the 
proper transmission rate dynamically in dependence upon the 
status of a network. To accomplish this task, RTCP control 
packets are classified the Signaling service class, which should 
be given the absolute preferential treatment over all other User 
service classes. Results obtained with NCTUns simulator and 
emulator show a significant impact of control information 
prioritization on QoS performance metrics and indicate that 
this approach could be a new starting point for research 
activities in the future. 
Keywords-control information prioritization; QoS; RTCP; 
RTP 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Customers have progressively come to desire real-time 
services, and the solutions to their desires came in the form 
of real-time protocols. Using packet switching and the 
routing of Internet Protocol (IP) packets means that delays 
are introduced in the access and core networks [1], and hence 
a data acquired in real-time is transformed undesirably in the 
networks to non-real-time in the receiver. Real-time 
protocols are used to correct these delays and the degradation 
that is introduced during data processing and IP routing in 
the network. The goal of real-time protocols is to transport, 
control, and reassemble the information-bearing bits into 
real-time data for display at the receiver. 
The real-time protocols include Real-time Transport 
Protocol (RTP) [2], which is an Internet Engineering Task 
Force (IETF) standard. The RTP offers data packet 
sequencing to enable correct ordering of packets at the 
receiver because packets can take different routes to their 
destination. It also provides identification of data source and 
type of payload, timing and synchronization, monitoring of 
delivery for diagnosing, reducing transmission problems, and 
sending the feedback of correct delivery and the quality of 
data transmission to the sending device. Furthermore, it 
integrates traffic sources of different types. This is used to 
merge heterogeneous traffic from multiple transmitting 
sources into a single flow. Because packets are time stamped 
at their source and destinations, delays encountered in transit 
can be estimated and unnecessary jitter can be removed to 
enable real-time display and enhance Quality of Service 
(QoS). 
This protocol comes together with its companion 
protocol Real-time Transport Control Protocol (RTCP) [2]. 
Its function is to provide a means for reporting the 
performance of data transfer in the network. Roles of RTCP 
are to expose the states of the client/server to each other so 
that they understand and exchange the parameters of the 
communication, and report on the quality of communication. 
This protocol issues and transmits periodic control packets 
from participants to all other participants in a session. Two 
types of RTCP packets are exchanged by the RTCP: the 
Sender Reports (SRs) and the Receiver Reports (RRs). Fields 
in the report packets contain descriptions of the state of the 
session. Compound RTCP packets can be formed by 
concatenating several report packets and transmitting them 
as one packet. The QoS can be determined using the 
parameters in the reports provided by the RTCP [3]. The 
RTCP reports on the number of packets sent and received 
since the last report (throughput) and hence the number of 
lost packets. Because packets are time stamped, the RTCP 
also provides the round-trip delay, the state of the paths, and 
of course, the jitter associated with the packets. 
These protocols, RTP and RTCP, are designed to be 
independent of the underlying transport and network layers. 
In its conventional implementation, RTP does not have a 
standard Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) or User 
Datagram Protocol (UDP) port on which it communicates. 
The only standard that RTP obeys is that UDP 
communications are done via an even port and the next 
higher odd port is used for RTCP communications. 
Since RTCP packets are sent using a different UDP 
source and destination port, it is not unlikely that the RTCP 
packets will receive a different treatment by the network. 
The standard approach requires that RTCP packets must be 
marked with the same DiffServ Code Point (DSCP) as the 
RTP packets in an effect to gain similar treatment from the 
network as that provided to the RTP packets. However, 
utilizing the same DSCP for the RTCP packets as that used 
for the RTP packet does not resolve all problems as follows. 
60
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

First, RTCP packets vary in size and are generally larger 
then RTP packets which effects their treatment by a network. 
Second, RTCP packets are sent at a rate as little as 1/500th of 
the rate that RTP packets are sent which may also affect their 
treatment by the network. Third, resource reservations made 
to protect the RTP flows of packets are unlikely to be made 
to protect the RTCP flow; and if the reservation was made 
for the RTCP packets, it could fail, and/or be treated 
differently because of the vastly different traffic profiles. In 
summary, the QoS statistics determined by RTCP packets 
may be different than the actual QoS experienced by RTP 
packets carrying the actual media. 
Accordingly, this paper proposes an idea of QoS 
enhancement by efficiently transmitting user control 
information and establishing the proper transmission rate 
dynamically in dependence upon the status of a network. 
This is attained through the classification of RTCP control 
packets into the Signaling service class rather than media-
oriented service classes. According to our previous work [4], 
Signaling service class should be given the absolute 
preferential treatment over all other User service classes. 
From the RTCP perspective, it is beneficial to receive the 
absolute preferential treatment over RTP as it provides more 
accurate statistics for the measurements performed by RTCP, 
and thereby increase the QoS. 
In the remainder of the paper, the related work on QoS 
evolution and signaling is discussed in Section II. The 
concept of control information prioritization is described in 
Section II. It also highlights the difference between the 
standard and novel approach in terms of control information 
prioritization. Section III considers the impact of standard 
and novel approach on QoS performance metrics using 
simulation methodology. It discusses the obtained results, 
together with their analysis to show that the conclusions are 
warranted. Section IV concludes this paper and outlines open 
issues for future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
First studies proposing QoS frameworks for IP networks 
started to appear within IETF. To support QoS in IP 
networks, IETF proposed two frameworks. These are 
Integrated Services (IntServ) [5], based on connection-
oriented resource reservation principle and Differentiated 
Services (DiffServ) [6], based on service differentiation 
approach. IntServ provides QoS to end hosts by reserving 
end-to-end resources using the Resource Reservation 
Protocol (RSVP) [7], when the end hosts signal their QoS 
needs. DiffServ obviates the need for a resource reservation 
protocol 
and 
offers 
the 
benefits 
of 
provisioning 
differentiated services. DiffServ is a starting point to 
guarantee QoS by providing different service classes, which 
are configured using specific combination of QoS 
mechanisms.  
Although Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) [8] is 
not considered as a QoS framework for IP networks, it 
provides a number of advantageous features to network 
operators. According to MPLS, data are transmitted along 
the so-called Label Switched Paths (LSP), which are 
established using either RSVP modification [9] or 
specifically developed Label Distribution Protocol (LDP) 
[10]. Modern QoS-aware networks such as DiffServ, MPLS 
or DiffServ/MPLS are specifically designed to be flexible 
enough to reallocate network resources in the best possible 
way, such that the required performance is provided using 
minimum amount of resources [11]. 
To be able to provide QoS when needed, it is necessary 
not only to deploy proper and effective QoS frameworks, but 
also to have means to signal to the network entities in charge 
to set-up QoS the desired level of service. In other words, it is 
necessary to build a framework that, interworking with a 
proper protocol, will signal QoS in an efficient and reliable 
way. The IETF Working Group Next Step in Signaling (NSIS) 
[12] has been chartered to address these issues, and define the 
framework 
for 
QoS 
signaling. 
Moreover, 
the 
Telecommunication Industry Association (TIA) has published 
a standard TIA-1039, QoS Signaling for IP QoS Support, 
which is involved in solutions to the problem of improving 
end-to-end QoS performance, e.g., Control for High-
Throughput Adaptive Resilient Transport (CHART) system 
[13]. Another approach related to providing QoS under 
network congestion is described in [14].  
In general, many QoS related projects show that there is 
an important background of work that aims at achieving 
QoS provisioning with the different tasks it involves [15]. 
Neither of referenced approaches discusses the possibility to 
enhance the QoS for real-time services by efficiently 
transmitting user control information. Our approach is based 
on an idea of prioritizing control information transmission 
in order to improve the QoS performance of real-time 
services. 
III. 
CONTROL INFORMATION PRIORITIZATION 
To accomplish the task of prioritizing control information 
transmission, DiffServ addresses the clear need for relatively 
simple and coarse methods of categorizing traffic into 
various service classes and applying QoS parameters to those 
classes. Different service classes are constructed using 
DSCPs, traffic conditioners, Per Hop Behaviors (PHBs), and 
Active Queue Management (AQM) mechanisms [16].  
Though the IETF standards provided a consistent set of 
PHBs for services marked to specific DSCP values, they 
never specified which service should be marked to which 
DSCP value. Cisco led many confusions and disagreements 
over matching services with standards-defined code points in 
2002 
to 
put 
forward 
a 
standards-based 
marking 
recommendation in its strategic architectural QoS Baseline 
document [17]. Eleven service classes that could exist within 
the enterprise were examined and extensively profiled, then 
matched to their optimal RFC-defined PHBs. More than four 
years after Cisco put forward its QoS Baseline document, 
RFC-4594 was formally accepted as an informational RFC 
in 2006 [16]. An informational RFC is an industry-
recommended best practice. This RFC puts forward twelve 
service classes and matches these to RFC-defined PHBs. 
There are more than a few similarities between Cisco’s 
QoS Baseline and RFC-4594, as there should be, since RFC-
4594 is essentially an industry-accepted evolution of Cisco’s 
QoS Baseline. However, there are some differences that 
61
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

merit attention. Cisco has completed a marking migration for 
Call Signaling from AF31 to CS3 (as per the original QoS 
Baseline). The most significant of the differences between 
Cisco’s QoS Baseline and RFC-4594 is the RFC-4594 
recommendation to mark Call Signaling to CS5. In 
summary, the Cisco modified version of RFC-4594 is very 
similar to RFC-4594, with the one exception of swapping 
Call Signaling marking and Broadcast Video [17]. 
Since RFC-4594 is to be viewed as industry best-
practice recommendation, enterprises and service providers 
are encouraged to adopt this recommendation, with the aim 
of 
improving 
QoS 
consistency, 
compatibility, 
and 
interoperability. However, since it is a set of formal 
DiffServ QoS configuration best practices, and not a 
requisite standard, modifications can be made to these 
recommendations as required by specific needs and 
constraints. To meet the QoS requirements as defined in 
International 
Telecommunication 
Union 
– 
Telecommunication 
Sector 
(ITU-T) 
Recommendation 
Y.1541, we proposed a modification of these configuration 
guidelines with regard to Signaling service class [4].  
The approach proposed in our previous work is based on 
configuring Signaling service class by using priority queuing 
system to give it absolute preferential treatment over all other 
User service classes. The priority queuing system is a 
combination of a set of queues and a scheduler that empties 
them in priority sequence [16]. When asked for a packet, the 
scheduler inspects the highest priority queue dedicated to 
Signaling service class and, if there is traffic present, returns a 
packet from that queue. Failing that, it inspects the next 
highest priority queue, and so on. A packet assigned to 
Signaling service class is marked with a new DSCP value, 
which should be requested from the Internet Assigned 
Numbers Authority (IANA). This DSCP value should be 
lower than one used to configure the Network Control service 
class and higher than one reserved for all User service classes 
defined in RFC-4594 and RFC-5865 [18].  
Though this approach is signaling protocol independent, 
our previous work has discussed it in the context of Session 
Initiation Protocol (SIP) [4]. This work considers the 
previously proposed approach with regard to RTCP. 
Since the RTCP packets simply signal information 
regarding the reception of the RTP packets, we propose to 
mark them with DSCP value associated to Signaling service 
class rather than media-oriented service classes. In this 
manner, it is possible to provide reliable and efficient 
transmission of user control information in order to increase 
the QoS by monitoring the media status, reporting on media 
quality, and taking any necessary corrective actions based 
on the media status. Thus, the main contribution of this 
paper lies in highlighting the fact that prioritizing control 
information transmission improves the QoS performance of 
real-time services.  
IV. 
SIMULATION METHODOLOGY 
A. Simulation Setup and Environment 
In order to investigate the impact of novel approach of 
control information prioritization on QoS performance 
metrics, the simulations are performed using NCTUns 
network simulator and emulator 6.0 [19], because it enables 
conduction of RTP/RTCP and DiffServ simulations. 
The simulations are based on two different simulation 
scenarios performed on the simple network topology shown 
on Figure 1. The scenarios differ in control information 
prioritization. In Scenario 1, RTCP control packets are 
marked with the same DSCP as RTP packets and classified 
into the Multimedia Streaming service class. On the other 
hand, in Scenario 2, RTCP control packets are marked with 
higher DSCP then one used for RTP packets. The RTCP 
control packets are classified into Network Control class, 
since it is the only class in NCTUns that provides the 
absolute preferential treatment over all other User service 
classes, as Signaling service class should. 
The single DiffServ domain, which constitutes the 
illustrated network topology, is composed of two boundary 
routers and one interior router. Boundary routers are 
responsible for classifying and conditioning traffic. Traffic 
classification is based on five-tuple (source IP address, 
destination IP address, source port number, destination port 
number, protocol). Several parameters are distinguished for 
this purpose as shown in Table I. 
 
 
a. RTP (Real-time Transport Protocol); b. RTCP (Real-time Transport Control Protocol). 
Figure 1.  Network topology. 
62
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

TABLE I.  
SIMULATION ENVIRONMENT DETAILS 
Node Name 
Node Type 
Source IPa Address 
Application 
Port 
Destination IPa Address 
Node 1 
Boundary Router 
NAb 
NAb 
NAb 
NAb 
Node 2 
Interior Router 
NAb 
NAb 
NAb 
NAb 
Node 3 
Boundary Router 
NAb 
NAb 
NAb 
NAb 
Node 4 
Sending Node 
1.0.1.2 
adapt_bw 
5004, 5005 
1.0.6.2 
Node 5 
Sending Node 
1.0.2.2 
stg 
Default 
1.0.7.2 
Node 6 
Receiving Node 
1.0.3.2 
rtg 
Default 
NAb 
Node 7 
Receiving Node 
1.0.6.2 
rtprecvonly 
5004, 5005 
NAb 
Node 8 
Receiving Node 
1.0.7.2 
rtg 
Default 
NAb 
Node 9 
Sending Node 
1.0.8.2 
stg 
Default 
1.0.3.2 
a. 
IP (Internet Protocol); b. NA (Not Applicable). 
 
Traffic conditioning is based on the token bucket scheme. 
Since traffic conditioning helps to prevent network 
congestion, it is set to be disabled in both simulation 
scenarios. Interior router is responsible for dispatching the 
incoming packets to the different service class queues for 
receiving 
different 
QoS treatments. The 
forwarding 
treatments (i.e., PHBs), which are used for the purpose of 
investigating the impact of control information prioritization 
on QoS performance metrics, are listed in Table II. 
The links between network nodes are dimensioned to 
implement simple network configuration with one bottleneck 
link (Node 2 → Node 3). The configured link capacities, as 
well as propagation delays are shown in Figure 1. The delay 
of all links is 10 ms, and links capacity is 10 Mbps except 
link between Node 2 and Node 3. The bottleneck link 
capacity is 5 Mbps. 
The network is loaded by two types of traffic flows that 
belong to different service classes. The Standard service 
class is intended for all background traffic that will receive 
normal (undifferentiated) forwarding treatment through the 
network. The Multimedia Streaming service class is used for 
transport of video traffic using RTP. The RTCP control 
packets use this service class in Scenario 1, and the Network 
Control service class in Scenario 2. The Network Control 
service class is primarily intended for routing and network 
control. Since this service class has preferential treatment 
over all other User service classes, it is considered as 
alternative to the Signaling service class in Scenario 2. 
The traffic generators components are stg and rtg, 
respectively for sending and receiving background traffic. 
Using UDP greedy mode, stg application on Node 5 
generates packets of 1400 bytes during 999 s, whereas stg 
application on Node 9 generates packets of 1024 bytes 
during 500 s. The RTP and RTCP traffic is generated using 
rtprecvonly and adapt_bw application programs, which are 
implemented on Node 7 and Node 4, respectively. 
Application rtprecvonly receives RTP and RTCP packets, 
sends RTCP packets, but does not send RTP packets. 
Application adapt_bw uses RTCP packets to report the 
received QoS at the receiver so that sender can dynamically 
adjust the sending rate of its RTP packets. The RTP packets 
are received on port 5004, whereas the RTCP packets are 
received on port 5005. The RTP is used to transport video 
traffic with characteristics listed in Table III. 
 
The simulations are run for 500 simulations seconds. Due 
to nearly permanent characteristics of background traffic, 
this period can be considered sufficient. The RTP/RTCP 
session active time is from 5th to 500th simulation second. 
Start time and stop time for background traffic generator 
implemented on Node 5 is 150th and 350th simulation second, 
respectively. The activity of background traffic generator 
implemented on Node 9 is started at 0.5th simulation second 
and ended at 500th simulation second. 
B. Simulation Results and Analysis 
Obtained simulation results show significant impact of 
the novel approach on critical QoS performance metrics in 
comparison to standard approach, which is particularly 
obvious during the maximum network load. The standard 
approach involves marking both RTP and RTCP packets 
with same DSCP value (i.e., Scenario 1). The novel approach 
is based on marking RTCP packets with the higher DSCP 
value than one used for RTP packets (i.e., Scenario 2). The 
considered performance metrics, which are important for 
QoS of real-time services, include: throughput, RTP packet 
loss rate, cumulative number of lost RTP packets, Round-
Trip Time (RTT) and jitter for RTP packets. 
TABLE II.  
DISTINGUISHED QOS CONFIGURATION PARAMETERS 
QoSg Configuration Setup in Boundary Router 
Rules 
Source IPe 
Address 
Source 
Port 
DSCPd 
Scenario 1 
Scenario 2 
1.0.1.2 
5004 
AFa31 
AFa31 
1.0.1.2 
5005 
AFa31 
CSb6 
1.0.6.2 
* 
DFc 
DFc 
1.0.8.2 
* 
DFc 
DFc 
QoSg Configuration Setup in Interior Router 
Queues 
PHBf Type 
Rate [Mbps] 
Queue 
Length 
[packets] 
DFc 
7.5 
10 
AFa41 
2 
10 
CSb6 
0.5 
10 
a. AF (Assured Forwarding); b. CS (Class Service); c. DF (Default Forwarding); d. DSCP (DiffServ 
Code Points); e. IP (Internet Protocol); f. PHB (Per Hop Behavior); g. QoS (Quality of Service). 
TABLE III.  
VIDEO TRAFFIC CHARACTERISTICS 
Encoding name 
nv [20] 
Sampling rate [Hz] 
90000 
Bits per sample 
0.555555 
Frame rate [fps] 
30 
 
63
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

As shown on Figure 2a, the novel approach based on 
classification of RTCP control packets into the Signaling 
service class, provides throughput in range from 5 kBps to 
20 kBps during the interval of maximum network load. On 
the other hand, throughput obtained in the standard approach, 
in which RTP and RTCP packets are classified into the same 
media-oriented service class, does not exceed 10 kBps 
during the same period. Therefore, the novel approach results 
in higher throughput than the standard approach. This is a 
consequence of the control information prioritization, which 
makes establishing the proper transmission rate dynamically 
in dependence upon the status of a network. 
The RTP packet loss rate shown on Figure 2b implicates 
that the novel approach to the classification of RTCP packets 
performs better than standard one. In the novel approach, 
RTCP packets adjust the sending rate of RTP packets more 
dynamically than in the standard approach. Thereby, packet 
losses are prevented, which results in lower cumulative 
number of lost RTP packets (Figure 2c). Accordingly, 
cumulative number of lost RTP packets equals 4383 and 
4892 packets in novel and standard approach, respectively. 
Since the novel approach uses RTCP packets for more 
dynamic adjustment of the sending rate of RTP packets, it 
also prevents RTP packets to experience long delay caused 
by network status. Standard approach, on the other hand, 
does not adjust the sending rate as fast as the novel approach, 
since the QoS statistics determined by delayed RTCP 
packets may be different than the actual QoS experienced by 
RTP packets carrying the media. The lack of the standard 
approach in comparison with the novel one is shown on 
Figure 2d. It is noticed that the RTT of RTP packets in 
standard approach is higher than in novel one during the 
interval of maximum network load. Moreover, it is kept 
constant during the simulation, which results in lower jitter 
than in novel approach (Figure 2e). 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper proposes an idea of improving the QoS 
performances of real-time services by prioritizing user 
control information transmission and establishing the proper 
transmission rate dynamically in dependence upon the status 
of a network. To accomplish this task, the approach proposed 
in our previous work is used. According to that approach, 
Signaling service class is configured using priority queuing 
system to give it absolute preferential treatment over all 
other User service classes. Since the proposed approach is 
signaling protocol independent, this paper considers it with 
regard to RTCP. In this respect, RTCP packets are classified 
into the Signaling service class rather than media-oriented 
service classes in order to transmit the user control 
information reliably and efficiently. 
Obtained results show the significant impact of control 
information prioritization on QoS performance particularly 
during the maximum network load. Prioritizing control 
information transmission provides more accurate statistics 
for the measurements performed by RTCP, and thereby 
increases the QoS.  
 
 
a. RTP (Real-time Transport Protocol); b. RTT (Round-Trip Time). 
Figure 2.  Simulation results: (a) Throughput; (b) Loss rate of RTP packets; (c) Cumulative number of lost RTP packets; (d) RTT for RTP packets; (e) Jitter 
for RTP packets. 
64
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

However, the opportunity for the improvement of this 
approach may be identified. Encouraged by the positive 
results, the intention is to elaborate proposed idea and 
investigate it in detail. That could include the research 
activities on behavior of various types of multimedia real-
time traffic under various network conditions. Additionally, 
the intention is to emulate the real-time traffic, in order to 
test the functions and performances of real-world devices 
and services, and observe how they would perform under 
various network conditions.  
Also, 
since 
today’s 
innovation 
and 
technology 
development depends on the users’ satisfaction, it is 
necessary to investigate users’ perceived quality of the real-
time services with regard to this approach. Being linked to 
various investigation areas, this idea is hopefully going to 
become a new starting point for research activities in the 
future. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers 
for their valuable comments that greatly improved the paper. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Baraković, J. Baraković, and H. Bajrić, “QoE Dimensions 
and 
QoE 
Measurement 
of 
NGN 
Services,” 
Proc. 
Telecommunications Forum (TELFOR 2010), IEEE press, 
November 2010, pp. 15-18. 
[2] H. Schulzrinne, S. Casner, R. Frederick, and V. Jacobson, 
“RTP: A Transport Protocol for Real-Time Applications,” 
Technical Report RFC 3550, Internet Engineering Task Force 
(IETF), July 2003. 
[3] J. I. Agbinya, IP Communications and Services for NGN. 
CRC Press, Taylor and Francis Group, 2010. 
[4] J. Barakovic, H. Bajric, and S. Barakovic, “Priority Level 
Configuration for Signaling Service Class,” Proc. IEEE 
International 
Conference 
on 
Communication 
Theory, 
Reliability and Quality of Service (CTRQ 2010), IEEE Press, 
June 2010, pp. 122-127, doi: 10.1109/CTRQ.2010.28. 
[5] B. Braden, D. Clark, and S. Shenker, “Integrated Services in 
the Internet Architecture: an overview,” Technical Report 
RFC 1633, Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), June 
1994. 
[6] S. Blake, D. Black, M. Carlson, E. Davies, Z. Wang, and W. 
Weiss, “An Architecture for Differentiated Service,” 
Technical Report RFC 2475, Internet Engineering Task Force 
(IETF), December 1998. 
[7] R. Braden, L. Zhang, S. Berson, S. Herzog, and S. Jamin, 
“Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP) - Version 1 
Functional Specification,” Technical Report RFC 2205, 
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), September 1997.  
[8] E. C. Rosen, A. Viswanathan, and R. Callon, “Multiprotocol 
Label Switching Architecture,” Technical Report RFC 3031, 
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), January 2001. 
[9] D. Awduche, L. Berger, D. Gan, T. Li, V. Srinivasan, and G. 
Swallow, “RSVP-TE: Extensions to RSVP for LSP Tunnels,” 
Technical Report RFC 3209, Internet Engineering Task Force 
(IETF), December 2001. 
[10] L. Andersson, P. Doolan, N. Feldman, A. Fredette, and B. 
Thomas, “LDP Specification,” Technical Report RFC 3036, 
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), January 2001. 
[11] J. Barakovic, H. Bajric, and A. Husic, “QoS Design Issues 
and Traffic Engineering in Next Generation IP/MPLS 
Network,“ Proc. IEEE  International Conference on 
Telecommunications (ConTEL 2007), IEEE Press, Zagreb, 
Croatia, 
June 
2007, 
pp. 
203-210, 
doi: 
10.1109/CONTEL.2007.381873. 
[12] X. Fu, H. Schulzrinne, A. Bader, D. Hogrefe, C. Kappler, G. 
Karagiannis, H. Tschofenig, and S. Van den Bosch, “NSIS: A 
New Extensible 
IP 
Sinaling 
Protocol 
Suite,“ 
IEEE 
Communication Magazine 2005, Vol. 43, No. 10, pp. 133-141. 
[13] J. Brassil, et al., “The CHART system: a high-performance, 
fair transport architecture based on explicit-rate signaling,” 
ACM SIGOPS Operating System Review, Vol. 43, No. 1, 
January 2009, pp. 26-35. 
[14] N. Dukkipati, N. McKeown, and A. G. Fraser, “RCP-AC: 
Congestion Control to Make Flows Complete Quickly in Any 
Environment,” Proc. IEEE International Conference on 
Computer Communications (INFOCOM 2006), IEEE press, 
April 2007, pp. 1-5, doi: 10.1109/INFOCOM.2006.18. 
[15] Project Economics and Technologies for Inter-Carrier 
Services 
(ETICS), 
“End-to-end 
service 
specification 
template,” November 2010. Available at: https://www.ict-
etics.eu/, 27.02.2011. 
[16] J. Babiarz, K. Chan, and F. Baker, “Configuration Guidelines 
for DiffServ Service Classes,” Technical Report RFC 4594, 
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), August 2006. 
[17] V. Joseph and B. Chapman, Deploying QoS for Cisco IP and 
next generation networks: the definitive guide. Morgan 
Kaufmann, 2009. 
[18] F. Baker, J. Polk, and M. Dolly, “A Differentiated Service 
Code 
Point 
(DSCP) 
for 
Capacity-Admitted 
Traffic,” 
Technical Report RFC 5865, Internet Engineering Task Force 
(IETF), May 2010. 
[19] NCTUns network simulator and emulator web site. Available 
at: http://nsl10.csie.nctu.edu.tw/nctuns.html, 27.02.2011. 
[20] H. Schulzrinne and S. Casner, “RTP Profile for Audio and 
Video Conferences with Minimal Control,” Technical Report 
RFC 3551, Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), July 
2003.
 
65
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

