A TDMA-based MAC Protocol for Wireless Mesh
Networks using Directional Antennas
Ali El Masri, Lyes Khoukhi, and Dominique Gaiti
ICD/ERA, Troyes University of Technology
12 rue Marie Curie, 10010 Troyes Cedex , France
Email: {ali.el masri, lyes.khoukhi, dominique.gaiti}@utt.fr
Abstract—Wireless Mesh Networks (WMNs) have emerged as
a key technology for next generation wireless networks. It is
expected that WMNs will support diverse kind of multimedia ser-
vices. Hence, there is a vital need to conceive efﬁcient and reliable
MAC protocols that allows alleviating wireless MAC problems. In
this paper, we develop a novel MAC scheme for Wireless Mesh
Networks based on a TDMA approach and using directional
antennas. Our main objective behind this proposal is to respond
to the main directional MAC problems such as deafness and
hidden terminal problems caused by the lack in knowledge at
each wireless node about its neighboring transmissions. The
contribution of our MAC scheme is twofold. First, in enabling
parallel transmissions and second in maintaining a full knowledge
at each wireless node about neighboring transmissions. Using
parallel transmissions, a busy node will not miss the start of
a neighboring transmission. A robust algorithm of mini-slot
assignment is proposed to provide full-knowledge, collision-free,
and a fair channel access between all the nodes in the network.
Index Terms—Wireless Mesh Networks; Directional Antennas;
Medium Access Control (MAC);
I. INTRODUCTION
Wireless mesh networks (WMNs) have emerged as a key
technology for next-generation wireless networks. A WMN is
a set of stationary wireless routers serving as access points
for wireless clients and forming together a wireless mesh
backbone (creating in effect, an ad hoc network).
One of the main challenges that are facing the deployment
of WMN is how to ensure Quality of Service (QoS) to the
real-time trafﬁc. In fact, a properly designed MAC protocol
is a key factor to maintain the reliability of transmissions, to
satisfy the QoS requirements and to efﬁciently allocate the
radio resources. Two main aspects distinguish WMNs from
traditional multi-hop wireless networks such as mobile ad
hoc and wireless sensor networks [1]. First, the routers are
placed in ﬁxed location with continuous power supply, and
then there is no mobility or energy constraints. Second, the
trafﬁc aggregated at each local router is heavy due to the
forwarded trafﬁc from neighboring routers and the uploaded
trafﬁc from local wireless clients, and then contention-based
MAC protocols suffer from serious collisions and great viola-
tions of QoS requirements. Hence, designing a properly MAC
protocols continues to be critical problem in WMNs.
In the other hand, directional antennas have been success-
fully applied to increase spatial reuse, reduce interference,
extend transmission range and optimize power consumption.
Directional antennas seem then to be an appropriate technique
to improve the performance of WMNs characterized by their
heavy load trafﬁc and their ﬁxed wireless routers. The past few
years have witnessed the special attention given by the wireless
community to the directional antennas concept. A number of
proposed MAC protocols based on directional antennas have
been proposed, most of them are CSMA/CA-based protocols.
However, the use of directional antennas introduces new MAC
problems such as deafness problem, new kinds of hidden
terminal problems and head-of-line blocking problem.
The deafness problem (Figure 1a) occurs when a node
C tries to communicate with a node A while node A is
beamformed to another direction than the direction of node C.
In such scenario, node C loses many RTS (Ready-To-Send)
packets while trying to establish the connections with A. It
leads to the following: Increase the contention window of
node C, lose the fairness between nodes, waste the bandwidth
and cancel the spatial reuse, which it is the main beneﬁt
of directional antennas. The hidden terminal problem (Figure
1b) occurs when two nodes A (source) and B (destination)
begin a communication while a neighboring node C is already
communicating with other nodes. When node C becomes idle,
it does not sense the communication between A and B due to
the use of directional antennas. If node C has in the head of its
queue a packet intended to node B, it starts the transmission of
a series of unsuccessful RTS packets. Node C suffers then from
the inconveniences of deafness problem explained above, and
node B suffers from collisions between data packets received
from A and RTS packets received from C. The head-of-line
problem (Figure 1c) occurs when a node C has in the head of
its queue a packet intended to a busy node A, while the next
packet in the queue is intended to an idle node D. Hence, the
packet intended to D suffers from unnecessary delay.
The main reason of these problems is the lack in aware-
ness at a wireless node about the concurrent neighboring
transmissions. This lack is due to one of the following two
scenarios. First, when two nodes begin a communication, they
do not inform all the nodes in their vicinity about the on-
going communication due to the use of directional RTS/CTS
(Clear-To-Send) transmissions. Second, even if nodes in the
vicinity of the communication are well informed, the RTS/CTS
handshake cannot be heard by a busy node. In our opinion,
parallel transmissions seem to be an optimal solution of these
problems. We mean by parallel transmissions that the different
concurrent transmissions have the same start and end times.
95
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

(a) Deafness problem
(b) Hidden terminal problem
(c) Head-of-line blocking problem
Fig. 1: Directional MAC problems
In this paper, we propose a new TDMA-based (Time Divi-
sion Multiple Access) MAC protocol for wireless mesh back-
bone using directional antennas. Our proposal aims to handle
directional MAC problems by enabling parallel transmissions.
The proposed protocol provides a full knowledge about the
concurrent transmission in the surrounding of each wireless
router. Thus, the proposed protocol is designed to be collision-
free, deafness-free and blocking-free. In addition, the proposed
MAC protocol includes a new algorithm that offers a ﬂexible
and scalable way for assigning time-slots to wireless routers.
The proposed time-slot assignment algorithm is applied at each
node/neighborhood, to completely avoid the transmission of
unsuccessful control messages, and hence to widely reduce
the control overhead in WMNs. Moreover, the time-slot as-
signment changes dynamically to ensure a fair channel access.
Beneﬁting from the transmission characteristics of directional
antennas, the spatial reuse is greatly increased by our protocol.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The related
work is reviewed in Section II. The antennas model is pre-
sented in Section III. In Section IV, we detail our proposed
protocol. Finally, we draw our conclusion in Section V.
II. RELATED WORK
Several proposed MAC protocols for ad hoc and mesh
networks using directional antennas exist in the literature.
Most of them are based on the IEEE 802.11 DCF MAC
protocol. In this section, we give our proper classiﬁcation
of MAC protocols using directional antennas. In our clas-
siﬁcation, protocols are divided into two groups: protocol
with parallel transmissions and protocol with non-parallel
transmission, each group is divided into several categories.
A. Non-Parallel Transmission
This group includes three categories of protocols, pure di-
rectional RTS/CTS, circular directional RTS/CTS, and explicit
control messages category.
In Pure Directional Category [2][3], all RTS/CTS/Data/Ack
packets are transmitted in the directional mode. Since no
additional control packets exists, the spatial reuse is improved.
However any proposed mechanism doesn’t handle the deafness
or the hidden terminal problem.
In the circular directional category [4][5], RTS and CTS
are circularly transmitted in the directional mode through all
or part of the unblocked beams of the transmitter and the
receiver. The goal is to alleviate the deafness problem and
to inform all the directional-omni neighbors about the ongo-
ing transmission. Although the deafness problem is largely
alleviated with this category of protocols, the deaf nodes are
not completely avoided. In addition, the control overhead is
largely increased due to additional control packets (circular
RTS/CTS), and further ﬁelds inserted into RTS/CTS packets.
In the category of explicit control messages, additional
control messages are used, e.g., busy-tone signals [6] and
receiver initiated messages [7]. The busy-tone signals [6] are
sent after the transmission to notify nodes in deafness state
to reset their contention window. RTR (Ready To Receive)
packet is sent by a receiver to invite potential sender to begin
the transmission. The mean weakness of these approaches
is that they try to solve directional MAC problems at the
end of transmissions. The fairness is improved, however the
unsuccessful RTS packets and bandwidth wastage still exist in
this kind of protocols.
B. Parallel Transmission
Few works are proposed in the group of parallel transmis-
sion. These protocols are divided into two categories: CSMA-
based [8], and TDMA-based [9]. In former case, the source-
destination couple of the ﬁrst successful exchange of RTS/CTS
packets are considered as master nodes. Nodes in their vicinity
are considered as slave nodes. After the successful exchange
of control packets, master nodes wait for a duration before
the beginning of transmission. Only the slave nodes, that win
to exchange successful RTS/CTS packets during the waiting
time, are allowed to transmit in parallel with the master nodes.
Several limitations are observed: First, RTS/CTS packets are
sent omnidirectionaly, hence the network connectivity is lim-
ited to OO-neighbors. Second, serious collisions may occur
during the waiting time after the RTS/CTS exchange between
the master nodes. Third, it is not clear how it will be the
behavior of slave nodes if they are common neighbors of two
couples of master nodes. To cope these issues, a directional
TDMA-based MAC (RT-DMAC) protocol is proposed in [9].
However, RT-DMAC is designed only for uniform grid topolo-
gies where each node has four neighbors and is equipped with
four beam antennas. The connectivity of RT-DMAC is also
limited to OO-neighbors. This approach in not realistic in real
WMNs and then the proposed protocol is not applicable.
III. ANTENNAS SET-UP
Each wireless router is equipped with M non-overlapped
directional antennas. Routers can transmit or receive using
directional or omnidirectional mode. When using omnidirec-
tional mode, a router can either transmit or receive through
all directions at the same time with a gain of Go. When
96
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

using directional mode, a router can either transmit or receive
through only one direction with a gain of Gd ≻ Go. Three
sets of neighbors are used in our model: OO-neighbors/DD-
neighbors when both the transmitter and the receiver use om-
nidirectional/directional mode respectively, and DO-neighbors
when either the transmitter or the receiver uses the directional
mode.
IV. THE PROPOSED MAC PROTOCOL
A. Time Division
The time sequence in nodes is divided into slots. Each slot
is divided into a control part and a transmission part. The goal
of the control part is to decide which nodes will transmit in
the following transmission part and which nodes will receive.
In order to minimize the control overhead, the transmission
part is much greater than the control part. The control part
is divided into N mini-slot when N represents the number of
nodes in the most load two-hop neighborhood. Each mini-slot
is divided into three mini-parts. The two-hop neighborhoods
of a given node consist of all nodes containing in the one-hop
or the two-hop neighbors of this node. The time division is
shown in Figure 2.
Fig. 2: Mini-slot Assignment
B. Mini-Slot Assignment
The goal of the mini-slot assignment is to assign a number
of nodes to each mini-slot. If the number of mini-slots is small,
then the control overhead is small. Hence, the number of nodes
into each mini-slot should be the largest as possible. The mini-
slot assignment should take into consideration that two nodes
in the same two-hop neighborhood cannot be assigned to the
same mini-slot. As explained in Section III-C, a node wishing
to transmit during the transmission part should send a jam
signal during it corresponding mini-slot. Hence, in order to
maintain a collision-free MAC protocol, two nodes in the same
two-hop neighborhood cannot be assigned to the same mini-
slot. In fact, if two nodes in the same two-hop neighborhoods
begin a transmission at the same time, resulting in a situation
where the receiver of one of them is a one-hop neighbor of
the other, and then a collision will occur at this receiver. The
algorithm of mini-slot assignment is shown in Algorithm 1.
C. Framework
At the beginning of each mini-slot, if a node S has a packet
to transmit to node R and if S is assigned to this mini-
slot, S will transmit a jam signal omnidirectionally during
Algorithm 1 Mini-slot assignment
1: N ← 1; Number of mini-slots
2: Li = The set of 2-hop neighbors of node i
3: Sj = The set of nodes in the mini-slot j
4: for i = 0 to Numberofnodes do
5:
flag ← false;
6:
for j = 0 to N do
7:
if Li ∩ Sj == ø then
8:
add i to Sj;
9:
flag ← true;
10:
break;
11:
end if
12:
end for
13:
if flag == false then
14:
N ← N + 1;
15:
add i to SN;
16:
end if
17: end for
the ﬁrst mini-part of the mini-slot. A jam signal is a busy-
tone signal and it does not contain any information. The jam
signal should be only sensed at the receiver but not decoded.
When a receiver node R receives a jam signal during the ﬁrst
mini-part, it detects the direction of the received signal and
it knows that the corresponding neighbor will be busy during
the following transmission part. Note that since a jam signal
only needs to be detected and not decoded, it will be sensed
by all the nodes in the set of DO-neighbors of the sender S
even if it is transmitted using the omnidirectional mode [10].
In the second mini-part, the node S transmits a jam signal
toward the direction of R using the directional mode. Hence,
when a neighbor node of S senses only the ﬁrst jam signal, it
knows that S will be busy during the following transmission
part. In the other case, when a node receives a jam signal
during the ﬁrst and the second mini-slots, it knows that it
will be the receiver node R during the following transmission
part. In the result, all the one-hop neighbors of S are notiﬁed
that S will be busy in the following transmission part. If one
of the neighbors of S has in the head of its queue a packet
intended to S, the transmission of this packet is deferred to the
next slot. In the third mini-slot, the receiver R transmits a jam
signal using the omnidirectional mode, and then the one-hop
neighbors of R know that R will be busy during the following
transmission part. In the following mini-slots, the assigned
nodes can follow the same procedure if their corresponding
receivers are not busy. In other words, the assigned nodes can
follow this procedure if they have not received a jam signal
from their corresponding receivers during the precedent mini-
slots of the same slot. It is clear that using our protocol, all the
nodes will have a complete knowledge about the concurrent
transmission in their vicinity, and then no deafness, hidden, or
blocking problem will take place since transmissions occur in
parallel.
In the aim of better understating our proposed work, let’s
97
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

Fig. 3: The framework of our protocol
consider the example shown in Figure 3. It presents a chain
topology of 6 nodes. In the ﬁrst step, the model has to
assign nodes to mini-slots. Let’s consider the set of nodes
A,B,C, since each node of this set is within the two-hop
neighborhoods of the two other nodes, each one of them
should be assigned to a separate mini-slot. Node D is not
within the two-hop neighborhood of node A, and then node
D is assigned to the same mini-slot of node A. For the same
reasons, node E is assigned to the mini-slot of node B and
node F is assigned to the mini-slot of node C. In the second
step, we explain the operations realized by our protocol. Let’s
consider that at the beginning of the slot, the node D has in
the head of its queue a packet intended to node C. During
the ﬁrst mini-part of the ﬁrst mini-slot, node D transmits a
jam signal using the omnidirectional mode. By sensing the
direction of the receiving jam signal, node C and node E know
that node D will be busy during the transmission part. During
the second mini-part of the ﬁrst mini-slot, node D transmits a
jam signal toward node C using the directional mode. Hence,
node C knows that it is the corresponding receiver of node D,
and node E knows that it is not the corresponding receiver of
node D. In the third mini-part, node C transmits a jam signal
using the omnidirectional mode. By sensing the direction of
the receiving jam signal, node B knows that node C will be
busy during the transmission part. Nodes B and E are assigned
to the second mini-slot. During the ﬁrst mini-slot if node B
has in the head of its queue a packet intended to node A,
it follows the same procedure of node D. In the other case,
if node B has in the head of its queue a packet intended to
node C, it defers the transmission of this packet to the next
mini-slot and it checks if it has another packet in the queue
indented to node A. If such packet exists, node B follows the
procedure of node D; otherwise B remains idle during its mini-
slot. Node E follows the procedure of node B by preventing the
transmission toward node D. The same procedure is repeated
in the third mini-slot. The transmission will take place just
after the end of the control part. The precedent mechanism is
repeated at the beginning of each slot.
D. Fairness
It is clear from the previous sections that the nodes assigned
to ﬁrst mini-slots have the higher priority to access the channel.
Hence, in order to maintain the fairness in channel access, the
mini-slot assignment is shifted at the beginning of each slot.
In other words, if a node is assigned to the ist mini-slot in
the current slot, it will be assigned to the (i − 1)st mini-slot
during the next slot. For instance, the nodes assigned to the
second mini-slot in the current slot, will be assigned to the ﬁrst
mini-slot in the next slot. Hence, the priority of these nodes
is incremented by one index. Also, the nodes assigned to the
ﬁrst mini-slot in the current slot will be assigned to the latest
mini-slot in the next slot. Hence, the priority of these nodes
will be changed from higher priority to lower priority.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper we have proposed a new TDMA-based MAC
protocol for WMNs using directional antennas. By provid-
ing a full knowledge for each node about its neighboring
transmissions and by maintaining parallel communications,
our protocol is able to alleviate the control access chal-
lenges encountering in many MAC protocols. Our protocol
is collision-free, deafness-free, hidden-free and blocking-free.
Our proposol also provides a full faireness between all the
nodes in the network.
Our future works will be focused on implementing and
deploying our model, and adding more functionalities such
as congestion control and service differentiation. In addition,
the performances evaluations of our work will be compared
with some existing directional MAC protocols.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Wang and W. Zhuang, “A collision-free mac scheme for multimedia
wireless mesh backbone,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communica-
tions, vol. 8, no. 7, pp. 3577 –3589, 2009.
[2] M. Takai, J. Martin, R. Bagrodia, and A. Ren, “Directional virtual
carrier sensing for directional antennas in mobile ad hoc networks,”
in Proceedings of the ACM MOBIHOC Conference, 2002.
[3] R. R. Choudhury, X. Yang, R. Ramanathan, and N. H. Vaidya, “Using
directional antennas for medium access control in ad hoc networks,” in
Proceedings of the ACM MOBICOM Conference, 2002, pp. 59–70.
[4] T. Korakis, G. Jakllari, and L. Tassiulas, “Cdr-mac: A protocol for full
exploitation of directional antennas in ad hoc wireless networks,” IEEE
Transactions on Mobile Computing, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 145 –155, 2008.
[5] P. Li, H. Zhai, and Y. Fang, “Sdmac: Selectively directional mac protocol
for wireless mobile ad hoc networks,” Wireless Networks, vol. 15, pp.
805–820, August 2009.
[6] R. Choudhury and N. Vaidya, “Deafness: a mac problem in ad hoc
networks when using directional antennas,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
ICNP Conference, 2004.
[7] M. Takata, M. Bandai, and T. Watanabe, “RI-DMAC a receiver initiated
directional mac protocol for deafness problem,” International Journal
on Sensors Networks, vol. 5, pp. 79–89, April 2009.
[8] J. Wang, H. Zhai, P. Li, Y. Fang, and D. Wu, “Directional medium
access control for ad hoc networks,” Wireless Networks, vol. 15, pp.
1059–1073, November 2009.
[9] A. Das and T. Zhu, “A reservation-based tdma mac protocol using
directional antennas (RTDMA-DA) for wireless mesh networks,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE GLOBECOM Conference, 2007.
[10] J. Winters, “Smart antenna techniques and their application to wireless
ad hoc networks,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 13, no. 4, pp.
77 –83, 2006.
98
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

