 Testing Triple Play Services Over Open Source IMS Solution for Various Radio 
Access Networks 
Haris Luckin 
BH Telecom d.d. Sarajevo 
Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina 
haris.luckin@bhtelecom.ba 
Mirko Skrbic 
University of Sarajevo 
Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina 
mirko.skrbic@etf.unsa.ba 
 
Abstract —  Nowadays, with the development of next 
generation networks, new standards for voice and video 
services have been introduced, and VoIP (Voice over IP) has 
become a very popular protocol. It leads to the convergence 
of networks which provide voice and data transfer services 
with enhanced and improved applications for customers. As 
a key element of the next generation networks, IMS (IP 
Multimedia Subsystem) architecture aims to offer multimedia 
services via fixed-mobile convergent solutions. In this paper, 
a work model offering triple play services via a UMTS 
network and an IMS subsystem is realized. This model is 
realized through an Open Source software solution for an 
IMS subsystem, and the success of the triple play service 
provided by this system is analyzed. Testing of access 
networks and of different codecs using an Open IMS Core 
system and a UMTS access network is carried out. The most 
successful codec is determined and proposed for use while 
offering triple play services. Further, an optimization of the 
UMTS radio-access network of a middle size operator is 
done by planning the optimal number of NodeB’s for this 
software solution and the dimensioning and optimization of 
the same. The conclusion is that, from the standpoint of 
offering triple play services to a certain number of users, no 
significant extensions of the radio network capacity are 
needed. The resulting system for offering triple play services 
is functional and optimized for exploitation in an active 
network with high reliability. 
 
Keywords – UMTS; IMS; Open IMS Core; EDGE; WiFi.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Third generation mobile systems (3G) were introduced 
in accordance with the needs of customers for high speed 
data transfers, in order to enable a broad spectrum of 
Internet 
services. 
The 
UMTS 
(Universal 
Mobile 
Telecommunications System) presents one of the most 
frequently used standards for third generation mobile 
networks [7]. The combination of Internet and mobile 
networks has resulted in UMTS enabling triple play 
services, whose primary goal is the transition of all current 
and future services to IP: data, voice and video.  
IMS (IP Multimedia Subsystem) represents a standard 
that defines core and service layer architecture of the fixed 
and the mobile telecommunication networks for a new 
generation [8]. The specification of its main elements, 
protocols and mechanisms is based on the cooperation of 
leading telecommunication standardization groups: 3GPP, 
ETSI/TISPAN and IETF. The main technological 
characteristic of IMS is its transparency towards different 
access networks. This is why IMS is the main initiator of 
the evolution of telecommunication networks, leading 
towards fixed-mobile convergence (FMC) solutions. Users 
can access the integrated user interface and are offered a 
unique broad spectrum of services using different devices 
and access technologies.  
In [1], Magedanz, Vingarzan and Harjoc tested the 
Open IMS Core system [9] when a million users access the 
same system. However, an analysis or evaluation of the 
system while providing triple play services in a 
corresponding real environment of a medium size operator 
is not presented. Vingarzan and Weik presented in [2], the 
performance results of the Open IMS Core system in the 
case of transferring signalization traffic for voice 
transmission over various access networks. Testing of the 
video service and choosing appropriate codecs is not 
observed. In [3], Prokkola, Perala, Hanski and Piri 
presented the testing of HSDPA and WCDMA networks. 
The performances of the HSDPA network are not 
compared with other wireless radio access technologies. 
The main research objectives presented in this paper are: 
• 
Realization of the IMS test platform based 
completely on open source technology. 
• 
Realization and testing of triple play services over 
an IMS platform (voice call, video call and data 
transfer). 
• 
Comparison of the performance of different 
access technologies (EDGE, WiFi, UMTS) 
through an IMS test platform by measuring 
appropriate parameters. 
• 
Selection of the optimal codec in order to achieve 
the 
best 
quality 
for 
voice 
and 
video 
communication. 
• 
Optimization of the UMTS radio access network 
in terms of predicting the number of users who 
will initially use the triple play services over 
UMTS radio access networks and the Open IMS 
Core system, and finally the optimization of the 
number of NodeB’s needed to meet the users’ 
needs. 
• 
Considering the results published in [1], the 
design of a potential IMS network for a medium 
size operator, which would meet the needs of the 
initial number of users and whose network core 
would be an Open IMS Core system. 
In the next section, the testing of triple play services 
over various radio access networks (EDGE/WiFi/UMTS) 
is described, with an analysis of the quality of the voice, 
video and data services. Thereafter, the optimization of 
mobile networks is described. The analysis is performed 
based on data from a medium sized telecom operator with 
a developed mobile network (GSM/EDGE/UMTS) and a 
fixed network (PSTN/ADSL), assuming that the number of 
users of the mobile network is 1.000.000, and 700.000 
users for the fixed network. This is followed by the 
47
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

dimensioning and optimization of the Open IMS Core 
system. 
II. 
TESTING OF THE IMS SYSTEM 
The parameters observed for the testing of every 
access network are: packet loss, delay, jitter, MOS (Mean 
Opinion Score) and R factor. The jitter diagram and the 
value of the MOS factor, when testing the voice and video 
service, will be shown for each access network. All of 
these measurements will be done for the GSM FR (GSM 
Full Rate) codec. The presumption is that a unloaded 
Open IMS Core system is used. The Open IMS Core is 
installed on the PC with a 1024/128 Kbit/s access link, 
and the conversation participants are stationary.  
Finally, these parameters will be tested for a UMTS 
access network using an iLBC (Internet Low Bitrate 
Codec) codec, and it will be determined if and what kind 
of progress was achieved by introducing this codec. 
In the case of data and instant messaging transfer, it 
can generally be concluded that there were no problems in 
the realization of these services through any of the used 
radio access technologies.  
A. Testing through the  EDGE radio access network 
The test results of the triple play services for the  
EDGE radio access will be listed below, with an analysis 
of the measured parameters. 
Figure 1 shows the block diagram of the triple play 
testing scenario through the EDGE radio access network 
and the Open IMS Core system. 
 
Figure 1. Testing of triple play services through the EDGE radio access 
network 
 
The test results of the voice service through the 
EDGE radio access network and the Open IMS Core 
system can be interpreted as follows: 
• 
The average value of the MOS parameter was 3.3, 
resulting in a very good quality of the voice 
communication. 
• 
Variations in the packet delay were highly 
emphasized during the voice communication, as 
shown in Figure 2. This refers especially to the 
jitter increase in the interval between the 22nd and 
the 25th second of the voice session. Average jitter 
was 23.42 ms, and is marked by squares in the 
picture. According to [10], where the suggested 
maximum value for jitter in the VoIP network is 
30 ms, it can be concluded that this network 
provides a good quality of the tested service. 
 
 
Figure 2. Measured jitter through the EDGE radio access network in the 
case of voice communication 
While testing the voice and video service together, a 
large decrease in value of the MOS parameter during the 
session was noted. In the beginning of the communication, 
this parameter had the value of 3.7, then immediately 
decreased to 1 (which is basically an unusable call). It 
retains this value until the end of the call.   
It can be seen from Figure 3 that the jitter had higher 
values during the first 9 seconds of the video session. 
Average jitter was 66 ms which is a very poor result for 
the tested type of service. 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Measured jitter through the EDGE radio access network in the 
case of voice and video communication 
 
From the measurements performed on the test system 
it can be summarized that video call services through an 
EDGE radio access network and an Open IMS Core 
system cannot be provided, since the introduction of a 
video call degrades the performances of the voice call to a 
level where it becomes impossible to use. This conclusion 
was to be expected given the practical transmission rate 
characteristic for EDGE technology.  
B. Testing through the WiFi radio access network 
The test results of the triple play services for a  
WiFi radio access network along with an analysis of the 
measured parameters will be presented below. Figure 4 
shows the block diagram of the test scenario through a 
WiFi radio access network. 
For the voice communication tested through the WiFi 
network, the MOS parameter had the value of 3.7, and 
was approximately stable during the entire period of the 
voice session, which is an excellent result for this type of 
codec. 
 
48
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

 
Figure 4. Testing of triple play services through a WiFi radio access 
network 
 
Variations in packet delay were not highly expressed 
(as was the case for the EDGE access network) during the 
voice communication, as shown in Figure 5. Average 
jitter was 3.98 ms, which is a very good result for this 
type of service. 
 
 
Figure 5. Measured jitter through the WiFi radio access network in the 
case of voice communication 
 
While transferring voice and video communication 
through the WiFi network, the MOS parameter was 2.1, 
which means that the introduction of  the video service 
significantly degraded the quality of the transmitted voice. 
It can be concluded from Figure 6 that the jitter values 
during the call session were within acceptable limits. 
There was only one larger increase of these values in the 
19th second of the call duration. Average jitter was 20.58 
ms, which is an acceptable value for this type of service. 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Measured jitter through the WiFi radio access network in the 
case of voice and video communication 
 
It can be concluded that, when transmitting voice and 
video services over a WiFi access network and an Open 
IMS Core system, the transmission performance is 
significantly degraded when compared to the transmission 
of a voice service alone. The WiFi technology can be used 
for the transmission of video services, but a poorer quality 
can be expected for the enduser.  
C. Testing through a UMTS radio access network 
In this section, the test results of the triple play 
services for the UMTS radio access will be shown, with 
an analysis of the measured parameters. 
Figure 7 shows a block diagram of the test scenario 
through the UMTS/HSxPA radio access network. 
The test results of the voice service through the UMTS 
radio access network and Open IMS Core system can be 
interpreted as follows: 
 
Node B
Alice
GGSN
ADSL modem
Bob
Internet
Jezgro mreže
UMTS/
HSxPA radio 
pristup
Open IMS 
Core server
 
Figure 7.  Testing of triple play services through UMTS radio access 
network 
• 
MOS parameter of the voice service tested 
through the UMTS network was 3.7, which is, as 
we know, an excellent result. It is important to 
emphasize that this parameter was stable 
throughout the entire duration of the session. 
• 
Variations in packet delay were not so emphasized 
during the voice communication, as is shown in 
Figure 8. Average jitter was 4.86 ms, which 
completely satisfies the requirements listed in 
[10]. 
 
 
 
Figure 8.  Measured jitter through the UMTS radio access network in the 
case of voice communication 
 
The MOS parameter for the transfer of voice and 
video communication over the UMTS network was 1, 
which means that the introduction of the video signal 
notably degraded the quality of the voice transmitted; 
therefore, it cannot be used for those purposes. 
From Figure 9 it can be concluded that jitter is 
emphasized at the beginning of the call, but later on 
during the communication, it decreases to a slightly lower 
49
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

level. Average jitter was 48.29 ms, which is an 
insufficient value for this type of service. 
 
 
 
Figure 9.  Measured jitter through the UMTS radio access network in the 
case of voice and video communication 
 
It can be concluded that the transmission of a voice 
and video service through the UMTS access network and 
the Open IMS Core system significantly degraded the 
transmission performance, when compared to the 
transmission of voice service alone. Therefore, the UMTS 
technology cannot be used for the transmission of a voice 
and video service at the same time and under these 
conditions.  
D. Testing through theUMTS radio access network – 
iLBC codec 
In order to optimize and provide high quality triple 
play services, the analysis of parameters measured when 
using the iLBC codec in the network will be given below. 
This codec is primarily intended for the coding of speech 
in IP communications. The main advantage of this codec 
is an acceptable degradation of speech quality if it comes 
to packet loss or packet delay. 
When testing the voice service using the iLBC codec 
through the UMTS access network and the Open IMS 
Core system, the results can be interpreted as follows: 
• 
MOS parameter for the voice service tested 
through the UMTS network had an average value 
of 4.1, which is an excellent call quality. It also 
took stable values throughout the entire duration 
of the session. 
• 
Variations in packet delay were not as emphasized 
during the voice communication, shown in Figure 
10. Average jitter was 6.27 ms. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.  Measured jitter through the UMTS radio access network in 
the case of voice communication using iLBC codec 
 
When testing the voice service together with the video 
signal through the UMTS access network and the Open 
IMS Core system, the results can be interpreted as 
follows: 
• 
MOS 
parameter 
for 
voice 
and 
video 
communication 
through 
the 
UMTS 
access 
network had an average value of 3.9, and was 
stable throughout the entire session. 
• 
Variations in packet delay were not as emphasized 
during 
the 
communication, 
except 
at 
the 
beginning of the call, as shown in Figure 11. 
Average jitter was 19.57 ms. 
 
 
 
Figure 11.  Measured jitter through the UMTS radio access network in 
the case of voice and video communication using iLBC codec  
 
E. Conclusions 
After obtaining the results of the transfer of the triple 
play service via the EDGE, UMTS and WiFi radio access 
networks, it can be concluded that the EDGE radio access 
network can be used for voice service, but the quality of 
the call is degraded completely when transferring the 
voice together with the video signal, and it cannot be used 
to offer these services to the end-users. As opposed to the 
EDGE network, the WiFi access network achieved an 
excellent performance for voice calls, however, for video 
calls there occurs a decrease in the quality of the call 
(MOS has the value 2), and it can be concluded that the 
WiFi 
technology, 
despite 
the 
significantly 
better 
performance, cannot be used for the transfer of triple play 
services over an Open IMS Core system, due to the 
relatively poor values of the MOS parameter. On the other 
hand, UMTS has also achieved an excellent performance 
for the voice call, while the video call has introduced a 
complete decrease in the quality of the service. It can also 
be concluded that UMTS is only to be used for voice and 
data services while it does not provide satisfactory 
parameters for a video service. 
     An improvement of the quality of voice and video 
communication through the Open IMS Core system and 
the UMTS radio access network using the iLBC codec is 
achieved in the final stage. When the iLBC codec is used 
to test the quality of triple play services of a voice 
communication, excellent performances of the quality of 
voice and video communication through the UMTS radio 
access network and the Open IMS Core system are 
achieved, which was to be expected taking into 
consideration the characteristics of this codec. 
III. OPTIMIZATION OF THE RADIO ACCESS NETWORK 
The fundamental factor for defining the number of 
users who will share network resources is the traffic 
50
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

produced by each one of them. The traffic per user 
depends on the call frequency and average call duration.  
One approach to the optimization of the UMTS radio 
access network for triple play users will be described 
below. 
Conditions, 
input 
data, 
presumptions 
and 
methodology for an optimal number of UMTS network 
NodeB’s will be listed, taken from an average telecom 
operator.  
Input data and presumptions are listed as follows: 
• 
The operator has 1.000.000 mobile users. 
• 
It is assumed that 20% of the mobile users use the 
UMTS service. 
• 
It is assumed that 30% of the UMTS users use the 
triple play service. 
• 
It is assumed that 10% of the triple play users 
access the system during busy hour.  
• 
It is assumed that the RAB traffic class is used for 
the triple play service. 
• Ideal propagation conditions are assumed. 
RAB (Radio Access Bearer) represents a logical 
relation between the core network and user equipment. It 
is used to enable a connection for the UMTS service 
across the UTRAN (UMTS Terrestrial Radio Access 
Network) network. The RAB connections are realized as 
Radio Bearer connections between the RNC (Radio 
Network Controller) and the core network.  
Triple play service users are considered to use the 
RAB interactive class of traffic and a certain service 
subscription package with a certain amount of traffic 
included. It is important to mention that (in order to define 
the busy hour) for packet traffic, it is assumed that 10% of 
the daily traffic is used during busy hour and the 
remaining 90% of data traffic is used during the rest of the 
day.  
The traffic measured in kB/busy hour is calculated by 
dividing the amount of traffic from the subscription 
package into 30 days, taking into consideration ten 
percent of the obtained average daily traffic. 
Considering the above calculation, and after the 
analysis of the average HSPA user, for the 1GB data 
traffic included in the monthly subscription, the traffic 
during busy hour is 28633 kbit. 
The relation between uplink and downlink traffic is 
10%, meaning that an average user realizes 318,19 kB of 
downlink traffic and 31,81 kB of uplink traffic during 
busy hour. 
The configuration of every base station/cell will be 
designed to support HSDPA up to 14,4 Mbps and EUL up 
to 1,4 Mbps, using only one frequency bearer, because of  
the theoretical restriction of the code tree resources 
(HSDPA requires 15 out of the 16 available codes). This 
can only be realized with the assumption that there is no 
other (R99) traffic (otherwise the use of two bearers is 
necessary).  
Since R99 traffic is still expected, it is optimal to 
include dynamical code allocation, i.e. a minimum of 10 
codes per cell are allocated to the HSDPA, and the 
remaining five codes will be available when the R99 
traffic is low.  
If 10 codes per cell are allocated to the HSDPA, it can 
be concluded that the maximum traffic for that cell will be 
7,2 Mb/s for downlink and 1,4 Mb/s for uplink traffic.  
Considering the above assumption, that 10% of the 
triple play users will be accessing the network during busy 
hour, a total number of 600 active triple play users is 
obtained for busy hour.  
For one cell it can be calculated:   
• 
7.2 Mbps/318,19 kB = 3 user/cell. 
Therefore, it can be concluded that it is necessary to 
plan 200 cells/NodeB in the UTRAN network, so as to 
serve the total number of triple play users accessing the 
system during busy hour.   
IV. 
DIMENSIONIG AND OPTIMISATION OF THE OPEN 
IMS CORE SYSTEM 
In order to carry out the dimensioning and optimization 
of the Open IMS Core system, besides the number of 
UMTS users of the triple play service who will access the 
system during busy hour, it is necessary to define the 
number of fixed network users who will use the triple play 
service.  
Input data and assumptions for this case are listed as 
follows: 
• 
The operator has 700.000 users. 
• 
It is assumed that 30% of the users use Internet 
service. 
• 
It is assumed that 20% of the Internet users use 
triple play service.  
• 
It is assumed that 10% of the triple play users 
access the network simultaneously during busy 
hour.  
Using these assumptions a total number of 42.000 
users who access the Open IMS Core system is obtained. 
Taking into account the assumption that 10% of the users 
use the triple play service at the same time, a total number 
of 4.200 users is obtained.  
Together with the UMTS users, a number of 10.200 
users accessing the Open IMS Core system at the same 
time is obtained.   
 Taking into account that the computer used for testing 
the Open IMS Core system has a poor performance, 
referring to the processor speed, the throughput of the 
network interface, memory, etc., this machine could not 
be used for an IMS core network of a real operator. 
Such 
a 
workstation 
can, 
according 
to 
[1], 
simultaneously serve 10000 calls. This would satisfy the 
requirements listed above.  
However, more users are expected to use the triple 
play service in the future, which will result in the need for 
proper dimensioning and optimization of the Open IMS 
Core system.  
Scalability and redundancy are the next important 
parameters which should be observed. In order to achieve 
a scalable system, expandable in accordance with the 
future growth of the number of triple play users, and to 
improve the performances of the system for future users, 
two parallel Open IMS Core systems can be installed.  
 
 
51
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

 
Figure 12. Optimized Open IMS Core system 
 
This is the horizontal scalability principle, where a 
capacity-expandable 
platform 
is 
achieved 
by 
the 
multiplication of servers (CSCF’s and FHoSS database). 
From the viewpoint of system redundancy, it is 
possible to provide database redundancy, computer 
processor redundancy and geographical redundancy. 
V. 
CHALLENGES FOR MOBILE OPERATORS – OTT 
(OVER-THE-TOP) 
We are witnessing a large increase in mobile data 
traffic and a significant utilization of the available 
bandwidth of networks, currently happening worldwide. 
This growth receives great support from the diverse 
offerings of IP-enabled intelligent devices. To adjust and 
to earn additional revenue, mobile operators must 
optimize their networks. This optimization refers to the 
installation of new multimedia platforms in the core 
network (IP RAN aggregate node, IP core network). The 
new platforms would, in order to identify the used OTT 
services and to implement certain rules and repayments, 
enable the following functions:  
• 
Service-aware charge. 
• 
Access control. 
• 
Policy control. 
• 
Content filtering. 
• 
Quality of service (QoS). 
• 
Application detection and control. 
• 
Optimization of data traffic. 
• 
Security. 
The Figure 13 presents these multimedia platforms. 
Internet
IMS - CSCF 
GGSN/PCEF/PGW
SGSN/MME/SGW
SPR/AAA
OCS/OFCS
PCRF
UMTS/
HSPA
Gy/Gz
Diameter
Diameter
Gx
Rx
 Figure 13. Multimedia platform 
Through the implementation of the mentioned 
platforms, mobile operators get the opportunity to develop 
new models of revenue sharing with OTT providers. Extra 
revenue could be achieved by introducing new services. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
After obtaining the measuring results of the transfer of 
triple play services across EDGE, WiFi and UMTS access 
networks, it can be concluded that when introducing a 
video signal to a voice session over WiFi and UMTS 
access networks it shows a poor performance, which 
implies a significantly decreased quality of service. For 
the EDGE access network this service is completely 
degraded and is impossible to use. 
For the voice transmission, very good performances are 
obtained for each of these three access technologies. 
Further, it is experimented with using different codecs 
for the transmission over UMTS in order to improve the 
quality of service for this access network. The best results 
are obtained using the iLBC codec, which achieved great 
performances for triple play services.  
From the viewpoint of data and instant messages 
transfer, it can generally be concluded that these sessions 
were successfully completed for each technology. 
Further, the optimization of the number of UMTS radio 
access network’s NodeB’s is completed. This was done 
for a middle size operator, and the conclusion is that in 
order to offer triple play services to a certain number of 
users, no additional extensions of the radio access network 
are needed. 
The increase in the number of users using advanced 
terminals and requests for the triple play service, results in 
an increase of the network load, which will result in an 
additional optimization of the network in the future.  
Furthermore, a dimensioning of the IMS core for 
middle-sized fixed operators and mobile operators is 
done. It can be concluded that the Open IMS Core as a 
commercial solution would be a functional IMS system, 
adjusted to customer's requests, and with a high capacity, 
so user penetration could be satisfied for a long period of 
time.  
Additional research could include testing of the WiFi 
network for different codecs, understanding  jitter 
behaviour 
for 
characteristical 
measurements, 
and 
52
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

measuring the same parameters over a longer measuring 
period. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
T. Magedanz, D. Vingarzan, and B. Harjoc, “Generating Realistic 
NGN load with SIPNuke on Inexpensive Hardware – The One 
Million Demonstration” Fraunhofer FOKUS, Berlin, 2008. 
[2] 
D. Vingarzan and P. Weik, “End-to-end Performance of the IP 
Multimedia Subsystem over Various Wireless Networks”, Wireless 
Communications and Networking Conference, WCNC IEEE, 2006. 
[3] 
J. Prokkola,  P.H.J. Perala, M. Hanski, and E. Piri, “3G/HSPA 
Performance in Live Networks from the End User Perspective”, 
IEEE International Conference on  Communications, 2009. 
[4] 
ITU-T 
Recommendation 
P.800, 
“Methods 
for 
subjective 
determination of transmission quality”. 
[5] 
ITU-T Recommendation G.107, “The E-model, a computational 
model for use in transmission planning”. 
[6] 
F. Yao and L. Zhang, “OpenIMS and Interoperability with 
Asterisk/Sip 
Express 
VOIP 
Enterprise 
Solutions”, 
Agder 
University College, Faculty and Communication Technology, 
Grimstad, Norway, May, 2007. 
[7] 
3rd Generation Partnership Project, Technical Specification Group 
Services and System Aspects, “3rd Generation mobile system 
Release 1999 Specifications”, 3GPP TS 21.101, last access date: 
11.02.2011. 
[8] 
3rd Generation Partnership Project, Technical Specification Group 
Services and System Aspects, “IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS), 
Stage 2, (Release 8)”, 3GPP TS 23.228 V8.5.0 (2008-06), last 
access date: 11.02.2011. 
[9] 
http://www.openimscore.org/, last access date: 11.02.2011. 
[10] T. Szigeti and C. Hattingh, “End-to-End QoS Network Design”, 
Cisco Press, 2004. 
 
 
53
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

