A Reputation System Model Based on Indication to Combat Pollution in P2P 
Networks 
 
Fabíola Bento Soares 
College of Computing 
Federal University of Uberlandia - UFU 
Uberlândia/MG, Brazil 
e-mail: fabiolasb@gmail.com 
Newarney Torrezão da Costa 
College of Computing 
Federal University of Uberlandia - UFU 
Uberlândia/MG, Brazil 
e-mail: newarney@gmail.com 
 
Luís Fernando Faina 
College of Computing 
Federal University of Uberlandia - UFU 
Uberlândia/MG, Brazil 
e-mail: faina@facom.ufu.br 
Jamil Salem Barbar 
College of Computing 
Federal University of Uberlandia - UFU 
Uberlândia/MG, Brazil 
e-mail: jamil@facom.ufu.br
 
Abstract— P2P Networks are compound by nodes, servers and 
suppliers of services or resources. This kind of system allows us 
as part of it to supply and ask for resources in easy manner as 
well as for fake or corrupted content resources. Some 
mechanisms based on resources or based on nodes, named 
reputation systems, are developed to decreasing the pollution 
in P2P Network. This article presents a reputation system 
model based on nodes and also means to defeat the pollution 
issue by expelling malicious nodes, underprivileging selfish 
nodes and improving the honest ones. Simulations prove the 
effectiveness of the model in question. 
Keywords-reputation; poisoning; pollution; peer-to-peer 
networks 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
A network architecture Peer-to-Peer (P2P) is made of 
elements that may perform as clients and suppliers of 
resources [1]. Those networks are spread systems, which 
have interconnected nodes with self-organization capability, 
aimed at sharing diverse resources such as, music, video, 
document, among others. Another skill to be stand out is 
their capability to adapt at the same time they keep the 
connectivity with acceptable performance, without mediators 
or support of a central control office [2]. 
They also make feasible a great inlet and outlet of 
members with most diverse intentions, therefore, there are no 
means to avoid poisoning, that is, the availability of 
resources with corrupted or useless content by P2P network. 
Due to this poisoning occurs the pollution, which configures 
the network breakdown. Such mainly happens for the action 
of bad-intentioned users that poison a specific resource. This 
poisoning of resources may take place in several manners 
such as adding it a invalid content, supplying it with false 
information able to corrupt files, also by changing 
frequencies of music files, linking Trojans, among other 
techniques.  
Resources, whether corrupted or not, have the same set of 
information, thus generating an issue, for it becomes hard to 
find those not poisoned [3]. Such issue may be detracted by a 
system of reputation that help the requestor nodes to acquire 
resources with valid content, besides avoiding dishonest 
nodes in the network [4]. In this context, there are nodes or 
selfish users which never share resources or narrow its 
permission to access, along with generous users that always 
release valid resources and cooperate for the right 
maintenance and good working of P2P network by supplying 
reliable information. 
In this perspective, great issues in reputation systems are: 
discriminate valid resources from invalid ones in distributed 
and decentralized systems in reason of the dynamic behavior 
it presents, stand out selfish users to repress them for they 
don’t add resources to the network. This work proposes to 
minimize these problems by reducing the pollution in P2P 
networks by means of a methodology which benefits 
generous users to the detriment of bad-behaved users, 
whether malicious or selfish. 
Therefore, instead of consulting directly the node 
reputation which hosts the recourse, a consulting to partner 
nodes is made. These nodes are addressed as supernodes and 
have already used the recourse requested, or they know the 
node reputation that hosts this recourse. Thus, the model 
privileges the good reputation nodes with the information 
shared with partner nodes. Therefore, the quality of the 
content offered by network evolves according to the 
distributed and regular policy. Accordingly, with gradual use 
of the net, generous users broaden their part in the system 
due to its quality of resources, giving priority to the 
proposition of groupware model. Despite the existence of 
selfish and bad-intentioned users, their performance in the 
net shall be reduced as partner nodes narrow their reputation. 
In order to develop the proposition, this article is 
structured as follows: the Introduction previously presented; 
Section 2 approaches the works related; Section 3 describes 
the model in question; Section 4 presents the simulation to 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-192-2
CTRQ 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

validate the hypothesis, and eventually, Section 5 brings final 
considerations. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
The performance of systems of reputation is based on 
two main concepts, which are, confidence and reputation. 
Confidence is about leaving the analysis whether something 
is a fact or not by delivering this study to the source where 
this information came from, and simply take this into 
consideration. For an individual to be considered trustful, it 
is necessary that it has positive, honest and cooperative 
attitudes in relation to the entities dependent on it. On the 
other hand, reliability is one’s capacity to be trustful, which 
means that confidence is a consequence of reliability [5]. 
Reputation, by one’s turn, is what one knows about the 
character or position of an individual before the judgment of 
a community. Therefore, reputation reflects the community’s 
vision over an individual, while trustfulness is about a 
subjective opinion. 
The systems of reputation represent a important 
alternative to help users themselves settling confident 
relationships through Internet, allowing them to make 
personal evaluations over individuals performance and 
identify the reputations estimated before the opinion of a 
community. Thus, those systems present mechanisms to 
stand out and manage reliability relations among users [6]. 
In this work, two systems of reputation were approached 
that guided the new model proposed: the Credence System 
[7] and the System Based upon Resources [8]. Both were 
proposed for P2P environment purely decentralized, in 
which information of nodes reputation is spread over the net. 
A. Credence system of reputation 
This system allows users to classify the resources 
obtained concerning its authenticity whether polluted or not. 
It works based on a protocol of research by voting, used to 
disseminate the rank of those resources by the system and a 
correlation scheme of votes that gives more weight to the 
ones came from pairs that tend to have the same opinion [7].  
Before the acquisition of a resource, one computes a 
correlation among the nodes of the net, that is, applicant and 
supplier nodes. It is natural that bad-intentioned users lie 
about their reputation to poison the net. This correlation 
presents two strategies to protect the statistics of confidence, 
which is locally stored. In one of them only locally computed 
correlations are changed, that is, the client may apply for the 
auditing of the correlation choosing one of the nodes 
involved on it, keeping its integrity.   
In the second strategy, in practice, the local confidence 
statistics has significant amount of redundant information, 
densely connected, forming cycles and raising maliciously 
the reputation before its mates. The auditing might identify 
such behavior and somehow punish the responsible ones.  
In this aspect, the relationship between two nodes is 
expressed by the correlation of their vote record, checking if 
the nodes tend to vote in similar manner, which we call 
positive correlation, in different manner, which is named 
negative correlation, or if their records of votes are not 
correlated. 
B. System of reputation based on resource 
In this model, before making the choice of a resource for 
download, the requestor applies to other nodes the score of 
the candidate resource, and weighs these resources according 
to the reliability and information received from partner 
nodes. When a node requires a resource it consults all the 
nodes in the net. Once it has the response, the applicant node 
may choose among the replies and get what it wants. After 
nodes interaction, the applicant ratify if what was required is 
in fact what it wanted [8]. 
This result is not always optimistic. As a common user, it 
cannot distinguish between the authentic and polluted 
resources unless it’s possible to verify the content after 
getting the resource, or make a remote evaluation, which is 
practically impossible. In this system of reputation, each 
node validates the authenticity of the resource it gets and 
records its result. Thus, the requestor either receives a 
authentic resource or a polluted one. 
Such mechanism aims at restraining the nodes from 
diffusing polluted resources in the following situations: a) 
damage by some kinds of bad behavior, as the sharing of 
invalid resources; b) false information given to other nodes 
in the net, thus sending misleading content over the 
resources; c) collusion of nodes that give right opinions 
about some resources by pretending to be an honest node in 
order to gain confidence of another ones. 
A distinction is made in relation to the resource and to 
the nodes concerning the reputation and reliability, in which 
the reputation of a resource from a node point of view, is 
used to evaluate the expectancy of a node in relation to this 
resource. The reliability of a node, from another node point 
of view, is a subjective expectation which believes that the 
evaluation of the resource is true.  
Each participant node keeps the record of identification 
of a resource in a set classified as RS, and the node 
identification is classified in a set named NS, which is 
compound by nodes that has been publicly evaluating at least 
one resource in RS set. Each node has a local storage defined 
by L to be saved in a matrix, and the reliability value of other 
nodes is saved in another matrix R. 
Each node P has a set of resources identifiers RSP, and a 
set of node identifiers NSP. RSP is compound of resources 
locally authenticated by P. NSP is compound by nodes which 
has publicly evaluated at least one of its resources in RSP, 
and RSP[0] is fitted to be P. 
In addition, each node stores locally the information in 
which P takes part in a matrix LP. Other reliability values are 
stored in a vector RP. 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-192-2
CTRQ 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Node_ 
Requestor 
 
Node_C 
 
Node_B 
 
Node_A 
QueryHit(resourceID, nodeID) 
Query(keyword) 
Query(keyword) 
Query(keyword) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Node_ 
Requestor 
 
Node_B 
 
Node_A 
RatingQuery(resouceID) 
RatingHit(nodeID, 
resourceID, ratingValue) 
RatingQuery(resouceID) 
RatingHit(nodeID, resourceID, ratingValue) 
 
C. Analysis of the reputation systems P2P networks 
In both systems analyzed, the polling for a resource 
brings overhead in P2P net. This occurs because every node 
which possesses the requested information shall be able to 
respond to the consult. Also, there isn’t a hierarchy model 
that distributes the nodes according to its reputation. In 
these systems, it is not considered the validity of the 
repository. This implies in risks to the security about the 
broadcast of reputation data in the net. In these models, once 
the user is considered to be trustful, it shall have the 
permission to spread the reputation obtained among the 
network’s nodes.  
However, for a network with thousands of transactions, 
in many cases, the access of a same file shall be done by 
many users at the same time. In case there is a group of 
malicious users that propagate a information of positive 
reputation to a set of files with doubtful integrity, this act 
may compromise the quality of network resources. 
Therefore, it is interesting that, even with the spread of 
reputation information, only the average shall be considered. 
Thus, if 10% of bad-intentioned users pollute the net and 
forge the reputation of its files, one expects that the 
evolution itself of the net with interactions among well-
behaved, shall be able to judge this poisoning attempt.  
The sequence of events to find a resource in both 
systems is the same. The node requestor, Node_Requestor, 
does 
the 
query 
using 
keywords, 
the 
message 
Query(keyword) is sent to the whole subset of nodes in P2P 
net, according to the employed protocol. The nodes which 
don’t possess the recourse and are willing to share it, reply 
with the message QueryHit(nodeID, resourceID, see  
Figure 1. 
Figure 1.  Sequence of events to consulting resource. 
After obtaining the responses, proceeds the evaluation of 
these. The applicant node, repeatedly chooses a recourse by 
sending a message to request the confidence punctuation for 
the nodes different from those that have the recourse with 
the  message  RatingQuery(resourceID).  The   expert   node 
Figure 2.  Sequence of events to validate the trust. 
responds with a message RatingHit(nodeID, resourceID, 
ratingValue), see Figure 2. 
At each of the systems, a validation of confidence is 
done in distinct manner, this correlation is presented next. 
After the acquisition of the recourse, the nodes which 
supplied information about the recourses are notified about 
the achievement of the resource, and the reputation of the 
recourse origin is updated for higher, when its valid, or 
otherwise lower. 
III. 
MODEL BASED ON INDICATION 
Society represents a model of reputation and confidence 
evolved, considering that, during the interactions, the 
behavior of elements belonging to this system is now 
considered and at each need for interaction, one makes a 
analysis by which one infers if it is trustful or not to interact 
with the node. When one needs a specific recourse, the 
requestor, in its seek of reference data to infer if a behavior 
is acceptable or not, it consults other elements that may have 
already acquire such recourse and have good reference of 
concluded negotiations. This approach differs from current 
ones, for it proposes to receive a indication of a recourse 
from a reliable source. Still there is a model of economy that 
allows the net to stretch, enabling new members to acquire a 
good reputation in the course of their interactions. 
From this information, one applies one’s policy of 
analysis and infers in which node it is possible to acquire 
such recourse with success. The analogy is established when 
someone who needs a certain service, a baby-sitter for 
instance, consults somebody who knows a qualified 
professional that was previously hired and with who one 
had no issues. This model tends to classify a individual 
according to its behavior converging to the “true” of the 
society and not to a pre-established threshold of the system. 
The model proposed acts in the same manner of the 
society, searching recourses by indication of nodes to others 
they had already interacted. With this information, it’s 
possible to rank the nodes which has similar recourses, and 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-192-2
CTRQ 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Node_ 
Requestor 
 
Node_C 
 
Power_Node_B 
 
Node_A 
QueryResponse(resourceID, nodeID, 
resourceReputation, nodeReputation) 
Query(keyword) 
 
the requestor policy is uncharged to infer whether one 
should or should not acquire such recourse, and in addition, 
classify the transaction and generate the record of 
interactions, ranking each time more precisely the nodes of 
the society. The evaluations are made as for the supplier 
node as to the recourse stored on it, and both has a 
reputation measured by the system. 
Another strategy of the proposed model is to encourage 
the sharing of recourses. In case it doesn’t happen, the 
malicious of selfish nodes are purged and not allowed to take 
part in P2P network. 
A. Hierachy structure 
The nodes of the net are classified in two levels, which 
are nodes and supernodes. Nodes are the elements that may 
share and request recourses, and any entrant node in the P2P 
net fits initially in this category. The supernode, besides 
being a node, is also able to make indications about the 
reputation of nodes and recourses, and make public the 
information of the data repository of its subordinates with 
the rest of the network. The supernode is a trustful element 
of the net. Compulsorily, every node is related to a 
supernode, and this association occurs in the occasion of the 
inlet of the node in the P2P net. The supernode, chosen to 
support the inlet node, is the one that possess the least 
amount of subordinate nodes. A node is associated solely to 
a supernode [9]. 
The node is promoted to a supernode when it reaches a 
pre-established threshold of points. This score is initially pre-
defined, but alters dynamically with the evolutions of 
supernodes, that is, the least score to become a supernode is 
the average of the current punctuation of a group of 
supernodes. Besides the scores, one must consider several 
basic characteristics to promote a node to a supernode, for 
instance, storage capability, band width, or still, the period of 
participation in P2P net. After the promotion, it is possible to 
be lowered to a node, according to its behavior. At each 
affiliation of a new node to a supernode, this receives a 
punctuation for publishing the information in P2P network. 
Every supernode has another contingency supernodes, in 
case some unavailability, the node may affiliate  itself to the 
contingency supernode [10]. 
B. Repositories 
Locally, each node stores a repository containing 
information of its shared recourses. In each shared recourse 
is given a punctuation to the supplier node. Also, it is given a 
initial punctuation to the recourse. Similarly to the node 
punctuation, each recourse takes a punctuation at each 
transaction, which may increase or decrease it. Each local 
information of each node is replicated in the supernode, and 
the supernode, with a certain frequency, replicates to the 
contingency supernodes. 
C. Seek for recourses 
The seek process for recourses is unique for avoiding the 
consult to every node of the net, but only to the supernodes, 
thus reducing a lot the amount of requests sent. When a 
requestor element, Node_Requestor, wishes s certain 
recourse, it sends to every supernode, including its superior, 
a requisition Query(keyWord), and every supernode that 
know the holder of this recourse respond with the 
identification of it. The supernode, according to the 
previously mentioned, is a element of reliability that knows 
either the one who possess a certain recourse or its 
respective reputation, node and recourse. Thus, the 
supernode sends such reputations to the requestor node in 
the 
message 
QueryResponse(resourceID, 
nodeID, 
resourceReputation, nodeReputation), see Figure 3. 
Figure 3.  Demand for resources. 
Either the score of recourses or the nodes score has a 
ranking character, since it has positive values, otherwise, it 
becomes eliminatory. In the course of interactions, in case 
the node or file zero out its scores, they shall be no longer 
indicated by the supernode. The nodes which have a score 
lower or equal to zero may not request for resources as well. 
This last rule restricts selfish users from staying in the 
network. 
D. Acquisition 
With the answers from supernodes, the requestor node 
chooses the right recourse ordered by the reputation and 
picks it. The recourses with higher reputation along with the 
nodes of higher reputation shall probably succeed in the 
acquisition of the recourse. Each recourse acquired generates 
a cost in scores for the requestor, independently whether the 
file is valid or not. 
E. Qualification 
After the acquisition of the recourse, the node requestor 
qualifies the transaction, scoring the same way either the 
supplier node or the recourse acquired. Such interaction is 
locally stored and sent to the supplier node. In case of 
conflict of score information, the one that prevails is always 
the lower, this inhibits bad-intentioned users that lie about its 
reputation to gain reliability. 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-192-2
CTRQ 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

 
 
IV. 
SIMULATION 
The model proposed assumes that the system may the 
parameterized in order to attend to the dynamism of the 
behavior of the P2P networks. To simulate this, values were 
defined to the score of behavior  actions, such as sharing a 
recourse, consume recourse, among others, according to 
Table I. 
TABLE I.  
VALUES FOR BEHAVIORAL ACTIONS 
Behavioral action 
Value 
Score to node entrant 
100 points for the node. 
Scoring for the shared resource 
50 points for the resource. 
Share resource  
1 point for sharing the node. 
consuming Resource 
-3 Point for the consumer. 
Being well qualified to provide 
resource 
10 points for the resource 
10 points for the provider node. 
Be badly qualified to provide 
resource 
-20 Points for the resource 
-20 Points for the provider node. 
Super-node join node 
100 points for super-node. 
Score for promotion to the 
super-node 
1000 points 
Due to the rule of each inlet node to compulsorily 
associate to a supernode, it was created a supernode element 
to start the activities of the P2P networks.  
One of the propositions of the model is to permit that 
new honest nodes get into the net and reach good reputation. 
After the creation of the supernode to simulate this scenario, 
one executed 4 steps applied to the values of Table II at 
each of them. 
TABLE II.  
DISTRIBUTION OF NODES AND RESOURCES APPLIED 
Element 
Quantity 
Nodes generous 
35% 
Malicious nodes 
35% 
Nodes Selfish 
30% 
Total of nodes 
2000 
Valid files 
50% 
Invalid files 
50% 
Total resources shared 
56,000 
Total interactions made 
270,000 
The execution considered the selection of requestor 
nodes and recourses supplied at chance. One of the 
restrictions imposed was that a node may not take a recourse 
of itself, for instance, the node itself does not consume its 
own recourse nor scores its own recourse. The average of 
reputation of honest nodes raises mainly by the sharing of 
valid files. On the other hand, the average of reputation of 
malicious nodes tends to zero, for sharing invalid files. 
Selfish nodes follow the same trend of the malicious ones, 
but, with least score, for they only consume recourses, 
according to Figure 4. 
Next, in Figure 5, it is possible to see the evolution of 
the amount of excluded nodes due to bad behavior and the 
amount of nodes promoted due to sharing of valid files 
during interactions. Frequently, nodes with good behavior 
are promoted once they are never despised, tending to 
promote every node with this behavior. Malicious or selfish 
nodes are despised with least proportion to the promoted 
nodes, still permitting to be promoted in case they become 
honest nodes. 
 
Figure 4.  Reputation average x Interactions. 
It is important to stand out that threshold of promotion 
of supernodes are dynamic, and still the scores given to the 
behavior actions are parameterized, but can be fitted. A 
node which is promoted to a supernode may be lowered to a 
node once more in case of a bad behavior, ensuring that the 
supernodes are trustful elements in the net. 
Figure 5.  Comparative Interactions x Nodes. 
By its turn, evaluations in simulated environment show 
that the model combats pollution, for attacks mainly the 
malicious nodes that share invalid files, promoting generous 
nodes and underprivileging selfish nodes. The benefits that 
the system promotes were validated. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
We presented a model of reputation able to combat the 
poisoning of recourses and, consequently, the pollution of 
the P2P network. Still it was showed that, from some 
interactions with the net, malicious nodes are despised and 
can no longer share not even consume recourses of the net. 
Selfish users are also underprivileged and follow the same 
tendency but with a less steep curve, according to which 
was proposed in the simulation section.  
The hierarchy characteristic applied to the distributed 
and decentralized net, allows a uniform growth, at the same 
time that the distribution weighs the supernodes that have 
less recourses associated. The overhead is drastically 
mitigated in such a way that, in the worse of cases, it would 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-192-2
CTRQ 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

reach to be equal to correlated works. The capability to 
parameterize the system helps finding the best threshold of 
promotion of supernodes and the purge of malicious and 
selfish nodes. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Marti, and H. Garcia-Molina, “Taxonomy of trust: 
Categorizing P2P reputation systems”, Computer Networks: 
The 
International 
Journal 
of 
Computer 
and 
Telecommunications Networking - Management in peer-to-
peer systems, vol. 50,  Elsevier, August 2005, pp. 472–484, 
doi:10.1016/j.comnet.2005.07.011. 
[2] M. P. Barcellos, and L. P. Gaspary, “Segurança em Redes 
P2P: Princípios, Tecnologias e Desafios”, Proceedings of 
short courses of the 24th Brazilian Symposium on Computer 
Networks, pp. 1-50, Brazil, Mai 2006. 
[3] C. Costa, “Disseminação de Conteúdo Poluído em redes 
P2P”, Proceedings of the 24th Brazilian Symposium on 
Computer Networks, pp. 1-13, Brazil, Mai 2006. 
[4] J. S. P. Guedes, “Framework para Cálculo de Reputações de 
Agentes de Software Baseado em Testemunhos”, Pontíficia 
Universidade Católica do Rio de Janeiro, pp. 45-82, Brazil, 
March 2007. 
[5] A. Josang, R. Ismail, and C. Boyd, “A survey of trust and 
reputation systems for online service provision”, Decision 
Support Systems, vol. 43, Elsevier, The Netherlands, July 
2007, pp. 618-644, doi: 10.1016/j.dss.2005.05.019. 
[6] P. Resnick, R. Zeckhauser, E. Friedman, and K. Kuwabara, 
“Reputation 
Systems: 
Facilitating 
Trust 
in 
Internet 
Interactions” Communications of the ACM, Vol. 43, USA, 
December 
2000, 
pp. 
45-48, 
doi:10.1109/IWQoS.2010.5542754. 
[7] K. Walsh, and E. G. Sirer, “Experience with an Object 
Reputation 
System 
for 
Peer-to-Peer 
Filesharing”, 
In 
Proceedings of the 3rd conference on Networked Systems 
Design & Implementation, Vol. 3, pp. 1-14, USENIX 
Association Berkeley, USA, 2006. 
[8] H. Chen, and G. Chen, “A Resource-based Reputation Rating 
Mechanism for Peer-to-Peer Networks”, Proceedings of the 
Sixth International Converence on Grid and Cooperative 
Computing, IEEE Computer Society, USA, August 2007,  
pp. 535-541, doi:10.1109/GCC.2007.23. 
[9] N. Christin, A. S. Weigend, and J. Chuang, “Content 
Availability, Pollution and Poisoning in File Sharing Peer-to-
Peer Networks”, Proceedings of the 6th ACM conference on 
Electronic commerce, ACM, Canada, June 2005, pp. 68-77, 
doi:10.1145/1064009.1064017. 
[10] F. Benevenuto, C. Costa, M. Vasconcelos, V. Almeida, J. 
Almeida, and M. Mowbray, “Impact of Peer Incentives on the 
Dissemination of Polluted Content”, Proceedings of the ACM 
Symposium on Applied Computing, France, April 2006, pp. 
1875-1879, doi:10.1145/1141277.1141720. 
[11] J. Liang, N. Naoumov, and K. W. Ross, “The Index Poisoning 
Attack in P2P file-sharing Systems”, Proceedings of the 25th 
IEEE 
International 
Conference 
on 
Computer 
Communications, 
Spain, 
April 
2007, 
pp. 
1-12, 
doi:10.1109/INFOCOM.2006.232. 
[12] R. Gupta, and A. K. Somani, “Reputation Management 
Framework and its use as Currency in Large-scale Peer-toPeer 
Networks”, 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
Fourth 
International 
Conference on Peer-to-Peer Computing, USA, 2004,  
pp. 124-132, doi:10.1109/P2P.2004.44. 
[13] M. Feldman, K. Lai, I. Stoica, and J. Chuang, “Robust 
incentive 
Techniques 
for 
Peer-to-Peer 
Networks”, 
Proceedings of the 5th ACM Conference on Electronic 
Commerce, 
USA, 
May 
2004,  
pp. 102-111, doi:10.1145/988772.988788. 
[14] S. D. Kanvar, M. T. Schlosser, and H. Garcia-Molina, “The 
EigenTrust Algorithm for Reputation Management in P2P 
Networks”, Proceedings of the 12th international conference 
on 
World 
Wide 
Web, 
USA, 
2003, 
pp. 
640-651, 
doi:10.1145/775152.775242.  
[15] A. C. F. Lopes, “Um método para geração de estimativas de 
reputação 
mais 
precisas 
perante 
a 
oscilação 
de 
comportamento das entidades avaliadas”. Universidade 
Federal Fluminense, Instituto de Computação, Brazil, July 
2006. 
[16] C. Costa, “Combatendo a Disseminação de Conteúdo Poluído 
em redes P2P”, Porceedings of the 25th Brazilian Symposium 
on Computer Networks and Distributed Systems, pp. 1-13, 
Brazil, Mai 2007 
 
 
 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-192-2
CTRQ 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

