Comprehensive Security Framework of an Intelligent Wastewater Purification
System for Irrigation
Jose M. Jimenez
Integrated Management Coastal Research Institute,
Universitat Politècnica de València,
Valencia, Spain
jojiher@dcom.upv.es
Laura Garcia
Integrated Management Coastal Research Institute,
Universitat Politècnica de València,
Valencia, Spain
laugarg2@teleco.upv.es
Miran Taha
Department of Computer Science
University of Sulaimani,
Kurdistan region, Iraq
miran.abdullah@univsul.edu.iq
Lorena Parra
Integrated Management Coastal Research Institute,
Universitat Politècnica de València,
Valencia, Spain
loparbo@doctor.upv.es
Jaime Lloret
Integrated Management Coastal Research Institute,
Universitat Politècnica de València,
Valencia, Spain
jlloret@dcom.upv.es
Pascal Lorenz
Network and Telecommunication Research Group,
University of Haute Alsace
Colmar, France
lorenz@ieee.org
Abstract— Although Internet of Things (IoT) is a growing and
evolving technology, attackers are exploiting the multiple
weaknesses of IoT devices. Some attackers even employ these
devices to perform massive attacks, which can greatly affect
the Internet. Furthermore, the data centers for the obtained
data from sensing IoT devices are comprised of several
devices:
hardware,
software
and
the
communication
equipment. Therefore, the data center requires a secure and
controlled environment. It is then evident the necessity of
implanting end-to-end integral security in IoT environments.
In this paper, we propose an integral security method for our
previously published intelligent wastewater purification system
for irrigation. The security is performed from the physical
device to the data stored at the data center including its
transport utilizing different technologies and going through
various pieces of equipment.
Keywords- IoT; Sensors; Actuators; Security; LoRaWAN;
Attacks.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The Internet of Things plays an extraordinary role in all
aspects
of
life.
Moreover,
billions
of
"things"
are
communicating to each other: from TVs, fridges and cars to
smart meters, health monitors, agriculture monitors and
wearables.
Therefore,
communication
through
wireless
networks, cloud computing and data communication among
IoTs are
increasing
[1]. This
opens-up
exciting
new
opportunities
for
research
in
academia
and
industry.
However, it also opens the door to a variety of new security
threats.
The weaknesses of the IoT devices allow accessing the
systems where they are being employed. There is a rapid
growth of botnets according to the report in [2]. Botnets are a
net of bots or robots that can perform autonomously and
automatically and can be jointly controlled. If attackers
employ these bots, it may lead to major attacks to the
Internet. Furthermore, the report indicates that many attacks
to the corporative network are unleashed after compromising
vulnerable servers and computing resources.
Wastewater treatment systems for irrigation benefit from
using
different
IoT
technologies
for
monitoring
and
managing information of the irrigation process. A smart
irrigation system relies on sensors and online services for
improved efficiency.
Users can control the system from a
remote device and can configure it using a cloud service.
These systems face different types of attacks which can
be physical attacks, network attacks and system attacks. For
physical attacks, the problem includes destroying or stealing
the components of the IoT devices. For communication
attacks, the lack of security and vulnerability of the channel
for
data
communication
allow
the
attacker
to
sniff
information from the network. In the system, unsecure data
storage allows the attacker to obtain information from the
cloud environment. Therefore, unauthorized people may
modify and steal information from the system.
There are some existing researches that proposed security
measures against the attacks to IoT systems. A design of IoT
based on smart security and monitoring for farming is
proposed in [3]. Therefore, IoT systems based on smart
security and monitoring devices for agriculture are being
developed. In the proposal described in [4], real time
notifications are provided based on information analysis and
processing used for the identification of rodents and threats.
Furthermore, IoT challenges and opportunities are presented
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-699-6
CTRQ 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

in [5], where tasks such as trusted sensing, computation,
communication, privacy, and digital forgetting are addressed.
In this paper, we analyze and mitigate the security threats
faced by a smart irrigation system by designing security
architectures that safeguard the IoT devices and data and
ensure the correct performance of the IoT system. The main
measures can be described as follows:
•
Preparing a protective box to protect from the
physical damage of IoT components such as sensors,
accessing the serial port, and the battery when people or
animals tamper with them.
•
Providing secure data communication for both wire
and wireless connection modes by establishing a VPN
(Virtual Private Network) in order to avoid eavesdropping.
•
Utilizing
a
security
mechanism
to
alert
and
determine the attempt of attacks to the Fog Computing
system. Therefore, data encryption and Fog security provides
a comprehensive portfolio for cloud service and enterprises.
•
Using access management encryption techniques to
provide data security when unauthorized people request and
want to modify the data.
•
Securing the servers at the data center where the
data obtained from the sensor nodes is stored.
•
Securing the network devices employed to forward
the data to the data centers.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The related
work is presented in Section II. Section III depicts the system
description. In Section IV, we present how the system should
be secured. Lastly, the conclusion and future work is
presented in Section V.
II.
RELATED WORK
The security of IoT is important because the world is
becoming very sensitive and there is constant fear about
threats, thieves and other dangerous situations. Therefore,
launching malicious attacks against irrigation systems can
have a significant impact on water utilities and their
customers.
Authors
of
[6]
proposed
a
smart
water
management
model
combining
IoT
technologies
with
business
processes
coordination
and
decision
support
systems. They defined the management exploitation layer,
coordination layer, subsystems layer, administration layer
and the interfaces that enable layer interaction. Their
proposed architecture can be used for controlling real water
management systems and dealing with many real problems
such as physical network definition or mapping identifiers.
The authors of [7] analyzed the security requirements
specific to IoT systems by taking into consideration network
security, identity management, privacy, trust, and resilience.
They presented mechanisms that ensure data confidentiality,
integrity, origin authentication and freshness for each IoT
technology. A large selection of IoT technologies was
analyzed, from single-layer protocols to full protocol stacks.
The security level of LoRaWan (LPWAN, Low Power
Wide Area Network) is studied in [8]. It is focused on the
security of LoRaWan. The LoRaWan protocol is a MAC
(Medium Access Control) layer protocol for LoRa, which
provides the communication infrastructure and interfaces for
gateway-sensor topologies, node coordination, and medium
access. They proposed several countermeasures and changes
to the LoRaWan protocol, which rendered all these attack
vectors harmless. Many of these countermeasures can be
implemented with minimal changes to the LoRa ecosystem.
The authors in [9] proposed a lightweight algorithm,
which is based on a set of rules to detect the characteristics
of the packets in the network. The proposed approach can
detect the malicious packets that are sent to the network.
Furthermore, the authors of [10] reviewed the architecture
and features of fog computing, including real-time services
and fog-assisted IoT applications based on the different roles
of fog nodes. They presented security and privacy threats
towards IoT applications.
Other authors have studied partial solutions to punctual
problems related to the security of the system, but they do
not provide an integral solution. The principal contribution
of our proposal is an integral security solution for the
complete system. It includes structured proposals based on
four differentiated categories based on where the attacks are
intended for in order to achieve security for all physical
devices as well as the flow of forwarded data and stored data.
On our proposed solution, we address a wide variety of
devices, network equipment and data that integrate different
technologies. The use of multiple technologies leads to an
increase of the complexity of the solution.
III.
SYSTEM DESCRIPTION
In this section, we will describe the location of the
devices and the different technologies used by our intelligent
wastewater purification system for irrigation.
As it can be seen in Fig. 1, our system is distributed in
different locations. In some of them, we have implemented
groups formed by nodes that can contain sensors or
actuators. Red circles with black dots inside identify groups
of sensor nodes. The black dots of each circle represent a
sensor node. Stars identify actuators nodes. The data is
transmitted wirelessly using LoRaWan between all the nodes
and among the node groups. Besides, there is a remote
location, which will be reached through wired technology,
where our data storage center and the equipment to carry out
the work with Artificial Intelligence (AI) are located.
Both the sensor nodes and the actuator nodes are
distributed in external locations. For this reason, they will be
protected by integrating them in
watertight boxes to
withstand water, weather variations and possible animal
attacks.
From one of the group of nodes, that is located in an
urban area, a WAN connection is established with the remote
location through an Internet Service Provider (ISP). In the
remote location, the network devices that are connected to
the ISP and to the different available equipment are
deployed. The Data Center and the equipment that utilizes
AI to process the information collected by the sensors is
deployed at the remote location as well. Behavior patterns
will be detected through AI and decision rules will be
applied in the actuator nodes according to the detected
patterns.
The vulnerabilities of the systems to control water, which
is
performed
through
actuator
nodes
in
our
water
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-699-6
CTRQ 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

Data
Center
Artificial
Intelligence
Groups of nodes with sensors
and actuators
WAN
Figure 1. Location of devices and equipment.
management proposal, may compromise the objective of our
system. Severe problems of both irrigation saturation and
shortage as well as an unwanted lack of control of the water
purification system may be generated. Furthermore, attackers
may obtain the control of the nodes so as to perform massive
attacks, which may affect the Internet.
IV.
SECURING THE SYSTEM
For our system, it is paramount to guarantee the
availability and accessibility to all the devices at any time.
At the report in [2], an attack to a water and wastewater
treatment plant managed by an international company, the
attackers compromised the internal network by launching an
attack from a server located on the demilitarized zone
(DMZ). It was discovered that the attackers performed the
following steps:
•
The DMZ server had been violated due to a bad
policy that allowed establishing RDP connections.
•
The server was violated and controlled through
different IPs (Internet Protocol) by different attackers that
were enemies to the company.
Those attackers performed more attacks to other plants of
the same company.
All systems that manage information or provide a service
are susceptible of being attacked. Irrigation and water
management systems may not manage information that must
remain private but ensuring the correct performance of the
system is crucial. Furthermore, these systems are not only
susceptible of attacks from people with malicious intentions
but also may be affected by animals, weather conditions and
people that accidentally compromise
the system.
The
scenario where people is interested in controlling the
waterflows of the canals according to their own interests is
also possible.
The main problem with IoT devices is that they are not
designed considering that their security is paramount on
certain fields. Once the network security is stablished, it is
important to perform a penetration test on the different
components that comprise the system so as to verify the
effectiveness of the solution.
Figure 2. Basic scheme of security and data flow.
In the next sections, we describe and propose the
solutions for our system. Fig. 2 shows the basic security
scheme that we will implement on our system. The three
network areas that we are going to utilize can be observed.
They are the IoT network area, the ISP network area, and the
network area of the data center and the AI equipment.
As it can be seen, two firewalls will protect the areas of
the network that belong to us from the shared network. The
green arrows represent the data flows that will be established
between the IoT network, the data center and the AI.
Considering the way the system performs its functions and
its vulnerabilities, attacks can be classified
into
four
categories: physical attacks, attacks on the data in transit,
attacks on the management system and attacks on the data.
A. Physical attacks
Physical attacks comprise those attacks that require the
physical access to the device. In the case of our proposed
system, removing the sensors, accessing the nodes through
the serial port or removing the batteries are some of the
physical attacks that can be performed.
Another important thing to consider in our system is the
possible presence of animals that could bite the wires or take
the devices. Thus, nodes should be enclosed on a protective
box so as to protect the device from possible attackers and
the elements. The box should include a combination lock and
the password to the lock should only be known by the
administrator of the system. Moreover, considering that the
nodes are deployed over several irrigation canals, there is a
possibility of losing the devices in case of flooding or
extreme rain. This security issue cannot be avoided, but the
system
includes
the
mechanisms
so
as
to
alert
of
malfunctioning or lost nodes. Therefore, the administrator
would know to replace the damaged devices in case of these
types of events.
It is also important to consider that most of the nodes, as
well as network devices and the computers employed on our
system, are provided with different access ports. For all the
equipment, we will only utilize the ports necessary to
transmit the information or to access the administration of
the different devices and equipment. We will disable the rest
of the ports so as to avoid the unauthorized access from
attackers external to the project.
Another important remark is reducing the usage of USB
(Universal Serial Bus) memory drives or other external
memory devices. These elements are connected to the
computing resources and may be infected with malware. By
utilizing just the necessary ports and previously analyzing
them, it is possible to avoid subsequent attacks. Furthermore,
physical security is also very important at the transmission
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-699-6
CTRQ 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

network and at the different storage and computation
devices.
B.
Attacks on the data in transit
These attacks would aim at making the system unable to
communicate or intercepting the transmitted data so as to
gain knowledge on the information gathered by the system.
It is necessary for our system to be protected against
eavesdropping and tampering. In order to achieve it, the
combination of forwarded data encryption and the protection
of the networks where the transmission is performed should
be performed. Attackers may try accessing through the
physical network infrastructure or through the software
components provided by the services of the network itself.
The impact of an attack performed utilizing software
components would probably be greater [11].
Our proposed system utilizes both wired and wireless
communication, and both types of communication should be
secured. The most effective way of establishing greater
security over the wired network is having a proprietary
telecommunications service comprised of an optic fiber
network. However, this proposal is not viable. For this
reason, for the wired communication, a VPN will be
established so as to avoid eavesdropping and access to the
network.
As for LoRaWan, replay attacks, jamming techniques
and
wormhole
attacks
could
compromise
the
communications [8]. Replay attacks consist on fooling the
device
by
utilizing
old
information
that
has
been
retransmitted. However, the attacker should know the
channels and the employed frequencies so as to sniff the
transmission. This attack is addressed by keeping track of
frame counters as seen in Fig. 3. Jamming consists on
disrupting radio transmissions by transmitting high power
radio signals in the vicinities of the nodes. The spreading
factor and transmissions on the same frequency may cause
interferences among the devices. Although this attack is
difficult to avoid, it is easier to detect, and proper actions can
be taken so as to re-establish communication. If the nodes of
the network begin to lose the connection, the communication
frequency should be changed. Lastly, wormhole attacks
consist on capturing packets and replaying to the source so as
to avoid them reaching the gateway. Regretfully, this type of
attacks is hard to detect but utilizing previous analyzed data,
abnormal behaviors could be detected.
Authentication between end-device and the network is
one of the implemented security measures. Moreover,
LoRaWan also incorporates end-to-end encryption [12]. It
utilizes AES (Advanced Encryption Standard) with CMAC
(Cipher-based Message Authentication Code) and CTR
(Counter) to provide integrity and encryption respectively.
The authentication is performed with a unique identifier and
128-bit AES key. AES-CMAC is utilized to compute the
Message Integrity Code (MIC). Furthermore, LoRaWan
already addresses some security issues by implementing
several security measures.
C. Attacks on the management system
Our proposed system utilizes Fog computing so as to
manage alerts and control the nodes from the edge. However,
an attack on the Fog server could compromise the correct
functioning of the system. Fog servers are susceptible of
attacks of Denial of Service (DoS), Man in the Middle
(MITM) or placing a rogue gateway [13].
The structure of Fog computing implies that DoS attacks
would affect the closest networks but not the whole system if
several Fog servers are utilized. Furthermore, the utilized
protocols
and
their
security
mechanisms
have
to
be
considered and will become determinant in the success or
failure of the attack. Man in the middle attacks could
intercept data such as the alerts of the system, resulting in the
system not taking the corresponding actions to resolve the
problem if these messages are not forwarded. Tracking the
messages and detecting abnormal behavior could help in
detecting these types of attacks.
If this attack is utilized for eavesdropping, proper
encryption techniques should be utilized. Furthermore, the
system should be designed so as to avoid the introduction of
rogue gateways that could disrupt the correct functioning of
the system.
Moreover, all devices must be configured with passwords
and access codes that will only be known by the authorized
management personal. As usual, the personal entrusted with
the management and administration of the system will
employ different passwords to access the devices and their
personal accounts. Furthermore, different access levels to
management privileges will be established according to the
activities related to each job position.
If
our
devices
are
not
provided
with
a
strong
authentication system, some of the previously addressed
problems may arise. These attacks may be denegation of
service, modification and/or data thief, brute force attacks,
etc. Device monitoring, freezing accounts and throttling are
some of the common measures that we will employ so as to
avoid the fraudulent access to the devices. Actualizing
firmware and the operating systems of all the utilized devices
is
critical.
All
devices
and
equipment
must
update
throughout their lifespan. Furthermore, the number of
equipment with external access to the Internet browser must
be reduced.
D. Attacks on the data
The
data
gathered
from
the
system
could
be
compromised by a third party. Unauthorized people could
acquire the data or modify it so as to disrupt the correct
performance of the system. The aspects that concern data
security are integrity, confidentiality and availability [14].
In the case of our proposed system, the integrity and
availability of the data is preferred to its confidentiality.
However, enough encryption techniques should be utilized
so as to provide the system with enough confidentiality.
Furthermore, the information stored on Fog servers and the
Figure 3. Frame counters.
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-699-6
CTRQ 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

TABLE I.
PROPOSALS TO REJECTS ATTACKS
cloud should be properly protected. Secure passwords to
access the data, authentication, encrypted data forwarding,
and guaranteeing that user accounts cannot be duplicated are
some of the measures to be considered.
At the data center, our data is previously protected by a
firewall that prevents the connection of unauthorized users
from the shared network (ISP). Moreover, the access
permissions and updates of operating systems and firewall
software of the different equipment must be adequate. These
tasks must be performed on all implemented proprietary
network resources as well.
The data of our system must be isolated from the data
from any other network at all time. This way, a direct
transfer can be avoided. Table 1 summarizes the proposals to
reject the attacks.
Fig. 4 shows the summary of the phases of our security
system. At the start, the proposals defined in Table 1 should
be applied to the different equipment and devices.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We have performed a study on the different key points
that may affect the security of our intelligent wastewater
purification system for irrigation. We define four possible
attack categories as being physical attacks, attacks on the
communications, attacks on the management system, and
attacks on the data. Furthermore, we specify the security
measures that we will apply for each category for our system
to be considered as secure.
As future work, we will implement the proposed policies
in a real environment, we will perform penetration tests so as
to verify its viability and we will correct any problem that we
may
detect.
Furthermore,
we
will
consider
the
implementation of an Ad-hoc network for our system
utilizing secure protocols as the one in [15].
Attacks
How our proposal refuses the attack
Access to physical
device.
Hardening devices and facilities.
Access control in the facilities.
Alarms.
Periodic inspections of the sensor nodes.
Compromised physical
Device.
User/password access.
Visual identity verification (authentication phase).
Compromised node.
Use of algorithms to detect compromised nodes.
Change of trust level. trust elimination.
Malfunctioning or lost
the nodes or
equipment.
Replacement of the damaged devices.
Power failure.
Equipment protection against failure to supply
power.
Persistent storage.
Lost data because of
failures or battery
discharge.
Persistent storage.
Authentication.
Access to user date in
physical device.
User/password access.
Privileges management.
Infestation with
Malware.
Reducing the usage of USB memory drives or
other external memory devices
Control ports.
Loose of connectivity.
Persistent data storage.
Authentication.
Identity impersonation. Visual identity verification (authentication phase).
Control ports.
Use of short-range technologies.
Firewall.
Trust policies.
Phishing, active
spoofing, compromised
data
Hashing and authentication.
Use of a trusted chain.
VPN IPSec.
Firewall.
Network data access
using passive spoofing.
Control ports.
Ciphered using session key.
Key management.
Firewall.
Access to network key
using passive spoofing.
(man-in-the-middle)
Asymmetric encryption.
Key-regeneration using trusted chains.
Firewall.
Access to private user
delivered data using
passive spoofing
Asymmetric or symmetric encryption guaranteeing
confidentiality.
VPN IPSec.
Data modification.
Compromised data
Hash function to guarantee data integrity.
VPN IPSec.
Overload and/or loose
of resources.
Capacity plan and forecast.
Control the number of asymmetric operations.
Firewall.
Persistent data storage.
Erroneous packets
delivery
Control sent and received packets.
Packet retransmission.
Data storage overload
Distributed data management and storage.
Denial-of-Service /
Data availability
Distributed data management and storage.
Distributed access to data services. Distributed
security processes.
Firewall.
Access to not reliable
data.
Data disclosure.
Data access only through trusted nodes.
Session key regeneration.
Are all devices secured?
No
Yes
Start
Measure
Store in SD nodes
Encription
Nodes send data LoRaWAN
Authentication & Encription
Secure all devices
Is data an Alarm?
Is it a know Alarm?
Send to DC & AI
VPN
Store data in DC
Authentication & Encription
Send data to AI
Authentication & Encription
Send decision to actuator
Authentication & Encription
Send decision to Central Node
VPN
Store Alarm List
Authentication & Encription
Send data to Actuator LoRaWAN
Authentication & Encription
Take action on actuator
nodes
Store in SD nodes
Encription
Each 24 hours
Figure 4. Phases security system.
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-699-6
CTRQ 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been partially supported by the "Ministerio
de Economía y Competitividad" in the "Programa Estatal de
Fomento de la Investigación Científica y Técnica de
Excelencia,
Subprograma
Estatal
de
Generación
de
Conocimiento" within the project under Grant TIN2017-
84802-C2-1-P. This work has also been partially supported
by
European
Union
through
the
ERANETMED
(Euromediterranean Cooperation through ERANET joint
activities
and
beyond)
project
ERANETMED3-227
SMARTWATIR.
REFERENCES
[1]
L. Garcia, J. M. Jimenez, M. Taha, and J. Lloret, "Wireless
Technologies for IoT in Smart Cities.", Network Protocols
and Algorithms, Vol. 10, No. 1, pp. 23-64, 2018.
[2]
Cisco
Cybersecurity
Reports.
Available
at:
https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/products/security/security-
reports.html (Last accessed on 26-11-2018).
[3]
S. Laxmi and B. Hemavati, “Design and Implementation of
IOT based Smart Security and Monitoring for Connected
Smart
Farming”,
International
Journal
of
Computer
Applications, Vol. 179,
No. 11, pp. 0975 – 8887, January
2018. DOI: 0.5120/ijca2018914779
[4]
T. Baranwal, and K. P. Pushpendr, "Development of IoT
based smart security and monitoring devices for agriculture."
2016 6th International Conference in Cloud System and Big
Data Engineering, Noida, India, 14-15 January 2016, pp. 597-
602.
[5]
T. Xu, J. B. Wendt, and M. Potkonjak. "Security of IoT
systems:
Design
challenges
and
opportunities.",
In
Proceedings of the 2014 IEEE/ACM International Conference
on Computer-Aided Design, San Jose, California, USA, 3-6
November 2014, pp. 417-423.
[6]
T. Robles, R. Alcarria, D. M. de Andrés, M. Navarro, R.
Calero, S. Iglesias, and M. López. "An IoT based reference
architecture for smart water management processes."JoWUA,
Vol. 6, No. 1, pp. 4-23, 2015.
[7]
D. Dragomir, L. Gheorghe, S. Costea, and A. Radovici. "A
Survey
on
Secure
Communication
Protocols
for
IoT
Systems.", 2016 International Workshop on Secure Internet of
Things (SIoT), Heraklion, Greece, 26-30 September 2016, pp.
47-62.
[8]
E. Aras, G. S. Ramachandran, P. Lawrence and D. Hughes.
"Exploring the security vulnerabilities of lora.", 2017 3rd
IEEE International Conference on Cybernetics (CYBCONF),
Exeter, UK, 21-23 June 2017, pp. 1-6.
[9]
C. Gkountis, M. Taha, J. Lloret, and G. Kambourakis.
"Lightweight algorithm for protecting SDN controller against
DDoS
attacks."
2017
10th
IFIP
Wireless
and
Mobile
Networking Conference (WMNC), Valencia, Spain, 25-27
September 2017, pp. 1-6.
[10] J. Ni, K. Zhang, X. Lin, and X. S. Shen. "Securing fog
computing for internet of things applications: Challenges and
solutions."IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, Vol.
20, No. 1, pp. 601-628, 2017.
[11] Cloud Security Principle 1: Data in transit protection.
Available
at:
https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/guidance/cloud-
security-principle-1-data-transit-protection (Last accessed on
26-11-2018).
[12] Gemalto, Actility and Semtech, “LoRaWAN Security: Full
end-to-end encryption for IoT application providers”, 2017.
[13] R.
Roman,
J.
Lopez
and
M.
Mambo,
“Mobile
edge
computing, Fog et al.: A survey and analysis of security
threats
and
challenges”,
Future
Generation
Computer
Systems, Vol. 78, pp. 680-698, 2018.
[14] M. U. Farooq, M. Waseem, A. Khairi and S. Mazhar, “A
Critical Analysis on the Security Concerns of Internet of
Things
(IoT)”,
International
Journal
of
Computer
Applications, Vol. 111, No. 7, pp. 1-6, 2015.
[15] R. Lacuesta, J. Lloret, M. García and L. Peñalver, “A Secure
Protocol
for
Spontaneous
Wireless
Ad
Hoc
Networks
Creation”, IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed
Systems, Vol. 24, No. 4, pp. 629-641, 2013.
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-699-6
CTRQ 2019 : The Twelfth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

