QoS signaling for Service Delivery in NGN/NGS Context 
Noëmie Simoni, Yijun Wu 
Network and Computer Science department  
Institute Telecom/TELECOM ParisTech 
Paris, France 
e-mail: simoni@telecom-paristech.fr, 
yijun333@hotmail.com 
Chunyang Yin 
Network and Computer Science department  
Institute Telecom/TELECOM ParisTech 
Paris, France 
e-mail: chunyang.yin@gmail.com
 
 
Abstract—The evolution of next generation network raises the 
issue of exploiting customizable services for a nomadic user 
within the environment of heterogeneity and mobility. In this 
context, the E2E QoS (Quality of Service) always remains as a 
challenge. In fact, the E2E supposes that apart the network 
resource, the service should be taken into account as an 
important resource, in the form of service component, i.e., we 
should also provision and monitor the service resource and 
verify the conformation to the QoS contract. In this paper, we 
propose a “dynamic user oriented end-to-end QoS signaling” 
for the service delivery in order to provision and dynamically 
negotiate the different services in the NGN environment. This 
end-to-end signaling extends to process the service delivery to 
maintain QoS continuity. The related sequence diagrams are 
defined and a demonstration is implemented with the purpose 
of presenting the feasibility of our proposals.  
Keywords-NGN; service delivery; QoS signaling 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
As networks are evolving towards NGN (Next 
Generation Network), the environment is becoming more 
and more complex. NGN is characterized by heterogeneity 
mobility and user centric.  
The deployment of such NGN raises the issue of 
development of Next Generation Service (NGS). The 
mobility challenges to offer service continuity in a 
personalized 
way 
for 
end 
users. 
Moreover, 
the 
personalization puts the user in the centre position in the 
architecture (user centric). An end-to-end service session 
should integrate user’s preferences with the dynamic context, 
which includes end user terminals, access networks, core 
networks and services (heterogeneity). 
If we follow the same strategy, then the user becomes the 
center of the consideration. Therefore, first, since the user is 
probably across the heterogeneous environment, to deal with 
the different providers or to gain the benefits from this 
evolving environment. For example, a travelling user is in a 
café bar where the WiFi service is offered. He is glad to 
grasp this chance to check his emails, but he has only the 
email account settings on his laptop and he’s not in the mood 
to configure his telephone for that moment. Therefore, the 
different terminals are desired to be integrated before the 
execution phase of a user’s service session. On the other 
side, user is also willing to benefit from the NGN mobility 
supports to have the service continuity. Mobility allows the 
end user to communicate regardless of location, used device, 
access mode and multiple spatial network domains. Finally, 
he wants to always keep his personality when the system 
choosing or adapting the services for him through his 
pertinent preferences.  
All these requirements lead us to focus on the service 
delivery with the service continuity. The service delivery we 
mentioned above is different with the traditional media 
delivery. Media delivery focuses on the data transfer solution 
treating the service continuity by shifting the access point 
and the corresponding supporting services in the network 
layer. The QoS is obliged to be recalculated and sometimes 
the delivery is interrupted. 
What’s more, to insure the E2E (End-to-End) QoS, 
today’s media delivery E2E QoS solution, aiming the 
network resources, is no more sufficient. The service should 
also be taken into account as an important type of resource as 
well as network resource. To compose the service as service 
components is a possible way to separate the service 
resources from the network resources. We should not only 
provision and monitor the service resources as well as the 
network resources, but also dynamically verify the 
conformation to the QoS contract established between 
service providers and user. 
In fact, the aiming user-centric session should allow users 
to access services in a customized way (composition of 
service) with QoS continuity. Therefore, a more flexible E2E 
QoS signaling is desired to support the service delivery and 
guarantee the QoS continuity. Its principle task is to 
negotiate the QoS and user information among service 
components for subscribers across any mobile or fixed 
network with any user appreciated equipment during the 
provisioning phase. During the real time of the user session, 
it can help to dynamically manage the session on the QoS 
level to have the QoS continuity.  
In this paper, we propose a QoS signaling which covers 
the end-to-end provisioning for demanded service and 
maintains the provided service conform to the SLA (Service 
Level Agreement) during the real time service session. 
Quality of Service in this paper is seen from end-user’s 
standpoint which means that the QoS assessment should be 
performed regards to the users’ requirements. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In 
Section II, the requirements of user-centric session are 
introduced. In Section III, the related works in signaling 
protocol are presented and analyzed. In Section IV, a 
dynamic E2E QoS signaling is proposed based on a service 
22
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

and sub-network integrated architecture. In order to examine 
the feasibility of our proposition, in Section V, the functional 
specification is detailed by explaining a user case and 
scenarios which take user’s needs into account with 
corresponding sequence diagram, and the implementation 
part is presented. Finally, Section VI is the conclusion and 
gives out the perspectives.  
II. 
USER CENTRIC SESSION REQUIREMENTS 
We 
have 
mentioned 
that 
there’s 
an 
important 
characteristics of NGN: user centric. However, what will be 
introduced by this change? The telecommunication world 
evolves and becomes now user centric in opposition to 
system centric (behavior is constrained by the system) and 
network centric (behavior is constrained by the network). 
Therefore, user-centric requirements are expressed by user-
related information, such as QoS parameters and user’s 
preferences etc. This information can be defined in the user’s 
profile. On the provider side, QoS commitments should 
match these user's requirements. These commitments can be 
defined in the customer contract SLA. As Figure 1 shows, 
the user’s profile in the centre represents the user in the E2E 
session. This conception contains the essential requirements 
as below:  
 
Figure 1.  User-centric session requirements 
• 
Personalization according to user’s preferences and 
the user profile. In order to meet the personalization 
of service delivery, a more flexible deployment of 
services (service aggregation) as well as a loose 
coupling architecture between service elements 
(service composition) is appreciated. 
• 
Unique user session for converged services delivery 
from different providers in a top-down way. It means 
that we don’t need lance several sessions for 
different media service demanded by user.  It is 
possible to have different media demanded in one 
session through difference transactions.  
• 
Better selection of connectivity with QoS in a 
dynamic manner according to user’s preferences 
(QoS, location, agenda, etc.) for the media delivery.  
• 
Adaptable accessibility to services regardless of 
terminal used. End users may have different user 
equipment (UE) in a Seamless Userware vision 
according to user’s preferences [1].  
III. 
RELATED WORK 
An end-to-end session goes through the user’s equipment, 
the connectivity network session (access and core network) 
and the service session. In each sub-session, it has his own 
method for the QoS issue, for example, GPRS (General 
Packet Radio Service) Tunnelling Protocol (GTP) used in 
between SGSN (Serving GPRS Support Node) and GGSN 
(Gateway GPRS Support Node) allows the SGSN to adjust 
QoS parameters in a session GPRS on a user’s behalf (PDP 
context); Session Initial Protocol (SIP) used between user 
and application server works with Session Description 
Protocol (SDP) for defining and negotiating the QoS 
parameters of media streams. We find that there is nothing 
for the service level. 
For the requirements of user-centric session, signaling 
should support broadening personalization coverage with 
QoS through composition of services in service levels to 
enhance 
capability 
of 
adaptation 
in 
mobility 
and 
heterogeneous environment. In this new context, we have 
evolved from a client/server architecture for a demanded 
application to a distribute architecture with a composition of 
services for a continuity of session demanded.  
Before presenting our proposals, we analyze the existing 
related work on the architectural proposals (IMS) and 
signaling proposals (SIP, NSIS) aiming at end-to-end QoS in 
this section. IMS (IP Multimedia Subsystem) architecture 
gives a converged network control layer. SIP is a signaling 
protocol of the session layer for media QoS control with the 
media. NSIS (Next Step In Signaling) is a signaling protocol 
of network layer to transferring with QoS parameters and. 
These proposals are in the network level to maintain the 
QoS, and there is nothing for the dynamic resource 
reservation of service. 
A. IMS 
IMS architecture defined by 3GPP (3rd Generation 
Partnership Project) creates one common access independent 
signaling platform for providing multiple services [2][3][4]. 
It implements the QoS mechanisms in management and 
control planes, i.e. policy control in the management plane 
and admission control in the control plane. In the TISPAN 
(Telecommunications and Internet converged Services and 
Protocols 
for 
Advanced 
Networking) 
NGN 
architecture[5][6][7], not only core networks but also access 
networks or even terminals on the user side have QoS related 
control and management functions.  
IMS integrates the network convergence but not the 
service convergence. In addition, IMS provides access to a 
service while still following client-server architecture as a 
tight coupling. In fact, we need a loose coupling for the 
service 
trans-organization 
in 
order 
to 
favor 
the 
personalization of service. 
 
23
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

B. SIP 
SIP as the basic protocol at IMS control layer and one of 
the multimedia communication system framework protocols 
[8], is the application layer protocol used to establish, 
change, or terminate a multimedia session. SIP enables 
flexible interaction of several media in one session. 
As far as QoS is concerned, SIP uses SDP to describe the 
media in the session and negotiate QoS requested in the 
network layer [9]. Moreover, SIP can filter information 
according to User Profile to implement application servers 
before establishment of a session.  
However, SIP does not cover description of service 
component behavior, and is not even able to communicate 
the QoS related information among the components in order 
to re-provision services during an active session in a mobility 
environment committed to user’s contract. 
C. NSIS 
NSIS focuses on developing a protocol to manipulate 
QoS resource states along the data path in the network. NSIS 
is concerning to media delivery. But their work does not 
cover all the service resources in order to cover overall 
service delivery which is more direct user relationship. 
The QoS NSLP (NSIS Signaling Layer Protocol) 
proposed by NSIS (Next Step in Signaling) work group in 
IETF (Internet Engineering Task Force) provides flexibility 
on patterns of signaling messages that are exchanged [10]. 
The proposed specification of QoS (QSPEC) carries a 
collection of objects that can describe QoS specifications in a 
number of different ways, named QoS Desired, QoS 
Available, QoS Reserved and Minimum QoS. A generic 
template which contains object formats for the QoS 
description has been designed to ensure interoperability 
while using the basic set of objects [11]. NSIS focuses on 
developing a protocol to manipulate QoS resource states 
along the data path in the network. NSIS is concerning to 
media delivery.  
However their work does not cover service resources 
which are essential in service delivery, where we should also 
reserve the QoS for each service component in a session. 
Facing to the NGN/NGS needs, the desired solutions 
should concern the QoS control for all the resources in a 
user-centric session, not just the network ones but also the 
service ones. The related work analysed above is still just in 
the network layer for the QoS control of media delivery.  
IV. 
PROPOSITION: USER-CENTRIC QOS SINGALING 
From a user centric point of view, the E2E QoS could be 
enhanced by including service components as resources. In 
order to satisfy the E2E QoS in the user-centric session, we 
propose a “dynamic user oriented E2E QoS control” 
supporting QoS provision and dynamic management 
(negotiation and adaptation). We develop this signaling on 
the existing SIP protocol framework and call it enhanced SIP 
(SIP+). SIP+ is able to circulate the media description and 
service 
component 
description 
for 
service 
delivery 
provisioning. We introduce firstly the VSPN (Virtual Private 
Service Network) architecture (§A) on which our proposition 
is built, then we explain the E2E QoS provisioning protocol 
(§B). Finally, we detail the dynamic QoS signaling which 
converges the management information in control messages 
during the exploitation with a state chart (§C). 
A. Architecture dimension 
In order to manage the service resources, we constitute 
VPSN with networked Service Elements (SEs) (Figure 2). 
This network is virtualized because the service components 
have sufficient abstraction features and they are mutually 
sharable. This network is private because it responses to a 
service request of a particular customer with specific QoS 
needs. The VPSN translates the logic of the requested service 
and links the service nodes according to “semantic routing” 
for the service composition. The VPSN proactively 
maintains this QoS to meet the customer’s SLA. Concerning 
the QoS communication and interworking solution between 
the separated service and network layer, based on IMS 
platform, in [12], authors have proposed a binding 
mechanism in the E2E user-centric session to correlate the 
information generated in the three parts (User equipment, 
network and service). These three levels would be aware of 
and self-adapt to any change for the dynamic QoS 
information management. This information are stocked in 
database on two sides: Infosphere, in user side, which 
provides personalization and ambient resources information 
around end-user; and an enhanced UPSF (User Profile 
Server Function) in operator’s side which offers an 
informational inference on all the resources [13]. The link is 
thus established integrating with sub-networks. 
 
Service layer with NGN Middleware
IMS (Session Middleware) 
P-CSCF
I-CSCF
S-CSCF
User Management
SE1
SE2
SE51
SE3
SE4
QoS Management
SIP+
User
Infosphere
UPSF+
SE9
SE8
SE10
SE52
SE53
VPSN
VSC
SIP
Diameter
SE: Service Element
UPSF+
 
Figure 2.  Global architecture of SIP+ 
We propose a VSC (virtual service community) to 
manage the QoS and functional equivalent service 
components in a community. VSC is a group of SEs that has 
the same functionality with an equivalent QoS. In case that a 
component is no longer suitable for a user session, another 
member could replace it and keep the QoS continuity. 
We map the proposal on the ETSI (European 
Telecommunications Standards Institute) IMS. Service 
components are in the different container (for example: 
Application Server). The NGN middleware offers the basic 
services, which enables QoS management, user management 
24
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

and other management functions. Service components are 
thus managed by NGN middleware. The NGN middleware 
selects and invokes services at the reception of SIP message 
from 
the 
IMS 
session 
middleware. 
These 
service 
components are chained into VPSN according to the service 
logic by the SIP+. Moreover, the service components can 
negotiate QoS information with end users through SIP+. 
B. E2E QoS provisioning protocol 
Enhanced SIP works in service layer to provision the 
resources for the E2E user-centric session based on our QoS 
model (four criteria: availability, delay, reliability and 
capability). This unified QoS model is applicable to all the 
resources in a session. These criteria can be applied to any 
QoS classification (Diffserv, Interserv, etc.) and can be also 
easily measured according to specific parameters. During the 
service’s deployment and provisioning, these four criteria are 
divided into three categories: conception value, current value 
and threshold value.  
The conception value is decided at the phase of service 
conception. It introduces the maximum possibilities of the 
node’s treatments and the link’s interactions. 
The current value is calculated during provisioning and 
exploitation to reflect the service’s behavior in real time.  
The (minimum/maximum) threshold value defines the 
range on which the node normally operates. They are alert 
thresholds avoiding the current value exceeds the limitation. 
Under the help of these modeling tools, the SIP+ could  
provide a QoS description in high level covering an overall 
service requested by end-user in a top-down declination 
(service node QoS, network QoS, equipment QoS) approach, 
as Figure 3 shows.  
 
 
Figure 3.  E2E QoS description 
The service node QoS contains the non functional 
characteristics of service. The network QoS collects the 
routing table which records the QoS of all the possible paths 
in the transport layer. The equipment QoS is the QoS view of 
the machine (CPU and memory etc).  
The recursive calculation of the QoS between the levels 
enables the E2E QoS aggregation across multiple providers. 
If service nodes are activated, the real-time QoS condition is 
recalculated and updated in the QoS table. The latter will 
probably cause the recalculation of the network QoS.  
NSIS has four kinds of QSPEC (QoS Specification) 
objects which consist of a number of parameters describing 
the condition and constraints of traffic as well as traffic 
classifier for the resource reservation in the network layer. 
The SIP+ aims at provisioning service resources in the same 
way as NSIS. Therefore, we propose a QoS description 
template in the SIP+ which has two objects: Demanded QoS 
and Current QoS (Figure 4). In each object, QoS parameters 
are classed into four QoS criteria.  
 
 
  
Figure 4.  SIP+ QoS description template 
In each node of VPSN, it has a QoS agent which stores a 
contracted QoS (Threshold range values) according to the 
SLA. The Demanded QoS and Offered QoS are negotiated 
during the phase of provisioning after service deployment 
according to the Contracted QoS. These QoS parameters are 
taken into account during the QoS provisioning. Thus, the 
service components have knowledge of the contract to fulfill 
and the image of its current performance.  
The service request (INVITE) message contains the 
demanded QoS. If the demanded QoS value is less than the 
current value; the demanded SE gives an “OK” response 
with the offered QoS. This service component will be 
activated. On the contrary, if the desired QoS value is more 
than the current value, the service component will not be 
activated. When the E2E provisioning ends, the session is 
activated. Figure 5 shows the corresponding QoS values in 
existing NSIS, SIP and our proposal SIP+. 
 
 
Figure 5.  SIP+ vs. SIP and NSIS 
25
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

C. Dynamic QoS control for  service delivery 
Dynamic QoS signaling gives the possibility of 
corrective actions to various problems (mobility, user’s 
preference) during the service delivery in order to maintain 
the QoS (Session continuity). New service components could 
be added; meanwhile activated service components could be 
replaced by others. Service component’s QoS condition (In 
contract/out contract) in the management system, which is 
got from comparison of current value and threshold range 
values, could be notified from time to time during the service 
delivery via the SIP+ NOTIFY message so as to maintain 
dynamically the QoS conform to the contract. The state chart 
of QoS control procedure is shown in Figure 6. 
 
Figure 6.  State chart of QoS control in service layer 
In an open session, when the QoS condition in one node 
changes, i.e., the current value exceed the threshold value, 
the VSC to which this service component belongs will firstly 
perform self-management to find another service component 
with the equivalent QoS to replace it. VSC manages the SEs 
in terms of QoS management. For instance, VSC could look 
for the suitable SE that can replace the QoS degraded one. If 
it fails, the QoS control could interact with the user system in 
the database and re-provision the QoS in the VPSN in order 
to find another node with a QoS commitment according to 
user’s preference (Figure 7). Meanwhile, the sub-network 
establishes a QoS path simultaneously.  Therefore, the user-
centric session keeps continuous.  
In the end-to-end session QoS signaling, we define four 
management states for each service node. The state chart of 
service component management is shown in Figure 7. 
UNAVAILABLE means the node is not accessible for 
the user or is unreachable due to user’s mobility. 
AVAILABLE means the node can be accessed but not 
activated yet.  
ACTIVABLE means the node is ready to use. The node 
is considered to be activated when it has been chosen to be a 
part of the VPSN and can be executed at any time.  
ACTIVATED means the node joins a real time 
transaction of a user centric session; its resource is being 
consumed. In this state, the QoS control agent checks the 
resource in real-time. If its behavior conforms to QoS 
contract, the state is changed to “IN CONTRACT”. If the 
behavior does not conform to QoS contract, the state is 
changed to “OUT contract”. And the VSC launches the 
process of self-management to find another service 
component to replace it. 
 
 
Figure 7.  State chart of service component management 
IN CONTRACT means that the QoS condition is in the 
scope of contract signed by the user and operator.  
OUT CONTRACT means that the QoS condition is out of 
scope of contract signed by the user and operator. After 
receiving the first “OUT contract” in the message, the node 
arms a timer (Timer 1) to wait for the VSC processing. If the 
VSC does not find a solution till timeout (Time 1), the node 
will solicit database (inforsphere & infoware) to modify the 
contracted QoS according to the user preference. The node 
arms a Timer 2 for this process. Until Timer 2 time out, the 
QoS control agent checks the current resource with the 
updated QoS contract in ACTIVATED.  
If the activated node receives continuously the “Out 
contract” in the header of NOTIFY messages that the 
received number exceed the threshold numbers for 
deactivating, the node turns into UNAVAILABLE state. 
In addition, we identify the events that cause transition of 
the state. User Initiated Events (User preference), and 
Service Initiated Events (self-management of service 
components in the virtual service community) are external 
events that trigger state change of service node. Meanwhile 
the QoS condition (In contract/Out contract) and the timer in 
the entities are needed to be notified in the VPSN during the 
service delivery. The latter are therefore identified as internal 
events. 
V. 
FUNCTIONAL SPECIFICATION AND DEMONSTRATION 
In this section, we describe a user case and related 
sequence diagrams with the purpose of presenting the 
functional specification of the concepts proposed and a 
demonstration. Based on a user case (§A) highlighting the 
specificities of the NGN context and the diagram sequences 
which are relevant to the scenario in our user case, we will 
present finally the demonstration (§B). 
 
26
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

A. User case 
The user case (Figure 8) clearly highlights the 
specificities of the NGN context. It shows terminal mobility, 
user mobility and session mobility with QoS continuity 
while the user moves across heterogeneous networks 
according to his preferences. In an "E2E user-centric 
session" vision, user could enjoy different types of media in 
one unique session in a customized way. The scenarios 
details are described as below. 
 
Figure 8.  User case 
While at home, the end-user Bob starts his PC at 8h30 in 
the morning and engages in a Video service SE22 and Web 
service SE 31. Bob uses his home network environment and 
accesses to the service through an Access Network AN1. 
Before leaving his home, Bob switches terminals (User 
Mobility), leaving his PC for his PDA. At this point, Bob, as 
a pedestrian, prefers to receive his messages in vocal mode 
rather than in text mode (User’s preference). Therefore, a 
Text to Voice service component (SE41) is invited into the 
opened session to adapt the new terminal according to user’s 
preference. When arriving at work, Bob’s PDA is still 
attached to the same service but the Web service element 
(SE31) is replaced by the SE33 in the same VSC (service 
mobility) for keeping QoS continuity in one session. At 
11AM, Tom closes the session, which he opened at home at 
8h30AM. 
For the user, all the operations are transparent. 
In our demonstration, we will implement a scenario that 
the SE31 is replaced by SE33 with QoS continuity. We call 
this procedure as “service mobility”. The SE31 (like other 
SEs in the VPSN) notifies its QoS notification (IN/OUT 
contract) to elements of its VSC in a peer to peer way. When 
SE31 is “OUT Contract”, the VSC finds another SE (SE33) 
to take place of SE31 within a limited time. The SE33 is then 
introduced in this session. In this way, the service 
components in one session can always keep their QoS “IN 
contract” according to SLA, the service mobility is done 
seamlessly. 
SE 2
SE 2
SE1
SE1
2. Nofity (state: OUT Contract)
VSC 
X
Timing: find another SE in  
VSC to replace
1. Nofity (state: IN Contract)
SE 32
SE 32
SE 33
SE 33
SE 32
SE 32
SE 32
SE 32
SE 31
SE 31
1.IN Contract (to all the SEs in VSC)
2. OUT Contract (to all the SE in VSC)
3. Notify ( state: IN Contract)
Session
Media
}
VSC
self-management
 
Figure 9.  Service mobility related sequence diagram 
The management result “IN” or “OUT” Contract is 
delivered in the signaling message SIP NOTIFY message 
from time to time in the VPSN.  
 
Figure 10.  Structure of NOTIFY message 
The structure of SIP NOTIFY message is shown in 
Figure 10. A SIP message, both the request and the 
response, contains a start-line followed by one or more 
headers and a message body. The CONTRACT IN/OUT is 
proposed to add into the message body (in red) of SIP to 
inform the management information during the process of 
service delivery. The NOTIFY body is used to report the 
condition on the resource being monitored (current value 
comparing with threshold values). 
B. Specification of experimental platform and 
demontration 
The identified scenarios are experimented on our 
27
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

platform [14] in laboratory. This platform is consisted of the 
OpenIMS Module (FOCUS) [15] which contains the 
essential blocks of IMS core (P-CSCF, I-CSCF, S-CSCF) 
and HSS+ in Oracle [16], and service platform (Service is 
offered as a composition of service elements considering the 
QoS management, security, mobility management and 
charging aspects) developed in SUN’s GlassFish [17] 
container with SIP JAIN supporting SIP server development 
(for SIP+ module). The detailed architecture of our 
technical platform is shown in Figure 11.  
 
 
Figure 11.  Experiment platform 
SIP+ module developed basing on SIP JAIN, notifies the 
QoS states among the service elements, and relays QoS 
information between service layer and IMS control layer. In 
our demonstration, we present the QoS management 
information (In/Out contract) exchanged between two 
service elements in VSC. As the Figure 9 shows, the SE31 
is active in the VPSN, and it sends the NOTIFY messages to 
the SE32 which is in the same VSC for informing the QoS 
event (In/Out contract). The global architecture of 
implementation is shown in Figure 12. The Data Base 
enables the SIP server to compare the current QoS value 
with the threshold QoS value. The result will tell if the SE’s 
QoS is in or out contract. 
 
 
Figure 12.  Global architeure of implementation 
In order to easily show the messages exchanged between 
two SEs, we create a graphic interface for each service 
element. It is shown in Figure 13. 
 
 
Figure 13.  Messages exchanged in graphic interfaces 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
End users expect to have a continuous comprehensive 
service throughout the whole session while moving 
(terminal mobility) or changing terminal (user mobility). 
During this session, a service is considered as a composition 
of elements in order to adapt to any change (session 
mobility). In such a user-centric approach, today’s control 
and management approaches aim at how to managing the 
QoS through media delivery. However, those solutions are 
unable to cover this E2E QoS issue to allow user-centric 
oriented service to be carried out properly. 
In this paper, we propose a QoS signaling (SIP+) in the 
service layer which covers end-to-end provisioning and 
SLA contract conformity. During the provisioning, SIP+ 
takes the behavior of the service component and the user’s 
expectation into consideration as well as media resources in 
the network. During the service delivery, information from 
management system (monitoring results “In contract” and 
“Out contract”) can be notified in the service layer via SIP+ 
control message to maintain E2E SLA. Finally, a user case 
and scenarios with related sequence diagrams are specified 
for analyzing the feasibility of our proposal. And a scenario 
is experimented in our platform.  The following work is to 
integrate our implementation within our global platform 
(VirtuOR’s virtual router [14], FOCUS OpenIMSCore [15] 
and SUN’s GlassFish [16] [17]) for analyzing the 
performance. 
 
 
 
28
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

ACKNOWLEDGMENT  
The authors thank to all the members of ETSI STF 360, 
and also thank to the members of ANR’s project UBIS for 
their work on our platform.  
REFERENCES 
[1] Sasan Rostambeik, Noëmie Simoni, Antoine Boutignon: Userware: A 
framework for next generation personalized services. Computer 
Communications 30(3): 619-629, 2007 
[2] Miika Poikselkä, Georg Mayer, Hisham Khartabil, and Aki Niemi, 
“The IMS: IP Multimedia Concepts and Services”, 2nd edition, 
Wiley, 2006 
[3] 3GPP TS 23.228 version 8.6.0 (2010-06), Universal Mobile 
Telecommunications 
System 
(UMTS); 
LTE;IP 
Multimedia 
Subsystem (IMS), Stage 2, Release 8  
[4] ETSI 
TS 
123 
228 
V8.6.0 
(2008-10): 
Digital 
cellular 
telecommunications system (Phase 2+) 
[5] ETSI TS 185 006 V2.0.0 (2008-03), Telecommunications and 
Internet converged Services and Protocols for Advanced Networking 
(TISPAN); Customer Devices architecture and Reference Points 
[6] ETSI ES 282 001 V2.0.0 (2008-03), NGN Functional Architecture 
[7] ETSI TS 185 005 V2.0.0 (2007-07), Telecommunications and 
Internet converged Services and Protocols for Advanced Networking 
(TISPAN); Services requirements and capabilities for customer 
networks connected to TISPAN NGN 
[8] RFC 3261: SIP (Session Initiation Protocol) July, 2002-06 
[9] 3GPP TS 24 229 V10.1.0 (2010-09): 3rd Generation Partnership 
Project; Technical Specification Group Core Network; IP Multimedia 
Call Control Protocol based on Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) and 
Session Description Protocol (SDP) Stage 3, Release 10 
[10] NLSP for QoS. Available: http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/nsis-
charter.html , December, 2010 
[11] QoS 
NSLP 
QSPEC 
Template. 
Available: 
http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/nsis-charter.html  
[12] N. Simoni and Y. Wu.: NGN Charging in enhanced IMS. ICN’08: 
87-92, Cancun, Mexico 
[13] N. Simoni, C. Yin, and G. Du Chéné.: An intelligent user centric 
middleware for NGN: Infosphere and AmbientGrid. COMSWARE 
08: 599-606. Bangalore, India  
[14] http://www.virtuor.fr/, December, 2010 
[15] http://www.openimscore.org/, January, 2011 
[16] http://www.oracle.com/index.html, Januarry, 2011 
[17] http://glassfish.java.net/public/downloadsindex.html#top, December, 
2010 
 
 
 
 
29
CTRQ 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-126-7

