Problem of IMS modeling – Solving Approaches 
 
Mesud Hadžialić, Mirko Škrbić, Nerma Šečić, Mirza Varatanović, Elvedina Zulić, Nedim Bijedić 
University of Sarajevo 
e-mail: mhadzialic@etf.unsa.ba, mskrbic@etf.unsa.ba, nsecic@etf.unsa.ba, mvaratanovic@etf.unsa.ba, 
elvedina.zulic@bstelecom.ba, nedim.bijedic@bstelecom.ba 
 
Abstract – IMS (IP Multimedia Subsystem) network has high 
demands from perspective of multimedia, flexible and 
interactive communications. Fulfillment of those demands, 
with appropriate levels of quality, is not a simple task. The 
primary objective of this paper is to set emphasis on the 
proper dimensioning of IMS network, and the need to find a 
methodology applicable in planning of IMS networks, that 
will be able to provide quantitative results on basis of the 
initial request. In addition, the goal is to provide insight to 
the basic problems of IMS network, and ways of solving 
them. This primarily refers to SIP (Session Initiation 
Protocol) servers, which are the key part of the IMS 
structure, which have to deal with overload due to improper 
dimensioning of the network. This paper will attempt to 
present systematically the existing solutions and to provide 
guidance for the future resolution of this problem. 
Keywords-IMS; modeling; overload; SIP. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
With 
the 
basic idea of 
integrating 
different 
networks into one multifunctional IP - based network, 
IMS (IP Multimedia Subsystem) aims to create  a unified 
communication environment for fixed and mobile users, 
by offering enriched and integrated services that were 
fragmented before. IMS needs to offer a high level of 
interaction for users  -  enriched calling  and enhanced 
messaging - sharing videos, images, and other multimedia 
during a voice call (during one communication session), 
with high level of service personalization. However, this 
level 
of 
communication 
flexibility 
significantly 
complicates the management, and among other things 
directly influences the increase of the number of signaling 
messages that must be exchanged and processed. 
SIP (Session Initiation Protocol) represents the core of  
IMS architecture. 
SIP servers 
are 
the 
main components responsible for processing and routing 
all signaling messages. The problem that imposes itself is 
the problem of dimensioning IMS network, i.e., 
dimensioning IMS components, which should be able to 
process large amounts of messages, in order to avoid 
server overload and therefore degradation of QoS 
(Quality of Service) and QoE (Quality of Experience). 
SIP provides limited built-in 
overload 
control 
mechanism - the 503 Service Unavailable response.  
However, as the price of rejecting SIP sessions typically 
cannot be ignored, this mechanism cannot prevent 
server’s congestions.  When a SIP server rejects a large 
amount of incoming sessions its performance degrades 
and, additionally, the impact of overload increases 
through the network - this is a key observation that 
distinguishes SIP server overload problem from other 
overload problems [8].  In order to eliminate or at least 
partially reduce the problems of SIP server overload, 
various approaches have been proposed in accordance 
with the opinion of what is the dominant problem that 
leads to uncontrolled overload.   
On the other hand, if the network is not initially 
properly dimensioned, the application of congestion 
control will not be enough.  In short time the nodes will 
fall into a state of congestion, which will lead to 
performance degradation of the entire network, and at 
some point, entire network will come to an outage and 
collapse.  Thus, the network dimensioning must be 
understood as the primary problem, and a congestion 
control as an additional factor that can improve efficiency 
of well dimensioned network.   Network modeling or a 
search for a loyal representation which reflects the 
behavior of IMS nodes and provides required output value 
in dependency on the input parameters, is a key of good 
methodologies for planning and dimensioning IMS 
network. 
This paper systematically presents key problems of 
IMS and provides a review of previous results that deal 
with overload problem; also provides a review of current 
achievements in the field of modeling and behavioral 
analysis of IMS network in order to optimize the same. 
During the process of result analysis some disadvantages 
were observed, and every author provided a unique 
guideline for solving this complex problem. The second 
section provides an overview of papers dealing with 
overload problem, while third section gives an overview 
of previous work in field of modeling, behavioral analysis 
of the IMS network in order to optimize the same. In last 
section, we provide guidelines for solving this complex 
problem. 
II. IDENTIFIED CONTRIBUTIONS AND 
EXPERIENCES IN SOLVING THE PROBLEM OF SIP 
OVERLOAD 
Numerous papers deal 
with 
overload 
problems 
on SIP servers. Some of the papers include a detailed 
analysis of possible overload causes, while others contain 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-192-2
CTRQ 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

suggestions and explanations of the different mechanisms 
and algorithms, which should have the ability to manage 
and control overload.   
Guided by representative papers for the stated problem, 
authors observed and exposed few potential aspects of 
SIP overload classification.  
 
One of the observed aspects involves creation of 
new protocol or changes on existing protocol. 
According to existing achievements this aspect 
could be the most complete solution but IMS, SIP 
servers and SIP protocol are so widespread in 
commercial use that there is no sense to try to 
change main standards in that area. 
For example, Whitehead [9] 2005 described the 
framework independent of the protocol, GOCAP, 
but his mapping in SIP has not yet been defined. 
Even if this framework becomes mapped; 
questionable is if it will be accepted by 
manufacturers of equipment. 
 
Another approach implies the use of new network 
elements or applications which would predict 
congestions or overloads. This means additional 
investments 
in 
HW 
(Hardware) 
and 
SW 
(Software); it demands additional time, resources 
and efforts on existing applications to send some 
performance indicators. 
Luca Monacelli [11] describes the overload 
problems and offers stabilization system, STBZ 
(STaBiliZer), which protects all network elements 
of IMS.  STBZ is a software application which 
collect measurements from network, processes it 
by appropriate stabilization policies and controls 
traffic shapers in order to avoid congestion on 
network elements 
 
One of most commonly used approaches is the 
creation of new algorithms on existing network 
elements.  
This approach directly influences source code of 
network elements, but upgrades and patches are 
standardized processes and are something that 
network operators often do which makes this 
solution acceptable. 
C. Shen and H. Schulzrinne [10] are among the 
first 
to deal 
with 
overload 
of 
TCP 
- 
based SIP server. They suggest new mechanisms 
for SIP overload control - which relies on the 
existing TCP flow control and congestion control. 
The algorithm consists of three components: 
Connection Split, Buffer Minimization and Smart 
Forwarding. Due to the specific nature of SIP 
protocol 
(session 
based) 
there 
is 
a  
need for separation 
of 
INVITE messages 
processing  - requests which start a session, and 
other non-INVITE messages, in order to prevent 
opening 
of 
new sessions that 
could lead 
to 
overload and that, on the other hand, will preserve 
the existing sessions. This part of the algorithm is 
called 
Connection Split, 
which allows 
that 
INVITE and non-INVITE messages are treated 
differently. Smart Forwarding is enforced on an 
INVITE connection. When an INVITE message 
arrives, decision about the forwarding of INVITE 
request is made in relation to the current state of 
buffer. This way a session that should not be 
established can be canceled as soon as possible. 
The paper further examines the impact of buffer 
size (buffer at the transmitter and the receiver side 
and applications buffer at the receiver side) to 
bandwidth and processing time.  It was concluded 
that the best results can be achieved through 
minimization of the buffer size on the receiving 
side, which is the third part of the algorithm. This 
algorithm shows very good results for classical 
SIP scenarios in core networks, where small 
number of transmitting servers simultaneously 
creates overload on the receiving server. But in 
the case of edge networks where the overload is 
prevalent, the described algorithm does not 
provide satisfactory results. 
 
Whatever solution is used to prevent overload it 
will not provide satisfactory results if network is 
not optimized and well dimensioned.  
There is no one disadvantage of this approach and 
this network optimization step must be applied on 
any professional network (of any kind). 
 
We concluded that solving SIP overload problem 
requires combined use of exposed aspects. We propose 
combination of new algorithm on existing network 
elements and optimization and well dimensioning of 
network.  
Guidelines stated by C. Shen and H. Schulzrinne [10]  
will provide a start point in further discussion of SIP 
overload problems. 
III. IDENTIFIED CONTRIBUTIONS AND 
EXPERIENCES IN SOLVING THE PROBLEMS OF 
IMS NETWORK OPTIMIZATION 
As stated earlier, this chapter provides a review of the 
previous works in the field of modeling and behavioral 
analysis of IMS network, in order to provide the guideline 
for optimization of the same. 
The problem identified in IMS networks is the 
existence of bottleneck nodes at different network layers 
of IMS architecture. The authors used a variety of 
scientific methods to investigate this issue of which the 
largest contributions were provided by analysis and 
modeling methods.  
 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-192-2
CTRQ 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

 
Figure 1. Model of central server for IMS [2] 
Mkwawa and Kouvatsos [2], using the modeling 
method, have proven that exactly S-CSCF (Serving Call 
Session Control Function) is the throat of the IMS 
network that processes great number of messages. 
They have compared the analytical and experimental 
results of IMS application modeling, user registration and 
the establishment of multimedia sessions, and have 
showed that the registration of users and establishment of 
multimedia session corresponds to a well-know central 
server model QNM (Queuing Network Model) Fig. 1. 
Using Buzen's algorithm [13] and Little's theorem [12], 
service rates for S-CSCF, AS (Autonomous System) and 
HSS (Home Subscriber Server) were calculated, as well 
as 
transition 
probabilities, 
server 
utilization 
and 
throughput of the model. 
Simulation results for server utilization and throughput 
for the same service speed and probability transitions 
were proven to coincide with the analytical model Fig. 2. 
[2] represents one of the ways for modeling the IMS 
system. This representation only indicates the network 
issues, but does not provide any kind of solution. 
Because of the bottleneck problems additional load on 
S-CSCF module is not recommended, so overload 
problems on service layer and dynamic interaction of 
services are solved using Service Brokers, or SCIM 
(Service Capability Interaction Management) [4] module 
Fig. 3.  
This module is not an integrated part of S-CSCF, 
instead it is being realized as an application server. 
Organization in this way allows better application server 
utilization in order to shift overload boundaries on the 
application layer. This opens new issues in the service 
interaction management field. 
 
Figure 2. Comparative study of simulations and analytical results of 
the central server model [2] 
 
The best overview of the results achieved by using 
modeling techniques are presented in [6] [7]. Both papers 
indicate the effects of adding servers to the networks 
assuming M/M/r model with Erlang C formula. It is 
shown in Fig. 4 and Fig. 5 that, by adding servers to the 
network, total waiting time in system is reduced, which 
has direct impact on system overload.  
Two approaches were used for the simulation of M/M/r 
model: hyper-threading and physical server adding.  It is 
shown that prioritizing calls affect waiting time. Fig. 6 
and Fig. 7 show that with the increase of the prioritizing 
calls from 25 % to 50%, waiting time for all calls is 
increased; so, it is necessary to define a threshold value of 
the amount of priority calls, which will truly give better 
QoS and increase the performance. 
 
Access
network
Access
network
PSTN
S-CSCF
P-CSCF
P-CSCF
I-CSCF
BGCF
MRFC
MRFP
MGCF
SGW
MGW
AS
AS
AS
SCIM
Call control network
Service Delivery Platform
Service
ISC
HSS
SLF
BGCF:    Breakout gateway control fumction
I-CSCF:  Interogation call session control function
MGCF:    Media gateway control function
MGW:     Media gateway
MRFC:    Media resource function control
MRFP:    Media resource function processor
P-CSCF: Proxy call session control function
SGW:      Signaling gateway
SLF:        Subscription locator function
 
Figure 3. IMS architecture with SCIM [5] 
 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-192-2
CTRQ 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

 
Figure 4. Mean waiting time in multi-server M/M/r system (µ=100) [6] 
 
Figure 5. Mean waiting time in queue (Tq) [7] 
Analysis was made with several assumptions; CSCF 
(Call Session Control Function) servers are replaced with 
one that has unlimited queue, while SIP requests and 
requested serving time have exponential distributions 
which considerably simplifies the process computation. 
 
 
Figure 6. Comparison of prioritizing calls waiting time for two 
different amount of prioritizing packets [6] 
 
 
Figure 7. Comparison of non-prioritizing calls waiting time for two 
different amount of prioritizing packets [6] 
IV. PROPOSAL FOR SOLVING OVERLOAD 
ISSUES AND IMS NETWORK OPTIMIZATION 
Analyzing the papers in the domain of SIP servers 
overload and IMS network optimization can be concluded 
that there is no unified position on what mechanism 
successfully prevents overload or which traffic model 
gives the accurate picture of the actual IMS architecture. 
Analyses that have been done so far include certain 
assumptions, whereby the obtained results do not provide 
the complete picture of the observed problems. 
The complete resolution of defined problems is much 
more complex and must be considered in environment 
that is adequate for real systems. This environment 
assumes the use of multiple SIP servers, limited waiting 
lines and service times which usually do not have 
exponential character.  
Our proposal for solving the problem of overload and 
optimization of IMS network is as follows: 
 
The prioritization of NON-INVITE over INVITE 
messages on S-CSCF node. This would prevent 
the accumulation of new sessions, which leads to 
efficient management and cleaning of active 
sessions.  
 
Message prioritizing implies separation of the 
incoming flow into two queues on S-CSCF. 
Service time distribution of processing an 
INVITE message will no longer have exponential 
character. 
 
It is necessary to experimentally determine 
distribution of service time of an INVITE 
message in case mentioned above. 
 
By the determination of service time distribution, 
preconditions are made for calculation of 
analytical 
dependencies 
between 
parameters 
which directly affect overload: queue length for 
INVITE messages and service time. 
 
Following step is the analytical and experimental 
analysis with systems that have more physically 
separated 
S-CSCF 
servers 
with 
previously 
mentioned methods applied. This analysis will 
provide results which should show dependency 
between system load and number of servers. 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-192-2
CTRQ 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

 
Additional optimization requires application layer 
modeling 
which 
implies 
classification 
of 
applications, e.g., by real-time, non-real-time 
characteristics. For each group of applications, 
traffic management model should be defined with 
theoretically and experimentally determination of 
service requests distributions, in order to get 
minimal response time for every group of 
services. Request priority and the corresponding 
service prices will have important role in traffic 
management model. One of possible approaches 
is the use of multiple conditional optimal paths. 
V.  CONCLUSION 
In order to ensure that IMS concept has the opportunity 
to be used in real conditions and to provide enriched 
services with the promising QoS, it is necessary to 
continue research and to make new progress towards 
solving these complex issues. The need to work on 
modeling is still persistent, and it is needed to pursue the 
faithful “behavior“ mapping of the IMS architecture into a 
model which will be able to provide analytical 
dependence of the output parameters with the input ones. 
Only well-modeled systems can provide valid results on 
which can be based further mechanisms of load control, 
and then the steps that will contribute to the optimization 
of the overall architecture. 
The paper gives an overview of all current 
achievements and provides a guideline for future work. 
All of the proposed methods should be the subject of the 
future research in order to solve the defined problem. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 3GPP TS 23.517, “IP Multimedia Subsystem; Functional 
architecture“, 2008., retrieved: December, 2011. 
[2] I. M. Mkwawa and D.D. Kouvatsos, “Performance Modelling and 
Evaluation of IP Multimedia Subsystems“, HET-NETs08, pp. 67-
79, February 2008. 
[3] 3GPP TS 23.002, “Network Architecture”, 2009., retrieved: 
December, 2011. 
[4] Nicholas S. Huslak and A.C. McQuaide Jr., “Service Brokering: 
Opportunities and Challenges“, AT&T Knowledge Ventures, 
2007., retrieved: December, 2011. 
[5] Kenichi Sakura, Soichiro Tange and Hisayuki Sekine, “Service 
Delivery Platform Implmenting IP Multimedia Subsystem“, 
FUJITSU Sci. Tech, Vol. 45, No. 4, pp. 409-414, October 2009. 
[6] A.M. Amooee and A. Falahati, “Overcoming Overload in IMS by 
Employment of Multiserver Nodes and Priority Queues“, 2009 
International Conference on Signal Processing Systems, pp. 348-
352, May 2009. 
[7] Mlindi Mashologu, “Performance Optimization of IP Multimedia 
Subsystem“, Dissertation.com, 2010., retrieved: December, 2011. 
[8] Rosenberg, J., “Requirements for Management of Overload in the 
Session Initiation Protocol“, IETF (SIPPING, Internet Draft), 
Decembar 2008., retrieved: December, 2011. 
[9] M. Whitehead, “GOCAP - one standardized overload control for 
next generation networks”, BT Technology Journal, Vol. 23, Issue 
1, pp. 147-153, January 2005. 
[10] C. Shen and H. Schulzrinne, “On TCP - based SIP server overload 
control“, IPTComm '10 Principles, Systems and Applications of IP 
Telecommunications, pp. 71-83, August 2010. 
[11] Luca Monacelli, “Including Overload Control in Existing IMS 
Compilant Networks by Using Traffic Shapers“, Mobimedia '09 
Proceedings of the 5th International ICST Mobile Multimedia 
Communications Conference, Article No. 56, September 2009. 
[12] John D.C. Little, “A Proof of the Queuing Formula: L=λW", 
Operations Research, Vol. 9, No. 3, pp. 383-387, May-June 1961. 
[13] Jeffrey P. Buzen, “Computational algorithms for closed queueing 
networks with exponential servers”, Communications of the ACM, 
Vol. 16, No. 9, pp. 527-531, September 1973. 
 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-192-2
CTRQ 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

