 
 
Evaluation of a new Scheduling Scheme for VoIP with Mobility in 3G LTE
Richard Musabe, Hadi Larijani 
Glasgow Caledonian University 
Glasgow, Scotland, UK 
e-mail: richard.musabe@gcu.ac.uk, h.larijani@gcu.ac.uk
  
Abstract- 3G long term evolution is an all internet protocol 
based network and one of its main aims is to improve mobile 
multimedia services. This is achieved through streamlining the 
system for packet services. This leads to improvements in the 
form of higher bit rates, lower latencies, and a variety of 
service offerings. However, more challenging technical 
difficulties may be expected to arise when voice traffic flows 
over a long term evolution network. There is a major change in 
the way voice is transmitted in long term evolution network, in 
that it is transmitted in packets instead of through circuits. The 
fact that long term evolution is designed to support mobility, it 
is of great importance to analyse the effect of mobility to our 
new scheduling scheme for voice over internet protocol in long 
term evolution systems. In this paper, we analyse the effect of 
mobility to our proposed scheduling algorithm, voice over 
internet protocol optimisation scheduling algorithm while 
taking into account the quality of service parameters of voice 
traffic in long term evolution network. Using long term 
evolution-SIM 
simulation 
software, 
we 
evaluate 
the 
performance of our proposed scheduling algorithm and 
compare it with other scheduling algorithms in the literature 
such as; exponential proportional fair and proportional fair 
scheduling algorithms. Simulation results showed that mobility 
had a significant impact on the quality of service for voice 
traffic on all the three scheduling algorithms. Our proposed 
algorithm provided the best quality of service for voice traffic 
compared to the other two scheduling algorithms based on the 
packet loss ratio, delay, and throughput metrics.  
Keywords- LTE; Mobility; Scheduling Schemes; VoIP. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
          3G long term evolution (LTE) was identified by the third 
generation partnership project (3GPP) as the preliminary version of 
next generation wireless communication systems because of its 
high data rates [1]. This mobile cellular communications 
technology provides a maximum 100Mbps downlink and 50Mbps 
uplink when using 20 MHz bandwidth [2]. In the downlink 
physical layer, LTE uses Orthogonal Frequency-Division Multiple 
Access (OFDMA) radio technology to meet the LTE requirements 
for spectrum flexibility and enables cost-efficient solutions for 
wide carriers with high peak rates. In the uplink, LTE uses a pre-
coded version of OFDMA known as Single-Carrier Frequency-
Division Multiple Access (SCFDMA) in order to compensate for a 
drawback with normal OFDMA of a high Peak-to-Average-Power 
Ratio (PAPR) [3].  Wireless technology has expanded from voice 
only to high-speed data, multimedia applications, and wireless 
internet [4].  
          LTE requirements for high data rates are achieved by the 
fact that this technology is only designed for packet switched 
networks (PSN); hence, there is no need for the circuit switched 
mode. However, this design brings with it more technical 
challenges especially for voice services. Voice over internet 
protocol (VoIP) services are both delay and packet loss sensitive. 
The biggest challenge of VoIP over LTE is to deliver Quality of 
Service (QoS). Normally, users would expect voice with the same 
quality as that provided by circuit switched networks. However, 
traffic delivered over PSNs is subject to delay and packet loss [5]. 
A major issue with VoIP over LTE is that 3G LTE adopts a 
different method of resource transmission from other cellular 
systems like Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA). 
          3G LTE uses Physical Resource Blocks (PRB) as its 
transmission unit. PRBs can be defined as the basic unit with both 
frequency and time aspects [6]. Basically, the base station of 3G 
LTE, known as eNodeB has a fixed number of available PRBs 
according to their allocated bandwidth and it is supposed to assign 
PRBs repeatedly at every Transmission Time Interval (TTI) [2]. 
Another issue with VoIP over LTE is that LTE systems also tend 
to support a very high mobility of up to 350 km/h [7]. LTE  aims at 
providing a fast and seamless handover from one cell (source cell) 
to another (target cell) [8]. However, the consequences of the 
handover procedures in LTE systems depends entirely on the type 
of application that is being used, for example some applications 
would tolerent a short interuption while others would not. In this 
paper, the application that is being used is VoIP, so it is crucial to 
evaluate the QoS of VoIP  for the high mobility. Different 
techniques have been introduced in recent years in order to 
overcome the challenges of voice over LTE [2] [1] [5]. However, 
QoS for voice over LTE is still a big challenge taking into account 
the mobility features of LTE, fading channels of wireless links as 
well as delay and packet loss sensitive voice characteristics. Our 
contributions in this paper are: 
 
Analyse the effect of mobility to our proposed  
scheduling algorithm; VoIP optimisation scheduling 
algorithm (VOSA) while taking into account the QoS 
parameters of voice traffic in LTE 
 
Evaluate the performance of our proposed scheduling 
algorithm VOSA with mobility features and compare it 
with other scheduling algorithms developed in [9] such 
as: 
exponential 
proportional 
fair 
(EXP-PF) 
and 
proportional fair (PF) scheduling algorithms. 
          The simulation results were generated using the open source 
LTE system simulator called long term evolution-SIM (LTE-SIM) 
[9]. It models different uplink and downlink scheduling strategies 
in multicell/multiuser environments; taking into account user 
mobility, radio resource optimization, frequency reuse techniques, 
the adaptive modulation, and coding (AMC) module. It also 
includes other aspects that are relevant to the industrial and 
scientific communities.  
           The rest of the paper is organised as follows: Section II 
discusses the general aspects of VoIP. Section III describes 
different  scheduling algorithms used in this paper. Section IV 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-192-2
CTRQ 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

 
 
describes the system model, scenario setup, handovers and 
mobility patterns. Section IV presents the simulation results and 
performance evaluation. Section V reviews the main conclusions, 
and introduces the future work. 
  
II. 
VoIP 
A.  Brief Description 
           VoIP is a way of transmitting voice traffic as data packets 
over an IP network. Voice traffic is first transformed into digital 
signals then it is compressed and broken into a series of packets. 
These series of packets will later be reassembled and decoded at 
the receiver.  Voice digitizing and encoding can either be done 
before or concurrently with packetization [10]. This technology 
has grown rapidly due to different factors such as:  low cost, the 
integration of voice and data traffic over the existing networking 
infrastructures, etc. 
          VoIP is transmitted over a packet-switched network rather 
than the circuit-switch network protocols of the PSTN [11]. 
Initially voice and data were transmitted using two different 
networks but with the introduction of VoIP technology, they can 
both be transmitted using the same network infrastructure.  VoIP 
reduces costs by avoiding the use of traditional PSTN. With VoIP 
technology the high cost for long distance calls and international 
calls transported over the circuit switched network can be reduced 
by transporting voice calls over low cost flat pricing packet 
switched network [12]. 
           The advantages of VoIP such as integrated services and 
flexibility has attracted more customers as well as companies from  
circuit switch networks to  packet switch networks. The fact that 
VoIP uses a packet-switched network means that the QoS provided 
by VoIP is not as good as that of circuit-switched network. This is 
due to the fact that real-time traffic such as voice is affected by 
technical issues like end-to-end delay or latency, jitter, and packet 
loss, hence adversely affecting the quality of voice [13]. Unique 
treatment should be given to voice traffic as it is vital for it to reach 
the destination in the quickest time [14]. 
           Since our main aim is to analyse the effect of mobility to the 
QoS of voice traffic, it is of great importance to analyse some 
important parameters that describe QoS of voice in LTE networks. 
These parameters will be investigated in the next sub section. 
B. 
VoIP QoS Analysis  
          The adaptive multirate (AMR) voice codec is one of the 
most popular voice codecs used in LTE. This codec provides 32-
bytes voice payload every 20 milliseconds during talk-spurt period 
and 7-bytes payload carries a silence descriptor (SID) frame every 
160 millisecond [1]. VoIP protocol stack that utilizes the real 
transport protocol (RTP) is encapsulated using user datagram 
protocol (UDP), and in turn is carried by IP. The combination of 
all these protocols requires a 40 byte IPv4 header or a 60-byte IPv6 
header, but the overhead brought about by these headers causes 
serious degrading in spectral efficiency in supporting VoIP 
services.  To solve this problem, an efficient and robust header 
compression (ROHC) technique is used. This technique solves the 
overhead problem by minimizing the size of the IP/UDP/RTP 
headers as little as 2 or 4 bytes using IETF RFC 3059 [6] [15]. 
          One of the main characteristics of voice traffic is 
block/packet error rate that leads to packet loss and delay [7]. 
According to [16], the allowed maximum mouth-to-ear delay for 
voice is 250ms with the assumption that the delay for the core 
network is approximately 100ms, while the tolerable delay for 
radio link control (RLC), MAC buffering, scheduling, and 
detection should be strictly lower than 150ms as shown in Fig.1. 
Hence, taking into account that both end users are LTE users, 
tolerable delay for buffering and scheduling must be lower than 
80ms. A delay of 50ms from eNB to UE has been chosen for the 
3GPP performance evaluation metric limit to better account for 
variability in network end-to-end delays [7]. When voice packets 
are transmitted over a packet switched network, packets will be 
dropped due to  error  rate and packet delay exceeding the target 
latency. However with the occurance of the packet loss, voice 
quality is not affected if the error rate is less than outage threshold 
[7]. This means that the Qos of VoIP in LTE is limited by an 
outage limit, described in TR 25.814 [6] and was later updated in 
R1-070674 [17]. The outage limit means that  error rate of VoIP 
users must be kept within 2%. The overall description of  the QoS 
for voice users in LTE  can then be defined as  the maximum 
number of VoIP users that can be supported without exceeding a 
given threshold. At least 95% of total VoIP users should meet the 
above described outage limits [1]. 
III. 
SCHEDULING ALGORITHMS 
           Different scheduling algorithms have been introduced in 
recent years in order to overcome the challenges of voice over 
LTE. 
           In [1], the authors proposed an efficient LTE scheduler to 
increase the capacity of VoIP in E-UTRA Uplink. The proposed 
scheme modified the persistent scheduling algorithm proposed in 
[5] such that the resources of two VoIP users can be coupled, this 
brought about early termination gains without the need of 
additional control signals. The proposed efficient scheduling 
method employs a resource sharing approach. It also employs the 
random user pairing and best user pairing method to improve the 
capacity of VoIP services over E-UTRA Uplink. The results 
showed that the employment of their proposed scheduling scheme 
makes a larger available capacity than that resulting from the 
original persistent scheduling. 
           In [2], a Medium Access Control (MAC) layer PRB 
scheduling algorithm was proposed. The key ideas of this scheme 
are VoIP priority mode and its adaptive duration management. The 
VoIP priority mode assigns PRBs first to VoIP calls and it is also 
able to minimize VoIP packet delay and packet loss while the 
adaptive duration management is able to prevent the overall system 
performance degradation. The proposed MAC scheduler in this 
paper allocates PRBs in a round robin way and the scheduling 
order is determined according to the following factors; the queue 
length and Signal to Interference Noise Ratio (SINR) of each call, 
so the larger the factor values are the earlier the corresponding call 
is scheduled. Their results show that when the VoIP priority mode 
is not used, the packet drop rate rises rapidly as the number of 
VoIP call increases. On the contrary, when using the VoIP priority 
mode, the drop rate remains at low level around 1 % in spite of the 
increase of VoIP calls. However, this proposed mode has got a 
possible negative effect. It might degrade the efficiency of the 
eNodeB resource utilization because VoIP calls are seldom able to 
fully utilize the allocated PRB capacity. 
 
 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-192-2
CTRQ 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

 
 
 
Figure 1. End To End Delay Components in E-UTRAN (LTE) 
          In [5], a new semi-persistent scheme of MAC scheduling, 
which adaptively prioritize VoIP traffic by not forcing other 
traffics to starve, was proposed. The proposed scheme, which 
combines VoIP priority mode with user coupling, allows utilizing 
the system capacity efficiently. The priority mode duration is 
adaptively controlled using the channel condition and two users are 
coupled to share the resources.  The controlling user is also 
determined dynamically using minimum information as possible. 
The priority mode works by assigning resources to VoIP traffic in 
a priority basis at the same time controlling the duration of this 
mode dynamically according to the channel conditions in order to 
avoid starvation of other services in the same time. The scheme 
also allows user coupling where two users share the resources 
allocated to them by the eNodeB therefore offsetting the low 
resource utilization while in priority mode.  
          This is achieved by allowing two users who have different 
channel conditions to share resources. Basically, the proposed 
scheme consists of two parts; user coupling and link authority 
change. User pairing method takes care of pairing VoIP users 
according to the channel conditions so that the pairing results in 
the most efficient usage of resource. The link authority change 
ensures that the user in need of resource at any point of time has 
the authority on the link to get the fair share. The authority 
adaption phase is executed using the Acknowledgement / No 
acknowledgement (ACK/NACK) channel of the users. Each user 
monitors his couple’s ACK/NACK channel and changes the 
authority status if the signal on his own channel and his pair’s 
channel is different, i.e., ‘his signal is ACK and his pair’s signal is 
NACK or vice versa’. On the other hand, the authority remains 
same if the signals of both the channels are same. Their results 
show a great improvement over the original persistent mode. 
          In [9], different scheduling algorithms were developed and 
the main ones included; PF and EXP-PF. PF scheduling algorithm 
focused on maximizing the total network throughput as well as 
assuring fairness among flows. It allocates resources based on two 
factors; experienced channel quality and the past user throughput 
[19]. This scheduler uses the metric descrbed as the ratio between 
the instantaneous available data rate and the average past rate with 
reference to the i-th flow in the j-th flow subchannel. This can be 
depicted in equation 1 below. 
j
i
j
i
i j
R
r
W
,
,
,
                                                                    (1) 
where Wij is the scheduler metric, Ri  is the estimated average data 
rate and  rij is the instantaneous available data rate.  
          EXP-PF scheduling algorithm basically aimed at increasing 
the priority of real-time flows as opposed to non-real-time flows. 
In other words, the flows with head-of-line packet delay very close 
to the delay threshold [20]. Its metrics were calculated as follows; 
j
i
i j
HOL i
i
i j
R
r
X
X
D
W
,
,
,
,
1
exp
                         (2) 
and 
r t
N
i
HOL i
i
t
r
D
N
X
,
1
,
,
1
                                         (3) 
 
with Nr,t being the number of active downlink real-time flow.   
           Considering a packet delay threshold Ti, the probability 
i is defined as the maximum probability that the delay DHOL,I of 
the head-of-line packet delay exceeds the delay threshold. 
Therefore 
i is given by 
i
i
i
T
log
                                                               (4) 
          With all these techniques in the literature, QoS for voice 
over LTE is still a big challenge taking into account the fading 
channels of wireless links as well as delay and packet loss sensitive 
voice characteristics. Based on the algorithm in [2], we propose a 
new scheduling algorithm called VOSA, with the aim of improving 
the performance of voice traffic over a 3G LTE network.  
          At the same time it reduces the negative impact that may be 
caused by the introduction of the new algorithm on the entire 
system’s performance. Details of VOSA can be found in [18]. This 
algorithm is activated at every TTI by considering if there is a 
VoIP call and if the duration period of the new algorithm has not 
exceeded the limit. To determine the duration of our new 
algorithm, we use the adaptive method proposed in [2]. This 
method provides limits to VOSA by adaptively changing between a 
pre-specific minimum and maximum according to the ratio of 
dropped packets. Higher drop ratio means that there are many 
ongoing VoIP calls, and hence it is necessary to increase the limits 
to allow more consecutive TTIs to be dedicated to VoIP calls. On 
the other hand, low drop ratio implies that QoS of VoIP calls are 
satisfied at decent levels, and thus it is safe to reduce the duration 
of the algorithm and serve other service in the network. It should 
be noted that the adaptive method used here considers only 
dropped packets due to many ongoing VoIP calls (Call 
congestions). However, packet loss can also be due to different 
factors such as fading channels, interferences, etc and these factors 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-192-2
CTRQ 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

 
 
were put under consideration while scheduling other kinds of 
traffic in our network. 
          Our scheduling scheme is designed by making modification 
to the algorithm in [2]. Basically, the VOSA allocates PRBs to 
VoIP calls based on the arrival time metric. Once the PRBs 
allocation is done, the scheduling order of the calls is determined 
by the following factors: Quality feedback (QF) and queue length 
(QL) of each call. The better the factor values are, the earlier the 
corresponding call is scheduled. In our algorithm we use the 
following equation: 
Df(i) = Qfeedback(i)*Qlength(i)                                                                                      (5) 
 
where Qfeedback (i) and Qlength (i) are the quality feedback and queue 
length respectively. Equation (5) implies that the better the 
wireless link and the longer the queue length, the earlier the 
corresponding call is scheduled to have the PRBs. This is 
calculated at every TTI. The details of the proposed algorithm 
consist of two parts. The first part of VOSA describes the PRBs 
allocation at every TTI. The second part is the adaptive method to 
control the duration of the proposed algorithm, detailed in [2]. 
          In short, scheduling starts at every TTI. The activation of the 
scheduling algorithm is determined by whether there exists a VoIP 
call or not, and whether the count of the consecutive scheduling 
algorithm enabled TTIs does not exceed the limit. Otherwise the 
normal mode is set to schedule non-real time traffic based on 
similar factors as in equation (5) and the count is reset. VoIP calls 
are assigned one PRB at a time. Calls with long queues and better 
wireless link are served first. It continues in the same routine as 
long as there are remaining PRBs and there are calls having data to 
send. If there are remaining PRBs after VoIP call scheduling, the 
remaining PRBs are allocated to other services in the same way as 
the normal mode. This prevents PRBs from being wasted.  
          VOSA scheduling algorithm is summarised in 8 different 
steps; 
1. 
Indentify the traffic type whether voice or any other 
traffic 
2. 
Determine the user  metrics (QF,QL) 
3. 
Find the user with the highest user  metric as defined in 
equation 5 
4. 
Consider the set of available resource blocks RBs 
Navail_RB, at every start of the algorithm , Navail_RB  = 
{1,2,…….., NRB} to be allocated to number of user K 
5. 
Assign the resource block N* to the user K* with the 
highest user  metrics value such that  NRB,K* = NRB,K* 
U {N*} 
6. 
Schedule the user K* first 
7. 
Delete the user K* and resource block N* from their 
respective lists 
8. 
Repeat all the steps until all users are scheduled and if 
more resource block exists then allocate them to other 
traffic types. 
          The fact that VOSA focuses on channel quality and queue 
length metrics at physical and MAC layers improves the QoS of 
Voice calls in LTE. Using equation (5), VOSA performs 
scheduling at the MAC layer and schedules Voice calls first before 
assigning PRBs to other traffic in the network. However, the 
starvation of other traffics in the network is controlled by the 
adaptive method used. In other words, VOSA is only deployed 
when there are voice calls to schedule and if it does not exceed its 
limits. 
IV. 
SYSTEM MODELLING AND SCENARIO SETUP 
A. 
  PRB Characteristics 
          In this sub-section, we introduce the characteristics of PRBs, 
described as the transmission resources in LTE. LTE systems 
consists of both a time and a frequecy  plane. The time plane is 
divided into 1 ms TTI which consists of two slots of 0.5 ms  to 
form 1 ms sub frames, where each sub frame contains 7 OFDMA 
symbols.  In each TTI, there are 14 OFDMA sysmbols, where 2 
symbols out of 14 are reserved for uplink pilot transmission, while 
the other 12 symbols are used for data and control information 
transimission. TTI can be defined as the minimum allocation unit 
in the time domain [21].  
          If we consider the frequency plane, the minimum allocation 
unit is the PRB, where each PRB contains 12 subcarriers of 15 Khz 
bandwidth  each. The number of OFDMA symbols in a resource 
block depends on a cyclic prefix being used. All these can be 
depicted in  Fig. 2. It must be noted that VoIP packets must be 
transmitted per TTI and they can occupy one or more PRBs [5]. 
The amount of data bits that can be transmitted by one PRB 
depends on the link between the eNodeB and the user mobile 
terminal. This is due to the fact that 3G LTE uses adaptive 
modulation and coding (AMC), in order to change modulation and 
coding schemes depending on the wireless link conditions. 
 
Figure 2. The structure and allocation of the eNodeB transmission 
resources symbols. 
B. 
Scenario Setup 
          The network is made up numerous cells and different 
network 
nodes 
such 
as; 
the 
EnodeB, 
mobility 
management/gateway (MME/GW) and user equipements (UEs). 
All the simulations were run in a diamond-pattern scenario with 
19-3-sector sites that totaled to about 57 cells. Most of the 
simulation parameters are presented in the table 1 below. VoIP 
flows are generated by the traffic generator in LTE-SIM called 
VoIP application. This application generates G.729 voice 
flows.VoIP traffic was designed with an ON/OFF Markov chain. 
The ON period  has an  exponentially distributed mean value of 3s 
while the OFF period  has a shortened exponential probability 
density function with an upper limit of 6.9s as well as an average 
value of 3s [22]. Throughout the ON period, the source sends 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-192-2
CTRQ 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

 
 
packets of 20bytes every 20 ms, thus implying that the source data 
rate is 8 kb/s. On the other hand, throughout the OFF period the 
rate is zero as we assume the presence of voice activity detector. 
          Three different scheduling algorithms were used in all 
simulation scenarios, these are: our proposed VOSA as well as  
EXP-PF and PF developed in [9]. In  one simulation scenario there 
was no mobility features implemented so the user speed was set to 
zero, this is equivalent to static position. In another simulation 
scenario, we implemented mobility features and the user speed was 
set to 30 km/h which was equivalent to vehicular and the distance 
covered was set to 400 meters by default. 
          To quantitatively investigate the effect of mobility to the 
voice traffic including each scheduling scheme, we measured three 
important VoIP QoS metrics (Packet-Loss-ratio, Delay, and 
throughput) for all the scheduling algorithms and in both scenarios. 
C. 
Handover and Mobility Pattern 
          One of the main aims of LTE systems is to provide a fast 
and seamless handover from one cell (source cell) to another 
(target cell) [8]. This is generally achieved due to the distributed 
nature of LTE radio access network architecture that consists of 
one node known as the EnodeB. According to the 3GPP release 8 
specifications, handovers in LTE are hard handovers, implying that 
there is a minimum interruption in the services when the handover 
is performed. 
          During the handover process, VoIP users cannot be 
scheduled, they cannot transmit or receive any data. The only 
transmitted and received data is the signalling related to the 
handover procedure [7]. This can lead to additional delays to 
Packet Data Units (PDUs) hence affecting the user quality on each 
handover process. LTE utilises a UE assisted hard handover 
algorithm for mobility. The UE measures the downlink signal 
quality and sends the the measurement reports to the EnodeB either 
periodically or when an event triggers i.e., ‘an interfering EnodeB 
becomes stronger than the current serving EnodeB’. Then the 
EnodeB will decide on the final handover based on the received 
measurement report. Normally, measurement averaging, handover 
margins, and timers are used to avoid excess handovers [23].  
          In the LTE-SIM simulator, two types of mobility models 
were developed, known as; random direction and random walk 
[24]. The user speed was selected between 0, 3, 30, 120 km/h, 
which were corresponding to static, pedestrian, and vehicular 
scenarios respectively. The user speed was mapped to a specific 
travel distance, i.e., ‘a user travelling at 3km/h would cover 200 
meters, a user travelling at 30km/h would cover 400 meters and the 
user travelling at 120km/h would cover 1000meters’. 
          If the random direction model is being used, the user 
chooses the speed direction at ramdom and keeps the same speed 
while moving towards the simulation boundary area. When the 
user reaches the simulation boundary area then new speed 
direction can be choosen. In contrary,  when the random walk 
model is chosen, user chooses the speed direction at random but  
keeps moving at that speed  for a specific travel distance 
depending on that speed. The user  only changes the speed 
direction if the distance is convered or once the simulation 
boundary is reached [9].  
 
 
 
V. 
SIMULATIONS AND PERFORMANCE 
EVALUATION 
          We used LTE-SIM to analyse the effect of mobility on our 
proposed scheduling algorithm (VOSA) and two other scheduling 
EXP-PF and PF. It should be noted that the details of VOSA can 
be found in [18]. The main contribution in this paper that was not 
introduced in [18] is mobility. We introduced mobility in our 
network and analysed it’s effect  on voice traffic in relation to the 
three scheduling algorithms in this paper. 
           The main reason for comparing our proposed scheduling 
algorithm with these other two scheduling algorithms is that, they 
use the same PRBs allocation as ours and similar simulation 
parameters except that they apply different metrics and the fairness 
factor. They were also used as the benchmark scheduling 
algorithms in the LTE-SIM simulator. This made our comparison 
more feasible.We measured the packet loss ratio (the rate at which 
VoIP packets were dropped during voice traffic transmission) 
while gradually increasing the number of VoIP users. 
          This is shown in Fig. 3. The packet drop ratio is measured 
and  plotted on the Y axis as we increased the number of VoIP user 
steadily to the maximum of twenty users. As it can be seen in 
Fig.3, mobility had a significant  impact on voice traffic in all three 
scheduling algorithms. There was a higher packet loss ratio in all 
the algorithms with mobility features compared to those without 
mobility features. However, there was less packet loss ratio in 
VOSA scheduling algorithm (with or without mobility features) 
compared to the other two scheduling algorithms. 
5
10
15
20
0
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.01
0.012
0.014
VoIP Users
PLR
VoIP Packet Loss Ratio
 
 
PF WITH NO MOBILITY
PF WITH MOBILITY
EXP-PF WITH NO MOBILITY
EXP-PF WITH MOBILITY
VOSA WITH NO MOBILITY
VOSA WITH MOBILITY
 
Figure 3. VoIP-Packet-Loss-Ratio Comparison 
          We also measured VoIP delay while gradually increasing the 
number of VoIP users. This is shown in Fig. 4. The VoIP delay is 
measured and plotted on the Y axis in seconds as we increased the 
number of users steadily to twenty. Similar to previous results, 
there was long delay in all the algorithms with mobility features 
and again VOSA had less delay than the other two scheduling 
algorithms. These two simulation results show that VOSA plays an 
important role in improving the QoS of Voice traffic in both 
scenarios. 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-192-2
CTRQ 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

 
 
5
10
15
20
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
VoIP Users
Delay(Sec)
VoIP Delay
 
 
PF WITH NO MOBILITY
PF WITH MOBILITY
EXP-PF WITH NO MOBILITY
EXP-PF WITH MOBILITY
VOSA WITH NO MOBILITY
VOSA WITH MOBILITY
 
Figure 4. VoIP Delay Comparison 
TABLE 1.  SIMULATION PARAMETERS 
Simulation 
Parameters 
Values 
Bandwidth 
5MHZ 
PRB Structure 
12subcarriers,2subframes 
TTI 
1msec 
Number of available 
PRBs 
25 
Modulations for AMC 
QPSK 
Number of sectors 
3 
Simulation time 
1000 TTIs 
User speeds  
30km/h 
Cyclic prefix 
Normal 
Mobility patterns 
Random direction and random walk 
Distance covered by 
user 
400m 
Scheduling algorithms 
VOSA,EXP-PF, and PF 
Cell radius 
1 
km 
             
          Apart from these two VoIP metrics, we also measured 
throughput while using all the scheduling algorithms and in both 
scenarios. This is shown in Fig. 5. As it can be seen, throughput 
decreased as the number of VoIP users increased in all algorithms 
and in both scenarios. This is mainly due to the fact that some 
VoIP packets were being dropped as the number of users were 
being increased, this  resulted in the less utilisation of  assigned 
PRBs. 
5
10
15
20
2
4
6
8
10
12
14x 10
4
VoIP Users
Throughput (bps)
VoIP Throughput
 
 
PF WITH NO MOBILITY
PF WITH MOBILITY
EXP-PF WITH NO MOBILITY
EXP-PF WITH MOBILITY
VOSA WITH NO MOBILITY
VOSA WITH MOBILITY
 
Figure 5.  VoIP Throughput Comparison 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
          In this paper, we analysed the effect of mobility on voice 
traffic with three different scheduling algorithms. Using the LTE-
SIM simulator, we were able to compare all the scheduling 
algorithms in two different scenarios. One scenario containing 
mobility features and another with no mobility features. Through 
simulations we found out that mobility had a significant impact on 
the QoS of voice traffic with all the three scheduling algorithms. 
However, our VOSA scheduling method provided better QoS of 
voice traffic than the other two scheduling algorithms by having 
short delay, less packet loss ratio, and slightly higher throughput. 
The main reason for the improvement in VOSA scheduling method 
is due to the fact that it does not cause any negative impact on the 
entire network’s system performance. It is only deployed when 
there are VoIP calls to schedule and if it does not exceed its limits. 
These limits are determined by the adaptive method used. On top 
of that, the wireless link quality and the queue length factors used 
in VOSA played an important role in reducing the packet drop 
ratio and delay. In future work, we are working on determining the 
complexity and fairness of our proposed scheduling algorithm 
VOSA. Find the way of optimizing our scheduling algorithm such 
that we lower its complexity.  
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Y. Kim, “An Efficient Scheduling Scheme to Enhance the 
Capacity of VoIP Services in Evolved UTRA Uplink,” EURASIP 
journal of Wireless Communications and Networking, vol 2008, 
Mar. 2008,  pp. 1-9, doi:10.1155/2008/732418. 
[2] S. Choi, K. Jun, Y. Shin, S. Kang, and B.  Choi, “Mac 
Scheduling Scheme for VoIP Traffic Services in 3G LTE,” IEEE 
66th Vehicular Technology Conference, pp. 1441-1445, Oct. 2007, 
doi: 10.1109/VETECF.2007.307 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-192-2
CTRQ 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

 
 
[3] Rohde and Schwarz, “UMTS long term evolution (LTE) 
Technology introduction,” A report by Rohde and Schwarz., pp. 1-
30, Mar.2007. 
[4] M. C. Chuah, and Q. Zhang, Introduction to Wireless 
Communications, US: Springer, 2006. 
[5] S. Saha and R. Quazi, “Priority-Coupling-A Semi-Persistent 
MAC Scheduling Scheme for VoIP Traffic on 3G LTE,”  ConTEL, 
10th International Conference on Telecommunications, pp. 325-
329, Aug.2009. 
[6] 3GPP, Physical layer aspects for Evolved UTRA, 3GPP 
Technical report 25.814, version7.1.0, pp. 1-135, Sep. 2006. 
[7] T. Henttonen, K. Aschan, J. Puttonen, N. Kolehmainen, P. 
Kela, M. Moisio, et al, “Performance of VoIP with Mobility in 
UTRA Long Term Evolution,” Vehicular Technology Conference, 
pp. 1-5,  May 2008, doi: 10.1109/VETECS.2008.549. 
[8] 
Qualcomm, 
LTE 
Mobility 
Enhancements, 
Qualcomm 
Incorporated, pp. 1-10, Feb.2010. 
[9] G. Piro, L. A. Grieco, G.  Boggia, F. Capozzi, and P. Camarda, 
“Simulating LTE Cellular Systems: An Open-Source Framework,” 
IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol.60, no.2, pp. 1-
16, Feb.2011. 
[10]  B.Goode, “Voive over internet protocol (VoIP),” Proc.IEEE, 
vol.90, no.9, Dec.2002, pp. 1495- 1517, doi:10.1109/JPROC.2002. 
802005. 
[11]  K. Gonia, Latency and QoS for Voice over IP, SANS 
Institute- As part of GIAC practical repository,  pp. 1-21, May. 
2004. 
[12] G. Zhang, and M. Hillenbrand, “Implementing SIP and H.323 
signalling 
as 
Webservices,” 
30th 
Euromico 
conference 
proceedings, pp. 1-7, Mar.2004. 
 [13] B. Khasnabish, Implementing Voice over IP. John Wiley & 
sons Inc,  pp. 1-224, 2003. 
[14] U. Varshney, A. Snow, M. McGivern, and C. Howard, “Voice 
over IP,” ACM  Journal, Jun. 2002, pp.1 –8. 
[15] IETF, Attribute list extension for the service location 
protocol,. IETF RFC 3059,  pp. 1-35, Nov.2001. 
[16] ITU-T, One way transmission time. ITU-T recommendation 
G.114,  pp. 1-20,  April.2003. 
[17] TSG-RAN1, LTE physical layer framework for performance 
verification, 3GPP TSG-RAN1 R1-070674, pp.1-30, Mar. 2007. 
[18] R. Musabe, H. Larijani, B. Stewart, and T. Boutaleb, “A New 
Scheduling Scheme for Voice Awareness in 3G LTE,” IEEE 
Computer Society, Sixth International Conference on Broadband 
and Wireless Computing, Communication and Applications, 
Dec.2011, pp. 1-8, doi: 10.1109/BWCCA.2011.46. 
[19] G. J. Choi and S. Bahk, “Cell-throughput Analysis of the 
proportional fair scheduler in the single-cell environment,” IEEE 
Transaction Vehicular Technology, vol.56, no.2, April 2007, pp. 
766-778, doi: 10.1109/TVT.2006.889570. 
[20] R. Basukala, H. M. Ramli, and K. Sandrasegaran, 
“Performance analysis of EXP/PF and M-LWDF in downlink 
3GPP LTE systems,” 1st AH-ICI . Kathmandu, Nepal, Nov.2009, 
pp.1-5, doi: 10.1109/AHICI.2009.5340336.  
[21] Roke, LTE eNodeB MAC Schedular, Roke Manor Research 
Ltd, Siemens, pp.1-4, Jan. 2009. 
[22] C. Chuah, and R. H. Katz, “Characterizing packet audio 
streams from internet multimedia applications,” Proc.IEEE, ICC, 
Aug. 2002, pp. 1199-1203, doi: 10.1109/ICC.2002.997040. 
[23]  J. Puttonen, T. Henttonen, N.  Kolehmainen, K. Aschan, M.   
Moisio,  and P. Kela, “Voice-over-IP Performance in UTRA Long 
Term Evolution Downlink,” Vehicular Technology Conference, 
pp. 2502- 2506, May 2008, doi: 10.1109/VETECS.2008.551. 
[24] T. Camp, J. Boleng, and V. Davies, “A Survey of Mobility 
Models for Ad Hoc Network Research,” Wireless Communication 
and Mobile Computing (WCMC), Special issue on Mobile Ad Hoc 
Networking, pp. 483-502, Dec. 2002. 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-192-2
CTRQ 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

