 
QoS Provisioning Through Bandwidth Granting Scheme for Wireless Networks  
 
Kuokkwee Wee, Tze Hui Liew, Shih Yin Ooi, Siew-chin Chong   
Faculty of Information Science and Technology  
Multimedia University 
Melaka, Malaysia  
Email: wee.kuok.kwee@mmu.edu.my, thliew@mmu.edu.my, syooi@mmu.edu.my, chong.siew.chin@mmu.edu.my
 
 
Abstract— Quality of Service (QoS) is an essential element in 
modern wireless networks such as WiFi, Long Term Evolution 
(LTE) and Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access 
(WiMAX). The QoS provisioning of a wireless network can be 
secured in the scheduling, admission control, bandwidth 
granting and queuing components that reside at the MAC 
layer. This paper focuses on the bandwidth granting 
mechanism for uplink traffic transmission. Until now, not 
much study has been done by researchers on improvements of 
this particular mechanism although it is an important 
component in QoS framework. Through our experiments, it is 
discovered that the network performance could be further 
improved by introducing custom-designed mechanisms in the 
bandwidth granting process. Another thing to note is that not 
all the common scheduling algorithms are appropriate to be 
implemented since the information on the bandwidth granting 
process is very limited. Furthermore, the design of bandwidth 
granting mechanism must be simple and fast. Thus, by taking 
into account these limitations and concerns, two mechanisms 
have been proposed and evaluated in this study. The 
traditional and typical approach used in bandwidth granting 
scheme is bench-marked and compared with our proposed 
mechanisms. The simulation results show that our proposed 
mechanisms outperform the conventional approach. 
Keywords- scheduling;bandwidth granting;quality of service; 
4G; wireless network  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access 
(WiMAX) is  an example of broadband wireless access 
(BWA) and defined by IEEE in its IEEE 802.16 standards 
[1][2]. The IEEE 802.16 standard is further divided into two 
categories which are the IEEE 802.16d (fixed WiMAX) and 
the IEEE 802.16e (mobile WiMAX) [2]. The recent 
development in the WiMAX standard has allowed many 
service providers to adapt this technology as the alternate 
solution for last-mile delivery.  
Theoretically, broadband access to an area blanketed by a 
radius of 31 miles can be covered using the WiMAX 
technology [1], [2]. This distance is achieved when using 
WiMAX for line-of-sight (LOS) backhaul service. However, 
for a deployment in the urban environment, it is difficult to 
achieve LOS between the receiver and the BS. In NLOS 
WiMAX, the signals arriving may come from reflected 
paths, scattered energy and some diffracted propagation 
paths. Hence, the area size is significantly lesser with only a 
radius of 3 to 5 miles covered.  
Its higher bandwidth and large area coverage compared 
to other BWAs makes WiMAX a suitable solution for many 
applications. Some examples of these applications include 
high quality Voice over Internet Protocol (VOIP), Video on 
Demand (VoD) and Internet Protocol Television (IPTV) 
services. 
The ability to be able to support multimedia applications 
such as IPTV and VoD is a challenging task faced by 
Internet Service Providers (ISP) worldwide. The Quality of 
Service (QoS) assurance for these multimedia applications is 
usually implemented from the application layer to the 
physical layer. Unlike other layers, the layer 2 (or the MAC 
layer) is varied from one technology to another. It is highly 
dependent on the medium access technology, especially 
when using wireless as the medium of access.  
As one of the prominent 4G technologies, WiMAX is 
designed to support all kind of services with QoS assurance. 
In general, the MAC layer is responsible to assure the quality 
of packet delivery.  There are many components in the MAC 
layer that assist in QoS provisioning. Some examples include 
the Call Admission Control (CAC), uplink/downlink 
schedulers, ranging, fragmentation and defragmentation, 
classifier and MAC management entity. The entire MAC 
architecture for subscriber station (SS) and base station (BS) 
is shown in Fig. 1.  
 
 
Fig. 1. MAC architecture for IEEE 802.16 
 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-322-3
CTRQ 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

Incoming traffic is categorized into five service classes in 
IEEE 802.16 [1], [2]. The five service classes are the 
Unsolicited Grant Service (UGS), Extended Real-time 
Polling Service (ertPS), Real-Time Polling Service (rtPS), 
Non-Real Time Polling Service (nrtPS), and Best Effort 
(BE). UGS traffic is aimed for VOIP service without silence 
suppression while ertPS service is for VOIP with silence 
suppression. Meanwhile, rtPS is designed for real-time 
Internet application such as VoD and online gaming. Both 
nrtPS and BE are targeted on non-real time services. 
Specifically, nrtPS is focused on the non-real time services 
that require bandwidth in variable sizes. 
The main contribution of this study is addressing the 
issues in bandwidth granting scheme at base station in 
WiMAX network, which has been overlooked by many 
researchers. Unlike uplink scheduler or downlink scheduler, 
information is very limited during bandwidth granting 
scheme. BS is unlikely to know the queue status, incoming 
packet rate or packet delay from the bandwidth requested 
message obtained from SS. Thus, most of the recent 
scheduling techniques are unable to work in bandwidth 
granting protocol. Proportional bandwidth granting schemes 
have been proposed and investigated in this study.           
This paper is organized as follows. Section II presents the 
bandwidth request/granting process of the IEEE 802.16e and 
Section III describes the proposed bandwidth granting 
mechanisms. Section IV depicts the simulation experiment 
environments and discusses the simulation results. Lastly, 
conclusions and future plans are presented in Section V.  
II. 
BANDWIDTH REQUEST/GRANTING PROCESS  
Despite there being several QoS components in the MAC 
layer, our research is only focused towards the bandwidth 
granting mechanism for uplink transmission. The bandwidth 
granting process happens only at the BS when a SS is 
requesting bandwidth for its uplink transmission, whereby 
uplink transmission is defined as the transfer of packet from 
a SS to the BS.  The uplink transmission is much more 
complicated than the downlink transmission because the 
information required by the uplink transmission is very 
limited compared to the downlink transmission. Local 
information such as the queue size is always available in the 
downlink transmission [3] but not for the uplink. 
Before an uplink transmission can commence, a SS is 
required to send a bandwidth request message to the BS. The 
bandwidth request message can be sent either explicitly or 
implicitly. In the explicit approach, the bandwidth request is 
attached and embedded in the data message while in the 
implicit approach, the bandwidth request is the only message 
sent to the BS. Another common bandwidth request 
approach is the contention based [4] approach. Contention 
based approach in the IEEE 802.16 is identical to the 
contention approach used in the IEEE 802.11.  See TABLE I 
for the eligibility of bandwidth request for different service 
classes. The IEEE 802.16 standard allows the bandwidth 
request to be done on per connection basis or per station 
basis. The bandwidth request per station is claimed to be 
more efficient due to the low management message usage 
[5].   
 
TABLE I    UPLINK REQUEST RULES 
 
 
UL request/grant 
UGS 
rtPS 
nrtPS 
BE 
Implicit  
 
√ 
√ 
√ 
Explicit 
 
√ 
√ 
√ 
Contention based  
 
 
√ 
√ 
 
Upon receiving a bandwidth request message, the BS 
stores the message in a queue based on its arrival time. The 
bandwidth request messages are processed by the bandwidth 
granting module before a new frame starts. This bandwidth 
granting process is very challenging since the information 
available is limited [6], [7]. From the bandwidth request 
messages received, the BS only have the information on the 
amount of bandwidth needed by the SS and the service class 
requirements. The situation becomes worse when the 
requests are from homogeneous application or the requesters 
are having similar QoS requirements. In this context, the BS 
can only depend on the amount of bandwidth needed during 
the bandwidth granting process. Due to the above concerns, 
many 
scheduling 
algorithms 
commonly 
used 
in 
uplink/downlink scheduler are not suitable in the bandwidth 
request module. For instance, strict priority policy used in 
downlink scheduler [7], [8]  is meaningless when the 
requests are from homogeneous applications. Weighted 
round robin [10], deficit round robin [11], weighted deficit 
round robin [12], worst-case fair weighted fair queuing [13], 
earliest deadline first [14] and other packet information 
based scheduling approaches from  [15], [16] and [17] are 
not able to be implemented in bandwidth granting module 
because of the unavailability of packet and queue 
information from the SS. Moreover, the bandwidth granting 
scheme is always neglected by many researchers and the 
most typical algorithm used in the bandwidth granting 
scheme is first-come-first-serve basis  [9], [18]. Hence, a 
custom-designed mechanism for the uplink bandwidth 
granting is needed and essential. We observed that the 
bandwidth granting mechanism which is not getting adequate 
attention of researchers has an important role in QoS 
provisioning of an IEEE 802.16e network. Experiment 
results have proven that the network performance 
(throughput and jitter) can be improved by introducing 
custom-designed bandwidth granting mechanism.  
 
III. 
PROPORTIONAL BANDWIDTH GRANTING SCHEMES 
The proposed bandwidth granting schemes consist of i) 
proportional byte based (PBB) and ii) proportional physical 
slot based (PPSB). In general, the amount of granted 
bandwidth of a SS depends on the following: 
 
 
Total amount of bandwidth request 
 
Individual amount of bandwidth request 
 
Total amount of available bandwidth 
Total amount of bandwidth request is the summation of 
all individual bandwidth requests from each SS at the current 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-322-3
CTRQ 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

cycle. Meanwhile, individual amount of bandwidth request is 
referring to the bandwidth request received by BS for each 
SS. Last but not least, total amount of available bandwidth is 
given by the vacancy slots, which are ready for transmission 
in the next cycle. 
The proportional byte based approach in bandwidth 
granting mechanism, PBB, is first presented in this research. 
The PBB mechanism keeps the individual bandwidth request 
in the byte format, which is its original value extracted from 
the bandwidth request message. The amount of granted 
bandwidth is calculated according to the percentage of 
occupancy by an individual bandwidth request. More 
bandwidth is given to those requesters who have higher 
bandwidth demands without consider any channel condition 
or modulation scheme. Unlike the approach used by [9] and 
[18], all requesters will be given some amount of the 
available bandwidth in PBB. At least some portions of the 
bandwidth will be granted to every SS and hence, starvation 
of SS can be avoided.  This approach intended is to give 
fairness to all of the requested too. The formula for PBB in 
bandwidth granting is as in (1).  
 
     
   
                                                                (1) 
 
where BWi is the amount of granted bandwidth and BRi is 
the amount of individual bandwidth request for the ith 
request respectively. ∑BR represents the total amount of the 
bandwidth requests while for the BW, this is the total 
available bandwidth.  
The second mechanism, PPSB is similar to PBB but it 
also takes into account the concern in [19], whereby the 
conversion from bandwidth request in byte to physical slot 
causes extra unused bandwidth to be allocated. In order to 
overcome this issue, PPSB converts the amount of 
bandwidth request, the total amount of bandwidth and the 
available bandwidth from byte to physical slot before any 
bandwidth allocation calculation. The conversion of byte to 
physical slot requires the Channel Quality Indicator (CQI) 
data for each SS. Overall, a better CQI is able to carry more 
data as compared to a lower CQI. PPSB mechanism also 
provides a more accurate allocation when there are different 
wireless network conditions in a scenario. As known, poor 
CQI requires more physical slots to send the same amount of 
data compared to those SSs in a better CQI network. The 
byte to physical slot conversion is based on (2). 
 
          
      
                                                              (2) 
 
where BRPhySlot is the bandwidth request in physical 
slot unit, BRbyte is the bandwidth request in byte unit and the 
bytePS reflects the amount of data in bytes that can be 
carried by a physical slot, which depends on Uplink Interval 
Usage Code (UIUC) as in TABLE II. In general, a higher 
UIUC index will result more bytes per slot. Maximum 27 
bytes per physical slot is defined in [3]. 
 
  
 
TABLE II  UIUC INDEX AND BYTE PER PHYSICAL SLOT 
 
UIUC Index 
Number of Byte per Slot 
1 
6 
2 
9 
3 
12 
4 
15 
5 
18 
6 
24 
7 
27 
 
Upon the conversion, the amount of granted bandwidth is 
then calculated by using (3).  Through this approach, the loss 
during the conversion may be identified. PPSB is also 
designed for network scenario whereby more than one 
wireless conditions or modulation and coding schemes are 
found in a WiMAX network.   
 
        
          
                                                         (3) 
 
where BWPSi is the amount of granted bandwidth in 
physical slot unit and BRPhySloti is the amount of individual 
bandwidth request in physical slot for the ith request 
respectively. ∑BRPhySlot represents the total amount of the 
bandwidth requests whereas the BWPhySlot is the total 
available bandwidth in physical slot.  
 
IV. 
SIMULATION EXPERIMENTS 
A. Simulation Model and Environment 
The simulation experiments were conducted using 
Qualnet network simulator version 5.0. The network scenario 
is a single cell with a BS and 10 SSs as in Fig. 2. All the SSs 
are located 150 meter away from the BS. The network 
simulation parameters for our experiment are as presented in 
TABLE III. 
 
Fig. 2. Simulation scenario 
 
 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-322-3
CTRQ 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

 
 
 
 
TABLE III  SIMULATION PARAMETERS 
 
Simulation Parameters 
PHY  
 OFDMA 
Bandwidth  
20MHz 
Cyclic Prefix, FFT Length 
1/8, 2048 
UL/DL Frame Length  
10ms 
Modulation  
16,64-QAM 
Antenna Type 
 Omni-directional 
Simulation Duration  
0 - 90s 
Wait UCD/DCD timeout interval 
25s 
UCD/DCD 
5s 
 
 
In order to validate the performance of the proposed 
bandwidth 
granting 
mechanisms 
in 
a 
homogenous 
environment, some slight modifications on the incoming 
traffic which base on [18] is used. Only rtPS traffic is 
selected and it is examined in our experiments. The 
performance of the proposed granting mechanisms in 
handling the traffic from the same service class is to be 
observed in our study.  Furthermore, rtPS is designed for 
video and multimedia transmission, whereby both are more 
challenging and demanding. All the SSs were equipped with 
2 uplink traffic with a 0.8 Mbps and a 1.2 Mbps traffic load 
respectively. Both implicit and explicit mechanisms were 
allowed in the bandwidth request mechanism. 
 
The experiments were simulated in a network scenario, 
whereby no different modulation scheme and coding or no 
different wireless network condition were created. A 
network scenario with only one type of wireless network 
condition, the 64 QAM was simulated. Our intention in this 
context was to test the efficiency of the proposed bandwidth 
granting mechanisms in the IEEE 802.16e network.  
 
Our proposed bandwidth granting mechanisms is 
benchmarked against the common bandwidth granting 
mechanism (CBGM) approach used by [9], [18] and the 
statistical approach (SA) from 
[20]. The network 
performance metrics; throughput, delay, and jitter, are 
makred as the major assessment elements in this study. We 
also assumed that there will be no new incoming traffic 
during the simulation. 
B. Simulation Results and Discussions 
 
Fig. 3 shows the total average end-to-end throughput for 
CBGM, PPSB, PBB and SA over the simulation time. The 
SA produces the highest throughput for the first 20 seconds 
of the simulation time. During the first 20 seconds, 
bandwidth requests for all SSs are at a moderate level, the 
reserved bandwidth is significant to be distributed fairly by 
using SA approach [20]. However, the performance of SA is 
overtaken by PPSB and PBB after the 30 seconds mark. The 
proposed PPSB and PBB always perform better than CBGM 
in this study. PBB mechanism achieves 1.29% higher total 
throughput in average as compared to CBGM.  The gap of 
difference between the PBB and CBGM becomes smaller 
along the simulation time. Also, it is observed that there is 
no significant difference between the PPSB and PBB in 
terms of throughput. These results indicate that byte to 
physical slot conversion issue is negligible in proportional 
approach when all the SSs are within the same modulation 
scheme and coding.   
 
The total average end-to-end delay is presented in Fig. 4. 
CBGM has the best performance for the first 30 seconds. 
For 40 seconds and onwards, SA has the lowest latency. 
There is a very significant different between CBGM and 
other approaches at the 10 seconds mark.  The difference 
between PBB/PPSB and CBGM gets lesser as the 
simulation time passes. It averages about 12% higher delay 
between PBB/PPSB and CBGM at the 90 seconds mark. 
Similar to the findings of the above, both PPSB and PBB do 
not have significant difference in the delay performance. For 
instance, PBB is only 0.5% better than PPSB at the 90 
seconds mark. Also, SA is the best performance for this 
category except during the first 30 seconds.  
From Fig. 5, for the total average end-to-end jitter, it is 
observed that both the PBB and PPSB mechanisms have 
improved the jitter performance of IEEE 802.16e networks, 
regardless of the simulation time. It is also observed that the 
SA has the worst results in this context. The jitter is 
improved from the range of 4.6% (at 10 seconds) to 2.1% (at 
90 seconds) when comparing the PPSB with CBGM. This 
phenomenon reflects that the PPSB and PBB mechanism 
spare some bandwidth to every SS instead of one or two 
greedy SS. Greedy SS requests and consumes a majority of 
the available bandwidth than others. The network becomes 
less healthy when the number of greedy SS increases. It is 
observed that the PPSB and PBB have an impact in 
controlling the greedy SS but it is not significant enough.   
 
 
Fig. 3. Total average end-to-end throughput 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-322-3
CTRQ 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

 
 
 
 
Fig. 4. Total average end-to-end delay 
 
Fig. 5. Total average end-to-end jitter  
 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE DIRECTION  
 
PPSB and PBB have the better average throughput and 
jitter, as observed from the simulation results. However, 
both PPSB and PBB failed to improve the delay, which is 
one of the crucial performance metrics for rtPS traffic. The 
poor delay result cannot be compromised for real-time 
application although a better result in throughput and jitter 
could be achieved. In conclusion, the PPSB and PBB are not 
suitable for real-time traffic. PPSB and PBB are for non-
real-time applications (nrtPS traffic) that do not have delay 
stringency and only target on the throughput. We also 
observed that some mechanisms to regulate the greedy 
bandwidth requesters and custom-designed bandwidth 
granting scheme is urgently needed, especially for 
homogenous application.  
 
From the results obtained, the proposed PBB and PPSB 
will be tested again by using nrtPS traffic, which does not 
have delay requirement. The modulation scheme and coding 
is another important consideration in carrying out a research 
in wireless networks. Hence, more network scenarios in 
different modulation schemes and codings will be created 
for a more extensive testing in the future. 
REFERENCES 
[1] IEEE, IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area 
Networks Part 16: Air Interface for Fixed Broadband Wireless 
Access Systems, 2004. 
[2] IEEE, IEEE Standard for Local and metropolitan area 
networks--Part 16: Air Interface for Fixed and Mobile 
Broadband Wireless Access Systems, 2009. 
[3] IEEE, IEEE Standard for Air Interface for Broadband 
Wireless Access Systems, 2012. 
[4] J. F. Borin and N. Da Fonseca, “Uplink Scheduler and 
Admission Control for the IEEE 802.16 Standard,” in Global 
Telecommunications Conference 2009 GLOBECOM 2009 
IEEE, 2009, pp. 1–6. 
[5] W. K. New, K. Wee Y.  Wee, and C.-O. Wong, “WiMAX: 
Performance Analysis and Enhancement of Real-time 
Bandwidth Request,” IAENG International Journal of 
Computer Science, vol. 40, no. 1, 2013, pp. 20–28. 
[6] S. Z. Tao and A. Gani, “Intelligent Uplink Bandwidth 
Allocation Based on PMP Mode for WiMAX,” Proc. 2009 
International Conference on Computer Technology and 
Development, 2009, pp. 86–90. 
[7] Kuokkwee Wee, R. Mardeni, S. W. Tan, and S. W. Lee, “QoS 
Prominent Bandwidth Control Design for Real Time Traffic 
in IEEE 802.16e Broadband Wireless Access,” The Arabian 
Journal for Science and Engineering, in press. 
[8] J. Sun, Y. Yao, and H. Zhu, “Quality of service scheduling i 
broadband wireless access systems,” Proc. 2006 IEEE 63rd 
Vehicular Technology Conference, 2006, vol. 3, pp. 1221–
1225. 
[9] K. K. Wee and S. W. Lee, “Priority Based Bandwidth 
Allocation Scheme for WiMAX Systems,” Proc. 2nd IEEE 
International 
Conference 
on 
Broadband 
Network 
& 
Multimedia Technology, 2009, pp. 15–18. 
[10] M. S. Arhaif, “Comparative study of scheduling algorithms in 
WiMAX,” International Journal of Scientific & Engineering 
Research, vol. 2, no. 2, 2011, pp. 1–7. 
[11] C.-H. H. C.-H. Hsieh, T.-J. W. T.-J. Wu, and H.-T. C. H.-T. 
Chern, “Bandwidth Control Protocol in WiMAX Network,” 
Proc. Parallel and Distributed Processing with Applications 
ISPA 2010 International Symposium on, 2010, pp. 342–349. 
[12] C. Cicconetti, L. Lenzini, E. Mingozzi, and C. Eklund, 
“Quality of service support in IEEE 802.16 networks,” IEEE 
Network, vol. 20, no. 2, 2006, pp. 50–55. 
[13] H. J. E. Blanco and I. P. P. Parra, “Evaluation of scheduling 
algorithms in WiMAX networks,” in ANDESCON 2010 
IEEE, 2010, pp. 1–3. 
[14] A. Chakchai, S. Raj, and J. K. Abdel, “Resource allocation in 
IEEE 802.16 mobile WiMAX,” in Orthogonal Frequency 
Division Multiple Access, 2010. 
[15] A. Esmailpour and N. Nasser, “Dynamic QoS-Based 
Bandwidth Allocation Framework for Broadband Wireless 
Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 
60, no. 6, 2011, pp. 2690–2700. 
[16] M. Andrews, K. Kumaran, K. Ramanan, A. Stolyar, P. 
Whiting, and R. Vijayakumar, “Providing quality of service 
over a shared wireless link,” IEEE Communications 
Magazine, vol. 39, no. 2, 2001, pp. 150–154. 
[17] C. Tian and D. Yuan, “A novel cross-layer scheduling 
algorithm for IEEE 802.16 WMAN,” Proc. International 
Workshop on Cross Layer Design, 2007, pp. 70-73. 
[18] J.-M. Liang, J.-J. Chen, Y.-C. Wang, and Y.-C. Tseng, “A 
Cross-Layer Framework for Overhead Reduction, Traffic 
Scheduling, and Burst Allocation in IEEE 802.16 OFDMA 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-322-3
CTRQ 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 
60, no. 4, 2011, pp. 1740–1755. 
[19] X. Bai, A. Shami, and Y. Ye, “Robust QoS Control for Single 
Carrier 
PMP 
Mode 
IEEE 
802.16 
Systems,” 
IEEE 
Transactions on Mobile Computing, vol. 7, no. 4, 2008,  pp. 
416–429. 
[20] Kuokkwee Wee, W. K. New, Y. Wee, and C.-O. Wong, 
“Intensive Bandwidth Request and Handling Design in PMP,” 
International Journal of Computer Science and Network 
Security, vol. 12, no. 2, 2012, pp. 27–32. 
[21] K. Wee, M. Roslee, S. W. Tan, and S. W. Lee, “Statistical 
Approach In Bandwidth Granting Process for IEEE 802.16 
Networks,” Proc. 8th International Conference on Wireless 
Communications Networking and Mobile Computing, IEEE 
Press,  2012, pp. 1-4.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-322-3
CTRQ 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

