Blocking Probabilities in Multi-Service Systems with 
Preemptive Scheduling 
Shuna Yang, Norvald Stol 
Department of Telematics 
Norwegian University of Science and Technology, NTNU 
Trondheim, Norway 
email: {shuna, norvald.stol}@item.ntnu.no 
 
Abstract—This paper investigates blocking probabilities in multi-
service communication systems, in which the preemptive 
scheduling is adopted to implement service differentiation. A 
novel approximation model is proposed. In contrast with existing 
multi-dimensional Markov model, which focuses on analyzing the 
small system with only two service classes and results in non-
closed form expressions of blocking probabilities, our model has 
three major advantages: 1) it is applicable to analyzing a general 
multi-service scenario, independent of the number of service 
classes and resources; 2) the closed form expressions of blocking 
probabilities can be derived directly; 3) this model shows 
excellent extensibility for analyzing larger system which supports 
more service classes or common resource units. The analytical 
values are compared with simulation results for two- and three-
service systems. Results show that the proposed model provides a 
high degree of accuracy in the blocking probabilities under 
different scenarios.  
Keywords-Markov chain; Preemptive Scheduling; blocking 
probability; service differentiation . 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Driven by increasing communication needs worldwide, a 
wide variety of services and applications will be brought into 
the future communication networks. Some of them have 
comparable demands to today’s services, while some demands 
much more strict requirements in terms of bandwidth and time 
delay [1]. In order to meet the diverse service demands, the 
scheduler (in routers or switches) has to deploy efficient 
handling schemes to serve the different applications in different 
ways. In the past the programmers resorted to a rigid, pre-
determined order for execution of different services, so that the 
corresponding service times could be predicted in advance [2]. 
Unfortunately these cyclic executive methods result in 
programs that are hard to understand and maintain because the 
code for logically independent tasks is interleaved. In order to 
guarantee the service of the safety-sensitive applications as 
well as simplify the task processing on large schedulers, 
preemptive scheduling approaches attract notable research 
efforts [3, 4]. 
In this paper we consider multi-service communication 
systems which integrate different kinds of applications together 
(some of them are safety-sensitive applications while some are 
safety-nonsensitive services). Central to these systems is a 
service facility with multiple common shared resource units 
(which may be interpreted according to the application under 
consideration as communication channels [5], computer 
memory sectors [6], time slots in a TDM bus [7], wavelength 
channels in an OPS/OBS (optical packet/burst switched) 
network [8, 9], etc.) and a service discipline of preemptive 
scheduling. That is, each type of service class is given a fixed 
priority and an interrupt mechanism is executed. Each class is 
served according to its assigned priority and the being served 
user can be preempted/interrupted by the higher priority 
arriving users in case of no available resource units. Otherwise 
it occupies the required resource unit for the duration of its 
service time. 
The performance of multi-service systems with preemptive 
scheduling can be evaluated by the existing multi-dimensional 
Markov model, which is built based on a variant of the multi-
dimensional Erlang blocking model. References [8]-[10] give a 
detailed discussion about the blocking probabilities in two-
service systems (in this case applied to an OPS/OBS network) 
using this model. However, the existing research focuses on 
two-dimensional Markov models, which can only be used for 
analyzing small systems supporting only two kinds of service 
classes. For the larger system which supports more service 
classes or common resource units, the model will become very 
complex and computationally much harder to solve. The reason 
is 
that 
it 
will 
introduce 
an 
excessive 
number 
of 
states/parameters (i.e. () states and parameters, where  is 
the number of shared resource units and   the number of 
supported service classes) [11]. Another major limitation is that 
no closed form expressions of blocking probabilities can be 
derived. Hence, the existing multi-dimensional Markov models 
have limited applicability in modeling multi-service systems 
which have practical value. 
In this paper we propose a novel approximation model to 
analyze the performance of multi-service systems with 
preemptive scheduling. By using conditional partitioning 
method, this model builds multiple levels of one-dimensional 
Markov chains. Each level presents all possible service states 
of the corresponding service class in the system. The blocking 
probabilities can be calculated level by level and their closed 
form expressions are derived directly. Compared with the 
existing multi-dimensional Markov model, the proposed model 
has several significant advantages: 1) it is applicable to 
analyzing the general multi-service system, independent of the 
number of the supported service classes and resource units; 2) 
the closed form expression of the blocking probability for any 
service class can be derived directly and separately; 3) by using 
the one-dimensional Markov chains to calculate blocking 
probabilities, the computational complexity is decreased 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-322-3
CTRQ 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

dramatically; 4) this model shows excellent extensibility for 
analyzing the larger system which supports more service 
classes and resources. Besides the model of the general multi-
service case, we also give the concrete models of the two- and 
three-service system cases in this paper.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
presents the operation of preemptive scheduling for the studied 
system. Section III proposes the approximation model and 
derives the closed form expressions of blocking probabilities; it 
also gives two concrete models of two- and three-service 
systems. Both analytical and simulation results are given in 
Section IV. Section V concludes the paper. 
II. 
THE PREEMPTIVE SCHEDULING 
As shown in Fig. 1, we consider the system with a capacity 
of  common resource units. The system services  ( is an 
integer) mutually independent classes of users: class 1 has the 
highest priority and class   has the lowest priority. For 
1  	  , class 	 users are assumed to arrive according to a 
Poisson process with arrival rate 
. Meanwhile, a class 	 user 
has a request size of one resource unit and an exponentially 
distributed holding time with mean value of 
. Thus, the 
average traffic offered to the system by a class 	 arrival process 
is equal to:   
 
⁄
.   
 
Figure 1. The traffic model of the studied system. 
Fig. 2 presents the detailed operation of the preemptive 
scheduling when a new user arrives. All available resource 
units are shared among  different classes. As long as there 
exist available resources, the new arriving user is served 
directly independent of its priority. However, if all resources 
are occupied, this new arriving user should check its priority 
with that of the being served users. As illustrated in Fig. 2, we 
assume the lowest priority of the being served users in the 
system is 	 (1  	  ) and the priority of this new user arrival 
is . If   	, this new user arrival will be blocked directly. If 
  	, it will preempt/interrupt the service of class 	 user and 
takes over the respective resource unit for its own use. When 	 
is equal to 1, all the resources are occupied by the highest 
priority class 1 users. Then all the new arrivals will be blocked 
and no preemption/interruption will happen. 
 
Figure 2. The operation of the preemptive scheduling. 
III. 
ANALYTICAL MODEL 
In this section, we present the approximation model to 
study the blocking in a multi-service communication system 
with preemptive scheduling. The traffic model is shown in 
Section II. In this part we first build the analytical model of a 
general -service system and present the detailed derivation of 
the closed form expressions of blocking probabilities.  Then we 
give the concrete models of the two- and three-service case 
systems to clarify its construction and calculation.  
A. The model of the general R-service system 
We model the number of the resource units occupied by 
each class as a continuous time Markov chain. For the  -
service communication system, according to the priority of 
each class, the model is built from the 1 /top to the 
/bottom level as shown in Fig. 3. Each level presents all 
possible service states of the corresponding class. The 1/top 
level gives all states of the class 1 users while the /bottom 
level presents all states of the class . In Fig. 3, state 	(0 
	  , 1    ) denotes that 	 resource units are currently 
serving class  users. Note that class 1 has the highest priority 
and class  has the lowest priority, the number of common 
resource units is equal to . 
For class 1 with the highest priority, blocking only happens 
when all resources are currently occupied by other class 1 
users, hence the system can be modeled as a /// loss 
system as shown in the 1/top level. 
For any state 	 (0  	  ) of class 1 in the 1/top level, 
it indicates that 	 resources are currently serving class 1 users. 
Due to the higher priority of class 2 compared with classes 
from 3 to , the remaining (  	) resources can be used for 
serving class 2 users. Accordingly, level 2 has a respective 
conditional one-dimensional Markov chain whose maximum 
state is (  	)  to denote the service states of class 2. 
However, when 	 is equal to , i.e., all resources are held by 
class 1 users, no resource can be accessed by class 2. Hence 
level 2 has   conditional one-dimensional Markov chains 
corresponding to the different states (	, 0  	  ) of class 1. 
For any state 	, 	in the 1/top and 2!" level, 	 # 	 
, there exists a conditional one-dimensional Markov chain 
whose maximum state is (  		) in the third level, i.e., in 
current 	, 	 resource units are busy serving class 1 and 2 users 
respectively. Also due to the higher priority of class 3 
compared with classes from 4 to , (  		) resources can 
be used for serving class 3 users. Considering all possible 
combinations of 	, 	  and 	 # 	   , level 3 has 
 ∗ ( # 1) 2
⁄  conditional one-dimensional Markov chains. 
Using the iterative method, we build all conditional one-
dimensional Markov chains in each level. Note that Fig. 3 
shows only one generic one-dimensional Markov chain in each 
level. However, when  % 1, except for level 1, the other 
levels have more than one one-dimensional Markov chain, i.e., 
one for each possible combination of the states in higher levels. 
When calculating the blocking probabilities, conditional 
probability principles are used to weigh and sum contributions 
from each one-dimensional Markov chain in each level. Note 
that this model only needs to increase  or  when modeling 
the larger system with more classes or resources, thus the 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-322-3
CTRQ 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

proposed model shows excellent extensibility compared with 
multi-dimensional Markov models. 
In Fig. 3, for each conditional one-dimensional Markov 
chain except that of level 1, the outgoing transition probability 
of the last state must be adjusted to take into account arrivals of 
higher priority users. For instance, for any one-dimensional 
Markov chain on level , the last state (  &) denotes that 
(  &) common resources are currently serving class  users 
while & resources are held by the higher priority users. Since 
all  resources are currently occupied, the being served class  
users can be interrupted/preempted if higher priority users 
arrive during their holding time. Because of the lower priority 
of class  compared with classes from 1 to (  1), ˄	and & 
of the th level in Fig. 3 are defined as: 
˄  ∑
 
*	,
*+
																						&  ∑
 	*	
*+
.               (1)                                                       
Hence, ˄	and &  in the  th level can be written as	˄ 
∑
 
*	,
*+
	&  ∑
 	*	
*+
. 
Figure 3. The model of the -service system with capacity of  common 
resource units.  
According to the model in Fig. 3, the blocking probability 
of each class can be calculated level by level. Due to the 
preemptive scheduling, for any class 	(1    ) , its 
blocking probability -() only depends on the traffic pattern of 
classes with equal or higher priority, while not influenced by 
the performance of classes with lower priority. We can derive 
the blocking probability of each class from the highest to the 
lowest priority/level. In the following analysis, we use .(	) 
to denote the probability of state 	  for class  , where 	 
resources are currently busy serving class  users. 
As illustrated in Fig. 3, the blocking probability (-(1)) of 
class 1 is given directly by the /// loss formula [12]: 
-(1)  .() 
/01 2!
⁄
∑
/04 5!
⁄
1
467
                             (2)                                                                            
For any service class	 (1    ), -() consists of two 
parts: one is the -()  introduced by the new class   user 
arrivals which are blocked directly; the other is the -() given 
by 
the 
being 
served 
class 

 users 
which 
are 
preempted/interrupted by higher priority users. The former 
happens in all states where all resources are occupied by users 
whose priority is equal to or higher than  . According to 
preemptive scheduling, the new class  arrival will be blocked 
directly. We call these states block states. The latter happens in 
states where all resources are occupied by users of which the 
lowest priority is equal to . In these states these being served 
class  users will be preempted if higher priority users arrive 
during their service time. We call these states preemption 
states. Note that the block states include all preemption states. 
As discussed above, in preemption states the arrival intensity of 
all higher priority classes is equal to ∑
 
*
*+
, and the arrival 
intensity of class   users is 
  in all states of the studied 
system. In the following analysis, we use .,89:;, .,<=>>?<@ 
to denote the probabilities of block states and preemption states 
respectively. We also introduce .A99 to denote the probability 
of all possible service states of the studied system, which is 
equal to 1. Hence the blocking probability of the service class  
is 
-()  
 ∗ B.,89:;C

 ∗ .A99
#
∑
 
*
*+
∗ B.,<=>>?<@C

 ∗ .A99
 
 .,89:; #
∑
FG0 DE
E60
DF
∗ B.,<=>>?<@C .                 (3) 
In order to calculate .,89:; and .,<=>>?<@ , we have to 
find all possible block and preemption states and their 
corresponding probabilities for service class .  
Block states consist of  different cases, we use .,89:;,5 
(1  H  ) to denote the probability of each case for class .  
1 case: all resources are currently held by only class 1 
when a new class  user arrives. The probability is 
.,89:;,  .().                             (4)                  
2!" case: all resources are currently occupied by the users 
whose lowest priority is 2 when a new class  user arrives. So, 
.,89:;,  ∑
2 .(	).(  	)
0+I
.              (5) 
v-th case (3  H  ): all resources are currently occupied 
by the users of which the lowest priority is H. Then new class  
arrival users will be blocked. Using the iterative method, the 
respective probability is obtained as 
.,89:;,5  KL M
N
.*O	*P
2∑
Q
EG0
Q60

E+I
R
5
*+
S .5(  N 	*
5
*+
). 
(6) 
where .*O	*P		(1    H) can be derived by node equations of 
the corresponding one-dimension Markov chain in level ,  
TUV
UW.*O	*P ∗ 
*  .*OX	 # 1Y*P ∗ 	 ∗ *	,																			0  	    ∑
* 	Z
Z+
 2
.*O	*P ∗ 
*  .*OX	 # 1Y*P ∗ B˄* # O  *P ∗ *C, 	    ∑
* 	Z
Z+
 1
∑
.*O	*P  1
2∑
EG0 [
+ [60
	,																																																																																								 \U]
U^
 (7)                  
After getting the value of .,89:;,5,.,89:; can be obtained: 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-322-3
CTRQ 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

.,89:;  ∑
.,89:;,5

5+
                            (8)                                                                                    
.,<=>>?<@ denotes the probability of preemption states that 
all resources are occupied and the lowest priority of users being 
served is  . Then the being served class   users can be 
preempted/interrupted by the higher priority class arrivals. Note 
that on preemption states, all the new class  arrivals will be 
blocked directly, the preemption states belong to one case of 
block states for class  (i.e., H   of block states). Hence, 
.,<=>>?<@  .,89:;,                       (9) 
Substituting formulas (8) and (9) into (3), we obtain the 
closed form expression of -(), which are expressed by 
*, 
*	(1     ) directly. Note that one-dimensional Markov 
chains are used to calculate the blocking probability of each 
class. The corresponding computation complexity is reduced 
dramatically compared with solving a multi-dimensional 
Markov chain. Next we will give the concrete models for two- 
and three-service systems, both of which clarify the detailed 
construction, 
blocking 
calculations 
and 
the 
excellent 
extensibility of the proposed model. 
B. Example I: the model of the two-service system 
As shown in Fig. 4, the model of the two-service system is 
built as two levels of one-dimensional Markov chains. The 1 
level shows an /// Erlang loss model, which presents 
all service states of class 1 users. For any state 	 (0  	  ) 
of class 1, the 2!"  level has a respective one-dimensional 
Markov chain, which gives all possible states of class 2 when 
	 resource units are busy serving class 1 users currently. Hence 
the level 2 has  different one-dimensional Markov chains. 
 
Figure 4. The model of the two-service system with capacity of  common 
resource units 
When calculating the blocking probabilities, we use the 
closed form expressions directly. For class 1, its -(1) is given 
by Erlang loss formula (i.e., formula (2)). For class 2, 
according to formulas (4) and (5), .,89:;,  .() , 
.,89:;,  ∑
2 .(	).(  	)
0+I
.   
Since formulas (3), (8) and (9), 
-(2)  .() #
(D0_D`)
D`
∗ ∑
2 .(	) ∗ .(  	)
+I
    (10) 
where .(	), .(	) are directly obtained by formula (7). 
C. Example II: the model of the three-service system 
Fig. 5 shows the analytical model of the three-service 
system. Compared with the model of two-service system in 
Fig. 4, this model has one more level of one-dimensional 
Markov chains, which presents the service states of class 3 
corresponding to all possible combinations of the states in first 
two levels. It is noticeable that, when we extend the model of 
two-service system into a new model of three-service system, 
we only need to add one more level of one-dimensional 
Markov chains. In addition, due to the preemptive scheduling, 
we also only need to calculate the blocking of the additional 
class 3, while the blocking expressions of the first two classes 
are not affected and kept unchanged. These shows the excellent 
extensibility of the proposed model. 
Figure 5. The model of the three-service system with capacity of  common 
resource units 
For class 3 with the lowest priority, formulas (4)-(6) imply, 
.a,89:;,  .()
, 
.a,89:;,  ∑
2 .(	).(  	)
0+I
,   
.a,89:;,a  ∑
∑
20 .(	) ∗ .(	) ∗ .a(  	  	)
`+I
2
0+I
. 
According to formulas (3), (8) and (9), 
-(3)  .() # ∑
2 .(	).(  	)
0+I
# b
D0_D`_Dc
Dc
d  
∗ ∑
∑
20 .(	) ∗ .(	) ∗ .a(  	  	)
`+I
2
0+I
.           (11) 
where .(	), .(	), .a(	a)  are given by equations (7). 
IV. 
SIMULATION AND ANALYTICAL RESULTS 
In this section we evaluate the accuracy of the proposed 
model by simulations. Two- and three-service scenarios are 
considered. The simulator was built in the Discrete Event 
Modeling on Simula (DEMOS) software [13]. Ten independent 
simulations were performed for each parameter setting. For all 
simulation results we have plotted the error-bars giving the 
results with 95% confidence. The analytical results are 
obtained using formulas (1)-(11).  
A. Two-service system 
We consider a two-service communication system with 32 
common resource units (  32). The total traffic (   #
) offered by two service classes is varied from 0.1 to 1 
(0.1    1). We use e1, e2 to denote the relative load value 
of two classes (e1  /, e2  /), and let f1, f2 to 
denote their mean holding times (f1  1/, f2  1/). In 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-322-3
CTRQ 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

this this we consider the same mean holding times of different 
service classes (f1  f2  1.184 ∗ 10i s).  
 
Figure 6. The blocking probabilities in a two-service system for different load 
allocations (f1  f2  1.184 ∗ 10i s). (a). the same relative load values 
(e1  e2  0.5). (b). the different relative load values (e1  0.3,e2  0.7). 
(c). the different relative load values (e1  0.7, e2  0.3). 
Fig. 6 shows the blocking probabilities of two classes under 
different load allocations. We first keep e1  e2 in Fig. 6(a), 
then change them as e1  0.3, e2  0.7  in Fig. 6(b) and 
e1  0.7, e2  0.3 in Fig. 6(c). Both simulation and analytical 
results are shown. The most important observation is that the 
analytical values approximate the simulation results very well 
under different system scenarios. We also observe that for class 
1, both results overlap with each other completely for the same 
system load. This validates the accuracy of the analytical 
model, at least for the calculation of -(1). Meanwhile, -(1) 
only depends on the value of e1, it increases as e1 grows, as 
shown in Fig. 6(a) and (c). And it diminishes as e1 decreases, 
as shown in Fig. 6(a) and (b). This can be explained by the 
closed form expression of  -(1) in formula (2). Furthermore, 
although the analytical results of class 2 are very close to that 
of simulation for certain system load, it always produces a little 
smaller value, especially when e1 is larger than e2, as shown 
in Fig. 6(c). The reason is that when we consider the 
preemptive scheduling in analytical model, we use the arrival 
rate of class 1 to approximate its preemption probability on 
class 2 in the respective state. This can be seen from the 
outgoing transition probability of the last state in each Markov 
chain of level 2, as shown in Fig. 4. However, this 
approximation is not accurate, and the corresponding 
discrepancy will increases as the relative arrival rate of class 1 
increases. Hence under the same system load Fig. 6(c) has 
larger discrepancy than Fig. 6(a) and (b), in which the 
discrepancy is so small and can be neglected. 
B. Three-service system 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7. The blocking probabilities in a three-service system for different load 
allocations ( f1  f2  1.184 ∗ 10i ). (a). the same relative load values 
(e1  e2  e3  1/3). (b). the different relative load values (e1  0.5, e2 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-322-3
CTRQ 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

0.3,e3  0.2). (c). the different relative load values (e1  0.3, e2  0.5, e3 
0.2). (d). the different relative load values (e1  0.2, e2  0.3, e3  0.5). 
In this subsection we evaluate the proposed approximation 
model under a three-service scenario, i.e., class 1 has the 
highest priority and class 3 has the lowest priority. Same as in 
part A of this Section, we use e1, e2 and e3 (e1  /, 
e2  / , e3  a/ ,    #  # a ) to denote the 
relative load value of three classes and let f1, f2, f3 (f1 
f2  f3  1.184 ∗ 10i  s) to denote their mean holding 
times. Fig. 7(a), (b), (c) and (d) present the results under 
different parameter settings. Both simulation and analytical 
results are shown. In order to further evaluate the accuracy of 
the propose model and get the influence of the different load 
allocations of three classes on the performance of the studied 
system, we first keep e1  e2  e3, the results are shown in 
Fig. 7(a), and then change the value of e1: e2: e3 as 5:3:2 
(Fig. 7(b)), 3:5:2 (Fig. 7(c)) and 2:3:5 (Fig. 7(d)).  
A number of observations can be done based on Fig. 7. 
The most important one is that the analytical values 
approximate the simulation results very well under different 
scenarios. This verifies the high accuracy of the proposed 
analytical model. We also observe that the analytical model 
always provides accurate -(1)  values for all consideration 
scenarios. Note that the discrepancies of class 1 in Fig. 7(b) 
and (d) resulted from the limited simulation times.  
Meanwhile, the 	-(1) values only depend on the traffic load of 
class 1. As shown in Fig. 7(c) and (d), the -(1) values are too 
small and can be neglected when e1 is not larger than 0.3. 
However, they will of course increase as e1 grows. In Fig. 
7(b), when e1  0.5, -(1) increases and the corresponding 
values are clearly shown. This can be explained by formula 
(2), the value of -(1) is dominated by e1 for a constant . For 
class 2 and 3, their blocking probabilities are only affected by 
the traffic pattern of the classes with same and higher priority, 
while not affected by the lower priority classes. Due to the 
operation of preemptive scheduling, the larger relative load 
value of one certain service class will lead to higher blocking 
probabilities of lower priority service classes. However, it 
cannot influence the blocking probabilities of higher priority 
service classes. As shown in Fig. 7(b) and (c), when e1 is 
increased to 0.5 while e2 is still 0.3, we can see the value of 
-(2)  increases over two orders of magnitude. However, 
comparing Fig. 7(b) and (d), when e3 is increased to 0.5 while 
keeping e2  unchanged, -(2)  decreases a lot due to the 
corresponding decrease in S1. For the lowest priority class 3 
the blocking probability depends on the total load value of all 
other classes, independent of their relative load allocations. As 
shown in Fig. 7(b) and (c), we can see that the -(3) value is 
kept the same under the same system load, even if the 
allocations of e1, e2 are different.  
In addition, same as discussed in part A of this Section, 
although the analytical values approximate the simulation 
results very well under different scenarios, the proposed 
analytical model always produces smaller values for class 2 
and 3. The reason is we made an important approximation for 
this model: for one service class, its preemption probability is 
equal to the arrival intensity of all higher priority classes. 
Hence this model offers high degree accurate blocking 
probabilities for the studied three-service system under small 
e1. Otherwise, it produces smaller values for both class 2 and 
3, as shown in Fig. 7(a) and (b). Meanwhile, for class 3 with 
lowest priority, the corresponding discrepancy decreases as 
(e1 # e2) diminishes. As shown in Fig. 7(d), when e1 # e2 
0.5, the discrepancy is so small and can be neglected. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we propose a novel analytical approximation 
model to investigate the performance of multi-service 
communication systems with preemptive scheduling. By using 
the conditional partitioning method, the proposed model builds 
multiple levels of one-dimensional Markov chains. Each level 
presents all possible service states of one service class. The 
corresponding blocking probability is calculated using the one-
dimensional Markov chains of all higher levels as well as its 
own level.  Its closed form expression can be derived directly 
and is shown in the paper. We also give the concrete models 
for both the two- and three-service case systems. Furthermore, 
the proposed model is evaluated by simulations. Both two- and 
three-service scenarios are considered. The results show that 
this model provides satisfactory approximation results under 
different scenarios. An additional observation is that for the 
lowest priority service class, its blocking probability depends 
on the total load value of all higher priority classes, 
independent of the allocation of their relative load values. 
REFERENCES 
[1] N. Stol, C. Raffaelli and M. Savi, “3-Level Integrated Hybrid Optical 
Network (3LIHON) to Meet Future QoS Requirements,” IEEE 
GLOBECOM 2011, Houston, Texas, USA, Dec. 2011. 
[2] C.J. Fidge, “Real-time schedulability tests for preemptive multitasking,” 
Computer Science, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 61-93, 1998. 
[3] K. Lakshmanan, R. Rajkumar and J.P. Lehoczky, “Partitioned fixed-
priority 
preemptive scheduling 
for 
multi-core processors,” In 
Proceedings of the 21st Euromicro Conference on Real-time Systems, 
Dublin, 2009. 
[4] S. Vestal, “Preemptive scheduling of multi-criticality systems with 
varying degrees of execution time assurance,” In Proceedings of the 
28th IEEE Internationsl Real-time Systems Symposium, Tucson, 2007. 
[5] A. A. Fredericks, “Congestion in blocking systems-a simple 
approximation technique,” The Bell System Technical Journal, vol. 59, 
no. 6, pp.805-827, 1980. 
[6] E. Arthurs, J.S. Kaufman, Sizing a message store subject to blocking 
criteria, In Proceeding of performance of data communications systems 
and their applications, Amsterdam, 1981. 
[7] J.W. Roberts, V. Mocci and I. Virtamo. “Broadband Network 
Teletraffic,” Final Report of Action, Springer, Berlin, 1996. 
[8] H. Øverby, N. Stol. “Evaluation of QoS differentiation Mechanism in 
Asynchronous Bufferless Optical Pakcet-Switched Networks,” IEEE 
Communication Magazine, vol.44, pp. 52-57, 2006. 
[9] H. Øverby, N. Stol. “Providing QoS in OPS/OBS networks with the 
Preemptive Drop Policy,” In Proceedings of the 3rd International 
Conference on Networking (ICN), vol. 1, pp. 312-319, 2004. 
[10] B. Kim, S. Lee, Y. Choi and Y. Cho, “An efficient preemption-based 
channel scheduling algorithm for service differentiation in OBS 
networks,” Computer  Communications, vol. 29, pp. 2348-2360, 2006. 
[11] M. Stasiak, M. Glabowski, “A simple approximation of the link model 
with reservation by a one-dimensional Markov chain,” IEEE 
Performance Evaluation, vol. 41, pp. 195-208, 2000. 
[12] H. Akimaru, K. Kawashima, “Teletraffic theory and applications,” 
Springer-Verlag, 1993. 
[13] G. Birtwistle. “Demos-a system for Discrete Event Modelling on 
Simula,” University of Sheffield, England S1 4DP, 2003. 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-322-3
CTRQ 2014 : The Seventh International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

