Cross-Silo and Cross-Eco IoT Communications with ID Oriented Networking (ION) 
 
Bin Da, Richard Li, Xiaofei Xu, Xiaohu Xu 
NGIP Laboratory, Beijing Huawei Digital Technologies Co., Ltd. 
No.156 Beiqing Street, Haidian District, Beijing, P.R.China, 100095 
Email: {dabin, renwei.li, xuxiaofei, xuxiaohu}@huawei.com 
 
 
Abstract—This paper reviews basic IoT architectures, the 
corresponding evolution at different stages, and presents 
generalized IoT interoperations under the trend of cross-silo 
and cross-ecosystem communications. In line with these trends 
and requirements, ID Oriented Networking, with the detailed 
background and implementation framework, is elaborated, 
which contributes to achieve unified IoT communications in 
future networks. Specifically, ION has the following key 
components: Network Mapping System, ID Management 
System, and ID Relationship Management System. And 
additionally, ION is able to naturally support universal 
mobility of IoT terminals and enhance intrinsic security of IoT 
networks, while also can facilitate internetworking of all 
virtual and physical things over distinct domains, for a fully 
connected world. At the end of this paper, the merits, 
challenges and future work of ION are briefly discussed as well.  
Keywords- Internet of Things; IoT; Identifier Locator Split; 
ID Oriented Networking; ION; Cross-Silo; Cross-Eco.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The Internet of Things (IoT) originates from RFID 
(Radio Frequency IDentification) and relevant technologies 
in 1980s, which is formally coined as IoT in 1999 [1]. Since 
then, the IoT paradigm has evolved in several generations, 
from the vast usage of tagged things and sensor networks [2], 
to ubiquitously connected smart things over Internet [2][3], 
and to recently proposed socialized and cloudified internet of 
things [4][5]. Along with such evolution direction, IoT is 
envisioned to become a global infrastructure that is able to 
interconnect everything in the world, which finally fulfills 
the objective of Everything as a Service (EaaS) [6]. 
As surveyed in the literature [2]-[7], the essential 
components of IoT should consist of: physical things with 
unique identifiers (IDs) for data capturing and local storage; 
routing mechanism for remote storage and processing; 
protocols for interoperability and service provision; and 
trustworthiness among things for security and privacy. 
Recently, virtualized entities become a prominent feature or 
candidate component of IoT‟s further evolution, which 
associates the Real World Objects (RWOs) with Virtual 
World Objects (VWOs) [8], for improved communication 
response and efficiency. All these components are widely 
practiced in various scenarios such as wearables, smart home, 
smart city, connected cars, supply chain, cyber physical 
system, and so forth. 
Furthermore, lots of IoT Alliances or Groups have been 
emerging in the past few years, such as oneM2M established 
in 2012, Thread launched in 2014, and Open Connectivity 
Foundation (OCF) newly formed in 2016 [7]. The typical 
feature, in the infancy of these alliances or groups, is to unite 
distinctly siloed IoT enabling technologies for achieving full 
interoperability, inside their respective ecosystems. However, 
for IoT to be consumed in a ubiquitous manner and be 
always accessible, these ecosystems are also required to 
communicate with each other. Henceforth, referred to as 
cross-ecosystem or cross-eco, this paper concentrates on 
providing mechanisms to enable cross-silo and cross-eco 
communications, in a fully connected IoT world. 
In line with aforementioned application scenarios and 
tendencies, the vision of a smart world can be imagined, 
where cross-silo and cross-eco interconnections become 
pervasive as a hidden infrastructure. As a result, for 
achieving this vision, this paper introduces the concept of ID 
Oriented Networking (ION), and its specific usage for 
globally unified IoT communications, while all IoT terminals 
are assumed to be with intelligence in a foreseen trend. 
The remainder is organized as follows: in Section II, the 
IoT architectures are briefly reviewed, with current IoT 
interoperation status. Then, the ION is elaborated in detail in 
Section III, with the corresponding building blocks, 
implementation framework, essential merits, and key 
features for IoT interoperability. Afterwards, Section IV 
discusses the challenges and future work, and Section V 
finally concludes this paper.  
II. 
ARCHITECTURE, EVOLUTION AND INTEROPERATION 
This section firstly reviews traditional IoT architectures 
which are prominent in industry and academy, then the 
evolution directions of IoT in the past decades are described. 
After which, a summary for the current status of generalized 
IoT interoperations is presented. Finally, the trend of cross-
silo and cross-eco IoT communications is highlighted. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Service Oriented Architecture (SOA). 
A. IoT Architecture Review 
Traditionally, the Service Oriented Architecture (SOA) 
and its variants are designed for IoT [2], which generally has 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-550-0
CTRQ 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

four layers (Sensing, Network, Service, and Interface layers). 
As shown in Fig.1 [2], the sensing layer normally contains a 
variety of hardware objects (e.g., RFID tags, sensors and 
actuators), for acquiring data. The network layer practically 
facilitates the data transfer over wired or wireless networks. 
In addition, the service layer generates and manages services 
whenever required. Lastly, the interface layer presents 
universal methods that are used by specific applications. 
Besides this fundamental SOA design, there proposed lots of 
IoT architectures, with distinct focuses on the applied 
scenarios [7]. Among which, IoT-A reference model forms a 
sophisticated architecture, with hundreds of practical IoT 
requirements into consideration [9]. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Evolution of Internet of Things (IoT). 
B. IoT Evolution 
As aforementioned, the term of Internet of Things (IoT) 
formally emerges in 1999 [1], which mainly builds on the 
previously developed RFID technologies. Since then, IoT‟s 
connotation has been continuously expanding, in particular, 
the corresponding IoT evolution is briefed in Fig. 2, in line 
with our analysis. The first generation of IoT is early 
contributed by the RFID technology, which connects things 
by RFID tags and transfers data relevant to the things being 
tagged, for generating meaningful information flows (e.g., 
for Supply Chain Management). Furthermore, other IoT 
connectivity technologies are devised [7], 
including 
Bluetooth, ZigBee, Z-Wave and so forth, for satisfying 
vertical applications, as exemplified by connected things 
indoor or outdoor. However, these distinguished verticals 
cannot be operable with each other, since they are addressed 
by different identifiers and interconnected by different 
mechanisms or protocols [2]. Thus, in the second generation, 
different vertical technologies usually resort to a gateway for 
protocol translation, so as to enable cross-silo IoT 
communications at local scale. Recently, adaption layers are 
developed (e.g., 6LoWPAN) for further extending vertical 
IoT domains to be connected with the Internet, which 
becomes Web of Things after Non-IP and IP convergence [3]. 
As a result, siloed IoT enabling technologies are able to be 
interconnected globally via the Internet. 
There is also a tendency towards evolution of IoT to be 
socialized and cloudified. Accordingly, socialized means IoT 
terminals tend to establish social links just as humans do [4], 
cloudified implies to build virtual counterparts of physical 
things in the cloud and to be equipped with cloud computing 
technologies [5]. The rationales behind such a tendency are 
multifold: Thing-to-Thing connections are expected to far 
exceed Human-to-Human connections in near future; Thing-
to-Thing connections are also becoming more intelligent and 
autonomous, with little or no human intervention; Moreover, 
the data associated with ubiquitously intelligent things and 
their interconnections will continue exponentially increasing, 
which finally leads to a large share of IoT data in the cloud. 
Thus, everything will be intelligent to smartly associate 
themselves with other things, for on-demand requirements in 
various applications, which may even resemble human-to-
human interactions to formulate thing-to-thing communities 
with autonomy. The Social IoT (SIoT) is then proposed [4], 
for systematically describing thing-to-thing relationships and 
interactions, along with some essential functionalities. 
Similarly, cloudified IoT solutions are also implemented by 
different platforms, for integrated data analytics and 
management over IoT entities [5]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Generalized IoT Interoperations. 
C. Current State of Generalized IoT Interoperations 
As previously described for the trend of IoT evolution, 
IoT-based interactions tend to become pervasive, anytime 
and anywhere, which is not merely for simple data collection 
but for meaningful service-oriented control. However, in real 
word, there exist entirely different demands for and types of 
IoT interoperations, in the manners of Thing-to-Thing and 
Human-to-Thing connections. 
To be more specific, some IoT terminals with fixed 
positions serve for collecting data locally or remotely, which 
is usually for centralized data storage and analytics along 
with few associated actuations (e.g., sensor configuration in 
remote metering). However, in lot of scenarios, especially 
with the involvement of human and smart things (i.e., 
generalized IoT terminals with intelligence), the nearby or 
remote interactions are aimed for achieving certain services. 
Without loss of generality, a smart device as the intelligent 
IoT terminal is exemplified in Fig. 3, for human-involved 
control on potential interconnections with terminals in a 
home network, which normally needs an application running 
in the device as control interface. In Fig. 3, six service-
oriented control manners are illustrated with sequential 
numbers, which are briefly explained below one by one: 
① 
Direct Point-to-Point (P2P) Operation: In the first case, 
the device is able to directly control the surrounding 
devices via P2P connections, which may use Wi-Fi 
Direct, Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE), Near Field 
Communications (NFC) [7]. In this P2P mode, the 
signal flows are not redirected from any other third 
parties, and are often used for content sharing, direct 
actuation, wireless payment. 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-550-0
CTRQ 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

② 
Interaction via Adjacent Gateway: The device also can 
go through a nearby gateway to control other IoT 
terminals, while the gateway practically shields the 
difference among different IoT technologies such as 
Wi-Fi, ZigBee, Z-Wave. As in Fig. 3, this is a typical 
scenario for smart home or s mart office. Note that, for 
Wireless Sensor Network (WSN), there still uses a 
gateway for collecting data from all sensor nodes 
through specific IoT enablers, however the interactions 
are much less as compared to smart home case. 
③ 
Remote Operation via Internet: Besides the above two 
cases for proximity control, the device is able to operate 
remote IoT terminals through traditional Internet, such 
as turning on the air conditioner at home on the road. 
④ 
Interaction via Operator’s Gateway: With the arising of 
Low 
Power 
Wide 
Area 
Network 
(LPWAN) 
technologies in recent years, the device is entitled to 
directly connect various IoT terminals at home via the 
operator‟s gateway at a remote distance (e.g., 10km 
away from home), which resembles the home gateway 
in the second case but with much longer operation 
distance. Note that these LPWAN technologies are also 
known as cellular IoT enablers, which are embodied by 
NB-IoT, LoRa, SigFox and so forth [10]. 
⑤ 
Remote Operation via Cloud: The cloud service is now 
integrated with IoT technologies at different levels, 
which is in line with three cloud types in particular, 
known as public, private, and hybrid services. These 
cloud-based services enable centralized control over 
IoT terminals with data view and data analytics, 
regardless of the distance. As a result, the device can 
easily control remote IoT terminals through the cloud 
services, with hidden underlying IoT technologies. 
⑥ 
Operation via Over The Top (OTT) Applications: The 
human social network applications, like WeChat, 
Whatsapp, Facebook, are penetrating into all domains 
of our daily life, including controlling IoT terminals as 
well. For instance, WeChat is able to perform wireless 
payment and remote control over smart devices now, 
and Facebook also can adjust IoT terminal behavior 
through aforementioned Web of Things. This type of 
OTT-based operation is actually built upon individual 
vertical ecosystems with hybrid usage of previous cases. 
Note that all the above six interoperation manners 
continuously generate data, which fully demonstrates the 
IoT‟s demand of being integrated with advanced cloud 
services, forming Cloud of Things (CoT) [5]. 
D. Trend of Cross-Silo and Cross-Eco IoT 
Communications 
In Section I, the fundamental concept of cross-silo and 
cross-eco IoT communications is briefly introduced. In this 
sub-section, a more detailed view is presented in Fig. 4, for 
elaborating such trend for IoT interoperability. Specifically, 
in Fig. 4 - (a), it shows the current status of IoT industrial 
layers with protocol stack, from which, it can be observed 
that there generally exist two types of IoT channels. One 
type covers relatively long distance, such as LoRa, SigFox, 
NB-IoT, which are known as LPWAN. Meanwhile, the 
others target on short distance connectivity like Bluetooth, 
ZigBee, Z-Wave. Obviously, these distinct IoT enabling 
technologies result in siloed operations in various applicable 
scenarios. Thus, to eliminate the underlying differences 
below Transport layer, an Adaptation layer can be utilized to 
link Non-IP and IP enablers with the Internet, the cloud or 
simply the centralized applications for achieving cross-silo 
IoT communications. As shown in Fig. 4 – (b), in line with 
previous philosophy, lots of ecosystems are established 
accordingly, such as Apple HomeKit, Google Weave, Open 
Interconnect Consortium, AllSeen Alliance and so forth, for 
IoT interoperations in Application layer or in Cloud. 
However, these independently formulated ecosystems 
become individual bigger silos at their infancies. As a result, 
for fulfilling the vision of complete interoperability of IoT, 
the trend of cross-eco communications is arising recently, 
which is diversely through merging, liaison, asset transfer, or 
interworking protocols as explicitly illustrated in Fig. 4 – (c) 
for exemplifying the newly formed Open Connectivity 
Foundation (OCF). Note that Huawei has established its own 
IoT ecosystem, which consists of OpenLife Platform, HiLink 
Protocol, LiteOS, and IoT chipsets. 
Based on the observations in Fig. 4, we have proposed a 
generalized type of internetworking denoted as ION, which 
adopts the identifier locator split framework and constructs 
an additional layer below Transport layer for horizontally 
universal connections, including cross-silo/eco IoT cases. 
The following section will introduce the details of ION. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Trend of Cross-Silo and Cross-Eco IoT Communications. 
III. 
ID ORIENTED NETWORKING 
This section introduces ID Oriented Networking (ION) 
concept and architecture in detail, with the background, 
implementation framework, essential merits, and relevance 
to cross-silo and cross-eco IoT communications. 
A. ION Background   
Future networks need to satisfy many demanding 
requirements such as high throughput, extremely low latency, 
flexible mobility, intrinsic security, networking automation, 
and so forth. Recently, at the European Telecommunications 
Standards Institute (ETSI) Next Generation Protocol (NGP) 
forum [11], Huawei introduced IP2020 which aims to meet 
these requirements for various future life scenarios (e.g., 
autonomous driving, tactile internet, AR/VR). IP2020 is a 
holistic solution that includes a high-throughput transport 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-550-0
CTRQ 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

layer, Self-X networking automation, intrinsic network 
security and ID Oriented Networking. 
 
Figure 5.  ID Oriented Networking (ION) Overview. 
B. ION Overview 
As shown in Fig. 5, ION follows the idea of Identifier 
(ID) and Locator Split (ILS) in general [12]. As is well 
known, the traditional Internet Protocol (IP) address assumes 
overloaded semantics of being both endpoint identifier and 
routing locator. Over past years, several proposals have been 
formulated to decouple the IP into two layers, which 
contributes to ID and IP layers as shown in Fig. 5 [11]. The 
IP layer aligns with the successful Internet practices to 
establish global reachability while ID layer performs 
functions essential for an endpoint‟s identity. The ID layer in 
ION framework has three components: Network Mapping 
System (NMS) for translating ID to locator whenever 
queried; ID Management System (IDMS) for centralized or 
distributed 
management 
of 
universal 
identifiers; 
ID 
Relationship Management System (IDRMS) for maintaining 
proper relations among ID-labeled physical or virtual entities. 
In addition, the data or information associated with all these 
indentified entities should be managed as well, which might 
resort to cloud-based solutions for vast data storage and 
analytics and is currently beyond the scope of ION. 
As previously mentioned, the idea behind ILS is not 
novel for usage in ION, which can be observed in many 
existing ILS research [12]. In the literature, identifiers could 
be categorized into three classes: IDs over pure IP addresses 
having different connotations, as in LISP and ILNP; flat IDs 
based on PKI with self-certifying features, including HIP and 
MobilityFirst; hierarchical or hybrid IDs, as designed in 
RANGI [13]. Moreover, for translating ID to locator, many 
mapping systems are proposed accordingly, such as RVS for 
HIP and GNRS for MobilityFirst, while our previous work 
presents a comprehensive summary as well [14].   
C. ION Implementation Framework (IONIF) 
In this sub-section, an ION Implementation Framework 
(IONIF) towards globally unified IoT communications is 
elaborated. IONIF is the realization of ION architecture, 
which integrates ID management, NMS, and IP reachability, 
to deliver ID aware networks. Applications benefit from ID 
aware transport using ID-oriented API, and the enabled 
sockets are location agnostic and can preserve end-to-end 
connections even the underlying locator layer attributes 
change. As in Fig. 6, the IONIF has four layers, which are 
locator, ID, ID-oriented socket API, and application layers, 
which comply with the previously layered ION overview.  
 
Figure 6.  ION Implementation Framework (IONIF).  
More specifically, the locator layer aims at achieving 
global connectivity via locator-based addressing and routing. 
As shown in Fig. 5, the most promising candidate of such 
global connectivity locator should be IP and its variants, 
which specify the destinations for packet-based deliveries [2]. 
The ID layer, as the core of IONIF, presents unique features 
for building flexible on-demand relationships horizontally, 
and satisfying upper layers‟ demands vertically. With the 
assistance of a global-scale ID Management System (IDMS), 
a worldwide unified ID management can be realized, which 
potentially supports distinct ID formats as well. Along with 
IDMS, on-demand relationships are created and managed 
according to specific application requirements in ID 
Relationship Management System (IDRMS), in a proactive 
or reactive manner. Furthermore, IDMS and IDRMS could 
be integrated to manage the identifiers with their respective 
semantic attributes and relationships, such as ID „A‟ 
indicates a refrigerator associating with other entities in Fig.6.  
Furthermore, as previously observed in Fig. 5, the access 
and IoT hardware heterogeneity has been shielded by the 
function of unified access and adaptation, thus the ID layer is 
able to enable Radio Access Technology (RAT) agnostic 
functions such as ID-based access control, ID-enabled 
privacy protection, ID-aware AAA, and other policies. In 
addition, for properly locating communication endpoints and 
supporting RAT-agnostic mobility management, NMS is 
dynamically used to map identifiers to locators. The NMS 
may be maintained by dedicated organizations, working in 
centralized or hierarchical decentralized manner, resembling 
the traditional DNS or some new design paradigms [14]-[16]. 
Above the ID layer, there exists an ID-oriented socket 
API for ID-aware data transmissions, which provides the 
interface to application layer and has adaptability to lower-
layer ID-based on-demand relationships. Moreover, in 
application layer, individual applications may request to 
establish tailored relationships for their operating things 
through this ID-oriented API. For example, a control 
application for home appliances, including refrigerator, air 
conditioner, thermostat etc., requires to build a same-owner 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-550-0
CTRQ 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

relationship among these appliances belonging to different 
manufacturers. Note that some fundamental Thing-to-Thing 
relationships are well investigated in Social IoT (SIoT) [4], 
which can be referred to for relation establishment in IONIF. 
As illustrated in Fig. 6, the horizontal relationship for an 
IoT community may further embrace a new feature of 
automatic relation-aware self-expansion, which determines 
useful and useless relationships for upper layer services by 
dynamically enrolling new members or removing existing 
members in a relational cluster. For instance, the relation 
formulated by pointer ①  for one application could be 
expanded to a renewed relation initiated by the same 
application, through involving new members with updated 
relations. Alternatively, individual applications with different 
services may also activate distinct relationships having 
partially shared members, as pointed by ① and ② for two 
applications sharing three common members. For IONIF, 
these horizontal ID-based relationships are maintained in 
IDRMS, being assisted by IDMS. 
Currently, the IONIF is still under development and 
refinement, and its core implementation components 
presented in this sub-section are able to accelerate global 
connectivity for unified IoT communications in near future. 
In which, Thing-to-Thing relations are maintained just like 
human society, and these things‟ relations are expected to be 
further intertwined with human behavior and services. 
D. ION for IoT Interoperations 
Based on above description, IONIF shows the potential 
for the future IoT interoperations in Fig. 7, other than 
integrated operations in the application layer. Previously, the 
IoT evolution has shown the trend towards cross-silo and 
cross-eco communications. In near future, with the help of 
ION, a unified IoT cross operation could be easily built upon 
ID layer, facilitating all the actions demonstrated in Fig. 3. In 
particular, regardless of IoT enabling technologies (e.g., 
Bluetooth, Z-Wave, LoRa, etc.), the universal adaptation 
layer normalizes the data transmitted among different IoT 
verticals, and further enables the connection with IP layer for 
global reachability. In addition, IDs defined in ION can 
persistently label all communication endpoints, without 
considering their specific routing locations. Note that the 
dynamic binding from ID to IP for smooth data transmission 
could be at the level of individual things supporting IP or at 
the level of IoT gateways with local locators other than IP.  
As a result, the heterogeneity of IoT technologies become 
hidden beneath ID layer, as in Figures 5 and 6, and upper 
services can request any type of on-demand relationship over 
IoT terminals, which fully satisfies the future trend. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.  ION for ID-based IoT Communications. 
E. ION Merits 
As shown in Figures 5-7, the merits of introducing ION 
for IoT interoperations, other than the present IoT integration 
in application layer, are multifold, which are concisely 
summarized below: 
 
Labels of Communication Entities: Currently, the 
communication identifiers of IoT terminals are in 
different formats in individual IoT enabling technologies. 
Thus, a unified identifier naming paradigm is highly 
desirable in the ID layer as shown in Figures 5-7, for 
consistent labeling of communicating IoT entities across 
various domains or ecosystems. Although this unified 
identifier could be a long-term multilateral effort, there 
exist a few trials of promoting such type of identifier [13], 
[15]-[17]. For example, a PKI-based hash value in binary 
format may be used as a unique 128-bit identifier as 
suggested in RANGI scheme [13]. 
 
Intrinsic Security: Besides the link-level security in 
pairing stage of individual IoT technologies (e.g., 
Bluetooth and ZigBee), an intrinsic level of security built 
upon Identity Based Signature (IBS) scheme is under 
development, for the purpose of enforcing future 
mobility security, network trust, and identity and key 
management [11]. As expected, authentication before 
establishing a transport layer connection may close many 
security holes nowadays in TCP/IP protocols, while 
further reducing the burden of deep packet inspection and 
the consequent overhead [18]. 
 
Mobility Support for IoT Terminals: ION largely 
follows the ILS paradigm, as described in previous 
sections, it thus naturally supports mobility of IoT 
terminals. Note that the fundamental principle behind 
mobility support is consistent communication identifiers 
regardless of location changes [12]. 
 
Social Community of Things: This is a prominent 
feature in line with IoT evolution in Section II, as Thing-
to-Thing interconnections become pervasive. Based on 
the observation in Fig. 6, a social community with on-
demand relationships among smart things could be 
established upon specific service requests. Meanwhile, 
such social community can be managed similarly as 
human society, with dynamic enrollment or removal and 
intelligent interaction, for achieving valued-added 
functions in autonomy. 
IV. 
FUTURE WORK 
For ION utilization in large scale, many challenges are 
inevitable in front, and are briefly discussed in this section, 
for the purpose of future work.  
As highlighted in Fig. 6 for IONIF, two essential 
elements of ION, i.e., IDMS and IDRMS, are logically 
intertwined for managing the universal identifiers and their 
on-demand relationships. However, unifying distinguished 
identifier formats of various IoT regimes under a single 
framework may take unexpected effort to achieve, and the 
consensus over atomic relationship definition for IoT 
terminals may encounter similar difficulty. Thus, the ID 
format definition with various ID support should be revisited, 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-550-0
CTRQ 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

along their potentially dynamic relationships in a socialized 
community. Meanwhile, an extended universal adaptation 
plane might be utilized to bridge existing siloed identifier 
domains, based on the adaptation layer shown in Fig. 7, 
which also needs a further study. 
As noticed, ION naturally support mobility due to 
constant communication identifiers, however, the mapping 
from identifier to locator may take additional time and 
becomes a new bottleneck. Thus, the NMS in ION should be 
further explored to fully support mobility of IoT terminals in 
distinct scenarios, which may accommodate all current ID 
formats in a unified way. Accordingly, an IDEAS group has 
been recently formulated in IETF, with the target of new 
mapping system design with novel principles and proof-of-
concept verifications for ILS schemes in general [19]. As a 
result, a generalized IoT mobility may be enhanced through 
a united endeavor over NMS design in near future. 
Furthermore, the security imposed by ION over IoT 
communications should be well designed so as to enable all-
round protections. As aforementioned, IoT security can be 
boosted after the introduction of ION in ID layer for future 
networks. However, since the interconnections and the 
accompanying data with the IoT terminals continue to be 
dramatically increasing, the security in every phase could be 
threatened, which occurs either in cross layer or in a hybrid 
manner. Thus, formulating a holistic security scheme, with 
consideration of identification, authentication, integrity, 
privacy, trust, safety, reliability, responsiveness, immunity, 
autonomy and so forth, is always a challenging work for 
candidate research [18]. 
ION socket, for broadly enabling ION implementation, 
may require modifications on host side. Thus, the problem of 
smooth adoption of ION in large scale, with minimum 
impacts on other layers is worthwhile to be further examined. 
The viable solutions might be either through a middleware 
for properly linking legacy and ION-based transmissions, or 
through an ID-aware socket that understands intrinsic 
connotations when legacy and ION-based IDs are actually 
utilized.  
As previously observed in IoT evolution, integrating IoT 
technologies with cloud computing is also a desirable trend 
for ION to serve IoT practices with hugely manageable data 
behind identifiers. Thus, hierarchical cloud enabled (i.e., 
fog/edge/core clouds) IoT under ION framework is a 
valuable extension as well. 
In summary, for achieving unified IoT communications, 
the functional components and key enabling technologies 
under the proposed ION framework are of importance for 
future refinement and study.    
V. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, the basic IoT architectures with its 
evolution stages are firstly introduced, which is followed by 
the driving forces and trends for cross-silo and cross-eco IoT 
interoperations. Subsequently, ID Oriented Networking (ION) 
with the corresponding background, core functional 
components, and implementation framework are elaborated. 
Finally, the merits and future work are briefly discussed.  
Overall, a smart world with unified communications 
under ION framework is imaginable, where generalized 
intelligent things in all types are agilely interconnected for 
providing integrated services to numerous local and global 
demanders.  
REFERENCES 
[1] Kevin Ashton, “That „internet of things‟ thing,” RFID Journal, 
pp. 97-114, 2009. 
[2] S. Li, D. Li, and S. Zhao, “The internet of things: a survey,” 
Information Systems Frontiers, pp. 243-259, 2015. 
[3] D. Zeng, S. Guo, and Z. Cheng, “The web of things: a 
survey,” Journal of Communications, pp. 424-438, 2011. 
[4] L. Atzori, A. Iera, G. Morabito, et al, “The social internet of 
things (SIoT) - when social networks meet the internet of 
things: concept, architecture and network characterization,” 
Computer Networks, pp. 3594-3608, 2012. 
[5] S. Distefano, G. Merlino, and A. Puliafito, “Enabling the 
cloud of things,” in Proceedings of IEEE Sixth International 
Conference on Innovative Mobile and Internet Services in 
Ubiquitous Computing (IMIS), 2012, pp. 858-863. 
[6] A. Botta, W. Donato, et al, “Integration of cloud computing 
and internet of things: a survey,” Future Generation Computer 
Systems, pp. 684-700, 2016. 
[7] A. Al-Fuqaha, M. Guizani, et al, “Internet of things: a survey 
on enabling technologies, protocols, and applications,” IEEE 
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, pp. 2347-2376, 2015. 
[8] I. Farris, R. Girau, et al, “Social virtual objects in the edge 
cloud,” IEEE Cloud Computing, pp. 20-28, 2015. 
[9] IoT-A Reference Model: http://www.iot-a.eu   
[10] J. P. Bardyn, T. Melly, et al, “IoT: The era of LPWAN is 
starting now,” in Proceedings of IEEE European Solid-State 
Circuits Conference (ESSCIRC), Oct. 2016, pp. 25-30. 
[11] Huawei 
IP 
2020 
Project 
Introduction 
is 
available: 
http://www.layer123.com/download&doc=Huawei-1016-
Renwei-Towards_2020-Challenges    
[12]  W. Ramirez, X. Masip-Bruin, et al, “A survey and taxonomy 
of ID/Locator Split Architectures (ILSA),” Computer 
Networks, pp. 13-33, 2014. 
[13] Y. Jia, X. Lu, et al, “A novel host mobility support method in 
IPv4/IPv6 network of RANGI architecture,” in Proceedings of 
IEEE International Conference on Fuzzy Systems and 
Knowledge Discovery (FSKD), 2012, pp. 2083-2087. 
[14] Bin Da, X. Xu, K. Bi, and X. Zheng, “DNS with mapping 
service in identifier locator split architecture,” in Proceedings 
of 22nd APCC Conference, 2016, pp. 470-475. 
[15] A. Sharma, X. Tie, et al, “A global name service for a highly 
mobile 
internetwork,” 
ACM 
SIGCOMM 
Computer 
Communication Review, vol. 44, no. 4, pp. 247-258, 2014. 
[16] V. P. Kafle, Y. Fukushima, and H. Harai, “ID-based 
communication for realizing IoT and M2M in future 
heterogeneous mobile networks,” in Proceedings of IEEE 
International Conference on Recent Advances in IoT, 2015. 
[17] Felice Armenio, Henri Barthel, et al, “The EPCglobal 
architecture framework,” 2005. 
[18] J. Granjal, E. Monteiro, and J. S. Silva, “Security for the 
internet of things: a survey of existing protocols and open 
research issues,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 
pp. 1294-1312, 2015. 
[19] IETF ID EnAbled networkS (IDEAS) Mailing List: 
https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/search/?email_list=ideas 
 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-550-0
CTRQ 2017 : The Tenth International Conference on Communication Theory, Reliability, and Quality of Service

