Clarifying Privacy in the Clouds
Karthick Ramachandran, Thomas Margoni, Mark Perry
Faculties of Science and Law
University of Western Ontario
London, Canada
{kramach , tmargoni, mperry}@uwo.ca
Abstract—Concomitant with the increased market appeal of
cloud-based services, there is growing concern over issues of
privacy within the architecture. In this paper, we analyze what
is meant by the term privacy from a legal perspective, and
how the meaning of cloud computing and their operation may
be affected in at least one jurisdiction. We also look at some
possible solutions to addressing privacy in clouds.
Keywords-Privacy, cloud computing, compliance with legis-
lation
I. INTRODUCTION
Cloud computing represents a relatively recent architec-
ture and business model in the information technology en-
vironment. It is a term that describes having data processed,
stored or retrieved in a cloud, where ’cloud’ means some-
where on the Internet. The Internet is a very generic term,
especially when we are interested in knowing the physical
location of data or a particular server. Saying it is in the
Internet or in a cloud means that, most of the times, we don’t
know, or don’t care, from a computing perspective where it
is. A main feature of cloud computing is that for operational
purposes the cloud users are not interested in their location.
This is extremely advantageous from a technical perspective
as from that viewpoint one needs the job to get done without
having to worry about availability of resources. However,
from a legal perspective it raises many problems, not least
that it is increasingly an issue in most jurisdictions that
companies address privacy requirements and comply with
privacy regulation. Location is a key factor that must be
considered. Here, we are addressing the issues of location-
independent computing, such as is part of the fundamental
design of cloud computing, in terms of privacy legislation,
in order to determine high non-compliance situations, and
identify some possible approaches to provide solutions, and
best practices. We take Canada as the use case for this
analysis.
We present an introduction to Privacy in Section II.
In Section III, we look at data protection laws, speciﬁc
to Canada. An introduction to Cloud Computing and its
architectural details are described in Section IV. Section V
enumerates some threats to data stored in remote servers. We
discuss some of the technical approaches to protect user’s
privacy in a Cloud computing environment in Section VI.
And ﬁnally we conclude in Section VII.
II. WHAT IS PRIVACY
Early interpretations of legislation in England outlawed
eavesdropping and spying on others. The English courts in
deciding about the granting of a warrant to “break open
doors, locks, and boxes, and to seize a man and all his
books” have held that “we can safely say there is no law in
this country to justify the defendants in what they have done;
if there was, it would destroy all the comforts of society, for
papers are often the dearest property any man can have”
[1]. Many international treaties, covenants and declarations
recognize privacy as a fundamental human right, such as
in Article 8 of the 1950 Convention for the Protection of
Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms “(1) Everyone
has the right to respect for his private and family life,
his home and his correspondence. (2) There shall be no
interference by a public authority with the exercise of this
right except as in accordance with the law and is necessary
in a democratic society in the interests of national security,
public safety or the economic well-being of the country,
for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection
of health of morals, or for the protection of the rights and
freedoms of others”. A simple condensing of the privacy
as an autonomous right was summed up as the “right to
be let alone” [2]. However, it must be said that the same
authors recognized that technological evolution carries with
new threats that were previously protected by other methods.
So, for example, the old tort of trespass (vis et Armis, in
its origins around 13th century) can be seen and adapted
to protect privacy to some extent, until when in order to
know what was happening in the seclusion of a house it
was necessary to enter the property of the house owner, i.e.
to trespass his own property. No doubt that such a remedy’s
main function was to protect the person and the property
of the owner. However, it was also capable of protecting
something that was not identiﬁed yet.
Advances in technology, in their very nature, enable
actions previously not possible, so it is possible to see
through walls with infrared cameras and store such images
on computers for easy replication and distribution. The so-
called ‘smart’ electricity meters enable the power supply
company to know what and when equipment is being turned
on and off inside your house, and possibly build a ‘power’
12
CYBERLAWS 2011 : The Second International Conference on Technical and Legal Aspects of the e-Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-122-9

proﬁle of a customer. No physical invasion of land has
occurred. It is also possible to determine whether somebody
is growing marijuana plants in his basement without entering
the property [3]. Or, listening to private conversations with-
out eavesdropping at the door but by capturing electronic
communications [4][5][6]. All those activities that in past
were not allowed because the old technology required an
action that was considered illegitimate (eg: entering the
property without a warrant), have become available because
technology now permits to carry out the activity without
performing the prohibited action.
Although the concept of privacy and data protection
has developed over the centuries to the point where most
countries now have legislation regulating these issues, new
technologies such as Deep Pocket Inspection, or trafﬁc
snifﬁng, and sophisticated listening and imaging tools, pose
an enormous threat on the protection of privacy and personal
data.
III. PRIVACY AND DATA PROTECTION IN CANADA
Canada does not have a generally accepted tort of invasion
of privacy at common law, although in the USA several
approaches by the courts have lent strength to privacy
protection. However, Canadian legislation address privacy
and data protection with regard to different conditions such
as the nature of the obliged subject (public or private), and
the type of activity carried out (commercial or not), and the
sector within which the activity is being carried out (for
example the extensive regulation of health services). The
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms is entrenched in
Canada’s constitution. Although it does not speciﬁcally give
a right to privacy, it does protect citizens from unreasonable
search and seizure by the state. This general principle has
been interpreted by the Supreme Court of Canada (SCC),
which stated that rights should be interpreted in a broad
and liberal manner so as to secure the citizen’s right to
a reasonable expectation of privacy against governmental
encroachments and intrusions [7]. The SCC went further
by stipulating that privacy should be at the core of modern
societies, and referring a previous Canadian Government
Study on Privacy and Computers (that dates back to 1972), in
a way that seems to suggest the applicability of the concept
of privacy to informational aspects as well:
“This notion of privacy derives from the assumption that
all information about a person is in a fundamental way his
own, for him to communicate or retains for himself as he
sees ﬁt”[8]
During the early 90s the SCC took the opportunity to
develop the concept of privacy with regard to governmental
intrusions, including the use of then new technologies [9]
[10] [11]. However, it must be observed that these cases
are based on governmental intrusions, mostly prosecutions
looking at the extent to which citizens should be protected
from unreasonable measures.
Regarding a different but connected area of collection
of data by Federal agencies the reference legislation is the
Privacy Act of 1982 [12]. Such legislation main aim is the
regulation of the collection and use of personal information
by the federal government and a number of federal public
agencies. Such statute is coupled with another piece of
federal legislation that is geared towards the accessibility
by citizens of information stored by government agencies
[13]. Both the Privacy Act and the Access to Information
Act refer to personal data or records retained by the Federal
Government, thereby identifying records that can be either
under an analogical or a digital expression form. It must be
noted how such legislation refers only to federal bodies, and
that on a provincial level similar legislation has been enacted
(For example in the [14], [15] and [16]).
Looking to the private sector, the most relevant piece of
legislation in Canada, and probably the more relevant in light
of this study, is without doubt the Personal Information Pro-
tection and Electronic Documents Act of 2000, also referred
to as PIPEDA [17], that applies to all private sector entities
that collect, use, or disclose personal information in the
course of commercial activities (with the exception of those
provinces that have enacted equivalent legislation). PIPEDA
as many other piece of legislation around the world
is
generally based on the Guidelines Governing the Protection
of Privacy and Transborder Flows of Personal Data of 1980
promulgated by the OECD [18]. Those principles, as enacted
by PIPEDA may be summarized as follows:
Accountability: the collecting organization is responsible
for the collected data
Identifying purpose: the purpose for collecting personal
information shall be identiﬁed before the information is
collected
Consent: individual’s consent is required for the collection
or disclosure or personal information
Limiting Collection: the collection of data should be
limited to those data necessary for the purpose of collection
Limiting Use, Disclosure and Retention: the collected
personal information should be used only for the purposes
for which it was collected
Accuracy: collected personal information should be ac-
curate and complete. It is a collecting organization duty to
maintain such information updated
Safeguards: the personal information collected shall be
protected by measures appropriate to the sensibility of the
data collected
Openness: the information regarding the organization pri-
vacy policies should be readily available to users
Individual Access: individuals shall access the information
retained by an organization regarding such individual, and
shall also pretend that the information be amended if not
correct
13
CYBERLAWS 2011 : The Second International Conference on Technical and Legal Aspects of the e-Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-122-9

Challenging compliant: the individual shall be able to
address a challenge regarding the compliance of those prin-
ciples to the organization designated individual [19].
The implementation of such basic principles that have
their roots in the OECD guidelines is particularly important.
In fact, jurisdictions such as the European Union, forbid the
transmission of personal data when the destination of such
ﬂow is a jurisdiction with not acceptable levels of privacy
protection, and this has caused some disruption of data
trade between the European Union and the United States
of America.
IV. CLOUD COMPUTING - INTRODUCTION
Cloud computing is the style of computing in which the
users can rent infrastructure, platform or software services
from other vendors without requiring the physical access
to them. It divides the responsibilities of managing tech-
nologies between two different stakeholders who can be
geographically situated in different corners of the world.
Owing to this advantage, the cloud computing has been
widely adopted. MarketsandMarkets estimates [20] Cloud
Computing market will increase from $37.8 billion in 2010
to $121.1 billion in 2015 at a compound annual growth rate
of 26.2 percent.
Figure 1 presents the evolution of cloud computing. Early
on in the development of the internet there were computers
that connected to the internet using dial-up, ISDN, T1 or
T3 lines. They were then replaced by powerful servers at
the (TCP) Internet access points. A single server was then
replaced by a rack of servers for power hungry applications.
Later the same rack of servers were shared between two
or three applications and users, to optimize its usage of
services. Moreover, a new paradigm of software as a service
evolved where standalone desktop applications were slowly
moved to powerful servers for ubiquity and more reliability.
Cloud computing evolved out of this stage, where multiple
vendors can dynamically provision resources based on their
requirements and the resources allocated to them can grow
or shrink like an elastic.
Cloud computing (access) can be implemented in three
different models (Figure 2); Infrastructure as a Service,
Platform as a Service and Software as a Service.
In Infrastructure as a Service, the users can rent the
physical/virtual machines from the cloud computing vendor
and the user installs the basic software in the machines. The
cloud service provider (CSP) can also expose some of the
machine renting capabilities as an public API, which can be
utilized by the users for dynamic provisioning [21]. Amazon,
Rackspace and Slicehost are some of the popular providers
of Infrastructure as a Service.
In Platform as a Service, the provider encourages the users
to develop their application using the platform provided
by the CSP (eg: Google App Engine, Microsoft Azure).
The users, while developing their applications using the
Computers - Dial 
Up Networking, 
ISDN, T1
Servers at 
Internet Access 
Points
Dedicated 
Datacenters with 
Rackservers
Shared 
Rackservers
Software as a 
Service
Cloud Computing
Timeline
1990
2010
Figure 1.
Evolution of Cloud Computing
Platform as a Service
Infrastructure as a 
Service
Software as a 
Service
Google App 
Engine
Microsoft 
Azure
Amazon Web 
Services
Rackspace 
Cloud
Amazon
Elastic Hosts
Google Apps
Salesforce.com
Microsoft Online 
Services
Figure 2.
Cloud Architectures
platform, need to only worry about the expression of their
application through the platform. The provider optimizes
their infrastructure for the platform and the application
once installed in the platform will seamlessly scale and the
scalability will be the responsibility of the CSP.
In Software as a Service, the provider implements the
software for the client and then provides a virtual container
to host the client speciﬁc data in the software (eg: Google
Docs, Salesforce etc). In this case, the client needs neither to
have the technical expertise to host the application or scale
nor the expertise to develop the application. The CSP uses
its infrastructure to provide the services to the client.
In all the above models, the CSP is responsible for hosting
the users data. The user loses the control of the data once
it reaches the CSPs data grid. The user is entrusting the
provider with data, because either the user has no infras-
tructure to host the data by themselves or assumes the data
will be reliably stored in the cloud providers infrastructure as
the cloud provider is trusted to have the necessary expertise
14
CYBERLAWS 2011 : The Second International Conference on Technical and Legal Aspects of the e-Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-122-9

to reliably store the data.
This exposes one of the major issues with Cloud comput-
ing. Cloud computing paradigm requires disturbing levels
of trust by users in the servers that hold their information.
Unless there is some means of totally obfuscating the data,
the user needs to trust that the data stored by the CSP will be
used by them only for the purposes for which it is intended
to be used.
V. THREATS TO DATA STORED IN CSP
There are variety of ways the datas privacy or security
can be compromised in a cloud computing environment [22].
Some of them are the following:
A. Sharing of data with an unauthorized party
Cloud provider could compromise the conﬁdentiality of
the data by sharing the data stored in the system to unautho-
rized parties. This can go against the terms and conditions
of the service and will qualify as the breach of security
and contract. The end user could never be aware of such a
breach, even if it happened.
B. Corruption of data stored
As the cloud computing provider has root access in the
physical machine, they will have rights to modify/delete the
data. Cloud provider can tamper with the data making the
data non-usable or modify the data in a way that system
cannot detect the modiﬁcation. This poses serious threat to
the correctness of the application.
C. Malicious Internal Users
The employee of a cloud computing provider who has
root access to these physical machines, can easily access
the data and use it for their advantage.
D. Data Loss or Leakage
When a virtual machine is used in an infrastructure, it
poses a variety of security issues [23] which could lead to
a compromise. Moreover, when the facility which hosts the
user’s data is subjected to a natural calamity, that would risk
the loss of the user’s data.
E. Account or Service Hijacking
Another risk for the cloud computing provider is, if the
service is hijacked, or the computer is hacked by a hacker,
the hacker will have full access to the data. As the cloud
infrastructure is not under the client’s control, it could be
more prone to attack as the risk proﬁle of the infrastructure
will be unknown to the client.
To summarize storing the data in the cloud, can increase
the privacy risks for the following stakeholders:
1) Cloud Computing User
2) Organization using the Cloud Service
3) Implementors of Cloud Platforms
4) Providers of application on top of cloud platforms
5) For the data subject
VI. APPROACHES TO ADDRESSING PRIVACY ISSUES IN
CLOUD COMPUTING
There are variety of ways in which the user can ensure that
data is protected from the cloud computing provider or the
cloud computing provider is made accountable for the data
stored. Privacy Enhancing Technologies (PET) can be used
by the developers of the application to enhance the privacy
of individuals in an application development environment.
Some of PET include:
1) Privacy management tools that enable inspection of
server side policies about handling of personal data
2) Secure online access mechanisms to enable individuals
to check and update the accuracy of their personal data
3) Anonymizer tools which will help users from revealing
their true identity by not revealing the PII (Privately
Identiﬁable Information) to the CSP.
A. Privacy By Encryption
Privacy can be enforced by encrypting all the data that is
stored in the CSP. The main issue with that architecture is
that the cloud provider can be only used for storage of the
data. As the data will be unrecognizable for CSP, it will not
be possible for CSP to process the data or perform some
number crunching tasks on it.
Searchable encryption employs an algorithm that allows
users to encrypt the data and then provide the server with
trapdoor information [24], so that the server can search for a
given string through searchable encryption algorithm. Public
Key Encryption with Keyword Search (PEKS) [24] is one
of the seminal works in the area of making encrypted data
searchable. The authors of PEKS propose to encrypt the
message using the Public-Private key infrastructure. Along
with this cipher text a Public-Key Encryption with Keyword
Search (PEKS) of each keyword is append to the ﬁnal
message. The PEKS has the trapdoor information, which
is the extra information sent to the server along with the
encrypted keyword for the server to test for the existence of
a keyword. Searchable encryption research is at its nascent
stage and it is limited only to exact word searches for now.
B. Privacy By Secure Computation
Another way to perform computation in the server in a
secure way is using secure computation algorithms. The
secure computation algorithms enables users to compute use
the infrastructure from a insecure environment for computa-
tion without revealing the exact input for the computation.
Yaos protocol [25] provides some of the basic techniques to
perform a computation in a secure way without revealing the
inputs. Yaos protocol forces the expression of a computation
problem in terms of logical circuit using gates. The input
of each gate is randomly encrypted and then then ﬁnal
resulting output is decrypted to get the exact answer of the
computation. The encryption and the decryption is done at
the clients end. The expression of a simple problem using
15
CYBERLAWS 2011 : The Second International Conference on Technical and Legal Aspects of the e-Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-122-9

Yaos protocol is found to be complex. Hence it still resides
in the theoretical realm.
C. Privacy By Using Secure Coprocessors
Secure coprocessors are currently the only realistic way
to perform general-computing even when the adversary had
direct physical access to the device (in our case adversary
can be the CSP itself). It is a very limited computer with its
ROM, RAM and battery backup for persistent storage and
an ethernet card. When installed in a computer, they can
be seen a secure area inside a computer that even the main
processor cannot access. Privacy as a Service [26] recognizes
these factors and proposes a system architecture in which a
coprocessor is installed in every cloud computing system.
The data loaded into the cloud is classiﬁed based on its
signiﬁcance and security by the cloud user (No Privacy,
Privacy with Trusted Provider, Privacy with Non-Trusted
Provider). The data tagged with Privacy with Non-Trusted
Provider level is processed by the secure coprocessor.
Figure 3.
System Model for Privacy by Secure Coprocessors [26]
Figure 3 [26] is an example of a system built using
secure coprocessors. Cloud customers, Trusted Third Party
and the Cloud Provider are the three main stakeholders of
this system. The coprocessor is signed by secret keys by the
trusted third party and then is supplied to cloud provider.
When a new customer registers with the cloud provider, they
share the secret keys with the trusted third party. The co-
processors can directly contact the trusted third party for the
keys to encrypt the secret data within the coprocessor. The
data channel between the co-processor and the trusted third
party is secured using a mutually agreed upon public/private
key pair during the initial time of supply of co-processors
to CSP by trusted third party.
One secure coprocessors cost in the order of hundred
thousands, even though PaaS provides some reasoning for
the economics behind using them in CSP’s machines, for
now it looks highly unrealistic to use a coprocessor in the
server infrastructure.
We discussed the technical options available to protect
user’s privacy by having minimum or no trust with the cloud
service provider. In all the solutions we noted down the
inability of these models to be used in the current cloud
environment.
There is a pressing need for the law to provide legal
protection to the cloud clients, as they need to trust the cloud
provider with their conﬁdential data.
VII. CONCLUSION
We have discussed some of the issues that confront cloud
providers and users, in particular when facing the growing
requirement for privacy of data in a growing number of
jurisdictions. Although some partial privacy solutions have
been suggested, it is unlikely that any of these can be
adopted by the providers in the current cloud environment.
We are working to develop other approaches to securing
privacy for users of clouds, and ensuring that the dangers
presented in the clouds are transparent to such users.
VIII. THANKS
The authors thank the Social Science and Humanities Re-
search Council of Canada and the IBM Center for Advanced
Studies for their support.
REFERENCES
[1] Entick v. Carrington. 1558-1774 All E.R. Rep. 45.
[2] S.D. Warren and L.D. Brandeis. The right to privacy. Harvard
Law Review, pages 193–220, 1890.
[3] Kyllo v. United States, 533 U.S. 27 (2001).
[4] T Nabbali and M Perry. Going for the throat: Carnivore in an
echelon world. part 1. Computer Law and Security Report,
19(6):456–467, 2003.
[5] T Nabbali and M Perry. Going for the throat: Carnivore in an
echelon world. part 2. Computer Law and Security Report,
20(2):84–97, 2004.
[6] T Nabbali and M Perry. Introducing carnivore: Going for the
throat with precision surveillance, TLF v3 0031 (2004).
[7] R. v. Dyment, [1988] 2 S.C.R. 417.
[8] Department of Communications and Department of Justice.
Privacy and computers: A report of a task force. Information
Canada, Ottawa, 1972.
[9] R. v. Wise, (1992), 70 C.C.C. (3d) 193 (S.C.C.).
[10] R. v. Wong, (1990), 60 C.C.C. (3d) 460 (S.C.C.).
[11] R. v. Duarte, (1990), 53 C.C.C. (3d) 1 (S.C.C.).
[12] Privacy act, (R.S., 1985, c. P-21).
[13] Access to information act, Act R.S.C. 1985, c. A-1.
[14] Ontario province: Freedom of information and protection of
privacy act, (1988).
[15] Municipal freedom of information and protection of privacy
act, (1991).
16
CYBERLAWS 2011 : The Second International Conference on Technical and Legal Aspects of the e-Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-122-9

[16] Personal health information protection act, (2004).
[17] Personal information protection and electronic documents act,
(2000, c. 5).
[18] The Organization for Economic Co-Operation and Develop-
ment. Guidelines on the protection of privacy and transborder
ﬂows of personal data.
[19] Takach G. Computer Law, pages 329–330. Irwin Law, 2nd
edition (July 2003).
[20] MarketsandMarkets.com. Cloud computing market - global
forecast (2010 -2015).
[21] Amazon.com. Amazon ec2 webservices.
[22] Cloud Security Alliance. Top threats to cloud computing v1.0.
[23] T. Garﬁnkel and M. Rosenblum. When virtual is harder than
real: Security challenges in virtual machine based computing
environments. In Proceedings of the 10th conference on Hot
Topics in Operating Systems-Volume 10, page 20. USENIX
Association, 2005.
[24] D. Boneh, G. Di Crescenzo, R. Ostrovsky, and G. Persiano.
Public key encryption with keyword search. In Advances in
Cryptology-Eurocrypt 2004, pages 506–522. Springer, 2004.
[25] A.C. Yao. Protocols for secure computations. In Proceedings
of the 23rd Annual IEEE Symposium on Foundations of
Computer Science, pages 160–164. Citeseer, 1982.
[26] W. Itani, A. Kayssi, and A. Chehab. Privacy as a Service:
Privacy-Aware Data Storage and Processing in Cloud Com-
puting Architectures. In 2009 Eighth IEEE International Con-
ference on Dependable, Autonomic and Secure Computing,
pages 711–716. IEEE, 2009.
17
CYBERLAWS 2011 : The Second International Conference on Technical and Legal Aspects of the e-Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-122-9

