 Towards Secure Robot Process Automation Environments
Petri Jurmu
Connectivity Research Area
Technical Research Centre of Finland VTT
Oulu, Finland
email: Petri.Jurmu@vtt.fi
Abstract— Information security is a part of the cyber security,
but the information security will increasingly play a key role in
securing and implementing cyber security operations in the
future. A big challenge in deployment of robot process
automation RPA is that organisations have to give an access to
information for software robots like for authorised personnel.
People have to take into account the information security and
data protection as a basis for a risk assessment, when planning
the processing of personal data. This report considers threats
and vulnerabilities related to the RPA and examines the
opportunities to improve security level in environments of the
robot process automation. Observations of security risks are
investigated in the case study part, where RPA is deployed in a
public service system. Future work of a security assurance in
RPA deployment is also described in this paper.
Keywords-robot process automation; RPA; cyber security;
mobiilimittari.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Cyber security thinking combines the perspective of
information security, continuity management and crisis
management in today’s society. Cyber security guarantees a
rolling of wheels in our society and securing of critical
functions in all circumstances. Information security is a part
of the cyber security, but the information security will
increasingly play a key role in securing and implementing
cyber security operations in the future. People have to take
the information security and data protection into account as
a basis for a risk assessment, when planning a processing of
personal data.
Robot process automation RPA develop an action list by
repeating a user’s performance for a workflow in an
application's graphical user interface GUI. RPA is built with
a trust on cornerstones of the information security,
confidentiality, integrity and availability [1]. Undisputed
and traceability of events are important aspects of protecting
personal data. In the implementation of the RPA, routine
tasks, that do not require a special discretion, are naturally
fruitful from a viewpoint of an automation [2].
From an angle of cyber security, a big challenge of RPA
deployment is that organisations have to give an access to
information to software robots like to authorised personnel.
Similarly, organisations have to give an access to a
processing service to certain persons or software robots. It is
important and in an interest of various parties to find ways
to separate parts of the information or activities, which are
necessary to be automated.
This paper gives practical information for a deployment
of the RPA. We investigated which kind of new surface an
adversarial actor can get, if we utilise RPA in maintenance
operations of Mobiilimittari service [3]. Mobiilimittari
service offers iOS and Android applications for end-users to
test their mobile connection quality and speed. With this
kind of survey, we can get additional information about
safety of our Mobiilimittari service system and make certain
actions for the production environment, if needed. This
paper presents briefly a case study of Mobiilimittari service,
where we started to deploy RPA and made observations.
Some useful ideas of the security assurance were proposed
as well.
The  structure  of  this  paper  is  as  follows.  Section  2
presents related work. Section 3 includes description of
threats and vulnerabilities related to the RPA. Section 4
presents the overview of security assurance in the robot
process automation. Section 5 describes our case study
environment and security specific observations in the case
study. Section 6 presents lessons learned and Section 7
concludes the paper and gives briefly ideas about the future
work.
II.
RELATED WORK
To be an RPA pioneer, you will need to take some risks
[4]. Authors in [4] proved in a trial the effectiveness of
RPA, which produced alarms in the company’s IT Security
system. It was stated in [4] that IT team had a mature
Business Process Management System (BPMS) in-house
and questioned why additional automation software was
needed. Of course, a risk means more work for IT team.
Security  requirements  for  a  global  RPA  platform  are
considered in Deckard’s article [5], which gives technical
security guidelines for deployment of RPA. Much of the
responsibility for this security lies with RPA vendors, who
incorporate certain security measures into their software
products. The vendor takes care of RPA tool, not whole
target environment. Therefore, not all of security concerns
could be pushed to vendor side.
Authors in [6] propose a new method that analyses
business processes and identifies the most suitable for RPA.
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-743-6
CYBER 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

That method has measurable parameters for the evaluation
of processes. Security aspect is not especially considered in
the method, however.
RPA can improve quality and efficiency of manual
operations and decrease a mistake probability that would
cause problems in production [7]. RPA can reduce costs of
production, but handling of data is constituent operation in
image recognition systems and security requirements has to
be taken tightly into account in the environment as well.
In [8] RPA is mentioned to be next generation testing.
From that perspective, it is an excellent way to improve
security level of the software and systems.
In our earlier research, we have examined the applying of
RPA and artificial intelligence AI in the public sector [1]. In
addition to that, we investigated how information security
and  data  protection  should  be  taken  into  account  in  the
application of RPA and AI in the public sector.
Our approach in this paper is to apply results of earlier
research to real service environment, which has been used
already several years. In addition, it has been investigated, if
there is any sense to start wider deployment of RPA. From
that viewpoint security level of existing service and
opportunities to improve it are considered.
III.
THREATS AGAINST ROBOT PROCESS AUTOMATION
A security threat poses a threat to some of security’s
components, 
such 
as 
confidentiality, 
integrity, 
or
availability. Threats against processing and using of the
information are a phenomenon of recent years and it will
continue to strengthen [9]. It is a consequence of a growth
of microservices and an increase of the number of interfaces
visible to a network [9]. The development of the prevalence
of security threats is from malware to code hijacking and
data phishing. The most common threats are still injections,
such as SQL injection, which is a database intrusion
technology. Threats to an identification and a session
management have been intense at the beginning of this
millennium.
Privacy is always a challenge in systems that work with
machines [10]. A misuse of confidential information is the
most important security threat in development and
application of the robot process automation [1]. An external
hostile actor can hijack codes and control a computer or
software. Figure 1 describes a adversarial actor in the RPA
environment exploiting observed vulnerabilities in software
and systems and causes various disturbing features such as
Denial of Service (DoS) to paralyse an ability of system to
work or Man-In-the-Middle MItM to listen or disturb a
communication path between two messengers by modifying
or deleting messages and hacking encryption keys or other
information. Additionally, the hostile actor can use
Structured Query Language SQL injection to penetrate into
a database-based applications and systems. Viruses, worms,
Trojan horses and other programs are used to sniff or
otherwise fill objectives of the hostile actor. Network
security assurance software might also be used for hostile
purposes.
Figure 1. An adversarial actor in the RPA environment.
Robot techniques themselves are generally safer than
human-oriented processes from the security point of view
[10]. Robots work strictly within regulations and safety
parameters of people they replace. Robots follow an
accurately programmed and automated event sequence. For
example robots do not respond to new arriving emails or
leave a screen containing sensitive information unlocked.
One of the threats to deployment of the robot process
automation and AI systems is an obsolescence of back-end
systems. In a fast-paced business, organisation does not
remember to modernise underlying systems, because
processes are handled by robotics. In this case, a next
security update may possibly break the system. A hacker
can  find  this  vulnerability  and  access  data  in  corporate
databases, web servers or employee computers by violating
system features and functionality.
RPA and AI are conceptually separated, but it seems that
in practical solutions they will be integrated [1]. Today an
application of AI is mainly implemented by machine
learning ML, which algorithms are tools to help AI to show
smarter behavior. Algorithms need information to work
correctly and accurately. More information used for learning
means more accurate algorithms. The primary threat to the
machine 
learning 
is 
through 
data 
processing 
[1].
Classification-based ML algorithms work by finding
patterns in a data source. Identifying a source or training
method for an algorithm is a valuable tool for hackers.
Suitably formatted and injected malicious or incorrect inputs
into a system may cause the system to produce erroneous
results. Deliberate manipulation of a data source used in a
teaching phase can cause bias in decisions of the AI system
and even produce inaccurate results. A malicious actor may
also attempt to steal algorithms or teaching resources for AI
models to produce copies of models for illegal use.
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-743-6
CYBER 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

IV.
ENSURING SECURITY OF ROBOT PROCESS
AUTOMATION
Modernisation of information and communication
technologies by the RPA and deployment of new tools and
methods always require a management and consideration of
new type of risks. The risk-based approach to protect
personal data is highlighted, among others, in the new EU
Data Protection Regulation [11]. Changes give people better
control of their personal data and make it easier for them to
access their personal information. It also guarantees
protection of the information in all situations, where data is
transmitted, processed or stored.
Different security standards define tasks of security risk
assessment. For example, the International Organization for
Standardization (ISO) has defined the ISO/IEC 27001
standard, which defines the general requirements for
creation, implementation and use of a system of information
security management. The most important security aspect of
RPA is how the robots are managed, how processes are
automated and how they are maintained and developed.
Security and availability must be a goal in every level of
software and systems. Physical level sets own requirements
to the information security as well as a level of networking,
application and human interaction.
In environments of the robot process automation, it is
important to take the access and data security seriously into
consideration. Responsibilities and obligations have to be
defined accurately for a controller of register and who is
dealing with data. Role-based access management has to be
a built-in authentication system, in which an access to RPA
can be restricted to authorised users and tasks to be
automated can be separated [5]. Using of encryption
mechanisms, 
anonymisation 
or 
pseudonymisation 
of
personal data have an essential role to protect sensitive data.
These mechanisms wholly or partially hide an original
content of the information. To achieve a stable state in every
phase of automation, it is wise to automate a piece at a time.
RPA tools based on TLS (Transport Layer Security) best
protect the privacy of data transmitted over a network [5].
Storing logs and operations of robots and users gives
traceability in problem situations.
If learning algorithms are supporting RPA functionality, a
quality assurance of a system must focus more on a testing
of borders and balance [12]. For example in deployment
phase a corresponding output of a chatbot feed is known,
but after learning, an output has become something
different. In a test system, a test case corresponding to this
feed is not working similarly as before. When you use the
chatbot, you must also test the entire package during use.
Testing during operations defines tests to check if the
system is working as expected or the system has learned
right things. It is also particularly useful to monitor the
functionality of the system during operation. Based on the
monitoring data effects of the changes can be analysed and
noticed if the system has remained within specified limits
and tolerances.
Traditional testing methods of software-based systems
are still in strong role in a quality assurance of the RPA
systems.  Source  code  analyser  of  software  finds  the  most
obvious errors in a program code and errors can be removed
before executing the program. Vulnerability scanning
searches for commonly known security issues in the target
system. Fuzz testing is a form of random testing, where
random inputs are generated to a program and program
outputs are monitored. Penetration testing evaluates a level
of system or network security by attacking a software or
system. At the same time, potential vulnerabilities in the
system are monitored and analysed.
Ensuring security of a learning system requires, in
addition to traditional methods, a special effort in testing
design. It is important to strive to ensure strict security
already in development phase of software and systems. The
learning system does not necessarily have a predetermined
activity that can be tested with certain inputs. Testing is
done 
for 
a 
specific 
configuration 
and 
predefined
functionality, but through the learning, the operation of the
software or system changes. That is why a comprehensive
set of historical information is needed to test the design to
ensure that the right things in the system are learned and that
the system does not learn harmful things.
V.
CASE STUDY
A.
Overview of Mobiilimittari service
Mobiilimittari service developed in Technical Research
Centre of Finland VTT offers iOS and Android applications
made publicly available for end-users in Finland to test their
mobile connection quality and speed as presented in Figure
2. It measures downlink/uplink speed, delay and forms an
overall connection quality metric (0-10). In addition, it has
own tabs for measurement, representing results on a map
(own/all), settings and detailed information about the latest
measurement.
Figure 2 . A fictional adversarial actor in Mobiilimittari service.
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-743-6
CYBER 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

This service has been created during the year 2015
without any support of a robot process automation. Security
requirements are properly fulfilled and things are in
sufficient level from that viewpoint. Security protocols are
used behind port configurations, accesses for user
applications are delivered via special security mechanisms.
Secured connections are used for remote connections and
for a handling of SQL database. In this study our aim was to
investigate, how certain routines like weekly reporting to
maintenance team could be performed with the RPA and
which kind of security requirements this kind of deployment
sets. In the maintenance team, we make a secure remote
connection to move measurement results or get periodical
reports about the state of the service. All of these actions
have been built and is performed under tight security
control.
We use Uipath free trial licence for our case study [13].
UiPath is a RPA vendor providing a complete software
platform to help organisation to automate business
processes. A software robot aims to manipulate the
presentation layer of application software in the same
manner a human does. UiPath platform includes the security
and audit capabilities related to the target system as well.
In this study, we reflect findings from our earlier research
to our real service environment. We used RPA in
development environment with a test data, not in production
environment with real personal data. In this study, we made
observations of a practical RPA deployment from security
perspective for example how some kind adversarial actor
could have possibility to try something unexpected.
B.
Observations
Earlier automated routines in Mobiilimittari service are
more like solutions of Business Process Management BPM,
which have built deeper to the server code. If there is need
for an updating, larger coding and compiling operation is
required. Robot process automation gives possibility to
build certain routine without any coding skills, but you have
to know details about underlying service system or other
back-end systems, when building robot process automation
however.
A lot of access rights have to be created and given to
robots for opening remote connections and logging to
databases. Remarkable amount of sensitive data could be in
robot  hands,  which  means  that  it  has  to  be  encrypted.  In
SSH connection user names and passwords may be open for
the misuse if the work station is not locked during the break
or some one is behind you. Robots don’t leave work station
unlocked and they are not doing other things same time.
It was observed, that quite a lot of malicious traffic is
knocking towards server interface, which is wasting
processor capacity of the server. If the RPA is used, robot
does not recognize the traffic as human can see from a real
time traces on the screen in other words robot’s eyes are
limited. It means that we have to build separate functionality
for a monitoring this kind of traffic.
The utilization of RPA in a wider scale needs quite a lot
of modifications to the existing service system. It could be
easier to start RPA development in parallel with a product
development to get best results. If we need heavy and deep
analysis for example of the measurement results, learning
algorithms are worth thinking to support the RPA
functionality.
VI.
LESSONS LEARNED
With this way, we can get additional information about
safety of our service system and make certain actions for the
production environment. We can watch carefully our server
system and keep eye on things, what adversarial actor can
do. Robot techniques themselves are generally safer than
human-oriented processes, but a challenge of the RPA
deployment are accesses to use services and accesses to
information.
The tool used in the case study seemed to be suitable to
support our requirements, but this may not be the case with
all tools on the market. Special attention should be paid on
selection of the robot process automation tools, how it fulfills
special requirements of certain organisation and user.
Although the first look to the case study seems quite
promising, it should be noted that the case study was not
executed with real RPA tools yet. Full service development
with  early  phase  support  of  the  RPA  would  be  needed  to
gather metrics and information about the real benefits of the
RPA from the security point of view.
VII.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we described observations, how routines
like weekly report delivering to maintenance team could be
performed with the RPA and which kind of security
requirements this kind of service development sets. Robot
process automation was applied to VTT’s Mobiilimittari
service, which has been made publicly available for end-
users in Finland to test their mobile connection quality and
speed. We observed that there is a lot of new surface for
adversial actors, which requires taking tightly care of
accesses to be created and given to robots. It was noted that
robots should move a remarkable amount of sensitive data
between separate servers.
Our case study continues with a real integration of RPA
and possibly AI features to the maintenance processes of
Mobiilimittari. In addition, we will investigate how we can
test the system from the angle of cyber security by applying
the RPA. AI comes to performing of security testing as well.
AI can determine which test cases or values of parameters
are best to use to detect errors. Test tools are able to do
certain things in a certain phase. Based on the test results,
smart test tools can further modify the tests and try new
things to find bugs and bottlenecks of the target system.
In future RPA solutions will increasingly integrate with
artificial intelligence solutions. This means increasing of
security challenges in the RPA environments as well.
Another noteworthy issue is the explosive growth of the
application of RPA, which means the level of security has
also to be kept up.
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-743-6
CYBER 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research is a part of the research project cluster of
Technical Research Centre of Finland VTT in the field of
robot process automation. The author wish to thank project
members and project partners involved in the projects.
REFERENCES
[1]
J. Kääriäinen et al., “Robotic process automation and artificial
intelligence 
– 
application 
roadmap”. 
Publications 
of
Government’s analysis, assessment and research activities
65/2018.
[2]
Quora, “What are the Feasibility parameters in robotic
process automation?” https://www.quora.com/What-are-the-
Feasibility-parameters-in-robotic-process-automation
2019.08.06.
[3]
Mobiilimittari https:/www.mobiilimittari.fi 2019.08.06.
[4]
L.  Willcocks,  M.  Lacity,  and  A.  Craig,  “Robotic  Process
Automation 
at 
Telefónica 
O2 (Paper 
15/02),” 
The
Outsourcing Unit Working Reasearch Paper Series, 2015.
[5]
M. Deckard, https://www.uipath.com/blog/the-security-
requirements-for-a-global-rpa-platform 2019.08.06.
[6]
A. Bourgouin, A. Leshob, and L. Renard, “Towards a Process
Analysis Approach to Adopt Robotic Process Automation”,
2018 IEEE 15th International Conference on e-Business
Engineering (ICEBE), page 46-53.
[7]
S. C. Lin, L. H. Shih, D. Yang, J. Lin, J. F. Kung, “Apply
RPA (Robotic Process Automation) in Semiconductor Smart
Manufacturing”, e-Manufacturing & Design Collaboration
Symposium 2018.
[8]
S. Bhukan, “Robot Process Automation and the Testing
future”,
https://www.testingbits.com/robotic-process-
automation-and-the-testing-future/ 2019.08.06.
[9]
OWASP Foundation, The Open Web Application Security
Project, https://owasp.org 2019.08.06.
[10] The Shared Services and Outsourcing Network SSON, “How
to Manage Risk and Ensure Control – What to Look Out for
in 
Robotic 
Process 
Implementation”,
https://www.ssonetwork.com/robotic-process-
automation/articles/how-to-manage-risk-and-ensure-control-
what-to 2019.08.06.
[11] EU 2016/679, Regulation of the European Parliament and the
Council,
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32016R0679&from=FI
2019.08.06.
[12] H.  Shaukat,  T.  Gansel,  R.  Marselis,  “Testing  of  Artificial
Intelligence, 
AI 
Quality 
Engineering 
Skills 
- 
An
Introduction”,
https://www.sogeti.com/globalassets/global/downloads/report
s/testing-of-artificial-intelligence_sogeti-report_11_12_2017-
.pdf 2019.08.06.
[13] Uipath Platform, Robot Process Automation RPA tool,
https://www.uipath.com/product/platform 2019.08.06.
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-743-6
CYBER 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

