Advanced Swarm Imaging for Three-Dimensional Mapping  
Martin Duncan 
University of North Carolina-Wilmington 
U.S.A. 
E-mail: duncanm@uncw.edu 
Paul Weil                     
Pluribus Technologies, Incorporated 
Lafayette, California, U.S.A. 
E-mail: dark.illuminations@gmail.com 
Thomas Klemas 
Sensemaking-PACOM Fellowship  
Cambridge, Massachusetts, U.S.A. 
E-mail: tklemas@alum.mit.edu 
 
 
 
Abstract—The richness of detail and ease of usage of 
three-dimensional mapping has grown by leaps and 
bounds, but the equipment to create these images is very 
expensive to purchase and use.  Inspired by the Internet-
of-Things, Pluribus Technologies has developed a novel 
imaging approach that combines cybernetics and a 
plethora of tiny, inexpensive sensors with cloud-based 
data streaming, Web service and API-based image 
manipulation 
software, 
and 
cutting-edge 
Web 
technologies to enable advanced data visualization and 
imaging capabilities for numerous applications which 
previously were cost prohibitive or impossible due to 
practical limitations of size or space.  This system 
repurposes 
pre-existing 
hardware 
and 
software 
components to transmit many streams of low-resolution 
visual data to a cloud-based server.  These streams can be 
composed into a single detailed 3D image, which can then 
be viewed, downloaded, or edited collaboratively in real-
time 3D on a Web-based client application.  Swarm 
Imaging is achieved through potentially disposable 
components mounted on an aggregate of mobile units 
with a modern user interface for the client.  Data can then 
be analyzed from images obtained in physical areas where 
humans do not wish to, or cannot, venture.  Users will 
benefit from an end result of viewable, manipulable 
images processed using a high quality Web application 
client functioning on any device equipped with an A-
grade 
browser. 
 
This 
invention 
will 
provide 
unprecedented terrestrial visualization for purposes of 
remote data analysis and sensemaking. 
Keywords: Swarm Imaging; Internet-of-Things; cloud 
services; digital imaging; mapping; data visualization; 
high-resolution 3D imaging; Web services; 
APIs; 
sensemaking.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
When data sets are extremely large, very complex, or the 
data is changing rapidly, analysis requirements exceed the 
capacity of most humans.  Analysis reaches a complexity and 
throughput level at which humans are unable to consider the 
full scope of the data and lack the capacity to keep up, derive 
insights, and make decisions.  In today's world of increasingly 
smart and interconnected systems, more and more sensors are 
deployed in civilian, medical, industrial, and military systems.  
Almost every object used at home or in the workplace contains 
some form of embedded microchip. The rise of wireless 
technologies such as Bluetooth and WiFi promotes ever more 
frequent networking of these devices within programming 
(automation), monitoring, and remote control.  These 
networks furthermore facilitate software updates, enable 
interactivity, and enable related objectives.  This Internet-of-
Things, or IoT, allows much richer and smarter applications 
in new technology.  A well-known example is the Google Nest 
family of products, allowing such innocuous consumer 
electronics as a thermostat controller, a smoke/CO alarm, and 
an indoor/outdoor Web camera to communicate with each 
other and provide rich aggregate data to home or business 
owners via Web application. The user monitors and controls 
the home or office facility on the basis of rich data composited 
from simple sensors.  The trend that all of our possessions can 
“talk” to each other, from our car to our phone to our 
wristwatch to our refrigerator, allows for a sort of collective 
intelligence capable of learning and adapting to users’ needs 
[1]. 
The emergence of the IoT, as well as increasingly 
inexpensive 3D printers, has driven the creation of relatively 
cheap circuit boards for use among a grassroots community of 
“Makers” who represent a new open-source hardware 
movement similar to the open source or free software 
movement that was prominent during the early days of 
computing. More and more people are building their own 
devices and robots and programming them using a variety of 
languages from their personal computers. There are “Maker 
Faires,” or conventions, and people share designs over the 
Internet, with downloadable specifications and projects 
analogous to allowing other developers to copy or fork 
projects on GitHub. President Obama has even created a 
Federally funded America Makes program. All of this 
promotes the creation of simple devices and sensors pooling 
data to deliver much more detailed and robust results. Makers 
use inexpensive, easily programmable circuit boards and 
sensors to create their own smart devices [2]. 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-512-8
CYBER 2016 : The First International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

State-of-the art 3D cameras are bulky and expensive, and 
drones can be used to map a large area in 3D, but they are 
noisy, cumbersome and hindered by heavy cameras.  The 
method proposed here provides visual data processing that 
synthesizes the fundamentals of remote imaging, access, and 
data visualization, implemented in a Web application that 
facilitates surveillance from multiple angles or manipulation 
of the image.  The Pluribus cybernetic swarm system is 
intended as a wholly more efficient alternative to 3D cameras, 
regardless of their attachment to drone vehicles.  Furthermore, 
we anticipate demand for our apparatus in many problem 
spaces currently underserved by 3D remote imaging 
technology.  
Inspired initially by the theories and practical applications 
of evolutionary psychologist Steven Pinker [3] and artificial 
intelligence researcher David H. Freeman [4], the Pluribus 
Technologies research & development effort has initiated the 
practical implementation of their ideas by leveraging multiple, 
advantageous, emerging technologies. The ubiquity of 
“smart” household items and the demand of Maker Movement 
hobbyists and developers has driven the creation of miniature 
circuit boards which can run JavaScript, tiny video and audio 
sensors, and miniature WiFi transmitters. A need to transmit 
and aggregate multiple real-time data streams has led to 
businesses providing these services as a specialty. Three-D 
imaging industry leader AutoDesk has reimplemented many 
software products as the cloud-based Forge Platform, a set of 
Web services, APIs, and SDKs, which allows easy, granular 
use of their various software features in both the Web browser 
and the IoT [5]. 
The ongoing Pluribus R&D utilizes currently available 
software and hardware components modified minimally for 
Swarm Imaging objectives. Rather than reinvent the wheel, 
Pluribus Technologies has assembled many sorts of existing 
puzzle pieces together in an innovative systems architecture – 
rather than simply building yet another wheel, the intent is to 
create an entirely new luxury vehicle from existing parts.  
Additionally, this approach prioritizes the low price point of 
Swarm Imaging, and the ability to obtain images from spaces 
which are impossible or impractical to access with drones 
and/or 3D cameras, as the key to eventual marketing.  The 
intended data visualization strategy optimizes and synthesizes 
the best aspects of low-cost cybernetic and sensing hardware 
components, JavaScript-driven swarm artificial intelligence, 
inexpensive and fast data streaming services, cloud-based 
Web services and APIs, and cutting-edge, browser-based Web 
technologies.  This paper presents the pragmatic potential of 
these technologies employed in concert, and demonstrates a 
new way to see and make sense of the world. 
The remainder of this manuscript is arranged as described 
herein.   Section II describes the technical details of the 3D 
cloud-based Web services visualization aspect of Swarm 
Imaging.  Section III provides a brief review of prototype 
specifications and potential applications of Swarm Imaging.  
Section IV offers our conclusions and anticipation of the 
benefits of Swarm Imaging. Finally, the acknowledgment and 
reference sections complete the manuscript. 
II. 
TECHNICAL DETAILS 
Perhaps the most important consequence of the Maker 
Movement is the availability of inexpensive circuit boards 
with pared down versions of the Linux operating system, 
capable of running NodeJS, a server-side version of 
JavaScript. This is desirable for two reasons: JavaScript is a 
Lambda language descended in large part from the Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) programming language LISP, and JavaScript 
is the de facto language of the Web. In 2016, most data is 
transmitted using JSON, a JavaScript-native format, rather 
than XML. This will simplify the interoperability of the 
various components of the Pluribus system architecture; a 
swarm is, in a way of thinking, a distributed AI.   
Another consequence of demand from Makers is the 
availability of microsensors such as tiny cameras and 
microphones. For example, the Jtron camera for Arduino costs 
around five US dollars; Adafruit makes an omnidirectional 
microphone the size of an aphid for less than $1; and Geeetech 
offers a very advanced motion detector that is about the size 
of a dime and which sells in the vicinity of $7. Particle makes 
a WiFi transmitter about the size of a fingernail and at a cost 
of approximately $10.  The Kinoma chip runs JavaScript 
natively and is also the size of a fingernail, and comes with a 
simple SDK which can be used to program the chip wirelessly. 
The small dimensions of these components are the key to their 
portability, affordability and disposability.  The Maker 
Movement has inspired Pluribus Technologies to an assertive 
feat of engineering in the service of data analysis. The array 
of microsensors to be mobilized on our platform is intended 
to maximize imaging capability.  Although the number of 
sensors may vary, and their mobility may suggest erratic data, 
this concept is meant to ensure a single, detailed image that 
may be altered to the degree the user so chooses. 
This proliferation of small, simple, and inexpensive off-
the-shelf or custom components, combined with easy data 
streaming, cloud-based 3D editing and rendering Web 
services, and advanced front-end Web data visualization 
technology enables data collection from many low-resolution 
sources positioned around a space. These many streams can 
subsequently be received and relayed by a Web application 
running on a tablet device, unified via one of many free or 
low-cost data streaming and aggregation network services, 
and delivered to a cloud-based server. On the server, image 
manipulation Web services can be invoked on these input 
streams to create a single high-resolution, 3D image, which 
can then be returned to a Web application running in a 
browser. The image can then be further viewed and 
manipulated in the browser by providing Ux controls which 
invoke image manipulation APIs, permitting real-time 
collaboration and subsequent output of the file to one of the 
many popular 3D image formats.  
According to Dr. Jingyi Yu of University of Delaware, to 
obtain photorealistic three-dimensional video images requires 
28 sensors [6]. However, to compose a still 3D image from 
multiple sources could be done with as few as six sensors; the 
more sensors that can be deployed, the higher the resulting 
image’s resolution and fine detail. The Pluribus camera 
sensors will be distributed throughout the space in order to 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-512-8
CYBER 2016 : The First International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

provide as many points of view (POVs) as possible within the 
constraints of a given application.  While the cameras will 
record only what falls within the lens compass, a dynamic 
image is nevertheless attained as the mobile units’ 
programming orients and drives the collective’s movement 
within the space.  Their circuit boards will run JavaScript code 
that can package the sensor data into data streams, and use a 
WiFi chip to transmit the streams of data to a JavaScript client 
Web application running on a tablet device. The client 
application will relay the streams via a streaming aggregation 
service to the Pluribus servers, which will run NodeJS 
software that can call Forge Web services to compose a single 
3D image from the streams. The Pluribus Web servers will 
serve the resulting image to the client application on the tablet, 
which will invoke APIs, also provided by Forge. 
Swarm Imaging will leverage key concepts from neural 
network approaches to maximize swarm capabilities at a 
reduced computational cost. The capacity to engage multiple 
mobile sensors working in concert reduces the cost overall and 
minimizes the compromise in case of lost or destroyed units. 
The units will be small enough to be deployed in places not 
commonly accessible to drone or human entry.   
 
Another novel feature of the Swarm approach is 
scalability. In case a rough image is all that is required, 
perhaps only six Pluribus sensor units need be activated. It is 
true that they could gather more POVs and therefore more 
detailed images over time; however, battery life would be a 
limiting factor in this employment. Certainly the more units 
engaged, the more POVs there will be to stream, and so it will 
be possible to get increasingly higher resolution images in real 
time by deploying a larger Swarm to a single location. 
 
The resulting user interface of the Web application 
will include controls to rotate, edit, share, and export the 
resulting image file, in real time.  The real-time streaming of 
data should allow for updates to render a progressively more 
detailed 3D image. From movies to animation, from art to 
architecture, the plethora of Autodesk products are ubiquitous 
in use. Forge allows the exporting of files to any Autodesk 
products’ format, so users can leverage their existing software 
skills to consume and make use of the image as part of their 
existing workflow. A collaboration feature will allow sharing 
of the same file in the Pluribus Web application, so multiple 
users can make edits to the same file concurrently. 
III. 
APPLICATION 
There are already companies with offerings in this space, 
but Pluribus Technologies targets several applications to suit 
potential users discouraged by the cost and glacier paced 
image creation of common 3D cameras. An intrepid surveyor 
would certainly risk sophisticated gear--not to mention life 
and limb--trying to map a sewer system, for example, but 
could complete the task somehow. Similarly, drones can carry 
a 3D camera and map areas outdoors with great precision. 
These are, however, ill-suited for inspecting for mold or rot 
between roofing tiles and damage to building foundations.  
The Pluribus sensors are estimated to have a production 
cost and sale price sufficiently low so as to make them 
potentially disposable. Users can be confident of acquiring a 
highly effective data analysis apparatus without breaking a 
budget or being burdened with high maintenance expenses.  
Pluribus technology is conceived to leave a light footprint 
as a terrestrial, mobile system that delivers a flexible 
imaging/mapping capability.  This economical solution 
should appeal to a variety of users seeking crucial vantage and 
advantage.   
 
Architects and designers can use it to create 
detailed topographical plans to aid their spatial 
conception, for example determining what set of 
furnishings will fit best into a room.  The room 
view can be rotated or exported for editing.  Most 
professionals in this area are using Autodesk 
products already, so swarm imaging will interface 
well with their workflow. 
 
City, State, and Federal agencies could use it for 
infrastructural planning, mapping out old, forgotten 
sewer systems and subway tunnels. These 
architects and engineers also overwhelmingly use 
Autodesk products. 
 
Real estate sellers could use it to create interactive 
maps of their properties; buyers would have the 
option to inspect the building for structural 
weaknesses, damage hidden out of sight, termite 
infestations, and so on. 
 
There are potential uses as stealth technology for 
military apps, especially scouting ahead for enemy 
combatants and explosive devices. Areas could 
also be cleared of landmines left behind from prior 
conflicts. 
 
Likewise, police might deploy the system for 
surveying hostage situations, a scenario during 
which speed, silence and low visibility are essential 
for saving lives. 
 
The Pluribus imaging architecture will be 
especially well-suited for search and rescue 
because the Swarm can be released into small, 
compressed areas such as a collapsed tunnel or 
ruined building.  We can only imagine how many 
people may have been located with the tireless 
swarm imaging tool after the earthquake last month 
in central Italy. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
Swarm Imaging provides a solution to some of the most 
challenging problems in data analytics today.  This technology 
is capable of putting “eyes” into an unprecedented assortment 
of spaces, from the mundane area under your floorboards to 
the menace lurking around the corner, at the bottom of a dark 
stairwell, or just over the next ridge.  The finely-grained 
architecture of Pluribus technology also works fast, providing 
the user a sensemaking tool responsive to rapidly changing 
circumstances.  Whatever the nature of the business during a 
particular operation, Swarm Imaging executes the visual 
groundwork so that users can concentrate on what cannot be 
automated, the analysis that demands human intelligence.  
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-512-8
CYBER 2016 : The First International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

Furthermore, Pluribus Technologies’ emphasis on this 
invention’s relatively low cost that makes it possible to put it 
in the hands of hardworking professionals who want to 
conduct their survey accurately at an affordable price point, to 
make it available for civil services charged with the quality of 
our community infrastructures and preservation of life, to add 
it to the arsenal of military and police forces so that men and 
women in uniform can feel more confident of success and 
survival on dangerous missions.  From these many needs 
comes one visionary technology soon to be available for 
customers with the greatest need to see and make sense of the 
twenty-first century. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank Wendy Chan, Michael 
Estes, Kathy Kang, Jennifer Chu, Laura Lee, Gurpreet Singh, 
and Laurie Taylor-Jackson for their input, support, diligence 
and determination in establishing our company and 
contributing to the Swarm Imaging model.  We are also 
grateful to the Autodesk Forge team and the Maker Movement 
for providing market impetus for the components that make 
this possible.  Thanks to Dr. Peter Weil for his invaluable 
suggestions and feedback during our conference preparation.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Perera, C. H. Liu, S. Jayawardena, and M. Chen, "A Survey 
on Internet of Things From Industrial Market Perspective," 
IEEE 
Access, 
vol. 
2, 
pp.1660-1679, 
2014 
 
doi: 
10.1109/ACCESS.2015.2389854 
[2] D. Dougherty, “The Maker Movement,” Innovations, vol. 7.3, 
pp. 11-14, 2012.  
[3] S. Pinker, “The Cognitive Niche: Coevolution of Intelligence, 
Sociality, and Language,” Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, vol. 107 
(Supplement 2), pp. 8993-8999, 2010.    
[4] D.H. Freeman, “Quantum Consciousness,” Discover, p. 90, 
1994. 
[5] “Forge platform: the future of making things,” Retrieved 
September 4, 2016, from https://developer.autodesk.com/ 
[6] J. Yu, L. McMillan, and P. Sturm, “Multiperspective 
Modeling, Rendering, and Imaging,” Computer Graphics 
Forum, vol. 29.1, pp. 227–246, 2010. 
 
 
 
 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-512-8
CYBER 2016 : The First International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

