Investigating the Security and Accessibility of Voyage Data Recorder Data using a 
USB attack 
 
 
Abstract— Voyage Data Recorders (VDR) or 'black boxes' for 
ships hold critical navigational and sensor data that can be 
used as evidence in an investigation. These systems have 
proven extremely useful in determining the cause of several 
previous shipping accidents. Considering the importance of the 
VDR and the increasing number of cyber-attacks in the 
maritime sector, the likelihood of it being attacked is high. This 
paper examines the security and accessibility of VDR data 
through a malicious USB device. A USB device is used after a 
series of tests, detailed in this paper, found it to be a viable way 
to compromise a VDR system. Intensive penetration testing 
was performed on a VDR, and this paper presents the four key 
highlights from the authors’ tests. The results show that real-
world VDR data might not be secure from an insider threat 
with little to no cyber knowledge, and future VDRs may open 
that up to more outsider attackers. For a device like VDR, 
where confidentiality, integrity and availability of data are 
critical, a cyber-attack could therefore lead to serious 
repercussions. 
Keywords- Maritime; Ransomware; USB Rubber Ducky; 
Voyage Data Recorder. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
    With the maritime industry increasingly dependent on 
technology, cyber incidents have also been on the rise. The 
emergence of new technologies has led to the creation of 
new attack vectors, such as Wi-Fi access, poor network 
configuration, and unsecure third-party devices, which can 
cause critical damage to the industry. Maritime industries 
are targeted in a wide variety of ways, from phishing attacks 
on shipping company offices to attacks on communications 
and navigation systems on board ships. In the event of a 
major incident in the industry, a forensic investigation will 
be conducted to determine the cause for legal and reporting 
purposes, which will also help in correcting past mistakes. 
The study [1] observes that forensic readiness in the 
maritime sector, though it is not yet developed, can help in 
assessing cyber risks and mitigating attacks in the future. 
A Voyage Data Recorder (VDR), often referred to as ‘the 
black boxes for ships’, plays a critical role in forensic 
investigations on ships. They store sensor data that can be 
retrieved following an incident, to construct the navigational 
plan and other factors that lead to the incident. Due to its 
importance, it is essential that the data stored is secure and 
tamper-proof, and the International Maritime Organization 
(IMO) clearly stipulates that VDRs should maintain a store 
with secure and retrievable information regarding the 
position, the physical status, and the command and control 
of the vessel over the period of the accident [2]. 
Interestingly, in some cases, the forensic investigators were 
not able to access the VDR or the data recorded. A few 
incidents have occurred when the VDR data disappeared 
mysteriously or the VDR status failed to record data at all 
[3]. There has been some previous research hacking a VDR 
(documented on a blog [3]) that exclusively used static 
analysis and Quick Emulator (QEMU) emulation on VDR 
software. In comparison, this paper builds on this previous 
understanding. As this study had full access to a VDR, 
experiments were done on the actual hardware and software 
of the system, and analyses were primarily dynamic for 
triggering real digital and physical effects. Our VDR was 
also connected to other real-world bridge systems, which it 
collected data from, adding a layer of realism beyond 
previous studies. 
The disappearance of data can either be accidental human 
error, system malfunction or deliberate tampering. This 
paper aims to determine how plausible tampering is. With 
the increase in cyber-attacks in the maritime industry, the 
possibility of tampering with the VDR data to cover an 
incident or attacking the VDR itself cannot be eliminated. In 
addition, we examine if tampering could be simplified, so 
that even an unskilled insider, could be a significant threat. 
This is unlike previous work, as it demonstrates how 
attackers, but also system pen-testers, can more easily 
penetrate a system using modern-day pen-testing tools (i.e., 
pre-programmed USB, pre-installed Kali Linux tools, 
publicly available malware simulators). Moreover, while 
previous studies [3] examined only Furuno VDR software, 
which required specific knowledge, the proposed pen-
testing USB stick in the paper could be used on any make or 
model, given there is a USB port. 
As a critical part of incident investigations, the 
disappearance of VDR data can lead to investigation dead 
ends. As outlined in [30], which looked at incidents from 
01/11/2020 to 31/10/2021, there were 275 incidents related 
to data breach by privilege misuse, and all these incidents 
 Avanthika Vineetha Harish 
 Kimberly Tam  
Kevin Jones 
       Faculty of Science and Engineering 
             University of Plymouth, Plymouth, United Kingdom 
e-mail: {avanthika.vineethaharish, kimberly.tam, kevin.jones}@plymouth.ac.uk 
 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-996-6
CYBER 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

were caused by insiders. It was reported that 78% of the 
incidents were motivated by financial gain, 9% by grudge, 
8% by espionage, and 6% by convenience [30]. A device 
like VDR, which stores its data for months on board a ship, 
leaves the possibility of insiders tampering with the 
evidence [1]. 
Based on the assumption that the threat actor is an 
insider, this paper examines the security and accessibility of 
VDR data with a malicious USB device. [5] shows that 
USBs are one of the top cyber security threat vectors, with 
USB threats targeted specifically at industries including 
shipping growing from 37% in 2021 to 52% in 2022, while 
the number of threats targeted at Industrial Control Systems 
(ICS) increased from 30% to 32% over the same period. 
Most VDRs typically have USB ports for updating the 
system, and older VDRs can only be updated this way, so 
leaving them open and accessible to anyone is a risk. 
Therefore, using the attack path of USB access seemed 
reasonable when the threat is an insider. 
The paper will provide an overview of VDR systems and 
their importance in Section 2 and then moves on to describe 
the tools used for testing the VDR in Section 3. In Section 4, 
the paper will discuss the key results and highlights of the 
testing, followed by a conclusion with discussions and future 
work. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
According to [6], the main purpose of a VDR is to collect 
and provide navigational data to aid in maritime accident 
investigations and to monitor system performance. A typical 
VDR system would consist of an electronics unit that gathers 
data from the sensors and saves it to a storage drive, with 
interfaces for communication and monitoring like USB, and 
Ethernet [4]. In addition, it will have an uninterruptible 
power supply, a hardened capsule, or a floating capsule for 
storing data and a monitor or console for performing tests 
[6]. The data collected include but are not limited to GPS 
data, heading and speed information, Electronic Chart and 
Display 
Information 
System 
(ECDIS), 
Automatic 
Identification System (AIS), data from Radar, voice feeds 
from bridge and rudder responses [7]. It is important to 
notice that VDRs currently do not have a mechanism for 
verifying the integrity of data to confirm if it has been 
tampered with. As a result, even if any of the data is 
manipulated, investigators might not be able to detect it. 
The IMO requires all passenger ships and other ships 
except those passenger ships exceeding 3000 gross 
tonnages that are constructed on or after 1 July 2002, to be 
equipped with VDRs to comply with the regulations under 
Safety of Navigation of the International Convention for the 
Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS) [2]. The Maritime Safety 
Committee of the IMO amended SOLAS chapter V 
regulation 20 in its 79th session to include requirements for 
VDR on cargo ships [2]. It states that cargo ships engaged in 
international voyages are required to have a VDR, which can 
be a simplified version of VDR (S-VDR) [2]. As per MSC 
Resolution 333.90, all VDRs installed after July 2014 must 
record continuously and retain data for a period of at least 30 
days on the long-term storage medium and at least 48 hours 
on fixed or floating storage medium [8]. VDRs installed 
before July 2014 must retain data for a minimum of 12 hours 
and data will be overwritten at the end of the period.  This 
implies that different ships will have different rules 
depending on the type of vessel and the date of device 
installation. Given the long-life span of ships before they are 
scrapped, there is a possibility that many ships out at sea may 
still be equipped with outdated VDRs that are prone to 
cyber-attacks and can compromise forensic investigations. 
Investigating 
authorities 
like 
Marine 
Accident 
Investigation Board (MAIB) and US National Transportation 
Safety Board (NTSB) have extensively used and interrogated 
VDRs as evidence. An iconic investigation was the sinking 
of El Faro following hurricane Joaquin when NTSB and a 
few other organizations spent 11 months on 3 expeditions to 
retrieve the VDR [9]. From 26 hours of audio recordings on 
the vessel's bridge, a transcript of over 500 pages was 
produced and it significantly contributed to the discovery of 
the accident's cause [10]. Another incident was the 
grounding of Costa Concordia in the Tyrrhenian Sea off the 
coast of Italy. Italian authorities recovered the hard disk from 
the concentrator and converted the data to usable formats, 
generating radar screenshots, National Marine Electronics 
Association (NMEA) strings, and other data logs [4]. The 
investigators analyzed all this information together to 
understand key details, such as whether the vessel was being 
driven by a manual or automatic pilot, rudder instructions 
given and followed, and the status of watertight doors that 
controlled the flooding of compartments [4]. 
III. 
TOOLS USED 
This paper examines whether the VDR data could be 
accessed or compromised and whether it could lead to 
unreliable data. Intensive penetration testing was performed 
to look for vulnerabilities and concerns that could lead to 
VDR data breaches and manipulation. Penetration testing or 
Pen-test is the method of attacking the system by authorised 
personnel, to identify and detect flaws in the system that 
could be exploited by attackers. Testing is carried out with 
several dedicated tools and custom scripts and this section 
will detail each of the tools and devices used to test an off-
the-shelf VDR. 
A. System Under Test 
The System under Test (SuT) is an off-the-shelf VDR 
manufactured by a global shipping equipment manufacturer 
that is used by ships around the world. The specific make 
and model of the SuT are omitted for security purposes. The 
PC associated with the VDR runs Windows Embedded 
Standard 7 Operating System (OS). To monitor the system 
and test for vulnerabilities, an external attack machine that is 
running on Kali Linux OS is used. Kali Linux is a special OS 
distribution 
with 
pre-configured 
tools 
designed 
for 
penetration testing purposes. This 64-bit Kali Linux machine 
with 2048MB base memory is installed on a virtual box to 
isolate the attacks running from the host machine. 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-996-6
CYBER 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

B. USB Rubber Ducky 
A $59.99 (around £52.6) malicious device that resembles 
a USB stick, called USB Rubber ducky was used to execute 
the attacks [11]. USB Rubber Ducky was created by an 
information security company, Hak5, and the tool gained 
popularity in the security community due to its properties, 
like ease of use and powerful payloads [11]. When 
physically plugged in, the Rubber Ducky injects keystrokes 
into the computer it is connected to. Users can specify the 
keystroke combinations they want using a scripting language 
called Ducky Script. The script is written in a text file and 
then transferred to a File Allocation Table (FAT) formatted 
Secure Digital (SD) card. The SD card used for performing 
tests, in this case, is of size 128MB. For using this device, 
users need not have prior complex cyber security knowledge 
as it automates the keystrokes for the commands and if set up 
correctly, this could lead to heavily damaging the system. 
There are Rubber Ducky payloads and resources available as 
Github repositories, making them publicly accessible [12]. 
This tool is useful for automating tests, as explained in the 
following sections. 
C. Metasploit Framework 
The Metasploit framework is a powerful penetration 
testing tool with many features [13]. It contains several 
modules, which are exploits that take advantage of 
weaknesses in the system to hack it, payloads which are code 
sets that interact with the system, and auxiliary modules that 
perform functions, like scanning and sniffing. This 
framework helps in detecting a vulnerability, exploiting it, 
creating, and transferring payloads, and executing attacks. 
Currently, Metasploit has over 2000 exploits for various 
platforms including Android, Linux, Windows, Java, etc. It 
also hosts some exploit modules targeting ICS devices and 
protocols, like Programmable Logic Controllers (PLCs) and 
Modbus. However, this is limited to generic industrial 
components and currently, no such framework exists for the 
maritime industry for evaluating its systems. 
D. Shinolocker Ransomware Simulator 
Ransomware is a type of malware that, once it infects a 
system, will encrypt the files and prevent them from being 
accessed. Users will then be asked by the attacker to pay a 
ransom to decrypt the files and retrieve them. According to 
[14], in the year 2021, there was a 151% increase in the 
number of global ransomware attacks than the previous year 
and the numbers are predicted to rise in the coming years. 
For VDRs, where data is crucial and sensitive, a ransomware 
attack could lead to legal and regulatory issues in the event 
of an accident. As testing the VDR with real ransomware is 
dangerous, a ransomware attack on the VDR was carried out 
by means of a tool called ShinoLocker. ShinoLocker is a 
ransomware simulator developed by a security researcher, 
Shota Shinogi, and presented at Black Hat 2016 [16]. It 
works exactly like real ransomware, except that it does not 
ask for ransom. Once the payload has been executed, it 
encrypts all files of the specified type, for example, EXE, 
PNG, and JPEG, and displays a message, in this case, a 
transaction id, to retrieve the decryption key for accessing 
the files [15]. This tool is very useful for training and 
teaching purposes. 
E. Nmap (Network Mapper) 
Nmap is a network scanning and auditing tool. It will 
scan the network, find hosts, open ports and services for each 
host and its OS [17]. Nmap was used to identify the OS of 
the VDR PC and its version. It was also used to find open 
ports on the VDR to create test scenarios. 
IV. 
HIGHLIGHTS FROM THE TESTING 
After an intensive penetration test on the SuT, four key 
highlights were derived and presented in this section. 
A. Reverse Shell 
Reverse shells are interactive shell connections from a 
target machine to the attacking machine, that allows the 
attacker to access, transfer, manipulate and delete files. The 
first test was to determine if the attacker could obtain a 
reverse shell from the VDR PC to the attacking machine for 
viewing and manipulating files. Figure 1 shows the attack 
path and flow of commands. To create a reverse shell 
session, a reverse TCP shell payload was created using 
Msfvenom, a payload generator for Metasploit. With 
Msfvenom, users can specify a shell type, IP address, and 
port number, as well as a payload type (EXE, ELF, PHP) to 
target a system of a given architecture [18]. 
Figure 1. Attack path for creating a reverse shell. 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-996-6
CYBER 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

Using Msfvenom, a reverse TCP shell payload was 
created to target Windows architecture using the local host 
IP address set as the IP address of the Kali machine. This 
payload then had to be transferred to the VDR for execution. 
To transfer the payload to the remote machine, an HTTP 
server was hosted on the Kali machine, and the payload was 
uploaded to it (see step (1) of Figure 1). Next, a ducky script 
was written such that once the USB device is plugged in, the 
HTTP server would download the payload to the VDR PC 
from the server.  This can be seen in Steps (2) - (4) of Figure 
1. Ducky script was written with five-second delays between 
each command, mimicking the keylogging of a human user 
in such a way that the VDR would be tricked even if it has a 
mechanism to flag fast key entries. The script was then 
encoded and written to an SD card. 
During this time, Metasploit was running on the Kali 
machine with the exploit set as multi/handler; payload as 
meterpreter/reverse TCP, listening for any connection [19]. 
When the USB was plugged into Kali, a Meterpreter shell 
session was opened, i.e., Step (5) of Figure 1. 
A complete list of steps for Figure 1 showing the path to 
the reverse shell: 
(1) Payload generated (Msfvenom) and hosted in HTTP 
server 
(2) Ducky Script written with commands to download 
payload 
(3) Once the USB is plugged in, the command to 
download the payload 
(4) Payload downloaded from server to VDR PC and 
executed 
(5) Meterpreter listener receives a connection from VDR, 
and the session is opened. 
Typically, shell sessions only grant local user access to 
the user. Thus, the privilege was escalated using the 
'getsystem' command, which allowed the user to view files 
and folders. Additionally, other options in the Meterpreter 
shell were explored, such as viewing and accessing system 
logs, capturing webcam images, sharing screens, and listing 
processes. A hash dump of passwords produced 5 New 
Technology LAN Manager (NTLM) hashes, cracking it 
produced five passwords, out of which three were blank ones 
(including that of the ‘Administrator’ account), and the other 
two of ‘Engineer’ and ‘Captain’ accounts had simple 
passwords. 
In a system like VDR, manipulating files using such a 
shell could be potentially dangerous and critical. An 
unauthorised or malicious insider could change the logs or 
files to create confusion during an accident investigation. 
Creating and using strong passwords is the first basic step in 
protecting any device from cyber-attacks. The guidelines on 
cyber security onboard ships document suggest using Multi-
Factor 
Authentication 
(MFA) 
and 
changing 
default 
passwords to protect confidential data on safety critical 
systems [20]. It also recommends establishing a password 
policy with guidelines on password creation, updating and 
securing. 
B. Ransomware attack 
Ransomware attacks are one of the most common cyber 
incidents in the maritime industry and according to [22], 
ransomware is the leading source of cybersecurity threat risk 
to US ports and terminals. Maritime transport is a billion-
dollar industry and ransomware attacks have risen over the 
past few years to take advantage of this. In the last five years, 
four major global shipping companies have been negatively 
affected by ransomware and their operations have been 
halted for weeks [21]. Recently, a Singapore-based offshore 
operator - Swift Pacific Offshore has reported a data breach 
that experts believe to be a ransomware attack [23]. To view 
the effects of a ransomware attack on the VDR, the 
ShinoLocker tool was used (see Figure 2). Since it was 
intended for training and teaching purposes, it appeared to be 
the most practical option without causing damage to the 
VDR.  
To encrypt all PNG, JPG, TXT, and EXE files in the 
VDR, a ShinoLocker payload was created specifying those 
file types. The payload was transferred to the VDR in the 
same way as mentioned in the previous section, using an 
HTTP server hosted on Kali Linux machine. A ducky script 
was written to download the malware on to the VDR PC and 
then the script was transferred to the USB Rubber Ducky. As 
Figure 2. ShinoLocker Message Window. 
Figure 3. Encrypted Files. 
 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-996-6
CYBER 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

soon as the USB device was plugged in to the VDR system, 
the malware started encrypting the files of the previously 
mentioned file types (see Figure 3). 
There was a message like a typical ransomware message 
on the screen, but it did not ask for a ransom. In the message, 
there was an option to enter the decryption key obtained via 
the original tool using the transaction ID displayed on the 
screen after the malware infection (see Figure 4). 
Up until recently, the biggest motivation for ransomware 
attacks was money, but that is changing slowly. In January 
2022, a Belarusian hacktivist group called ‘Cyber Partisans’ 
attacked the Belarus Railway systems using ransomware and 
encrypted the systems. They claim it as an act of protest and 
demanded the release of fifty 50 high-risk political prisoners 
in addition to banning Russian soldiers from using 
Belarusian trains as the ransom [24]. This shows that the 
definition of ransom in ransomware attacks is changing, and 
it is interesting to see if cybercriminals are likely to hold 
VDR data in exchange for ransom in a case where the VDR 
has critical evidence of a major incident.   
C. Hard Drive Erasure 
A third scenario involved erasing the disk contents and 
uninstalling Windows. This test was not performed as it 
would change the current settings of the machine and may 
destroy it. However, it could be easily accomplished with a 
USB Rubber Ducky and a few lines of code. The 
consequences of such an attack could be catastrophic on an 
autonomous vessel, where all configurations and settings are 
controlled by a machine. This is a denial-of-service attack 
where the system might not be available when it is needed 
the most or it might not be reliable.  
Erasure or tampering of evidence data could lead to 
serious repercussions in investigations involving legal fines, 
human life, or geopolitical tensions. Almost a decade ago, on 
15th February 2012, two Indian fishermen on a fishing boat 
‘St.Anthony’ were killed off the coast of Kerala, India in a 
shooting incident mistaking the fishermen as pirates and 
India detained two Italian mariners on board the ship ‘Enrica 
Lexie’, an oil tanker, owned by a Milan-based company [25]. 
This incident strained the political relationship between the 
two countries. In this case, the Kerala police seized the VDR 
hard disk, however, it was alleged that the captain failed to 
preserve VDR data after the incident and the second officer 
of ‘Enrica Lexie’ stated that he did not press the VDR for 
recording [25]. 
D. Eternal Blue Vulnerability 
While testing, an interesting result was obtained. The 
VDR PC was running Windows Embedded Standard 7 and a 
Nmap (Network Mapper) scan discovered that ports 139 and 
445 were open. The VDR PC was found to be vulnerable to 
the Eternal Blue exploit that exploits remote code execution 
vulnerability in Microsoft SMBv1 Servers with vulnerability 
entry of CVE-2017-0143 in the Common Vulnerabilities and 
Exposures (CVE) database [26]. This vulnerability has a 
Common Vulnerability Scoring System (CVSS) score of 8.1 
(HIGH) and the famous WannaCry attack used this exploit to 
spread its infection [27].  This could not have been found by 
only emulating parts of VDR firmware.  
Even though the exploit module on Metasploit 
framework for Eternal Blue vulnerability was designed for 
64-bit systems, and while the PC had a 32-bit operating 
system, the exploit module was run to see how the VDR 
would respond. The session was not opened as expected, 
however, VDR crashed with a blue screen of death and the 
machine needed to be manually rebooted. Since the Eternal 
Blue is a Random Access Memory (RAM) resident implant, 
once the system has been rebooted, it will function as normal 
again. As a result, the system may not be available when 
needed, and if the system is vulnerable to attacks like Eternal 
Blue, it may cause heavy damage. 
V. 
FUTURE WORK AND DISCUSSIONS 
Cyber security for maritime equipment is in its infancy, 
and there is little literature on voyage data recorders with 
even less research done on their security. Much of the 
literature available are reports of accidents involving VDRs, 
published by organisations like MAIB. Other articles analyse 
the investigation from a digital forensics point of view and 
suggest ways to improve the security of voyage data recorder 
data like the paper on the Costa Concordia shipwreck [4]. 
Data Integrity and Availability are critical properties in the 
Confidentiality, Integrity, and Availability (CIA) triad for 
devices, like Voyage Data Recorders. A study by [28] 
developed an algorithm of hash-based data recording where 
the time and date of the message are used to generate a key 
for authentication and a hash function is used to generate a 
key that combined with the original message can be used to 
check for message integrity. Research to improve the 
Remote Alarm Module (RAM) connected to the VDR would 
be good to alert the crew and people on the bridge if 
something is wrong in the system [29].  
There is a need to improve VDR security from both 
technical and regulatory perspectives based on the little 
research conducted in this area. In the coming years, VDRs 
will become more connected, allowing new attack vectors, 
such as Wi-Fi access and poor network configuration, 
widening the attack surface. The encryption of critical data 
and the deployment of access control methods would help to 
protect the confidentiality of the evidence to an extent. The 
use of USB ports must also be restricted in addition to 
flagging when a USB device is connected to the system. 
Figure 4. Decrypting Files. 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-996-6
CYBER 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

Using Sheep-dip protocol, where a dedicated computer that 
is isolated from the ship’s network set up onboard, could also 
protect its systems from USB-based attacks. In this protocol, 
the removable media is plugged into the dedicated computer 
for scanning viruses and malware and preventing the spread 
of infection. This could be particularly useful in maritime 
systems where systems and charts are updated via USB 
drives.  
The penetration testing of the systems could identify 
possible threats early on and allow them to be mitigated. At 
present, most of the testing is done manually by pen-testers 
who walk into a ship, scan the network, and inspect premises 
to find potential vulnerabilities. Considering the live 
networks and systems of critical shipping operations, this can 
be time-consuming and pose a high risk. In addition, manual 
penetration testing may miss certain vulnerabilities that are 
specific to a particular industry or system. An automated 
USB pen test tool, as demonstrated here, would make this 
job faster and easier.  This is also more realistic than 
emulating parts of the VDR system [3]. As the paper [31] 
mentions, the main challenge in securing the maritime 
industry from cyber-attacks is that the common tools 
available currently may not be suitable or appropriate for 
testing due to the bespoke nature of the systems. Therefore, it 
is necessary to consider automated penetration testing and 
new vulnerability assessment framework tools that are 
specific to maritime systems and operations.  This paper has 
done so with the use of the Rubber Ducky and scripts. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper looked at investigating the security and 
accessibility of VDR data using an automated USB device. 
VDRs are safety-critical maritime systems that hold potential 
evidence in the occurrence of an incident. By performing an 
intensive penetration test, the authors were able to conclude 
that the data stored in the VDR is not secure and can be 
tampered with by a simple USB attack. Four main highlights 
of the testing were presented and each one discussed the 
consequences of the exploitation of those vulnerabilities. 
When VDRs become more networked and connected in 
future, the cyber-attack surface will expand, creating new 
attack vectors. Further research is needed to develop and 
standardize penetration testing methods for the shipping 
industry 
that 
will 
identify 
critical 
assets, 
uncover 
vulnerabilities, and report them in a way mariners could 
understand. It is also necessary to create information security 
policies and regulations for maritime systems, that will 
accommodate their industry-specific characteristics, to 
protect the data contained in these systems.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
This research was part of the Cyber SHIP lab project at 
the University of Plymouth. The authors are grateful to the 
project funder - Research England and our industry partners 
who supported our research by providing tools and 
equipment. The authors would also like to thank Juan Palbar 
Misas, Wesley Andrews and Rory Hopcraft from the 
University of Plymouth for their valuable comments and 
insights. 
REFERENCES 
[1] K. Tam and K. Jones, “Forensic readiness within the maritime 
sector,” 2019 Int. Conf. Cyber Situational Awareness, Data 
Anal. Assessment, Cyber SA 2019, no. June, 2019, doi: 
10.1109/CyberSA.2019.8899642.  
[2] International 
Maritime 
Organization, 
“Voyage 
Data 
Recorders,” 
Safety 
of 
navigation, 
2022. 
https://www.imo.org/en/OurWork/Safety/Pages/VDR.aspx 
(accessed 2022.10.21). 
[3] R. Santamarta, “Maritime Security: Hacking into a Voyage 
Data 
Recorder 
(VDR),” 
IOActive, 
2015. 
http://blog.ioactive.com/2015/12/maritime-security-hacking-
into-voyage.html (accessed 2022.10.21). 
[4] M. Piccinelli and P. Gubian, “Modern ships voyage data 
recorders: A forensics perspective on the Costa Concordia 
shipwreck,” Proc. Digit. Forensic Res. Conf. DFRWS 2013 
USA, pp. S41–S49, 2013, doi: 10.1016/j.diin.2013.06.005. 
[5] Honeywell, “Industrial Usb Threat Report 2021,” 2021. 
Accessed:2022.10.21. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.honeywellforge.ai/content/dam/forge/en/docume
nts/cybersecurity/Industrial-Cybersecurity-USB-Threat-
Report-2022.pdf 
[6] N. Bowditch, “American practical navigator: an epitome of 
navigation and nautical astronomy,” vol.1, pp. 72-73, 2019. 
[7] IACS, “Recommendations on Voyage Data Recorder,” no. 
85, pp. 1–7, 2018. 
[8] IMO, “Adoption of Revised Performance Standards for 
Shipborne Voyage Data Recorders Vdrs). IMO Resolution 
MSC 333(90),” 2012. 
[9] N. Degnarain, “Decoding The Black Box: The 2015 US 
Disaster That Revolutionized Ship Crash Investigations,” 
2020. 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/nishandegnarain/2020/10/13/de
coding-the-black-box-the-2015-us-disaster-that-
revolutionized-ship-crash-investigations/?sh=2d39d9c3712f 
(accessed 2022.10.21). 
[10] National Transportation Safety Board, “Sinking of the US 
Cargo 
Vessel 
El 
Faro,” 
2015, 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.ntsb.gov/investigations/AccidentReports/Reports
/SPC1801.pdf (accessed 2022.10.21) 
[11] Hak5, 
“USB 
Rubber 
Ducky 
- 
Hak5,” 
2022. 
https://shop.hak5.org/products/usb-rubber-ducky-deluxe 
(accessed 2022.10.21). 
[12] Hak5, “GitHub - hak5/usbrubberducky-payloads: The Official 
USB 
Rubber 
Ducky 
Payload 
Repository.” 
2022. 
https://github.com/hak5/usbrubberducky-payloads (accessed 
2022.10.21). 
[13] Rapid7 Inc., “Metasploit | Penetration Testing Software, Pen 
Testing Security | Metasploit,” Metasploit.Com, 2019. 
https://www.metasploit.com/ (accessed 2022.10.21). 
[14] Sonicwall, “Mid Year Upadte Sonicwall Cyber Threat 
Report,” 
2021, 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.sonicwall.com/2021-cyber-threat-report/ 
(accessed 2022.10.21). 
[15] “ShinoLocker 
- 
The 
Ransomware 
Simulator-.” 
https://shinolocker.com/ (accessed 2022.10.21). 
[16] “ShinoLocker 
- 
Malware 
Wiki.” 
https://malwiki.org/index.php?title=ShinoLocker 
(accessed 
2022.10.21). 
[17] nmap.org, “Nmap: the Network Mapper - Free Security 
Scanner,” 
Https://Nmap.Org/, 
2021. 
https://nmap.org/ 
(accessed 2022.10.21). 
[18] Offensive Security, “Msfvenom - Metasploit Unleashed,” 
2016. 
https://www.offensive-security.com/metasploit-
unleashed/Msfvenom/ (accessed 2022.10.21). 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-996-6
CYBER 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

[19] Offensive Security, “About the Metasploit Meterpreter - 
Metasploit 
Unleashed,” 
Offensive 
Security, 
2018. 
https://www.offensive-security.com/metasploit-
unleashed/about-meterpreter/ (accessed 2022.10.21). 
[20] BIMCO, “The Guidelines on Cyber Security Onboard Ships,” 
Int. Chambber Shipp. Shipp., vol. 4, pp. 1–53, 2021. 
[21] C. Cimpanu, “All four of the world’s largest shipping 
companies have now been hit by cyber-attacks | ZDNet,” 
ZDNet, 2020. https://www.zdnet.com/article/all-four-of-the-
worlds-largest-shipping-companies-have-now-been-hit-by-
cyber-attacks/ (accessed 2022.10.21). 
[22] J. Walker, “Ports and Terminals Cybersecurity Survey,” 
2022.Available:https://sites-
communications.joneswalker.com/38/1936/landing-
pages/2022-cybersecurity-survey---lp.asp 
(accessed 
2022.10.21). 
[23] Maritime Execuritve, “Ransomware Attack on Swire Pacific 
Offshore 
Breaches 
Personnel 
Data.”2021.  
https://www.maritime-executive.com/article/ransomware-
attack-on-swire-pacific-offshore-breaches-personnel-data 
(accessed 2022.10.21). 
[24] A. Greenberg,“Why the Belarus Railways Hack Marks a First 
for 
Ransomware 
| 
WIRED 
” 
2022. 
https://www.wired.com/story/belarus-railways-ransomware-
hack-cyber-partisans/ (accessed 2022.10.21). 
[25] V. Golitsyn, J.-H. Paik, P. Robinson, F. Francioni, and P. 
Sreenivasa Rao, “Pca Case No. 2015-28 In The Matter Of An 
Arbitration-Before-An Arbitral Tribunal Constituted Under 
Annex Vii To The 1982 United Nations Convention On The 
Law Of The Sea The Italian Republic-V.-The Republic Of 
India-Concerning-The ‘Enrica Lexie’ Incident Registry: 
Permanent Court of Arbitration,” 2020 [Online]. Available: 
https://pcacases.com/web/sendAttach/16500 
(accessed 
2022.11.09) 
[26] MITRE Corporation, “Cve - Cve-2017-0144,” Cve, 2015. 
https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=cve-2017-
0144 (accessed 2022.10.21). 
[27] NIST, “Nvd - Cve-2017-0144,” National Vulnerability 
Database, 2017. https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2017-
0144 (accessed 2022.10.21). 
[28] K.-T. Seong and G.-H. Kim, “Implementation of voyage data 
recording device using a digital forensics-based hash 
algorithm,” International Journal of Electrical and Computer 
Engineering (IJECE), vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 5412–5419, 2019, doi: 
10.11591/ijece.v9i6.pp5412-5419. 
[29] J. Kang, B. Youm, D. Cho, H and H. Choe, “Development of 
Remote Alarm Module with playback functions in Voyage 
Data 
Recorder,” 
2009, 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=5
334244 (accessed 2022.10.21). 
[30] G. Bassett, D. Hylender, P. Langlois, A. Pinto, and S. Widup, 
“DBIR Data Breach Investigations Report,” 2022 [Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.verizon.com/business/resources/reports/dbir/ 
(accessed 2022.10.21). 
[31] K. Tam, K. Forshaw, and K. Jones, “Cyber-SHIP: Developing 
Next Generation Maritime Cyber Research Capabilities,” 
2019, doi: 10.24868/icmet.oman.2019.005. 
 
 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-996-6
CYBER 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

