A Secure Storage Scheme for Healthcare Data Over the Cloud
Based on Multiple Authorizations
Zeyad A. Al-Odat∗, Sudarshan K. Srinivasan∗, Eman M. Al-Qtiemat∗, Sana Shuja†
∗Electrical and Computer Engineering, North Dakota State University
Fargo, ND, USA
†Electrical Engineering, COMSATS Institute of Information Technology,
Islambad, Pakistan
Emails: ∗zeyad.alodat@ndsu.edu, ∗sudarshan.srinivasan@ndsu.edu, ∗eman.alqtiemat@ndsu.edu,
†SanaShuja@comsats.edu.pk
Abstract—This paper introduces a secure storage scheme
for healthcare data with multiple authorizations. The proposed
design divides the healthcare data into small parts and distributes
them over multiple cloud locations. The Shamir’s Secret Sharing
and Secure Hash Algorithm are employed to provide the security
and authenticity requirements to the proposed design. The design
comprises two phases, the distribution phase, and the retrieving
phase. The distribution phase comprises three operations of divid-
ing, encrypting, and distribution. The retrieving phase performs
collecting and verifying operations. To increase the security level,
the encryption key is divided into secret shares using Shamir’s
Secret Sharing. Moreover, the Secure Hash Algorithm is used
to verify the healthcare data after retrieving from the cloud.
The experimental results show that the proposed design can
reconstruct a distributed healthcare data with a signiﬁcant speed
while conserving the security and authenticity properties.
Keywords—Healthcare; Security; Shamir’s Secret Sharing; Au-
thorization.
I. INTRODUCTION
The global healthcare system is changing every day, partic-
ularly the conversion into a digital healthcare environment that
contains all patient’s data and their corresponding records [1].
This change is stimulated by the new technologies, increased
number of populations, and the change in people’s lifestyles.
The emerging technology offers a convenient environment for
supporting healthcare management, digital clinics, monitoring,
and preserving of health records [2].
Cloud computing is an emerging technology that is updated
frequently and adopted with new technologies rapidly [3]. The
big healthcare data is considered as a big data application
over cloud computing. Therefore, all challenges, analyses, and
concerns that are related to cloud computing are applied to the
big healthcare data [4].
The security and privacy of big data are important because
numerous amount of data is stored at the same pool of
storage locations [5]. The security and privacy concerns of the
healthcare data over the cloud are increasing, in addition to
the concerns of healthcare institutions that found the security
and privacy requirements of the healthcare data over the cloud
are not adequate [2][6].
Big data security is guaranteed by different technologies,
including the following: 1) Encryption, 2) Centralized key
management, 3) User access control, 4) Intrusion detection
and prevention, and 5) Physical security. Moreover, everyone
is responsible for security, e.g., policies, agreement list, and
security software. The security requirements of physical com-
ponents are guaranteed by the Cloud Service Provider (CSP),
which grants proper accesses to the data owners [7].
One of the main methods to share big data is distribution
technology. The big data is divided into parts and distributed
over several storage locations [8]. However, many criteria need
to be addressed in this scheme including data security and
retrieval. The data need to be secured against unauthorized
access and protected from data tampering and alteration.
Data security is achieved using encryption techniques, e.g.,
Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) while data integrity is
achieved using the Secure Hash Algorithm (SHA). However,
an attacker can hack the encryption key and access the
big data. In the case of healthcare data, the attacker will
gain access to the patients’ sensitive information, e.g., social
security numbers [9].
In this paper, we introduce a secure and authentic healthcare
storage scheme over the cloud. In our design, the Shamir’s
Secret Sharing (SSS) and SHA are employed to provide the
security requirements of the proposed scheme. The SSS is
used to divide the encryption key into parts and distributes
these parts over authorized entities. The SHA − 512 is used
to check the data integrity after retrieval [10].
The rest of paper is organized as follows: Section II provides
a background information about the secure hash algorithm and
Shamir’s Secret Sharing; a literature review is presented in
Section III; Sections IV exhibits the proposed methodology;
results and discussions are conferred in Section V; Section VI
concludes the paper.
II. BACKGROUND
Before going through the details of our proposal, brief
descriptions about The SSS and SHA will be presented in the
subsequent text.
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-743-6
CYBER 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

D
S1
S2
S3
Sn
. . .
S1
S2
Sm
. . .
D
Divide
Reconstruct
Figure 1. Shamir’s Secret Sharing structure
A. Shamir’s Secret Sharing
The SSS is a secret sharing technique that is proposed by
Adi Shamir [11]. The SSS divides data (D) into a number
of pieces (Sn) where D is easily reconstructable from the
minimum number of pieces (Sm). The SSS is a (m, n) based
scheme, where m is the minimum number of pieces that are
needed to reconstruct the data (D) and n is the total number
of pieces that the data (D) is divided to. Additionally, D
is completely undetermined if the number of known pieces
is fewer than m − 1, which means that m pieces must be
available to reconstruct the original data D. Figure 1 shows
the general structure of the SSS algorithm, where it involves
two operations, the divide and reconstruct. The upper part of
the ﬁgure shows that the data D is divided into n pieces. Then,
to reconstruct the data D from these parts a minimum of m
pieces is needed. More details will be presented in Section IV.
B. Secure Hash Algorithm
The SHA is a cryptography function that is used for
integrity scrutiny. The SHA takes a message (M) of arbitrary
size, then through compression function calculations produces
the message hash (H). The SHA is used to provide the
authenticity and integrity of the data, i.e., ensure that the data
have not tampered during transmission or storing.
The secure hash algorithms follow two construction models.
The ﬁrst construction model is Merkle Damgard (MD), which
is used to construct the hash functions MD4, MD5, SHA-1,
and SHA-2 [12]. The second one is the Sponge structure model
that is used to construct the SHA − 3 hash function [13]. In
our proposal, we use the MD structure model to provide data
Preprocessing
Message M
IHV
F
F
F
F
Message M*
B0
B1
B2
Bn
...
...
H
Figure 2. General structure of the Secure Hash Algorithm (SHA)
integrity and authenticity. Figure 2 shows the general structure
of the MD structure model. The message M of size < 2128
is preprocessed ﬁrst by padding the input message to make its
size a multiple of the block size (B). Then the padded message
M ∗ is divided into equal size blocks (Bn).
In the MD hash standards, the maximum message size that
each algorithm accepts is dependent on the block size, where
the 512-bit block size accepts messages of size less than 264-
bit, while the others accept a message size of 2128-bit. All
hash standards perform the following steps:
1) Message padding. In this phase, the message is padded
with a sufﬁcient number of zeros to make the message
size multiple of the block size.
2) Message divide. In this phase, the message is divided into
equal size blocks (B), where the block size is dependent
to the desired hash function.
3) Compression function calculation. All blocks are pro-
cessed sequentially using compression function (F). The
Initial Hash Value (IHV ) is used to process the ﬁrst block
(B0), then the output of processing each block is used as
(IHV ) to the next block calculation.
4) Output hash generation. The output of the last block
calculation is taken as the output hash (H).
For more details about secure hash algorithms and their
compression functions, the reader is referred to [14].
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-743-6
CYBER 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

C. Threat Model
Two major threats are related to this work.
1) Privacy Threat. The healthcare data owners (patients,
medical institutions, authorized entities) have concerns
about the privacy of their data. These concerns include
the encryption key exposure by an adversary and the CSP
threat. Once the attacker gains access to the encryption
key, all sensitive healthcare information will be exposed.
Furthermore, the CSP can access the uploaded data
and distributes them without the knowledge of the data
owners. Therefore, the level of trust between the data
owners and CSPs is reduced [15].
2) Integrity Threat. The healthcare data might be exposed
to intentional or unintentional data tampering. The data
owners are not aware of their uploaded data over the
cloud and they consider that the CSP will take full
responsibility for the uploaded data. However, the stored
healthcare records may be tampered by an external adver-
sary or due to software or hardware failures of the cloud
service [16].
In our work, we preserve the healthcare data privacy over the
cloud and provide a scheme that increases the level of trust
between the data owners and the CSP.
III. RELATED WORK
A secure leakage resilient s-health system has been pro-
posed to protect the privacy keys from seizing that might
happen because of some leakage attacks [17]. This approach
presented a new cryptographic public key called leakage-
resilient anonymous Hierarchical Identity-Based Encryption
(HIBE). The security of this construction has been proven
against chosen-plaintext attacks. Also, performance analysis
has been done to demonstrate the practicability of this tech-
nique.
To solve security challenges, many approaches have been
suggested based on Attribute-Based Encryption. Charanya et
al. employed multiple parties in cloud computing to assure
that eHealth data are secure [18]. Attributes and key policy
have been used to encrypt health data, the only one who has
this information can decrypt the health data. Decryption can be
done only after verifying the attributes and key policy by using
both a key distribution center and the secure data distributor.
However, both of the aforementioned approaches consider the
key privacy not all health data privacy.
An efﬁcient data-sharing scheme called MedChain has been
presented to control efﬁciency issues in the existing ap-
proaches such as sharing data streams, which are generated by
monitoring devices [19]. This technique collects blockchain,
digest chain, and structured peer to peer network techniques
for sharing both types of healthcare data. For ﬂexible data
sharing, a session-based healthcare data-sharing scheme is
designed. an evaluation process has been applied on MedChain
illustrated that it can fulﬁll higher adequacy and satisfy the
security-based requirements in data sharing.
A novel framework has been proposed for control accessing
the Personal Health Records (PHRs) in the cloud computing
environment [20]. To enable ﬁne-grained and scalable access
control for PHRs, Attribute-Based Encryption (ABE) tech-
niques have been utilized to encrypt the PHRs for patients.
Authors divided their system into various security domains,
each domain is responsible for a subset of the users. Each
patient has full control over his data, and the complexity of key
management is reduced signiﬁcantly. The proposed scheme is
ﬂexible, it supports efﬁcient and on-demand repeal of user
access rights.
Chen et al. have presented a secure dynamic access struc-
ture that can guarantee accurate access to the cloud server’s
medical records with multi-user settings [21]. Cryptography
based on Lagrange multipliers has been used for encrypting
the records to assure the maximum control of patients over
their medical data. Mainly, this work focused on improving the
encryption of PHRs and enhancing user dynamic access rules.
This approach is very ﬂexible in case of multi-user access and
addition or modiﬁcation of PHR.
The delay time of accessing the patient record can cause a
death toll and decrease the health service level delivered by
the medicinal professionals. A new study has been introduced
that combines the Triple Data Encryption Standard (3DE)
and Least Signiﬁcant Bit (LSB) to enhance security measure
that is applied to the patient’s data [22]. For the experiment,
a simulation program has been developed by using Java
programming language. The experiment shows that patient’s
data and is saved, shared, and controlled in a secure way using
the proposed combined method.
A new approach has been introduced to protect the iden-
tity and the privacy of the medical data using an effective
encryption technique [23]. Also, an authorization framework
has been discussed to control the access control mechanism
of medical data. Encryption was done by using ARCANA
that provides hierarchically access to many data resources.
The XACML access model has been employed to subedit
the access control framework. The AT&T scheme has been
implemented to control the access mechanism of the patient’s
health data.
In the subsequent section, a secure healthcare storage and
sharing scheme based on multiple authorizations will be
presented.
IV. PROPOSED METHODOLOGY
The proposed design comprises two phases, distribution
and retrieving. In the distribution phase, the healthcare data
are signed, encrypted and distributed over multiple cloud
locations. Also, the encryption key (E) is divided into parts and
distributed over n authorized entities (AEs). In the retrieving
phase, the healthcare data are collected from the storage
locations using the (SE), and least number of authorized
entities are requested to provide their secret part (En). The
proposed design is implemented with aligning to Figure 3 and
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-743-6
CYBER 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

Figure 5. To better understand the ﬁgures and the details of
the proposed work, please refer to Table I that shows the used
notations in this section.
TABLE I. NOTATIONS
Symbols
Meaning
D
The healthcare Data
SHA
Secure Hash Algorithm (SHA-512)
H
Hash value after applying the SHA-512
H∗
Hash value after retrieving D
SSS
Shamir’s Secret Sharing
Di
i part of Data D
E
Encryption Key
En
n parts of Encryption key E
L(x)
Lagrange polynomial to ﬁnd L(0)
CSP
Cloud Service Provider
AE
Authorized Entity
SE
Service Entity that responsible for Data collection
A. Distribution Phase
In the distribution phase, the SHA-512 compression function
is applied to the healthcare data ﬁle. Then, the calculated hash
value (H) is appended to the healthcare data (D), as shown
in Figure 3. Afterward, the healthcare data ﬁle is divided into
smaller blocks (D1, D2, . . . , Di), where the hash value (H)
is appended to the last block (Di). Each of the healthcare data
parts is encrypted using the encryption key (E) and distributed
over multiple cloud locations for storage and sharing.
The Encryption key (E) plays a major rule in the security
of the healthcare data D. Therefore, the encryption key (E) is
divided into shares (E1, E2, ..., En) using the SSS algorithm.
Then, these shares are distributed over n authorized entities
(AEs), where m number of shares must be present to calculate
the original encryption key. According to the SSS algorithm,
the number of shares (m) that are needed to reconstruct E
is represented by a polynomial of power (m − 1), as shown
in Figure 4. The ﬁgure shows the pseudo-code of the general
procedure to divide the encryption key (E) into shares (En).
Firstly, the minimum number of shares (m) that are needed to
reconstruct E is determined. Then, an (m-1) random numbers
(am−1) are generated to construct the polynomial equation
(f(x)) that is used to generate the required shares (n). Noting
that, the value of a0 is equal to the value of E. Afterward,
the total number of shares (n) is determined, and n pairs of
shares (t, f(t)) are generated using the polynomial function
(f(x)). The generated secret shares are distributed over sev-
eral authorized entities (AEs) including patients, physicians,
medical institutions, and any other authorized entities, which
are determined ahead of the secret shares generation process.
B. Retrieving Phase
In the cloud, the healthcare data parts are distributed over
multiple storage locations. To keep track of all parts a unique
identiﬁer is given to each part after partitioning. In our
proposal, one of the authorized entities, called Service Entity
(SE), is responsible for data parts collection and parsing. The
AEs have the correct order of the data parts and their locations
Distribution Phase
Distribution Phase
D
D1
D2
D3
...
Di
E
E2
En
E3
...
E1
SHA
SSS
D
H
D
H
H
Figure 3. Schematic diagram of the Distribution phase
Figure 4. Pseudo Code of the SSS algorithm
over the cloud, and every time a retrieval job is requested
the SE duty is assigned to one of the AEs. However, the
SE is unable to decrypt the healthcare data because of the
multiple authorization scheme that we deployed using the SSS
algorithm. To ensure that the SE is not considered as a weak
part in the design, the SE duty is assigned to one of the data
owners every time a data retrieval request is performed.
To retrieve the healthcare data, one of the authorized entities
sends an access request to the service entity. The service
entity sends a secret-key share request to all authorized entities
(AEs). According to the predeﬁned conﬁgurations in the dis-
tribution phase, m number of secret shares must be provided
to reconstruct the encryption/decryption key. Once collected,
the encryption/decryption key (E) is computed using Lagrange
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-743-6
CYBER 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

Retrieving Phase
Retrieving Phase
D1
D2
D3
Di
...
E1
E2
Em
SSS
...
E
D
H
D
H
SHA(D)
?
H*
H
Figure 5. Schematic diagram of the Retrieving phase
polynomials equation, as shown in (1).
L(0) =
m−1
X
j=0
f(xj)
m−1
Y
q=0
q̸=j
xq
xq − xj
,
(1)
where L(0) represents the retrieved key (E), and each point
pair (x, f(xj)) refers to one share.
Afterward, the healthcare data parts are collected from the
storage locations, assembled according to their identiﬁers, and
decrypted using the retrieved E-key. Moreover, one more step
is needed to verify the integrity of the healthcare data. The
secure hash algorithm is used to accomplish the last step,
where the SHA-512 is used to compute the hash value (H∗)
of the retrieved healthcare data D. The computed hash value
(H∗) and the appended hash value (H) are compared to
determine whether they are equal. If D is correctly gathered
and not modiﬁed during transmission, the values of H and H∗
are equal. Otherwise, D is corrupted and contains tampered
contents. In the case of retrieving an individual record, the
SE determines which data part the requested record belong to.
Then, the data part block is decrypted to retrieve the required
record.
V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The experiments were tested using a conﬁgurable experi-
mental environment for High-Performance Computing (HPC)
using Center for Computationally Assisted Science and Tech-
nology (CCAST) at the North Dakota State University. On
CCAST, we reserved a cluster lease with 2-Intel Xeon proces-
sors 2.5GHz with 56 threads and 64GB of RAM. We tested
the proposed design using a sample of synthesized data. The
size of this sample is equal to 5GiB.
A. Experimental analysis
To test the speed of the proposed design, we measured the
elapsed time to collect and hash the test sample data. The
results show that the proposed design requires 26.5 seconds
to compute the hash value for the collected sample data. The
time needed to collect the sample data parts and decrypts them
is equal to 475.26 seconds. Overall, the total time to hash and
collect the sample data parts shows the signiﬁcant speed of
our proposal over other designs in the literature, neglecting
the time needed to collect the encryption key (E). Moreover,
the decentralized approach that we proposed using the SSS
algorithm provides a secure and authentic mechanism to store
and monitor the healthcare data over the cloud.
B. Security Analysis
The security of the proposed design is expressed from the
healthcare data owners perspective. For each security threat,
we built a security model to verify the efﬁciency of the
proposed design. This model includes the employed security
functions (SSS and SHA-512) and experimental results. The
security analyses results were deduced according to four
deductions.
Deduction 1: The healthcare data parts are distributed over
multiple locations and identiﬁed by a unique identiﬁer for each
part.
The ﬁrst level of security is accomplished using the service
entity, where the (SE) is the only one who is responsible for
data summing according to their identiﬁers.
Deduction 2: The encryption key (E) is divided into shares
and distributed over multiple authorized entities.
The second level of security is obtained using the SSS
algorithm, where the decentralized encryption key scheme
protects the encryption key (E) even if parts of the secret
shares are exposed to an adversary.
Deduction 3: The healthcare data are integral and authentic,
thanks to the SHA-512.
The third level of security is achieved by using the SHA-512.
After retrieving the healthcare data, the SHA-512 compression
function is applied to make sure the retrieved data are tamper-
free and gathered in the correct order.
Deduction 4: The level of trust between the healthcare data
owners and the CSPs is increased.
The healthcare data owners make sure that the CSP has no
access to the stored data. This is because the data are encrypted
and the encryption key is distributed over multiple users.
Moreover, the proposed design allows the healthcare data parts
to be distributed over different CSPs which is supported by the
data identiﬁers and the SE.
The employment of the SHA and SSS algorithms consoli-
dates the healthcare data storage and sharing and increases the
level of trust between the CSP and client. The proposed design
accomplished the security requirements of data integrity and
CSP prevention. Moreover, the use of SSS consolidates the
proposed design against centralized control.
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-743-6
CYBER 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, a secure storage scheme for healthcare data
was presented. The proposed design employed the SSS algo-
rithm and SHA-512 to provide the security requirements to
the proposed design. The SSS is used to divide the encryption
key into secret shares and distributes these shares on multiple
authorized entities. Also, the SHA-512 ensures that the health-
care data parts are tamper-free and collected in the correct
order after retrieval. The proposed design is tested using a
synthesized data sample using a high-performance computing
environment. The results showed a signiﬁcant speed in retriev-
ing the healthcare data, and the security analysis provides the
security proof of the proposed design.
In the future, further experiments will be conducted to
include different samples. The security requirements will be
extended to include the case of third-party auditor (TPA).
Moreover, a data replication scheme over the cloud will be
applied to the proposed design using division and replication
of data in the cloud for optimal performance and security.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This publication was funded by a grant from the United
States Government and the generous support of the American
people through the United States Department of State and the
United States Agency for International Development (USAID)
under the Pakistan - U.S. Science & Technology Cooperation
Program. The contents do not necessarily reﬂect the views of
the United States Government.
Computing services, ﬁnancial and administrative support
from the North Dakota State University Center for Compu-
tationally Assisted Science and Technology (CCAST) and the
Department of Energy through Grant No. DE-SC0001717 are
gratefully acknowledged.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Burghard, “Big data and analytics key to accountable care success,”
IDC health insights, pp. 1–9, 2012.
[2] J. G. Ronquillo, J. Erik Winterholler, K. Cwikla, R. Szymanski, and
C. Levy, “Health it, hacking, and cybersecurity: national trends in data
breaches of protected health information,” JAMIA Open, vol. 1, no. 1,
pp. 15–19, 2018.
[3] M. Ahmadi and N. Aslani, “Capabilities and advantages of cloud
computing in the implementation of electronic health record,” Acta
Informatica Medica, vol. 26, no. 1, p. 24, 2018.
[4] K. Abouelmehdi, A. Beni-Hessane, and H. Khalouﬁ, “Big healthcare
data: preserving security and privacy,” Journal of Big Data, vol. 5, no. 1,
p. 1, 2018.
[5] C. Tankard, “Big data security,” Network security, vol. 2012, no. 7, pp.
5–8, 2012.
[6] W. Wilkowska and M. Zieﬂe, “Privacy and data security in e-health:
Requirements from the users perspective,” Health informatics journal,
vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 191–201, 2012.
[7] R. Lu, H. Zhu, X. Liu, J. K. Liu, and J. Shao, “Toward efﬁcient and
privacy-preserving computing in big data era,” IEEE Network, vol. 28,
no. 4, pp. 46–50, 2014.
[8] Y. Li, K. Gai, L. Qiu, M. Qiu, and H. Zhao, “Intelligent cryptography
approach for secure distributed big data storage in cloud computing,”
Information Sciences, vol. 387, pp. 103–115, 2017.
[9] Z. A. Al-Odat, S. K. Srinivasan, E. Al-Qtiemat, m. a. latha dubasi,
and s. shuja, “Iot-based secure embedded scheme for insulin pump data
acquisition and monitoring,” in The Third International Conference on
Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems.
IARIA, 2018, pp. 90–93.
[10] Z. Al-Odat, M. Ali, and S. U. Khan, “Mitigation and improving sha-
1 standard using collision detection approach,” in 2018 International
Conference on Frontiers of Information Technology (FIT). IEEE, 2018,
pp. 333–338.
[11] A. Shamir, “How to share a secret,” Commun. ACM, vol. 22, no. 11,
pp. 612–613, Nov. 1979. [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.
1145/359168.359176
[12] I. B. Damg˚ard, “A design principle for hash functions,” in Advances in
Cryptology — CRYPTO’ 89 Proceedings, G. Brassard, Ed.
New York,
NY: Springer New York, 1990, pp. 416–427.
[13] G. Bertoni, J. Daemen, M. Peeters, and G. Van Assche, “Sponge
functions,” in ECRYPT hash workshop, vol. 2007, no. 9.
Citeseer,
2007, pp. 1–93.
[14] F. PUB, “Secure hash standard (shs),” FIPS PUB 180, vol. 4, pp. 1–27,
2012.
[15] B. L. Filkins et al., “Privacy and security in the era of digital health:
what should translational researchers know and do about it?” American
journal of translational research, vol. 8, no. 3, p. 1560, 2016.
[16] Y. X. Yan, L. Wu, W. Y. Xu, H. Wang, and Z. M. Liu, “Integrity audit of
shared cloud data with identity tracking,” Security and Communication
Networks, vol. 2019, pp. 1–11, 2019, doi.org/10.1155/2019/1354346.
[17] Y. Zhang, P. Lang, D. Zheng, M. Yang, and R. Guo, “A secure and
privacy-aware smart health system with secret key leakage resilience,”
Security and Communication Networks, vol. 2018, pp. 1–13, 2018.
[18] R. Charanya, S. Nithya, and N. Manikandan, “Attribute based encryption
for secure sharing of e-health data,” in Materials Science and Engineer-
ing Conference Series, vol. 263, no. 4, 2017, p. 042030.
[19] B. Shen, J. Guo, and Y. Yang, “Medchain: Efﬁcient healthcare data
sharing via blockchain,” Applied Sciences, vol. 9, no. 6, p. 1207, 2019.
[20] M. Li, S. Yu, K. Ren, and W. Lou, “Securing personal health records
in cloud computing: Patient-centric and ﬁne-grained data access control
in multi-owner settings,” in International conference on security and
privacy in communication systems.
Springer, 2010, pp. 89–106.
[21] T.-S. Chen et al., “Secure dynamic access control scheme of phr in cloud
computing,” Journal of medical systems, vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 4005–4020,
2012.
[22] A. Babatunde, A. Taiwo, and E. Dada, “Information security in health
care centre using cryptography and steganography,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1803.05593, 2018.
[23] J. Vora et al., “Ensuring privacy and security in e-health records,” in
2018 International Conference on Computer, Information and Telecom-
munication Systems (CITS).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–5.
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-743-6
CYBER 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

