On the Alignment of Safety and Security for Autonomous Vehicles
Jin Cui, Giedre Sabaliauskaite
Centre for Research in Cyber Security (iTrust)
Singapore University of Technology and Design, SUTD
Email:{jin_cui,giedre}@sutd.edu.sg
Abstract—Safety is the primary requirement and the key chal-
lenge in autonomous vehicles. Any accidental failures (safety
issue) and/or intentional attacks (security issue) may result in
severe injury or loss of life. Thus, any missing consideration
on either failures or attacks may lead to terrible consequence.
Safety and security are inter-related and, therefore, have to be
aligned early in the development process. International standards,
International Organization for Standardization (ISO 26262),
and Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE J3061), have been
proposed for vehicle safety and security. However, they do not
address all the aspects of autonomous vehicles as they rely on a
human driver controlling the vehicle. In high automation vehicles
(level 3 or above, as deﬁned by the international standard SAE
J3016), the autonomous driving system is fully responsible for
driving the vehicle. Thus, different driving automation levels
have to be taken into consideration when designing autonomous
vehicle safety and security. We propose an approach for aligning
safety and security lifecycles, based on SAE J3061, SAE J3016,
and ISO 26262 standards at an early development phase. The
proposed approach uses the Failure, Attack and Countermeasure
(FACT) graph to connect safety failures, security attacks, and the
associated countermeasures. The proposed approach is helpful
for designing or tailoring the safety and security processes, and
selecting appropriate countermeasures for autonomous vehicles
taking into consideration the driving automation levels.
Keywords–Autonomous vehicle; Safety; Security; FACT graph;
SAE J3016; SAE J3061; ISO 26262.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Autonomous Vehicle (AV) is a vehicle capable of ful-
ﬁlling the main transportation capabilities of a traditional
car. The main difference to a traditional car is a Driving
Automation System (DAS) designed for AV. DAS provides
driving automation to the vehicle platform, thereby offering the
possibility of fundamentally changing transportation in order
to reduce crashes, energy consumption, pollution, and cost of
congestion [1]. Such vehicle attracts lots of attention from
academia, industry and government.
AV is a safety critical system. Any failure of AV may result
in severe human injuries or even death. Meanwhile, as a cyber
physical system, an autonomous vehicle consists of a myriad
of heterogeneous components, both cyber and physical, which
pose additional security challenges. The complex interactions
between these components inside the AV make it difﬁcult to
model the system, and to align the safety and security in an
autonomous vehicle.
For a cyber physical system, safety aims at protecting the
system from accidental failures in order to avoid hazards, while
security focuses on protecting the system from intentional
attacks [2]. AV’s safety and security is shown in Figure 1.
Safety of AV includes mechanical system safety and Electrical
and Electronic (E/E) system safety. While considering E/E
safety, it is composed of DAS safety and vehicle platform
safety. Standard ISO 26262 [3] deﬁnes the E/E safety for
vehicle platform. Similarity, AV security includes physical
security and cyber security. For the latter one, DAS security
and vehicle security have to be considered. Standard SAE
J3061 [4] deﬁnes the cyber security for conventional vehicle.
Accidental failures may trigger safety losses, such as harm
to life, property and environment, and intentional attacks can
result in privacy, ﬁnancial, operational and safety losses. In this
paper, we focus on the alignment between E/E system safety
and security.
Safety
(Life, property, 
environment)
Privacy
Finacial
Operational 
performance
Safety
(accidental failures)
Security
(intentional attacks)
Mechanical 
system safety
E/E system 
safety
DAS safety
ISO 26262
(safety for 
vehicle)
Physical 
security
Cyber security
DAS security
SAE J3061
(Cybersecurity 
for vehicle)
AV
Losses
Figure 1. Safety and security in Autonomous Vehicles.
Aligning safety and security is crucial for autonomous
vehicles, since any of failures or attacks may lead to safety
losses (as seen in Figure 1). The alignment issues for cyber
physical system have been discussed in literature [5] [6] [7].
However, such alignment for AVs has not been addressed yet.
In SAE J3016 [8], six levels of driving automation have been
deﬁned. The recent advanced driver assistance systems are only
listed around level 1 and 2 (as described in [9]). This will not
satisfy the growing demand on driving automation systems.
Different level of DAS is corresponding to different driving
functions and safety requirements. In addition, different levels
will face more potential hazards, threats, and challenges. Thus,
it is necessary to consider DAS when we analyse safety and
security for AV system, because the selection of safety and
security countermeasures for an AV with the same driving
function differs depending on its automation level. However,
ISO 26262 does not take into consideration driving automation
levels and assumes that a human driver is always present [10].
In this paper, we propose an approach for aligning AV’s
safety and security at early development phases by synchro-
nizing safety and security lifecycles based on SAE J3061,
SAE J3016 and ISO 26262 standards. We use Failure Attack
and Countermeasure (FACT) graph [2] to list safety failures,
security attacks and the associated countermeasures together,
which will avoid the safety losses incurred by either failures
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-605-7
CYBER 2017 : The Second International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

or attacks, thereby guaranteeing the safety of autonomous
vehicles. Moreover, this alignment is helpful to design or
tailor the safety and security processes for autonomous vehicle
considering the driving automation levels, and to support safety
and security analysis.
The rest of the paper is organized as follow: we introduce
the preliminary information in Section II, and explore AV’s
safety and security alignment in Section III. Finally, we
conclude our work in Section IV.
II.
PRELIMINARY
To demonstrate our alignment method, we give some
preliminary information in this section.
A. Dynamic Driving Task
The driving task is the function required to operate a
vehicle in on-road trafﬁc and includes operational functions
(basic vehicle motion control), tactical functions (planning
and execution for event/object avoidance and expedited route
following) and strategic functions (route and destination timing
and selection) [8]. The Dynamic Driving Task (DDT) [8]
includes the operational and tactical functions, such as (without
limitation):
1.
Lateral vehicle motion control via steering (opera-
tional);
2.
Longitudinal vehicle motion control via acceleration
and deceleration (operational);
3.
Monitoring the driving environment via object and
event detection, recognition, classiﬁcation, and re-
sponse preparation (operational and tactical);
4.
Object and event response execution (operational and
tactical);
5.
Maneuver planning (tactical);
6.
Enhancing conspicuity via lighting, signaling and ges-
turing, etc. (tactical).
Because the subtasks 3 and 4 are all related to object and
event detection and response, they are collectively referred to
as OEDR.
When a DDT fails, the response to either re-perform the
DDT or reduce the risk of crash is considered as DDT-fallback.
An example of this is when the adaptive cruise control on a
car experiences a system failure that causes the feature to stop
performing its intended function. The driver will perform the
DDT-fallback by resuming performance of the complete DDT.
B. Levels of driving automation
Driving Automation System, DAS, is the hardware and
software that are collectively capable of performing the entire
DDT on a sustained basis, which is the key property that
can replace a human driver for AV. The levels of driving
automation are also classiﬁed by the requirements on DAS,
which include [8]:
•
Level 1, the DAS performs either the longitudinal or
the lateral vehicle motion control (subtask 1 or 2 of
the DDT).
•
Level 2, the DAS performs both the longitudinal and
the lateral vehicle motion control (subtasks 1 and 2
of the DDT simultaneously).
•
Level 3, the DAS also performs the OEDR (subtask 3
and 4 of the DDT).
•
Level 4, the DAS also performs DDT-fallback.
•
Level 5, the DAS is unlimited by Operational Design
Domain (ODD).
Here, the ODD is a speciﬁc operating domain in which an
automated function or system is designed to properly operate,
including but not limited to roadway types, speed range,
geography, trafﬁc, environmental conditions (e.g., weather,
daytime/nighttime), and other domain constraints [11]. For
example, we can design a ODD like this: road way is ﬁxed as
express way, the vehicle can hold a speed lower than 35km/h
driving in the daytime only.
Perform complete 
DDT and DDT-
fallback without 
ODD limit?
Perform complete 
DDT and DDT-
fallback with ODD 
limit?
Perform complete 
DDT, but no DDT-
fallback?
Perform both 
longitudinal and 
lateral vehicle 
motion control?
Perform either 
longitudinal or 
lateral vehicle 
motion control?
Perform none of 
DDT or DDT-
fallback?
Level 5
Level 4
Level 3
Level 2
Level 1
Level 0
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
Figure 2. Levels of driving automation.
Figure 2 shows the levels of driving automation and the
corresponding features. For the low driving automation (level 0
to level 2), a driver is needed to perform part or all driving task;
while for high automation (level 3 to level 5), DAS can replace
the driver to perform the complete DDT. The conventional
cars in our daily life are at level 0, No Driving Automation.
The human driver is necessary to perform the driving task and
to respond to all the fallback. Level 1 is Driver Assistance,
which means a DAS can perform either lateral or longitudinal
control for the car. When the DAS performs both lateral and
longitudinal control, such automation is in level 2, i.e., Partial
Driving Automation.
For the level 3, i.e., Conditional Driving Automation, DAS
can perform the whole DDT. But a user of the vehicle who is
able to operate the vehicle is expected to be able to resume
DDT performance when a DDT system failure occurs or when
the DAS is about to leave its ODD. If the DAS also can
perform DDT-fallback but with limited ODD, this division of
role corresponds to level 4, i.e., High Driving Automation. The
Full Driving Automation (level 5) is the situation when DAS
can perform complete DDT and DDT-fallback, and meanwhile,
the corresponding ODD is unlimited.
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-605-7
CYBER 2017 : The Second International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

SAE J3061
SAE J3016
ISO 26262
DAS-TARA
Threat Analysis and Risk 
Assessment (TARA)
Hazard Analysis and Risk 
Assement (HARA)
AV
Security process
Safety process
Feature Definition
Functional Security concept
Functional Safety concept
Security requirement
Safety requirement
Security assessment
Safety assessment
Only one is relevant
All are relevant
Not relevant
level
DDT
DDT-fallback
ODD
1
2
3
4
5
6
Driver
User
ADS
Limited
Unlimited
0
1
2
3
4
5
DAS-HARA
DAS
Figure 3. Aligning the safety and security concept phase based on standards SAE J3016, SAE J3061 and ISO 26262.
C. Related safety and security standards
SAE J3061 [4] is a cyber security guidebook for vehicle
systems, which deﬁnes the lifecycle process framework, and
provides guiding principles etc. In SAE J3061, the cyber secu-
rity lifecycle can be divided into several phases: concept phase,
product development phase (system level, hardware level and
software level), production and operation phase. The concept
phase is the ﬁrst step for the whole lifecycle, which includes
the following activities: feature deﬁnition, threat analysis and
risk assessment, functional security concept, security require-
ments, and security assessment. The feature deﬁnition deﬁnes
the system being developed to which the cyber security process
will be applied, i.e., it deﬁnes the boundary of the features.
Threat Analysis and Risk Assessment (TARA) identiﬁes threats
and assesses the risk, and the result of TARA drives all
downstream activates. Security concept describes the high-
level strategy for obtaining security from TARA phase, and
once the concept is determined for satisfying the feature, the
security requirement can be determined. Security assessment is
performed to identify the current security posture of the cyber
physical vehicle, and it is developed in stages throughout the
security lifecycle.
ISO 26262 [3] is an international standard for functional
safety of E/E systems in production automobiles deﬁned by the
International Organization for Standardization, which provides
an automotive safety lifecycle (management, development,
production, operation, service, decommissioning) and supports
tailoring the necessary activities during these phases. In the
development part, similarly to SAE J3061, the safety process is
composed of Hazard Analysis and Risk Assessment (HARA),
functional safety concept, safety requirement and safety as-
sessment.
III.
ALIGNING SAFETY AND SECURITY FOR AVS
In this section, we introduce an approach to align safety
and security for autonomous vehicles.
A. Concept phase of safety and security
Standard SAE J3061 [4] proposes a way to integrate vehicle
safety (ISO 26262) and security (SAE J3061) processes by
establishing communication paths between safety and cyber-
security concept phase activities, e.g., cybersecurity TARA
activity and safety HARA activities, cybersecurity requirement
and safety requirement activities. We propose to extend this ap-
proach by adding the AV-speciﬁc information from SAE J3016
standard, as shown in Figure 3. Additional activities, DAS-
TARA and DAS-HARA are added to the integrated safety and
security analysis process. Furthermore, communication links
are established between DAS-TARA, DAS-HARA, TARA, and
HARA activities, as shown in Figure 3.
Figure 3 shows the merged safety and security concept
phases, which consists of the phases from different standards.
There is no successive order between the activities of safety
and security, but for each stage, we need to consider them
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-605-7
CYBER 2017 : The Second International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

simultaneously. We use dotted line with double arrows to
depict the simultaneous activities in Figure 3. Because of the
automation levels of DAS, TARA and HARA should corre-
spond to each level. A colorful table is used to demonstrate
the levels and their properties: yellow denotes the DDT, red
represents executor of DDT-fallback, and blue shows ODD
constraints. After completion of TARA and DAS-TARA, an
activity security concept is performed, which integrates the
results of TARA and DAS-TARA, followed by security re-
quirement, and security assessment. In parallel, a functional
safety concept activity is performed by DAS-HARA and
HARA, followed by safety requirement and safety assessment.
B. Threat analysis and risk assessment for AVs
As mentioned in Section II-C, TARA deﬁnes the threats
and assesses risks, and derives all the following activities in the
security lifecycle. Thus, it is important for the whole security
design and development. Most methods for TARA are designed
for the automotive domain and are not speciﬁc for AVs. In
this section, we study automotive TARA cases, and provide a
general TARA method, which can also be used for AVs.
TARA
EVITA
OCTAVE
HEAVENS
Threat classification
Threat identification
Establish risk criteria
Profile assets
Identify threats
Identify and 
mitigate risks
Use cases study
Threat analysis
Risk assessment
Assets analysis
Threat 
identification
Threat 
classification
Risk assessment
Risk assessment
Figure 4. Methods for threat analysis and risk assessment.
EVITA method [12] comes from an European research
project EVITA (E-Safety Vehicle Intrusion Protected Appli-
cations), which deals with on-board network protection. In
EVITA method, TARA phase includes mainly three activities:
threat identiﬁcation, threat classiﬁcation and risk analysis.
Thread identiﬁcation uses attack trees [13] to identify generic
threats; threat classiﬁcation means classify the threat risk; and
risk assessment recommends actions based on the resulting risk
classiﬁcation of the threats.
OCTAVE [14] stands for Operationally Critical Threat,
Asset, and Vulnerability Evaluation, which is a process-driven
threat/risk assessment methodology. In OCTAVE, TARA phase
can be done by such processes: establish risk criteria, proﬁle
assets, identify threats, and identify and mitigate risks.
HEAVENS Security Model [15] focuses on methods, pro-
cesses and tool support for security analysis. In HEAVENS,
the main workﬂow for TARA includes: use case study, threat
analysis and risk assessment.
The TARA methods of EVITA, OCTAVE and HEAVENS
have different processes (as shown in Figure 4), but these
processes have similar functions or similar effects. We classify
them into our general method (denoted by arrows in Figure 4).
The proposed method has four activities: assets analysis,
threat identiﬁcation, threat classiﬁcation and risk assessment
(rounded rectangles in Figure 4). Assets analysis includes
studying use cases, establishing risk criteria, and identifying
the assets. Threat identiﬁcation uses attack trees to identify
threats (similar to EVITA). Threat classiﬁcation classiﬁes the
threat risks, and analyzes the mains risks considering use
cases. Risk assessment assesses the risks and generates security
requirements.
For AVs, the four processes have broader deﬁnitions. For
assets, besides the visible and information assets on a vehicle,
the functional assets (e.g., DDT function) should also be
considered. The threats for DAS should be treated as key
threats to mitigate, because any functional error of DAS may
incur terrible injuries for humans. Thus, the threats which
effect DAS should assessed to be of higher risk.
Attack tree [13] is a popular methodology for TARA, which
is a graph that describes the steps of the attack process. It
uses some basic symbols to demonstrate an attack, e.g., nodes
(represent attack events), gates (AND and OR gates) and edges
(path of attacks through the system).
C. Hazard Analysis and Risk Assessment for AVs
Following ISO 26262 standard, a HARA is performed to
determine the possible hazards, and criticality of the system
under consideration. Similar to TARA, the results of HARAs
strongly inﬂuence the effort to be undertaken in the following
activities of ensuring functional safety.
SAHARA [16] is a security-aware HARA method, which
expands the inductive analysis of HARA, and encompasses
threats from STRIDE model [17], which describes the main
security threat categories. SAHARA proposes a security level
determination method, and uses it in combination with Auto-
motive Safety Integrity Levels (ASILs) to assess the possible
threat.
In [18], the authors propose a HARA method for AV at
level 4, i.e., the vehicle is operated on the emergency stopping
lane of highway with speed lower than 12km/h. In this work,
ASILs are iteratively reﬁned to achieve speciﬁc safety goals
for such vehicle.
In summary, conventional HARA is of limited suitability
for AVs. But the ASIL is key point that can be used for
AVs, because it can be used to assess the threats or hazards
impacting DDT or related components of AVs. Fault tree [19]
is often used for HARA. Fault trees are similar to attack trees,
where the tree nodes represent failure events.
D. Alignment of safety and security
We use FACT graph [2] to combine the safety and security
lifecycles. FACT graph is a tree-shaped graph to show system
failures, attacks and the associated countermeasures together,
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-605-7
CYBER 2017 : The Second International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

TARA
DAS-TARA
HARA
Feature Definition
Functional Security concept
Functional Safety concept
Security requirement
Safety requirement
Security assessment
Safety assessment
Design safety 
countermeasures
Design security 
countermeasures
Product development (Software & Hardware development )
Production and operation
Security
Countermeasures
Attack Trees
Attack Trees
Fault Trees
Safety
Countermeasures
Safety and security alignment
FACT Graph
Activity in 
lifecycle
Artefact
DAS-HARA
Fault Trees
Figure 5. Safety and security alignment for autonomous vehicles.
which is formed throughout several activities of the merged
safety and security lifecycle.
The alignment approach is shown in Figure 5, where we
use rectangles to denote the activity in lifecycle, and rounded
rectangles to present the artefact (i.e., the methodology used
for activity). The concept phase comes from Figure 3. We can
see that DAS-TARA and TARA constitute the threat analysis
and risk assessment part for autonomous vehicles. This is
followed by the security concept, the security requirement
and the security assessment. Simultaneously, DAS-HARA and
HARA should be achieved from a safety view, followed
by functional safety concept, safety requirement and safety
assessment. After the concept phase part, design of safety
and security countermeasures is added to provide mitigation
approaches. This activity is not only served for alignment
purpose (proposing countermeasure to FACT graph), but also
served for the next phases, such as production development,
and production and operation as deﬁned in standard SAE
J3061.
Figure 6 depicts a simple example of AV FACT graph,
which includes Global Positioning System (GPS) failures. GPS
data is very important for autonomous vehicles, which is used
for localizing the car. If this data is wrong, the consequences
could be disastrous. For example, wrong GPS data may lead
to trafﬁc disturbance or crash hazard [20]. Here, we consider
GPS data on AVs to be the target of an attacker. The associated
FACT graph is formed using the following steps (as shown in
Figure 6):
•
1. Add safety failures as a subtree of the attack goal
(e.g., GPS error). In this situation, a functional fail is
considered as a type of safety failure.
•
2. Add security attack as a subtree of GPS error.
We consider two types of intentional attacks: spooﬁng
and jamming. Spooﬁng attacks will modify GPS data,
while jamming attacks will prevent AV from receiving
GPS data.
•
3. Add safety countermeasures (if any) to associated
safety failure. For functional failures, we can consider
periodic inspection as one of mitigation technique.
•
4. Add security countermeasures (if any) to cor-
responding security attack. To avoid spooﬁng GPS
data, we can consider to set the authentication before
reading the GPS data. To mitigate jamming GPS data,
we can use anti-jam GPS techniques [20]. They are
marked as SEC 1 and SEC 2 in Figure 6 respectively.
With the use of FACT graph, any misalignment between safety
and security countermeasures can be identiﬁed, as well as
countermeasure duplicates and missing means of protection.
Furthermore, safety and security countermeasures are associ-
ated to the relevant faults and attacks, thus, it is easy to analyze
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-605-7
CYBER 2017 : The Second International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

Traﬃc
Disturbance
GPS error
IntenƟonal
aƩacks
Spooﬁng
SEC_1
AuthenƟcaƟon
Jamming
SEC_2
AnƟ-jam GPS
techniques
FuncƟonal
fails
InspecƟon
Other
failures,
aƩacks
Failure/aƩack event
Security countermeasure
Safety countermeasure
OR Gate
AND Gate
Countermeasure
Figure 6. Forming an FACT graph considering GPS error.
the potential failure and attack, and then analyze safety and
security requirements.
IV.
CONCLUSION
Safety is the primary target when designing autonomous
vehicles. Any accidental failures (safety issues) and/or inten-
tional attacks (security issues) for such vehicle may result in
severe safety losses, e.g., human injuries or even death. Thus,
the effective alignment of safety and security for AVs is of
great importance.
The main difference between AV and conventional vehicle
is that there are different levels of driving automation in
AV that deﬁne which operational and tactical functions are
performed by a human driver and by the driving automation
system. Thus, the selection of safety and security countermea-
sures for an AV with the same functions differs depending
on its automation level. In this paper, we have proposed an
approach for aligning autonomous vehicle safety and security
at early development phases considering the levels of driving
automation. The proposed approach suggests a way to integrate
safety and security lifecycle process phases, deﬁned by SAE
J3016, SAE J3061 and ISO 26262 standards. Using this
approach, practitioners may align AV’s safety and security
activities, by following the merged safety and security lifecycle
process.
Our proposal can be used for analyzing safety and security
of existing AVs, as well on designing new AVs. In the future,
we will extend our alignment framework to enable more
comprehensive AV safety-security analysis.
REFERENCES
[1]
J. M. Anderson, K. Nidhi, K. D. Stanley, P. Sorensen, C. Samaras,
and O. A. Oluwatola, Autonomous vehicle technology: A guide for
policymakers.
Rand Corporation, 2014, ISBN:978-08-33-08-39-82.
[2]
G. Sabaliauskaite and A. P. Mathur, “Aligning cyber-physical system
safety and security,” Complex Systems Design & Management Asia,
2015, pp. 41–53, ISBN:978-33-19-12-54-42.
[3]
International Organization for Standardization (ISO), ISO-26262: Road
Vehicles - Functional safety, Dec 2016.
[4]
Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE), SAE-J3061: Cybersecurity
Guidebook for Cyber-Physical Vehicle Systems, Jan 2016.
[5]
A. Banerjee, K. K. Venkatasubramanian, T. Mukherjee, and S. K. S.
Gupta, “Ensuring safety, security, and sustainability of mission-critical
cyber–physical systems,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 100, 2012, pp.
283–299, ISSN:0018-9219.
[6]
L. Pi`etre-Cambac´ed`es and M. Bouissou, “Cross-fertilization between
safety and security engineering,” Reliability Engineering & System
Safety, vol. 110, 2013, pp. 110–126, ISSN: 0951-8320.
[7]
T. Novak and A. Treytl, “Functional safety and system security in au-
tomation systems-a life cycle model,” in IEEE International Conference
on Emerging Technologies and Factory Automation (ETFA) Sept. 15-
18, 2008, Hamburg, Germany, Sep. 2008, pp. 311–318, ISSN:1946-
0740, URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/4638412/ [accessed:
2017-09-20].
[8]
Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE), SAE-J3016: Taxonomy and
Deﬁnitions for terms Related to Driving Automation Systems for On-
ROad Motor Vehicles, Sep 2016.
[9]
H. Martin, K. Tschabuschnig, O. Bridal, and D. Watzenig, Functional
Safety of Automated Driving Systems: Does ISO 26262 Meet the
Challenges?
Springer International Publishing, Sep 2017, chapter 16,
pp. 387–416, in Automated Driving, ISBN:978-33-19-31-89-50.
[10]
F. Warg, M. Gassilewski, J. Tryggvesson, V. Izosimov, A. Werneman,
and R. Johansson, “Deﬁning autonomous functions using iterative
hazard analysis and requirements reﬁnement,” in International Confer-
ence on Computer Safety, Reliability, and Security September 20-23,
2016, Trondheim, Norway, September 2016, pp. 286–297, ISBN:978-
33-19-45-48-01, URL: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-45480-1 23
[accessed: 2017-09-20].
[11]
NHTSA, “Federal automated vehicles policy,” 2016, URL: https://www.
transportation.gov/AV [accessed: 2017-09-20].
[12]
R. A. et al., “Deliverable d2.3: Security requirements for automotive
on-board networks based on dark-side scenarios,” Tech. Rep., 2008,
URL: https://rieke.link/EVITAD2.3v1.1.pdf [accessed: 2017-09-20].
[13]
B. Schneier, Attack trees.
Wiley Publishing, Inc., Oct 2015, chapter
21, pp. 318–333, in Secrets and Lies, ISBN:978-11-19-18-36-31.
[14]
C. J. Alberts, S. G. Behrens, R. D. Pethia, and W. R. Wilson,
“Operationally
critical
threat,
asset,
and
vulnerability
evaluation
(octave) framework, version 1.0,” DTIC Document, Tech. Rep., 1999,
URL:https://resources.sei.cmu.edu/asset ﬁles/TechnicalReport/1999
005 001 16769.pdf [accessed: 2017-09-20].
[15]
M. I. et al., “Deliverable d2 security models,” Tech. Rep., 2014,
URL:https://research.chalmers.se/en/project/5809 [accessed: 2017-09-
20].
[16]
G. Macher, H. Sporer, R. Berlach, E. Armengaud, and C. Kreiner,
“Sahara: a security-aware hazard and risk analysis method,” in Design,
Automation Test in Europe Conference Exhibition (DATE) March 09-
13, 2015, Grenoble, France, Mar 2015, pp. 621–624, ISSN:1530-1591,
URL: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7092463/ [accessed: 2017-
09-20].
[17]
M. Corporation, “The stride threat model,” 2005, URL: https://msdn.
microsoft.com/en-us/library/ee823878(v=cs.20).aspx [accessed: 2017-
09-20].
[18]
T. Stolte, G. Bagschik, A. Reschka et al., “Hazard analysis and risk
assessment for an automated unmanned protective vehicle,” in IEEE
Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV) June 11-14, 2017, Los Angeles,
CA, USA, June 2017, pp. 1848–1855, ISBN:978-15-09-04-80-45, URL:
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7995974/ [accessed: 2017-09-20].
[19]
E. Ruijters and M. Stoelinga, “Fault tree analysis: A survey of the state-
of-the-art in modeling, analysis and tools,” Computer science review,
vol. 15, 2015, pp. 29–62, ISSN:1574-0137.
[20]
J. Petit and S. E. Shladover, “Potential cyberattacks on automated
vehicles,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems,
vol. 16, no. 2, 2015, pp. 546–556, ISSN:1524-9050.
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-605-7
CYBER 2017 : The Second International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

