Digital Dactyloscopy: A First Design Proposal for  
a Privacy Preserving Fingerprint Scanning System
Matthias Pocs / Benjamin Stach 
Project Group Constitutionally Compatible Technology 
Design (provet) 
Universität Kassel, Germany 
{matthias.pocs, benjamin.stach}@uni-kassel.de 
Mario Hildebrandt / Stefan Kiltz / Jana Dittmann 
Research Group on Multimedia and Security 
Otto-von-Guericke University Magdeburg 
Magdeburg, Germany 
{hildebrandt, kiltz, dittmann}@iti.cs.uni-magdeburg.de
 
 
Abstract—Biometric technology for crime prevention is 
emerging. One example is digital contact-less capture of 
fingerprint traces, which is currently under development. As a 
first approach we propose the design of a system for securing 
court evidence. The proposal is based on an evaluation of data 
formats for the application in future fingerprint scanning 
systems and is derived from requirements of the German law. 
Aiming at enhancing privacy, preserving anonymity and 
protecting against illegitimate “identity change,” this proposal 
shows how to derive technology design proposals from human 
rights law using a fingerprint scanning system as an example. 
Keywords-privacy 
and 
data 
protection; 
dactyloscopy; 
fingerprint scanning system; digital capture; biometric systems; 
German law on court evidence. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Fingerprints are used for decades in forensics to identify 
that people were present at some point in time at a crime 
scene or have touched certain items, potentially linking them 
to a crime. The methods for the acquisition and analysis of 
traces have not changed significantly over this long period. A 
major improvement was the introduction of automated 
fingerprint identification system (AFIS) [1]. This particular 
system uses an automated identification of potentially 
matching fingerprints. However, all candidates (usually 15-
20) are verified manually by forensic experts. Even with 
those precautions misidentifications are possible [2]. 
New acquisition techniques might allow for a non-
destructive collection of fingerprint traces with one or 
multiple sensors in crime prosecution and prevention use-
cases [3]. The use of such new techniques can provide more 
information about a single trace since it can be investigated 
all over again from different perspectives and using different 
techniques. This allows for a more thorough investigation by 
forensic 
experts 
and 
might 
reduce 
the 
risk 
for 
misidentifications. However, the application of new sensors 
and the subsequent investigation of the digitised traces 
constitute a major change of the generally accepted 
investigation process of fingerprint traces. 
In order to achieve those goals, a first process model for 
the digital dactyloscopy is introduced in [4]. It is derived 
from a process model intended for digital forensics because 
similar precautions must be regarded during the investigation 
process in digital forensics. The derived process model 
consists of seven phases: strategic preparation, physical 
acquisition, operational preparation, data gathering, data 
investigation, data analysis and documentation. The 
documentation is divided into a process accompanying 
documentation consisting of a detailed record of all 
performed actions together with all their parameters, and a 
final documentation as a concluding result of the forensic 
analysis. Additionally, the security aspects integrity and 
authenticity [21] of the processed data must be considered 
and addressed throughout the entire investigation. Since 
digital data can be copied and transferred easily, the security 
aspect of confidentiality [21] must be retained to preserve the 
privacy [20]. Furthermore, the anonymity should be 
preserved by the unlinkability [20] between a trace and the 
name until a matching reference sample is found. 
Subsequently, the security aspects non-repudiation [21], e.g., 
for the chain of custody, and availability [21] might be 
required for the investigation of fingerprint traces. 
In this paper we evaluate various data formats, including 
the container format for digitised fingerprint traces from 
Kiertscher et al. [5], a database-centric approach [6] and a 
data format for multiple data streams for use in digital 
forensics [7], for their applicability in a future fingerprint 
scanning system. For that we derive requirements from the 
German law. Furthermore, we introduce a legal approach as 
a foundation for our technical design proposal of a future 
fingerprint scanning system derived from German law 
principles. This particular technical design proposal is 
intended to be applicable for the fingerprint acquisition on 
crime-scenes and in a forensic lab. It aims at enhancing 
privacy and preserving anonymity. The standard of data 
privacy is quite strict in Germany from a comparative law 
point of view. Therefore, any requirement regarding data 
privacy might be suited as a showcase requirement. 
Nonetheless, it has to be considered that criminal law 
proceedings may differ highly in certain national legislation. 
This paper is structured as follows: In Section I, we 
analyse legal aspects of court evidence. Our legal approach is 
introduced in Section III. We summarise the process model 
for the digital dactyloscopy and the forensic data formats that 
are evaluated in this paper in Section IV. We define main 
technical requirements and introduce our first design 
approach in Section V. In Section VI, we analyse the 
suitability of various selected forensic data formats for future 
fingerprint scanning systems.  Finally, we summarise the 
challenges for a digitised fingerprint analysis and outline 
future work in Section VII. 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-182-3
CYBERLAWS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Technical and Legal Aspects of the e-Society

II. 
EVIDENCE IN COURT 
In Germany, statutory law and its judicial interpretation 
governs court proceedings. Evidence is defined as the 
assessment of facts (of a case) as an established fact by 
judicial 
persuasion. 
German 
law 
recognises 
several 
principles in criminal proceedings. The principle regarding 
evidence is particularly the principle of free evaluation of the 
evidence, which is set out in § 261 Code of Criminal 
Proceeding (Strafprozessordnung). 
Besides, the criminal procedure is a strict inquisitorial 
system. This means the court conducts its own investigation 
and may not rely solely on the facts and evidence presented 
by the parties. Furthermore, the Rechtsstaat principle (best 
translated as “law-based state” principle) in art. 20 para. 3 
Basic Law (Grundgesetz) and art. 6 European Convention on 
Human Rights demands the trial to be conducted fairly. Due 
to the ‘fair trial’ principle, police and prosecution have to 
consider both the burdening and the unburdening facts. 
A. Significance of Traces of Fingerprints as Evidence 
Fingerprints may be used to identify a person. Every 
person has an individual fingerprint, even identical twins. 
Thus, traces of fingerprints are significant as evidence. But it 
is crucial to point out that fingerprints may only be used to 
link a certain person to a certain place. Digitalisation might 
add a greater value to fingerprints as evidence in court.  
Digitalisation by contactless devices is a non-destructive 
method to obtain fingerprints. Until now forensic scientists 
use so called developer to detect contrasts between the ridge 
patterns and the surface. The developer is usually a powder 
or even a chemical reagent. Such technologies destroy any 
potential DNA traces on the particular fingerprint. 
Digitalisation might even produce more information 
than conventional methods. At the moment, forensic 
scientists are not able to separate overlapping fingerprints or 
to estimate the age of a fingerprint. Both may be possible by 
means of digitalisation and is currently under research. 
B. Risks of Digitalisation 
Digitalisation might bear several risks. These risks might 
impede the use of digitised fingerprints in court at all. Thus, 
these risks need to be excluded by technical means. 
1) Tampered Evidence: Digital evidence might be 
tampered with. The risk of tampering is higher by digital 
means than by analogous ones. The problem is that 
manipulations can be done even without special knowledge. 
Furthermore, manipulation might not be detected at all. This 
also includes unintentional manipulations, e.g., corruption 
by storage errors. Tampered evidence would be useless in 
court because it might not be admissible as evidence at all or 
would be at worst the cause for an unjust ruling. 
2) Evidentiary Value: Digitally collected fingerprints 
must not be handled differently to normal fingerprints. As 
an example, a dirt smudge cannot be regarded as a precise 
imprint only on the basis of being collected digitally and a 
precise imprint needs to be treated as such. Therefore, the 
information on the quality of the taken imprint needs to be 
linked tightly to the presented digital image. 
C. Enhancing the evidentiary value 
Accordingly, 
if 
these risks 
could 
be 
excluded, 
digitalisation would enhance the evidentiary value of 
fingerprints as evidence in court. Furthermore, digitalisation 
might even allow more probative facts to be collected. 
1) Secured Chain of Custody: A secured chain of 
custody can exclude any tampering of the evidence. A 
complete verification and a complete presentability are 
necessary for this purpose. 
2) Integrated 
Context 
Data: 
Context 
data 
can 
additionally give a description of how the fingerprint has 
been collected by whom, where and when. Also, the age of 
the imprint might be added as context data. The forensic 
scientist needs to add the quality of the found imprint. This 
ensures that all the collected data is bound together. The 
context data needs to be presentable. 
3) Conclusion: For the purpose of evidence, any data of 
the digitised fingerprint has to be stored in a secured chain 
of custody. This involves any additional context data, such 
as location and time of collection or age as well as quality of 
the imprint. Any context data would enhance the evidentiary 
value contrary to plain analogous forensic scientists’ 
transcript by including it into the secured chain of custody. 
III. 
LEGAL FRAMEWORK 
The German constitutional principle of the Rechtsstaat lays 
down that innocence of persons accused of a crime be 
assumed until evidence is furnished [8]; this is also 
enshrined in art. 6 European Convention on Human Rights. 
In relation to data processing one has to comply with the 
fundamental right to informational self-determination 
according to art. 2 para. 1 i.c.w. art. 1 para. 1 Grundgesetz. 
This aims at enhancing privacy and preserving anonymity of 
nonsuspects and protecting them against “identity change.” 
A. Legal Requirements 
Currently fingerprints at crime scenes are manually collected 
by the police officer in charge of securing evidence. During 
criminal proceedings the fingerprint as well as the officer’s 
record about securing the fingerprint with his/her signature 
on that record are furnished as documentary evidence 
pursuant to §§ 249 ff. Strafprozessordnung. The authenticity 
of the record is proven by means of the officer’s testimony to 
the signature on the record pursuant to §§ 48 ff. 
Strafprozessordnung. For automatic capture of fingerprint 
traces, this means that it needs to have a solid scientific and 
technological basis, be applied without error and ensure that 
the fingerprint traces have a quality suitable for furnishing 
evidence [9]. Moreover, integrating context data can increase 
the evidentiary value. 
B. Legal Criteria 
There are several legal criteria that specify the general legal 
criteria of scientific and technological basis, error-free 
application, trace quality and integration of context data. 
For establishing the existence of a scientific and 
technological basis we may put forward several criteria 
(testing, standards, comprehensibility by experts/judges, and 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-182-3
CYBERLAWS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Technical and Legal Aspects of the e-Society

error rates). Concerning the error rates one has to consider 
that the fingerprint scanning system does not decide whether 
or not a fingerprint belongs to a certain person but only 
digitises the trace of a fingerprint. Deciding on similarity of 
two fingerprints is not part of it. Nonetheless, there may be 
errors (wrong choice of surface material, “regions-of-
interest,” or distinction surface/fingerprint). The significance 
or the error rate needs to be explored in the future. 
Concerning the error-free application of the method the 
fingerprint scanning system offers an opportunity. This is 
due to the fact that the fingerprint captures are automated and 
the method can be applied without error as far as it is 
automated. One can clarify what processes are automated. 
Avoiding error or manipulation is achieved by measures 
of data security relying on the state of the art [10]. All stages 
of processing within the scanning system are logged in a 
secure way [11]. These processes also comprise manual 
inputs of additional information that is necessary for the 
evaluation of secured fingerprints. The data must be secured 
from the time of data capture. 
Sophisticated encryption oriented towards the state of the 
art and secure access should be used [12] [13]. Further the 
scanning system may be protected using digital watermarks. 
Watermarks can be reversible or irreversible. As long as the 
data are not devaluated in a way that the scientific basis does 
not apply anymore, irreversible watermarks are preferable 
because they guarantee increased data integrity. 
The trace quality relies on the trace and properties of the 
surface material, which has to be considered when designing 
the system. One can explore how to collect information 
about the trace quality by automatic means; this may be a 
research question for the future. Surface material information 
is manually entered; also with conventional methods such 
information needs to be collected [14]. However, it needs to 
be adapted and defined for the scanning system. 
Integrating context data is a new possibility the scanning 
system offers. Currently the police officer is in charge of 
proving the time of securing the evidence and place of the 
crime scene using his/her respective record. With the 
fingerprint system, the information about time and place 
could be captured automatically (secured system time/GPS 
or time/place stamps) in order to rule out confusion of 
different investigations. In this way the evidentiary value of 
the captured fingerprint data is increased. 
In addition, research promises to determine additional 
context information about the fingerprint. First the scanning 
system can determine the age of the fingerprint. The age of 
such traces is decisive to establish whether or not the trace 
was left during the criminal activity [15]. Furthermore, the 
system can separate overlapping fingerprints. Moreover, 
spoofing the capture device by using artificial fingerprints 
can be revealed. Such attacks will be more likely in the 
future if use of biometric systems will increase [16]. 
IV. 
STATE OF THE ART 
We use the process model for the digital dactyloscopy [4] 
to describe our concept of a criminal court proved design of 
a future non-destructive optical fingerprint scanning system. 
Furthermore, we analyse different data storage formats or 
concepts as a base for the digitised forensic investigation. 
A. Process model for the digital dactyloscopy 
The process model for the digital dactyloscopy [4] 
consists of seven phases. During the first phase strategic 
preparation (SP) potential investigations are prepared. This 
phase describes procedures and techniques used ahead of a 
specific incident. Those include the acquisition and 
installation of sensors, as well as training arrangements for 
the personnel. Furthermore, a software directory, sample 
material and aging models should be created and evaluated 
by benchmarking [17]. Subsequently, guidelines for the 
physical acquisition should be defined for crime scene 
investigators to avoid any alteration of fingerprint traces. 
The physical acquisition (PA) describes the identification 
and acquisition (e.g., seizure) of physical objects that might 
contain fingerprint traces. The crime scene investigator 
should also decide whether the object can be transported to a 
forensic lab for the acquisition or whether it is better to 
acquire it directly on the crime scene (e.g., if the object is too 
large or if the trace might be destroyed during the transport). 
The operational preparation (OP) describes all processes 
that are required prior to the digital acquisition. In particular, 
it includes the choice of the appropriate acquisition sensors 
and processing methods to achieve the highest possible 
quality of the digitised trace. Here the results of the strategic 
preparation will be used. 
During the data gathering (DG) several actions are 
performed to acquire the fingerprint traces from a particular 
object using contact-less sensory equipment. Firstly, the 
required acquisition parameters and material properties are 
determined. Secondly, a coarse scan is performed to detect 
Regions-of-Interest (ROI) that need to be acquired with a 
detailed scan. Subsequently, each ROI is acquired using 
high-resolution detailed scans. 
The data investigation (DI) contains all pre-processing 
steps prior to the fingerprint ridge pattern analysis. In this 
phase overlapping fingerprint patterns are separated, the age 
of each pattern is determined and the visibility of the ridge 
pattern is enhanced for the manual analysis using pre-
processing techniques. 
The identification of the fingerprints is performed during 
the data analysis (DA). It is performed manually with 
optional machine assistance (e.g., feature extraction and 
highlighting). The investigation should strictly adhere to 
current investigation standards: the analysis, comparison, 
evaluation, and verification (ACE-V) methodology, etc. [1] 
Subsequently, the results are summarised in the phase of 
the documentation (DO). Besides the concluding final 
documentation a process accompanying documentation 
contains a detailed log of all performed investigation steps 
throughout the whole process. This allows for an enhanced 
comprehensibility of the course of the investigation. 
B. Forensic data storage and exchange formats 
Various formats for the storage and exchange of forensic 
traces exist.  In this paper we compare the data format for 
the interchange of fingerprint, facial & SMT information 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-182-3
CYBERLAWS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Technical and Legal Aspects of the e-Society

(ANSI/NIST-ITL 1-2000) [18], the Advanced Forensics 
Format (AFF4) [7], a container format for digitised 
fingerprint traces [5] and a database centric approach for 
digitised fingerprint traces [6]. 
The data format for the interchange of fingerprint, facial 
& SMT information (ANSI/NIST-ITL 1-2000) is used for the 
exchange of fingerprint data for the automated fingerprint 
identification systems (AFIS) [1]. The design goals for this 
particular format are openness, non-intrusiveness, inter-
operability and wide usage. The data format consists of 
ASCII and Binary data records. Those logical records 
include transaction information, user-defined descriptive 
texts, fingerprint images in different resolutions and 
encodings (e.g., Binary and greyscale), a user defined image, 
an image of the handwritten signature of the subject and/or 
the officer, minutiae data, images of latent prints or Common 
Biometric Exchange Formats Framework (CBEFF) [19] [19] 
Biometric data records. It supports various image formats for 
the fingerprint image: uncompressed images, WSQ version 
2.0, lossy and lossless JPEG, lossy and lossless JPEG 2000 
and PNG. Images can be binary, greyscale or  colour data. 
The Advanced Forensics Format 4 (AFF4) [7] is 
designed for digital forensics. It is able to store multiple 
digital traces within a single volume. The data can be stored 
as a directory volume or Zip64 volume. Both, digital traces 
and meta-data can be stored within this structure. A directory 
volume is a directory on the file system of a computer, which 
contains the segments of the volume named after a unique 
Uniform Resource Name (URN). A Zip64 volume contains a 
Central Directory at the end of the archive, which consists of 
a list of pointers to each digital trace within the volume. The 
format natively supports digital signatures to fulfil the 
security 
aspects 
integrity 
and 
authenticity. 
The 
confidentiality of the stored data can be preserved using an 
integrated stream based encryption scheme, which supports 
different access levels. Furthermore, AFF4 is designed to 
support distributed evidence. 
A very similar data format, especially for the digital 
dactyloscopy, is introduced by Kiertscher et al. in [5]. It has 
a directory and a zip-file operation mode, too. In contrast to 
AFF4 it contains a tree of editions that can form a simple 
chain-of-custody to comprehend or audit the investigation 
process. It includes a hierarchical hash tree based on digital 
signatures to ensure integrity and authenticity for the data 
within the container. The underlying model supports 
encryption for the digitised traces and a portion of the meta-
data. However, all encrypted data must be decrypted prior to 
any transformation of the container. 
The database-centric approach of the Fingerprint 
Verification Database (FiVe DB) [6] has several advantages 
and disadvantages compared to the file based data exchange 
formats. It uses a watermarking approach for the digitised 
traces. The compression and difference expansion based 
watermark is embedded within the areas of the data, which 
contain the fingerprint. Those areas are compressed to gain 
storage for the meta-data. The embedded data is divided into 
a public and a private (encrypted) part. The latter contains 
the original fingerprint impression to ensure privacy. The 
embedded data contains digital signatures to ensure 
authenticity and integrity. The required location map for 
embedding areas is embedded throughout all data using a 
difference expansion approach. The hybrid database 
approach [6] employs user-defined functions to insert and 
read digitised traces. Those functions verify the authenticity 
and integrity of the transferred and stored data. Furthermore, 
it is easily possible to log any access to the data to create a 
chain-of-custody. However, FiVe DB requires a direct 
connection to the database to transfer the data. Alternatively, 
the watermark protected digitised traces can be exchanged as 
files, which enables a verification of the authenticity and 
integrity and ensures the confidentiality by the encryption of 
the private data. However, without the database the chain-of-
custody information are quite limited within the watermark, 
due to the limited embedding capacity. 
V. 
TECHNICAL DESIGN PROPOSAL 
In this paper we focus on the challenges of the 
digitisation of the investigation of fingerprint traces. Our 
technical design proposal is derived from the process model 
for the digital dactyloscopy ([4], see Section IV.A). In 
contrast to the process model we primarily regard the 
transfer of digitised fingerprint traces (Figure 1).  
 
Figure 1.  Our technical design proposal for a fingerprint scanning 
and analysis system. 
The technical design has to cover two possible use-cases: 
on crime scene trace acquisition and the acquisition in a 
forensic lab. Since we focus on the newly digitised part of 
the forensic investigation, mostly the phases of data 
gathering (DG), data investigation (DI) and data analysis 
(DA) are relevant including the data transfer between the 
phases. The technical design of a fingerprint scanning system 
must address the security aspects of integrity and authenticity 
for the gathered and processed data to be able to detect any 
modification (see Section IV.B). Thus, the final docu-
mentation should contain enough data to verify the integrity 
and authenticity of the data throughout the investigation 
process. Furthermore, it might be necessary to address the 
confidentiality of the acquired data to preserve privacy (see 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-182-3
CYBERLAWS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Technical and Legal Aspects of the e-Society

Section III). This is especially needed if the digital traces are 
transferred. A criminal court proven design requires a 
detailed chain-of-custody for both, the digitised trace and the 
physical object containing the trace (see Section II.C.1).  
With the data gathering (DG) the digitised trace is 
acquired. It is very important to retain a link between the 
physical object and its digital pendant or pendants. 
Therefore, multiple additional information, or meta-data, 
must be recorded. Such data includes various information, 
e.g., who acquires the trace, where is the trace acquired 
(especially for an on crime scene acquisition), when is it 
acquired, how are the environmental conditions during the 
acquisition or for which case are the traces acquired. 
Afterwards, the collected data is transferred for a detailed 
investigation. This might include the transfer over insecure 
channels, e.g., if the data is send directly from a crime scene 
to a forensic investigation agency. It is crucial, that no data is 
altered or leaked during the transfer to preserve the 
evidentiary value and the confidentiality also as a pre-
requisite for privacy. In the following data investigation the 
traces are prepared for the manual analysis.  
During the data investigation (DI) the age of a fingerprint 
might be determined, overlapping fingerprints might be 
separated and the visual image of the ridge pattern might be 
enhanced for a better visibility of features during the 
analysis. However, at least the separation and the visibility 
enhancement involve an alteration of the original data. Thus, 
all parameters how the data is altered must be recorded and 
the original data must be accessible, too.  
After the data investigation, the data are transferred to 
dactyloscopic experts for the extraction of biometric features 
and the subsequent identification of the fingerprint trace. In 
this data analysis (DA) phase additional data transfers might 
be necessary: transfer of the data to other forensic 
investigation agencies for the verification of the results (see 
ACE-V methodology [1]) or the transfer of the data for the 
comparison with AFIS databases (see [1]). The authenticity, 
integrity and confidentiality of the transferred data and the 
whole transfer process must be ensured because it might 
include insecure communication channels. 
If a particular trace is identified a final documentation is 
created. Similar to the ACE-V methodology [1], this 
concluding result of the investigation should contain all 
investigation results. The digitised trace itself should not be 
included in the report. Thus, it is not required to ensure the 
confidentiality of the data because it does not contain any 
biometric traits. The integrity and authenticity of the 
documentation must be ensured in a digital representation. 
Furthermore, the entire process needs to be documented 
within the process accompanying documentation. 
In the following section, we exemplarily evaluate data 
formats according to their suitability for a future fingerprint 
scanning and analysis system. For that we derive the 
following technical requirements from our design proposal: 
1. Authenticity protection, 
2. Integrity protection, 
3. Confidentiality/privacy protection, 
4. Ability to store multiple traces and intermediate 
results of the investigation, 
5. Ability to store various meta-data. 
The requirement of a chain-of-custody can be fulfilled if 
the format supports all of the technical requirements except 
the confidentiality protection. The process accompanying 
documentation, e.g., from secure logging facilities, should be 
stored as meta-data within the file format.  
VI. 
ANALYSIS OF FORENSIC DATA FORMATS 
In this section, we analyse data formats towards their 
suitability for a future latent fingerprint scanning system. 
The data format for the interchange of fingerprint, facial & 
SMT information (ANSI/NIST-ITL 1-2000) [18] is already 
used in forensic investigations for the data exchange between 
different AFIS databases. Hence, it could be seen as 
generally accepted and should fulfil the legal requirements 
(Section III.A). However, this format does not support any 
techniques to preserve the privacy or confidentiality of the 
transferred data. Moreover, it does not preserve the integrity 
or the authenticity of the transferred data. Only a digital 
image of the signature of the acquisition officer is included 
within the file. The format supports multiple samples of 
different biometric traits and user-defined meta-data. Thus, 
at least the technical requirements 4 and 5 from our technical 
design proposal in Section V are addressed.  
The Advanced Forensics Format (AFF4) [7] is not 
designed for the forensic analysis of biometric traits. 
However, it has several advantageous features for digitised 
forensics. The security aspects integrity, authenticity and 
confidentiality are sufficiently addressed by the data format 
if activated by the user or the used software. Furthermore, 
multiple traces or intermediate results and meta-data can be 
stored in this file format, fulfilling our technical require-
ments for a future fingerprint scanning system. Moreover, 
the ability to access data remotely through encrypted streams 
and the embedded access restriction enables a distributed 
investigation while preserving the confidentiality as a 
prerequisite for privacy. Additionally, different traces on the 
same object can be stored within a single trace file as a 
digital representation of the physical evidence bag. 
The container for the digital dactyloscopy [5] ensures the 
integrity, authenticity and, optionally, confidentiality of the 
stored data, too. It enables the storage of multiple traces and 
intermediate results within the container file. Additionally, 
meta-data can be stored within separate files in the container. 
Thus, the container format fulfils our technical requirements 
for a future fingerprint scanning system, too. However, if the 
concurrent access to different traces within the container is 
necessary it is required to clone the container, which requires 
a merging-strategy if the two containers are joined again. 
The database-centric approach FiVe DB [6] significantly 
differs from the file based approaches. The processed image 
files fulfil our technical requirements integrity, authenticity 
and confidentiality by the embedded watermark. A limited 
amount of meta-data can be stored directly within the image 
file. However, it is not possible to store multiple traces or 
intermediate results within a single image. The advantage of 
this approach is the superior access restriction and automated 
logging facilities of the database management system. The 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-182-3
CYBERLAWS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Technical and Legal Aspects of the e-Society

disadvantage is the limited support for a data exchange 
without direct access to the database. 
Table 1 summarises our evaluation for the data formats. 
TABLE I.  
SUMMARY OF OUR EVALUATION RESULTS FOR THE 
STORAGE AND TRANSFER OF DIGITISED TRACES (+ REQUIREMENT 
FULFILLED; - REQUIREMENT NOT FULFILLED) 
Technical 
requirement 
Storage / transfer 
ANSI/NIST-
ITL 1-2000 
Advanced 
Forensics 
Format 
(AFF4) 
Container for 
the digital 
dactyloscopy 
FiVe 
DB 
Authenticity 
protection 
-/- 
+/+ 
+/+ 
+/+ 
Integrity protection 
-/- 
+/+ 
+/+ 
+/+ 
Confidentiality 
protection 
-/- 
+/+ 
+/+ 
+/+ 
Multiple traces / 
intermediate results 
+/+ 
+/+ 
+/+ 
+/- 
Meta-data 
+/+ 
+/+ 
+/+ 
+/+ 
 
In conclusion, the current ANSI/NIST-ITL 1-2000 is 
insufficient for a future fingerprint scanning system due to 
the lack of any addressed security aspects. In general, the 
other formats in this exemplary evaluation are appropriate.  
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper we proposed a criminal court proved design 
for a new fingerprint scanning system. For that, we analysed 
current legal requirements and derived a new legal approach. 
We use this framework to introduce a potential design for a 
digitised latent fingerprint acquisition and analysis system. It 
aims at enhancing privacy and preserving anonymity. We 
preliminarily modelled the data flow and data transfer. 
Subsequently, we derived technical requirements for data 
formats using the technical design proposal and the legal 
approach. Our exemplary analysis of data formats using our 
requirements indicates that the currently used ANSI/NIST-
ITL 1-2000 format is insufficient especially regarding the 
security aspects integrity, authenticity and confidentiality 
and thus unsuitable for privacy preserving transfers over 
insecure communication channels. The other data formats 
are appropriate for a future fingerprint scanning system. 
In future work different sensors and processing 
techniques should be evaluated towards their applicability in 
a fingerprint scanning system. Furthermore, the necessary 
amount of meta-data for the chain-of-custody should be 
analysed to fulfil the requirements of criminal courts. This 
might improve the evidentiary value of each trace, too. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The work in this paper has been funded in part by the 
German Federal Ministry of Education and Science (BMBF) 
through the Research Programme under Contract No. FKZ: 
13N10820 and FKZ: 13N10818. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Scientific Working Group on Friction Ridge Analysis, Study and 
Technology (SWGFAST), "The Fingerprint Sourcebook," NCJ 
225320, 2011. 
[2] S. A. Cole, "More than Zero: Accounting for Error in Latent 
Fingerprint 
Identification," 
Journal 
of 
Criminal 
Law 
and 
Criminology, Vol. 95, No. 3, pp. 985-1078, 2005. 
[3] M. Hildebrandt, J. Dittmann, M. Pocs, M. Ulrich, R. Merkel, and T. 
Fries, "Privacy Preserving Challenges: New Design Aspects for 
Latent Fingerprint Detection Systems with Contact-Less Sensors for 
Future Preventive Applications in Airport Luggage Handling," in: 
Biometrics and ID Management, LNCS 6583, pp. 286-298, 2011. 
[4] M. Hildebrandt, S. Kiltz, I. Grossmann, and C. Vielhauer, 
"Convergence of Digital and Traditional Forensic Disciplines: A First 
Exemplary Study for Digital Dactyloscopy," in Proceedings of the 
thirteenth ACM multimedia workshop on Multimedia and security 
(MM&Sec '11), pp. 1-8, 2011. 
[5] T. Kiertscher, C. Vielhauer, and M. Leich, "Automated Forensic 
Fingerprint Analysis: A Novel Generic Process Model and Container 
Format," in: Biometrics and ID Management, LNCS 6583, pp. 262-
273, 2011. 
[6] M. Schäler, S. Schulze, R. Merkel, G. Saake, and J. Dittmann, 
"Reliable Provenance Information for Multimedia Data Using 
Invertible Fragile Watermarks," In 28th British National Conference 
on Databases (BNCOD), LNCS 7051, pp. 3-17, 2011. 
[7] M. Cohen, B. Schatz, and S. Garfinkel, "Extending the advanced 
forensic format to accommodate  multiple data sources, logical 
evidence, arbitrary information and forensic workflow," in Digital 
Investigation, 6(Supplement), pp. 57-68, 2009. 
[8] BVerfGE (Bundesverfassungsgerichtsentscheidungen, respectively, 
collection of decisions of the Federal Constitutional Court of 
Germany) 110, 1 (22 f.), 1996; 82, 106 (118 ff.); 74, 358 (369 ff.); 35, 
311 (320); 19, 342 (347 f.). 
[9] B. Kasper, “Freie Beweiswürdigung und moderne Kriminaltechnik,” 
Hamburg 1975, p. 119. 
[10] For data security BVerfGE 125, 260 (para. 224), 2010; also § 17 para. 
1 subpara. 2 Data Protection Directive 95/46/EC. 
[11] A constitutional safeguard according to BVerfGE 125, 260 (224). 
[12] In detail A. Roßnagel and P. Schmücker, “Beweiskräftige 
elektronische Archivierung - Bieten elektronische Signaturen 
Rechtssicherheit?,” Bonn2006, pp. 13 ff. 
[13] M. Knopp, “Digitalfotos als Beweismittel,” in Zeitschrift für 
Rechtspolitik, 2008, 156 w. f. r. 
[14] S. Tietze and K. Witthuhn, “Papillarleistenstruktur der menschlichen 
Handinnenfläche (Band 9),” Luchterhand, 2001, p. 76. 
[15] Bundesgerichtshof, decision of 25.09.2007 – (4 StR 348/07). 
[16] Pfitzmann, A., Informatik-Spektrum 10/2006, p. 353. 
[17] S. Kiltz, M. Leich, J. Dittmann, C. Vielhauer, and M. Ulrich, 
”Revised benchmarking of contact-less fingerprint scanners for 
forensic fingerprint detection: challenges and results for chromatic 
white light scanners (CWL)”, Proc. SPIE 7881, 78810G, 2011. 
[18] The INTERPOL AFIS Expert Group, “Data format for the 
Interchange of Fingerprint, Facial & SMT information”, INTERPOL 
Implementation Version 5.03 (ANSI/NIST-ITL 1-2000), [Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.interpol.int/Public/Forensic/fingerprints/ 
RefDoc/ImplementationV5.pdf, 2011 [last checked 19.11.2011] 
[19] National Institute of Standards and Technology, “CBEFF Common 
Biometric Exchange Formats Framework”, NISTIR 6529-A, 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/ 
nistir/NISTIR6529A.pdf, 2004 [last checked 19.11.2011] 
[20] A. Pfitzmann, and M. Hansen, “A terminology for talking about 
privacy 
by 
data 
minimization: 
Anonymity, 
Unlinkability, 
Undetectability, 
Unobservability, 
Pseudonymity, 
and 
Identity 
Management”, 
v0.34, 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://dud.inf.tu-
dresden.de/literatur/Anon_Terminology_v0.34.pdf, 
2010 
[last 
checked 22.11.2011] 
[21] S. Kiltz, A. Lang, and J. Dittmann, „Taxonomy for Computer 
Security Incidents“, Cyber Warfare and Cyber Terrorism, pp. 412-
417, ISBN 978-1-59140-991-5, 2007. 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-182-3
CYBERLAWS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Technical and Legal Aspects of the e-Society

