A Ship Honeynet Project to Collect Data on Cyber Threats to the Maritime Sector 
 
Stephen James McCombie  
Maritime IT Security Research Group 
NHL Stenden University of Applied Sciences 
Leeuwarden Netherlands 
Email: stephen.mccombie@nhlstenden.com 
Jeroen Pijpker 
Maritime IT Security Research Group 
NHL Stenden University of Applied Sciences 
Emmen Netherlands 
Email: jeroen.pijpker@nhlstenden.com
 
 
Abstract— This paper discusses the development of a ship 
Honeynet. The criticality and fragility of the Global Maritime 
Transportation System (GMTS) has been clearly demonstrated 
during the COVID-19 Pandemic.  At the same time, fleets are 
aging and their technology is aging with them and thus they 
are more vulnerable to cyber-attacks.  This paper will describe 
a project aiming to gather information on current cyber-
attacks on vessels using a Honeynet to gather data.  Honeypots 
are Internet systems deployed for the sole purpose of being 
compromised to observe adversaries. Networks of Honeypots 
are termed Honeynets and, like network telescopes, are 
typically deployed on an otherwise unused address space.  
While Honeypot/Honeynets are not new, simulating all the 
different systems of a ship to research cyber attackers 
targeting them is a new concept.  A ship in real life consists of 
multiple 
digital 
systems 
including 
for 
navigation, 
communication, safety, propulsion, cargo management and 
numerous other purposes. This paper will explain the concept 
of Honeynets and a ship Honeynet in particular, as well as 
their design considerations and benefits.  This paper will also 
discuss the challenge of making the Honeynet digitally realistic 
and attractive for cyber attackers to interact with and drop 
targeted malware and other interesting artefacts. 
Keywords – Cybersecurity; Maritime Security; Cyber-Physical 
Security; Vessel; Honeynet; Honeypot; Cyber Deception. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
This paper will discuss the concept, development and use 
of a ship Honeynet to gather information on current cyber-
attacks on vessels.  This will be achieved by luring cyber 
attackers to interact with the ship Honeynet and capturing 
that interaction for later analysis. The criticality and fragility 
of our supply chains have been demonstrated during the 
COVID-19 Pandemic.  This is particularly evident within the 
GMTS.  The GMTS is a system of systems and includes not 
just vessels but also waterways, ports, and land-side 
connections, moving people and goods to and from the 
water.  The role of GMTS in the global economy is 
significant with over 80% of the world’s cargo transported 
by ship [2] and representing 70% of global trade by value 
[3].  At the same time, fleets are aging, and their technology 
is aging with them and thus they are more vulnerable to 
cyber-attacks.  38% of oil tankers and 59% of general cargo 
ships are more than twenty years old [4].  Supply chains 
themselves are increasingly vulnerable to cyber-attacks.  
This is particularly stark in recent years, “…European 
sources estimated a 400% growth in supply chain 
cyberattacks in 2021 compared to 2020” [5]. GMTS is 
clearly a key part of global supply chains and will be 
increasingly targeted by cyber threat actors.  Since 2018, 
state sponsored threat actors from China (amongst others) 
have specifically targeted the maritime industry [6]. 
Honeypots are Internet systems deployed for the sole 
purpose of being compromised in order to observe 
adversaries. Networks of Honeypots are termed Honeynets 
and, like network telescopes, are typically deployed on an 
otherwise 
unused 
address 
space 
[1]. 
While 
Honeypot/Honeynets are not new, simulating all the different 
systems of a ship to research cyber attackers targeting them 
is a new concept.  A ship in real life consists of multiple 
digital systems including for navigation, communication, 
safety, propulsion, cargo management and numerous other 
purposes.  The Honeynet needs to simulate this. 
Part of the process is to make the Honeynet to appear 
realistic to potential attackers and the paper identifies a 
number of features that would make the Honeynet more 
realistic and thus more likely to attract and engage attackers. 
The ship Honeynet is going to use a technique proposed by 
Luo et al. [7] called intelligent interaction. The paper also 
discusses methods to capture all interactions with those 
attackers including connection details, commands executed, 
files dropped, and other relevant activity. 
The Honeynet data and any discovered attacker Tactics, 
Techniques and Practices (TTPs), will be used for a number 
of important purposes. To build industry awareness of this 
rising threat. To create research reports/publications. To 
report any identified vulnerabilities to vendors. Lastly to 
create realistic maritime cyber incident simulations for 
industry education and research into human factors. 
The structure of this paper is firstly a description of the 
background of Honeynets, etc., followed by a description of 
the cyber threats to the maritime sector, then the project plan 
and design considerations for a ship Honeynet and, finally, 
the conclusions and future research. 
II. BACKGROUND OF DECEPTION, HONEYPOTS AND 
HONEYNETS 
Honeypots and the use of deception against cyber 
attackers date back to the 1980s. Astronomer Clifford Stoll 
in his seminal hacking tale, The Cuckoo’s Egg, described 
when working as a part time system administrator at 
Lawrence Berkeley National Lab in the USA his efforts to 
uncover hackers who had penetrated his system [8].  This 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-996-6
CYBER 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

early Honeypot was born of his scientific approach to 
observe his attackers and get them to reveal more of 
themselves, “Do research...OK, I’ll watch the guy and call it 
science” [9]. In 1999, the Honeynet Project was formed with 
30 members from the, at that stage, small cyber security 
community.  Amongst that group of 30 was Lance Spitzner 
and he described a Honeypot as: 
 
“A … security resource whose value lies in being probed, 
attacked, or compromised… It does not matter what the 
resource is (a router, scripts running emulated services, a jail, 
an actual production system). What does matter is that the 
resource's value lies in its being attacked” [10]. 
 
Common deployment strategies for Honeypots were 
described by Scottberg et al. [11].  They include: “Sacrificial 
Lamb”, an isolated system that has no entry point to 
production systems; a “Hacker Zoo”, an entire subnet of 
Honeypots with varied platforms, services, vulnerabilities, 
and configurations, which are isolated from production 
systems; a “Minefield”, a number of Honeypots placed in 
forefront to serve as first attack targets; a “Proximity 
Decoy”, a Honeypots deployed in close proximity to 
production systems; a “Redirection Shield External”, that 
appear on production systems through port redirection and, 
lastly, a “Deception Port”, simulating services (e.g., SMTP, 
DNS, FTP) on production systems. 
 
III. CRITICAL CYBER THREAT TO MARITIME  
As stated in the introduction the criticality and fragility of 
our supply chains is particularly evident within the Global 
Maritime Transportation System (GMTS). 
In a 2019 report ‘Shen attack: Cyber risk in Asia Pacific 
ports’ – produced by the University of Cambridge Centre for 
Risk Studies, researchers described a hypothetical cyber-
attack across the Asia Pacific against 15 ports using malware 
that jumped from ships to ports.  They projected the loss 
could go as high as USD$110 Billion with the vast majority 
of that amount not being covered by any insurance [12].  
Such a cyber-attack on this scale has not as yet been seen in 
the maritime sector, but we have seen numerous ports and 
ships impacted by attacks using ransomware, destructive 
malware, and the even hacking of Operational Technology 
(OT).  These attacks have been initiated by both criminal 
groups and nation-state hackers. The well-known case of 
Maersk which lost over USD$200 million in 2017 in the 
NotPetya malware attack is a significant example [13]. 
In a non-cyber case in March 2020, the MV Evergiven 
blocked the Suez Canal and caused major disruption to the 
GMTS. While the incident was caused by human error rather 
than a cyber-attack it demonstrates the fragility of the GMTS 
costing some USD$9 Billion per day [14].  Such an incident 
could easily be deliberately caused by a cyber-attack.  The 
threat actor could achieve this by compromising the 
navigation or propulsion systems of a ship or in a number of 
other ways.   The aim of such an attack might be a part of a 
great power conflict (i.e., USA/China), a regional conflict 
(i.e., Israel/Iran), or by cybercriminals demanding ransom or 
shorting the stock market. 
 
IV. PROJECT PLAN AND DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS FOR SHIP 
HONEYNET 
A. 
Project Plan 
The initial phase of the project to develop the ship Honey 
ship is as follows: 
 
• 
Design of the ship Honeynet. 
• 
Initial deployment in a test environment. 
• 
Internal testing of the ship Honeynet. 
• 
Penetration test by EC Council Certified Ethical 
Hacking (CEH) students. 
• 
Initial deployment on the Internet. 
• 
Examination of result of initial deployment and data 
gathered on cyber attacker activity. 
• 
Analysis of cyber attacker information and artefacts 
gathered. 
• 
Subsequent deployments with improvements. 
 
B. 
Architecture 
Ships are a complex network with a wide range of 
information and communication technologies onboard. Ships 
also have networked Operational Technology (OT) often 
directly connected to their IT networks.  
Due to this significant complexity for the first version of 
the maritime Honeynet it was decided to just simulate the 
Integrated Bridge System (IBS) of a ship. This was to 
simplify the task for this initial version and also because of 
the critical nature of the IBS.  The IBS acts as the main 
command and control of a vessel as it interconnects various 
digital devices used for navigation in open seas and is also 
connected to other on-board systems of a vessel, e.g., 
navigation 
and 
control, 
propulsion 
and 
machinery 
management system, cargo management system and safety 
management 
system, 
core 
infra 
structure 
systems, 
administrative and crew welfare systems, etc. [15]. 
Additionally, it also provides a gateway to the Internet.  
The International Maritime Organisation (IMO) defines 
an IBS as combination of systems which are interconnected 
in order to allow centralized access to sensor information or 
command/control from workstations, with the aim of 
increasing safe and efficient ship’s management by suitably 
qualified personnel [16]. 
The main components that are part of the IBS are 
Automatic Identification System (AIS), Electronic Chart 
Display Information System (ECDIS), radar, conning 
display, Bridge and Watch Alarm System (BNWAS) / 
Bridge Alert Management System (BAMS), Voyage Data 
Recorder (VDR), and autopilot. Sensors like compass, speed 
log, and echo sounder are also providing information to the 
system in the IBS [17]. In most cases there is Satellite 
terminal connected to provide the access through to the 
Internet. 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-996-6
CYBER 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

The diagram in Figure 1 represents an architectural 
drawing of the ship Honeynet consisting of the following 
components 
ECDIS, 
Satcom, 
AIS, 
Long-Range 
Identification and Tracking (LRIT), VHF communications 
and VDR. These are the identified minimum components to 
run a realistic ship Honeynet. While not all the potential 
components of an IBS are represented the key systems are 
present. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Minimal architectural drawing of the ship Honeynet. [18] 
 
Figure 1 also describes the components that will each be 
hosted in so called docker containers. A docker container 
image is a lightweight, standalone, executable package of 
software that includes everything needed to run that 
application: code, runtime, system tools, system libraries and 
settings [19]. In practice, a container is easy to deploy and 
maintain. Utilising docker containers also provides security 
to prevent cyber attackers jumping from the ship Honeynet 
to the host system. 
 
C. 
Making the ship Honeynet an attractive target 
 
Considerations also needs to be made to make the ship 
Honeynet attractive and believable to potential cyber 
attackers.  
To make the IBS attractive to cyber attackers as possible 
the following considerations will be taken into account [18]: 
• 
Logical server location. 
• 
Logical sailing route with realistic AIS data. 
• 
Network speeds when using satellite should be slow. 
• 
Network signs of life with traffic between systems. 
• 
Logical entry point for cyber attackers i.e., Satcom, 
remote access portal etc. 
• 
System architecture appropriate to type and size of 
ship. 
 
The ship Honeynet is also going to use a technique 
proposed by Luo et al. [7] called intelligent interaction. The 
goal of intelligent-interaction is to learn the ‘correct’ 
behaviours to interact with clients from zero-knowledge 
about the maritime Honeynet. 
D. 
Entry point for ship Honeynet 
The entry point for a cyber attacker into the IBS is the 
satellite terminal for the first version of the ship Honeynet. 
Different 
vulnerability 
reports 
have 
revealed 
the 
misconfiguration of these types of remote management 
terminals are common. Leaving them open allows entry and 
also access to the network that sits behind it. So, when a 
cyber attacker is scanning the IBS they will find for example 
an open SSH port of the satellite terminal to attack and 
enumerate.  
A specific example of a possible attack vector for the 
cyber attacker and a way of gaining access to the IBS can be 
done by emulating a Cobham SeaTel terminal. This type of 
terminal is being used as a gateway to the Internet. The 
Cobham SeaTel terminal has vulnerability regarding 
injection of malicious JavaScript using the devices TELNET 
built-in commands [20]. This way the attacker can gain 
access to the IBS directly from the Internet then move 
around the connected ship Honeynet in a realistic fashion. 
 
E. 
Broader scenario development for ship Honeynet 
 
The research team have gathered information on 152 
maritime cyber incidents dating from 2001 to 2022.  This is 
currently being formatted and will be published in December 
2022.  Analysis of those different cyber-attacks will inform 
scenario development for the Honeynet. For example, there 
was a malware attack targeting a deep draft Vessel travelling 
to the Port of New York in 2019 [21]. The malware in this 
example was transferred via USB drive.  We would alter this 
ship cyber incident so the transfer could occur through the 
Internet gateway of the ship Honeynet since the introduction 
of malware via a USB is difficult to simulate within a ship 
Honeynet. 
F. 
Capturing the cyber attacker interaction 
 
An essential part of the maritime Honeynet is capturing 
the activity of the cyber attackers and storing it for later 
analysis. One basic but important element is capturing the 
source of the attack. The source refers to the origin of the 
attack and it includes the country and location. While source 
information such as IP addresses used by cyber attackers are 
often proxied to hide their origin or use anonymizing 
networks such as Tor they still may allow for attribution. 
Research on attribution has shown numerous methods of 
identifying the source of cyber-attacks [22]-[24].  This also 
includes examining the characteristics of the attack tools 
utilised.  
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-996-6
CYBER 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

Retaining the actual network traffic in the form of a 
packet captures is a preferred option for the project, but can 
cause storage issues if not managed carefully.  Other network 
parameters and connection information will also be captured.  
Naturally all cyber attacker keystrokes and files will be 
captured. 
 
G. 
Testing the ship Honeynet 
 
NHL Stenden University of Applied Sciences teach the 
EU Council Certified Ethical Hacking program.  Researchers 
working with students of that program will thoroughly 
penetration test the ship Honeynet for its functionality, 
realism and security.  This will be an iterative process as new 
versions are created. Students involved will complete 
detailed surveys to identify weaknesses and areas for 
potential development in the ship Honeynet. Researchers 
will also evaluate the monitoring and data capture to ensure 
it is capturing all activity of the cyber attacker. 
 
H. 
Secrecy and deception of the ship Honeynet 
 
While it may appear an unusual approach to talk about 
the ship Honeynet if the aim is to trick cyber attackers it 
believing it is real.  However, the nature of deception means 
that even if a cyber attacker reads this research they will not 
know when scanning the Internet and they find something 
that looks like a ship whether in fact it is a Honeynet or the 
real thing and may conclude that it is a Honeynet when in 
fact it is the real digital footprint of a ship.  Research on 
cyber deception has shown it may significantly slow down 
their progress and negatively influence the decision making 
of a cyber attacker [25], [26]. 
V. CONCLUSIONS 
While the design, development, and operation of a ship 
Honeynet is a quite complex project the benefit of 
intelligence that it would provide on current cyber attacker 
activity including modus operandi, motive and origin make it 
a worthwhile effort.  The project itself will involve a series 
of ship Honeynets to build capability and to explore different 
aspects of the maritime sector. 
A. 
Future Research 
One area of further research is to focus is going to be on 
developing a more mature model that also represents both 
Information Technology and Operational Technology 
networks in ship environments.  
This is a challenge because the maritime industry has a 
lot of standards for interconnecting components. The most 
relevant protocols are NMEA 2000, NMEA 0183, TCP/IPv6, 
and the latest one NMEA OneNet [27].   
Other options include exploring simulating various types 
of ship environments such as container ships, cruise ships, 
tugboats, and executive yachts. 
While a ship Honeynet in this case is used to study cyber 
attackers, it can also be a method to delay, frustrate and 
confuse them.  This is an area studied under cyber deception 
but also an opportunity for further research in this area. 
 
B. 
Benefits of the ship Honeynet 
As stated, the ultimate purpose of a Honeynet is to be 
“probed, attacked, or compromised” by cyber attackers and 
by this process we learn more of the nature of those attacks, 
the threat they pose, the modus operandi of those attackers 
including their Tactics, Techniques and Practices (TTPs), 
their motives and other relevant features of their activity. 
This intelligence will be used for industry awareness, 
research reports/publications, reporting any identified 
vulnerabilities to vendors, and creating realistic maritime 
cyber incident simulations. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank the contribution of the 
software engineering student group from Windesheim 
University of Applied Sciences, Rick Rijnierse, Erik 
Vedelaar, Stan van der Veen and Sami el Farj. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
J. Franco, A. Aris, B. Canberk, and A. S. Uluagac, “A 
Survey of Honeypots and Honeynets for Internet of 
Things, Industrial Internet of Things, and Cyber-Physical 
Systems,” IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials, 
vol. 23, no. 4, 2021, doi: 10.1109/COMST.2021.3106669. 
[2] 
C. Bronk and P. deWitte, “Maritime cybersecurity: 
Meeting threats to globalization’s great conveyor,” in 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
Annual 
Hawaii 
International 
Conference on System Sciences, 2020, vol. 2020-January. 
doi: 10.24251/hicss.2020.240. 
[3] 
W. Loomis, V. V. Singh, G. C. Kessler, and X. Bellekens, 
“Raising the Colors: Signaling for Cooperation on 
Maritime Cybersecurity,” Oct. 2021. 
[4] 
K. Tam and K. D. Jones, “Maritime cybersecurity policy: 
the scope and impact of evolving technology on 
international shipping,” Journal of Cyber Policy, vol. 3, 
no. 2, 2018, doi: 10.1080/23738871.2018.1513053. 
[5] 
G. Kessler and S. Shepherd, Maritime Cybersecurity: A 
Guide for Leaders and Managers, 2nd ed. Daytona 
Beach, Florida: Independently published, 2022. 
[6] 
Mandiant, “Suspected Chinese Cyber Espionage Group 
(TEMP.Periscope) Targeting U.S. Engineering and 
Maritime Industries,” Alexandria VA, 2018. 
[7] 
T. Luo, Z. Xu, X. Jin, Y. Jia, and X. Ouyang, 
“IoTCandyJar: 
Towards 
an 
Intelligent-Interaction 
Honeypot for IoT Devices,” Black Hat 2017, 2017. 
[8] 
C. Stoll and J. W. D. Connolly, “The Cuckoo’s Egg: 
Tracking a Spy Through the Maze of Computer 
Espionage,” Phys Today, vol. 43, no. 8, 1990, doi: 
10.1063/1.2810663. 
[9] 
C. Stoll, “The Cuckoo’s Egg: A True Story of 
International Computer Espionage,”. 1989. Doubleday, 
New York. ISBN: 0-385-24946-2.  
[10] 
L. Spitzner, Honeypots: Tracking Hackers By Lance 
Spitzner, vol. 52, no. 1. 2002. 
[11] 
B. Scottberg, W. Yurcik, and D. Doss, “Internet 
honeypots: protection or entrapment?” in IEEE 2002 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-996-6
CYBER 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

International Symposium on Technology and Society 
(ISTAS’02). Social Implications of Information and 
Communication 
Technology. 
Proceedings 
(Cat. 
No.02CH37293), 
2002, 
pp. 
387–391. 
doi: 
10.1109/ISTAS.2002.1013842. 
[12] 
J. Daffron and S. Ruffle, “Shen Attack: Cyber Risk in 
Asia Pacific Ports,” 2019. 
[13] 
L. Matthews, “NotPetya Ransomware Attack Cost 
Shipping Giant Maersk Over $200 Million,” Forbes, 
2017. 
[14] 
J. M. Lee and E. Y. Wong, “Suez Canal blockage: an 
analysis of legal impact, risks and liabilities to the global 
supply chain,” MATEC Web of Conferences, vol. 339, 
2021, doi: 10.1051/matecconf/202133901019. 
[15] 
M. S. Kaleem Awan and M. A. A. Ghamdi, 
“Understanding the vulnerabilities in digital components 
of an integrated bridge system (IBS),” J Mar Sci Eng, vol. 
7, no. 10, 2019, doi: 10.3390/jmse7100350. 
[16] 
BIMCO, “The Guidelines on Cyber Security Onboard 
Ships,” International Chamber of Shippinger of Shipping, 
vol. 4, 2021. 
[17] 
C. Hemminghaus, J. Bauer, and E. Padilla, “Brat: A 
bridge attack tool for cyber security assessments of 
maritime systems,” TransNav, vol. 15, no. 1, 2021, doi: 
10.12716/1001.15.01.02. 
[18] 
R. Rijnierse, E. Vedelaar, S. van der Veen, and S. el Farj, 
“Ship Honeynet Student Project,” Windesheim, 2022. 
[19] 
S. Bistarelli, E. Bosimini, and F. Santini, “A report on the 
security of home connections with IoT and docker 
honeypots,” in CEUR Workshop Proceedings, 2020, vol. 
2597. 
[20] 
The Mitre Corporation, “CVE-2018-5071,” 2018. 
[21] 
F. Akpan, G. Bendiab, S. Shiaeles, S. Karamperidis, and 
M. Michaloliakos, “Cybersecurity Challenges in the 
Maritime Sector,” Network, vol. 2, no. 1, 2022, doi: 
10.3390/network2010009. 
[22] 
S. McCombie, “Threat actor-oriented strategy: knowing 
your enemy to better defend, detect and respond to cyber-
attacks,” 
Journal 
of 
the 
Australian 
Institute 
of 
Professional Intelligence Officers, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 24–
41, 2018. 
[23] 
T. Rid and B. Buchanan, “Attributing Cyber Attacks,” 
Journal of Strategic Studies, vol. 38, no. 1–2, pp. 4–37, 
Jan. 2015, doi: 10.1080/01402390.2014.977382. 
[24] 
S. Goel, “Cyberwarfare,” Commun ACM, vol. 54, no. 8, 
pp. 132–140, Aug. 2011, doi: 10.1145/1978542.1978569. 
[25] 
K. J. Ferguson-Walter et al., “The Tularosa study: An 
experimental design and implementation to quantify the 
effectiveness of cyber deception,” in Proceedings of the 
Annual Hawaii International Conference on System 
Sciences, 
2019, 
vol. 
2019-January. 
doi: 
10.24251/hicss.2019.874. 
[26] 
K. E. Heckman, F. J. Stech, B. S. Schmoker, and R. K. 
Thomas, “Denial and Deception in Cyber Defense,” 
Computer (Long Beach Calif), vol. 48, no. 4, 2015, doi: 
10.1109/MC.2015.104. 
[27] 
K. Tran, S. Keene, E. Fretheim, and M. Tsikerdekis, 
“Marine Network Protocols and Security Risks,” Journal 
of Cybersecurity and Privacy, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 239–251, 
2021, doi: 10.3390/jcp1020013. 
 
 
 
 
 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-996-6
CYBER 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

