Cyber and Space: Information Warfare and Joint All Domain Effects in the 
Youngest Domains 
 
Joshua A. Sipper 
Air Command and Staff College 
Air University 
Maxwell AFB, AL, United States 
Email: joshua.sipper.1@us.af.mil 
 
 
 
 
Abstract— Cyberspace and space operations are examined 
here as interdependent, cross-functional, and co-dependent on 
the electromagnetic spectrum. The research methodologies 
used here are survey research and comparative analysis 
leveraging 
the 
myriad 
entanglements 
between 
space, 
cyberspace, and electromagnetic spectrum technologies. To get 
a closer look at how space and interdisciplinary cyber 
operations can achieve these effects, cyber and space 
technological relationships, doctrine, operations, and cross-
domain integration are analyzed and discussed. Through this 
analysis, it is found that these technologies have the intrinsic 
potential to affect deep enclaves of the electromagnetic 
spectrum, critical infrastructure, information infrastructure, 
information-related 
capabilities, 
and 
joint 
all-domain 
operations. These various technological and operational 
connections suggest various vulnerabilities and consequences if 
they are not properly secured and managed. However,  if space 
and cyber can combine and interact across the full range of 
operations, there is a greater possibility of achieving sustained 
victory and peace. 
Keywords- cyber; space; infrastructure; electromagnetic; 
spectrum; security. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The domains of space and cyber share many similarities, 
especially the fact that both are operationally akin to flying 
an aircraft that never lands, especially when referring to 
satellite operations. This, among other things, means that you 
never bring the airframe to depot for maintenance and 
refueling always takes place while the plane is flying. These 
and other similar properties were the impetus for the original 
assignment of Air Force Network Operations (AFNetOps), 
now cyber, under Air Force Space Command. Not only did 
the operational needs and mechanisms flow well together, 
the space doctrine and instructions made the most sense 
initially for establishing cyber guidance and procedures. 
Essentially, both domains follow the motto of the 26th 
Network Operations Squadron; Always On, Always Ready 
[1]. These two domains flow well together philosophically 
and operationally as both domains are mutually supportive, 
complementary, and critical enablers of Joint All-Domain 
Operations (JADO).  
The most inherently positive correlations between space 
and cyber operations are their technological prowess and 
global empowerment of JADO. Joint All-Domain Operations 
require that cyber and space, from a domain perspective, 
focus on enabling capabilities to ensure strategic overmatch 
against 
foreign 
adversaries 
[2]. 
Through 
conjoined 
technological enhancements, cyber and space both push 
boundaries within their respective battlespaces and the 
kinetic, traditional domains. This fact coupled with the 
interlaced operational constructs of space and cyber 
technological capabilities brings additional power to bear in 
situations where networks, Global Positioning Systems 
(GPS), timing servers, and communications are of paramount 
importance to JADO. Further analysis of these technological 
capabilities will be examined later and special attention will 
be given to the specific enabling actions and effects 
produced using space and cyber together. 
Doctrine is always at the forefront of any discussion 
concerning warfighting domains as it contains the best 
practices found in service and joint policy that guide and 
give weight to how wars are prosecuted. As with any highly 
technical subject matter, service and joint doctrine have 
historically found it difficult to capture the operational and 
tactical aura of the space and cyber domains. However, as 
further understanding concerning these domains and their 
capabilities has developed, an inclusion of their placement in 
JADO has begun to develop. This is vitally important as it 
relates to the aforementioned fact that space and cyber share 
a parallel function as critical enablers for all domains. 
Doctrine currently exists that points to joint capabilities that 
cross domains as this foundation is necessary for continued 
expansion and development of the domains and their 
intertwined nature [3]. Doctrine is and will continue to be an 
extremely important method for stating in service and joint 
terms how space and cyber will operate together and support 
JADO now and into the future.  
Every domain includes specific operational capacities 
and limitations. However, within the space and cyber 
domains, these proclivities tend to reach much farther into 
other domains than others might into their more technical 
and abstract auspices. It is in these specific operational 
spaces that a deep exploration must take place in order to 
grasp how space and cyber press and change what have been 
considered impenetrable boundaries in the past. It is in these 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-113-8
CYBER 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

“technological zones” [4] that cyber and space have 
significant impact, spanning operational Command, Control, 
Communication, and Computers (C4) while saturating 
Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance (ISR) and 
Electromagnetic Warfare (EW) as well. Operationally, space 
and cyber act not only as conduits for furthering operations 
in other domains, but also as equal partners, benefiting from 
one another and the air, sea, and land feedback loops, 
furthering the cyber and space situational awareness and ISR 
counterbalance. It is in this fundamentally cyclical and 
interdisciplinary construct that true combined JADO effects 
can take place.  
Finally, interdisciplinary cross-domain effects are of peak 
concern when considering the combinatory power and 
effects of cyber and space within the JADO construct. As 
Laird put it, “A future war might first begin with attack-
defense confrontation in space and network space, and 
seizing command of space and network dominance will 
become the crux to obtaining comprehensive dominance 
rights on the battlefield to further conquer the enemy and 
gain victory [5].” It is easy to sense the rhizomatic nature of 
space and cyber in this image of future conflicts. With the 
immediate battlefield advantage offered through feeding 
power into other domains with technological overmatch, all 
other domain spaces would naturally follow. Of course, this 
is dependent on numerous, complex factors within the space 
and cyber domains proper, not to mention the other domains. 
Some of these complexities will be underlined in later 
analysis.  
The remainder of the paper structure is organized as 
follows. In section 2, space and cyberspace technical 
relationships are discussed to add context concerning the 
various linkages and dependencies across these domains. 
Section 3 presents an analysis of cyberspace and space 
doctrinal 
connections 
and 
overlaps 
for 
appropriate 
interactions within joint and service doctrinal enclaves. 
Section 4 delves into the complex interrelationships between 
cyberspace and space operations to include linkages through 
the 
Electromagnetic 
Spectrum 
(EMS) 
and 
satellite 
communications and telemetry. Section 5 analyzes the cross-
domain synthesis and operability between space and 
cyberspace domains. Finally, section 6 summarizes and 
closes the paper and gives a forward perspective as 
cyberspace and space operations continue to coalesce and 
fuse. Technology, doctrine, operations, and cross-domain 
integration and effects are by no means the only 
considerations when exploring the cyber and space domains 
and their growing influence within military operational and 
strategic constructs. Nevertheless, these are areas of great 
importance that set the stage for many other issues of 
significance and consideration. Through analyzing and 
understanding these areas, a firmer comprehension of the 
overarching methodologies and constructs can be grasped. 
 
II. 
SPACE AND CYBER TECHNOLOGICAL RELATIONSHIPS 
Space and cyber are two domains, intimately linked in a 
constant technological surge for superiority and supremacy, 
both in military and civilian capacities. This linkage serves to 
produce ever more interesting and far reaching progress 
technologically while simultaneously presenting entangled 
complexity and problems. This is characterized by the 
amazing, and what Mills [6] characterizes as miraculous, 
technological leaps innate in cyber and space technologies, 
but also in security concerns and concurrent adversary 
advancement technologically and interdisciplinarily. These 
areas of import will serve as the crux of the following 
discussion concerning space and cyber technology, but also 
as a running theme represented not only here, but in the real 
world as cyber and space professionals have noted numerous 
times [7]. 
Technology in space and cyber are, although different, 
irrevocably intertwined and interdependent. As Madelyn R. 
Creedon, former Assistant Secretary of Defense Global 
Strategic Affairs, states, “the different physics and technical 
realities of space and cyberspace result in somewhat different 
threats. But despite the differences in our use of space and 
cyberspace, there are many similarities in the challenges 
[2].” These technological similarities are what drive space 
and cyber to continue the development of new and better 
technical methodologies for operations to meet the strategic 
concerns often seen on the horizon both domestically and 
abroad. These concerns are generally presented through 
vulnerabilities in cyber and space technologies, however, the 
technical realities of how space and cyber systems work 
together and are advancing offer ways to meet these 
challenges and work through and around them. For instance, 
the increasing capability to introduce more granular and 
advanced cyber and onboard space network information 
protection measures has increased and continues to increase 
rapidly. “More and more information can be stored and 
transported at ever-smaller scales, using profoundly fewer 
atoms and less energy per unit [6].” The accompanying 
miniaturization of components that can store increasingly 
more information more securely and stably offers cyber and 
space technological applications a way to protect against and 
drive past many of the current strategic concerns being 
forewarned. Additionally, as compared with legacy computer 
systems, current technology consumes over 100 million 
times less energy per logic operation, while working in a 
physical space more than one million times smaller with this 
same trend continuing exponentially on a daily basis [6]. 
And this doesn’t even account for nascent technologies such 
as artificial intelligence, machine learning, deep learning, 
nanotech, and quantum computing; areas showing great 
promise toward increasing storage, speed, and computing at 
a distance through entanglement of subatomic particles. The 
technological interleaving of the space and cyber domains 
strategically and operationally offer seemingly limitless 
opportunities going forward, however, with any great step 
comes potentially great opportunity to stumble as further 
discussion regarding security and adversary competition 
shall bear out. 
Security is a constant concern when dealing with any 
technology. The overwhelming desire of nation-state, 
terrorist, criminal, and corporate actors to gain access to 
information about and within bleeding edge cyber and space 
technologies presents a constant barrage of attacks and 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-113-8
CYBER 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

probes attempting to gain access and insight. But, even more 
sinister is the parallel desire to deny, degrade, deceive and 
destroy cyber and space assets. Adversaries across the 
spectrum from individuals and small groups to state and state 
sponsored cyber attackers, if not already, will soon have 
tools at their disposal to enact anti-satellite cyberattacks [8]. 
The consistent prodding and pushing to develop ways into 
cyber and space technological systems presents a growing 
risk to all domains of warfare, not just space and cyber. The 
continuing dependence of air, land, and sea operations for 
cyber and space situational awareness, navigation, and 
C4ISR carries with it myriad opportunities for mission 
failure. GPS is one of several examples of cyber enable 
satellite technology that could bring a rapid breakdown in 
operational capability if degraded. “These troubling trends 
are driving defense spending increases in resiliency and 
redundancy, including considerations of how best to achieve 
GPS-dependent Position, Navigation, and Timing (PNT) 
assurance [8].” It is only in protecting cyber and space 
technologies through mission assurance that operations can 
be continued, even in the most contested and congested of 
operational and information environments. 
Peer and near-peer adversaries present several risks 
strategically and operationally to both cyber and space in the 
technological sphere. As has been reported and confirmed on 
numerous occasions, peer adversaries China and Russia 
engage 
constantly 
in 
industrial 
espionage, 
working 
vociferously to catch and surpass the United States 
technological aptitude and advances. “Washington views 
Russia’s and China’s pursuit of Anti-Satellite weapons 
(ASAT), including laser-armed, satellite-hunting aircraft, as 
an attempt ‘to reduce U.S. and allied military effectiveness’ 
and ‘to offset any perceived US military advantage derived 
from military, civil, or commercial space systems [8].” With 
increasing regularity and persistence, China especially has 
sought to maintain a foothold in United States cyber and 
space systems, adding to the threat of espionage and 
sabotage on a massive scale. This can be seen in China’s 
strategic move to establish its Strategic Support Force (SSF) 
which, among other things, consolidates space and cyber 
power to advance China’s strategic interests in economic 
growth 
and 
technological 
development 
[9]. 
These 
advancements strategically undergird China’s dream to 
further their space program and pass that of the United 
States, reaching farther into space than has been previously 
imagined. With this enhanced reach and power, China could 
set itself up for economic and technological power projection 
launching the country far ahead of all other competition. 
“China aims to establish a manned space station by 2020–22 
and a space-based solar power station by 2050 to meet its 
burgeoning economic and energy needs, develop space 
science and technology, explore outer space, and land on 
Mars [7].” With strategic aims such as these, China stands a 
great chance of surpassing US technological capabilities and 
reaching the potentially vast resources contained in the inner 
solar system and belt.  
Technological reach, while only one area of interest and 
concern within the cyber and space operational domains, is 
nevertheless extremely important, probabilistically affecting 
every other domain and area of strategic interest including 
doctrine, operations, and cross-domain integration. With the 
technological piece firmly planted in the consciousness of 
military and government psyches, further considerations 
must be made to advance cyber and space technological 
growth and integration, security protections and mission 
assurance, and peer competition. Only through continued 
technological advancement in these arenas will the US be 
able to continue to lead the way in every area of global and 
space power insertion. 
III. 
CYBER AND SPACE DOCTRINE 
The interlacing of doctrine concerning disparate domains 
has always been an area of difficulty and potential 
breakdown, especially when it comes to highly technical and 
complex domain infrastructures such as space and cyber. The 
level of competency and understanding the technical and 
architectural requirements related to operations and strategic 
concerns, not to mention the deep tactical intricacies, in the 
cyber and space domains often makes tying these areas into 
other operations difficult. This is true not only for the 
traditional domains, but even more so between space and 
cyber since the technologies are always growing and 
advancing in capability and complexity. Doctrinally, the 
areas cogent to this discussion are space and cyber 
operational entanglement, operational thresholds regarding 
war and potential escalation, and the operational systems 
associated with these domains across the spectrum of 
conflict.  
As technologically diverse and discrete fields often are, 
space and cyber tie closely together due to their 
technological 
dependence 
for 
operations 
while 
simultaneously holding their own entrenched technical 
specificities. Regardless of any disparities, however, the 
space and cyber domains experience what can best be 
described as entanglement; the quality of a technological 
cause and effect relationship. This can be seen across the 
operational spectrum within space and cyber as certain areas 
of networking for cyber operations are space dependent and 
many areas of space operations from a networking and 
C4ISR perspective are supported, enabled, and driven by 
cyber operations. Cybersecurity supports and defends space 
assets, provides authentication and encryption to space 
assets, and uses filtering shielding, and spread-spectrum 
techniques to guard against electromagnetic interference, 
jamming, and other attack [10]. The transverse is true as 
space assets provide over-the-horizon communications, data 
linkages and network capability, network command and 
control, and ISR data for cyber operations, creating a 
continuous, complementary feedback loop. As doctrine 
concerning these cross-domain interactions is developed and 
specified, these relationships will become clearer and more 
defined. 
Both cyber and space domains share a similar 
kinetic/non-kinetic threshold as well. When it comes to the 
level of conflict that may lead to escalation and potential acts 
of war, both space and cyber present advantages and 
complexities. For instance, both space and cyber may be 
used consistently to degrade, deny, and deceive adversaries, 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-113-8
CYBER 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

leading to conflict below the threshold of kinetic operations 
that may extend into potential kinetic conflict leading to war. 
It is important from a doctrinal perspective to draw these 
lines and intimate the contrasts involved in these conflict 
situations. Questions such as what level of operations define 
the level of Anti-Satellite (ASAT) weapons, whether lasing 
or jamming are considered ASAT, for example, persist [11]. 
Differentiation must also be expressed regarding the various 
actions potential during wartime and peacetime. “Possibly 
only probing and reversible cyber-type attacks would be 
allowed in peacetime, but more permanent, damaging attacks 
could be executed in general wartime situations [12].” These 
issues must be discussed within space and cyber doctrine in 
order to help operators and strategists in both disciplines 
create opportunities and battlefield effects across the 
spectrum of conflict. 
The operational systems used to drive those operations 
are integral to the success of space and cyber operational 
integration. While it is usually not wise from a doctrinal 
standpoint to specify systems, it is nevertheless important to 
note that systems do exist and interleave. This is true for 
many domains and will only become more important as 
JADO continues to grow and ramify. However, space and 
cyber operational systems are often interdependent, leading 
to even more need to understand these entanglements and 
ensure they are spelled out in doctrine. For instance, “The 
term space systems refers to the equipment required for 
space operations, which is comprised of nodes and links. 
This includes all the devices and organizations forming the 
space network, which consists of spacecraft; ground and 
airborne stations; and data links among spacecraft, mission, 
and user terminals [13].” All of the data links, nodes, and 
other network linkages mentioned here are cyber driven and 
controlled. Unfortunately, this is not always specifically, 
explicitly stated in doctrinal sources. While some might cite 
the implicit understanding, it may not always come through 
to operators trying to ensure space and cyber assets and 
operational systems are integrated and working together. 
As doctrine inevitably shifts and changes with the stand-
up of the new United States Space Force (USSF), it will be 
increasingly important to ensure that space and cyber are 
linked and operationally related in every way possible. With 
the JADO concept of operations continuing to gain strength 
and significance, this will become even more important to 
ensure all-domain operation and superiority. As cyber and 
space entanglement grow continuously, the operational 
dependencies naturally present will need to be noted and 
explained in doctrine. The operational thresholds also must 
be framed and dictated to ensure the appropriate measures 
are prescribed across the spectrum of conflict. Also, 
operational systems related to both space and cyber domains 
must be interlocked and explicitly discussed in doctrine to 
ensure clear and concise operational understanding and 
future integration. 
IV. 
CYBER AND SPACE OPERATIONS 
As relatively new warfare domains, space and cyber both 
operate in distinct ways compared to the traditional air, land, 
and sea battlespaces. This can be seen primarily in the 
technological emphasis inherent in space and cyber, but also 
in several other operationally vital areas. Many of the 
operational support, training, and auxiliary elements 
associated with space and cyber are uniquely attuned to the 
specialized technical and navigability requirements for these 
domains. Without the proper equipment and operational 
understanding of that equipment, for instance, the space and 
cyber missions are intractable. Both space and cyber also 
contain imbedded operational vulnerabilities special to their 
battlespace environs. While space suffers the tyranny of 
distance, cyber suffers a tyranny of locality, both of which 
present different and convoluted vulnerabilities. Space and 
cyber, while young domains, also have grown and matured 
rapidly over the last decade, bringing with them amazing and 
powerful capabilities that have revolutionized warfare, 
making JADO and Information Warfare (IW) realities. The 
following areas of space and cyber operational elements, 
operational vulnerabilities, and operational maturity serve as 
major topics of understanding going forward. 
The operational elements associated with cyber and space 
are integral to the domains’ ability to interleave and 
prosecute missions. While some areas such as intelligence, 
education, and training are definitively carried over into 
these domains operationally [14] others such as land- and 
sea-based nuclear operations, cyberspace operations, and the 
overall missile defense mission have been suggested to be set 
aside as tangential [15]. While it could be understood how 
some of these areas might be considered tangential and need 
to be somewhat decentralized within their own domain 
structures, it is imperative that some (cyber especially) be 
closely held and integrate into space operations from launch 
to landing. This is not to say that USSF needs to hold 
operational control of US Cyber Command, but that the 
elements should work closely to ensure space and cyber 
operations carry forward for JADO, IW, and cross-domain 
support. Without this solid operations linkage, mission 
assurance could disintegrate rapidly. 
The potential disintegration relates directly to the various, 
specialized vulnerabilities present within the space and cyber 
operational constructs. As these domains continue operating 
together, they tend to rub off on one another to some extent 
as they both are highly dependent on their respective and 
combined technological scaffolds. “Technology can be lost 
in microseconds through cyber espionage, giving rogue 
nations the ability to catch up without the time or investment 
devoted by first movers [11].” The technical, strategic, and 
economic vulnerabilities to space and cyber are often related 
to what has become an increasingly lower level of entry into 
these spheres; one that will continue to present risks. 
Integration of C2 and other systems also introduces potential 
problems into operations as bugs and zero day vulnerabilities 
may lie unpatched [16]. These issues are various and 
plentiful and must be considered as space and cyber 
integration proceeds. 
Conversely, as the youthful domains of space and cyber 
have grown preternaturally over the last decade, they have 
taken 
on 
many, 
extremely 
complex 
operational 
responsibilities, leading to the development of JADO and IW 
strategic and operational concepts. As enabling and 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-113-8
CYBER 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

singularly capable operation domains, space and cyber have 
both found purchase in every area of warfare, leading to 
combinations and effects heretofore unheard of. For instance, 
both domains offer power and stability to information related 
capabilities 
such 
as 
Information 
Operations 
(IO), 
Electromagnetic Warfare (EW), and ISR that have allowed 
the integration and cross-disciplinary operation of all of these 
elements to produce IW effects. Consequently, “space and 
cyberspace have… grown from their original manifestations 
as supporting capabilities into warfighting arenas in their 
own right [17].” As space and cyber continue to develop and 
mature, the capabilities and technologies associated with and 
shared by both domains will doubtless continue to take new 
and conjoined shapes.  
Operationally, space and cyber are distinct, yet linked in 
numerous ways. Both share elements that can be integrated 
and moved fluidly through both domains while still being 
irrevocably linked to their own operational area. Training, 
education, and ISR are a good example as these can easily 
overlap 
operationally, 
feeding 
necessary 
information 
between all domains, further enhancing the JADO and IW 
concepts. Space and cyber also share similar vulnerabilities. 
While space vulnerabilities are ones associated with distance 
such as communications and networks, they also relate with 
the cyber domain vulnerabilities of the same ilk which are 
most often made difficult in the local, global ability of 
adversaries to affect devices at light speed instantaneously 
from a distance. Ultimately, the maturity of both domains 
have lent them the ability to operate together, exponentially 
increasing each other’s potential and effectiveness while also 
enhancing JADO and IW battlespace efficacy. 
 
V. 
CYBER AND SPACE CROSS-DOMAIN CONSIDERATIONS 
As IW and JADO strategic scaffolds proliferate 
throughout joint and service philosophy, space and cyber 
cross-domain effects and concepts will continue to pervade 
every domain. This fact makes understanding and 
performing space and cyber cross-domain effects all the 
more important and integral to operations at every level. 
While there are potentially copious ways to ensure cross-
domain considerations are attended to, the most vital 
components for discussion are cross-domain platforms, 
hardening across technologies, and IW and JADO 
superiority. Platforms within any domain are the bedrock, 
tangible resources upon which most operations rest. If 
platforms are not well designed and integrated, mission 
success is constantly in question. Hardening of these 
platforms and systems directly affects whether or not they 
can function since the protective measures from hardening 
often spell the difference between operational success and 
failure. If space and cyber missions are active, assured, and 
ready, IW and JADO can be mission assured, leading to 
victory across all domains, disciplines, and battle spaces.  
Cross-domain operations are, more often than not, 
supported and assured through platform integration and 
interoperability. This can be seen in the more traditional 
domains through close air support, ground support to naval 
activities, 
and 
other 
integral 
platform-dependent 
undertakings. The same types of integration can be seen in 
network support to space operations and space platform 
network support to cyber operations and numerous other 
examples of platform interlocking. Position, Navigation, and 
Timing (PNT) is one critical area associated with cross-
platform integration. “PNT information is a critical enabler 
for the delivery of numerous types of Precision-Guided 
Munitions (PGMs) including aircraft missiles, naval gunnery 
and land-based artillery shells. Synchronous timing provided 
by space-based PNT services is also a vital element of many 
military communication and information systems [18].” 
Another cross-platform solution deeply related to PNT is 
GPS through which coordination of cross-domain, JADO, 
and IW activities can be coordinated globally. These and 
other cross-platform necessities must be considered heavily 
in order to ensure operational stability.  
To ensure cross-platform permanency, vulnerabilities 
must be identified, addressed, and continuously reevaluated 
as new threats arise. While threats to space and cyber 
sometimes differ, they tend to overlap often as the 
technological vulnerabilities associated with electronic 
traffic through the EMS pervade every corner of space and 
cyber operations. Various attacks across the EMS and 
networks are possible including jamming, spoofing and 
hacking attacks on communication networks via space 
infrastructure, attacks on satellites, targeting their control 
systems or mission packages, perhaps taking control of a 
satellite to exploit its capabilities, shut it down, alter its orbit, 
or “cook” or “grill” its solar cells through deliberate 
exposure to damaging levels of radiation attacks on ground 
infrastructure, such as satellite control centers, associated 
networks and data centers, leading to potential global 
cascading effects on critical information infrastructure and 
networks [18]. With this level of destruction at adversaries’ 
fingertips, it is vitally important to consider ways in which to 
harden and protect the cross-platform infrastructures and 
information transmission dependencies necessary for mission 
completion. “Debilitating loss of space capabilities from a 
surprise attack; direct assaults with ballistic and cruise 
missiles; cyber strikes; or, in the near future, space-based 
weaponry could be anticipated within minutes [15].” Thus, 
hardening must reach outside of the kinetic norms while 
continuing to consider the wide array of possible adversary 
attack options. Several options exist for hardening including 
air gapping, strong encryption, and layer authentication 
protocols, many of which are already in use. However, space 
and cyber operators must always be vigilant as new attacks, 
vulnerabilities, and weak spots in human diligence are 
always present. 
Although 
cross-domain 
dependencies 
specifically 
between space and cyber are extremely important, the 
strategic and operational landscapes of IW and JADO must 
also be given full attention as these nascent concepts are 
growing in power and profusion. IW is currently defined as 
the interdisciplinary combination of information related 
capabilities (Cyber, ISR, EW, and IO) to produce effects. 
This is an extremely powerful panoply and lends its strength 
potentially to JADO as IW operational effects have the 
potential to create major weaknesses in adversary defensive 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-113-8
CYBER 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

and operational constructs. A prime example of this is the 
Israeli Air Force operation carried out in September of 2007 
against the joint Syrian/North Korean nuclear operations in 
Syria where Israel used a combination of cyber, ISR, EW, 
and IO along with its kinetic air capabilities to destroy the 
Syrian reactor. [20] This lethal combination is just one 
instance where the use of IW and JADO/MDO was an 
unparalleled success. Space factors well into these types of 
operations as well as the space-eye view enables ISR, cyber, 
and numerous other domain and information areas close 
access to battlespaces. “A state may, over time, create a 
resilient constellation of hundreds of networked satellites 
(national, commercial, and allied) that may be able to 
convince an adversary that its forces will not be able to 
accomplish their objective of denying space-derived 
information [19].” The same can be seen in the IW sphere as 
combinations of information related capabilities produce a 
united front during conflict by leveraging space, cyberspace, 
and electronic warfare assets [3] as well as ISR through 
imagery and other intelligence disciplines [17]. The decisive 
victory to be gained through JADO and IW interactions and 
integration with space and cyber cannot be overstated. 
Through a full-spectrum junction of this cornucopia of 
capabilities, space and cyber power can create and sustain 
effects profoundly into every space of engagement.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
Cyber and space, while the youngest of the warfighting 
domains, have risen rapidly in prominence, capability, and 
maturity to become the key JADO and IW critical enablers. 
This can be seen in the constant operation constructs of space 
and cyber as ongoing missions; planes that never land. 
Additionally, the technical prowess and capabilities of space 
and cyber make them integral parts of every mission area 
within every domain. Through the C4ISR and cross-domain 
enablement found in these young domains, information 
flows and operations succeed. Doctrine is an area constantly 
striving to maintain pace with technologically agile areas and 
must continue to shape and expand to fill gaps and tie 
together warfighting concepts as they evolve. From and 
operational standpoint, space and cyber represent the Gemini 
in warfighting constructs, complementing and completing 
each other while offering their superior operational 
technological scaffold for use in IW and JADO. The 
possibilities are seemingly limitless as are the challenges, but 
if space and cyber can combine and interact across the full 
range of operations, there is a much greater possibility of 
achieving sustained victory and peace. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 26th 
NOS 
motto, 
retrieved 
9 
July 
2020: 
https://www.afhra.af.mil/About-Us/Fact-
Sheets/Display/Article/432510/26-network-operations-
squadron-afspc/ 
[2] M. Creedon, “Space and Cyber: Shared Challenges, Shared 
Opportunities”, Strategic Studies Quarterly, Vol. 6, No. 1, 
SPRING 2012, pp. 3-8. 
[3] J. Caton, “The Land, Space, and Cyberspace Nexus: 
Evolution of the Oldest Military Operations in The Newest 
Military Domains”, Strategic Studies Institute, US Army War 
College, 2018. 
[4] J. Hay, “The Invention of Air Space, Outer Space, and 
Cyberspace,” Rutgers University Press, 2019. 
[5] B. Laird, “Space and Cyberspace Operations,” Center for a 
New American Security, 2017. 
[6] M. Mills, “Making Technological Miracles”, The New 
Atlantis, Spring 2017, No. 52, pp. 37-55. 
[7] N. Gowswami, “China in Space: Ambitions and Possible 
Conflict”, Strategic Studies Quarterly, Vol. 12, No. 1, 
SPRING 2018, pp. 74-97. 
[8] C. Kavanagh, “New Tech, New Threats, and New 
Governance Challenges: An Opportunity to Craft Smarter 
Responses?” Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 
2019. 
[9] A. Ni, “Dreams in Space” ANU Press, 2020. 
[10] Annex 3-14 - Counterspace Operations, retrieved 7/16/2020 
from https://www.doctrine.af.mil/Doctrine-Annexes/Annex-3-
14-Counterspace-Ops/ 
[11] T. Harrison, “Defining Space Warfare and Space Weapons,” 
Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), 2020. 
[12] P. Szymanski, “Techniques for Great Power Space War” 
Strategic Studies Quarterly, Vol. 13, No. 4, WINTER 2019, 
pp. 78-104. 
[13] C. King, D. Young, E. Byrne, and P. Konyha, “AU-18 Space 
Primer,” Air Command and Staff College and Space Research 
Electives Seminars Air University Press, 2009. 
[14] RAND Corporation, “Creating a Separate Space Force: 
Challenges and Opportunities for an Effective, Efficient, 
Independent Space Service,” RAND Corporation, 2020. 
[15] E. Dolman, “Space Force Déjà Vu,” Strategic Studies 
Quarterly, Vol. 13, No. 2, SUMMER 2019, pp. 16-22. 
[16] G. McCleod, G. Nacouzi, P. Dreyer, M. Eisman, M. Hura, K. 
Langeland, D. Manheim, and G. Torrington, “Resilience and 
Air Force Space Operations,” RAND Corporation, 2016. 
[17] D. Grant, and M. Neil, “The Case for Space: A Legislative 
Framework for an Independent United States Space Force,” 
Air University Press, 2020. 
[18] M. Davis, “Why maintaining space access matters,” 
Australian Strategic Policy Institute, 2019. 
[19] J. Moltz, “The Changing Dynamics of Twenty-First-Century 
Space Power,” Strategic Studies Quarterly, Vol. 13, No. 1, 
SPRING 2019, pp. 66-94. 
[20] V. Holath and H. Stark, “How Israel Destroyed Syria's Al 
Kibar Nuclear Reactor,” Der Spiegel, retrived 13 August 
2023: 
https://www.spiegel.de/international/world/the-story-
of-operation-orchard-how-israel-destroyed-syria-s-al-kibar-
nuclear-reactor-a-658663.html 
 
 
 
DISCLAIMERS: 
 
The views expressed are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of the Air Force, the 
Department of Defense, or the U.S. Government. 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-113-8
CYBER 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

DoD School Policy. DoD gives its personnel in its school environments the widest latitude to express their views. To ensure a climate 
of academic freedom and to encourage intellectual expression, students and faculty members of an academy, college, university, or 
DoD school are not required to submit papers or material that are prepared in response to academic requirements and not intended for 
release outside the academic institution. Information proposed for public release or made available in libraries or databases or on web 
sites to which the public has access shall be submitted for review. 
 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-113-8
CYBER 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

