Annealed Cyber Resiliency 
Cyber Discernment for the Launch Providers of Space Systems 
Steve Chan 
Decision Engineering Analysis Laboratory 
San Diego, California 
email: schan@dengineering.org 
Bob Griffin 
Tucson, Arizona 
email: bobgriffin@me.com
 
 
Abstract—Out-of-the-box and outside-the-wire thinking is 
required to identify sophisticated synthetic aberrations, which 
would bypass prototypical cyber defense systems. The various 
tools and techniques are somewhat important within the 
ecosystem, but an assessment methodology that embodies 
diligence, persistence, and learning over time can be even more 
vital than the various tools and techniques. This paper posits that 
the depth and breadth of any cyber investigation foray can well be 
achieved by employing an approach that is termed Cyber 
Discernment. In Cyber Discernment, a methodological robust 
decision engineering framework, Karassian Netchain Analysis 
(KNA), among others, is utilized to understand Negative Influence 
Dominating Sets (NIDS) or areas of instability and Positive 
Influence Dominating Sets (PIDS) or islands of stability. By 
ascertaining PIDS and understanding how best to mitigate NIDS, a 
form of annealed cyber resiliency, enhanced cyber security, and latent 
cyber stability can be achieved, thereby mitigating against 
unintended consequences, undesired elements of instability, and 
“perfect storm” crises lurking within the system. 
Keywords-space systems; strategic infrastructure; critical 
infrastructure; advanced persistent threats; outside-the-wire. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Generally speaking, systems residing within the “space” 
ecosystem constitute attractive “persistent targets” (for 
“Advanced Persistent Threats (APTs)” due to their serving as 
an “Achilles heel” or central point of failure for large-scale 
systems, their potential lack of stringently enforced cyber 
security regulation, and their relatively large and pervasive 
attack surface area. Considering that much of the world’s 
strategic infrastructural and critical infrastructural systems 
rely upon space-based systems, it would seem axiomatic the 
attacks would be channeled in this direction. Technically, 
space systems do not require substantively different cyber 
security systems from that of other strategic and/or critical 
infrastructure; however, as  these space systems often serve as 
underlying infrastructure for other strategic and/or critical 
infrastructural systems (hence, “outside-the-wire,” which is 
military jargon for being beyond the relatively safe confines 
of a controlled environment), they are not necessarily 
construed to be intrinsic to the referenced strategic and/or 
critical infrastructural systems and, therefore, are not 
necessarily subject to the same cyber security standards.  
Typically, space systems are relatively sophisticated 
pieces of equipment (e.g., hardening, compute capabilities, 
communications packages, etc.). Despite the involved 
sophisticated technology, cybersecurity standards for space 
system assets are not necessarily strictly regulated by any 
governing body; the relative lack of regulation segues to an 
arena, 
wherein 
space 
systems 
may 
lack 
common 
cybersecurity standards and may be subject to a myriad of 
cyberattacks. This is distinct from other domains, such as 
Industrial Control Systems (ICS), which are regulated by the 
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) and subject 
to, on a voluntary basis, the electric utility industry's North 
American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC), which is 
the successor to the North American Electric Reliability 
Council (also known as NERC). The United Nations 
International Telecommunication Union (ITU) regulates the 
assigned frequencies for satellite communications and 
registers the orbits of satellites, but apart from this aspect, 
there are relatively few standards at play, and cyber 
vulnerabilities remain a challenge [1]. 
While the seemingly lack of standards for such 
sophisticated systems is already of great concern, the recent 
trend of low-cost satellites — utilizing commercial-off-the-
shelf (COTS) technology — being launched into orbit may be 
of even greater concern. These “cubesats” have a fairly low 
barrier to entry with regards to engineering from a technical 
standpoint and are relatively inexpensive to launch (less than 
$100K). Considering the COTS nature of the satellite, it is 
likely that open-source software (OSS) is used prevalently by 
the 
components 
with 
the 
concomitant 
associated 
vulnerabilities. As has been debated over time [2], there are 
advantages and disadvantages to OSS. First, the wide 
distribution of COTS products and its associated OSS means 
that many people have access to the code base, and an attacker 
can extensively analyze the paradigm for vulnerabilities. 
Second, COTS products and its associated OSS need to be 
actively maintained, patched, and upgraded, particularly as 
cyber attackers are becoming increasingly adept.  Just as 
Managed Service Providers (MSPs) and Managed [Cyber] 
Security Service Providers (MSSPs) are leveraging early 
warning indicators, such as the National Vulnerability 
Database (NVD) and Sentient Hyper Optimized Data Access 
Network (SHODAN), cyber attackers are also leveraging 
these assets for exploitation opportunities and as attack 
accelerants [3]; security patches are often not applied, and 
software vulnerabilities or backdoors (which may have been 
intentionally embedded) persist. 
While the National Institute of Standards and Technology 
(NIST) Cybersecurity Framework is well-documented and 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-743-6
CYBER 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

widely adopted on a voluntary basis, currently, there is no 
mandatory reporting, via the Code of Federal Regulations for 
the Department of Defense-Defense Industrial Base 
Cybersecurity Activities (32 CFR Part 236). In other words, 
there is no mandatory reporting of cyber incidents by space 
systems organizations, which are responsible for space 
systems that enable other strategic and/or critical 
infrastructures. 
Section I provided an introduction to the paper. Section II 
presents the criticality of time synchronization for event 
correlation. Section III delineates the cyber risks and 
responsibilities within an exemplar satellite launch project. 
Section IV posits a robust decision engineering framework 
for addressing cyber in a defense-in-depth fashion. Section V 
summarizes the paper and alludes to future work. 
II. 
THE CRITICALITY OF TIME SYNCHRONIZATION FOR 
EVENT CORRELATION 
Among the various cyber-attack vectors, the criticality of 
Assured, Position, Navigation, and Timing is affirmed by the 
legislative direction of the National Defense Authorization 
Act for Fiscal Year 2019. In essence, it recognizes that 
“strategic high-end competitors possess the capability to 
disrupt systems that depend on [Global Positioning System] 
GPS which could pose an unacceptable level of risk … in 
GPS-denied environments.” Accordingly, a paradigm of 
“cyber-robust[ness]” is being emphasized by the U.S. Army’s 
Program Executive Office, Missiles and Space to “counter 
emerging threats.”  
At the core of the GPS issue is the fact that GPS-based 
clocks have become foundational to critical infrastructural 
systems (some are construed as mission-critical strategic 
infrastructural systems). Yet, despite this criticality, GPS-
based clocks are susceptible to a variety of issues and 
represent a potential cyber “Achilles heel” for the modern-day 
mission-critical 
strategic 
infrastructural 
and 
critical 
infrastructural systems. Along this vein, the term of art 
“cyber,” particularly within the context of the discussed case 
of the GPS-based clock, should be more clearly delineated. 
Among a variety of sources, the U.S. Army Cyber Warfare 
Field Manual (FM) 3-38 [4], “Cyber Electromagnetic 
Activities” (supplanted by FM 3-12 “Cyberspace and 
Electronic Warfare”) contends that “Cyber Electromagnetic 
Activities” encompass not only conventional cyber activities 
(e.g. Distributed Denial-of-Service or DDoS attack, which is 
an attack by which multiple compromised computer systems 
attack a targeted resource, such as a GPS-based clock. The 
torrent of incoming messages, connection requests force the 
targeted resource to slow down or shut down, thereby denying 
service for legitimate use), but also activities involving 
electronic warfare (e.g., GPS jamming, GPS spoofing, etc.) 
and spectrum management operations. Professor Todd 
Humphreys at the University of Texas, Austin demonstrated 
in 2012 that a software-defined small-scale spoof attack might 
be quite inexpensive to build and execute [5], and the U.S. 
Maritime Administration noted in 2017 that a large-scale 
spoof attack occurred in the Black Sea (a body of water and 
marginal sea of the Atlantic Ocean between the Balkans, 
Eastern Europe, the Caucasus, and Western Asia) against 20 
ships [6]. Spectrum management operations refers to the 
management of the spectrum. By way of example, the U.S. 
spectrum is managed by the Federal Communications 
Commission (FCC) for non-governmental applications as 
well as by the National Telecommunications and Information 
Administration (NTIA) for governmental applications. 
Spectrum management is a burgeoning problem due to the 
growing number of spectrums uses, such as over-the-air 
broadcasting, government and research uses (e.g. defense, 
public safety), commercial services to the public (e.g. wireless 
broadband), and industrial, scientific, as well as medical 
services. This is delineated in Figure 1 below. 
 
 
Source: FM 3-38, p 1-2. 
Figure 1. Cyber Electromagnetic Vulnerabilities 
As can be seen by way of various vulnerability databases 
(e.g. NVD), such as that produced by the National 
Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center 
(NCCIC) Cyber Emergency Response Team (ICS-CERT), 
there exists several GPS clock vulnerabilities that can affect 
the accuracy of the clock. This is unacceptable as correct 
correlation of data (i.e. event correlation) [7] to time (i.e., 
accurate timestamping) [8] is needed to establish a meaningful 
baseline against which anomalies can be detected. To 
rearticulate this matter, by way of example, logs are 
predicated upon timestamps, as can be seen in Figure 2. If 
these timestamps are manipulated, then the sequencing of the 
log entries would be incorrect; any subsequent utilization of 
detection methodologies [9][10] for forensic investigation 
would be greatly inhibited. 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-743-6
CYBER 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
Figure 2. Exemplar Log for Forensic Investigation 
There have been a variety of attacks against space systems, 
and interestingly, the attackers’ interest has not necessarily 
focused upon the space system itself, but rather upon the 
technology, which was enabled by the space system. For 
example, Kaspersky Labs discovered that Turla, a Russia-
based cyber-espionage group, had compromised a satellite 
internet provider and obfuscated their ensuing cyber-
espionage operations against countries ranging from the U.S. 
to various former Eastern Bloc countries [11]. By using a 
ground antenna, Turla could detect Internet Protocol (IP) 
addresses from satellite internet users and proceed to initiate a 
Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP) 
connection from the compromised IP address. This type of 
attack is not easily discernable, as it does not perceivably 
impact a satellite internet user’s performance (which depends 
upon whether the attacker and legitimate satellite internet 
users are using the IP address concurrently), and it is unlikely 
to be flagged by conventional intrusion detection systems 
(IDS). 
III. 
CYBER SECURITY RISKS AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
WITHIN AN EXEMPLAR SATELLITE PROJECT  
Unfortunately, the expanding ecosystem of cyber 
electromagnetic spectrum cyber vulnerabilities presents a 
dilemma for those involved in satellite projects. Satellite 
projects were technologically challenging enough from just a 
capabilities perspective (e.g., Ka-band systems are susceptible 
to weather due to signal absorption by moisture in the air and 
by wetness on antenna surfaces [12], [13]), but the spectrum 
of cyber-attack pathways given the growing complexity of 
systems [14] and the vulnerability to cyber manipulation [15] 
greatly exacerbate the situation.  
As an exemplar, the Iridium satellite constellation 
provides L-band voice and data coverage to integrated 
receivers, satellite phones, and pagers. Originally, the Iridium 
satellite owners had asserted that “the complexity of the 
Iridium air interface makes the challenge of developing an 
Iridium L-Band monitoring device very difficult and probably 
beyond the reach of all but the most determined adversaries.” 
However, at the Chaos Communication Camp, held in 
Zehdenick, Germany during August 2015, the conference 
organizers distributed 4,500 software-defined rad1o badges 
(a.k.a. HackRF), which were sensitive enough to intercept 
satellite traffic from the Iridium communications network 
(Iridium pager traffic is, by default, sent in cleartext, and most 
pager traffic remains unencrypted). Other vulnerabilities, such 
as in the firmware (digital “backdoors” embedded within the 
computer code as well as “hardcoded credentials”) have been 
cited in reports related to satellite communications 
(SATCOM) security.  
However, similar to other industries (e.g. automotive 
industry, ICS industry), space technology designers, 
manufacturers, and industry providers have progressed slowly 
in their efforts toward enhancing cyber security. Perhaps, it is 
due to the distributed responsibility. By way of example, as is 
delineated in Figure 3 below, A may commission the 
development of a satellite with B, which then assumes the 
cybersecurity responsibility of the satellite. B then outsources 
the satellite development to (and/or sources components from) 
to C and D, who each maintain their own cybersecurity 
responsibility for their respective components. When B 
completes the development of the satellite and delivers it to A, 
E is contracted to manage the operations of the satellite; at this 
point, E assumes cybersecurity responsibility for the satellite. 
Then, E commissions F to launch the satellite into space; at 
this point, F assumes cybersecurity responsibility during the 
launch process. The liability for this cybersecurity 
responsibility is often displaced to G, an insurance 
underwriter. Once the satellite is in orbit and is operational, E 
resumes cybersecurity responsibility for the operations of the 
satellite. Oftentimes, A will want to maximize profitability 
and will proceed to lease bandwidth and/or the processing 
capability of the satellite to other companies, such as H and I. 
Depending upon the usage (e.g. ICS), H and I will now have 
cyber liability as well. Due to the complex ecosystem of 
owner, 
developer, 
operator, 
and 
user 
cybersecurity 
responsibilities, there are a myriad of attack vectors along the 
cyber-physical supply chain.  
 
 
Figure 3. Cybersecurity Responsibilities for an Exemplar Satellite 
Project [16] 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-743-6
CYBER 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

From a certain vantage point, the cyber rationale might seem 
quite robust given the seemingly “logical” delineation of 
responsibilities, but given the lesson learned from the NASA 
Space Shuttle Challenger (Orbiter Vehicle or OV-99) 
explosion in 1986, metaphorically, all it takes is one “O-
Ring” (the primary and secondary O-rings, which were 
designed to prevent a leakage of hot gases were incapable of 
properly sealing the gaps between the Solid Rocket Booster 
(SRB) joints in extremely cold weather) for catastrophic (in 
this case, cyber) failure of the system as a whole. 
A. Cyber-Physical Supply Chain Issues at Boeing and 
Elsewhere 
As demonstrated by the July 2007 unveiling of Boeing’s 
Dreamliner or Boeing 787 (a.k.a. “B787”), supply chain 
structures are becoming increasingly multi-layered and 
complex. Along this vein, for the first time in its history, 
Boeing (the world’s largest aerospace company) outsourced 
its engineering of — and integration for — its aircraft parts. 
In it of itself, this particular fact may not raise any eyebrows 
until it is realized that more than 90% of the Dreamliner 
program was outsourced to a variety of supply chain partners 
across the globe [17]. Interestingly, for these partners to 
participate in the Dreamliner program, they were obligated to 
finance and oversee the development of — and assimilation 
for — the assigned outsourced specific part based upon very 
granular technical specifications provided by Boeing.  
While Boeing did indeed reduce its own upfront 
developmental costs, and its Vice President for Global 
Supply Partners, Steven Schaffer, was feted as the “Supply 
Chain Manager of the Year” in 2007 by Purchasing 
Magazine, the back-story, according to Stan Sorscher, 
Legislative Director at the Society for Professional 
Engineering Employees in Aerospace (SPEEA) (a union 
representing over 20,000 scientists, engineers, technical and 
professional employees within the aerospace industry), was 
that Boeing was shocked when it was confronted by a rather 
opaque supply chain and realized that it no longer had a 
crystal-clear vantage point as to what went into the detailed 
designs of its own aircraft sections. After all, since the 
suppliers spent their own funds to design and develop the 
various assigned parts, they also, naturally, retained these 
precious designs as intellectual property. Also, because 
Boeing had selected, principally, those suppliers, who had the 
financial wherewithal to both proffer the initial capital 
expenditure (for the specialized research and development of 
the specific part), as well as instantiate the cash flow 
necessary to accommodate the need for Boeing to sell an 
aircraft before the supplier received any payment, it turned 
out that the performance metric of technical capability of the 
supplier came, for the most part, second to the performance 
metric of financial capacity. Therefore, from a product 
development vantage point, numerous Boeing suppliers may 
have been sub-optimally selected, and in turn, these 
financially minded subcontractors outsourced a myriad of 
tasks to a further network of, potentially, lowest bid sub-
suppliers. Suffice it to say, not all the actors within this 
intricate sub-supplier fabric were commensurate with 
Boeing’s high standards for excellence, and an exemplar of a 
quality assurance/quality control (QA/QC) issue includes the 
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) asserting, in January 
2011, that the code written by an Indian software company, 
HCL Technologies, for the Dreamliner’s electrical systems, 
was so low in quality that it had to be redone [18]. Other 
commensurate situations include aircraft parts — being 
delivered to Boeing — that were simply unfinished. These 
shocking citations merely depict the proverbial tip of the 
iceberg as to what can go awry when transparency in the 
cyber-physical supply chain does not run deep; this further 
begets the question of how the cybersecurity protocols fared, 
if even the contracted core competencies were in disarray. 
In a similar fashion, the re-use, modification of open-
source software (OSS) code published by the National 
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and other 
space agencies have, over time, segued to “commercial 
offerings,” via wrappers around the OSS; this has muddied 
the waters of the cyber-physical supply chain with regards to 
its provenance and overall transparency. By way of example, 
sometimes, commercial solutions may quickly advance to the 
forefront, but in some cases, many are overtaken by various 
OSS 
projects. 
Among 
various 
reasons, 
innovation, 
particularly as pertains to the commercial offerings, may 
decrease after the product reaches a certain level of maturity. 
In several other cases, the more successful commercial 
solutions are comprised of either the original or variants of 
OSS projects. Accordingly, it is becoming increasingly 
complex to distinguish what was originally “proprietary” and 
what is a derivative work product. In either case, 
cybersecurity vulnerabilities abound and need to be 
addressed.  
B. Cyber Issues at NASA and Elsewhere 
In Fiscal Year (FY) 2015, an audit at NASA revealed the 
need for a revamping of cybersecurity standards and 
protocols. The audit cited several attacks on NASA space 
assets, which were not publicly disclosed [19]. Previously, 
the Office of the Chief Information Officer (OCIO) was 
responsible for cybersecurity across all of NASA. However, 
OCIO teams could not fully contend with both the 
infrastructural security of NASA’s various laboratories as 
well as the various attack vectors of its complex mission 
systems (let alone the emergent threats of the cyber 
electromagnetic spectrum). To contend with these issues, 
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) instantiated the 
Cyber Defense Engineering and Research Group (CDER), 
whose goal is to specifically to address mission systems, 
which may have unique cybersecurity requirements; in June 
2019, a report published by the NASA Office of the Inspector 
General (OIG) revealed that in April 2018, attackers had 
breached NASA’s network and exfiltrated approximately 
500MB of data related to its Mars missions [20]. 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-743-6
CYBER 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

IV. 
ROBUST DECISION ENGINEERING FRAMEWORK FOR 
CYBER SECURITY 
One mitigating cyber framework centers upon a [Big 
Compute] approach, as it is a blend of complexity science, 
cyber-physical supply chain science, network science, and 
decision engineering — “Cyber Discernment.” Cyber 
Discernment shows promise, as it works for a fairly 
straightforward reason: it embodies the characteristics of how 
the world actually works. To analyze complex real-world 
relationships, the utilized methodological framework — 
“karassian netchain analysis” (KNA) — is utilized [21]. This 
framework differs from traditional netchain analysis (network 
and supply chain analysis) in three critical ways: (1) it 
adequately considers the network of dotted-line relationships 
that are not codified elsewhere; (2) it expands the observational 
space to include the interactions among heterogeneous actors 
within a given “horizontal” layer of a supply chain; and (3) it 
captures the latent potential for actors within the horizontal 
and/or vertical layers to deviate significantly from the average 
behavior, which may have ensuing dramatic effects. 
Furthermore, through KNA, it is possible to identify specific 
local community structures within the cyber-physical supply 
chain, via discernible “shapes” (i.e. morphology) that 
correspond to specific conditions and/or adaptations amidst 
various pressure sensitivities. The identification of these 
morphological motifs are crucial for mitigating against 
exfiltration, such as of the Mars mission data previously 
delineated.  
While the social and physical sciences have traditionally 
tackled problems by breaking them into constituent parts and 
simplifying interactions between them, it is now clear within the 
context of the Challenger explosion that for the arena of space 
systems, the emergent patterns that beget predictions will appear 
only when problems are considered in their full complexity and 
local context. This approach vector will better illuminate cyber-
physical supply chains and pertinent local community structures 
that must be: (1) orchestrated to achieve annealed cyber 
resiliency, (2) leveraged to secure pathways for enhanced cyber 
security, and (3) amalgamated to serve as the backbone of latent 
cyber stability. 
The concept of “islands of stability,” such as for KNA, is 
exemplified by the “sandpile effect” (more formally, the Bak-
Tang-Wiesenfield sandpile model of non-equilibrium systems 
[22]) in which sand is dropped, one grain at a time, onto the same 
spot on a flat surface, until the addition of one more grain of sand 
causes an avalanche to slide down the slopes of the growing 
sandpile. In 1987, physicists Per Bak, Chao Tang, and Kurt 
Wiesenfield investigated the “sandpile effect” by using a 
computer to color the sandpile according to steepness—the 
steepest regions of the pile were colored in red, and the flattest, 
green; they discovered that a single grain of sand falling onto a 
red region would instigate an avalanche, which not only caused 
certain green regions to become red, but also compounded into 
a cascading series of avalanches that grew in size and intensity 
as it disturbed other red regions (i.e. cascading failure). Restated 
in terms of KNA, instability (e.g. a compromised component, 
such as an “O-ring”) can spread throughout the entire network, 
via islands of potentially unstable nodes; these small sets of 
nodes with the power to influence the entire network are known 
as Influence Dominating Sets (IDS). Just as a sandpile avalanche 
can create instability in previously stable areas, real-world 
phenomena (e.g. a compromised sub-system) can originate at 
just a few nodes (an occurrence of IDS) and eventually permeate 
an entire large-scale system. Identifying Negative Influence 
Dominating Sets (NIDS) in a given network requires a detailed 
knowledge and sophisticated analysis of the involved network 
so as to uncover the harbingers of instability and “perfect storm” 
crises lurking within a network, and, on the positive side, to 
identify opportunities to infuse latent cyber stability, enhanced 
cyber security, and cyber resiliency throughout the network by 
cultivating and/or influencing PIDS. One goal is to understand 
fundamental patterns and constraints that arise from those 
interactions, based upon the preliminary hypothesis that 
successful, sustainable coordination arises most readily out of 
PIDS, which can anneal a system and reduce brittleness. 
 
A. Utilization of Artificial Intelligence for Cyber Diagnosis 
within a System 
 
Without having conducted an interview or on-site 
investigation, it is difficult to assert what cyber paradigm 
should be implemented. However, the utilization of an 
apropos Artificial Intelligence (AI) paradigm, such as via a 
Convolutional Neural Network (CANN), for a preliminary 
diagnosis within a system has been successfully utilized, 
within a cyber context, to provide certain insights (particularly 
those at machine speed). An exemplar CANN is shown in 
Figure 4 below. 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Hybrid Model involving various CNNs and a Nonlinear SVM, 
which segue to a [Deep Learning] Convolutional [Generative] Adversarial 
Neural Network (CANN) Paradigm to provide certain cyber insights 
(particularly those at machine speed) [23]. 
B. Exemplar Posited Hybridized Solution Stack for Cyber 
Generally speaking, variants of an apropos AI CANN 
operating atop a hybridized solution stack to address cyber in 
a defense-in-depth fashion have successfully provided certain 
insights into the degree of cyber uncertainty and/or ambiguity 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-743-6
CYBER 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

in the system. An exemplar hybridized solution stack in 
shown in Figure 5 below. 
 
 
Figure 5. Hybridized Cyber Stability/Security/Resiliency Solution Stack to 
provide certain insights into the degree of cyber uncertainty and/or 
ambiguity in the ecosystem [24]. 
 
As can be seen in Fig. 5, there are groupings at different 
levels: (1)  End Point Behavior Monitoring (EPBM) 
(comprised of Professional Services Automation [PSA] and 
Remote Monitoring and Management [RMM] tools); (2) 
Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) (comprised of Network 
Intrusion Detection Systems [NIDS] and Host Intrusion 
Detection Systems [HIDs]), as well as Intrusion Prevention 
Systems (IPSs); (3) Security Information and Event 
Management (SIEM) and Security Orchestration (SO);  (4) 
Vulnerability Scanning (VS) (comprised of a Log [Analysis] 
and Correlation Engine [LCE] as a Monitoring Strategy, 
Container-Orchestration System [COS], and Dynamic 
Service Discovery [DSD]); and (5) Threat Intelligence (TI) 
(comprised of Threat Intelligence Platforms [TIPs] and a 
Threat Intelligence Processing Framework [TIPF]). Each set 
of groupings pass their outputs to a N-Input Voting 
Algorithm (NIVA), which acts in concert with a Fault 
Tolerant Averaging Algorithm (FTAA), via ensemble 
method Machine Learning (ML). For Intrusion Detection, C-
1, C-2, and C-3 passed their outputs to NIVA-1, whose output 
was refined by FTAA and the resultant was N-1 (red 
pathway). For VS, H-1, H-2, H-3, and H-4 passed their 
outputs to NIVA-2, whose output was refined by FTAA and 
the resultant was N-2 (red pathway). For TI, J-1 and J-2 
passed their outputs to NIVA-3, whose output was refined by 
FTAA and the resultant was N-3 (red pathway). The FTAA 
refinement pathways are illuminated (green pathway). The 
various interim steps were as follows: (A-1)&(B-1)->(L-1), 
(N-1)&(D-1)->(L-2), (E-1)&(F-1)->(L-3), (G-1)&(N-2)&(I-
1)->(L-4), and (K-1)&(N-3)->(L-5). Each layer of the 
solution stack passed its output to the layer above; hence, 
EPBM (L-1) -> IDS (L-2) -> SIEM (L-3)  -> VS (L-4) -> TI 
(L-5) (purple pathway). Of course, the TIPF fed its output 
back to the SIEM, and the VS repertoire fed its output to the 
LCE (orange pathway).  
C. Assessment Methodology 
The learnings behind Figure 4 were that certain cyber 
insights (particularly those at machine speed) are necessary 
to understand the IDS described for KNA. The learnings 
behind Figure 5 were that certain cyber insights (particularly 
to identify the degree of uncertainty and/or ambiguity at each 
level in the ecosystem) are also necessary to contextualize the 
PIDS and NIDS as part of KNA.  
The various tools and techniques are somewhat important 
within the ecosystem, but an assessment methodology that 
embodies diligence, persistence, and learning over time can 
be even more vital than the various tools and techniques. 
Figure 6 shows a common motif to intentional skewing of 
timestamping so as to adversely impact the timestamping (in 
this case, GPS-based timestamping paradigm for the Phasor 
Measurement Units [PMUs] of an ICS ecosystem was 
affected) paradigm for pertinent logs. It is emblematic of the 
outside-the-wire and out-of-the-box thinking required to 
identify sophisticated synthetic aberrations, which would 
bypass prototypical cyber defense systems. 
 
 
 
Figure 6. The Diligence and Persistence of Baselining Data over Time so as 
to identify Aberrations within the Timestamping Paradigm. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The public has already raised the specter of cybersecurity to 
space technology designers, manufacturers, and providers, such 
as SpaceX [25]. The dialectic is growing with intensity. As can 
be gleaned from the Boeing case study, there is a dilemma with 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-743-6
CYBER 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

regards to driving down production costs amidst the ever-
increasing complexity of the cyber-physical supply chain; global 
supply chains exacerbate this dilemma. From our longitudinal 
research within this arena, we posit that the depth and breadth of 
any cyber investigation foray can well be achieved by employing 
an approach that we term Cyber Discernment. In Cyber 
Discernment, a methodological robust decision engineering 
framework, karassian netchain analysis (KNA), among others, 
is utilized to understand Negative Influence Dominating Sets 
(NIDS) or areas of instability and Positive Influence Dominating 
Sets (PIDS) or islands of stability. By understanding both 
heuristics and algorithmics for cyber at machine speed and 
ascertaining PIDS as well as understanding how best to mitigate 
NIDS, a form of annealed cyber resiliency, enhanced cyber 
security, and latent cyber stability can be achieved, thereby 
mitigating against unintended consequences, undesired elements 
of instability, and “perfect storm” crises lurking within the 
system. Future work will provide further anonymized case 
studies beyond those presented thus far. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank I. Oktavianti and O. Prafito 
for their invaluable assistance with completing this paper. 
Without their ongoing assistance, the production of this paper 
would have been delayed. The authors would also like to 
thank the Decision Engineering Analysis Laboratory for the 
support in completing the requirements for this paper.  
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Chan, Chapter 5, “Measuring the Information Society, 150th 
Anniversary 
Edition” 
United 
Nations 
International 
Telecommunication Union (ITU), pp. 147-185, 2015. 
[2] R. Spousta and S. Chan “Milk or Wine: Are Critical 
Infrastructure Protection Architectures Improving with Age?” 
Journal of Challenges, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1-13, 2015. 
[3] S. Chan, “Prototype Orchestration Framework as a High 
Exposure Dimension Cyber Defense Accelerant Amidst Ever-
Increasing Cycles of Adaptation by Attackers: A Modified 
Deep Belief Network Accelerated by a Stacked Generative 
Adversarial Network for Enhanced Event Correlation,” The 
Third International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and 
Cyber-Systems, pp. 28-38, 2018. 
[4] “U.S. Army Cyber Warfare Field Manual (FM) 3-38,” 
Department of the Army, February 2014. 
[5] “UT Austin Researchers Successfully Spoof an $80 million 
Yacht at Sea,” UT News, The University of Texas at Austin, 
July 2013. 
[6] Maritime 
Administration 
(MARAD), 
“2017-005A-GPS 
Interference-Black Sea,” U.S. Department of Transportation. 
2017.  
[7] S. Chan, “Quality Assurance/Quality Control Engine for Power 
Outage Mitigation: The Challenge of Event Correlation for a 
Smart Grid Architecture Amidst Data Quality Issues,” 
Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing. 
[8] S. Chan, “A Potential Cascading Succession of Cyber 
Electromagnetic Achilles’ Heels in the Power Grid: The 
Challenge of Time Synchronization for Power System 
Disturbance Monitoring Equipment in a Smart Grid Amidst 
Cyber 
Electromagnetic 
Vulnerabilities,” 
Advances 
in 
Information and Communication: Proceedings of the 2019 
Future of Information and Communication Conference (FICC), 
vol. 2, pp. 912-935, 2019. 
[9] R. Spousta and S. Chan, “Electrical Islanding Detection based 
on the Integration of Synchronized Phasor Measurements,” 
IEEE Future Technologies Conference (FTC) 2016, pp. 68–73, 
December 2016. 
[10] S. Chan, “Methods and Apparatus for Detecting and Correcting 
Instabilities within a Power Distribution System,” U.S. Patent 
Trademark Office (PTO), August 2016. 
[11] Kaspersky’s Global Research and Analysis Team (GReAT), 
“The Epic Turla Operation,” SecureList, August 2014.  
[12] S. Sala, et al., “Mitigation of Rain-Induced Ka-Band 
Attenuation and Enhancement of Communications Resiliency 
in Sub-Saharan Africa,” Proceedings Annual Workshop of the 
AIS Special Interest Group for ICT in Global Development, 
December 2013. 
[13] R. Spousta, S. Chan, and B. Griffin, “Space 2.0: Expanding 
Global Internet Accessibility,” The Fourth International 
Conference on Data Analytics, pp. 17-24, 2015. 
[14] S. Chan and S. Sala, “Sensemaking and Robust Decision 
Engineering: Synchrophasors and their Application for a 
Secure Smart Grid,” 7th IEEE International Conference on 
Digital Ecosystems and Technologies (DEST), pp. 102-107, 
July 2013. 
[15] R. Spousta and S. Chan, “Ocean Data Vulnerability to Cyber 
Manipulation 
and 
Consequences 
for 
Infrastructural 
Resilience,” IEEE Future Technologies Conference (FTC), pp. 
672-680, December 2016. 
[16] “Insuring Space Activities,” Aon Risk Solutions, October 16. 
[17] R. 
Preston, 
“Sorry, 
But 
Outsourcing 
Isn’t 
Evil,” 
InformationWeek, 3 August 2012. 
[18] P. Cohan, “Is the Boeing 787’s electrical system working?” 
Daily Finance, 20 August 2009. 
[19] P. Martin, “NASA’s Management of the Deep Space 
Network,” NASA Office of Audits, pp. 1-42, March 2015.  
[20] P. Martin, “NASA Cybersecurity: An Examination of the 
Agency’s Information Security,” Testimony before the 
Subcommittee on Investigations and Oversight, House 
Committee on Science, Space, and Technology, pp. 1-9, 
February 2012.  
[21] S. Chan, “Robust Decision Engineering: Collaborative Big 
Data and its Application to International Development/Aid,” 
8th International Conference on Collaborative Computing: 
Networking, 
Applications 
and 
Worksharing 
(CollaborateCom), pp. 597-604, December 2011. 
[22] P. Bak, C. Tang, and K. Wiesenfeld, “Self-Organized 
Criticality,” Physical Review, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 364-375, July 
1988. 
[23] S. Chan, I. Oktavianti,1 V. Puspita, and P. Nopphawan, 
“Convolutional Adversarial Neural Network (CANN) for Fault 
Diagnosis within a Power System: Addressing the Challenge 
of Event Correlation for Diagnosis by Power Disturbance 
Monitoring Equipment in a Smart Grid,” The 2nd IEEE 
International Conference on Information and Communications 
Technology (2nd ICOIACT 2019), July 2019. 
[24] S. Chan, “Prototype Open-Source Software Stack for the 
Reduction of False Positives and Negatives in the Detection of 
Cyber Indicators of Compromise and Attack: Hybridized Log 
Analysis Correlation Engine and Container-Orchestration 
System 
Supplemented 
by 
Ensemble 
Method 
Voting 
Algorithms for Enhanced Event Correlation,” The Third 
International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-
Systems, pp. 39-48, 2018. 
[25] Z. Abbany, “SpaceX’s Starlink satellite internet: It’s time for 
tough talk on cyber security in space,” Deutsche Welle, 2018, 
[Online]. Available from: https://www.dw.com/en/spacexs-
starlink-satellite-internet-its-time-for-tough-talk-on-cyber-
security-in-space/a-42678704/   2019.05.27     
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-743-6
CYBER 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

