CyberSDnL: A Roadmap to Cyber Security Device Nutrition Label
Abdullahi Arabo
Computer Science and Creative Technologies
The University of the West of England
Bristol UK
Email: abdullahi.arabo@uwe.ac.uk
Abstract—Security issues mainly evolve from attacking the weak-
est link within the chain of the ecosystem. One of such weakest
links with poor security posture is the smart devices used within
a smart space and as Bring Your Own Device (BOYD) for the
corporate sector. The main focus of this paper is to brieﬂy
highlight the issues and present a roadmap that will facilitate
better cyber security footings for smart spaces ecosystems. Based
on our ﬁndings, we have also proposed a Cyber Security Device
nutrition Label (CyberSDnL) conceptual framework as a contri-
bution to the knowledge within this ﬁeld. Our contributions are
threefold: 1) inform the user of the risk associated with their
device; this is also a crucial requirement for organization in
reference to the development of the new General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR) 2) try to inﬂuence manufacturers to change
their attitudes towards producing unsecured devices and 3)
use this as a platform to create early warning systems to the
ecosystem that will be able to stop already infected/insecure
devices from proliferating vulnerabilities or risking the entire
network/ecosystem from an attack.
Keywords–smart device security; privacy; cyber security; security
labels; moving target defense.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Communications technologies, devices, and services are
becoming more interconnected; hence an enabled future In-
ternet of Things (IoT) connected home. Even though this
development offers extensive assistance to home users, it also
gives rise to new security threats as this device act as a means
of data crowd-sensing agents. The development of ubiquitous
computing; IoT to be more speciﬁc, has empowered the
concept of a connected home ecosystem. This notion is around
content anywhere, crowd-sensing and information sharing. Use
of IoT devices within connected home ecosystems spawns a
cumulative volume of data, habitually lacking the assent of the
user, or the user being absolutely cognisant of the insinuations
of partaking their personal data. This paper provides a new and
easy to use security framework for home devices, with the aim
of minimizing the security and privacy threats identiﬁed.
Arguably the Internet is one of the utmost human suc-
cesses in terms of inter-connectivity of things and general
telecommunication. However, the development of connected
home ecosystems as a result of ubiquitous computing and
IoT, promises to make things even more challenging in terms
of security and offers more possibilities for improving our
way of lives. As a result, users are demanding for seamless
inter-connectivity of things to offer countless capabilities to
users within their homes and ofﬁces. This development is a
welcome development, nonetheless, it needs to be noted that
it opens up more security and privacy issues for users and
critical infrastructure. While we have knowledge of some of
the possible vulnerabilities, that are normally only associated
with traditional infrastructures, there has been little research
and into the individual privacy matters as a result of an
interconnected system where devices, with various level of
complexity and security, exchange information via a wireless
connection to the Internet. Interconnected smart spaces are
acting as agent for crowd-sensing. An example of this merging
is the control and monitoring of smart grid infrastructures via
the use of mobile phones powered either using Android or
iOS. Developments within the interconnected ecosystem and
demand or seamless and wireless smart grid, coupled with the
defencelessness of the smart connected home, will unavoidably
lead to consequences in the event of a hacking attack, malware
infection or Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS), while the
assortment of interconnected systems will likely convert a hub
for criminal events, privacy breaches, and other cyber attacks,
developing in a life-threatening security hallucination for users
[2]. None of these devices used within such environments are
developed and deployed with the capability or consideration
of being shielded from hacking. Meanwhile, most IoT devices
are designed to operate autonomously without considering long
periods security protection.
The pace at which they have been spreading is growing
exponentially: multiple studies suggest that more than 20
billion smart devices will be circulating by 2020 [9]. Such a
complex interconnection and exchange of information requires
the development of sophisticated technologies that will allow
users, organizations, and the devices themselves, to be reliable,
secure and efﬁcient: the main purpose of a smart object is to
make the life of the user easier [26]. The growing presence
of these devices in our households also points to a level of
trust that the consumer has in them. This reliance also led to
question the quality, the security of the whole infrastructure,
while pointing to the issue of privacy: where is personal
information stored? Are they secured? Can we make sure that
what we want to keep quiet, will remain private? These and
additional questions were at the start of the development of
the paper that this paper will explore.
Information security is can essentially be considered a
societal problem rather than scientiﬁc issues. IoT provides
avenues for people to generate snowballing volume of data,
often lacking users knowledge, permissions and knowing its
consequences. Whereby, this information is either administered
by the service provider cloud service or other third parties. The
development and inter-connectivity of smart devices within
a connected ecosystem will be a vulnerability threat to an
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-683-5
CYBER 2018 : The Third International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

individual user or a cumulative community of users. It is
only now that society is starting to understand the security
implications and costs of privacy, in both its legal and ethical
senses [1]. Oberheide and Jahanian [29] have explored when
and why it is more difﬁcult to secure mobile devices in
comparison to non-mobile equivalents. They derive a set of
principles for mobile security.
A major issue that will be addressed is the freedom of
information currently being presented on the devices that we
use every day. At the present, this information is being shown
or heard without any regard to whom that information is
related too. The paper will address this issue by attempting
to identify insecure apps and devices that not only hide
or reveal information while been installed hence providing
context-based security solutions, in the other words it will
build a system which is privacy aware of its surroundings.
Preliminary research found out that the concept of privacy
is understood in a different way than the one used in this
paper. The literature Xu [25] and Brauchi [6] addresses privacy
concerns in a parallel to way to security concern, so privacy
of information means that they are not shared outside the
household or refers in general to the possible unwanted sharing
of personal information as an issue of conﬁdentiality [16]. For
the aim of the paper, when talking about privacy, it will indicate
the personal users privacy, and his ability to decide whether
he wants to share his own information with other users, within
the household, or not.
Consequently, we will look at the main cyber security
challenges of living in a Smart Home, along with the security
and privacy threats that are presented in Smart Home Devices
today. The outcome of the research will be used to outline
fundamental requirements needed to provide secure and con-
ﬁdential operations in Smart Homes, by providing the user
the security rating label for each device used within their
ecosystems.
The rest of the paper is structured as follow, in section II we
highlight the key state of the art and related work. Section III
provides a description of our proposed conceptual framework,
with more details on the use of trafﬁc light systems as key
to device security nutrition labeling. The proof of concept of
the framework is been presented and discussed in section IV,
with key ﬁndings. Sections V concludes the paper with future
research directions in terms of creating a moving target defense
for zero trust security in a connected home ecosystem that will
further enhance out early results using machine learning.
II.
RELATED WORK
A major issue that will be addressed with the paper is
the freedom of information currently being presented on the
devices that we use every day. At the present, this information
is being shown or heard without any regard to whom that
information is related too. A number of studies have been
conducted in reference to the effectiveness of warning labels
on cigarettes and food products [13][15], , etc. Purmehdi
[20], has indicated that label effectiveness is contingent on
the type of expected behavioral outcome. In response to these
problems, Kelley et al [14], proposed a solution for creating an
information design that improves the visual presentation and
comprehensibility of privacy police viewed online. Their pri-
vacy label was inspired by a nutrition label which summarized
website privacy policies.
It has been shown that displaying uncertain data visually
enables users to understand better. This has been established on
food nutrition labels [24]. Supermarkets and food manufactur-
ers have helped users decide between products by using trafﬁc
light color-coded labels. Color-coded nutritional information,
as shown in Figure 1, gives users at-a-glance information. By
the glance, users can quickly see if the food has high (red),
medium (orange) or low (green) amounts of fats, saturates,
sugars and salt [18].
Figure 1. Food Nutrition Label [28]
III.
PROPOSED CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK
Based upon our research ﬁndings, the paper provides a
road-map and a visual proposal has been designed for both
users and manufacturers which identiﬁes the key issues and
vulnerabilities in Smart Devices. This design provides a solu-
tion to the key problems of this research which is to extend
awareness for both stakeholders. Many users are unaware of
what potential threats, vulnerabilities, and issues there are and
how many of those Smart Devices contain. By displaying each
security component in a red, orange and green color code,
users will visually be able to see what risks the device has and
whether it is safe to have in their home. Whilst this proposal
will be beneﬁcial for users purchasing Smart Devices, it will
also help guide manufacturers to make better decisions when
designing the product.
Following the food nutritional label, the security nutritional
label key and colors are presented in Figure 2. The trafﬁc light
color system is well known to users around the world and
has been utilized by other industries. Applying the system to
our proposal, users can effectively understand what each color
represents. In this approach, we are targeting a label system
that educates the stakeholder on a safe use of the smart device
and the potential risk that such devices can be to other users
in the smart ecosystems as a whole.
Information on the label for Smart Devices includes:
•
Vulnerability: This will show users an overall estima-
tion of how vulnerable the device is. It will take into
consideration the security and privacy aspects and the
possible attacks the device is vulnerable to. It will also
conﬁrm whether there are default passwords and if so,
advising users to change the password straight away
•
Operating System (OS): This will state the OS of the
device and how vulnerable it is to attacks. It will show
if the device updates are automatic or whether users
have to update them their selves. A recommended
timescale is given to show how often to look.
•
Privacy: This will show how much conﬁdential per-
sonal data is being collected and used by the manu-
factures and third-parties
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-683-5
CYBER 2018 : The Third International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

•
Threats: This will display the possible threats the
device is vulnerable to.
Figure 2. Key and for security food label
This design provides beneﬁts for both users and manufac-
turers. At ﬁrst glance, users can automatically see that this
device is vulnerable and insecure due to the colors presented.
The label informs the users brieﬂy about what threats and
privacy issues the device is susceptible to.
Figure 3. Conceptual Model
Manufacturers will beneﬁt from the use of these labels
as it will make them more aware of the designing process.
The nutritional label currently seen on food and drink makes
users instantly aware as to how sugary it is or how much
fat is contained from the colors presented on the label. This
type of label on Smart Devices will aid in manufacturer sales
whilst boosting user awareness. As manufacturers continuously
improve their devices, the awareness will continuously grow
until every user is fully aware of the current risks. Convenience
will no longer be a priority for an average user. It is important
to note that this design is a short-term solution for Smart De-
vices in homes, as smart technology is continuously evolving
over time. Our proposed road-map is based on the conceptual
model depicted in Figure 3 which is based on the principles
of (VAR) corresponds to VISIBILITY, AWARENESS, and
RESPONSE to facilitate a proactive device security nutrition
labeling approve. Where we identiﬁed some vital contextual
factors which have the inﬂuence to security risk rating of
various devices based on the device features and installed 3rd
part applications within the device as well as the context on
which the device is been used.
IV.
PROOF OF CONCEPT
As a proof of concept for our proposed road-map and
conceptual module, we have developed an Android app that
is able to dynamically analysis the contents of the devices that
are installed on and is able to inform the user the risk rating or
security nutrition label of the device. Where the app is able to
dynamically deactivate the access to certain activities within
the device and the ecosystem based on the overall security
score/rating of the device. To achieve this we have considered
the following key context and characteristics:
•
Device OS,
•
OS version,
•
API,
•
Security patch last updated,
•
Days since the last update,
•
Make Model,
•
Screen size,
•
is the device rooted?
This will then give a device security score. Device score
is as follows, and has been worked out using metrics speciﬁed
below:
•
1 -3 (Green / low-security risk)
•
4-5 (Amber/medium security risk)
•
6-10 (Red / high-security risk)
All devices start out with a score of 1 by default and the score
is added to if risks are identiﬁed, such as;
•
If the device is rooted - score = 6 (automatically high
risk)
•
If the device hasn’t had a security patch in 120 days
or more - score = 4
•
If the device security patch is over a month old, but
not yet 3 months old - score = 3
•
If the device OS is out of date (i.e. less than 8) - score
= 4
•
If the device OS is up to date, but not the latest API
(i.e. if it is 8.0, not 8.1) - score = 3
Figure 4. Device Score and a Warning message
The app also looks at the 3rd party apps installed on the
phone and their permissions and how many have 40% or more
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-683-5
CYBER 2018 : The Third International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

requested permissions than actual permissions as shown in
Figure 5 (B).
•
If 4 or more 3rd party apps have - score = 4
•
If less than 4 3rd party apps have - score = 3 (still
Green)
•
If none (which would be impossible I feel) then
change to the score (still 1).
The app allows the user to launch other activities, which
they set themselves (for proof of concept only) based on the
following scores, score breakdown and permitted activities are
presented in Figure 5
•
Payroll allow only when green and bigger screen size
(Tablet, so 6” or greater)
•
Social media amber or green
•
Finance only green
•
Student record only green
•
ISIS only green, bigger screen size,
•
if OS not up to date, automatically deny even if overall
rating is green
Figure 5. Activity List and Score Breakdown
The end user (admin) can set either a website Figure 4 (C)
or app Figure 5 (A) on their phone which is launched when
they click the relevant button, assuming the button/activity has
not been disabled due to their device score, screen size etc.
Lastly, the end user can submit their device data to a Gmail
account/form, this submits/lists all the information from the
front screen along with how many potentially insecure 3rd
party apps are on the device. This data is aim to be used
as a training set for the future aspect of this prototype
the
immune systems depicted in the conceptual model presented
in Figure 3.
V.
CONCLUSION
IoT is undoubtedly transforming our daily lives by creating
opportunities to live better and more efﬁciently. The increase
of Smart Devices is transforming residential homes into Smart
Homes. Sooner rather than later, every home will evolve into
a Smart Home due to the numerous beneﬁts they provide.
However, whilst the beneﬁts of Smart Homes may outweigh
the problems for users it is important to address the security-
related challenges and concerns within this domain. We have
provided a brief description and analysis of the issues of smart
device, and the main contribution of our paper is in term of
providing a conceptual framework and road-map to a more
secure devices security ecosystems based on lessons learned
from nutrition labels in both food and tobacco industries. The
next step of this paper is to provide a proof of concept that
will demonstrate the effectiveness of this framework and road-
map to the cyber security ecosystems of smart spaces while
highlighting the beneﬁts of the road-map to the three-fold
contribution/aims of the paper. This will further be enhanced
by providing a proof of concept and more intelligent zero-trust
framework for CyberSDnL.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors appreciate the help and some funding from the
CodeWest project, which has supplied some funding for the
development of the proof-of-concept presented in this paper.
Also, our appreciation goes to the students who helped with
the prototype and the background work on the research.
REFERENCES
[1]
A.Arabo, I. Brown, F. Musa, ”Privacy in the Age of Mobility and Smart
Devices in Smart Homes”, 2012 ASE/IEEE International Conference
on Social Computing and 2012 ASE/IEEE International Conference on
Privacy, Security, Risk, and Trust, pp. 803-809, 2014
[2]
A. Arabo, ”Cyber Security Challenges within the Connected Home
Ecosystem Futures.” Procedia Computer Science, 61, pp.227-232.
[3]
N. Apthorpe, D. Reisman, and N. Feamster, ”Closing the Blinds: Four
Strategies for Protecting Smart Home Privacy from Network Observers,”
Cornell University Library. pp. 2. [Accessed 5 October 2018].
[4]
N. Apthorpe, D. Reisman, S. Sundaresan, and N. Feamster, ”Spying
on the Smart Home: Privacy Attacks and Defenses on Encrypted IoT
Trafﬁc”, arXiv.org [Accessed 11 October 2018].
[5]
M. Barnes, ”Alexa, are you listening?. MWR InfoSecurity”, Avail-
able from: https://labs.mwrinfosecurity.com/blog/alexa-are-you-listening/
[Accessed 26 October 2018].
[6]
A. Brauchli, D. Li, ” A Solution-Based Analysis of Attack Vectors on
Smart Home Systems. In:Fei, Security, and Privacy in the Internet of
Things (IoTs): models, algorithms and implementation.” Taylor Francis
Group. pp. 92-106.
[7]
S. Bustamante, P. Castro, A. Laso, M. Manana,
A. Arroyo, ” Smart
Thermostats: An Experimental Facility to Test Their Capabilities and
Savings Potential ” Sustainability. 9 (8), pp. 1462. [Accessed 7 November
2018].
[8]
R. L.Finn, D. Wright, and M. Friedewald, ”Seven Types of Privacy.
European Data Protection: Coming of Age, Dordrecht”, Springer, pp3-
32.
[9]
Gartner ”Gartner Says 8.4 Billion Connected ”Things” Will Be
in
Use
in
2017,
Up
31
Percent
From
2016.”
Available
from:
https://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/3598917 [Accessed 4 November
2018].
[10]
M. Ghiglieri, M. Volkamer, and K. Renaud, ”Exploring Consumers
Attitudes of Smart TV Related Privacy Risks [online]”. Human Aspects
of Information Security, Privacy, and Trust. pp. 656-674. [Accessed 3
October 2018].
[11]
W. Haack, M. Severance, M. Wallace, and J. Wohlwend, ” Security
Analysis of the Amazon Echo [online]”. pp. 1-10. [Accessed 7 November
2018].
[12]
C. Jackson, & A. Orebaugh, ”A study of security and privacy issues
associated with the Amazon Echo [online]”. International Journal of
Internet of Things and Cyber-Assurance. 1 (1), pp. 91-98.
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-683-5
CYBER 2018 : The Third International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

[13]
J. Kees, S. J. Burton, C. Andrews, and J. Kozup , ”Tests of Graphic
Visuals and Cigarette Package Warning Combinations: Implications for
the Framework Convention on Tobacco Control.” Journal of Public Policy
Marketing: Fall 2006, Vol. 25, No. 2, pp. 212-223.
[14]
P. Kelley, J. Bresee, L. Cranor, and R. Reeder, ” A ”nutrition label” for
privacy [online]. Proceedings of the 5th Symposium on Usable Privacy
and Security” - SOUPS ’09. [Accessed 21 October 2018].
[15]
N. Khandpur, P.M. Sato, L.A. Mais, A.P.B. Martins, C.G. Spinillo, M.T.
Garcia, C.F.U. Rojas, P.C. Jaime, ” Are Front-of-Package Warning Labels
More Effective at Communicating Nutrition Information than Trafﬁc-
Light Labels? A Randomized Controlled Experiment in a Brazilian
Sample.” Nutrients 2018, 10, 688
[16]
H. Lin, N. W. Bergmann, ” IoT Privacy and Security Challenges for
Smart Home Environments.” Information. 7 (44), pp.
[17]
R. Miao, R. Potharaju, M. Yu and N. Jain, ”The Dark Menace.”
Proceedings of the 2015 ACM Conference on Internet Measurement
Conference - IMC ’15. pp. 170. [Accessed 16 October 2018].
[18]
NHS
”Food
labels.
[online]”.
Available
from:
https://www.nhs.uk/Livewell/Goodfood/Pages/food-labelling.aspx
[Accessed 20 October 2018].
[19]
A. Prasad, ” Exploring the Convergence of Big Data and the Internet
of Things.” IGI Global.
[20]
M. Purmehdi, R. Legoux, F. Carrillat, and S. Senecal , ”The Effective-
ness of Warning Labels for Consumers: A Meta-Analytic Investigation
into Their Underlying Process and Contingencies.” Journal of Public
Policy Marketing: Spring 2017, Vol. 36, No. 1, pp. 36-53.
[21]
SAP
National
Security
Services,
Inc
”
Cracking
the
conun-
drum
of
IoT
convenience
and
security
–
what’s
next?.
[on-
line]”. Available from: https://www.sapns2.com/cracking-conundrum-iot-
convenience-security-whats-next/ [Accessed 6 October 2018].
[22]
C. Stergiou, K. Psannis, B. Kim, and B. Gupta, ” Secure integration
of IoT and Cloud Computing.” Future Generation Computer Systems.
78pp. 964-975.
[23]
Trend
Micro
”A
Look
Into
the
Most
Noteworthy
Home
Network
Security
Threats
of
2017.[online]”.
Available
from:
https://www.trendmicro.com/vinfo/au/security/research-and-
analysis/threat-reports/roundup/a-look-into-the-most-noteworthy-Home-
network-security-threats-of-2017 [Accessed 1 November 2018].
[24]
M. Vasiljevic, R. Pechey, and T. Marteau, ” Making food labels social:
The impact of colour of nutritional labels and injunctive norms on
perceptions and choice of snack foods.” 91pp. 56-63. [Accessed 20
October 2018].
[25]
C. Xu, X. Zheng X. Xiong, ” The Design and Implementation of a Low
Cost and High Security Smart Home System Based on Wi-Fi and SSL
Technologies.” Journal of Physics: Conference Series 806 012012.
[26]
I. Andrea, C. Chrysostomou, ” Internet of Things: Security vulnerabil-
ities and challenges.” Computers and Commmunications (ISCC), 2015
IEEE Symposium on. pp. 180-187.
[27]
S. Zheng, M. Chetty , and N. Feamster, ” User Perceptions of Privacy
in Smart Homes” [online]. arXiv.org [Accessed 25 Octover 2018].
[28]
Food Standards Agency ”Food nutrition label. [online].” Available from:
https://www.food.gov.uk/northern-ireland/nutritionni/fop-ni [Accessed 15
October 2018].
[29]
J.Oberheide, and F. Jahanian, ”When mobile is harder than ﬁxed (and
vice versa): demystifying security challenges in mobile environments”,
Proceedings of the Eleventh Workshop on Mobile Computing Systems
Applications, pp.4348.
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-683-5
CYBER 2018 : The Third International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

