 
 
Physical-World Access Attestation 
 
 
Rainer Falk and Steffen Fries 
Siemens AG  
Technology 
Munich, Germany 
e-mail: {rainer.falk|steffen.fries}@siemens.com 
 
 
Abstract—Virtualized automation functions can be used in a 
cyber-physical system to influence the real, physical world using 
sensors and actuators connected via input-output modules. 
Other virtualized automation functions may be used for 
planning, testing, or optimization. It has to be distinguished 
reliably which instances in fact interact with the real, physical 
world, and which ones are used for other, less critical purposes. 
A reliable method for determining whether a certain virtualized 
automation function has access to the real, physical world is 
proposed, based on a cryptographically protected physical-
world access attestation issued by an input/output module. It 
confirms whether a certain virtualized automation function has 
in fact access to the real-physical world.  
Keywords–cyber physical system; attestation, industrial 
security; cybersecurity. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
A Cyber Physical System (CPS) contains control devices 
that interact with the real, physical world using sensors and 
actuators. Which automation and control devices are 
connected via sensors and actuators to the real, physical world 
has implicitly been clear from the structure of physical control 
devices, sensors, actuators and their cabling.  
Digital twins supporting the simulation of the CPS and its 
control devices provide the possibility to perform plausibility 
checks of the measured real-world behavior and the expected, 
simulated behavior in parallel. This eases the detection of 
unexpected system behavior, which may indicate a failure 
situation or even an attack. In addition, virtualization of 
control devices is increasing, allowing to deploy multiple 
instances of virtualized control devices that look and behave 
identically [1]. A virtualized control device can be realized as 
virtual machine or container hosted on an app-enabled edge 
device or on a cloud infrastructure by a virtualized 
Automation Function (vAF). In such a deployment, it has to 
be distinguished which vAF instances in fact interact with the 
real, physical world, and which ones are used for other 
purposes as, e.g., training, optimization, planning, virtual 
commissioning, simulation, or for testing. The vAF instance 
that in fact has access to the real physical world is the one that 
is the most critical, as its operation affects the real world.  
In this paper, we propose a reliable method for 
determining whether a certain vAF instance has access to the 
real, physical world. A cryptographically protected Physical-
World Access Attestation (PWAA) issued by an Input/Output 
(IO) module confirms whether a certain vAF instance has 
access to that IO module. The IO module itself provides the 
connectivity to the real, physical world via the connected 
sensors and actuators.  
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: 
Section II gives an overview on related work. Section III 
describes the concept of physical world access attestations, 
and Section IV presents a usage scenario in an industrial 
Operation Technology (OT) environment. Section V provides 
a preliminary evaluation of the presented approach. 
Section VI concludes the paper and gives an outlook towards 
future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Cybersecurity for Industrial Automation and Control 
Systems (IACS) is specified in the standard series IEC62443 
[2]. This series provides a security framework as a set of 
security standards defining security requirements for the 
development process and the operation of IACS as well as 
technical cybersecurity requirements on automation systems 
and the used components.  
The Trusted Computing Group (TCG) defined attestation 
as the process of vouching for the accuracy of information [3]. 
An attestation is a cryptographically protected data structure 
that asserts the accuracy of the attested information.  
The Remote Attestation procedureS (RATS) working 
group of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) 
described various attestation use cases [4]. Examples are the 
attestation of platform integrity and the attestation of the 
implementation approach for a cryptographic key store. An 
attestation allows a communication peer to reliably determine 
information about the (remote) platform besides the 
authenticated identity.  
III. 
PHYSICAL WORLD ACCESS ATTESTATION 
A cryptographically protected PWAA is issued by an 
input/output (IO) module confirming in a reliable way that a 
certain vAF instance has in fact access to that IO module, i.e., 
that it has access to the physical world. This information can 
be used for monitoring the CPS operations as well as for 
adapting access permissions of the vAF. It can be reliably 
determined whether the intended vAFs have in fact access to 
the physical world. Furthermore, only those vAFs having the 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-113-8
CYBER 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
 
privilege of accessing the physical world can be granted 
access to perform security-critical operations during 
production, e.g., providing production data to a product 
database. 
A. CPS System Model 
Figure 1 shows an example of a CPS where multiple vAFs 
monitor and control the physical world via sensors and 
actuators connected to IO Modules (IOM). The vAFs are 
executed on an industrial edge compute system by an 
industrial edge RunTime Environment (RTE). It would also 
be possible that vAFs are executed on different edge compute 
systems or on a backend compute system (cloud-based 
control).  
Physical World
Control Network 
IOM
S
S
A
A
Industrial Edge 
Compute System
vAF
vAF
vAF
Industrial Edge RTE
IOM
S
S
A
A
IOM
S
S
A
A
IOM
S
S
A
A
 
 
Figure 1. CPS system model 
As depicted in Figure 1, an IOM is directly connected to 
sensors and actuators that in turn provide the interaction with 
the real, physical world. Thus, these IO modules are crucial as 
they control on one hand the actions to be performed in the 
physical world, but also provide monitoring data received 
from the physical world via the sensors.  
B. Physical-World Access Attestation 
An IOM authenticates the vAF that is accessing the IOM, 
e.g., by using a mutual certificate-based Transport Layer 
Security (TLS) authentication. The IOM creates a 
cryptographically protected attestation (the aforementioned 
PWAA) that confirms reliably which vAF is accessing this 
IOM, thereby confirming that the identified vAF has access to 
the sensors/actuators connected to the IOM, and thereby 
consequently having access to the physical world. The PWAA 
confirms, based on the authenticated communication session 
between a vAF and the IOM, that the authenticated vAF has 
currently access to the physical world via this IOM. In 
addition, the PWAA may also provide additional information 
like information about the sensors and actuators connected to 
the IOM, or about its location.  
PWAA
IOM: ...
vAF: ...
Timestamp:  
Optional
- Sensors: ...
- Actors:  
- Location: ...
Digital Signature: ...
 
Figure 2. Physical world access attestation 
Figure 2 visualizes the main elements of a PWAA. It 
indicates the IOM, the vAF, and it includes furthermore a 
timestamp to ensure freshness, and a digital signature of the 
IOM issuing the PWAA. The identification of the IOM and 
also the vAF may be done based on the credentials used for 
the mutual authentication between both. Optionally, the 
PWAA can comprise also an information on the sensors and 
actuators to which the indicated vAF has access, or on its 
location. The digital signature ensures that any manipulation 
of the PWAA can be detected.   
C. IO-Module with Real-world Access Attestation 
An IOM includes an attestation unit that creates and 
provides the cryptographically protected PWAA. 
Secure Communication
IOM
I/O
Network 
Interface
Authentication and 
Key Agreement
Credential 
Store
Permissions
Physical World Access Attestation 
Unit
PWA 
Attestation 
Key
PWA 
Attestation 
Network Traffic 
Encryption/Decryption
PWAA
Control Command Processing
 
Figure 3. IO module with physical world access attestation 
Figure 3 shows an IOM that includes an attestation unit 
that determines and provides the PWAA to a relying party, 
e.g., a CPS management system . The IOM comprises an 
input-output interface (I/O) to which sensors and actuators can 
be connected. The IOM can be accessed via its network 
interface 
using 
a 
mutually 
authenticated 
secure 
communication session. The physical world access attestation 
unit determines which vAF has been authenticated by the IOM 
to establish a secure communication session, and builds a 
cryptographically protected PWAA. The digital signature of 
the PWAA may be build using the same credentials as used 
for mutual authentication or by distinct ones. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-113-8
CYBER 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
 
D. Adapting Access Permissions 
The PWAA provided by an IOM is verified by a relying 
party, e.g., a production management system to adapt access 
information related to the vAF indicated by the PWAA. The 
PWAA can be seen as a context information used in access 
control decision. This is related to a zero-trust security 
approach, where context information of the requester and also 
the responder is taken into account for access control 
decisions.  
E. Integrating with System Integrity Monitoring 
The PWAAs provided by IOMs can also be used by a CPS 
integrity monitoring systems as described in [6]. It allows to 
reliably determine which vAF instances are the “real” ones 
that in fact have access to the physical world. Those vAFs are 
the ones that are subject to the operative CPS integrity 
monitoring. Other vAF instances may be used for simulations, 
tests, or as redundant backup functions. 
IV. 
USAGE EXAMPLE 
This section describes the usage of PWAA for CPS in an 
exemplary way. Figure 4 shows a CPS usage scenario. It 
shows two control networks for two production networks 
(zone1, zone2) and a plant network. The automation system is 
virtualized, i.e., it is realized by virtual automation functions 
(vAF) that are execute on an on-premise compute 
infrastructure (Industrial Edge Compute System) or in a 
backend computing infrastructure, e.g., a hyperscaler cloud or 
a multiaccess edge computing infrastructure of a mobile 
communication network.  
In addition to the IOMs connected to the control network, 
also remote IO modules (rIOM) connected to the IOMs can be 
used. The IO modules (IOM, rIOM) provide PWAA to a 
physical world access monitoring system. Optionally, also the 
RTEs executing the vAFs can provide attestations confirming 
to which IOMs a vAF is connected.   
The physical world access monitoring system determines 
which vAFs have access to the physical world. Depending on 
the monitoring results, an authorization token, e.g., an OAuth 
token [7], a verifiable credential [8], or an attribute certificate, 
can be provided to the vAF, or it can be granted the permission 
to perform a startup procedure of a technical system, e.g., a 
production machine. 
It is also possible to adapt access permissions of a vAF, 
e.g., to access a production management system or a 
Supervisory Control And Data Acquisition (SCADA) system. 
Moreover, based on the context information contained in 
the PWAA, a pwAccess monitoring system as shown in Figure 
4 can use this information to derive a system state based on 
specific sensor and actuator information. This system state can 
characterize if the system is operating in normal mode, in alert 
mode, or even in emergency mode, based on the evaluation of 
the actual measured values with potentially simulated and thus 
expected values. This derived system state in turn may 
influence further access decisions. This may be specifically 
important for systems in a critical infrastructure, like a power 
generation or distribution facility. Here, it may be important 
to bind access decisions on the overall system state to ensure 
reliable operation of the system.  
Furthermore, external provided system state information 
may also influence the access decision. An example may be 
the information about a maintenance period, to ensure that 
certain operation of a system is not possible during this time.  
The physical world access monitoring system is shown as 
dedicated component. However, it is also possible to realize it 
as virtualized function, e.g., as virtual machine or as container 
executed on an edge computing platform. 
Control Network 
(Zone1)
Plant 
Network
IOM
S
A
A
IOM
S
S
A
A
GW
IoT 
Gateway
GW
Control Network
(Zone2)
Industrial Edge 
Compute System
SCADA
DD
IoT Backend Compute System
S
rIOM
vAF
vAF
vAF
vAF
IOM
S
A
A
IOM
S
S
A
A
S
rIOM
vAF
pwAccess Monitoring System
Industrial Edge RTE
Industrial RTE
PWAA
CSatt 
Check
Pol
 
Figure 4. Example PWAA usage scenario 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-113-8
CYBER 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
 
V. 
EVALUATION 
This section gives a preliminary evaluation of the 
presented PWAA concept from the perspective of the operator 
of a CPS, and from the perspective of IO module 
implementation, performance impact, and provisioning. 
Operator perspective: Availability and the flexibility to 
adapt to changing production requirements are important 
requirements for OT operators [5]. The proposed approach 
allows to apply strict cybersecurity controls automatically 
only when really needed, i.e., for operational real-world 
systems. The information may be utilized to report a system 
overall health state, which in turn can be considered in further 
access decisions. Other installations can be handled more 
openly, providing more flexibility.  
Implementation perspective: The IOMs have to provide 
cryptographic attestations. This required support for basic 
cryptographic operations (cryptographic algorithms, key 
store, key management) is already available on IO modules 
that allow authenticated network access. So, only the 
additional functionality to create and provide attestations has 
to be implemented.  
Performance perspective: The creation of an attestation is 
expected to have a negligible impact on the real-time 
performance of the IOM. For example, the signature can be 
generated during the authentication and key agreement phase 
of the secure communication protocol between IOM and vAF. 
Certain parts of the PWAA may also be prepared based on the 
locally available sensor information to require only minor 
lookup and completing of the information structure during the 
actual authentication and authorization phase.  
Provisioning perspective: Additional key material has to 
be provisioned for protecting attestations, as the attestation 
key should be different to the device authentication key of IO 
module to have separate key material for different 
cybersecurity usages. Here, it may be assumed that for 
certificate management an automated interaction based on 
typical certificate management protocols like the Certificate 
Management Protocol CMP [10], Enrollment over Secure 
Transport EST [11], or the Simple Certificate Enrolment 
Protocol SCEP [12] is applied to overcome the burden of 
manual administration. In this context, a separate attestation 
key pair may be managed in addition to device authentication 
keys.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The physical-world access attestation proposed in this 
paper allows to determine reliably which vAFs have in fact 
access to the real, physical world, i.e., to operational real-
world technical systems. This information allows to apply 
stricter cybersecurity controls automatically specifically to 
those vAFs and their hosting platforms that are determined to 
be critical for the real-world CPS operation.   
The exact implementation size and performance overhead 
of a technical realization has still to be evaluated, considering 
that cryptographic building blocks that are needed, e.g., for 
secure communications, can be reused. From a practical 
perspective, it is considered to be more important to determine 
the usefulness in practical use, i.e., to what degree it allows to 
enhance flexibility in CPS planning and operation, and to 
increase operational efficiency by reducing the time needed 
for reconfiguring real-world technical systems while still 
being compliant with the required cybersecurity level.  
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Gundall, D. Reti, and H. D. Schotten, “Application of 
Virtualization Technologies in Novel Industrial Automation: 
Catalyst or Show-Stopper?”, arXiv:2011.07804v1, Nov. 2020, 
[Online]. Available from: https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.07804 
[retrieved: Aug., 2023] 
[2] IEC 62443, “Industrial Automation and Control System 
Security” (formerly ISA99), [Online]. Available from: 
http://isa99.isa.org/Documents/Forms/AllItems.aspx 
[retrieved: Aug., 2023] 
[3] Trusted Computing Group, “Glossary”, 2012, [Online]. 
Available 
from 
https://trustedcomputinggroup.org/wp-
content/uploads/TCG_Glossary_Board-
Approved_12.13.2012.pdf [retrieved: Aug., 2023] 
[4] H. Birkholz, D. Thaler, M. Richardson, N. Smith, and W. Pan, 
“Remote ATtestation procedureS (RATS) Architecture”, 
Internet Request for Comments RFC9334, 2023, [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/rfc9334/ 
[retrieved: Aug., 2023] 
[5] R. Falk and S. Fries, “System Integrity Monitoring for 
Industrial Cyber Physical Systems”, Journal on Advances in 
Security, vol 11, no 1&2, July 2018, pp. 170-179, [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
www.iariajournals.org/security/sec_v11_n12_2018_paged.pdf 
[retrieved: Aug., 2023] 
[6] R. Falk and S. Fries, “Dynamic Trust Evaluation of Evolving 
Cyber Physical Systems”, CYBER 2022, The Seventh 
International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-
Systems, 
pp.19-24, 
2022, 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&articleid=cyber
_2022_1_30_80022 [retrieved: Aug., 2023] 
[7] D. Hardt (Editor), “ The OAuth 2.0 Authorization Framework”, 
Internet Request for Comments RFC6749, 2012, [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/rfc6749/ 
[retrieved: Aug., 2023] 
[8] D. Longley and M. Sporny, “Verifiable Credential Data 
Integrity 1.0 – Securing the Integrity of Verifiable Credential 
Data”, W3C Working Draft 15 May 2023, [Online]. Available 
from: https://www.w3.org/TR/vc-data-integrity/ [retrieved: 
Aug., 2023]  
[9] “Information technology - Open Systems Interconnection - The 
Directory: Public-key and attribute certificate frameworks”,  
ITU-T X.509, October 2019, [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-X.509-201910-I/en [retrieved: 
Aug., 2023] 
[10] C. Adams, S. Farrell, T. Kause, and T. Mononen, “Internet 
X.509 Public Key Infrastructure Certificate Management 
Protocol (CMP)”, Internet Request for Comments RFC4210, 
2005, 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/rfc4210 [retrieved: Aug., 2023] 
[11] M. Pritikin, P. Yee, and D. Harkins, “Enrollment over Secure 
Transport”, Internet Request for Comments RFC7030, 2013, 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/rfc7030 [retrieved: Aug., 2023] 
[12] P. Gutmann, “Simple Certificate Enrolment Protocol”, Internet 
Request for Comments RFC8894, 2020, [Online]. Available 
from: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/rfc8894 [retrieved: Aug., 
2023] 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-113-8
CYBER 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

