  Recovery of Forensic Artefacts from a Smart Home IoT Ecosystem 
M A Hannan Bin Azhar and Samuel Benjamin Louis Bate  
School of Engineering, Technology and Design 
Canterbury Christ Church University 
Canterbury, United Kingdom 
Email: hannan.azhar@canterbury.ac.uk; sblbate@gmail.com 
 
Abstract— This paper reports an investigation into a modern 
smart-environment ecosystem comprising of multiple Internet 
of Things devices: Amazon Echo, Nest Indoor Camera and 
Philips Hue smart-bulb. As of yet, there is still little to no 
documentation, 
nor 
established 
methodology 
for 
the 
examination, acquisition and documentation of evidentiary 
artefacts from a smart-environment. Much of the research still 
remains individual to each device and does not incorporate the 
“melting pot” reality of most smart-environments. The 
methodology outlined in this paper was artefact-centric, and 
was purposely designed to facilitate the creation, discovery and 
documentation of network-native, cloud-native and device-
native artefacts. Whilst not all aspects of the investigation were 
successful, a strong groundwork of documentation of the 
artefacts present on each of the smart-devices examined has 
been compiled, so as to inform and lay the foundations for future 
studies on this area of research.  
Keywords- Internet of Things Forensics; Internet of Things 
ecosystem forensics; Digital forensics; Smart Home; Internet of 
Things; Amazon Alexa; Nest Camera; Smart-Bulb. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
It has been forecasted that by 2022 smart-homes will 
number half a billion equating to 22.5% of households 
globally [1], with Internet connected devices numbering as 
many as 100 billion [2] by 2020. Increasingly these smart-
devices have been used to automate our daily lives from 
scheduling of alarms that coincides with the level of lighting 
in the bedroom to become a hub for the social media or to 
order goods and services in a quick and convenient manner. 
However, with the ever-growing importance and reliance 
placed on these devices, the security and privacy concerns, 
widely reported [3][4] from these devices, cannot be ignored. 
Personal data, such as addresses, contact details and banking 
information are all stored in some manner by these devices, 
and can be recalled by the device at any given time to process 
a command contextually relevant to that information. The 
inherent weakness of these devices due to their lack of 
dedicated defense leaves them susceptible to outside 
unauthorised access by attackers, as seen by the rise of botnet 
Distributed Denial-of-Service (DDoS) attacks, most notably 
in the Mirai botnet, wherein devices were hijacked, enslaved 
and utilised to cause chaos and damage on a widespread scale 
[3]. Thus, criminals are targeting these devices to commit a 
new form of burglary, which necessitates the need for forensic 
investigation of home Internet of Things (IoT) devices with 
aim to recover potential wealth of evidence by the law 
enforcement agencies [4]. There are generally three areas of 
interest to a digital forensic investigator when examining a 
device for artefacts of evidentiary value, specifically how and 
when the device might have communicated or otherwise 
logged an event. These three categories of interest are 
communications or events specific to the device itself, known 
as device native artefacts; communications made across a 
shared network, known as network native artefacts and 
communications between the device and a service via the 
cloud, known as cloud-native artefacts [5]. Even though some 
authors reported extraction of artefacts from smart IoT devices 
[5][6][7], there is lack of research reporting investigation of a 
smart eco-system connecting a wide range of devices. 
Ecosystems created by a range of interconnected devices can 
be complex due to their heterogeneous nature [5]. The results 
presented in this paper will demonstrate retrieval and 
interpretation of numerous network, cloud native and device 
specific artefacts taken from a smart-environment consisting 
of a range of devices, specifically by including a smart bulb, 
Philips Hue smart-bulb [8], which was not explored before. 
Other IoT devices in the smart environment were Amazon 
Echo [9], a Nest Indoor Security Camera [10] and an Android 
smartphone [11].  
 The remainder of the paper will be organised as follows: 
Section 2 of this paper reviews existing work on forensic 
investigations of Smart IoT devices. A brief explanation on 
the methodology used will be discussed in Section 3. Results 
and analysis will be reported in Sections 4 and 5. Finally, 
Section 6 concludes the paper.   
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Apthorpe et al. [7] conducted their investigation upon a 
“melting pot” [12] smart-environment, utilising a Nest 
Camera, a Sense Sleep Monitor, and a WeMo Switch smart-
plug. Their investigation was conducted from the perspective 
of a passive observer to a network, such as a system 
administrator or an Internet Service Provider (ISP). During the 
experiment, they found that using a packet sniffing software 
they were able to reliably obtain evidence of the presence and 
activity of these devices on the network, namely through 
communications between the devices and their respective 
companies’ domains. They noted that the Sense Sleep 
Monitor, through its communications with those domains, left 
a tangible trail of artefacts that an observer to the system 
would easily be able to identify and subsequently discover the 
wearers activity [7]. Sleeping patterns were also able to be 
identified, such as times the wearer would go to bed and wake 
up in the morning, or during the night.  
Chung et al. [5] were also able to identify cloud-native 
artefacts produced by the Amazon Echo during its usage due 
to its reliance on Internet services throughout its operation 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-743-6
CYBER 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

which they could access through unofficial Application 
Programming Interfaces (APIs) [13]. Another online source, 
Piette [14], has extensively documented the APIs for the 
Amazon Echo, which are integral to the daily operation of the 
device and could potentially hold valuable evidence to a 
digital forensic investigation. It is possible to view a user’s 
data that is stored in the cloud through these APIs, and each 
piece of user data is assigned as a “card” by Amazon for 
storage. Organisation of user data by Amazon means it is easy 
to search through these artefacts to locate user data, and 
discern the time and date of actions performed by the user, as 
well as the type of actions performed. However, these cards 
do not last usually more than a few days [14] and this severely 
limits their evidentiary potential as there is only a matter of 
hours for an investigator to discover them before the artefacts 
are lost forever. 
As with Chung et al. [5], Dorai et al. [6] similarly were 
able to find client-native artefacts present in their investigation 
of a Nest device smart-environment with a focus on Internet 
Protocol (IP) enabled security cameras. A vast number of 
artefacts were retrieved that provided evidence of the Nest 
companion app having been used on a device. As reported by 
Dorai et al. [6], whilst artefacts of evidentiary value could be 
retrieved, the detection algorithm employed by the IP camera 
devices, unless fine-tuned by the owner, produces a great 
number of false-positives as well as false-negatives through 
either reporting events. As such, the artefacts produced by the 
operation of the device should be examined in conjunction 
with other sources of evidence where possible, so as to 
validate that neither a false-positive, nor false-negative, 
occurred. Ji et al. [15] corroborated these findings in their own 
investigation into IP cameras and in developing a tool named 
HomeSpy, and were able to monitor the network and cloud-
native artefacts produced by such devices, proving that 
monitoring of these artefacts bears a great evidentiary value to 
the investigators. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
The study detailed in this paper analyses a smart 
environment consisting of an Amazon Echo [9], a Philips Hue 
smart-bulb [8], a Nest Indoor Security Camera [10] and an 
Android smartphone [11]. The Android Operating System 
(OS) was selected for its market dominance [16], representing 
a higher likelihood of its involvement in a crime-scene. The 
environment in which the testing took place was designed to 
emulate a smart-home ecosystem, with the devices all set-up 
and connected to a home network, as shown in Figure 1. At 
the center of the ecosystem was the router and hub that 
connected the devices across the network and Internet, either 
through Wi-Fi or a wired connection. The Philips Hue system 
uses a hub, so there is no direct communication between the 
smart phone and the smart light bulbs, as the commands to the 
bulb goes through the hub via the Zigbee protocol. As all the 
traffic was broadcasted over the network, by connecting an 
observation machine via a wired ethernet to the hub allows 
capturing and analysis of packets for the examination. 
The smartphone was used within the environment, as a 
controller for the devices, to simulate a user’s interaction 
within the smart-home. In addition to controlling the devices 
via the smartphone, If This Then That (IFTTT) [17] 
application was used to create interactions between smart-
devices, known as ‘recipes’, in which an action on one triggers 
another. Using the mobile to control the devices, and the 
IFTTT to link their interactions with one another, evidentiary 
artefacts were created on the smartphones, the devices, the 
network and cloud with the aim to be retrieved and examined. 
As shown in Figure 1, listed beneath the Cloud, Android 
mobile and Laptop are the tools, utilities, applications and 
other possible locations where evidence might be produced 
during the experiment. Due to the nature of the experiment, a 
private network was used to limit the amount of unwanted 
traffic occurring across it, which would otherwise potentially 
obscure the examination of artefacts transmitted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. A Smart-Home ecosystem. 
The examination of the devices was structured in several 
stages, each taking its own form and artefact-centric. The 
main objective of the investigation was not to apportion guilt 
for a crime committed within a smart-environment, but to 
provide an overview for what artefacts are generated by smart-
devices during their daily usage. First and foremost was the 
passive observation of the devices whilst in use, as in 
Apthorpe et al. [7], to observe and record network-native 
artefacts, such as communications instigated by the devices to 
external services and IP addresses during their usage. This 
observation was conducted with the network traffic analysis 
software Wireshark [18] running on a laptop with Kali Linux 
[19], an OS used in forensic investigations, which comes with 
many useful utilities and tools pre-installed. 
The next stage of the investigation was concerned with the 
discovery and documentation of cloud-based artefacts 
generated during the devices’ usage. To investigate these 
artefacts, several methods were used. Firstly, unofficial APIs 
for the Amazon Echo [14] were used to allow access to the 
available data stored by the device in the cloud. Secondly, the 
user accounts of the smart-devices were accessed to 
investigate any cloud-native artefacts that might be 
discoverable through the user account portals of each of the 
device’s respective websites.  
The final stage of the investigation involved port-scanning 
of the devices used to see if any ports were open on them that 
might allow remote access to the onboard storage of the 
devices. For this, the ‘nmap’ utility (on Kali Linux) was used 
with the ‘aggressive’ flag, which offers a wider range of 
 
Cloud 
Philips Hue 
Amazon 
Nest 
 
Android Mobile 
IFTTT app 
Amazon Alexa app 
Chrome app 
Philips Hue app 
Nest app 
 
Nest Camera 
Ethernet 
Laptop 
Kali Linux 
Wireshark 
nmap 
Firefox browser (Cloud, API) 
Hue Bridge 
Philips Hue bulb 
Amazon Echo 
Router/Hub 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-743-6
CYBER 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

information about the device in addition to the visible ports. 
The aggressive scan allowed the probing of OS detection (-O), 
version scanning (-sV), script scanning (-sC) and traceroute (-
-traceroute) on the devices in addition to any open ports that 
might be exploited to gain access to the devices. The ACPO 
good practice guidelines [20] state in the first and second 
principles that in the recovery of data of evidentiary value, the 
data should not be altered in any way, and if it is, this must be 
explained and justified. These principles also extend to the 
physical modification of a device to gain access to data upon 
it, such as removing an exterior casing from an Amazon Echo 
to access the on-board storage device, that was otherwise 
inaccessible. This paper’s research strictly adhered to these 
principles, and as such, no physical modification of the 
evidence took place.  
IV. 
RESULTS OF NETWORK-NATIVE AND DEVICE SPECIFIC 
ARTEFACTS 
This section reports the artefacts discovered during the 
passive observation of the network and while using the port 
scanning to gain remote access to the devices. The results are 
presented for both network-native and device-specific 
artefacts. 
A. Amazon Echo 
Network-native artefacts were observed during the usage 
of the Amazon Echo device in the form of communications 
created by the device, directed to Internet Protocol version 4 
(IPv4) addresses related to Amazon and official third-party 
advertisement organisations related to Amazon. Upon asking 
the Amazon Alexa “Alexa, what is the time?” a 
communication was observed with the Internet Protocol 
version 4 (IPv4) address “13.32.69.70” (Figure 2), which was 
identified as a UK based Amazon address using the ‘whois’ 
lookup tool included with Kali Linux’s terminal. In addition 
to the UK address, contact was also made with a US address 
also associated with Amazon. As can be noted in Figure 2, IP 
addresses similar to “13.32.69.70” were communicated with 
during the operation; however, these are similarly registered 
to Amazon Technologies with a range of IP addresses having 
been reserved and registered for communications purposes. 
Figure 2. IPv4 address related to Amazon. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Port scan of the Amazon Alexa. 
The aggressive port scanning of Amazon Alexa revealed 
that it was largely locked down (Figure 3). This is to be 
expected of Amazon Echo, which handles sensitive personal 
information, such as the user’s full name and email address. 
Due to the closed ports, displayed during the scan in Figure 3, 
there were no access points to enter the device’s on-board 
storage remotely. 
 
B. Nest Indoor Security Camera 
In order to create network-native artefacts from the Nest 
camera, live streaming of the camera’s feed and its ability to 
play audio, recorded from the mobile controller’s microphone, 
were used; however, no artefacts were visible across the 
network.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Port scan of the Nest camera. 
Aggressive scanning of the camera revealed that all 1000 
scanned ports were closed, as shown in Figure 4. This 
indicates that the device received the querying packets sent 
during the scan and responded with a packet, indicating there 
was no service active or listening on that port [21]. As with 
the Amazon Echo, the lack of discovered open ports meant 
that there was no way to remotely access the device’s on-
board storage. 
C. Philips Hue smart-bulbs and bridge 
With regards to the Philips Hue smart-bulb, using the 
‘nmap’ utility, the Philips Hue smart-bulb bridge was 
identified, as evidenced by Figure 5. 
Figure 5. Port scan of Philips Hue smart-bulb bridge. 
The aggressive scanning revealed that the Philips Hue 
smart-bulb bridge had three open ports, these ports were for 
“http” and “ssl/http” services.  Moreover device-native 
artefacts were present in the scan of the Philips Hue smart-
bulb bridge in Figure 5, specifically in the form of details of 
the Linux-based OS, Philips Hue Bridge 2.0, the device was 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-743-6
CYBER 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

operating on. The webserver listening on the port 80 of the 
bridge carry an inherently weak form of security due to the 
way it allows user to control the bulbs [22]. Given that a 
malware or an attacker can see the history of devices 
previously connected to the local area network using the ‘arp’ 
command, access to the bulb can be easily gained through the 
hashing of a whitelisted Media Access Control (MAC) 
address. 
Figure 6. Wireshark observation of smart-bulb bridge. 
Controlling the device using the Philips Hue smart-phone 
application, the bulbs were turned on and off several times in 
an attempt to simulate an attack of hacking and controlling of 
the smart bulbs, causing them to flash. It was observed via the 
Wireshark’s report, as shown in Figure 6, that the device left 
traces of the activity on the network by making several 
“Membership Report/Join group” requests during the event. 
The significance of these artefacts would be that to an 
investigator, midway through such an attack there would be 
clear evidence of its occurrence upon the network.  
D. Artefacts from Multiple Devices  
IFTTT was used in the experiment to connect multiple 
devices to observe how they interact with one another on a 
network level. The application allows users to make ‘recipes’, 
which are essentially if/then statements. In the case of the 
experiment, the setup was that when the Amazon Echo’s timer 
ended, the Philips Hue smart-bulbs would flash on and off. 
Figure 7. Wireshark observation of IFTTT ecosystem. 
Figure 7 shows a Wireshark observation of the Echo’s 
timer reaching zero, triggering the Philips Hue smart-bulbs to 
flash on and off. As can be seen in the final three events, 
application data is detected originating from the Philips Hue 
smart-bulb 
bridge, 
which 
contacts 
the 
IP 
address 
“216.58.201.2”. A simple ‘whois’ lookup of this IP reveals 
this to be a Google registered IP address. 
With regards to the network-native artefacts, it is worth 
noting that the Amazon Echo proved to be the ‘loudest’ device 
on the network, generating a mass of network-native artefacts, 
while communicating not only with servers owned by 
Amazon but with the third-parties for the purpose of 
advertisement. It appeared that a single command invoked on 
the Amazon Echo generated more traffic and network-native 
artefacts than that of when the rest of the devices were put 
together. 
V. 
RESULTS OF CLOUD-NATIVE ARTEFACTS 
This section reports the artefacts discovered in the cloud 
storage generated by each device while they were used in the 
smart environment. Results are categorised by each device 
type.  
A.  Amazon Echo 
There were many recorded examples of cloud-native 
artefacts created in the usage of the Amazon Alexa device, of 
which seven separate categories of artefacts could be 
observed. The artefact categories were as follows: customer 
status, authentication, bluetooth, music account details, 
provider capabilities, third party consent and devices listed to 
the Amazon account. It primarily concerns the initial setup of 
the user’s Amazon Account with that device with flags, such 
as 
“countryOfResidenceSet”, 
“eulaAcceptance” 
and 
“preferredMarketplaceSet”. 
 
` 
Figure 8. Alexa Authentication Artefact. 
Figure 8 displays the Authentication artefact. This artefact 
seems to concern whether or not the user’s account is 
authenticated (“authenticated:true”), presumably via a 
confirmation email following sign-up as well as other 
information specific to the user’s account, such as their email 
address, name and Amazon ID. Additionally, the status of the 
user is also listed (whether or not they have Amazon Prime 
membership) labelled as “canAccessPrimeMusicContent”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9. Alexa Music account detail. 
Figure 9 displays some of the artefacts from the registered 
account’s music details. Information, such as the customer’s 
identity, personal information and their prime membership 
status can be seen identified here. Moreover, associated 
services that can be accessed such as “AUDIBLE”, 
“CLOUD_PLAYER”, and “TUNE_IN” are listed here. 
Amongst other artefacts recovered were Alexa’s Bluetooth, 
Provider Capabilities and Device artefacts. This concerns the 
Bluetooth connectivity of the Amazon Echo, and details the 
device’s serial number and the software version operating on 
the device. Provider Capabilities detail what control 
applications, such as “AUDIBLE” can have over the Alexa 
device, such as “bookmarkSong” as well as the capability to 
use the search functions (“canSearchForStationByArtist”) on 
the device. Device artefact lists the Alexa device associated 
with a user’s Amazon account and contains information 
regarding the name of the device (““accountName””) as well 
as services that might be run from the device including 
“TIMERS_AND_ALARMS”, “VOLUME_SETTING” and 
“VOICE_TRAINING”. 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-743-6
CYBER 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

B. Nest Indoor Security Camera 
Numerous cloud-native artefacts were observed during the 
experimentation period due to Nest’s reliance on an always-
online connection to the Internet to allow the device to 
communicate with the Nest’s servers. Cloud-native artefacts 
for Nest Camera consisted of hours of raw video footage saved 
to the cloud storage, which is viewable both through the Nest 
companion application and website. In addition to the raw 
hours of footage from the camera, the device also flags when 
movement is detected within the frame and is able to recognise 
when a person enters the frame and bookmarks that footage 
(as ‘Events’) for viewing at a later time. 
 
 
Figure 10. Nest Application on Android.  
Figure 10 is a screenshot of the Nest application on 
Android, viewing the cloud-native ‘events’ artefacts. As can 
be seen, the service is able to distinguish between motion and 
people within a scene, which it stores for review by the owner. 
It also shows the wider number of cloud-native artefacts 
available to be viewed, which are raw footage recordings from 
previous days. It was also found that with the Nest Aware 
membership, up to 30 days of raw footage recorded from the 
user’s Nest device can be saved to Nest’s servers for viewing 
at a later time.  
C. Philips Hue smart-bulb 
Interestingly, it appears that the Philips Hue smart-bulb 
and its associated bridge remain permanently linked to any 
previous accounts and applications authorised upon them, by 
any previous owner. Therefore, the new owner of the bulb 
would have access to personal information, such as names and 
email addresses of the previous owner. These artefacts can be 
accessed by any account associated with the bridge, as 
evidenced by the screen-capture in Figure 11, where a 
previous owner’s name and email address have been 
blackened out.  Similarly, trace of one of the author’s personal 
email address, sblbate@gmail.com, was also found, as it was 
used in a prior installation of the Hue Bridge.  
Retrieval of personal data associated with previous owners 
would constitute a data breach under the General Data 
Protection Regulation (GDPR), as both names and email 
addresses are deemed personal data according to the GDPR 
guidelines [23]. Even though, finding a suspect’s details, as a 
possible previous user of the device, can be of great interest to 
an investigator, it should be noted that removing an associated 
account with the bridge is relatively simple task; as such, anti-
forensics measures could be employed by a suspect by 
deleting their account or unlinking their account from the 
bridge.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11. Philips Hue’s Other users Artefacts. 
 
 
 
Figure 12. Philips Device specific artefacts on Cloud.   
Figure 12 demonstrates example artefacts unique to the 
Philips Hue Bridge device captured from the Philips Hue 
website. In this case, it is possible to view the device’s MAC 
address, its firmware version and unique identity. In addition 
to this, it is also possible to view the IP address and Gateway 
currently associated with the bridge. Further investigation on 
artefacts 
revealed 
that 
naming 
of 
the 
application 
“hue_ios_app#A**********’s iPhone” demonstrate that the 
application includes the host device’s name set by the user, 
which can provide further evidence of which device the 
application was used on.  
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper reports a large number of artefacts from various 
devices, especially by using a smart bulb in the ecosystem, 
with the IFTTT application used in the experiment to connect 
multiple devices to observe how they interact with one 
another. Even though the recovery of the device-native 
artefacts were limited due to the closure of any port for the 
remote access, numerous artefacts were discovered and 
documented on a network and cloud level; which includes 
personal details, logged video footage, and details of previous 
owners. These artefacts, when applied to a real-world 
investigation, have significant importance to identifying the 
implied ownership of the devices through personal 
information tied to these devices and stored on cloud servers. 
It is interesting to note that they all contain a great degree of 
personal information that would provide strong evidence to an 
investigator seeking to prove the identity of the owner. In the 
case of the Amazon Echo, its extensive documentation of a 
wide range of personal information was documented, e.g. 
email addresses, full names and agreements made including 
End User License Agreements (EULAs), authorisations for 
third-party music and streaming services, etc.  
Nest (like Amazon) had a wealth of cloud-native artefacts 
available for viewing to an investigator. Though, where it did 
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-743-6
CYBER 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

not have much in the way of addresses and names, it did offer 
up to five days of recorded footage. This footage came 
complete with periods of interest, automatically flagged up for 
quick and convenient viewing, further categorised into alerts 
caused by a person in the frame and identified motion. 
The Philips Hue smart-bulb and bridge continued the trend 
of storing large swathes of personal data in its cloud-native 
artefacts, tying accounts used in the past to the Philips Hue 
bridge and, in a sense, merging them together. As covered in 
the literature review, IoT devices typically are lacking when it 
comes to security, and the Philips Hue bridge seems to be no 
exception to this.  It not only stores personal information but 
collates multiple users of a unique device into one shared hub, 
in which any user can view the information of others. 
Whilst there was not a specific focus upon testing anti-
forensics measures, anti-forensics must form a core 
component of any future research, building upon the 
foundation that this study provides. Moreover, to broaden the 
scope of the study, a wider range of mobile platforms 
including iOS should be explored to see what client-native 
artefacts can be recovered from Apple’s Operating System 
and hardware, and to compare the differences, if any, between 
Android and iOS. Furthermore, future research should 
endeavour to develop an IoT specific forensic tool, so that 
majority of the investigation in this paper can be automated, 
enabling quicker retrieval of artefacts from the smart home 
ecosystem. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. De Renesse, Smart Home Devices Forecast Report: 2017-
22 | Ovum Link, Ovum.informa.com. [Online]. Available from: 
https://ovum.informa.com/resources/product-content/smart-
home-devices-forecast-report-201722 
(Accessed: 
7-Aug-
2019) 
[2] C. Perera, A. Zaslavsky, P. Christen, and D. Georgakopoulos, 
“Context Aware Computing for The Internet of Things: A 
Survey”, IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 
16(1), 
pp. 
414-454, 
2014, 
doi: 
10.1109/surv.2013.042313.00197. 
[3] Z. Whittaker, Mirai botnet attackers are trying to knock an 
entire country offline, ZDNet. [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.zdnet.com/article/mirai-botnet-attack-briefly-
knocked-an-entire-country-offline/ (Accessed: 7-Aug-2019). 
[4] E. Casey, “Smart home forensics”, Digital Investigation, vol. 
13, pp. A1-A2, 2015,  doi: 10.1016/j.diin.2015.05.017. 
[5] H. Chung, J. Park, and S. Lee, "Digital forensic approaches for 
Amazon Alexa ecosystem", Digital Investigation, vol. 22, pp. 
15-25, 2017, doi: 10.1016/j.diin.2017.06.010. 
[6] G. Dorai, S. Houshmand and I. Baggili, “I Know What You 
Did Last Summer: Your Smart Home Internet of Things and 
Your iPhone Forensically Ratting You Out”, In Proc. of the 
13th Int. Conf. on Availability, Reliability and Security,  USA, 
Article 
49, 
10 
pages, 
2018, 
doi: 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3230833.3232814. 
[7] N. Apthorpe, D. Reisman, and N. Feamster, "A Smart Home is 
No Castle: Privacy Vulnerabilities of Encrypted IoT Traffic", 
2017, doi: arXiv:1705.06805. 
[8] Philips Hue, Hue White ambiance Starter kit E27, [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.philips.co.uk/c-
p/8718696728925/hue-white-ambiance-starter-kit-
e27/specifications (Accessed: 7-Aug-2019). 
[9] Amazon Echo, Echo Plus (1st Gen) – With built-in smart home 
hub 
(White), 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.amazon.co.uk/Echo-Plus-With-Built-In-Smart-
Home-Hub-Black/dp/B01J4IYBI0?th=1 (Accessed: 7-Aug-
2019). 
[10] Google Nest, Google Nest Cam Indoor. [Online]. Available 
from:  https://store.google.com/gb/product/nest_cam_specs 
(Accessed: 7-Aug-2019). 
[11] Android Phone, Samsung Galaxy J3 (2016). [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://deviceguides.vodafone.co.uk/samsung/galaxy-j3-2016-
android-5-1-1/specifications/ (Accessed: 7-Aug-2019). 
[12] I. Vujačić, I. Ognjanović, and R. Šendelj, “SM@RT Home 
Personal Security and Digital Forensic Issues”, The Eight Int. 
Conf. on Business Information Security,  Serbia, October 2016. 
[13] Analytic Physics, Accessing Amazon Echo Data with 
JavaScript, 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://analyticphysics.com/Diversions/Accessing%20Amazon
%20Echo%20Data%20with%20JavaScript.htm (Accessed: 7-
Aug-2019). 
[14] O. Piette, The Amazon Echo API, [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.piettes.com/the-amazon-echo-api/ (Accessed: 7-
Aug-2019). 
[15] X. Ji, Y. Cheng, W. Xu and X. Zhou, "User Presence Inference 
via Encrypted Traffic of Wireless Camera in Smart Homes", 
Security and Communication Networks, pp. 1-10. 2018, doi: 
10.1155/2018/3980371. 
[16] Device Atlas, Android v iOS market share 2019, [Online]. 
Available from: https://deviceatlas.com/blog/android-v-ios-
market-share (Accessed: 7-Aug-2019) 
[17] IFTTT App, [Online]. Available from: https://ifttt.com/ 
(Accessed: 7-Aug-2019). 
[18] Wireshark 
Website, 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.wireshark.org/ (Accessed: 7-Aug-2019). 
[19] Kali Linux, [Online]. Available from: https://www.kali.org 
(Accessed: 7-Aug-2019) 
[20] ACPO, ACPO Good Practice Guide for Digital Evidence, 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.digital-
detective.net/digital-forensics-
documents/ACPO_Good_Practice_Guide_for_Digital_Eviden
ce_v5.pdf (Accessed: 7-Aug-2019) 
[21] J. Williams, Port Scanning 101: What It Is, What It Does, Why 
Hackers Love It, And Why You Will Too, [Online]. Available 
from: https://blog.ipswitch.com/port-scanning-101-what-it-is-
what-it-does (Accessed: 7-Aug-2019) 
[22]  N. Dhanjani, Hacking Lightbulbs: Security evaluations of the 
Philips Hue Personal Wireless lighting system, [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.dhanjani.com/docs/Hacking%20Lighbulbs%20H
ue%20Dhanjani%202013.pdf (Accessed: 7-Aug-2019) 
[23] GDPR, GDPR Regulation, [Online]. Available from: 
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32016R0679 (Accessed: 
7-Aug-2019) 
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-743-6
CYBER 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

