Application Services in Space Information Networks
Anders Fongen
Norwegian Defence University College, Cyber Defence Academy (FHS/CIS)
Lillehammer, Norway
Email: anders@fongen.no
Abstract—As Low Earth Orbit satellites (LEO) are evolving
from “radio mirrors” to “network entities” it is reasonable
to foresee a development of satellite networks which not only
forwards network trafﬁc, but engage in middleware operations,
discovery services and even collaborate applications. However,
efforts already investigating “data centers in space” do so without
taking into regard the special properties of orbiting spacecrafts
and their relation to the demographic characteristics on the
ground below them. In this position paper, an outline of a
distributed system hosted in a Space Information Network (SIN)
will be presented. Of special interest is the cyclic properties of
the link topology and the predictability of the workload offered
by its client on the surface below. Beside the general operating
principle, a selection of discovery and application services will
be used to demonstrate the feasibility of the principles, as well
as to identify remaining problems and research topics.
Keywords—LEO satellites; space information networks; AaaS
in space
I. INTRODUCTION
A number of Geosynchronous Equatorial Orbit (GEO), High
Eliptical Orbit (HEO) and Low Earth Orbit (LEO) satellites
together with high altitude aircrafts (balloons, drones) may
form a distributed system sometimes called a Space Informa-
tion Network (SIN). Although most often proposed for the
provision of communication services only, some efforts also
investigate the SIN as “cloud computing in space”.
The advantages offered by a SIN should not only be global
coverage, but also faster Round Trip Time (RTT). In theory,
a satellite at 300 km altitude can offer an RTT of only 2ms,
far better than any surface based path to a data center. Shorter
RTT enables new applications for synchronous collaboration
and remote control.
The main challenges with the AaaS (Application as a
Service) principle in a SIN is the transfer of state during
handover operations. For low-orbit spacecrafts, handover takes
place at short intervals and must be subject to scalability
analysis since a potentially high number of client sessions are
kept in the spacecrafts.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section II,
the distinct properties of a SIN, compared to other distributed
systems are presented. In Section III, a small modeling effort
is shown together with a plot considering population density
during orbital period. Related research is brieﬂy discussed in
Section IV. A more technological perspective on a number
of basic elements are discussed in Section V followed by a
presentation of three example application services in Section
VI. Finally, a summary and suggested future research problems
are given in Section VII.
II. PROPERTIES OF A SIN
A SIN has properties distinct from an ordinary distributed
mobile system. Unlike a mobile system, where the users move
around a more or less stationary infrastructure, a SIN system
will consist of a mobile infrastructure and stationary (as seen
from space) users. Besides, the mobility patterns of the SIN
infrastructure are highly predictable, and cyclic. At any time
in the future, the position of the spacecraft, the topology of
the inter-satellite links and the relative position of the ground
stations are known, as well as the demographic characteristics
of the population at the surface below.
Demographic characteristics refer to population density, age
distribution, language, etc, as well as other preferences learned
through earlier pass or from other satellites. The characteristics
can be predicted to estimate type and volume of service
requests for which the satellites can prepare in advance.
The workload estimation may also be used to schedule
delay tolerant communication and computational activities
to periods of low activity. The population pattern of the
earth leaves short, but frequent periods of no human activity
below (except for expeditioners and unmanned sensors) where
background activities like synchronization and replication can
take place. Ground stations can be used for intermittent high-
speed communication with the terrestrial network and should
be located in locations with low population density. Also,
inter-satellite communication for background activities can
take place in the polar regions, where the longitude distance
between the satellites is short.
III. POPULATION DENSITY ESTIMATIONS
For the purpose of studying the varying population density
on the ground below a satellite during its orbital period, a
Python program was made which models the orbit and corre-
lates the satellite position with demographic data available for
download [1].
The downloaded data is easily accessed and incorporated
into the program. Each grid element limited by longitude great
circles and latitude small circles is represented with a value
indicating the number of people per square km.
The modeled orbits are all assumed to be circular with 90
minutes orbit cycle o, and with inclination angles φ of 60, 70
and 80 degrees, respectively. From the length of the arc a,
which is expressed as a function of time t:
a = (t/o) mod 1 ∗ 2π
(1)
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-893-8
CYBER 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

The corresponding longitude lo and latitude la is calculated
as a function of a and φ:
la = arcsin(sin(φ) ∗ sin(a))
(2)
lo = arccos(cos(a)/ cos(la))
(3)
A graphical representation of the result is shown in Figure
1, with the horizontal axis showing time in minutes and the
vertical axis the corresponding population density. Different
ﬁll patterns represent the different orbit inclination angles as
indicated in the legends. As expected, the plot shows that there
are short bursts of high population density below with idle
periods in between. Please observe that there seems to be one
high peak for every 90 minutes cycle, with only modest trafﬁc
in between.
The plot is far from accurate in its details, but indicates
the opportunity for the satellite to spend its communication
resources on maintenance and updating tasks between busy
periods.
Since higher inclination angles means relatively more time
over polar regions the results were expected to show bigger
variations than what is indicated in the ﬁgure. But the most
important question remains as: How can these idle periods
be used for communication and computation tasks not related
to client requests, and to prepare the spacecraft for the next
populated area on its itinerary?
IV. RELATED RESEARCH
Most efforts on SIN have envisioned the structure as a
provider of communication services only, where the commu-
nication endpoints are located on the earth’s surface. Existing
infrastructure like the Iridium system has been in operation
for three decades and proves the feasibility of a LEO system
for global telephone service. More recent initiatives like the
Starlink infrastructure are currently being deployed on a very
large scale for the provision of global Internet access [2].
Other projects have proposed “cloud computing” in space
by deploying data centers in larger satellites with volume
and energy resources sufﬁcient for their operation. Other
smaller satellites may carry units for “fog computing” in
a distributed fashion in order to provide replicated services
through communication paths with fewer hops [3] [4].
The resource management in satellites with great variations
in its workload can be predicted, but machine learning ap-
proaches may also contribute to a management scheme which
better adapts to unpredictable variations. Zhou et al. offer their
results on a study based on neural networks in [5].
In order to improve the communication capacity of SIN
units, lots of research has gone into the development of
antennas for spatial multiplexing (space-division multiple ac-
cess, SDMA), beamforming, non-orthogonal multiple access,
optical communication links etc. [6] [7].
The proposals made in this position paper will not deal
with technical details in the communication technology, but
rather view the SIN as a distributed system which borrows its
methods and solutions from the ﬁeld of distributed computing.
The author is not aware of other efforts to investigate this per-
spective to the extent necessary for a SIN offering application
services.
V. TECHNOLOGICAL ASPECTS OF SIN SERVICES
Services offered by a SIN will have properties different
from ordinary distributed systems. A technological discussion
on how to support these properties follows in subsequent
paragraphs.
A. State Transfer Between SIN units
For any location on earth, a LEO satellite will pass from
one horizon to the other in a matter of minutes. Frequent
handover to a trailing satellite every few minutes is necessary
in order to provide a ground terminal with continuous service.
For the provision of communication services only, this is a
solved problem. For application services, however, a handover
requires a state transfer of possibly complex and large data
structures, e.g.:
• Web session objects, with open connections to ﬁles and
databases
• Cached contents in Domain Name Service (DNS) proxies
• Shared document collections expected to be available and
up to date
• Ongoing chat and media-rich conferences
Some of these data structures will be bound to a client
session and their content subject to client actions. Others, like
cached content from discovery protocols, are dependent on
the collective actions of the client community. This kind of
information can also be speculatively pre-fetched, based on
expected client requests derived from the correlation of orbital
parameters and demographic data.
State bound to client sessions cannot be pre-fetched, but
must be transferred from leading satellites, i.e. the previous
satellites (front and front-west, since the earth is rotating
counter clockwise), and passed on to trailing satellites (back
and back-east). Communication between satellites in the same
orbital plane may effectively use optical links for high speed
communication since their relative positions are ﬁxed, while
links to satellites in the neighbouring orbital plane would
need adjustable beams as their relative position changes with
the latitude position. The optical links will not compete with
ground links for transmission capacity.
One can visualize the collection of client states being
“ﬁxed” in the sky above the client’s position while the satellites
move and continuously relay the state objects in the opposite
direction. Some session objects will be passed to trailing
satellites in the same orbital plane, others to the orbital plane
to the east, depending on the hand-over operation (of which
the sending satellite is assumed to be informed of).
The handling of shared storage (document collections and
databases) which should be available for ground terminals
takes the form of a replication problem where availability,
consistency and ordering semantics must be taken into ac-
count. The timeliness of updates is also of interest, since the
predictable patterns of user request allows some updates to
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-893-8
CYBER 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

mm
 0
 200
 400
 600
 800
 1000
 1200
 0
 100
 200
 300
 400
 500
 600
 700
 800
"run60-12h"
"run70-12h"
"run80-12h"
Figure 1. Population density below a satellite during 12 hour orbit
be postponed until more communication and computational
resources are in supply.
Only objects with serializable properties (in the sense
used in the Java programming language) may be passed on
between spacecrafts. Objects representing local OS resources
like sockets, ﬁles and mutexes will not. This limitation will
impose the same system design restrictions as what are found
in traditional mobile and distributed systems.
B. Delay Tolerant Services
A signiﬁcant fraction of client requests is expected to
be forwarded to other resources, possibly terrestrial. Due to
response time requirements, the requests and the resulting
reply need to be given high priority. Other requests can be
regarded as delay tolerant, and the forwarding operation may
be postponed to a later instant where resources have better
availability, e.g. when the satellite is within range of a ground
station. Requests falling into this category can be:
• E-mail operations, both inbox update and sending (sub-
ject to message priority)
• Certain type of sensor readings, e.g., environmental ob-
servations
• Software updates
• Transfer of large ﬁles
• BitTorrent applications
• Cache refreshes
• Speculative (proactive) replication
C. IP address structure
The satellites will expose their network endpoint for client
connections, but it is not advisable to give each satellite
a unique IP address. With separate Internet Protocol (IP)
addresses, handover operations would require complicated
arrangements for maintaining existing ﬂows and connections.
A more appealing approach is to give all satellites the same IP
address for their service endpoint, since clients on the surface
will never address more than one of them. An IP address that is
preserved across handover will allow a transparent transfer of
User Datagram Protocol (UDP) ﬂows from one satellite to the
next. Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) connections may
also in theory be transferred, but would require a modiﬁed
TCP protocol stack.
Satellites will need to invoke services in other satellites
through their inter-satellite links. The interfaces used for this
purpose must have unique IP addresses within a private/non-
connected subnet, since these interfaces should not be reach-
able from endpoints elsewhere, e.g., in the Internet.
For the forwarding of IP datagrams between satellites, the
inter-satellite link interfaces could be used for IP-based rout-
ing, but a more ﬂexible solution would be to leave forwarding
actions to the link layer, e.g., by employing Multiprotocol
Label Switching (MPLS). The connection between a terrestrial
client and a spacecraft should be handled likewise by a link-
layer tunnel which also take care of keeping the handover
operation transparent at the IP layer.
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-893-8
CYBER 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

D. Speculative caching
As a satellite enters a populated region, the expected work-
load offered by terrestrial clients is estimated from a range
of data sources: The demographic data of the region, the set
of requests from earlier passes, the requests received from
immediate leading spacecrafts etc. These data sources can be
subject to statistical or machine-learned algorithms in order
to determine the content of on-board data storage that will
provide the best and fastest response to the requests from that
region.
This content may be loaded from leading satellites or from
ground stations. For this reason, the location of ground stations
become a signiﬁcant factor for the caching scheme. Even
existing data objects may be loaded if the master copy is
updated.
The cached data objects may be updated through client
requests, and the replication of updates to other storage units
must observe the decided consistency and ordering semantics.
VI. OUTLINE OF EXAMPLE APPLICATIONS
The following paragraphs will discuss the SIN’s ability to
support a small selection of simple applications, chosen in
order also to identify architectural limitations. The selection
includes both discovery service, streaming service and storage
service.
A. Discovery Service - DNS
Domain Name Services (DNS) is of utmost importance
for the daily transactions taking place on the Internet. The
performance of the DNS service may well form a bottleneck in
these transactions since most of them require the DNS service
invocation to complete prior to the actual application service.
The SIN-based DNS service will act as a DNS proxy and pass
on requests through the communication service if they cannot
be resolved by the local cache.
The chosen strategies should aim to maximize the cache-hit
rate, which is an easily measured number. Due to the diversity
of requests during the complete orbital period, a single body
of cached DNS entries of reasonable size is not expected
to produce an acceptable hit rate. Due to the predictability
of requests during the orbital period, ground stations may
receive request statistics from recently passed areas and upload
a selection of cache entries based on previously received
statistics. Ground stations need to be interconnected in order
to obtain this, and cache entry selection may well be subject
to machine-learning algorithms.
This approach exploits the great variations in request trafﬁc
during the orbital period, and the ground stations should be
located in less populated areas in order not to compete with
trafﬁc from ground terminals.
B. Conversational Service - SIP
As was mentioned in the introduction, a LEO spacecraft can
offer a shorter RTT than most terrestrial paths, but requires that
clients are served by the same spacecraft or by a short path of
spacecrafts. This poses an interesting research problem, since
client handover should happen in a synchronous manner to
keep the path short.
A Voice-over-IP (VoIP) service depends on the Service
Description Protocol/Session Initiation Protocol (SDP/SIP)
protocols for signalling, but not for media trafﬁc, which is
typically handled by the Realtime Transport Protocol (RTP)
protocol. The latency requirements will not be applied to the
signalling phase, which can progress and ﬁnish in a relaxed
manner, but the media transfer phase should beneﬁt from the
low latency offered by the SIN to enable applications like
music rehearsals, remote control with video feedback etc.
A SIP server can be implemented in each satellite and will
locate and connect VoIP users even on other parts for the
SIN, as well as those connected to terrestrial SIP servers. SIP
servers do not normally facilitate media trafﬁc, but leave that
to realtime-centric protocols like RTP. The perceived quality
of the VoIP service relies more on the sound quality than the
connection latency, and the properties of the IP communication
services of the SIN becomes the most important factor.
Multi-part VoIP sessions identify the need for multicast
services in the SIN. IP multicast is not a candidate technology,
since the SIN is not an IP network. The link layer tunnelling
technology used for the SIN infrastructure must be able to es-
tablish and maintain a forest of multicast trees in the presence
of frequent handovers and relaying to endpoints in the IP-
based terrestrial network. Multi-part VoIP has been researched
in RFC4353, RFC4579 and, most detailed, in RFC5850 [8].
The latter identiﬁes mechanisms for multicast endpoints, based
on IP multicast protocols. Arrangements for multicast through
L2 tunnels must be developed and implemented in the VoIP
User Agent for the end systems directly connected to the SIP.
C. Storage Service - Content Delivery Network
Since the vast majority of web transactions are protected
by the https protocol, traditional web caches do not offer
any reduction in latency or trafﬁc volume. Content Delivery
Networks (CDN), however, works ﬁne over https and offers
improved web performance. Can a CDN be deployed in a SIN?
A CDN combines DNS and Hypertext Transfer Protocol
(HTTP) services to provide content from the replica located
closest to the client. One replica may be contained in the
satellite above, and the DNS provided by the SIN will refer
the client to its IP address if the content is to be found there.
Contrary to terrestrial CDN services, the CDN provided
by the SIN will not beneﬁt from the storage of localized
information, since the satellite traverses the entire earth’s
surface. Ground stations may assist the satellites in loading
information for the surface area ahead in its path, information
which may be discarded at a later instant. The content of
any CDN instance is therefore subject to speculative/pro-
active replication from ground stations based on demographic
properties ahead, and possibly from leading satellites in the
same orbital plane.
As earlier stated, the SIN satellites may share the same IP
address. It simpliﬁes the client conﬁguration, and ongoing
sessions (TCP connections etc.) with SIN services are not
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-893-8
CYBER 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

interrupted during a handover to another satellite. The CDN
design is also simpliﬁed since the service will always be
found on the same IP address. On the other hand, it is
infeasible to give guarantees that the actual CDN instance
under invocation contains the actual information object. This
problem cannot be solved by the DNS service, and a form of
request forwarding must be implemented in order to forward
requests to supplementary CDN servers.
VII. CONCLUSION
The architecture principles of a service-oriented satellite
network is the focus of this position paper. The contribution
in the proposal is to take the cyclic properties of the orbit and
a map of the population density into regard for the scheduling
of trafﬁc with ground stations and other satellites. A number
of example services are discussed in more detail.
The conclusion from the initial analysis is that several
established protocols will need modiﬁcation in the User Agent
software in the terrestrial clients, and that certain service
qualities need to be chosen by the client user, e.g., the priority
of mail messages. This is somewhat similar to the required
modiﬁcations found in Delay Tolerant Systems.
Trust management has not been addressed in this article,
which is an obvious requirements for the protection of data
and separation of activities. Trust Management is being inves-
tigated and the results are subject for publishing in a future
paper.
The satellite platform will need a Service Provider Inter-
face in order for independent service providers to implement
services in the satellites.
Other future research activities in this ﬁeld of interest in-
clude machine-learning for workload prediction, optimization
of replication activities, resource management and scalability
analysis.
REFERENCES
[1] “Gridded
population
of
the
world
v.4.11,”
https://sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/data/collection/gpw-v4/sets/browse,
[Online; accessed 30-Aug-2021].
[2] “Starlink web site,” https://www.starlink.com/, [Online; accessed 30-Aug-
2021].
[3] S. Briatore, N. Garzaniti, and A. Golkar, “Towards the internet for
space: Bringing cloud computing to space systems,” in 36th International
Communications Satellite Systems Conference (ICSSC 2018), 2018, pp.
1–5.
[4] S. Cao et al., “Space-based cloud-fog computing architecture and its
applications,” in 2019 IEEE World Congress on Services (SERVICES),
vol. 2642-939X, 2019, pp. 166–171.
[5] H. He, D. Zhou, M. Sheng, and J. Li, “Mission structure learning-based
resource allocation in space information networks,” in ICC 2021 - IEEE
International Conference on Communications, 2021, pp. 1–6.
[6] X. Zhang, L. Zhu, T. Li, Y. Xia, and W. Zhuang, “Multiple-user trans-
mission in space information networks: Architecture and key techniques,”
IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 17–23, 2019.
[7] Y. Su et al., “Broadband leo satellite communications: Architectures and
key technologies,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 26, no. 2, pp.
55–61, 2019.
[8] D. Petrie, J. Rosenberg, A. Johnston, R. Sparks, and R. Mahy, “A Call
Control and Multi-Party Usage Framework for the Session Initiation
Protocol (SIP),” https://rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5850.txt, May 2010, [Online;
accessed 30-Aug-2021].
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-893-8
CYBER 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

