Efficiency of an Artificial Intelligence-based Chatbot Support  
for an IT-Awareness and Cybersecurity Learning Platform 
Dominik Fanta, Farhan Sajid, Michael Masssoth and Lennart Kruck  
Department of Computer Science 
Hochschule Darmstadt (h_da) - University of Applied Sciences Darmstadt, 
Darmstadt, Germany 
e-mail: {dominik.fanta, farhan.sajid}@stud.h-da.de , {michael.massoth, lennart.kruck}@h-da.de 
 
Abstract-The IT awareness learning platform with Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) learning chatbot imparts target group-specific 
expert knowledge on the topics of IT awareness and 
cybersecurity. The user interactively controls the AI chatbot by 
making selections and asking questions. There is also the option 
that the AI chatbot questions the user and the user has to answer 
the questions. The AI chatbot is an expert in 23 IT security 
topics, including malware, but also in the areas of sexting or 
catfishing. The goal is to provide a fully comprehensive IT 
awareness and cybersecurity learning platform. In order to best 
adapt the AI chatbot to the needs of the users, it was important 
to conduct surveys with the target group in order to best 
recognize the respective spelling of the users so that there are no 
problems with the recognition of the input at the beginning. IT 
awareness knowledge is imparted by means of the AI chatbot 
through efficient dialog-based learning in a low-threshold, 
mobile way, "in small bites", and "for in between". 
Keywords— Artificial Intelligence; chatbot; it-awareness; 
learning platform; chat flow; ecosystem security. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Due to the SARS-CoV2-pandemic, the threat situation in 
the digital space is intensifying. Employees are operating in 
their home offices, in some cases outside the company's own 
protected IT infrastructures.  
    IT infrastructures, and mobile devices are increasingly 
being used. Criminals are exploiting the global pandemic 
situation technically and, above all, as a thematic starting 
point for social engineering and other attacks. 
 
The Proofpoint Human Factor Report 2019 proves, 
"more than 99 percent of cyberattacks rely on a human 
interaction in the process, making the individual user the last 
line of defense." The report shows that more than 99 percent 
of observed threats required a human interaction, whether it 
was activating a macro, opening a file, clicking a link or 
opening a document. To significantly reduce risk, 
organizations need a holistic approach to cybersecurity that 
focuses on the individual employee. Essential to this is the 
sensitization of all people in the company as well as effective 
security awareness training. 
 
Through AI-based IT awareness training and education, 
companies and government agencies are strengthening the 
digital defenses of the entire workforce. AI chatbots enable 
efficient conversational learning. Learning with AI chatbots is 
thus comparable to learning through discussion rounds. As a 
rule, people remember content more easily when it is 
conveyed during a dialogue, rather than through a frontal 
presentation. AI chatbots make it possible to convey IT 
awareness knowledge in a short, mobile and interactive way. 
 
This project aims to improve the aforementioned efficiency of 
AI-based learning chatbots in the context of IT knowledge 
training. 
 
This paper is organized as follows: 
Section II reviews the relevant terminology and advantages 
of AI chatbots. Section III describes the current state of the art 
considering related works. Section IV describes the IT 
awareness chatbot approach. In Section V, the implementation 
and structure of an AI learning chatbot. In Section VI, initial 
test results of a user testing are disclosed. Section VII deals 
with the efficiency of learning chatbots and the learning gains 
that can be achieved with them. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
IT and cybersecurity awareness [Definition]: IT and 
cybersecurity awareness mean problem awareness and secure 
behavior. In everyday dealings with IT systems, awareness is 
an elementary security measure. First, this means creating an 
awareness of the problem of cyber security attacks and threats. 
Building on this, it is possible to achieve a change in behavior 
toward secure digital use. Security awareness measures are 
successful if they empower the target groups and motivate 
individuals to improve their cyber security. It is important to 
develop awareness at eye level and in a practical manner [1]. 
 
AI learning chatbot [Definition]: An AI learning chatbot 
is a computer program that uses Artificial Intelligence (AI) 
and Natural Language Processing (NLP) to understand 
learners’ questions and automate responses to them, 
simulating human conversation. Users can ask questions to 
which the system responds in natural language [2]. 
 
Advantages of an AI chatbot: AI chatbots in use for IT 
awareness can help: 
• Reduce costs. AI chatbots can support processes through 
automation and thus reduce process costs. Here specifically 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-996-6
CYBER 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

the costs for necessary awareness measures and presence 
training. 
• Relieve employees. AI chatbots are able to take on 
uncomplicated cases in the call center or self-services. This 
can significantly reduce the workload of employees; and they 
are given the opportunity to focus fully on the critical IT 
security cases where they are really needed.  
• Improve the user experience through efficient dialog-
based learning. 
 
All advantages of AI chatbots at a glance: 
• Chatbots are available 24/7 
• Chatbots never drop out due to illness or vacation 
• Chatbots learn constantly and get better the longer they 
are deployed 
• Chatbots eliminate waiting time for learners and users 
• Chatbots are fast and effective 
• Chatbots are scalable 
 
Benefits for around 150,000 employees in the state of 
Hesse: 
In Hesse alone, there are around 150,000 employees (full-time 
equivalents) at the state level who can be users of IT 
awareness training with AI chatbots. 
 
III. 
RELATED WORK AND RESEARCH QUESTION 
State of research and technology: 
If we take a closer look at the topic of chatbots, we can see 
that it has become increasingly important in recent years. It 
has therefore also been shown in several studies that it is 
possible to learn with a chatbot. The authors in [8] have shown 
in their study that it is possible to learn with a chatbot. For this 
purpose, they took 2 study courses with once 167 and once 
124 students. Of the 167 and 124 students, 121 and 87 passed 
respectively. At the end of the semester, the students who had 
passed were able to fill out a questionnaire in which 187 had 
responded. The analysis of the questionnaires showed that 133 
times (71.13%) the chatbot provided correct suggestions. In 
30(16.04%) cases, the chatbot has the correct suggestion but 
not suitable for the students' needs. Only in 24 (12.83%) cases, 
the chatbot provided wrong suggestion.  
In order to make learning with a chatbot more interesting, 
the authors in [7] showed that it is necessary to come up with 
a suitable gamification strategy to make users learn longer 
with it. Badges, different levels, quests, countdown, rule and 
reward or leaderboards are mentioned here as possible 
approaches, all of which should be considered when designing 
a AI learning chatbot.  
However, good chances of success or a good gamification 
concept are only secondary for chatbots; it is much more 
important that the users can interact with the chatbot. Yin-
Chun Fung and Lap-Kei Lee [6] conducted a survey with 20 
participants to test an AI chatbot for cybersecurity awareness 
in their survey, it was found that 75% of the respondents know 
how to use an AI chatbot. It was also found that using a 
cybersecurity awareness chatbot can increase cybersecurity 
awareness, so 75% of the respondents agreed and the 
remaining 25% were neutral. 
An extensive literature search has not yet been able to find 
any studies or research results on the use and effectiveness of 
AI chatbots in IT awareness training. IBM Germany also 
informed the project manager that Darmstadt University of 
Applied Sciences is conducting the first project in the area of 
AI learning chatbots for IT awareness in Germany [as of 
01/2022]. The objective of the project goes beyond the current 
state of research and does real pioneering work. 
 
Research questions and objectives: It is investigated 
how the existing knowledge about IT awareness and 
cybersecurity can be increased in a target group-specific way 
by using an AI chatbot. Target groups are especially users 
without detailed knowledge about information security, as 
well as executives and IT administrators. The goal of the 
research project is to determine the effectiveness and 
efficiency of an AI chatbot for raising awareness among 
employees of the Hessian state administration and 
government in a target group-specific manner. The AI-based 
learning chatbot will be tested and optimized on selected 
target groups. 
IV. 
IDEA AND APPROACH 
An IT awareness learning platform with AI chatbot: 
An AI-based learning chatbot is an intelligent, voice- 
respectively text-based dialog system that allows chatting 
with an Artificial Intelligence. Such an AI-based learning 
chatbot is to be used and tested for the first time as part of an 
IT awareness training for basic sensitization of employees.  
The AI chatbot conveys the most relevant learning content on 
the topic of IT awareness to the learner in a simple, and in 
some cases even playful, dialog. In the process, AI chatbots 
divide the knowledge into small "morsels" and send them to 
the user one by one. 
 
Solution: The IT awareness learning platform with AI 
chatbots imparts expert knowledge about IT awareness and 
cyber security to specific target groups: Low-threshold, "in 
small bites", "for in between".  
The user controls the AI learning chatbot through his 
questions/choices/selections. 
 
The following specialist topics are already included in the 
current IT awareness learning platform with AI chatbots and 
optimized for detection rates of over 75%. 
TABLE I.  
SUBJECT MATERIALS 
Malware 
Phishing 
Secure 
handling on the 
web 
Good and 
secure 
passwords 
Social 
engineering 
Data protection 
on the web 
Blackmail 
Trojan 
Computer 
viruses 
Spying on data 
Botnets and 
DDoS attacks 
Cyber and 
computer crime 
Voice 
assistants 
Hacking - my 
online bank 
data on the web 
Industrial and 
commercial 
espionage 
Cyberbullying 
and 
cyberstalking 
Fake stores, 
fraud, 
subscription 
traps 
Skimming 
ICT criminal 
law 
Sexting on the 
web 
Catfishing 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-996-6
CYBER 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

The AI-based IT awareness training starts with a self-
assessment of the user and a placement test and is then based 
on the knowledge level of the individual participants. In this 
way, the strengths and weaknesses, as well as the individual 
learning type of the employee are taken into account and a 
training adapted to the respective person is guaranteed. 
 
V. 
STRUCTURE OF THE AI CHATBOT 
Learning scenario 1:  
Answering questions from learners 
The AI-based learning chatbot shall be able to answer 
frequently asked questions, a precise analysis of the most 
frequently asked questions per subject had to be carried out 
first. Based on this analysis, a knowledge base was then 
developed for the AI chatbot answers. If the AI chatbot detects 
a similarity between a new question and a question in the 
knowledge database, it outputs the corresponding answer. 
 
Important success factor: 
Helping users to ask questions 
With an A/B/C-usability test it was conducted in which the 
participants were to test the learning platform by asking the 
chatbot questions. Group A was given no additional tools on 
the learning webpage, group B was given a mind map diagram 
as an additional tool to ask questions, and group C was given 
an additional info-video (but no mind map). As result of the 
A/B/C-usability test, it turned out, that group B achieved the 
greatest success, in which they were able to achieve the 
greatest learning gain and asked the most amount of questions 
to the chatbot [3]. The example mind map diagram in Figure 
1 is intended to give users who are not familiar with the topic 
some clues and ideas as to what they can ask the chatbot. 
 
Learning scenario 2:  
Inquire about and deepen (prior) knowledge 
The AI chatbot is used to determine the (prior) knowledge of 
a learner. To do this, the AI chatbot asks a series of predefined 
questions (chat flow) and evaluates the answers. Unlike 
multiple-choice tests, there are no predetermined answers. 
The AI chatbot can provide solution hints and feedback 
immediately after the answer. The prerequisite for such a 
dialog is that the test questions have been defined beforehand 
and the AI chatbot knows the correct answers. Using intent 
matching, the AI chatbot can estimate whether a correct or 
incorrect answer was given. 
 
Test scenario:  
Knowledge check to certify a training measure 
The guided chat flow (from learning scenario 2) is used to 
test the knowledge of a learner. Here there are 3 different 
levels of difficulty (easy, medium, hard). The learner can 
collect 15 points per training unit. Once a certain number of 
points has been reached, a successful IT awareness training 
session can be certified. 
 
A. Structure of the questioning chatbot 
The chatbot is set up in such a way that the learner can 
prove his knowledge with the help of a quiz in the chatbot, 
where the chatbot asks the learner questions. By entering a 
keyword or trigger, such as “Malware Quiz”, the chat flow in 
the chatbot is addressed and the quiz is started. The learner 
collects points by correctly answering the questions posed by 
the chatbot. The chatbot asks the learner five questions per 
difficulty level and topic. Depending on whether the learner 
answered the question correctly or incorrectly, he or she 
receives points and a short explanation of the correct answer. 
 
1) Game method 
There are 2 methods of play to successfully complete the 
quiz. The first method is based on the fact that the learner has 
already unlocked all difficulty levels at the beginning, 
whereas in the second method, the learner can only select the 
difficulty level at the beginning and unlock the other levels 
first. difficulty level at the beginning and has to unlock the 
other levels first. must first unlock the other levels. 
 
a) Method 1: Difficulty level selectable 
In the first method, the learner can choose any difficulty 
level, but the learner must play through all three difficulty 
levels for the chosen subject to be considered successful. For 
each question answered correctly, the learner receives one 
point. This means that the learner must achieve 15 points to 
successfully complete the quiz for the selected subject.  
 
In the example, the chatbot was addressed with the trigger 
“test quiz” and the chatbot gives the learner the opportunity to 
select the difficulty level. 
 
b) Method 2: Unlock difficulty level 
In the second method of play, the learner must first 
successfully complete the easy difficulty to unlock the 
intermediate level, and then the learner must successfully 
complete this to unlock the hard difficulty. 
This method gives the learner the feeling that he is in a 
game and must make progress to unlock the so-called “end 
level”, the level difficult. In this method of playing, the learner 
does not have a free choice to select the difficulty level, but 
the learner can start the quiz or also read through the rules of 
the game. 
Figure 1. 
Example of a mind map diagram 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-996-6
CYBER 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

2) Chat flows 
To conduct the quizzes, so-called chat flows are used. 
Here there are connections that can be used to insert many 
branches into the chat flows. The learner can use these to 
navigate to a specific point. For example, in the quiz there are 
paths, depending on whether the learner’s answer is correct or 
incorrect, the learner is forwarded to the particular branch. As 
a result of how many questions the learner answers correctly, 
he gets his points by advancing in the particular path. In this 
quiz, each correct answer directs the user down one level in 
the tree diagram and in the left direction; if an answer is 
incorrect, the branch at the bottom right is taken. On the 
whole, the chat flow is similar in structure to the normal Chat 
bot, in which the learner asks the chatbot questions, also a so-
called Question and Answers. The special feature here, 
however, is that you can create a direct connection from one 
conversation to the next. In order not to put the performance 
of the chatbot under high load, a chat flow and a difficulty 
level has only five questions. By answering all the questions 
correctly, the node redirects the user to a new chat flow at the 
end, where he can continue with the quiz. This allows the 
learner to be guided through a multi-level dialogue, for 
example, to request several pieces of information or to define 
a problem in more detail. This function is also used, for 
example, to create a ticket for support. In Figure 2, you can 
see what the tree structure looks like with the various branches 
and how complex it can become, depending on the number of 
questions. 
 
3) Future outlook 
To bring out the full potential of the AI-based learning 
chatbot, and for learners to achieve even better success, it is 
necessary to conduct surveys to find out the learning behavior 
of users. Therefore, some surveys about the learning behavior 
will take place in the coming weeks. On the one hand it will 
be tested if the learners prefer to learn via multiple choice or 
if they prefer a variant where they have to enter the complete 
answer manually. It will also be tested which of the above-
mentioned game modes lead to a better game experience or to 
an increased learning gain. In addition, it is still checked 
which requirements are optimal for the awarding of a 
certificate so that it has a relevant value. After completion of 
the surveys, the results will be evaluated and based on these, 
the chatbot will be further improved. In addition, a final test 
with subsequent certification will be implemented. In order 
for the certification to have a value that is recognized in 
society, an attempt will be made to accredit the complete IT 
awareness chatbot. 
VI. 
USER EXPERIENCE TESTING 
 
A User Experience Questionnaire (UEQ) consists of 6 
predefined 
UX 
factors: 
Attractiveness, 
Efficiency, 
Perspicuity, Dependability, Stimulation and Novelty. For 
many other products or applications, however, the above-
mentioned UX factors are not really relevant. The extension 
of the User Experience Questionnaire (UEQ+) therefore does 
not consist of 6 predefined UX factors, but of a question 
catalogue consisting of 20 UX factors, which can be adapted 
to the needs of your product. Since each UX factor consists 
of 4 pairs of opposing characteristics and the importance of 
the UX factor is also asked, it is advisable not to use more 
than 5 or 6 of the 20 UX factors so that the length of the 
UEQ+ questionnaire is within a reasonable range. A user 
experience questionnaire is now conducted with a 
representative number of test persons in order to obtain 
values that are as accurate as possible. During the test, the test 
persons have to rate the pairs of opposites on the basis of a 
predefined question. As can be seen in Figure 3, the 
evaluation is done on a scale of 1 to 7, with the more negative 
characteristics on the left and the positive characteristics on 
the right [4]. 
 
After conducting the User Experience Questionnaire with a 
representative number of test persons, it can be analysed with 
an Excel table provided by UEQ+ and the mean value, 
standard deviation and confidence range for each individual 
UX factor are obtained. The confidence interval indicates the 
Figure 3. 
Example of a UEQ+ UX factor 
Figure 2. 
Chatflow of a Multiple-Choice Quiz 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-996-6
CYBER 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

range that includes the mean value of a distribution with a 
certain probability. For this purpose, the upper and lower 
limits of the confidence interval are additionally determined 
and presented in the evaluation. These are represented by 
black lines within the associated mean values of the 
respective UX factors. 
There is also the option of displaying the importance of the 
individual UX factors, the evaluation is carried out as 
explained above. The aim is to get an overview of how well 
the respective UX factors are implemented and which factors 
need to be addressed. 
 
A. User Experience Questionnaire+ for AI learning 
chatbots 
Testing the user experience of an AI learning chatbot 
requires a good testing method. The UEQ+ is the best testing 
method for AI learning chatbots because it allows UX factors 
to be specifically tailored to the chatbot under test. However, 
since there are no studies yet on which UX factors are 
particularly well suited for an AI learning chatbot, a small 
study was conducted with 30 computer science students from 
the Darmstadt University of Applied Sciences as part of this 
project. The goal of the study was to find out which UX 
factors are particularly suitable for AI learning chatbots and 
to obtain initial user feedback on the existing AI learning 
chatbot. For the study, the 30 subjects filled out a user 
experience questionnaire with 18 of the 20 UX factors. The 
UX factors haptics and acoustics were deliberately neglected, 
as our AI learning chatbot does not generally communicate 
acoustically and cannot be touched. Then, the mean values of 
each UX factor were measured and the best 6 factors were 
selected based on the result. Figure 4 shows that it is 
especially important for a learning AI chatbot to be a 
reputable source that is good to learn with. After the best 6 
UX factors were collected, they were then evaluated. Figure 
5 shows that the learning AI chatbot already performs very 
well in many of the 6 relevant UX factors. 
VII. RESULTS 
Initial user experience tests on the AI chatbot yielded the 
following results: 
• 
The AI chatbot was very well received by test persons 
• 
Subjects found it very enjoyable to use 
• 
Easy use of the chatbot 
• 
High recommendation rate 
 
In order to measure the efficiency of an AI learning 
chatbot, learning growth was measured in addition to the 
UEQ+ mentioned above. For this purpose, a study was 
conducted with 30 computer science students from Darmstadt 
University of Applied Sciences, in which they were able to 
interact and learn with the AI learning chatbot. The study was 
structured in such a way that the subjects first had to complete 
the entrance test on a specialized topic (Table 1) and then ask 
questions to the chatbot in the learning area based on a mind 
map (Figure 1). In the next step, the subjects had to be 
questioned by the chatbot to verify the previously learned 
knowledge. Finally, the subjects had to complete the final test, 
which contained the same questions as the initial test. At the 
end, the points achieved in the initial test were subtracted from 
the points in the final test to measure the learning progress. 
The subjects had to complete this run for all subject topics. As 
can be seen in Figure 6, a learning gain of 15.73 % was 
achieved, even though the test subjects were computer science 
students who are at least in their 4th semester and who already 
have prior knowledge in the area of cybersecurity due to their 
studies.  
Figure 5. 
General evaluation of the AI chatbot 
Figure 4. 
Importance Rating of an AI learning Chatbot 
Figure 6. 
Learning Growth 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-996-6
CYBER 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

Percentile: 
Of all the valid tests for the individual subjects, the scores 
achieved on the entrance tests were used to calculate 
percentiles. In total, the results of 266 entrance tests were 
considered. Depending on the prior knowledge of the test 
subjects, between 0 and 100 points could be achieved on the 
entrance test. Table 2 shows that half of the test subjects 
(median) already scored 70 points or more on the entrance 
test. The best 10% of the test persons even achieved 90 points 
or more in the entrance test. The results in Table 2 clearly 
show that our test group had sound prior knowledge of all the 
specialist topics of IT awareness and IT security and cannot 
be regarded as beginners or laypersons. 
 
TABLE II. 
PERCENTILES OF 266 ENTRANCE TEST 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the Hessian Ministry of the 
Interior and Sports HMdIS, Government of the Federal State 
of Hessen; Research funding program: Cybersecurity. R&D 
project: "Awareness Training with AI chatbots" 
REFERENCES 
[1] Federal Office for Information Security (BSI), Germany; 
https://www.bsi.bund.de/EN/Home/home_node.html; 
last 
accessed on 2022-06-12 
[2] IBM Chatbots: https://www.ibm.com/cloud/learn/chatbots-
explained; last accessed on 2022-06-12 
[3] A. D. S. Fernandes, “ Implementation, evaluation and 
optimization of the user experience and IT security of an IT 
awareness learning platform with AI chatbots. ”, Bachelor 
thesis 2021 at Darmstadt University of Applied Sciences at the 
Department of Computer Science 
[4] UEQ+_Handbook_V2: ueq-research.org 
[5] D. Bahcecioglu, “Development and optimization of an IT 
awareness learning platform with AI chatbots with regard to 
quality assurance through UX testing.”, Bachelor thesis 2022 
at Darmstadt University of Applied Sciences at the Department 
of Computer Science 
[6] Y. C. Fung and L. K. Lee, “A Chatbot for Promoting 
Cybersecurity Awareness”, Cyber Security, Privacy and 
Networking, 2022 - Springer 
[7] I. Hidayatulloh, S. Pambudi, H. D. Surjono and T. 
Sukardiyono, “Gamification on Chatbot-Based Learning 
Media: a Review and Challenges”, ELINVO (Electronics, 
Informatics, and Vocational Education), Mei 2021; vol 6 
(1):71-80, ISSN 2580-6424 (printed), ISSN 2477-2399 
(online,) DOI: 10.21831/ elinvo.v6i1.4370 
[8] F. Colace, M. D. Santo, M. Lombardi, F. Pascale and A. 
Pietrosanto, “Chatbot for E-Learning: A Case of Study”, 
International Journal of Mechanical Engineering and Robotics 
Research Vol. 7, No. 5, September 2018.
 
Percentile 
Value (points) 
[Up to max. 100] 
Meaning and 
discussion 
5 percent percentiles 
20 
95% of the testers 
scored at least 20 
points or more on the 
entrance test 
10 percent 
percentiles 
20 
See line above (5 
percent percentiles). 
50 percent 
percentiles 
70 
50% of the testers 
scored at least 70 
points or more on the 
entrance test 
90 percent 
percentiles 
90 
The best 10% of the 
testers already 
achieve 
entrance test score 90 
points or more 
95 percent 
percentiles 
100 
The top 5% of testers 
already achieved the 
maximum possible 
entrance test the 
maximum possible 
100 points 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-996-6
CYBER 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

