 
 
Enhancing Attack Resilience in the Presence of Manipulated IoT Devices within a 
Cyber Physical System 
 
 
 
Rainer Falk, Steffen Fries 
Corporate Technology 
Siemens AG 
Munich, Germany 
e-mail: {rainer.falk|steffen.fries}@siemens.com 
 
 
Abstract—Industrial cyber physical systems are exposed to 
attacks. Security standards define how such systems and the 
used devices can be protected against attacks (prevent). Despite 
all efforts to protect from attacks, it should always be assumed 
that attacks may happen. Security monitoring allows to detect 
successful attacks (detect), so that corresponding measures can 
be performed (react). This prevent-detect-react cycle is common 
approach in security of information technology and operation 
technology. This paper describes an additional approach for 
protecting cyber physical systems. The devices are designed in a 
way that makes it harder to use them for launching attacks on 
other devices. A device-internal hardware-based or isolated 
firewall limits the network traffic that the device software 
executed on the device can send or receive. Even if the device 
software contains a vulnerability allowing an attacker to 
compromise the device, the possible impact on other connected 
devices is limited, thereby enhancing the resilience of the cyber 
physical system in the presence of manipulated devices.  
Keywords–cyber security; cyber resilience; system integrity; 
cyber physical systems; industrial automation and control system; 
Internet of Things. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Traditionally, IT security has been focusing on 
information security, protecting confidentiality, integrity, and 
availability of data at rest and data in transit, and sometimes 
also protecting data in use by confidential computation. In 
Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS), major protection goals are 
availability, 
meaning 
that 
automation 
systems 
stay 
productive, and system integrity, ensuring that it is operating 
as intended. Typical application domains are factory 
automation, process automation, building automation, railway 
signaling systems, intelligent traffic management, and power 
system management. Cyber security is covering different 
phases during operation as there are protect, detect, and react: 
Protecting against threats, detecting when an attack has 
occurred, and recovering from attacks.  
When designing a security solution for a CPS or a device 
used within the CPS, the focus is on protecting the assets of 
the CPS or device, by preventing attacks against the relevant 
assets. However, this is not sufficient from a more holistic 
perspective: Also, the environment of a device or a CPS has 
to be protected from attacks originating from a manipulated 
CPS or one of its devices. In particular, Internet of Things 
(IoT) devices have been attacked with the objective to use 
them for launching attacks against other systems. Dao, Phan 
et al. described distributed denial of service (DDoS) attacks 
originating from manipulated IoT devices [1]. As (consumer) 
IoT devices have often also a weak security management, so 
that vulnerabilities are often not patched in time, making them 
an easy victim.  
This paper presents an approach for protecting the network 
environment, i.e., other devices of a CPS and further connect 
devices, from attacks originating from a manipulated 
component of the CPS. The objective is to limit the impact of 
a manipulated CPS device on other devices of the CPS, 
enhancing resilience of the CPS. The intention is to keep the 
CPS in an operational state even if some devices of the CPS 
should have been successfully attacked and be manipulated. 
Devices have to be designed in a way that it is made hard to 
use them for attacks even if they should be hacked. After 
giving an overview on cyber physical systems and on 
industrial cyber security in Sections II and III, a new approach 
on protecting the network environment from manipulated 
devices of a CPS is described in Section IV. It is a concept to 
increase the resilience of a CPS when being under attack. 
Aspects to evaluate the new approach are discussed in Section 
V. Section VI concludes the paper. 
II. 
CYBER PHYSICAL SYSTEMS 
A cyber-physical system, e.g., an Industrial Automation 
and Control System (IACS), monitors and controls a technical 
system. Examples are process automation, machine control, 
energy automation, and cloud robotics. Automation control 
equipment with sensors (S) and actuators (A) is connected 
directly with automation components, or via remote 
input/output modules. The technical process is controlled by 
measuring its current state using the sensors, and by 
determining the corresponding actuator signals.  
Figure 1 shows an example of an industrial automation and 
control system, comprising different control networks 
connected to a plant network and a cloud backend system. 
Separation of the network is typically used to realize distinct 
control networks with strict real-time requirements for the 
interaction between sensors and actuators of a production cell, 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-893-8
CYBER 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
 
or to enforce a specific security policy within a production 
cell. Such an industrial automation and control system is an 
example of a CPS and is utilized in various automation 
domains, including discrete automation (factory automation), 
process automation, railway automation, energy automation, 
and building automation. 
Figure 2 shows the typical simplified structure of 
automation components. The functionality realized by an 
automation 
component 
is 
largely 
defined 
by 
the 
firmware/software and the configuration data stored in its 
flash memory. 
 
Automation Component / Remote IO
S
S
A
A
RAM
FW 
Flash
CPU
NW 
IF
IO
 
Figure 2. Automation Component  
In practice, it has to be assumed that each software 
component may comprise vulnerabilities, independent of the 
effort spend to ensure high software quality. This is one reason 
why automation systems are usually organized in separate 
security zones. Network traffic can be filtered using network 
firewalls between different zones, limiting the impact of an 
impact in one security zone on other connected security zones. 
In addition, it is often not possible to fix known vulnerabilities 
immediately by installing a software update, as updates have 
to be tested thoroughly in a test system before being installed 
in an operational system, and as an installation is often 
possible only during a scheduled maintenance window. Also, 
the priorities of security objectives in different security zones 
are often different, too. In CPSs, the impact of a vulnerability 
in an OT system may not only affect data and data processing 
as in classical IT, but it may have an effect also on the physical 
world. For example, production equipment could be damaged, 
or the physical process may operate outside the designed 
physical boundaries, so that the produced goods may not have 
the expected quality or even that human health or life is 
endangered.  
III. 
INDUSTRIAL CYBER SECURITY 
Protecting 
IACSs 
against 
intentional 
attacks 
is 
increasingly demanded by operators to ensure a reliable 
operation, and also by regulation. This section gives an 
overview on industrial security, and on the main relevant 
industrial security standard IEC 62443 [11].  
A. Industrial CPS Security Requirements 
Industrial security is called also Operation Technology 
security (OT security), to distinguish it from general 
Information Technology (IT) security. Industrial systems have 
not only different security requirements compared to general 
IT systems, but come also with specific side conditions 
preventing the direct application of security concepts 
established in the IT domain in an OT environment. For 
example, availability and integrity of an automation system 
often have a higher priority than confidentiality. As an 
example, 
high 
availability 
requirements, 
different 
organization processes (e.g., yearly maintenance windows), 
and required certifications may prevent the immediate 
installations of updates. 
The three basic security requirements are confidentiality, 
integrity, and availability (“CIA” requirements). However, in 
automation systems or industrial IT, the priorities are 
commonly just the other way around: Availability of the IACS 
has typically the highest priority, followed by integrity. 
Confidentiality is often no strong requirement for control 
communications, but may be needed to protect critical 
business know-how. 
Control Network
SCADA
Log 
Server
Plant Network
Automation 
Component
S
S
A
A
Automation 
Component
S
S
A
A
GW
IoT 
Gateway
GW
Control Network
Automation 
Component
S
S
A
A
Automation 
Component
S
S
A
A
Automation 
Component
IoT Backend
Remote IO
S
S
A
A
Remote IO
S
S
A
A
Edge Cloud
 
Figure 1. Example – Industrial Automation and Control System 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-893-8
CYBER 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
 
Availability
Priority
Integrity
Confidentiality
Confidentiality
Integrity
Availability
Industrial Automation 
and Control Systems
Office IT Systems
 
Figure 3. The CIA Pyramid [9] 
Figure 3 shows that in common IT systems, the priority is 
“CIA”. As shown graphically, the CIA pyramid is inverted 
(turned upside down) in many automation systems.  
Specific requirements and side conditions of an IACS like 
high availability, planned configuration (engineering info), 
long life cycles, unattended operation, real-time operation, 
and communication, as well as safety requirements have to be 
considered when designing a cyber security solution. Often, 
an important aspect is that the applied security measures do 
not put availability and integrity of the automation system at 
risk. Depending on the considered industry (vertical), they 
may also be part of the critical infrastructure domain, for 
which security requirements are also imposed for instance by 
the European Network and Information Systems (NIS) 
directive [10] or country specific realizations of the directive. 
Further security requirements are provided by applying 
standards defining functional requirements, for instance 
defined in IEC 62443. The defined security requirements can 
be mapped to different automation domains, including energy 
automation, railway automation, building automation, process 
automation.  
Security measures to address these requirements range 
from security processes, personal and physical security, 
device security, network security, and application security. No 
single security technology alone is adequate, but a 
combination of security measures addressing prevention, 
detection, and reaction to incidents is required (“defense in 
depth”).  
B. Overview IEC 62443 Industrial Security Standard 
The international industrial security framework IEC 
62443 [11] is a security requirements framework defined by 
the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC). It 
addresses the need to design cybersecurity robustness and 
resilience into industrial automation and control systems, 
covering both organizational and technical aspects of security 
over the life cycle. Specific parts of this framework are 
applied successfully in different automation domains, 
including 
factory 
and 
process 
automation, 
railway 
automation, energy automation, and building automation. The 
standard specifies security for Industrial Automation and 
Control Systems (IACS) and covers both, organizational and 
technical aspects of security. Specifically addressed for the 
industrial domain is the setup of a security organization and 
the definition of security processes as part of an Information 
Security Management System (ISMS) based on already 
existing standards like ISO 27001 [12] or the NIST cyber 
security 
framework. 
Furthermore, 
technical 
security 
requirements are specified distinguishing different security 
levels for industrial automation and control systems, and also 
for the used components. The standard has been created to 
address the specific requirements of industrial automation and 
control systems. 
Different parts of the IEC62443 standard are grouped into 
four clusters, covering:  
− 
common definitions and metrics; 
− 
requirements on setup of a security organization (ISMS 
related, similar to ISO 27001 [12]), as well as solution 
supplier and service provider processes;  
− 
technical requirements and methodology for security on 
system-wide level, and  
− 
requirements on the secure development lifecycle of 
system components, and security requirements to such 
components at a technical level.  
The framework parts address different roles over different 
phases of the system lifecycle: The operator of an IACS 
operates the IACS that has been integrated by the system 
integrator, using components of product suppliers. In the set 
of corresponding documents, security requirements are 
defined, which target the solution operator and the integrator 
but also the product manufacturer.  
According to the methodology described in IEC 62443 
part 3-2, a complex automation system is structured into zones 
that are connected by and communicate through so-called 
“conduits” that map for example to the logical network 
protocol communication between two zones. Moreover, this 
document defines Security Levels (SL) that correspond with 
the strength of a potential adversary. To achieve a dedicated 
SL, the defined requirements have to be fulfilled. 
Part 3-3 of IEC 62443 [14], addressing an overall 
automation system, is in particular relevant for the system 
integrator. It defines seven foundational requirements that 
group specific requirements of a certain category: 
− 
FR 1 Identification and authentication control 
− 
FR 2 Use control 
− 
FR 3 System integrity  
− 
FR 4 Data confidentiality  
− 
FR 5 Restricted data flow 
− 
FR 6 Timely response to events  
− 
FR 7 Resource availability 
For each of the foundational requirements, several 
concrete 
technical 
security 
requirements 
(SR) 
and 
requirement enhancements (RE) are defined. Related security 
requirements are defined for the components of an industrial 
automation and control system in IEC 62443 part 4-2 [15], 
addressing in particular component manufacturers.  
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-893-8
CYBER 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
 
IV. 
PROTECTING NETWORK ENVIRONMENT FROM 
MANIPULATED IOT DEVICES 
The security objective “resilience under attack” means that 
a CPS, e.g., an IACS or an industrial Internet of Things (IoT) 
environment, should stay operational even when some devices 
would be manipulated. Considering the manifold of devices 
used in real-world CPS, it has to be assumed that some of them 
will have vulnerabilities that can be used to install malware to 
attack other devices. Hence, it shall be avoided that a 
successfully hacked device can be used to launch attacks 
against other devices. This is a specific security objective: 
When designing the security architecture for a device, usually 
attacks against the device are investigated. Here, it shall be 
avoided that even if a device would be attacked successfully 
despite its designed-in protection means, the impact of this 
attack on the network environment is reduced.  
The software execution environment executes the 
software (firmware) of the device that might have a 
vulnerability. A separated, e.g., a separate hardware based, on-
device firewall limits the network communication that the 
executed software can perform. This enforcement is realized 
independently from the executed device software, so that it is 
still working even if the device software has been manipulated 
by an attacker. This independence is a necessary pre-requisite. 
In the described design, this independence is achieved by 
separate 
hardware-based 
component. 
However, 
the 
independence from the executed device software could be 
achieved also by using an isolated software execution 
environment, e.g., a separate processor or a separate trusted 
execution environment. Using a hardware-based realization 
has the advantage of limiting the impact on real-time 
communication properties as delay and jitter, and also on the 
energy consumption. It can be easily implemented if a 
dedicated hardware-based network interface is in use anyhow 
to support real-time communication protocols.   
Possible filter criteria are source and destination network 
addresses, 
protocols, 
port 
numbers, 
transmit 
rate 
(frames/packets per second), or data volume. In an advanced 
form, the firewall may even verify on application level, 
whether certain control flows are aligned with either the 
typical (historical) behavior of the device or with an 
engineered process. The policy might be fixed, e.g., for 
embedded control devices with a fixed functionality, or 
configurable. Important is that the device software cannot 
modify the filter policy on its own.  
The filter policy might be adapted automatically 
depending on the patch status of the device software, or 
depending on a cryptographically protected health check 
confirmation received from a device integrity monitoring 
service. This would allow to keep the system operational, 
although with potentially limited capabilities, thus keeping it 
resilient. Also, limiting specific functionalities as result of 
missing device integrity may stipulate the timely application 
of patches, to get the system back to normal operation with 
full functionality and performance.  
Figure 4 shows an IoT Field Device with a central 
processing unit CPU executing device firmware/software 
stored in a flash of RAM memory. 
IoT Field Device
CPU
RAM
Flash
NW
IF
USB Port
D+
D-
Environment 
Protecting 
Hardware 
Network 
Firewall
I/O
 
Figure 4. Attack-preventing IoT Device Architecture 
The software can communicate over the network interface 
(NW IF) with other devices, e.g., using HTTPS or OPC UA 
over TCP/IP. Also, sensors and actuators can be connected via 
an input-output (I/O) interface. An USB interface allows to 
configure the device or to install a firmware update.  
To enhance resilience, the device includes a hardware-
based network firewall to protect the network environment 
from attacks originating from the IoT field device. It limits the 
type of network communication that can be performed by the 
device software executed on the CPU. This function is fixed, 
so that the device software cannot modify it, so that the 
filtering is performed with high level of trustworthiness. The 
hardware-based network firewall is still effective even if the 
device software should be manipulated.  
The hardware-based firewall can be realized by an 
integrated circuit, e.g., an application-specific integrated 
circuit (ASIC), a field programmable gate array (FPGA), or a 
separate microcontroller or security controller, or it can be 
integrated with a hardware-based network interface. The filter 
policy might be adapted, depending on whether a 
cryptographically protected network access token (NAcT) is 
provided to the hardware firewall. The NAcT can be provided 
by a backend device integrity check service. The device 
software may provide a received NAcT token to the device 
hardware firewall, but cannot manipulate it. This allows the 
backend device integrity check service to temporarily activate 
a less restrictive policy if the device integrity has been verified 
successfully. A NAcT token can be protected by a 
cryptographic checksum, e.g., a digital signature (e.g., RSA, 
DSA, ECDSA) or a symmetric message authentication code 
(e.g., HMAC, AES-CBC-MAC). The NAcT token realizes an 
authenticated watchdog, as described by England, Aigner, 
Marochko, Mattoon, Spiger, and Thom [3]. However, here it 
is used for selecting a firewall policy, not for initiation a 
device recovery procedure. If an integrity monitoring system 
monitoring the integrity of control devices or a network-based 
intrusion detection system, realizing the device integrity check 
service, detects an ongoing attack in the IACS, it can limit 
reliably the network communications of devices, allowing to 
confine the attack.   
A different approach compared to attack monitoring is to 
monitor write access to the flash memory, i.e., to check 
whether the device software (firmware) stored in the flash 
memory is updated regularly. The less restrictive, open filter 
policy stays activated only if the device firmware is updated 
regularly.  
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-893-8
CYBER 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
 
V. 
EVALUATION 
While the original motivation for ”plug and produce”, as 
defined for Industry 4.0, is to increase flexibility in production 
and to reduce the time needed to reconfigure an automation 
environment for different manufacturing tasks or batches, this 
flexibility is also advantageous for increasing resilience under 
attack: Even if some of the devices are manipulated (attacked) 
and cannot be used for production until they are patched, the 
flexibility of the overall production system allows to 
reconfigure the IACS components, avoiding or at least 
limiting the interaction with affected devices. Therefore, 
production can continue, maybe with limitations, even when 
some devices should have been manipulated. When using the 
enhancement described in section IV, it depends on the 
specific IACS and on the specific attack scenario to what 
degree the IACS can stay operational under attack. For the 
evaluation, it has to be determined to what degree relevant 
risks of the IACS are reduced by introducing such protection 
measures.  
The security of a CPS is evaluated in practice in various 
approaches and stages of the system’s lifecycle: 
− 
A Threat and Risk Analysis (TRA, also abbreviated as 
TARA) is typically conducted at the beginning of the 
product or system development, and updated after major 
design changes, or to address a changed threat landscape. 
In a TRA, possible attacks (threats) on the system are 
identified. The impact that would be caused by a 
successful attack and the probability that the attack 
happens are evaluated to determine the risk of the 
identified threats. The risk evaluation allows to prioritize 
the threats, focusing on the most relevant risks and to 
define corresponding security measures. Security 
measures can target to reduce the probability of an attack 
by preventing it, or by reducing the impact.  
− 
Security checks can be performed during operation or 
during maintenance windows to determine key 
performance indicators (e.g., check compliance of 
device configurations) and to verified that the defined 
security measures are in fact in place.  
− 
Security testing (penetration testing, also called 
pentesting for short) can be performed for a system that 
has been built, but that is currently not in operation. A 
pentest can usually not be performed on an operational 
automation and control system, as the pentest could 
endanger the reliable operation auf the system. 
Pentesting can be performed during a maintenance 
window when the physical system is in a safe state, or 
using a separate test system. Security testing can be 
performed also on a digital representation of a target 
system, e.g., a simulation in the easiest case. This digital 
representation is also called “digital twin”. This allows 
to perform security checks and pentesting for systems 
that are not existing yet physically (design phase), or to 
perform pentesting of operational systems in the digital 
world without the risk of disturbing the regular operation 
of the real-world system.  
As long as the technology proposed in the paper has not 
been proven in a real-world operational setting, it can be 
evaluated conceptually by analyzing the impact that the 
additional security measure would have on the identified 
residual risks as determined by a TRA. The general effect of 
the presented security measure is that the impact of a threat, 
i.e., a successful attack, on the physical world controlled by 
the CPS is reduced. Whatever attack is ongoing on the IT-
based automation and control system, still the possible impact 
on the real, physical world is limited. While security measures 
often target the prevention of attacks, the proposed resilience 
measure reduces the impact and thereby the risk. The impact 
of a threat is reduced if the IACS in fact can stay operational, 
at least with limited functionality, in relevant attack scenarios.   
However, TRAs for real-world CPS are not available 
publicly. Nevertheless, an illustrative example may be given 
by a chemical production plant performing a specific process 
like refinery, or a factory producing glue or cement. If the 
plant is attacked, the attack may target to destroy the 
production equipment by immediately stopping the process 
leading to physical hardening of the chemicals / consumables 
and thus to a permanent unavailability of the production 
equipment. In this case, trusted sensors could be used to detect 
a falsified sensor signal, and the physical-world firewall can 
be used to limit actions in the physical world. Both, the trusted 
sensors and the physical world firewall build a security 
overlay network, independent from the actual operational 
control network. Thereby, a physical damage of the 
production equipment can be avoided. If needed, a controlled 
shutdown of the production site can be performed.  
As the evaluation in a real-world CPS requires significant 
effort, and as attack scenarios cannot be tested that could 
really have a (severe) impact on the physical world, a 
simulation-based approach or using specific test-beds are 
possible approaches, allowing to simulate or evaluate in a 
protected test-bed the effect on the physical world of certain 
attack scenarios with compromised components. The 
simulation would have to include not only the IT-based 
control function, but also the physical world impact of an 
attack. Using physical-world simulation and test beds to 
evaluate the impact of attacks have been described by Urbina, 
Giraldo et al. [24].  
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
A CPS comprises the operational cyber-technology and 
the physical world with which the system interacts. Both parts 
have to be covered by a security concept and solution. 
Traditional cyber security puts the focus on the cyber-part, 
i.e., automation and control systems. The security of the 
physical part, like machinery, is protected often by physical 
and organizational security measures, only. This paper 
presented a concept for a new approach that enhances the 
resilience of a CPS in the presence of attacked devices, by 
making it harder that a compromised device is used for 
attacking other devices of the CPS. This can be a useful 
element to ensure the availability of the automation system, as 
even under attack, the automation system has not to be shut 
down. It is complementary to other approaches for enhancing 
CPS resilience by protecting the physical-world interface [2].  
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-893-8
CYBER 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] N. N. Dao, T. V. Phan, Umar Sa’ad, Joongheon Kim, Thomas 
Bauschert, and Sungrae Cho, “Securing Heterogeneous IoT 
with Intelligent DDoS Attack Behavior Learning”, arXiv: 
1711.06041v3 [cs.NI] 7 Aug 2019, [Online]. Available from: 
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1711.06041.pdf [retrieved August, 2021] 
[2] R. Falk and S. Fries, “Enhancing Resilience by Protecting the 
Physical-World Interface of Cyber-Physical Systems”, The 
Fourth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and 
Cyber-Systems CYBER 2019, pp. 6–11, September 22, 2019 
to September 26, 2019 - Porto, Portugal, [Online]. Available 
from: 
https://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&articleid
=cyber_2019_1_20_80033 [retrieved August, 2021] 
[3] P. England, R. Aigner, A. Marochko, D. Mattoon, R. Spiger, 
and S. Thom, “Cyber resilient platforms”, Microsoft Technical 
Report MSR-TR-2017-40, Sep. 2017, [Online]. Available 
from: 
https://www.microsoft.com/en-
us/research/publication/cyber-resilient-platforms-overview/ 
[retrieved August, 2021] 
[4] Electronic Communications Resilience&Response Group, 
“EC-RRG resilience guidelines for providers of critical 
national telecommunications infrastructure”, version 0.7, 
March 
2008, 
available 
from: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/s
ystem/uploads/attachment_data/file/62281/telecoms-ecrrg-
resilience-guidelines.pdf [retrieved August, 2021] 
[5] D. Urbina, J. Giraldo, N. O. Tippenhauer, and A. Cardenas, 
“Attacking fieldbus communications in ICS: applications to the 
SWaT testbed”, Singapore Cyber-Security Conference (SG-
CRC), IOS press, pp. 75–89, 2016, [Online]. Available from: 
http://ebooks.iospress.nl/volumearticle/42054 
[retrieved 
August, 2021] 
[6] C. C. Davidson, T. R. Andel, M. Yampolskiy, J. T. McDonald, 
W. B. Glisson, and T. Thomas, “On SCADA PLC and fieldbus 
cyber security”, 13th International Conference on Cyber 
Warfare 
and 
Security, 
National 
Defense 
University, 
Washington, DC, pp. 140–148, 2018  
[7] D. Bodeau and R. Graubart, “Cyber resiliency design 
principles”, MITRE Technical Report, January 2017, [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.mitre.org/sites/default/files/ 
publications/PR%20170103%20Cyber%20Resiliency%20Des
ign%20Principles%20MTR17001.pdf 
[retrieved 
August, 
2021] 
[8] A. Kott and I. Linkov (Eds.), “Cyber Resilience of Systems and 
Networks”, Springer, 2019 
[9] R. Falk and S. Fries, “Enhancing integrity protection for 
industrial cyber physical systems”, The Second International 
Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems, 
CYBER 2017, pp. 35–40, November 12 - 16, 2017, Barcelona, 
Spain, 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&articleid=
cyber_2017_3_30_80031 [retrieved August, 2021] 
[10] European Commission, “The directive on security of network 
and information systems (NIS Directive)”, [Online]. Available 
from: 
https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/network-
and-information-security-nis-directive 
[retrieved 
August, 
2021] 
[11] IEC 62443, “Industrial automation and control system 
security” (formerly ISA99), [Online]. Available from: 
https://webstore.iec.ch/searchform&q=62443 
[retrieved 
August, 2021] 
[12] ISO/IEC 27001, “Information technology – security techniques 
– Information security management systems – requirements”, 
October 
2013, 
[Online]. 
Available 
from:  
https://www.iso.org/standard/54534.html [retrieved August, 
2021] 
[13] NIST, “Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure 
Cybersecurity”, Version 1.1, April 16, 2018, [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/CSWP/NIST.CSWP.041620
18.pdf [retrieved August, 2021] 
[14] IEC 62443-3-3:2013, “Industrial communication networks – 
network and system security – Part 3-3: System security 
requirements and security levels”, Edition 1.0, August 2013 
[15] IEC 62443-4.2, “Industrial communication networks - security 
for industrial automation and control systems - Part 4-2: 
technical security requirements for IACS components”, Feb. 
2019 
[16] P. Bock, J. P. Hauet, R. Françoise, and R. Foley, “Ukrainian 
power grids cyberattack - A forensic analysis based on 
ISA/IEC 62443”, ISA InTech magazine, 2017, [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.isa.org/intech-
home/2017/march-april/features/ukrainian-power-grids-
cyberattack [retrieved August, 2021] 
[17] ZVEI, ”Orientation guideline for manufacturers on IEC 
62443”, “Orientierungsleitfaden für Hersteller zur IEC 62443“ 
[German], ZVEI Whitepaper, 2017, [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.zvei.org/presse-
medien/publikationen/orientierungsleitfaden-fuer-hersteller-
zur-iec-62443/ [retrieved August, 2021] 
[18] H. R. Ghaeini, M. Chan, R. Bahmani, F. Brasser, L. Garcia, J. 
Zhou, A. R. Sadeghi, N. O. Tippenhauer, and S. Zonouz, “PAtt: 
Physics-based Attestation of Control Systems”, 22nd 
International Symposium on Research in Attacks, Intrusions 
and Defenses, USENIX, pp. 165–180, September 23-25, 2019,  
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.usenix.org/system/files/raid2019-ghaeini.pdf 
[retrieved August, 2021] 
[19] Plattform Industrie 4.0, “Industrie 4.0 Plug-and-produce for 
adaptable factories: example use case definition, models, and 
implementation”, Plattform Industrie 4.0 working paper, June 
2017, 
[Online]. 
Available 
from:https://www.zvei.org/fileadmin/user_upload/Presse_und
_Medien/Publikationen/2017/Juni/Industrie_4.0_Plug_and_pr
oduce/Industrie-4.0-_Plug-and-Produce-zvei.pdf 
[retrieved 
August, 2021] 
[20] T. Hupperich, H. Hosseini, and T. Holz, “Leveraging sensor 
fingerprinting for mobile device authentication”, International 
Conference on Detection of Intrusions and Malware, and 
Vulnerability Assessment, LNCS 9721, Springer, pp. 377–396, 
2016, [Online]. Available from: https://www.syssec.ruhr-uni-
bochum.de/media/emma/veroeffentlichungen/2016/09/28/pap
er.pdf [retrieved August, 2021] 
[21] H. Bojinov, D. Boneh, Y. Michalevsky, and G. Nakibly, 
“Mobile device identification via sensor fingerprinting”, 
arXiv:1408.1416, 
2016, 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://arxiv.org/abs/1408.1416 [retrieved August, 2021] 
[22] P. Hao, “Wireless device authentication techniques using 
physical-layer device fingerprint”, PhD thesis, University of 
Western 
Ontario, 
Electronic 
Thesis 
and 
Dissertation 
Repository, 
3440, 
2015, 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://ir.lib.uwo.ca/etd/3440 [retrieved August, 2021] 
[23] R. Falk and M. Trommer, “Integrated Management of Network 
and Host Based Security Mechanisms”, 3rd Australasian 
Conference on Information Security and Privacy, ACISP98, 
pp. 36-47, July 13-15, 1998, LNCS 1438, Springer, 1998  
[24] D. Urbina, J. Giraldo, A. Cardenas, N. O. Tippenhauer, J. 
Valente, M. Faisal, J. Ruths, R. Candell, and H. Sandberg, 
“Limiting The Impact of Stealthy Attacks on Industrial Control 
Systems”, 
ACM 
Conference 
on 
Computer 
and 
Communications Security (CCS), pp. 1092–1105, Vienna, 
Austria, 2016 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-893-8
CYBER 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

