Cloud Computing and Data Jurisdiction: A New Challenge for Digital Forensics 
 
 
Giuseppe Vaciago 
Faculty of Law 
University of Milan 
Piazza Ateneo Nuovo 1, Milan, Italy 
e-mail: vaciago@htlaw.it 
 
 
Abstract— Although it has become clear that digital forensics – 
the practical analysis of digital data following the acquisition of 
a bit-stream image of a suspect’s hard disk – suffered a setback 
with the wide adoption of mobile devices and the increasing 
use of flash memory and encryption systems, it is undoubtedly 
also the case that it experienced a fundamental change due to 
the incredible expansion of cloud computing systems. In this 
article, the aim is to study the jurisdictional problems that 
cloud computing systems cause and the possible solutions at an 
EU level that have been adopted by legislators and the courts 
of the European Union in relation to the gathering of digital 
evidence that may be concealed in the ‘clouds’. Particular 
attention must be paid to German and Italian case law 
experience as Courts in these countries have addressed the 
problem, providing different solutions to resolve the same 
problem. 
Keywords: Cloud Computing; Digital Forensics; Remote 
Forensics; Jurisdiction. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
The increasing popularity of cloud computing [1], 
moreover, has made conventional crime detection even 
more difficult: the very strengths of cloud computing, which 
allows anyone anywhere in the world to use publicly 
accessible software to process data stored in a virtual 
cyberspace location, could be put to devious use by 
criminals to store incriminating data on a server located 
beyond the jurisdiction of the courts of their country of 
residence, preferably in a State with no judicial cooperation 
treaty with that country. 
Over the last few years, various approaches have been 
offered to solve the ‘loss of location’ of digital evidence in 
the ‘cloud world’. The traditional approach is the territorial 
principle by virtue of which the court in the place where the 
data is located has jurisdiction. This approach essentially 
prohibits any type of investigation because even the cloud 
provider might not know exactly where the data is located. 
Another approach is the nationality principle by virtue of 
which the nationality of the perpetrator is the factor used to 
establish criminal jurisdiction. This principle imposes 
certain restrictions, since the perpetrators in a cybercrime 
case might easily be foreign nationals, given that cybercrime 
is generally transnational and there is no need for physical 
proximity. Furthermore, data does not have a nationality, 
because it is an attribute of an individual.  
A third approach is the ‘flag principle’, which basically 
states that crimes committed on ships, aircraft and 
spacecraft are subject to the jurisdiction of the flag State, 
regardless of their location at the time of the crime (article 
22, Convention on Cybercrime) [2]. Since digital data is 
constantly changing, this principle also seems to be 
applicable to cloud computing. However, to apply this to the 
cloud computing scenario, it is necessary to remember that 
this principle could motivate cybercriminals to select a 
cloud computing provider under a ‘pirate flag’. 
Finally, a recent discussion paper, prepared by the 
Council of Europe within the framework of the global 
Project on Cybercrime, suggested the ‘Power of Disposal 
Approach’ [3]. From a practical point of view, a regulation 
based on the power of disposal approach would make it 
feasible for law enforcement to obtain access to a suspect’s 
data within the cloud. Law enforcement would only have to 
legally obtain the username and password combination and 
be able to prove that additional requirements have been met. 
This type of approach certainly overcomes any jurisdictional 
issue, but a balance must be struck with the legitimate need 
for privacy and the rights of the citizens even if a judicial 
authority investigates them. 
There has been heated debate on both sides of the 
Atlantic in recent years on the wisdom of empowering law 
enforcement authorities to use remote forensics technology 
to obtain access to the digital data storage devices (laptops, 
serves, smart telephones, etc) of suspects. Law enforcement 
agencies find it increasingly difficult to locate the servers on 
which incriminating data are stored, since perpetrators tend 
to rely on remote access connections to store and process 
data using faraway devices [4].  
 
II. 
LEGISLATIVE MEASURE OF THE CONVENTION ON 
CYBERCRIME 
 
To overcome obstacles generated by the ‘data loss’ 
location of digital evidence, signatory States have endowed 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-182-3
CYBERLAWS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Technical and Legal Aspects of the e-Society

their respective judicial authority and law enforcement 
agencies with a number of legislative measures in 
implementation of articles 18 (Production Orders), 19 
(Search and Seizure of Stored Computer Data) and 20 
(Real-time Collection of Traffic Data), of the Convention on 
Cybercrime. 
Under article 18 of the Convention on Cybercrime, 
signatory States are required to empower their respective 
judicial authorities to issue Production Orders requiring any 
person or party (obviously, including ISPs) to submit to law 
enforcement authorities specific digital data in the 
possession or control of the person or party in question, and 
stored on a computer system or data storage medium [5]. 
Some Italian commentators hold the view that Production 
Orders could also be issued to compel the disclosure of data 
pertaining to web users based outside the boundaries of a 
signatory State, provided that the same have signed up for 
services provided by an ISP that operates, amongst other 
things, in the signatory State in question [6]. 
This interesting approach appears, however, to conflict 
with the principle of sovereignty, and, may, in any event, be 
applied solely to subscriber information (article 18(1)(b) of 
the Convention on Cybercrime), since only ISPs located 
within the territory of the signatory State in which the 
Production Order is issued may be compelled to submit 
user-generated content (article 18(1)(a) of the Convention 
on Cybercrime) [7]. 
Pursuant to article 19 of the Convention on Cybercrime, 
moreover, signatory States are required to ensure that, upon 
discovering that pertinent digital evidence is, in fact, stored 
on another server, their respective law enforcement agencies 
are also empowered to access also the other server, 
provided, however, that the latter is located within their 
national borders, and that the digital data to be seized, may 
be accessed from the server initially covered by the related 
search and seizure warrant. 
In any event, even when searching for specific data stored 
on a computer system located within the borders of the 
signatory State in which the Production Order is issued, law 
enforcement agencies may encounter serious difficulties as a 
result of the sheer volume of data to be parsed to find useful 
digital evidence. 
In light of these obstacles, the Convention on Cybercrime 
requires law enforcement agencies to be empowered to 
compel the IT manager to provide ‘as is reasonable’ the 
information necessary for successfully securing the digital 
evidence sought [8]. 
Finally, article 20 of the Convention on Cybercrime 
requires that law enforcement authorities of signatory States 
to be afforded real-time access to web traffic data, that is to 
say the electronic records of a suspect’s on-line activities 
(web sites visited, e-mail correspondents, downloads, etc). 
Towards this end, signatory States must enact national 
legislation requiring ISPs either to provide law enforcement 
authorities with the software tools necessary for directly 
collecting and recording traffic data subject to search and 
seizure, or alternatively, to collect and record such data on 
an ad hoc basis, pursuant to a judicial or prosecutorial order 
to such effect. 
As in the case of evidentiary seizures of e-mail, 
‘Production Orders’ and the ‘Real-time Collection of Traffic 
Data’ contemplated in articles 18 and 20 of the Convention 
on Cybercrime respectively, are very similar to the 
interception of communications, which are subject to 
specific restrictions pursuant to article 8 of the European 
Convention on Human Rights. 
Sadly, these three crucial ‘crime-fighting’ tools, 
entrenched in the Convention on Cybercrime, are available 
only in part to Italian law enforcement agencies. Whilst the 
Italian Code of Criminal Procedure does, in fact, currently 
contemplate procedural instruments designed to achieve the 
same results (the appointment of a digital forensics expert to 
assist law enforcement officers pursuant to article 348, 
paragraph 4; discovery orders within the meaning of article 
248; and interception of communications regulated under 
article 266-bis), in ratifying the Convention on Cybercrime, 
Italy failed to avail of a significant opportunity to fine-tune 
these ‘crime-fighting tools’.  
III. 
ITALIAN AND GERMAN CASE LAW ON REMOTE 
FORENSICS TECHNOLOGY 
Several European countries are currently considering 
legislation that would invest their law enforcement 
authorities with powers to remotely monitor and record the 
traffic data of suspects in real time to an extent that far 
exceeds the scope of the procedural tools outlined above [9], 
whilst, on the other shore of the Atlantic, the FBI has 
already successfully tested a peculiar type of spyware 
(CIPAV) specifically designed for such a purpose [10]. 
In any event, it is clear that by allowing law enforcement 
officers to monitor the on-line activities of a blissfully 
unaware suspect from the air-conditioned comfort of their 
offices, remote forensic techniques have proven far more 
cost-efficient and effective than conventional detective work 
and, moreover, without any jurisdictional problems, as 
digital evidence would not be acquired in a territory other 
than the one in which the Prosecutor has jurisdiction.  
At the same time, it would be perilous to lose sight of the 
dangers that such invasive techniques might entail in terms 
of the citizen’s fundamental rights and freedoms. Great care 
must, accordingly, be taken to properly weigh all the legal 
interests involved, and strike a delicate balance between the 
prevention of crime and public security, and the need to 
protect the suspect’s due process, privacy and other human 
rights. 
On this issue, it is interesting to note that the Italian 
Supreme 
Court 
evinced 
no 
need 
to 
address 
the 
constitutionality of a prosecutorial warrant, authorizing the 
use of surreptitiously installed ghost software to obtain a 
copy of the digital data stored on a desktop used by the 
suspect and located in a public office on the grounds that the 
related evidentiary seizure order did not pertain to a flow of 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-182-3
CYBERLAWS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Technical and Legal Aspects of the e-Society

communications but merely entailed the mining of data 
already stored on the suspect’s desktop, that is to say, a ‘a 
one-directional flow of data’ contained within the 
computer’s internal circuitry [11]. 
The Supreme Court moreover held that, in the case in 
question, this technical activity was repeatable, given that 
‘copying the stored files neither altered the same nor 
entailed the destruction of the database which remained 
totally unchanged, and therefore accessible and open to 
consultation, subject to the same terms and conditions, even 
upon conclusion of evidence gathering operations’. 
According to the Supreme Court, the copying in question 
amounted to no more than a repeatable operation that could 
be undertaken without informing defense counsel, much less 
inviting the latter to attend the proceedings, since the same 
operation could be reproduced and repeated a second time if 
need be for procedural purposes, although such need did not 
arise. 
During the Supreme Court proceedings, however, counsel 
for the defense argued that the warrant issued by the public 
prosecutor, whilst authorizing no more than the seizure of a 
copy of the digital data in question, effectively entailed the 
interception of computerized communications. The scope of 
the prosecutorial warrant, in fact, covered not only the files 
already stored in the suspect’s computer system through to 
the date of the related search and seizure, but also any and 
all data input into the system in the future.  
This factual situation was confirmed by the operating 
procedures followed in executing the prosecutorial warrant, 
which included the surreptitious installation of ghost 
software on the computer system in question, for the 
purpose of copying files already stored on the computer, and 
subsequently copying in real time any and all data processed 
using the computer system, before, finally, transmitting all 
the data that was copied back to law enforcement officers on 
a periodic basis. As a result, the computer system used by 
the suspect was effectively subjected to digital surveillance 
for over eight months. 
The ruling deserves criticism from two standpoints: first, 
the Supreme Court does not appear to have considered the 
fact that the alleged repeatability of the copying and 
transmitting operations necessarily implies that no further 
data processing was carried out using the computer system 
in question, following the original operations; second, in 
support of its refusal to apply the statutory provisions 
regulating 
the 
interception 
and 
recording 
of 
communications, the Supreme Court goes no further than to 
point out that the flow of communications copied by and 
transmitted to law enforcement authorities did not pertain to 
electronic correspondence between two private parties, but 
focused solely on a ‘unilateral flow of communications’. 
Whilst this approach is certainly reasonable, there still 
seems to be a cloud of mystery shrouding both the Supreme 
Court’s refusal to apply article 266-bis which regulates the 
interception of a ‘flow of communications pertaining to 
computerized or electronic systems, or otherwise among 
several systems’, and its apparent tolerance of highly 
invasive evidence-gathering techniques that go so far as to 
entail the prolonged monitoring of a computer system 
without judicial oversight. 
A totally different approach was taken by Germany. On 
20 December 2006, article 5.2 (11) of the Law on the 
Protection of the Constitution in North Rhine-Westphalia 
was amended with the introduction of provisions on remote 
forensics instruments, both on-line and by obtaining access 
to information technology systems [12]. 
The issue first came to the attention of the general public 
and legal scholars in 2006 when a state prosecutor applied 
to 
the 
Federal 
Court 
of 
Justice 
of 
Germany 
(Bundesgerichtshof) to authorize a remote search of 
computers allegedly containing data useful to continuing 
investigations, by applying an analogy to the law governing 
search-and- seizure operations conducted on physical 
premises. The court dismissed the motion, holding that 
clandestine remote searches of computers could not be 
deemed analogous to raids conducted on physical premises, 
but left open the possibility for new laws to be enacted 
endowing law enforcement authorities with specific search-
and-seizure powers in respect of electronic data. It was this 
latter portion of the decision that led to the amendment of 
the Law on the Protection of the Constitution in North 
Rhine-Westphalia. 
The new provisions reinforced the domestic secret 
service known as the ‘Federal Office for the Protection of 
the Constitution’ (Bundesamt für Verfassungsschutz) by 
authorizing the establishment of an agency with the specific 
task of gathering intelligence by obtaining covert access to 
computer 
systems 
and 
secretly 
monitoring 
on-line 
communications and web traffic. 
Private computer systems could be covertly accessed 
either 
physically, 
using 
hardware 
(interception 
of 
communications and bugs) or ‘remotely’, thanks to software 
(keylogger and sniffer programs) installed on the target 
system without the owner’s knowledge, for instance, in the 
form of Trojans incorporated within or disguised as 
harmless content, by convincing the hapless owner to 
voluntarily upload the relevant spyware or disclose 
passwords through cleverly devised social engineering and 
phishing initiatives [13]. 
Under the amendment in question, the above remote 
forensics operations could be launched without a warrant or 
court order of any kind, and there was no specified limit on 
how long a particular computer system and on-line 
communication could be subjected to surveillance. 
In consideration of all these elements, the German 
Constitutional 
Court 
[14] 
determined 
that 
the 
constitutionality of the amendment had to be assessed in 
light of three distinct fundamental rights enshrined in the 
country’s Basic Law (Grundgesetz – GG): the privacy of 
correspondence [15], the inviolability of the home [16] and 
the ‘right to informational self-determination’ [17]. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-182-3
CYBERLAWS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Technical and Legal Aspects of the e-Society

With regard to the privacy of correspondence, the 
Constitutional Court held that this fundamental privilege 
extended to all types of telecommunications regardless of 
the means of transmission used (cable or broadcast, analog 
or digital transmission), and the type of transmitted content 
(speech, picture, sound, or other data). However, the court 
went on to assert that constitutional protection did not 
extend to telecommunications data stored on computerized 
devices after the communications process had been 
completed. In effect this means that it is not unlawful for the 
German secret service to surreptitiously copy data from the 
computer hard drives of suspects. 
With regard to the second fundamental right engaged in 
the case, the Constitutional Court pointed out that the 
principle of the inviolability of the home, enshrined in 
article 13.1 of the Basic Law, only bars law enforcement 
officers from trespassing on private property in a bid to 
physically interfere with the hardware located on the 
premises. Since remote surveillance using Trojans or other 
spyware can be conducted regardless of where the target 
device may be located at any given time, location-specific 
protection falls far short of ensuring adequate safeguards, 
especially since it is increasingly commonplace for 
computers to be operated outside or in transit between 
private premises. 
Finally, 
the 
Constitutional 
Court 
examined 
the 
amendment in light of the ‘right to informational self-
determination’ which protects web users against the 
collection and profiling of the data they post on-line. Once 
again, however, the remote forensics activities authorized 
under the amendment to the Law on the Protection of the 
Constitution go beyond the mere collection of personal data 
for profiling purposes, since clandestine access to just about 
any personal computer could, on its own, potentially prove a 
valuable discovery of highly sensitive data regarding its 
owner, without the need for any further profiling of the 
information collected in the process. 
Having determined that the three fundamental rights 
enshrined in Germany’s Basic Law afforded inadequate 
protection in the circumstances, the Constitutional Court 
opted to establish a new ‘right to the confidentiality and 
integrity of information technology systems’. 
In the same way as the ‘right to informational self-
determination’, this new ‘right to the confidentiality and 
integrity of information technology systems’ can be found 
in article 2.1 GG (right to the free development of one’s 
personality), read in conjunction with article 1.1 GG (right 
to human dignity) and provides protection against State 
access to each and every information technology system 
taken as a whole, and therefore extends to all data, whether 
stored or transmitted. 
Although the court conceded that the right to the 
confidentiality and integrity of information technology 
systems is not absolute and may be restricted in the interest 
of law enforcement and crime prevention, it took pains to 
point out that no encroachments on the newly created 
constitutional right could be tolerated, save to the extent 
necessary to safeguard even more imperative fundamental 
values which the court specifically limited to the life and 
liberty of other citizens, the foundational institutions of the 
State and the essential values of human dignity. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
While declaring the amendment unconstitutional by 
reason of breach of the principles of proportionality and fair 
labelling, the German Constitutional Court has, however, left 
room for the passage of new laws authorizing remote 
forensic and on-line surveillance operations, albeit within the 
bounds of the principles outlined above. 
It has, quite rightly, been pointed out that ‘the digital 
citizen has, as a result of this case, come a step closer’:  there 
can be no doubt that an increasing number of individuals not 
only use web technology on a daily basis, but actually ‘live’ 
on-line. The internet has become a place where people make 
friends, come together and exchange information and 
opinions. The German Constitutional Court acknowledged 
that the pre-existing legal framework was not robust enough 
to adequately protect ‘digital’ citizens against unwarranted 
State intrusion. 
More intriguing, however, are the comments on the 
decision by German authors who posit that software 
programs themselves could be considered invested with 
rights, freedoms and duties, and subjected to monitoring in 
accordance with applicable procedural requirements, quite 
like people [18]. 
At present, Trojans are considered mere software tools 
used by law enforcement officers to prevent, solve, fight and 
thwart crime. What if, tomorrow, the courts were to consider 
Trojan fully-fledged ‘digital police officers’ who inhabit 
cyberspace on an equal footing with ‘digital citizens’? 
To engage in this thought experiment is to follow Alice 
as she steps through the looking-glass – or rather the 
computer screen – to enter a Wonderland whose cyber-
inhabitants enjoy the same rights and freedoms and are 
bound by the same ethical rules and duties as citizens in the 
real world, with the full complexity of self-perception and 
overall vision of the virtual community and its peculiar 
social norms, that the human beings behind the cyber-
personalities or software programs actually experience 
online.  
The implementation of any such virtual legal system, 
would obviously require a complete overhaul of prevailing 
philosophies of law, and entail deep-reaching legislative 
reforms tailored to suit the worldview of the growing 
international community of people who work, relax, study, 
play, and socialize largely online.  
In such a scenario, it would be quite useless to train law 
enforcement officers in digital forensics, and far more 
sensible 
to 
develop 
software 
applications 
designed 
specifically to police the borderless confines of cyberspace, 
and endowed with computational capabilities to match the 
performance levels of the virtual citizens subject to their 
authority. These policing software applications would have 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-182-3
CYBERLAWS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Technical and Legal Aspects of the e-Society

to be developed by computer-science specialists who are also 
well-versed in the finer points of law (especially criminal 
procedure), 
and, 
consequently, 
necessarily 
entail 
a 
multidisciplinary approach. 
To conclude, my opinion is as follows: remote access to 
an IT system situated in the location where the prosecutor 
conducting investigations has jurisdiction makes it possible 
to solve the “data loss” location problems. However this type 
of activity must be carried out fully respecting the 
constitutional guarantees of the person under investigation 
and people having multidisciplinary skills, legal and 
technical alike must conduct it. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Janna Quitney Anderson and Lee Rainie, “The Future of 
cloud computing”, Pew Internet & American Life Project, 11 
June 
2010, 
available 
at 
http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2010/The-future-of-cloud-
computing.aspx. 
[2] Article 22 of the Convention on Cybercrime (Jurisdiction): 1. 
Each Party shall adopt such legislative and other measures as 
may be necessary to establish jurisdiction over any offence 
established in accordance with Articles 2 through 11 of this 
Convention, when the offence is committed: (a) in its 
territory; or (b) on board a ship flying the flag of that Party; or 
(c) on board an aircraft registered under the laws of that Party; 
or (d) by one of its nationals, if the offence is punishable 
under criminal law where it was committed or if the offence is 
committed outside the territorial jurisdiction of any State 
[….]. 
[3] Jan 
Spoenle, 
“Cloud 
Computing 
and 
cybercrime 
investigations: Territoriality vs. the power of disposal?”, (31 
August 2010, Council of Europe Project on Cybercrime), 
available 
at 
http://www.coe.int/t/dghl/cooperation/economiccrime/cybercr
ime/Documents/Internationalcooperation/2079_Cloud_Comp
uting_power_disposal_31Aug10a.pdf. 
[4] Dr Marco Gercke, “Understanding Cybercrime: A Guide For 
Developing Countries”, (April 2009), 192, available at 
http://www.itu.int/ITU-
D/cyb/cybersecurity/projects/crimeguide.html. 
[5] Orin S. Kerr, “Searches and Seizures in a digital world”, 
Harvard Law Review, 119 (2006), 531. 
[6] Dr Fabio Licata, “The Cybercrime Convention of Council of 
Europe 
and 
Cooperation 
between 
Law 
Enforcement 
Authorities” (La Convenzione del Consiglio d’Europa sul 
cybercrime e le forme della cooperazione giudiziaria: una 
risposta 
globale 
alle 
nuove 
sfide 
della 
criminalità 
transnazionale), in a workshop of Consiglio Superiore della 
Magistratura, held in Rome on 19 September 2005, at 17, 
available 
(in 
Italian) 
at 
http://appinter.csm.it/incontri/relaz/12009.pdf. 
[7] On this issue, see point 170 of the Explanatory Report on the 
Convention on Cybercrime: ‘Paragraph 1 of this article calls 
for Parties to enable their competent authorities to compel a 
person in its territory to provide specified stored computer 
data, or a service provider offering its services in the territory 
of the Party to submit subscriber information. The data in 
question are stored or existing data, and do not include data 
that has not yet come into existence such as traffic data or 
content data related to future communications. Instead of 
requiring States to apply systematically coercive measures in 
relation to third parties, such as search and seizure of data, it 
is essential that States have within their domestic law 
alternative investigative powers that provide a less intrusive 
means of obtaining information relevant to criminal 
investigations’. 
[8] A similar approach was adopted by the cybercrime experts 
who, in 2001, drew up a Model Law on Computer and 
Computer Related Crime, no. 202, for the implementation of 
the Convention on Cybercrime in Commonwealth countries 
(LLM(02)17, October 2002); see section 11 of the ‘Model 
Law’ 
available 
at 
http://www.thecommonwealth.org/shared_asp_ 
files/uploadedfiles/%7BDA109CD2-5204-4FAB-AA77-
86970A639B05%7D_Computer%20Crime.pdf. 
[9] John Blau, “Debate rages over German government spyware 
plan”, 5 May 2007, in Computerworld Security, available at 
http://www.computerworld.com/s/article/print/9034459/Debat
e_rages_over_German_government_spyware_plan?taxonomy
Name=Security&taxonomyId=17. 
[10] For further information on the CIPAV project, see Kevin 
Poulsen, ‘FBI’s Secret Spyware Tracks Down Teen Who 
Made Bomb Threats’, Wired, 18 July 2007, available at 
http://www.wired.com/politics/law/news/2007/07/fbi_spywar
e; and Kevin Poulsen, ‘Documents: FBI Spyware Has Been 
Snaring Extortionists, Hackers for Years’, Wired, 16 April 
2009, 
available 
at 
http://www.wired.com/threatlevel/2009/04/fbi-spyware-pro/. 
A similar project developed by FBI was “Carnivore”. 
Carnivore was a system implemented by the Federal Bureau 
of Investigation that was designed to monitor email and 
electronic communications. It used a customizable packet 
sniffer that can monitor all of a target user's Internet traffic. 
Carnivore was implemented in October 1997 and replaced in 
2005 
with 
improved 
commercial 
software 
such 
as 
NarusInsight. Talitha Nabbali, Going for the throat: 
Carnivore in an ECHELON world - Part II, Computer Law 
and Security Report, Volume 20, Issue 2, March-April 2004, 
Pages 84-97. Software of this type has been present in various 
forms ever since 2001, the year in which the existence of  
“Magic Lantern” was revealed to the world; this software 
produced by FBI, NSA and George Lawton, Invasive 
Software: Who’s Inside Your Computer?, Computer, vol. 35, 
no. 7, pages 15-18, July 2002, doi:10.1109/MC.2002.1016895 
(http://utopia.csis.pace.edu/dps/2007/jkile/2005%20-
%20Spring/DCS823/Spyware/01016895.pdf). The use of such 
technology is already widespread and becoming quite a 
common-currency in the market, making available to 
(cyber)crime fighting authorities a variety of software 
solutions. Amongst the many types of software currently 
available. we can mention, by way of example, the software 
produced by Web watcher, which is available at the following 
link: 
http://www.awarenesstech.com/Law-
Enforcement/Remote-Monitoring.html. 
[11] Supreme Court of Cassation, 5th Criminal Section, decision 
no. 16556 of 14 October 2009. 
[12] Law on the Protection of the Constitution in North Rhine-
Westphalia (Gesetz über den Verfassungsschutz in Nordrhein-
Westfalen) as mended on 20 December 2006, articles 5.2(11), 
7.1, 5.3, 5.1 and 13 (VSG); Wiebke Abel and Burkhard 
Schafer, ‘The German Constitutional Court on the Right in 
Confidentiality and Integrity of Information Technology 
Systems – a case report on BVerfG, NJW 2008, 822’, (2009) 
6:1 
SCRIPTed 
106, 
available 
at 
http://www.law.ed.ac.uk/ahrc/script-ed/vol6-1/abel.asp. 
[13] Matthew Lewis, “Biologger – A Biometric Keylogger”, (IRM 
Research Paper, December 2008) presented at the Black Hat 
Conference, Amsterdam, 27-28 March 2008, available at 
http://www.blackhat.com/presentations/bh-europe-
08/Lewis/Whitepaper/bh-eu-08-lewis-WP.pdf; also well as 
Episode 621 on Internet TV Hak5 entitled “MiTM Javascript 
Keylogger, Social Engineering Toolkit and more” available at 
http://www.hak5.org/?s=keylogger&x=0&y=0. This approach 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-182-3
CYBERLAWS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Technical and Legal Aspects of the e-Society

may not be easy to take, because many devices (particularly 
mobile devices) are protected through the use of DRM; 
which, in addition to preventing the installation of 
unauthorized software, provide a level of security that would 
make it difficult to obtain access by way of Trojan horses or 
other malicious software. 
[14] It is interesting to note that during the proceedings on the 
constitutionality of the amendment, in addition to three 
technical experts from academia (Prof. Felix Freiling, Chair 
of Computer Science at the University of Mannheim, Prof. 
Andreas Pfitzmann, head of the privacy and security group at 
Dresden University of Technology and Prof. Ulrich Sieber, 
director at the Max Planck Institute for Foreign and 
International Criminal Law) the German Constitutional Court 
also heard a highly experienced hacker (Andreas Bogk, 
freelance hacker for Clozure, Inc., and CEO of Chaos 
Computer Club Events). 
[15] Article 10 of the German Basic Law (Grundgesetz): ‘1. The 
privacy of correspondence, posts and telecommunications 
shall be inviolable. 2. Restrictions may be ordered only 
pursuant to a law. If the restriction serves to protect the free 
democratic basic order or the existence or security of the 
Federation or of a Land, the law may provide that the person 
affected shall not be informed of the restriction and that 
recourse to the courts shall be replaced by a review of the case 
by agencies and auxiliary agencies appointed by the 
legislature’. 
[16] Article 13 of the German Basic Law (Grundgesetz): ‘1. The 
home is inviolable. 2. Searches may be authorized only by a 
judge or, when time is of the essence, by other authorities 
designated by the laws, and may be carried out only in the 
manner therein prescribed’. 
[17] The right ‘to informational self-determination’ is derived 
from the combined provisions of article 2.1 and article 1.1 of 
the German Basic Law (Grundgesetz – GG) which enshrine 
the rights to ‘free development of personality’ and to ‘human 
dignity’, respectively. The right to informational self-
determination was established by the German Constitutional 
Court for the first time in a historic decision that led up to the 
passage of the German data protection law (decision of the 
Bundesverfassungsgericht of December 15, 1983, BVerG, 
paragraphs 65, 1, <43>; 84, 192). 
[18] Wiebke Abel and Burkhard Schafer, “The German 
Constitutional Court on the Right in Confidentiality and 
Integrity of Information Technology Systems” – a case report 
on BVerfG, NJW 2008, 822’. 
 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-182-3
CYBERLAWS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Technical and Legal Aspects of the e-Society

