 
Indian Approach to Privacy in Cyberspace 
 
M. Tariq Banday 
Department of Electronics & Inst. Technology 
University of Kashmir 
Srinagar, India 
e-mail: sgrmtb@yahoo.com 
 
Farooq Ahmad Mir 
Department of Law 
University of Kashmir 
Srinagar, India 
e-mail: far_lwtr@rediffmail.com 
 
 
Abstract—Privacy as a right has genesis in the technology of 
printing and photography. This technology was viewed as 
impinging confidentiality of individual. Privacy right has been 
expanded over the years to enfold its other aspects and has 
been made actionable against an individual under law of Torts 
and redress-able against State under Constitutional Law for 
violating autonomy of an individual. Digital Technology has 
privacy issues. These issues cannot be addressed by applying 
traditional principles. Furthermore, Information Technology 
Act (IT Act) in India has been amended in the year 2008 which 
has given enormous powers to the Centre and State 
Governments to invade privacy. This paper makes an attempt 
to raise privacy issues pertinent to cyberspace, examines 
Indian judicial approach to constitutional right to privacy and 
evaluates technological approach to privacy.   
Keywords—Privacy; Interception; Monitoring; Privacy & 
Security; IT ACT 2008; Judicial Approach to Privacy 
I. 
PRIVACY ISSUES IN CYBERSPACE 
Development of privacy jurisprudence is intimately 
associated with technological developments much before 
Internet came on the horizon. Its seeds were sown at the end 
of the nineteenth century, following the publication of 
Warren and Brandies article, the right to privacy [1]. This 
article was prompted by the technological innovations of 
print media (newspapers) and the portable camera 
(photographs) which were thought to have potential to 
invade personal privacy.  J. Thomas Cooly in a celebrated 
case of Olmstead v. United State1 crystalized this doctrine by 
declaring that every individual has a right to be let alone. 
Invasion of privacy means an unjustified exploitation of 
one‘s personality or intrusion into one‘s personal activity, 
actionable under tort law and sometimes under constitutional 
law. Initially this right was confined to what later became its 
essential but not exclusive component, the right to protect the 
confidentiality of one‘s private sphere against public or 
private interference. Soon this right was expanded to en-
cover four distinct torts that may possibly arise in case of 
breach of privacy a) intrusion upon a person‘s solitude or 
seclusion or into his affairs, b) public disclosure of 
embarrassing facts of a person‘s private life, c) publicity 
                                                           
1 Olmstead v. United States, 277 U.S. 438, 478 (1928) (Brandeis, J., 
dissenting). 
  
which places an individual in false light in public eyes, and 
d) appropriation to a person‘s advantage of another‘s name 
or likeness [2].  
The concept and the right of privacy have undergone a 
significant 
evolution, 
due 
to 
the 
Socio-economic 
developments and, much more, due to the introduction of the 
information Communications Technologies (ICT) into daily 
life [3]. Equally the amount of data collected by cameras and 
biometric systems through the use of automated devices and 
their intelligent use in order to provide personalized services, 
clearly, gives rise to privacy problems [4]. 
Digital technology has changed form as well as the 
nature of the privacy right. In recent years, the World Wide 
Web, particularly Web 2.0, has raised challenges for privacy, 
as it fuses together voices, text, pictures, recording and 
retrieval technologies, and a larger capacity for the incidental 
gathering of details of people‘s private lives [5]. It involves 
more voices than previous Internet technologies. Blogs, 
wikis, online social networks, and massively multiplayer 
online games allow more people to communicate and 
interact more than ever before, about their own self or about 
their surroundings. This raises a plethora of privacy concerns 
differing in content and ambit from that which was 
traditionally known. Earlier Internet privacy concerns related 
predominantly to the aggregation of personal information to 
create 
large-scale, 
text-based 
digital 
dossiers 
about 
individuals [6].  
Interactive Web 2.0 technology has led to an increasing 
tendency for people to publish texts, photographs, videos, 
locations, tags and preferences online, thereby placing a 
good deal of private life on record [7]. With more voices 
online, there is a wider scope for privacy invasion. With 
more recording technologies readily at hand such as cell 
phone cameras and text messaging services like Twitter—
there is a wider scope for incidental gathering of details of 
people‘s private lives that can be uploaded and disseminated 
globally at the mouse click. 
These developments have blurred the boundaries 
between the public and private spheres or at least are 
becoming more difficult to discern. Thus, any privacy laws 
premised on conceptions of a ―reasonable expectation of 
privacy‖ are becoming more difficult to apply [8]. Facebook 
founder Mark Zuckerberg has argued that social changes 
mean that privacy is no longer a norm [9]. The privacy issues 
cropped up by the technology cannot be resolved by 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-182-3
CYBERLAWS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Technical and Legal Aspects of the e-Society

 
applying traditional approach to right to privacy. This is the 
reason that the privacy jurisprudence was revisited in the 
light of the developments that took place by the introduction 
of Internet. The right to privacy is now loaded with fresh 
contents and it is contended that its breach would include: a) 
information 
collection, 
consists 
of 
surveillance 
and 
interrogation, b) information processing, involves taking the 
information gathered and making sense out of the raw facts 
for any probable use which can be further  classified into 
aggregation, identification, insecurity, secondary use and 
exclusion, c) information dissemination, concerned with the 
dissemination of the information and it consists of the breach 
of 
confidentiality, 
disclosure, 
exposure, 
increased 
accessibility, blackmail, appropriation and distortion, and d) 
invasion, concerning invasive acts that disturb one‘s 
tranquility or solitude without concerning information [10]. 
In digital age, breach of privacy cannot be properly 
addressed if it is circumscribed by ‗the right to leave alone.‘ 
Privacy is about knowing ‗what data is being collected‘ and 
‗what is happening to it‘, having choices about how it is 
collected and used, and being confident that it is secure.2 
The importance of marketable information has been so 
profound that it is argued that privacy as a fundamental 
concept should extend its reach to ‗information privacy‘ for 
online transactions and personally identifiable information 
[11] that would include an individual‘s claim to control the 
terms under which ‗personal information‘ is acquired, 
disclosed, and used.3  
II. 
INDIAN CONSTITUTIONAL APPROACH TO PRIVACY 
The right to privacy as a fundamental right was accorded 
recognition in India much before the Independence of India 
and adoption of the Indian Constitution. The Allahabad High 
Court in Nihal Chand v.Bhawan Dei4 made the following 
pertinent observation: 
‘The right to privacy based on social custom is different 
from a right to privacy based on natural modesty and human 
morality, the latter is not confined to any class, creed, colour 
or race and it is birth right of any human being and is sacred 
and should be observed.’ 
The right to privacy as a fundamental right has not been 
expressly mentioned in the Indian Constitution. The courts in 
India have stretched Article 21 5  to encompass right to 
privacy as a fundamental right by holding that right to life 
means a dignified life. This right to privacy like other 
fundamental rights is not an absolute right but admits 
reasonable restriction. 
                                                           
2 Testimony of Mr. Erich Anderson, Deputy General Counsel of Microsoft 
Corporation, The State of Online Consumer Privacy, Hearing before S. 
Comm. on Commerce, Science, and Transportation, 112th Cong., (2011) 
(hereinafter Microsoft testimony) 
3 U.S. Govt. Information Infrastructure Task Force, Information Policy 
Committee, Privacy Working Group, Privacy and the National Information 
Infrastructure: Principles for Providing and Using Personal Information, 
Commentary 2 (1995) 
4 AIR 1935 All. 1002  
5 Article 21, ―Protection of Life and Personal Liberty‖ No person shall be 
deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to procedure 
established by law. 
The Supreme Court of India has, immediately after the 
adoption of the Constitution, laid down foundation for 
privacy jurisprudence in M P Sharma v. Satish Chandra6. It 
was held that a power of search and seizure is in any system 
of State for the protection of social security and the power is 
necessarily regulated by law. This positive approach was 
carried further in Kharak Singh v. State of UP7 by J. Subba 
Rao, the architect of modern privacy Jurisprudence. The 
Apex court found seeds of privacy jurisprudence in Article 
21 and held that this Article is comprehensive enough to 
include right to privacy. The pertinent observation, valid for 
all times to come, is that a person‘s house, where he lives 
with his family is his ―castle‖ and nothing is more 
deleterious to a man‘s physical happiness and health than a 
calculated interference with his privacy. This right was 
further fortified in Gobind v. State of MP 8by accepting 
limited recognition in Articles 19(a)(d) in addition to Article 
21. While expanding horizons of privacy jurisprudence, the 
Supreme Court held that right to liberty, right to move freely 
throughout the territory of India and the freedom of speech 
taken together create an independent right to privacy. In the 
words of Justice Mathews, the fundamental rights explicitly 
guaranteed to a citizen have penumbral zones and the right to 
privacy is itself a fundamental right. The apex court 
formulated the following principles to govern the right to 
privacy: 
a) Privacy – dignity claims deserve to be examined 
with care and to be denied only when an important 
countervailing interest is shown to be superior, 
b) If the court does not find that a claimed right is 
entitled to protection as a fundamental right, a law 
infringing it must satisfy the compelling state 
interest test, 
c) Privacy primarily concerns the individual. It 
therefore relates to and overlaps with the concept of 
liberty, 
d) The most serious advocates of privacy must confess 
that there are serious problems of defining the 
essence and scope of the right. Privacy interest in 
autonomy must also be placed in the context of other 
right s and values, and 
e) Any right to privacy must encompass and protect the 
personal intimacy of the home, the family, marriage, 
motherhood, procreation and child rearing. 
Malak Singh v. State of Punjab9 represents an extended 
reach of privacy jurisprudence. The apex court held that a 
surveillance of the subject by the state is intrusive and an 
encroachment upon his right to privacy. This approach was 
taken to new heights by the Indian Courts in a number of 
cases10. 
                                                           
6 AIR 1954 SC 300 
7 AIR 1963 SC 1295  
8 (1957) 2 SCC 148 
9 (1981)1  SCC 301 
10 See for instance, PUCL v. Union of India. AIR 1991 SC 207; State of 
Maharashtra v.Madhukar Narayan Mordikar, AIR 1999 SC 495; Mr.X v. 
Z Hospital, (1998) 8S CC 996; R. Rajagopal v. State of Tamil Nadu,  AIR 
1995 SC 264; District Registrar and Collector v. Canara Bank AIR 2005 
SC 186 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-182-3
CYBERLAWS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Technical and Legal Aspects of the e-Society

 
On technology front, the apex court found an opportunity 
more than once to pronounce that the privacy right exists 
even when the technology is used to circumvent this right. In 
R.M. Malkani v. State of Maharashtra11 the apex court held 
that the telephonic conversation of an innocent person would 
be protected by the courts against wrongful or high handed 
interference by tapping of the conversation by the police. A 
more elaborative approach was adopted by the apex court in 
Peoples Union for Civil Liberties v. Union of India12. It was 
held that the telephonic tapping, a form of technological 
eavesdropping, infringes the right to privacy. Justice 
Kuldeep Singh laid down that the telephone taping which 
amounts to intrusion into privacy can take place only in the 
gravest of grave situation when national security is 
endangered and not otherwise. In usual or normal 
circumstance, there should not be any phone tapping and the 
person should not be under surveillance because he has right 
to privacy, which is a part of the right to life and is 
recognized by the constitution of India. 
III. 
LIMITS OF PRIVACY RIGHT 
The courts in India have maintained that like other 
fundamental rights, the right to privacy is not absolute. This 
right cannot be claimed where the information sought to be 
published or disseminated is already in public domain13 or 
there is reasonable excuse available. This right to privacy is 
available only against the State and not against any private 
individual14.  In a more recent case of State of Maharashtra 
v. Bharat Shanti Lal Shah15, the apex court observed that 
―interception of conversation though constitutes an invasion 
of an Individual‘s right of privacy but the said right can be 
curtailed in accordance with procedure validly established by 
law. Thus, what the court is required to see is that the 
procedure itself must be fair, just and reasonable and non-
arbitrary, fanciful or oppressive. 
IV. 
JUDICIAL APPROACH TO PRIVACY IN CYBERSPACE 
Indian judiciary has not yet found an opportunity to 
deliberate on the privacy issues associated with cyberspace 
but there are instances in transnational jurisdictions where 
                                                           
11 AIR 1973 SC 157. 
12 AIR (1997) 1 SCC 301. 
13In Petronet LNG Ltd. v. Indian Petro Group, (2009) 95 S.C.L. 207 
(Delhi) (India) the case concerned an application for an injunction against 
the defendants from publishing information which the plaintiff alleged was 
confidential. The plaintiff alleged that the defendant breached its privacy 
by accessing as well as disseminating information. The court held that the 
information was freely available in public and hence the defendant was not 
in breach of the plaintiff‘s right to privacy; Similarly in Rajinder Jaina v. 
Central Information Commission, 164 (2009) D.L.T. 153 the case 
concerned a writ petition about the disclosure of information under the 
Right to Information Act, 2005 wherein the petitioner challenged the 
disclosure on grounds of infringement of the right to privacy. The court 
held that the information already existed in the public domain and no 
claims as to privacy could be made.  
14 See, Khushwant Singh v. Maneka Gandhi, A.I.R. 2002 Del. 58; Indu Jain 
v. Forbes Incorporated, IA 12993/2006 in CS(OS) 2172/2006 (High Court 
of Delhi, 12th October 2007) (India). The court noted  that the enforcement 
of the right to privacy under the Indian constitutional scheme can only be 
made against state instrumentalities and not against private persons. 
15 (2008) 13 S.C.C. 5 (India) (Per K. G. Balakrishnan, C. J. et al.). 
courts have authoritatively invoked privacy right in 
cyberspace.  In America, the Supreme Court in Whalen v. 
Roe, 16 recognized an implicit constitutional right of 
informational privacy. A New York law empowered to 
create a centralized state computer file of the names and 
addresses of all persons who obtained medicines containing 
narcotics pursuant to a doctor‘s prescription. The Court 
upheld the validity of the law, nevertheless, it held that this 
gathering of information impinges upon two interests. The 
first was an individual interest in avoiding disclosure of 
personal matters; the other, the interest in independence in 
making certain kinds of important decisions. These two 
interests rest on the substantive due process protections 
found in the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments. 
The courts in America have in a good number of cases 
upheld in different contexts citizen‘s right to privacy in 
cyberspace. In US v. Ziegler, 17 an employee had accessed 
child pornography websites from his workplace. His 
employer noticed his activities, made copies of the hard 
drive, and gave the FBI the employee's computer. At his 
criminal trial, Ziegler filed a motion to suppress the evidence 
because he argued that the government violated his Fourth 
Amendment rights. 
The Ninth Circuit allowed the lower court to admit the 
child pornography as evidence. After reviewing relevant 
Supreme Court opinions on a reasonable expectation of 
privacy, the Court acknowledged that Ziegler had a 
reasonable expectation of privacy at his office and on his 
computer. That Court also found that his employer could 
consent to a government search of the computer and that, 
therefore, the search did not violate Ziegler's Fourth 
Amendment rights. 
The New Jersey Supreme Court held in State v. Reid 18 
that computer users have a reasonable expectation of privacy 
concerning the personal information they give to their ISPs. 
This case also serves as an illustration of how case law on 
privacy regarding workplace computers is still evolving. 
In Robbins v. Lower Merion School District 19 (U.S. 
Eastern District of Pennsylvania 2010), the federal trial court 
issued an injunction against the school district after plaintiffs 
charged two suburban Philadelphia high schools violated the 
privacy of students and others when they secretly spied on 
students by surreptitiously and remotely activating webcams 
embedded in school-issued laptops the students were using at 
home. The schools admitted to secretly snapping over 66,000 
web-shots and screenshots, including webcam shots of 
students in their bedrooms.  
In a recent decision 20 , the Court reconfirmed its 
recognition of a constitutional right to information privacy. 
The contract workers of National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration (NASA) contended they are required to 
answer questions about their drug treatment and are asked 
their references whether they have any reason to question the 
                                                           
16 429 U.S. 589 (1977)  
17 F.3d 1077 (9th Cir. Jan. 30, 2007, No. 05-30177) 
18 lawlibrary.rutgers.edu. Retrieved 2011-11-25 
19 Doug Stanglin (February 18, 2010). "School district accused of spying on 
kids via laptop webcams". USA Today. Retrieved February 19, 2010.  
20 131 S. Ct. 746 (2011) 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-182-3
CYBERLAWS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Technical and Legal Aspects of the e-Society

 
individual‘s honesty or trustworthiness. NASA thus violated 
their privacy rights under the U.S. Constitution. The court 
rejected this contention 8-0. The court recognized 
individual‘s right to informational privacy but also 
recognized Government‘s legitimate interest and held that 
the Government is not precluded from taking reasonable 
steps to serve its legitimate interests for public good. 
V. 
TECHNOLOGICAL APPROACH TO PRIVACY IN INDIA 
Recent measures for the fight against terrorism and 
organized crime do stipulate serious interference with 
common human rights - particularly in form of monitoring 
and interception of information of individuals in India. There 
has been a constant debate about the supremacy of 
individual‘s fundamental right and the state‘s sovereign 
power to maintain security and in turn integrity of the 
country. This debate has sharpened after 9/11 in America 
[12] and 26/11 in India. The Governments have given legal 
mandate to the use of technology for monitoring and 
surveillance. The Indian Government framed Rules in April, 
2011 asking Internet service providers to delete information 
posted on websites that officials or private citizens deemed 
disparaging or harassing. The Government also plans to set 
up its own unit to monitor information posted on websites 
and social media sites. (Govt. faceoff brewing with 
Facebook, others, Times of India, 5th December, 2011) 
The growing interest in the new surveillance technology 
is precisely due to the fact that these technologies have 
enormously increased government‘s capacity to develop 
record keeping instruments and refined instruments of 
control that often impinges upon the privacy and other 
associated rights. This has resulted in the enactment of Data 
Protection laws in many countries that are based on the 
premise that  autonomous fundamental right have to be 
preserved  in all levels that  involve personal data processing 
for private or public aims but there may be  situations in 
which states can deny right to privacy in public good and 
counter terrorism is one of them for the aims of which 
security agencies can investigate and check persons or 
personal belongings also with new technological systems. 
However, counter terrorism, in no case can legalize all the 
interferences in the private spheres of individuals. There has 
to be reasonable nexus between the means and the objective 
to be achieved [13]. After all, a decent treatment of people in 
society represents a core value of data protection, and 
implies that people know when and for what purpose their 
data are collected. This may, however, prove a high degree 
of privacy protection especially in the present Indian context 
as is evinced by the following provision of the IT Act. 
A. Power to Decrypt Information 
Prior to Amendment Act, 2008, the Controller of the 
Certifying Authorities had power to decrypt any information 
in the interest of sovereignty, security, and integrity of the 
country. This power has been taken from the Controller and 
is given to the Central or State Government or any of its 
officers especially authorized by the Central or State 
Government as the case may be. From mere power of the 
Controller to decrypt information, the Central Government 
or the State Government has enormous powers which 
include: 
a) Power to intercept, monitor, or decrypt any 
information, and 
b) Power to monitor and collect traffic data or 
information. 
B. Power to Intercept, monitor or decrypt any Information 
The Central or State Government or any of its officers 
who has been specially authorized by the Central or State 
Government as the case may be, may direct any agency of 
the appropriate Government to intercept or monitor or 
decrypt or cause to be intercepted or monitored or decrypted 
any information generated, transmitted, received or stored in 
any computer resource21. The term ‗decryption‘ means the 
process of conversion of information in non-intelligible form 
to an intelligible form via a mathematical formula, code, 
password or algorithm or a combination thereof22.   
The word ‗intercept‘ with its grammatical variation and 
cognate expressions means aural or other acquisition of the 
contents of any information through the use of any means, 
including an interception device, so as to make some or all of 
the contents of information available to a person other than 
the sender or recipient or intended recipient of that 
communication, and includes: 
a) Monitoring of any such information by means of any 
monitoring device, 
b) Viewing, examination or inspection of the contents 
of any direct or indirect information, and  
c) Diversion of any direct or indirect information from 
its intended destination to any other destination.23  
The word ‗monitor‘ with its grammatical variations and 
cognate expressions, includes to view or to inspect or listen 
to or record information by means of a monitoring device24. 
The above power is not limitless. It can be exercised only 
when the authority empowered is satisfied that it is necessary 
or expedient so to do, in the interest of: 
a) Sovereignty of India, or  
b) Integrity of India, or 
c) Defense of India, or 
d) Security of the State, or 
e) Friendly relations with the foreign States, or Public 
order, or 
f) 
For preventing incitement to the commission of any 
cognizable offence relating to above, or 
g) For investigation of any offence. 
Before any order is issued under this provision, the 
competent authority has to record reasons in writing for 
making such order. The competent authority for this purpose 
means: 
a) The Secretary in the Ministry of Home Affairs in 
case of the Central Government, or 
                                                           
21 Section 69 of the IT Act 
22 Rule 2 (f) of the IT Act (Procedure and Safeguard for Interception, 
Monitoring and Decryption of Information) Rules, 2009 
23 Rule 2 (i) (Procedure and Safeguard for Interception, Monitoring and 
Decryption of Information) Rules, 2009 
24  Rule 2 (o) (Procedure and Safeguard for Interception, Monitoring and 
Decryption of Information) Rules, 2009 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-182-3
CYBERLAWS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Technical and Legal Aspects of the e-Society

 
b) The Secretary in charge of the Home Department, in 
case of the State Government or the Union territory 
as the case may be.25 The competent authority may 
call any subscriber or intermediary or any person in-
charge of the computer resource that shall extend all 
facilities and technical assistance to: 
 Provide access to or secure access to the 
computer resource generating, transmitting, 
receiving or storing such information, or 
 Intercept, monitor, or decrypt the information, 
as the case may be, or 
 Provide 
information 
stored 
in 
computer 
resource. 
The subscriber or intermediary or any person who fails to 
assist the competent authority shall be punished with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years 
and shall be also liable to fine. The term intermediary with 
respect to any particular electronic record means any person 
who on behalf of another person receives, stores or transmits 
that record or provides any service with respect to that record 
and includes telecom service providers, network service 
providers, Internet service providers, web hosting service 
providers, search engines, online payment sites, online-
auction sites, online-market places and cyber cafes.26 
The above provision finds parallel in Section 5(2) of the 
Telegraph Act that has been framed in pursuance to the 
Supreme Court pronouncement in PUCL v. Union of India27. 
These rules provide when a) public emergency, or b) public 
safety situation exists, then an order may be made to issue 
directions for interception. These rules effectively authorize 
to issue directions for the interception of messages. A 
balancing measure to safeguard against a blanket violation of 
privacy has been provided. The section itself provides for 
several safeguards that include recording of reasons for 
taking any of these steps. These measures cannot be taken 
unless it is shown that such step is necessary or expedient in 
the interest of a) sovereignty and integrity of India, b) the 
security of the state, c) friendly relations with foreign states, 
d) public order, and e) incitement to the commission of an 
offence. There is no direct case decided by any court in India 
on the above issue. However, recently the United States 
court of Appeals for the district of Columbia Circuit in 
Appellee vs. Lawrence Maynard 28 had an opportunity to 
decide effect of use of GPS on privacy right of an individual. 
The court observed that the advent of GPS technology has 
occasioned a heretofore unknown type of intrusion into an 
ordinarily and hitherto private enclave. A search conducted 
without a warrant is per se unreasonable under the fourth 
amendment subject only to a few specifically established and 
well delineated exceptions. The court gave go ahead to the 
use of technology for surveillance purpose for security 
reasons subject to certain safeguards. 
                                                           
25 Rule 2 (d) of the IT Act (Procedure and Safeguard for Interception, 
Monitoring and Decryption of Information) Rules, 2009 
26 Section 2 (w) of the IT Act 
27 Supra note 12 
28 No. 08-0330 decided on August 6, 2010 
 
C. Procedure for Interception, Monitoring, or Decryption 
of any information 
The circumstances warranting interception, monitoring 
and decryption of information can be classified into three 
categories, namely: a) Normal, b) unavoidable, and c) 
Emergency29. The interception, monitoring, or decryption of 
any information can be carried out in normal circumstances 
only by an order issued by the competent authority. No 
person shall carry out the interception or monitoring or 
decryption of any information generated, transmitted, 
received or stored in any computer resource, except by an 
order issued by the competent authority. The interception, 
monitoring, or decryption of any information can be carried 
out in unavoidable circumstances by an officer not below the 
rank of the joint secretary to the Government of India, 
provided that he has been duly authorized by the competent 
authority. 
Emergency cases have been subdivided into two 
categories: a) Locational, and, b) operational. The 
interception, monitoring, or decryption of any information 
may be required in a remote area but obtaining of prior 
directions for such interception or monitoring or decryption 
of information is not feasible. Or where obtaining of prior 
directions for interception or monitoring or decryption of any 
information generated, transmitted, received or store in any 
computer resource, for operational reasons, is not feasible. 
In the emergency cases, resulted by locational or 
operational reasons, the interception, monitoring, or 
decryption of any information generated, transmitted, 
received or stored in any computer resource may be carried 
out with the prior approval of the Head or the second senior 
most officer of the security and law enforcement agency at 
the central level and the officer and the officer authorized in 
this behalf not below the rank of Inspector General of Police 
or an officer of equivalent rank at the State or Union territory 
level. 
The officer, who has permitted the interception, 
monitoring, or decryption of any information in case of 
emergency, shall inform in writing to the competent 
authority about the emergency and of such interception, 
monitoring, or decryption within three days. The concerned 
officer must obtain the approval of the competent authority 
within the period of seven working days. If the approval of 
the competent authority has not been obtained within the 
stipulated time of seven working days, such interception, 
monitoring, or decryption shall cease and the information 
shall not be intercepted, monitored or decrypted thereafter 
without the prior approval of the competent authority. 
It is quite possible that the State Government or Union 
Territory 
administration 
may 
require 
interception, 
monitoring, or decryption of any information beyond its 
territorial Jurisdiction. The Secretary in-charge of the Home 
Department in that State or Union Territory, as the case may 
be, shall make a request to the secretary in the Ministry of 
Home Affairs, Government of India for issuing direction to 
                                                           
29  Rule 3 of the IT Act (Procedure and Safeguard for Interception, 
Monitoring and Decryption of Information) Rules, 2009 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-182-3
CYBERLAWS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Technical and Legal Aspects of the e-Society

 
the appropriate authority for such interception, monitoring, 
or decryption of information. 
 The competent authority shall consider possibility of 
acquiring the necessary information by other means and the 
direction shall be issued only when it is not possible to 
acquire the information by any other reasonable means. 
Every direction shall specify the name and designation of 
the officer of the authorized agency to whom the intercepted, 
monitored or decrypted information shall be subject to the 
provisions of the IT Act. The direction for interception or 
monitoring or decryption shall remain in force, unless 
revoked earlier, for a period not exceeding sixty days from 
the date of its issue and may be renewed from time to time 
for such period not exceeding the total period of one hundred 
and eighty days. 
The above provisions have been incorporated by the 
Amendment Act, 2008 and attempt to remove the limitations 
of the original Act by making IT Act a complete code for 
Internet behavior. This provision, like Section 69 has roots in 
the ratio of PUCL v. Union of India30 wherein the court has 
held that the direction may only be issued when it is 
warranted by a) public emergency; or b) public safety. These 
limitations are based on Section 5(2) of the Telegraph Act. 
The direction must contain reasons for taking such measures. 
It also contains the requirement of recording for which the 
prescribed procedure under section 69(2) has to be followed. 
VI. 
CRIMINAL LIABILITY FOR VIOLATION OF PRIVACY 
The IT (Amendment) Act has carved out a new provision 
which makes capturing of an ―image of the private area of a 
person‖, under circumstances violating the privacy of the 
person, punishable. The circumstances violating the privacy 
of a person are when such person has a reasonable 
expectation that a) he or she could disrobe in privacy without 
being concerned that an image of his/her private area was 
being captured, or b) any part of his/her private area would 
not be visible to the public, whether such person is in a 
public or a private place.31 Where a person lawfully secures 
access 
to 
any 
electronic 
record, 
book, 
register, 
correspondence, information, document or other material and 
discloses 
such 
electronic 
record, 
book, 
register, 
correspondence, information, document or other material to 
any other person without the authority of the person 
concerned, he shall be punished with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to two years or with fine which may 
extend to one lakh rupees or both.32 But surprisingly there is 
no provision for imprisonment or fine for simple breach of 
privacy committed by an individual. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
India has no independent legislation on Data Protection. 
The existing legal principles are yet to be tested in 
cyberspace as the courts have not yet found any direct 
opportunity to decide any case involving privacy issues of 
cyberspace. The only inference which one could draw from 
                                                           
30 Supra note 27 
31 Section 66E 
32 Section 72 
the existing precedents involving other technologies is that 
courts are stressing on procedural safeguards and are shying 
away from establishing substantively limits of the state‘s 
power to circumvent right to privacy. The IT Act has laid 
down procedure for interception, monitoring and decryption 
of the information and imposed criminal liability on any 
person who captures image of the private part of any person. 
Similarly, any person who has got information lawfully but 
discloses it without the authority of the person concerned 
will be punished but there is no provision for imprisonment 
or fine for simple breach of privacy committed by an 
individual. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Samuel D. Warren and Louis D. Brandeis, ―The Right to Privacy,‖ 4 
Harv.L.Rev. 193 (1890). 
[2] William L. Prosser, ―Privacy‖, CAL. L. REV., 48, (1960), pp. 383. 
[3] Monteleone, Share, ―Ambient Intelligence and the Right To Privacy: 
The challenges of Detection Technologies,‖ European University 
Institute,  DOI:10.2870/24183. 
[4] S. Gutwirth, ―Biometrics between Opacity and Transparency,‖ 
Annuali dell‘Istituto Superiore di Sanita, 43(1),  (2007), pp. 61-65. 
[5] Lipton, J. D., ―Mapping Online Privacy,‖ Case Western Reserve 
University School of Law, Case Research Paper Series in Legal 
Studies Working Paper  (2009),  pp. 09-24. 
[6] Shrikant Ardhapurkar et al. ―Privacy and Data Protection in 
Cyberspace in Indian Environment,‖ International Journal of 
Engineering Science and Technology,  2(5), (2010), pp. 942-951.  
[7] O‘Hara, K. and Shadbolt, N., ―The Spy in the Coffee Machine: The 
End of Privacy As We Know It,‖ One-world, Oxford, (2008).  
[8] Jacqueline D.L., ―Mapping Online Privacy,‖ 477 N.W. U. L Rev., 
140, (2010), pp. 481-82. 
[9] Johnson, B., ―Privacy no longer a social norm, says Facebook 
founder,‖  Guardian, 11
th 
Jan, (2010). 
[10] Daniel J.S., ―A Taxonomy of Privacy,‖ 154 U. PA. L. REV., 477,  
(2006), pp. 482-483. 
[11] Joel R.R., ―Privacy in the Information Economy: A Fortress or 
Frontier for Individual Rights? ,‖ 44 Fed. Comm. L.J. (1992),  pp. 
195. 
[12] Zuac L., ―Constitutional Dilemmas,‖ Oxford  University Press,  
(2008). 
[13] Van Der Schyff, G., ―Limitation of Rights,‖ Wolf Legal Publisher, 
Nijimegen,  (2005), pp. 228. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-182-3
CYBERLAWS 2012 : The Third International Conference on Technical and Legal Aspects of the e-Society

