Experiment of Sensor Fault Tolerance Algorithm combined with Cyber System for
Coil Tilter on the Smart Hybrid Powerpack
Jaegwang Lee
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Sungkyunkwan University
Suwon, Korea
email: leejkcool@gmail.com
Janggeol Nam, Buchun Song, Hyeonwoo Kim, Iksu Choi and Hunmo Kim
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Sungkyunkwan University
Suwon, Korea
email: mystic777@skku.edu, theme7749@gmail.com, 88jamesk88@gmail.com, cis326@naver.com, kimhm@me.skku.ac.kr
Abstract
—
This
paper
presents
a
Smart
Hybrid
Powerpack (SHP) for the sensor failure recovery algorithm for
coil tilter and cyber system for control and monitoring. The
SHP is combined with all advanced technologies: an Electro
Hydraulic Actuator (EHA), fault tolerant control, intelligent
control, and Graphic User Interface (GUI) based remote
control and monitoring. The proposed algorithm for the sensor
failure recovery uses a Kalman filter for noise caused by
electric
currents
and
temporary
failures
caused
by
a
disturbance. In addition, sensor hardware that
becomes
damaged due to external impact, fails due to aging, or
permanently fails due to damage, uses the Sliding Mode
Observer
(SMO)
for
normal
waveform
estimation
and
recovery. The proposed algorithm for the sensor failure
recovery
was
implemented
using
an
experiment.
The
performance of the proposed algorithm is verified through an
alarm and monitoring of the cyber system in the event of
failure of the coil tilter system.
Keywords — Coil tilter; Smart Hybrid Powerpack (SHP);
Electro Hydraulic Actuator (EHA); fault tolerance; Machine
GUI; Office GUI; Mobile GUI.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Hydraulic actuators are widely used in various industries
where high actuating forces are required. In order to enhance
the performance of the hydraulic system, disturbances due to
the external environment and effects of interference should
be minimized [1]. In addition, Electro Hydraulic Actuator
(EHA) systems were developed to compensate for the
disadvantages of the conventional hydraulic actuator, such as
low energy efficiency, limited installation spaces, heavy
weight of components, and fluid leakage [2]. The EHA
system has high energy efficiency due to a two-way fluid
pump and an electric motor directly connected to each pump.
The existing remote system was only possible for fault
diagnosis through system monitoring [3][4]. The newly
proposed Smart Hybrid Powerpack (SHP) combined with the
cyber system are shown in Fig.1. Unlike the existing remote
system, the EHA system is applied to the control and
monitoring through a ECU control board and Graphic User
Interface (GUI) by wireless
communication and
wire
network. The cyber system includes an intelligent fault
tolerance control, such as real time feedback of sensor
signals, software filter, and sensor observer detecting and
recovering from sensor faults. [5][6].
Figure 1. The SHP structure combined with cyber system
The various sensors in the SHP are applied by intelligent
control systems for its safety and reliability, for the remote
control system with monitoring, and for precision and
accuracy of control. The sensors applied to the SHP are the
LVDT
(Linear
Variable
Differential
Transformer)
for
tracking the change of the position of the cylinder, pressure
for controlling the thrust, and encoder for motor speed. The
LVDT sensor is mounted onto the cylinder rod, and the
pressure sensors are attached to the cylinder head and rod.
When a fault occurs in the SHP sensors, it is difficult to
control the cylinder due to inaccurate sensor values. If a
transient noise occurs due to an electrical malfunction, the
noise can be recovered by using hardware methods, such as a
coil filter. Also, the noise can be recovered by using software
methods, such as a Kalman filter. If a permanent failure
occurs in sensors attached to the SHP, such as disturbances,
vibration, internal hardware problem in the sensors, or aging
equipment, a rapid recovery is required because it can cause
serious problems with the control. When a permanent failure
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-512-8
CYBER 2016 : The First International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

occurs in the SHP, the original sensor signal is estimated and
recovered by the Sliding Mode Observer (SMO). The
prototype is operated through the (Office/Machine/Mobile)
GUI, and the failure recovery algorithm is performed
through a MATLAB Simulink [5].
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2,
two types of faults (temporary and permanent) are presented,
and the design and analysis of the SMO algorithm for failure
recovery are discussed. In Section 3, the experimental results
of fault recovery are shown. We conclude in Section 4.
II.
DESIGN OF FAULT TOLERANCE ALGORITHM
A.
Classification of fault types
Sensor fault modes are classified in two categories, as
shown in TABLE I. Once electronic noises are generated due
to external factors, there is a possibility that normal signal
accompany sensor errors or failure can occur. If the normal
sensor signal is blended with a temporary fault caused by an
electric current or outer high-voltage surge, it can generate
instantaneous errors on account of high frequency noise.
Permanent fault (Failure) can be caused by a sensor
hardware problem, such as physical force, heat, deterioration
of equipment, or being a defective product. It can generate
permanent failure of the sensor [6].
TABLE I.
THE CLASSIFICATION
Faults
Cause
Effects
Temporary
fault (Error)
Noise
Error value by transient noise
Permanent
fault (Failure)
Breaking of
wire, Short
circuit
Output Voltage 0V
Fixation
Fixed voltage output
Zero drift
Offset change
Fig 2. shows the characteristics of the sensor waveform
in the event of the two types of sensor faults (temporary and
permanent) [6].
Figure 2. Four types of sensor faults
In case of a temporary fault (Error), instantaneous errors
will appear in the sensor data output line in case of unstable
voltage (power) supply or disturbance. This is shown in Fig.
2 by the irregular blue line (noise). In the case of a
permanent fault, such as disconnection of a wire or a short
circuit during the operation of the EHA, it is impossible to
receive both data of the current cylinder position and sensor
status due to the physical breakdown of the data line. This is
shown in Fig. 2 by the wide dashed green line. Eventually,
the output signal goes to zero voltage. When the output
signal is constant (see middle dashed red line in Fig. 2), it is
defined as fixation. When fixation occurs, the SHP will not
recognize the stop command and will operate the EHA
continuously; the EHA may cause a malfunction of over
output exceeding the reference input. Also, the pump
continues to rotate due to wrong information coming from
the sensors. Eventually, pressure inside of the pump
increases and it can become a serious threat to the safety of
the system. In the case of zero-drift, an offset occurs because
of the addition of an initial signal and jumping voltage signal
(see the short dashed purple line in Fig. 2). Offset signal
occurs with a permanent fault.
B.
Analysis of fault tolerance algorithm
Sensor errors caused by noise are recovered by the
Kalman filter. The Kalman filter estimates the current sensor
signal value from past sensor signal values based on the
system model [7].
T
T
-1
t+1
t+1
t+1
K
= C
H (HC
H + R)
(1)
t+1
t+1
t+1
t+1
C
= C
- K
HC
(2)
$
$
$
t+1
t+1
t+1
t+1 t+1
t+1
x
= x
+K
z
- K
H x
(3)
Equation (1) calculates the Kalman gain
Kt+1
by using
system model H , R , prediction error covariance
Ct+1
.
Kalman acts as a scale for the calculation of estimated value
$t+1
x
which is the final output in the Kalman filter algorithm.
In (2), the error covariance
Ct+1
is calculated by using the
Kalman gain, system model H , and prediction error
covariance
Ct+1
. Error covariance is used to determine how
accurate is the estimated value in the prediction equation.
The error covariance is larger than the largest error. Equation
(3) calculates the estimated value of current time by using
predicted estimated value $t+1
x
, input
zt+1
,
Kt+1
as the
weighting and system model variable H . According to
previous situations and system model, Kalman filter tunes a
Kalman gain each time by repeating equation. So, it can
correct the estimated value within the normal margin of error
in the face of rapid waveform variations due to noise [7].
In order to control the output of the cylinder, we have to
know the position of the rod and the internal pressure of the
cylinder. If the position sensor has a permanent fault, ECU
cannot control the cylinder because the exact position of the
cylinder rod cannot be detected. If the pressure sensor has a
permanent fault, ECU cannot obtain the information for the
precise axial control because ECU cannot detect the internal
pressure of the system. In order to estimate the output of the
sensors, we should be aware of the change of discharge flow
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-512-8
CYBER 2016 : The First International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

rate in the pump to be input to the system and system
dynamics model of the EHA [8][9].
Through dynamic cylinder models, SMO estimates a
signal of the position sensor or pressure sensor, which
requires a repair by using the input flow rate variation. The
SMO model for estimating the position sensor is expressed
as follows [10].
$
$
1 sgn(
)
(
)
e
H
H
Q
y
g
y
y
y
V
S y
β


=
−
−
+ 

+



(4)
where, Q is the discharge flow rate of the pump,
SH
is
the cross section of the cylinder head, y is the location of
the cylinder rod,
VH
is the volume of the cylinder head, and
e
β is the effective bulk modulus of the hydraulic fluid. In
the (4), $y

is the estimated output speed of the cylinder rod,
$y is the estimated location of cylinder rod, and
1g is an
arbitrary constant of the signum function (sgn). The SMO
algorithm has characteristics that estimate the original sensor
signals and vibration with signum function of difference
between the output value of the sensor and the estimated
value. The signum function compares the difference between
the location of the cylinder rod and the estimated location of
the cylinder rod based on the system model and reduces their
error range. The SMO can quickly recover the permanent
fault of the sensor because it has a robust characteristic for
the disturbance and a succinct model equation [10].
III.
EXPERIMENT OF THE FAULT TOLERANCE ALGORITHM
COMBINED WITH CYBER SYSTEM
The coil tilter SHP is composed of three main parts that
include the EHA system, the fault tolerance in ECU, and the
cyber system.
The cyber system consists of the Office GUI, the
Machine GUI, and the Mobile GUI. The Mobile GUI of the
cyber system is connected to the ECU and exerts its control
over the SHP by wireless network communication. The
Machine GUI and the Office GUI are connected to the ECU
by a wire network. The GUI sends the reference input signal
to the ECU and the ECU sends command signals to the EHA.
In this experiment, we consider a fault that may occur
while operating the SHP through the cyber system shown in
Fig. 3. The sensor fault occurs through a function generator
and relay. The object of this experiment is to determine
whether the fault tolerance algorithm can make the cyber
system detect the fault, send an alarm for the fault, and
recover from the fault by using the fault tolerance algorithm.
Fig. 4 shows the SMO algorithm of the LVDT sensor by
using the function blocks from MATLAB Simulink.
Figure 3. The experiment equipment
Figure 4. Fault tolerance algorithm of LVDT
The fault tolerance algorithm indicates that the SMO
algorithm used as an input of the flow rate change by using
speed of the motor is combined with the dynamic equation of
the SHP model. When the temporary fault happens, a
Kalman gain changes in real time in the Kalman filter and it
calculates estimated value of the sensor. So, the ECU can
correct the estimated value within the normal margin of error.
When a fault occurs (temporary or permanent), a comparison
is done between the reference input signals and the SMO
signal calculated by the SMO formula, and the fault input
signal is replaced with the recovered sensor input signal
through a fault detector in the fault tolerance algorithm.
IV.
RESULTS
When a fault does not happen, the normal position value
of the cylinder rod is shown in Fig.5.
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-512-8
CYBER 2016 : The First International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

Figure 5. Normal signal of LVDT
To get the temporary fault, a function generator was used
to give random noise signals. Fig. 6 shows the estimation of
the LVDT sensor output using the Kalman filter and the
threshold predictor. Mixed noise signals (see the dashed line
in Fig. 6) were recovered through the Kalman filter.
Figure 6. Noise signal and recovered signal by using Kalman filter
To generate the LVDT sensor signal with a permanent
sensor fault, the experiment used a relay which is an
electromagnetic switch to generate the sudden permanent
fault (breaking of the wire and short circuit). After a fault
occurs (relay operated), the voltage of the LVDT goes to 0V.
When the relay is electrically switched at time 27 seconds,
the LVDT signal goes to 0V due to breaking of the wire and
short circuit. When the signal is over the allowable error
range, the LVDT signal is replaced to threshold predictor
signal from encoder related to motor rpm. Estimates of the
LVDT sensor outputs by using the SMO model and
recovered signal are shown in Fig. 7.
Figure 7. Short circuit / Disconnection of wire fault signal and recovered
signal by using SMO
The position of the cylinder rod follows the recovered
signal into the reference error based on the SMO model.
After that, the alarm output is switching from 0 to 1 as
shown in Fig. 8. Also, the cyber system alarm is warning on
the display and the (Office/Machine/Mobile) GUIs show that
LVDT is under recovery while the alarm goes on.
Figure 8. Fault detection alarm of Short circuit / Disconnection of wire
To find out the error rate of the SMO, by comparing the
LVDT signal with the SMO threshold predictor signal, it
shows that the recovered signal is well operated because the
maximum of the reference error is under an allowable range.
If the LVDT signal exceeds the allowable signal, the fault
detector gives an alarm during recovery. Also, the LVDT
sensor signal is replaced by the SMO signal in parallel. If the
fault persists, the signal may be considered as a permanent
fault, as indicated in the fault classification shown in TABLE I.
Following the previous experiments, two sudden permanent
fault experiments (fixation, zero-drift) will be applied.
To generate the LVDT sensor signal with a permanent
fault, we use a relay for sudden operation and power supply
to engender fixation. After the fault occurs, the voltage of the
LVDT goes to a fixed voltage (3V). When the signal exceeds
the allowable error range, the LVDT signal is replaced by a
threshold predictor signal from encoder related to motor rpm.
Estimates of the LVDT sensor outputs by using the SMO
model and recovered signal are shown in Fig. 9.
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-512-8
CYBER 2016 : The First International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

Figure 9. Fixation fault signal and recovered signal by using SMO
After that, the alarm output is switching from 0 to 1, as
shown in Fig. 10. We see a fault where chattering occurred
near time 27 seconds during the alarm, but the duration of
the alarm is too short to determine the presence of the
permanent fault. Also, the cyber system alarm is warning in
display and the (Office/Machine/Mobile) GUI shows that the
LVDT is under recovery while the alarm operates.
Figure 10. Fault detection alarm of fixation
To generate the LVDT sensor signal with a permanent
fault, we use a relay for sudden operation and power supply
to make zero-drift. After the fault occurs, the voltage of
LVDT will be lower offset. When the signal exceeds the
allowable error range, the LVDT signal is replaced by a
threshold predictor signal from encoder related to motor rpm.
Estimates of the LVDT sensor outputs by using the SMO
model and the recovered signal are shown in Fig. 11.
Figure 11. Lower zero-drift fault signal and recovered signal by using SMO
After that, the alarm output is switching from 0 to 1 as
shown in Fig.12.
Figure 12. Fault detection alarm of lower zero-drift
After a fault occurs, the voltage of LVDT will be upper
offset. Estimates of the LVDT sensor outputs by using the
SMO model and the recovered signal are shown in Fig. 13.
Figure 13. Upper zero-drift fault signal and recovered signal by using
SMO
After the permanent fault occurs, the alarm output is
switching from 0 to 1, as shown in Fig. 14.
Figure 14. Fault detection alarm of upper zero-drift
During the whole process of permanent fault experiment,
the cyber system alarm is warning in the display and the
(Office/Machine/Mobile) GUI shows that the LVDT is
under recovery while the alarm operates, as shown in Fig.
15.
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-512-8
CYBER 2016 : The First International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

Figure 15. Fault detection alarm of cyber system
Fig.16 shows the overall configuration of the coil tilter
system.
Figure 16. The structure of coil tilter SHP
When operating without a fault, the command signal is
given to the coil tilter SHP through (Office/Machine/Mobile)
GUI. If the coil tilter SHP in not the normal operation due to
the fault, the fault tolerance algorithm will be operated and
(Office/Machine/Mobile) GUI are verified through an alarm
to users and recover the fault. After the fault is returned to
normal waveform, the alarm will turn off and the coil tilter
SHP will operate normally.
V.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, SHP system uses the sensor fault tolerance
algorithm combined with the cyber system for the coil tilter.
When a fault happens in the coil tilter SHP, a proposed fault
tolerance algorithm verifies the fault type and recovers the
(temporary
or
permanent)
fault
and
the
(Office/Machine/Mobile)
GUI
observes
the
recovering
procedure through a monitoring display. In consideration of
the fault that may occur during control through the cyber
system, the importance of a sensor fault tolerance technology
is emphasized. When sensors do not detect the fault properly,
the
fault
tolerance
algorithm
automatically
and
simultaneously operates with the prototype. If one sensor
does not operate properly, the fault tolerance algorithm
replaces a broken signal to estimate signal from Kalman
filter or SMO related to other sensor signals. The proposed
fault tolerant algorithm is designed and performed for
temporary or permanent faults with the LVDT sensor as an
experiment. Also, monitoring and alarming in the cyber
system confirms the performance. As a result, a sensor fault
tolerance technology with the cyber system is suitable for
coil tilter SHP. In the future, all experiments will be applied
to new prototypes.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research is supported by the SW Fusion Component
Development
of
the
KEIT
grant
funded
by
Korea
government Ministry of Trade, industry & Energy.
REFERENCES
[1]
E. Sampson, S. R. Habibi, Y. Chinniah, R. Burton, “Model
identification of the electrohydraulic actuator for small signal
inputs”, In 18th Bath workshop on power transmission and
motion control (PTMC 2005), pp. 7-9, Sep. 2005.
[2]
S. R. Habibi, and A. Goldenberg, "A Mechatronics Approach
for the Design of a New High Performance Electro Hydraulic
Actuator", SAE transactions, vol. 108, pp. 353-360, Sep. 1999,
doi:10.4271/1999-01-2853.
[3]
D. Kim, K. W. Oh, D. Hong, Y. K. Kim, S. H. Hong, "Motion
Control of Excavator with Tele-OperatedSystem," In 26th
International Symposium on Automation and Robotics in
Construction (ISARC 2009), pp. 341-347, June. 2009.
[4]
J. H. Kim, and Y. H. Yu, "Development of electro hydraulic
ballast remote valve control system with diagnostic function
using redundant modbus communication," Journal of the
Korean Society of Marine Engineering, vol.38, pp.292-301,
Mar. 2014, doi: 10.5916/jkosme.2014.38.3.292.
[5]
B. Song, et al. , "Application of an advanced graphic user
interface for the coil tilter smart hybrid powerpack system,"
In International conference Electrical, Electronic & Computer
Engineering Technologies (ICEECET 2016), pp. 1-13, Apr.
2016, in press.
[6]
S. Jo, H. Kim, I. Choi, H. Kim, "Design of Permanent Sensor
Fault Tolerance Algorithms by Sliding Mode Observer for
Smart Hybrid Powerpack," World Academy of Science,
Engineering
and
Technology,
International
Journal
of
Mechanical,
Aerospace,
Industrial,
Mechatronic
and
Manufacturing Engineering, vol. 8(9), pp. 1664-1671, Sep.
2014, PISSN:2010-376X, EISSN:2010-3778.
[7]
G. Welch, and G. Bishop, "An introduction to the kalman
filter Department of Computer Science, University of North
Carolina," July. 2006.
[8]
C. Guan, and S. Pan, (2008). "Adaptive sliding mode control
of
electro-hydraulic
system
with
nonlinear
unknown
parameters," Control Engineering Practice, vol. 16(11), pp.
1275-1284, Nov. 2008,doi:10.1016/j.conengprac.2008.02.002.
[9]
S. Habibi, and A. Goldenberg, "Design of a new high
performance
electrohydraulic
actuator,"
In
Advanced
Intelligent
Mechatronics,
Proc.
1999
IEEE/ASME
International Conference on. IEEE, pp. 227-232, Sep. 1999,
doi: 10.1109/AIM.1999.803171.
[10] J. J. E. Slotine, J. K. Hedrick, E. A. Misawa,"On sliding
observers for nonlinear systems," Control vol. 109(3), pp.245-
252, Sep. 1987, doi:10.1115/1.3143852.
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-512-8
CYBER 2016 : The First International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

