Designing An IEC 61850 Based Power Distribution Substation Simulation/Emulation
Testbed for Cyber-Physical Security Studies
Eniye Tebekaemi ∗ and Duminda Wijesekera†
Volgenau School of Engineering
George Mason University
Fairfax, USA
Email: ∗etebekae@gmu.edu, †dwijesek@gmu.edu
Abstract—The present traditional power grid system is slowly
migrating to an interactive, intelligent power grid system (smart
grid or future grid) driven by information and communication
technology. The smart grid functions are expected to improve
the reliability, efﬁciency, operations and control of the electric
power grid. The smart grid functions are realizable through
power communication networks that interface with traditional
computer networks often connected to the Internet. This sit-
uation makes cyber-physical security a serious concern in the
design, development, and implementation of smart grid functions
in power grid systems. Understanding the physical behavior,
cyber security challenges, physical security challenges, impact
of cyber/physical security breaches, and security requirements
of time-critical cyber-physical systems like the smart grid is
critical in designing a robust security solution that ensures its
safe and reliable operation. This work focuses on the design
and implementation of a simulation testbed that would support
extensive analysis of communication protocols, cyber-physical se-
curity functions, intelligent electronic device (IED) vulnerabilities,
network conﬁguration, and physical security requirements of an
IEC 61850 based power distribution substation.
Keywords–Cyber Security; Communication Protocols; Simula-
tion Testbed; Cyber-Physical Systems; Smart Grid; Power Substa-
tion Automation.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Simulation of cyber-physical systems is fast becoming a
popular method for analyzing the behavior of hybrid systems
and testing out new functionalities before deployment in the
real world. In power systems, simulation testbeds have been
used extensively for fault analysis, testing of protection and
control functions, and in the testing and analysis of new tech-
nologies. The future grid (or smart grid) represents one such
new technology that incorporates data communication network
into existing power networks to provide a more efﬁcient and re-
silient power grid system. Simulating the smart grid functions
for cyber-physical security studies requires three major parts:
1) Simulation of the physical power system, 2) Simulation of
the communication network, and 3) The interaction between
the physical power system and the communication network.
There exist several power systems simulation software used
for the design, evaluation, and analysis of powers systems that
supports real-time simulation, discrete event simulation, and
hardware in the loop (HIL) simulation. Most research work
focuses on the use of network simulators to simulate network
communication between components, and either implement
the smart grid functions in the simulated network nodes or
as functions in the power system simulator. This approach
helps researchers to determine suitable network topology and
conﬁguration that supports the real-time communication re-
quirements for the smart grid. For cyber security studies, the
approach helps in studying the effects of packet delay, packet
loss, packet injection and data manipulation on the simulated
power systems.
The major objective of this work is to expand the scope
of cyber-physical security studies using simulation testbeds
to perform real-time analysis of smart grid communication
network and security protocols, analyze the impact of physical
disturbance (deliberate and accidental), provide a realistic envi-
ronment for implementing and testing new and existing smart
grid functions through virtual IEDs, perform vulnerability
analysis of physical IEDs used in smart grid systems, test
new Internet of Things (IoT) services, and analyze security
protocols and security controls for the smart grid. To achieve
this, the physical system, IEDs and communication network
must be independent and support relevant standards and pro-
tocols to ensure interoperability when implementing smart grid
functions. Implementing IEDs as nodes in network simulators
or as procedures in power system simulators in the smart grid
simulation testbed makes it tough to perform studies that meet
our objectives.
In this work, we make use of virtual IEDs, which are
computing units implemented as either virtual machines (VMs)
or standalone computers with full network support capabilities.
The virtual IEDs can be connected through a physical, sim-
ulated or software-deﬁned network (SDN). The virtual IEDs
depending on the smart grid function they implement, can read
values from the simulated power system, communicate with
other IEDs through the communication network, and write
control instructions to the simulated power system. Fig. 1
shows the high-level graphical representation of the simulation
testbed.
Figure 1: High-level representation of the proposed testbed
The simulation testbed presented in this work enables
cyber-physical security research objectives at level 2. Some
of the other advantages of this model include:
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-512-8
CYBER 2016 : The First International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

1)
Modular Design - The modular structure used in
our testbed enables components to be easily replaced
with newer and more efﬁcient components, making
it easy to test new technologies, upgrade and replace
existing components, and perform scale up operations
seamlessly.
2)
Scalability – The testbed can easily be scaled out
to support more smart grid functions, HIL co-
simulations, distributed simulations, and remote IoT
operations.
3)
Cost – Using virtual IEDs makes it cheap and con-
venient to implement practical smart grid functions.
The testbed can be set up on a small scale in a purely
virtual environment, using a single host computer
with multiple VMs costing a few hundred dollars;
or large scale using real-time HIL simulators such
as RTDS Simulator and OPAL-RT Simulator with
real IEDs and actual communications and networking
equipment.
4)
Ease of Setup and Use – Both network and power
simulators come with APIs written in a speciﬁc
programming language that must be learned to use
the simulator. Using these network simulators means
that one can hardly take advantage of already existing
smart grid libraries when using network simulators.
Our testbed allows users to implement smart grid
functions using libraries, programming languages,
and applications they are comfortable with in the
virtual IEDs.
5)
Interoperability - The testbed is based on IEC 61850
standards and related protocols, which makes it rel-
atively easy to perform system in the loop (SIL)
and HIL simulations with systems and devices that
support IEC 61850.
The remainder of this work is organized as follows: Sec-
tion II discusses the cyber and physical vulnerabilities of
the smart grid, and related work is discussed in Section III.
Section IV reviews related smart grid standards, software,
and tools that are frequently used in designing simulation
testbeds. In Section V, we present our simulation testbed
model. Section VI focuses on the implementation of the model
and presentation of some of our results. We conclude in
Section VII by discussing the accomplishments and limitations
of this work, and potential future work.
II.
CYBER AND PHYSICAL VULNERABILITIES OF SMART
GRID
Over the years, we have seen series of cyber-attacks of
massive scale against government organizations and private
companies alike. Cyber-Physical systems like the smart grid,
are vulnerable to both cyber and physical acts that could
critically impact their safe and reliable operation. Also, the
high availability, tight coupling of components, and time
sensitive communication requirements of power systems make
them even more vulnerable.
A. Physical Vulnerabilities
Attacks on Physical Components - Power systems have
components distributed over a large geographical area, and
some of their components are installed in areas where it
is difﬁcult to guarantee physical security. An attacker can
physically attack sensors, actuators and other components that
may result in faulty measurements causing errors in the system
state estimation and control operations [1], [2].
Faults and Failure of Components - Devices may fail
during operation. These failures could be caused by some
accumulated faults or the device reaching its end of life. In
most cases, power system components degenerate progres-
sively giving facility managers enough time to respond and
in some cases, failure is abrupt with little or no indication.
Accidents and Acts of Nature - Severe weather conditions
could cause instability in power systems and power disruption.
Power systems frequently suffer from trees falling on power
lines, storms, lightning and thunder strikes destroying power
installations and causing power outages.
B. Cyber Vulnerabilities
Software and Firmware Bugs - IEDs rely on software to
provide the much-needed functionality. Software often comes
preinstalled which determines the (primary) behavior of the
IED without any need for human interaction (ﬁrmware and
drivers), while others can be installed by the user to extend
the functionality of the smart device. Since software is written
by humans, we cannot rule out errors in the implementation,
and attackers look for such errors to exploit the system [3].
An example of this was the Heartbleed vulnerability of 2014
caused by bugs in the OpenSSL implementation of the secure
sockets layer (SSL) protocol [4].
IED and Network Misconﬁguration - Misconﬁguration of
network components and IEDs are huge security risks to the
smart grid. Some of these misconﬁgurations include: 1) Using
default settings and default passwords even when the device
is operational, 2) poorly maintained security and software
patches, 3) using short and guessable passwords, 4) poorly
conﬁgured ﬁrewall [5], or some other conﬁguration issues. All
these can put the network at risk.
Data Manipulation and Falsiﬁcation - Data manipulation
and falsiﬁcation attacks border on data integrity. By altering
certain bits of the signal, an attacker alters the meaning
of the control signal. An attacker with knowledge of how
the system works can generate packets or replay previously
recorded packets to change the correct behavior of the system.
Data manipulation attacks are countered by proper application
of cryptographic controls in the authentication and integrity
checks of communicating nodes and data.
Malware and Advanced Persistent Threat (APT) - Malware
are pieces of software with malicious intent. Malware could
open covert communication channels to the remote attacker so
that the attacker can take control of the host, send vital infor-
mation about the system to a remote attacker, or just perform
preprogrammed malicious actions [6]. APTs are unique forms
of malware and attacks that use various stealthy techniques
to gain remote access while staying undetected on the host
system for a long time.
Communication Channel - power systems are distributed
and span multiple locations requiring communication links
between the various parts of the system. This communication
network can be wired or wireless, although the wireless
connection is most often used. One weakness of wireless
communication is that of visibility. Anyone in proximity to
the wireless network and operating on the same frequency and
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-512-8
CYBER 2016 : The First International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

channel can see the network trafﬁc. Power systems rely on the
timeliness of communication packets to operate (e.g., inter-
locking and switching functions in power distribution systems)
and a mere delay or loss of packets may yield undesired results.
Typical attacks include signal jamming, wormhole attacks, and
signal diversion attacks.
C. Coordinated Cyber-Physical Attacks
Another possibility is a coordinated cyber-physical attack,
exploiting both the physical and cyber vulnerabilities of the
power system in a contemporary way to maximize the impact.
This kind of attack could be a collusion between an insider
with access to the physical power system components, and
a cyber attacker at a remote location with knowledge of
the power communication network working together to cause
cascading failures and service disruption.
III.
RELATED WORK
There are a few substation simulation testbeds designed
primarily for cyber-physical security related research. These
testbeds are either too expensive to reproduce or lack the
capability for level 2 cyber security work. This is a sig-
niﬁcant setback for researchers who need a realistic simu-
lation testbed for cyber-physical security studies in power
systems but do not have a large budget. Other issues are
the lack of implementation of existing information security
standards, which means these information security protocols
cannot be evaluated for vulnerabilities and possible impact on
the substation. For example, the IEC 62531-9 uses the group
domain of interpretation (GDOI) protocol for key management,
but what happens if the key management server is down
or compromised? Hahn et al. [7] developed the PowerCyber
testbed at Iowa State University that supports level 1 and 2
cyber security objectives. In their work, they use the RTDS
Simulator platform and the PowerFactory power simulation
software to simulate the physical power system. The RTDS
Simulator provides real-time HIL simulation and interfaces
directly with the IEDs, while the PowerFactory is used mainly
for non-realtime analysis and connects to the RTDS Simulator
through the open platform communications (OPC) protocols.
The IEDs are either actual physical IEDs or virtual machines
(VMs), and they communicate with remote terminal units
(RTUs) that aggregate their data and send it to the controller.
For the communication network part, they use the Internet-
Scale Event and Attack Generation Environment (ISEAGE), a
multimillion-dollar research at Iowa State University dedicated
to designing a security testbed to emulate the Internet for the
purpose of researching, designing, and testing cyber defense
mechanisms.
Yang et al. [8] presented a testbed that simulates the
power system using the RTDS Simulator, actual IEDs and
communication devices. Using only real IEDs makes it difﬁcult
to implement and analyze new substation security protocols
and functions, and gives little room for scalability. Liu et
al. [9] designed a reconﬁgurable testbed for analyzing the
impact of speciﬁc cyber-attacks on the power systems. They
implemented their substation testbed using RTDS Simulator
to simulate the power system, and used network simulator
3 (NS3) and the defense technology experimental research
laboratory (DeterLab) to simulate the communication network.
Their testbed was not implemented according to the IEC
61850 standards, and their controllers were modeled as nodes
in the network simulator. Koutsandria et al. [10] simulated
the power system with Matlab/Simulink and used simulated
and actual programmable logic controllers (PLC) for control.
They also used an actual local area network (LAN) setup
for the network communication part. Their objective was to
validate the continuous, reliable operation of network intrusion
detection systems (NIDS) in exposed network environments.
Jarmakiewicz et al. [11] used labVIEW software to simu-
late the power system and used real IEDs connected to a real
LAN. Hong et al. proposed in [12] a cyber-physical security
testbed to simulate attacks and validate security controls. Their
proposed testbed although not yet implemented, would be
based on RTDS and support HIL simulations. Deng et al. in
[13] designed their testbed to test the operation, control and
protection functions of the substation using RT-LAB, actual
and virtual IEDs. Their testbed is not intended for cyber
security analysis and lacks an appropriate communication
network model. Chen et al. [14] used RTDS and OPNET
to simulate the power system and communication network
respectively, but implemented the bay-Level IEDs as functions
in RTDS and the station-level IEDs as nodes in OPNET, and
not as standalone devices. The works [15]–[19] all have similar
software based testbeds. The major differences are in their
choice of software combination used in the co-simulation of
power and communication network systems. The IEDs used
in their simulation is either modeled as nodes in the network
simulator or as functions in the power system simulation.
IV.
REVIEW OF STANDARDS, LIBRARIES AND TOOLS
Understanding the standards for substation automation nec-
essary to set up a simulation testbed for research in power
systems could be daunting, as it requires one to have adequate
knowledge of both the power systems and communications
network domain. The international organization for standard-
ization (ISO) and the international electrotechnical commission
(IEC) are the two primary organizations that deﬁne standards
for power systems. In this section, we will discuss the IEC
61850 Standards (communication networks and systems for
substations), the ISO/IEC 9506 (MMS – Manufacturing Mes-
sage Speciﬁcation), the IEC 62351 (Information Security for
Power System Control Operations), the RFC 6407 (GDOI -
Group Domain of Interpretation) and the relevant parts of the
open systems interconnection (OSI) communication model.
IEC 61850 (Communication Networks and Systems in Sub-
stations) is the most popular internationally accepted standard
for substation automation. It describes the structure, functions,
and interface for substation devices, as well as the communi-
cation protocol for process-level, bay-level, and station-level
communication necessary for substation automation.
ISO/IEC 9506 (MMS – Manufacturing Message Speciﬁca-
tion) is an application layer messaging standard based on the
OSI communication model. MMS is designed for controlling
and monitoring devices remotely through remote terminal units
(RTU) and programmable logic controllers (PLC). It deﬁnes
functions common across distributed automation systems and
acts as a concrete object to implement the abstract IEC 61850
standards.
IEC 62351 (Information Security for Power Systems Con-
trol Operations) is the current security standard and deﬁnes
the end to end cyber security requirements for securing power
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-512-8
CYBER 2016 : The First International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

management networks. It speciﬁes the security requirements
for secure data communication and processing in power sys-
tems in regards to data conﬁdentiality, data integrity, authen-
tication, and non-repudiation.
RFC 6407 (GDOI - The Group Domain of Interpretation)
is the internet engineering task force (IETF) protocol used to
provide group key management for secure group communica-
tions. The IEC 62351 standard speciﬁes the use of the GDOI
for managing security associations and distributing security
transforms in power systems.
Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) Model is the commu-
nication model that standardizes the communication functions
necessary for computer network communication. The OSI
model consists of 7 abstraction layers and deﬁnes communi-
cation functions and requirements for each layer. It serves as
an abstract structure through which network communication
protocols are deﬁned.
A. Intelligent Electric Devices (IEDs)
Understanding how the IEC 61850 standard deﬁnes the
naming structure, data structures, services, and command sets
for read, write, and control is necessary to design virtual IEDs.
Substation automation consists of functions that facilitate
monitoring, protection, and control in the substation. Each
substation automation function performs dedicated tasks and
is referred to as a logical node in the IEC 61850 standard. A
logical node (LN) is deﬁned as the smallest part of the IED
that exchanges data and performs some functions [20]. An IED
is composed of one or more LNs and must implement all the
necessary data structures, services, and interfaces to support
each LN it contains. LNs are the building blocks for IEDs
and have standardized names, data structures, abstract service
interfaces, and behavior models.
1) Naming Structure: LNs exchange data by reading and
writing values to memory locations referenced to by their data
attribute (DA). The IEC 61850 standard uses a hierarchical
naming convention that uniquely identiﬁes each DA in the
substation. The ﬁrst letter of the LN name identiﬁes the
group to which the LN belongs, and sufﬁxes can be used
to identify each instance of the LN in the IED. An IED
name is unique within the substation, and LN name is unique
within the IED. Using Fig. 2, we can determine the status
value (stVal) of the switch position (Pos) of the circuit breaker
Relay1 by referencing “Relay1/XCBR2.ST.Pos.stVal”, where
“2” represents an instance of the circuit breaker LN (XCBR)
in “Relay1”, ”X” identiﬁes its LN group as switchgear, and
”ST” represents the functional constraint (FC) for status value.
2) Data Structure: The compatible data class (CDC) tem-
plate speciﬁes the data type of each data attribute (DA) allowed
for the given data object (DO). For example, if the CDC
speciﬁes that the controllable double point (DPC) template
be used for the Relay1/XCBR1.Pos data object, then the
data attribute for Relay1/XCBR1.ST.Pos.stVal will have a type
”coded enum” with four possible states intermediate-state, off,
on, bad-state [21]. The timestamp attribute “t” referenced by
Relay1/XCBR2.ST.Pos.t will have a data type of either int32
or unsigned int24 based on the chosen time quality [22]. Both
IEC 61850-7-2 and IEC 61850-7-3 should be consulted for the
detailed deﬁnition of all data types and recommended values
used in the CDC template.
Figure 2: Structural Composition of an IEC 61850 based IED
Figure 3: Conceptual service model of the ACSI [22]
3) Services and Interfaces: IEC 61850-7-2 deﬁnes an ab-
stract communication service interface (ACSI) for IEC 61850
based IEDs. All IEDs must implement some of the services
and interfaces deﬁned by the ACSI if they require real-time
cooperation in the substation. ACSI deﬁnes abstract interfaces
for client/server remote communication that supports real-
time data access, remote control, event reporting and more. It
also deﬁnes the subscriber/publisher communication abstract
interface for fast and reliable system-wide event distribution
and transmission of sampled values. Interfaces represent com-
munication points, IEDs communicate with one another using
these interfaces. Services are activities that run on interfaces,
the kind of interface an IED supports determines the type of
service the IED can provide.
Fig. 3 summarizes all the abstract interfaces available de-
ﬁned in [22]. IEDs can implement all or a subset of interfaces.
The type of interface an IED implements determines the kind
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-512-8
CYBER 2016 : The First International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

of services it can provide and the type of communication pro-
tocol it can use. For example, an IED needs to implement the
Generic Object Oriented Substation Event (GOOSE) control
block interface to use the GOOSE communication protocol to
send GOOSE messages.
B. Protocol for Data Communication
Communication protocols are necessary for IEDs to send
and receive messages in a power communication network. IEC
61850 based IEDs rely on the 7-layer OSI reference model
which speciﬁes the functional requirements for each layer. The
IEC 61850 standard groups the seven abstract OSI layers into
two proﬁles; 1) the ISO application proﬁle (A-Proﬁle) com-
posed of the three upper layers, and 2) the ISO transport proﬁle
(T-Proﬁle) composed of the four lower layers. It is important
to draw the distinction between an application program and an
application protocol. An application program provides a set of
functions and an interface through which users can interact
with the application, while an application protocol provides a
communication structure through which applications interact
with other applications irrespective of their internal system
representation. Application protocol provides interoperability
and universality, which means that application programs can
be written in different programming languages, run on different
operating systems and still be able to communicate as long as
the implement the same application protocol.
The IEC 61850 standard deﬁnes all requirements needed
to design IED application programs, but not application pro-
tocols. Instead, it relies on existing application protocols, and
deﬁnes mappings from ACSI services to the communication
protocol (A-Proﬁle and T-Proﬁle). [23] and [24] describe in
detail the mappings from ACSI to MMS, ACSI to Generic
Substation Events (GSE/GOOSE), ACSI to Generic Substation
State Event (GSSE), and ACSI to sampled value (SV) for both
application and transport proﬁles (A-Proﬁle and T-Proﬁle).
C. Data and Communication Security
Information security is a grave concern for power manage-
ment systems. Many standards have been proposed over the
years, and the IEC 62531 standard [25] is the only globally
accepted standard for securing power management systems.
The IEC 62531 standard suite deﬁnes information security
requirements for the various communication proﬁles used in
substation automation necessary to provide conﬁdentiality,
integrity, availability, and non-repudiation. The IEC 62531
standard identiﬁes potential threats and vulnerabilities for
power automation systems, and other aspects of information
security relevant to power automation systems.
1) TCP Proﬁle: IEC 62531-3 speciﬁes the use of transport
layer security (TLS) 1.0 or higher to protect TCP/IP pro-
ﬁles and provides protection against eavesdropping through
encryption, spooﬁng through Security Certiﬁcates (Node Au-
thentication), replay through TLS encryption, and man-in-the-
middle security risk through message authentication [25]. It
mandates the support for Rivest, Shamir, and Alderman (RSA)
and digital signature standard (DSS) signature algorithms with
RSA key length of 2048 bits and also mandates the support
for regular and ephemeral Difﬁe-Hellman key exchange with a
key length of 2048 bits. For authentication, it mandates the use
of the X.509 certiﬁcates with support for multiple certiﬁcate
authority (CA). As observed by Schlegel et a. [26], IEC 62531-
3 can protect against rogue certiﬁcates but not against already
compromised IEDs which would have valid certiﬁcates.
2) MMS Proﬁle: IEC 62531-4 deﬁnes the security re-
quirements for all proﬁles that include MMS. It provides
authentication through the use TLS based X.509 certiﬁcates
but does not cover message integrity and conﬁdentiality. If
encryption is to be employed then IEC 62531-3 should be used.
The IEC 62531-4 by itself only protects against unauthorized
access to information.
3) GOOSE and SV: IEC 62531-6 deﬁnes the security
requirements for IEC 61850 communication proﬁles. GOOSE
and SV proﬁles use multicast and non-routable messages that
run on the substation LAN, and must be transmitted within
4ms. IEC 62531-6 does not recommend the use of encryption
or certiﬁcate based authentication as it may increase the trans-
mission time and add more processing overhead. For GOOSE
proﬁle, encryption can be used only if the processing and
transmission time is less than 4ms. For message authentication
and integrity protection of GOOSE and SV messages, the IEC
61850 supports the use of HMAC digital signatures.
4) Access Control and Certiﬁcate Management:
IEC
62531-8 speciﬁes the use of role-based access control (RBAC)
for power systems. RBAC deﬁnes roles and set of rights
associated with each role. Users/Entities are assigned to roles,
and they inherit all the rights associated with that role. The
IEC 62531-8 standard deﬁnes a list of roles and associated
rights for power systems. For certiﬁcate/key management, the
IEC working group is currently working on the IEC 62351-9
standards, which will specify the use of the Group Domain of
Interpretation (GDOI) protocol (RFC 6407).
D. Libraries, Software and Tools
In this section, we will discuss IEC 61850 libraries, net-
work and power simulation software, and other tools frequently
used to simulate substation automation functions.
1) IEC 61850 Libraries and Tools: Software libraries are a
collection of prepackaged functions and resources used to help
reduce the time and effort needed to implement applications
that share common properties. Since IEDs implement IEC
61850 services, libraries have been developed by individuals
and organizations for some or all of the IEC 61850 services.
The libiec61850 [27] and the OpenIEC61850 [28] are two of
the most popular open source IEC 61850 libraries in use.
The libiec61850 is a c library written by Michael Zillgith
under the GPLv3 license and provides a server and client
library for the IEC 61850/MMS, IEC 61850/GOOSE, and
IEC 61850-9-2/Sampled Values communication protocols. It
supports the static implementation and dynamic creation of
IED models using substation conﬁguration language (SCL)
ﬁles or through API calls. It also provides full ISO protocol
stack on top of TCP/IP, and publisher and subscriber models
used for GOOSE and SV applications. The OpenIEC61850 is
an open source implementation of IEC 61850 standard suite
written in Java under the Apache 2.0 license. OpenIEC61850
provides IEC 61850/MMS client and server libraries but does
not provide native support for the subscriber/publisher model
based GOOSE and SV communication protocol. Organizations
like Systemcorp, Xelas Energy, SISCO, and SmartGridware
all have their implementation of the IEC 61850 standard suite
available for purchase.
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-512-8
CYBER 2016 : The First International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

Development IEC 61850 based IED models could be a
complicated process. Creating virtual IEDs requires the ap-
plication developer to have a thorough understanding of data
objects (DO), data attributes (DA), compatible data classes
(CDC), interfaces, and services that apply to all the LNs
to be implemented in the IED. IED modeling applications
such as IEDModeler and OpenSCLTools amongst others, help
reduce the complexity and programming errors associated
with designing IEDs by visualizing the IED modeling process
and generating the corresponding IED Capability Description
(ICD) ﬁles. Like most of the other IEC 61850 libraries, the
libiec61850 library suite has individual tools that parse ICD
ﬁles into c classes corresponding to the IED model.
2) Power Simulation Software: IEDs implement substa-
tion automation functions (protection, monitoring, and con-
trol) used inside substations as part of the power manage-
ment ecosystem. There are several applications used to sim-
ulate power systems, some of them are MATLAB/Simulink,
GridLab-D, and PSS/E amongst others. MATLAB/Simulink
produced by Mathworks is one of the most popular simula-
tion software used for power system simulation experiments
today. MATLAB/Simulink uses a very intuitive, graphical
component-based code generation process to create models of
systems. For power systems simulation, MATLAB/Simulink
has a specialized toolbox called Simscape Power Systems
(SimPowerSystem). SimPowerSystem provides component li-
braries and tools for modeling and simulating physical power
systems. GridLAb-D is an open source multi-agent based
power system distribution simulation and analysis tool devel-
oped by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE). Gridlab-d is
very useful in power simulations that involve distributed energy
resources (DER), distribution automation, and retail markets
interaction and evolution. PSS/E is a power system planning
and analysis tool used primarily for power transmission sys-
tems [29].
Other popular platforms for power systems simulation are
the specialized real-time digital simulators like those pro-
duced by RTDS [30] and OPAL-RT [31] Technologies. These
are custom hardware and software solutions specialized for
continuous real-time digital simulations. They can be used
to design, test, analyze and optimize control systems and
support personal computer and ﬁeld programmable gate array
(PC/FPGA) based real-time HIL simulations.
3) Communication Network Simulation Software:
IEC
61850 based IEDs exchange messages over data communi-
cation networks. OPNET, NS2, NS3, OMNET++, and NetSim
are some of the most popular network simulation and analysis
application used in simulating the communication network part
of the power systems automation network. Siraj et al. [32] give
a comprehensive analysis of these network simulators, their
features, advantages, and disadvantages.
V.
TESTBED MODEL
Our testbed model consists of the power model, IED model,
communication model, and attack model. The power model
for this work is a single bay power distribution substation as
shown in Fig. 4.
A. IED Model
IEDs have physical properties such as names, network
interfaces, and ON/OFF states. IEDs also have logical behavior
which aggregates the behavior of the all the LN’s functions that
make up the IED. IEC-61850 mandates all IEDs to implement
the two system LNs; 1) the physical device LN (LPHD), which
abstracts the physical properties of the IEDs, and 2) the Logical
node zero (LLN0), which aggregates all the mandatory DAs
of the LNs in the IED to provide a single consistent point of
access/update. These two system LNs are mandatory for all
IEDs whether they are process-level, bay-level or station-level
devices as shown in Fig. 2.
1) Process Level:
Switchgear Devices - Make use of circuit breaker LNs (XCBR)
and circuit switch LNs (XSWI) that directly control power
systems actuators to open or close the breakers and isolators.
XCBR and XSWI are process-level devices and subscribe to
switch controller (CSWI) for open or close instructions. Each
instance of XCBR or XSWI represents one circuit breaker
or isolator and controls the operations of that breaker or
isolator. Switchgear devices communicate with bay-level IEDs
through GOOSE messages and support the GOOSE com-
munication protocol with keyed-hash message authentication
code (HMAC) for authentication and integrity protection. All
devices in the substation connected to the same process bus
share a single group key. The group key is managed by the
key management server and must be changed periodically.
Measurement Devices - Make use of current transformer
LNs (TCTR) and the voltage transformer LNs (TVTR) to
obtain current and voltage measurements from the power
system. Each instance of TCTR or TVTR represents one
phase measurement from the current or voltage instrumentation
transformer in the power system. The TCTRs and TVTRs
are aggregated into merging units (MU) that operates a pub-
lisher/subscriber service. Merging units support SV multicast
communication protocol and transmit voltage and current mea-
surements to subscribers. Merging units also support HMAC
for authentication and integrity protection, and TLS protected
MMS connection for key management services.
2) Bay Level:
Control IEDs - Control operations like bay-level interlocking
functions, fault isolation functions, load management switch-
ing functions, voltage/VAR control, frequency control, and
power quality control functions are all designed as control
IEDs and form part of the ”Bay Controller.” At the mini-
mum, all control IEDs implement the switch controller LN
(CSWI), and sometimes implement the bay-level interlocking
LN (CILO) if interlocking functions are to be provided at the
bay level. The CSWI controls the operations of switchgear
devices (XCBR and XSWI), and the CILO provides the bay-
level interlocking rules.
Protection IEDs - Make use of protection function LNs like
the time overcurrent protection (PTOC), time overvoltage pro-
tection (PTOC), instantaneous overcurrent protection (PIOC),
and distance protection (PDIS). Protection IEDs subscribe to
the MU and monitoring IEDs to obtain necessary data values
needed to make protection decisions. Protection IEDs also
implement CSWI for controlling switchgear operations in re-
sponse to protection decisions. Monitoring IEDs - Make Use of
sensor-based monitoring LN like the monitor and diagnostics
for arc LN (SARC) that monitors gas volumes of gas insulated
switchgear devices. Monitor IEDs obtain information from
sensors that monitor power system equipment to obtain their
state information.
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-512-8
CYBER 2016 : The First International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

Figure 4: Single Bay IEC 61850 Power Distribution Substation Simulation Testbed
Bay-level IEDs could also implement measuring and me-
tering LNs (MMXU and MMTR), and other LNs to provide
additional functionalities that may be required at the bay level.
Bay-level Control IEDs support GOOSE and SV protocols
for communication with the process and bay-level devices,
and MMS protocol for communication with the station-level
devices.
3) Station Level: Station-level devices provide monitoring,
control, and remote terminal functions for the substation.
Functions at this level include human machine interface LN
(IHMI), group control/key server (GCKS), remote terminal
unit (RTU), and supervisory control and data acquisition
(SCADA) services. Station-level devices support TLS pro-
tected MMS communication with devices at the station and
bay level.
B. Communication Model
The communication model consists of the process network
and the station network. Each bay has a dedicated process net-
work, which is a switched or hub-based 10/100Base-T LAN,
that supports GOOSE and SV multicast/broadcast protocols
and isolate from that of other bays in the substation. The
substation has one station network connecting all the bay-level
devices and the station-level devices. The substation network
is a switched 10/100Base-T LAN redundantly conﬁgured.
C. Attack Model
Attacks on the smart power grid could be physical-based,
cyber-based, or both physical and cyber based.
1) Physical Attack Model: - There are two types of physical
attacks; 1) the incremental attack where the attack occurs
slowly and is spaced over time, and 2) the abrupt attack where
the impact is sudden. Let Ci be the current state of the device,
X be the set of all normal operating states, and Y be the set of
faulty states and Y = ¯X, then we can model an abrupt attack
as
C1 = {C0 + A} ∈ Y
(1)
Where A is the attack value, and C0 is the state of the
device just before the start of the attack. If A is spread over
n duration such that a = A/n be the attack value for each
iteration, then we can model the incremental attack as
Ci = {Ci−1 + a} ∈ X | 0 ≤ i ≤ n − 1}
and
{C0 + a.n} ∈ Y
(2)
2) Network Attack Model: An attacker may be able to
access the substation network from the process LAN, station
LAN, or from a remote network. The type of trafﬁc at each
access level is different, and requires different attack strategies
for each access level. Process-Level Attacks - We assume that
the attacker can gain physical access to the process LAN, and
the network trafﬁc is predominantly broadcast and multicast
GOOSE and SV packets. Station-Level Attacks - We assume
that the attacker can gain physical access to the substation
LAN, and the network trafﬁc is a mixture of multicast GOOSE
and unicast MMS packets. Remote Attacks - These are attacks
that seek to compromise the substation RTUs, IDS, and ﬁrewall
to gain access to the station network.
VI.
IMPLEMENTATION AND RESULTS
Our testbed is implemented as shown in Fig. 4, and consists
of a single bay with the associated substation devices. The
simulation testbed runs on an Intel corei7 MacBook Pro
computer, with a processor speed of 2.5ghz, 16GB of RAM,
and 512GB SSD.
A. Implementation Details
1) Physical Power System: The power substation system
is simulated in Matlab/Simulink. The substation consists of
a single bay (Bay1) connected to two three-phase power
transmission lines from two different power generation sources
using two busbars (Busbar1 and Busbar2). The busbars are
controlled by isolator switches (switch 1 and switch 2), and
the bay is protected by a circuit breaker (breaker 1). The Bay
also has two earthing switches (switch 3 and switch 4) and
three three-phase voltage/current measurement units. The sim-
ulated power system uses two functions; Measurement I/O, and
Relay to send and receive messages from the communication
network system through UDP ports. The measurement I/O
function receives voltage and current measurements from all
the measurement units, converts them into a data communica-
tion compatible format and sends them to the communication
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-512-8
CYBER 2016 : The First International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

network. The relay function receives switchgear control mes-
sages from the communication network and converts them into
control signals for the simulated switchgears.
2) Process-Level IEDs: At the process-level, we imple-
mented a single VM (I/O Merging Unit) that performs the
measurements merging and switchgear control functions. The
measurements merging function is composed of nine TVTR
and nine TCTR corresponding to each phase in the three
three-phase voltage/current measurements received from the
measurement I/O. The switchgear control function consists of
four XSWI and one XCBR necessary to control the switches
and the circuit breaker in the simulated power system.
3) Bay-Level IEDs: We implemented two VMs at the
bay level. The ﬁrst VM (Protection/Control) consists of ﬁve
CSWIs, two MMXUs, and two CILOs. The CSWIs are con-
ﬁgured to publish their status information to all the XSWI and
XCBR subscribers in the I/O merging unit using the GOOSE
control blocks. The MMXUs subscribe to the TVTRs and
TCTRs in the I/O merging unit VM using SV message blocks.
The two CILOs contain state and interlocking information
about the two isolator switches. The second VM (Measure-
ment/Metering) consists of three MMXUs and subscribes to
the TVTRs and TCTRs in the I/O merging unit using SV
message blocks.
4) Station-Level Devices: At the station-level, we have the
ofﬂine CA server VM (not shown in Fig. 4) and the station
controller VM. The station controller runs the CSWI client
applications for all the switchgear devices and connects to the
bay-level IEDs through MMS. The CA server is run ofﬂine
and its only function is to issue certiﬁcates.
5) Communication Network: The communication network
simulation comprises of 4 VMs that are identically conﬁgured
(Ubuntu 14.04.4LTS 1GB RAM, 1 Core Processor, 20GB
HDD), the process LAN, and the station LAN. The IEC 61850
standard is implemented using the libiec61850 API modiﬁed
to support MMS over TLS. The process and station LAN
infrastructure are simulated using the GNS3 network emulator.
The GNS3 is a network emulation software that emulates
network devices (switches and routers) to use VMs without
modiﬁcation as shown in Fig. 4.
6) Attacker: The attacker is implemented as a Kali VM (not
shown in Fig. 4). Kali is an advanced penetration testing Linux
distribution tool used for penetration testing, hacking, and
network security assessments. The Kali VM comes preinstalled
with applications frequently used in network security testing
and exploitation. The Kali VM is conﬁgured to have access to
the process and station LAN.
B. Preliminary Results
We tested the testbed against some well-known network
attacks at the process and network LAN.
1) Process LAN Attacks: Process-level trafﬁc is predom-
inantly multicast/broadcast and publisher/subscriber ethernet
messages. An attacker having access to the process LAN can
read and write GOOSE and SV messages. Using wireshark
and tcpreplay from the attacker VM, we were able to capture
and replay GOOSE messages from the protection/control VM
to the I/O merging unit VM. By observing the stNum (status
number) and sqNum (sequence number) of the goose messages
for switchgear control, we were able to create custom GOOSE
messages using scapy (a packet manipulation tool) to control
the switchgear devices.
2) Station LAN Attacks: At the station level our single
bay implementation only supports MMS unicast client-server
messages. To gain access to the network trafﬁc, we did a
man-in-the-middle attack by spooﬁng the ARP messages of
the station controller and protection/control VMs. Then we
conﬁgured our attacker VM to intercept and forward the MMS
messages between the station controller and protection/control
VMs using the ettercap tool.
The attacks were ﬁrst performed when the IEC-62531
standard was not implemented, and then when the IEC-62531
standard was implemented. The attacks were not successful
when the IEC 62531 standard was implemented. However, the
attacker can still see the process LAN messages in plain text,
and can learn useful information concerning the behavior of
the system.
VII.
CONCLUSION
Cyber-physical systems have both physical and cyber com-
ponents, and any security solution for cyber-physical systems
must take this into consideration. Building an IEC 61850
based substation simulation testbed for cyber-physical security
studies requires independence between the physical system,
the IEDs, and the communication network to realistically
represent the IEC 61850 power substation. This work presents
a cost effective testbed model that can be easily implemented
and scaled according to budget constraints. Our modular and
independent design enables various IEC 61850 functions and
conﬁgurations that supports security to be implemented and
tested using virtual IEDs. Our model enables testing and tuning
of network conﬁguration to enhance security and performance,
and study the effects of physical attacks and disturbances on
the security posture of the substation network.
In our future work, we would expand our substation
testbed to use real IEDs, and implement multiple bays like
actual substation with full SCADA functions using IEC 61850
standards. We would also simulate physical attacks to study
its effects on the security posture of the substation network,
analyze existing and proposed smart grid security protocols
and controls, and develop cyber-physical security solutions that
would take into consideration the physical and cyber behavior
of intelligent power systems.
REFERENCES
[1]
R. Smith, “Assault on California power station raises alarm on potential
for terrorism,” Wall Street Journal, vol. 5, 2014.
[2]
E. I. Bilis, W. Kr¨oger, and C. Nan, “Performance of electric power
systems under physical malicious attacks,” IEEE Systems Journal,
vol. 7, no. 4, 2013, pp. 854–865.
[3]
Y. Li, J. M. McCune, and A. Perrig, “Sbap: Software-based attestation
for peripherals,” in International Conference on Trust and Trustworthy
Computing.
Springer, 2010, pp. 16–29.
[4]
Z. Durumeric, J. Kasten, D. Adrian, J. A. Halderman, M. Bailey, F. Li,
N. Weaver, J. Amann, J. Beekman, M. Payer, and V. Paxson, “The
matter of heartbleed,” in Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Internet
Measurement Conference, ser. IMC ’14.
ACM, 2014, pp. 475–488.
[5]
C.-C. Liu, A. Stefanov, J. Hong, and P. Panciatici, “Intruders in the
grid,” IEEE Power and Energy magazine, vol. 10, no. 1, 2012, pp. 58–
66.
[6]
R. Langner, “Stuxnet: Dissecting a cyberwarfare weapon,” IEEE Secu-
rity & Privacy, vol. 9, no. 3, 2011, pp. 49–51.
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-512-8
CYBER 2016 : The First International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

[7]
A. Hahn, A. Ashok, S. Sridhar, and M. Govindarasu, “Cyber-physical
security testbeds: Architecture, application, and evaluation for smart
grid,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 4, no. 2, June 2013, pp.
847–855.
[8]
Y. Yang et al., “Cybersecurity test-bed for IEC 61850 based smart
substations,” in 2015 IEEE Power & Energy Society General Meeting.
IEEE, July 2015, pp. 1–5.
[9]
R. Liu, C. Vellaithurai, S. S. Biswas, T. T. Gamage, and A. K.
Srivastava, “Analyzing the cyber-physical impact of cyber events on
the power grid,” IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 6, no. 5, Sep.
2015, pp. 2444–2453.
[10]
G. Koutsandria et al., “A real-time testbed environment for cyber-
physical security on the power grid,” in Proceedings of the First ACM
Workshop on Cyber-Physical Systems-Security and Privacy, ACM.
ACM Press, 2015, pp. 67–78.
[11]
J. Jarmakiewicz, K. Ma´slanka, and K. Parobczak, “Development of
cyber security testbed for critical infrastructure,” in 2015 International
Conference on Military Communications and Information Systems
(ICMCIS).
IEEE, May 2015, pp. 1–10.
[12]
J. Hong et al., “Cyber-physical security test bed: A platform
for enabling collaborative cyber defense methods,” 2015. [Online].
Available: http://taocui.info/docs/TestBed.pdf
[13]
W. Deng, W. Pei, Z. Shen, and Z. Zhao, “IEC 61850 based testbed for
micro-grid operation, control and protection,” in 2015 5th International
Conference on Electric Utility Deregulation and Restructuring and
Power Technologies (DRPT).
IEEE, Nov. 2015, pp. 2154–2159.
[14]
B. Chen, K. L. Butler-Purry, A. Goulart, and D. Kundur, “Implementing
a real-time cyber-physical system test bed in RTDS and OPNET,” in
North American Power Symposium (NAPS), 2014.
IEEE, Sep. 2014,
pp. 1–6.
[15]
M. A. H. Sadi, M. H. Ali, D. Dasgupta, and R. K. Abercrombie,
“OPNET/simulink based testbed for disturbance detection in the smart
grid,” in Proceedings of the 10th Annual Cyber and Information
Security Research Conference, ACM.
ACM Press, 2015, pp. 1–4.
[16]
D. Bian, M. Kuzlu, M. Pipattanasomporn, S. Rahman, and Y. Wu,
“Real-time co-simulation platform using OPAL-RT and OPNET for
analyzing smart grid performance,” in 2015 IEEE Power Energy Society
General Meeting.
IEEE, July 2015, pp. 1–5.
[17]
J. Nivethan, M. Papa, and P. Hawrylak, “Modeling and simulation
of electric power substation employing an IEC 61850 network,” in
Proceedings of the 9th Annual Cyber and Information Security Research
Conference, ser. CISR ’14, ACM.
ACM Press, 2014, pp. 89–92.
[18]
A. Razaq, B. Pranggono, H. Tianﬁeld, and H. Yue, “Simulating smart
grid: Co-simulation of power and communication network,” in Power
Engineering Conference (UPEC), 2015 50th International Universities.
IEEE, Sep. 2015, pp. 1–6.
[19]
K. Mets, J. A. Ojea, and C. Develder, “Combining power and com-
munication network simulation for cost-effective smart grid analysis,”
IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 16, no. 3, 2014, pp.
1771–1796.
[20]
IEC
61850-5:2003,
“Communication
networks
and
systems
in
substations - part 5: Communication requirements for functions and
device models,” ﬁrst Edition. [Online]. Available: https://webstore.iec.
ch/publication/20075
[21]
IEC 61850-7-3:2003, “Communication networks and systems in
substations - part 7-3: Basic communication structure for substation
and feeder equipment - common data classes,” ﬁrst Edition. [Online].
Available: https://webstore.iec.ch/publication/20075
[22]
IEC 61850-7-2:2003, “Communication networks and systems in
substations - part 7-2: Basic information and communication structure
- abstract communication service interface (ACSI),” ﬁrst Edition.
[Online]. Available: https://webstore.iec.ch/publication/20075
[23]
IEC 61850-8-1:2004, “Communication networks and systems in
substations - part 8-1: Speciﬁc communication service mapping
(SCSM)
-
mappings
to
MMS
(ISO
9506-1
and
ISO
9506-
2)
and
to
ISO/IEC
8802-3,”
ﬁrst
Edition.
[Online].
Available:
https://webstore.iec.ch/publication/20075
[24]
IEC 61850-9-2:2004, “Communication networks and systems in
substations - part 9-2: Speciﬁc communication service mapping
(SCSM) - sampled values over ISO/IEC 8802-3,” ﬁrst Edition.
[Online]. Available: https://webstore.iec.ch/publication/20075
[25]
IEC TS 62351-1:2007, “Power systems management and associated
information exchange - data and communications security - part 1:
Communication network and system security - introduction to security
issues.” [Online]. Available: https://webstore.iec.ch/publication/6903
[26]
R. Schlegel, S. Obermeier, and J. Schneider, “Assessing the security of
iec 62351,” in Proceedings of the 3rd International Symposium for ICS
& SCADA Cyber Security Research, ser. ICS-CSR ’15.
Swinton, UK,
UK: British Computer Society, 2015, pp. 11–19.
[27]
Michael Zillgith. libIEC61850 | open source library for IEC 61850.
[Online]. Available: http://www.libiec61850.com/libiec61850/ (2016)
[28]
Stefan Feuerhahn, Marco Mittelsdorf, Dirk Zimmermann, Albrecht
Schall, Philipp Fels. OpenIEC61850 | open source library for IEC
61850. [Online]. Available: https://www.openmuc.org/index.php?id=35
[29]
SIEMENS.
PSS R⃝E
-
Power
Transmission
System
Planning
Software.
[Online].
Available:
http://w3.siemens.com/
smartgrid/global/en/products-systems-solutions/software-solutions/
planning-data-management-software/planning-simulation/Pages/
PSS-E.aspx (2016)
[30]
RTDS Technologies. RTDS - Real Time Digital Simulation. [Online].
Available: https://www.rtds.com (2016)
[31]
OPAL-RT Technologies. OPAL-RT - PC/FPGA Based Real-Time
Digital Simulators. [Online]. Available: http://www.opal-rt.com (2016)
[32]
S. Siraj, A. Gupta, and R. Badgujar, “Network simulation tools survey,”
International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer and Commu-
nication Engineering, vol. 1, no. 4, 2012, pp. 199–206.
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-512-8
CYBER 2016 : The First International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

