 
Prediction of Underground Fire Behavior in South Sumatra 
Using Support Vector Machine with Adversarial Neural Network Support 
 
Ika Oktavianti Najib 
Center for Research on IoT, Data Science, and Resiliency 
Sriwijaya University, Computer Science Department 
Palembang, Indonesia 
inajib@cridr.org 
 
 
Abstract— Fires, which are the basic cause of smoke haze, can 
happen due to several reasons, such as the common practice of 
burning agricultural land, deforestation and delayed rainy 
seasons (e.g., unusual climatic conditions in the last 20 years, 
such as El Nino). For plantation companies, land burning is a 
quick and easy way of preparing land for planting new seeds. 
Fires that occur in peatlands (peat is a soil composed of partly 
decaying plant material formed within wetland areas), tend to 
be under the old soil, generate a great deal of smoke, and are 
difficult to extinguish. Forest crises and land fires occurring in 
South Sumatra typically begin in early July, and a fog condition 
typically lasts until mid-November. According to statistical 
data, in 2014-2015, 60% of burned land was peatland. In the 
event of fire, the Government strives to extinguish the fire on 
peatlands with water bombing, making canals, and others with 
a variety of local and international aid. However, the most 
effective way is prevention and/or early intervention. Early 
intervention is done by installation of aerial and subsurface 
sensors. Aerial sensors not only detect forest fires in one way, 
but also detect some additional elements, such as levels of ozone, 
carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, and other elements 
associated with forest fires. Subsurface sensors detect fires 
below the ground that were previously undetectable. The result 
of this research is to provide an enhanced baseline analysis for 
regions of the province of South Sumatra and to determine the 
probability of fire for particular areas as well as the escalation 
potential. 
Keywords—forest fire; peatland; smoke; haze; aerial sensor; 
subsurface sensor. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Forest fires have become a world phenomenon. The 
impacts from these forest fires are very dangerous, not only 
for the directly affected community, but also for the adjacent 
environments. As has just happened in Greece in July 2018, it 
was reported that this wildfire was the worst forest fire in over 
a decade that occurred in a small resort town near Athens. This 
tragedy killed at least 74 people, injured almost 200 people, 
and forced hundreds more to rush on to beaches and into the 
sea as the blaze devoured houses and cars [1].   
Elsewhere in the world, the illegal burning of forests and 
agricultural land, such as across Indonesia, has blanketed 
much of Southeast Asia in a dangerous haze, leading to one of 
the most severe regional (e.g., Association of Southeast Asian 
Nations or ASEAN) problems in years. The neighbors of 
Indonesia have complained. For example, Malaysian Prime 
Minister Najib Razak, has demanded that Indonesia take 
decisive action again those plantation companies generating 
the noxious smoke and ensuing haze [2]. The fires, which are 
the root cause of the haze, stem from a convergence of factors: 
the prevalent practice of burning agricultural land, 
deforestation, and a delayed rainy season (due to the most 
unusual climatic conditions in the past 20 years, such as El 
Nino). Unfortunately, it is difficult for the plantation 
companies to stop, for the burning of land is a quick and easy 
way to prepare soil for new seed. The fires, most of which are 
burning in peatlands, tend to produce long-lasting, smoky, 
massive underground blazes. The effects of these blazes are 
having widespread public health impacts, contributing to 
respiratory ailments and premature deaths throughout 
Southeast Asia [3].  
In Singapore, news websites post near-hourly updates on 
the danger of being outside and exposed to the pollution. 
Some stores in Singapore are providing free masks for 
children and elderly people. The National Environment 
Agency in Singapore stated that the haze has entered an 
“unhealthy range,” and to underscore this point, races for the 
swimming world cup – the Fédération Internationale de 
Natation[A] (FINA) (English: International Swimming 
Federation) Swimming World Cup 2017 in Singapore – were 
cancelled. A marathon in Malaysia was also cancelled, and all 
schools were closed as a result of the haze [4]. 
The South Sumatra forest and land fire crisis of 2015 
commenced at the beginning of July. There were some 
warning symptoms by way of an increase in hotspots; the 
number of hotspots increased until the haze had spread to 
areas well outside of South Sumatra. This haze condition 
lasted until mid-November. Based upon the information 
provided by the Citra Landsat satellite, forest and land fires 
affected almost 613 thousand hectares and nearly all the 
districts and cities within the areas of Musi Banyuasin, Ogan 
Komering Ilir (OKI), Ogan Ilir, and Banyuasin. The cause of 
these forest and land fires were principally human-induced, 
and the ensuing widespread unbridled fires were further 
fueled by the vastness of the peatland areas. As a statistic, 
between 2014 and 2015, 60% of these unbridled fires occurred 
within peatlands [5]. 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-683-5
CYBER 2018 : The Third International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
Due to the severity of forest fires in 2015, the President of 
Indonesia decided to establish a “presidential office” in the 
Ogan Komering Ilir (OKI) district, which is a region of South 
Sumatra. The OKI district had experienced more forest fires 
than any other region at that time. This “presidential office” 
served as an Emergency Operations Center for the President 
to personally conduct emergency fire-fighting operations. The 
President also created a task force and various governmental 
posts to serve as a dedicated force for the handling of forest 
fires. The task force could request water bombing and direct 
law enforcement to stop the perpetrators of forest fires. To the 
surrounding communities, the President articulated the 
impacts of the fires, such as the impact on the health of the 
people. Examples raised included Acute Respiratory Infection 
(ARI) [6]. 
In 2015, the Governor of South Sumatra asserted that there 
can be no further forest and land fires in the province of South 
Sumatra. In 2016, the Governor took steps to ensure that there 
would be a way to contend with these fires. Accordingly, he 
established a forest and land fire taskforce (Satgas Karhutlah). 
However, fires continued to occur throughout 2017. In 2017, 
an extended drought aggravated the situation [7]. 
In order to avoid similar events, the focus shifted to the 
effective pathway of forest fire prevention. In this research, 
sample data from the installation of various aerial sensors and 
subsurface sensors in particular regions will be utilized, and 
this data will be processed by various mechanisms, including 
an analytical engine.  
In this study, efforts that have been made by the 
government in dealing with forest fires will be explained in 
Section II. The research methodology will be presented in 
Section III, which consists of data mining and classification. 
Then, the data processing will be presented in Section IV, 
which explains how the data is processed using several 
methods, as well as delineating some types of sensors that can 
produce more complete and accurate data. Then, the 
conclusion and follow-up as to what future work will be done 
are summarized in Section V. 
II. 
GOVERNMENTAL STUDY AS A BASIS 
Much research has been done on forest fires in Indonesia, 
particularly regarding the prevention, as well as root causes of 
the forest fires themselves. Every year, the province of South 
Sumatra experiences wildfires; the impacts are classified as 
mild, moderate, to severe. To better understand these 
incidents, a governmental study was conducted by the South 
Sumatra Forest Fire Management Project (SSFFMP), and it 
examined the causes of forest fires occurring annually in 
South Sumatra [8]. 
This research was conducted for 5 years from 2003 to 
2007, involving many parties such as the National 
Government (Ministry of Forestry and Bappenas), and 
Provincial 
Governments 
(Forestry, 
Planning, 
and 
Environment 
Department), 
and 
District/Municipal 
Governments 
(Forestry, 
Planning, 
and 
Environment 
Department). The main objectives of this research were to 
reduce the level of forest fires and to cope with the impacts 
of forest and land fires. This included the environmental 
damage caused by smoke that also affects the territory of 
Indonesia as well as the territory of neighboring countries. 
Accordingly, this study was utilized as a launching pad upon 
which to build this paper. This paper builds upon the study 
by combining existing sensor data with that of other newly 
deployed sensors and utilizes Support Vector Machines 
(SVM) and an Adversarial Neural Network engine (a 
component of Analytics on Analytics or A2O) support to 
analyze that data. Our methodology is presented below. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
A. Data Mining 
Data mining is a process of automatically searching for 
useful information in large data storage [9]. Other terms often 
used include Knowledge Discovery [mining] in Database 
(KDD), knowledge extraction, data / pattern analysis, data 
archeology, data dredging, information harvesting, and 
business intelligence. Data mining techniques are used to 
examine large databases as a way to discover new and useful 
patterns. Data mining is also an integral part of KDD. The 
entire KDD process for raw data conversion into useful 
information is shown in Figure 1. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.    Process in KDD 
 
Input data can be stored in various formats, such as flat 
files, spreadsheets, or relational tables, and can occupy 
centralized or distributed data storage in many places. The 
purpose of pre-processing is to transform raw input data into 
an appropriate format for further analysis. The steps involved 
in pre-processing data include combining data from multiple 
sources, cleansing data to remove noise and duplicate 
observations, and selecting records and features relevant for 
data mining jobs. Because there are many ways of collecting 
and storing data, the prepositional data stages are a time-
consuming step in KDD. In addition, the data obtained from 
the newly deployed sensors constitute prodigious amounts of 
data, and the resolution desired added to this complexity. 
B. Classification 
Classification is the method in Data Mining that is most 
often used to solve real-world problems. This method 
examines the patterns of historical data (a collection of 
information - such as features, variables, features - on various 
characteristics of previously labeled items) with the aim of 
locating new objects (with previously unknown labels) into 
groups or classes, respectively. 
The two most common steps of classification prediction 
are the development / training model and the testing / 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-683-5
CYBER 2018 : The Third International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
deployment model. In the development model phase, a set of 
input data, including various actual class labels, will be 
trained. Once a model is “trained,” the model is tested against 
the remaining sample data for accuracy assessment and can 
ultimately be implemented for real use. In the case of the 
presented research, the results will be used for the relevant 
agencies dealing with forest fire prevention. Some of the 
factors used to assess the model are as follows [9]: 
 
• 
Predictive accuracy, the ability of the model to 
accurately predict class labels from new or never seen 
data; 
• 
Speed, as pertains to the generation and utilization of 
the model as well as the computational speed of the 
system and its constituent components; 
• 
Robustness (reliability), the ability of the model to 
make predictions fairly accurately, albeit the data may 
be “noisy” or data may have missing values or be 
incorrect. 
• 
Scalability, the ability to efficiently model predictions 
with considerable amounts of data; 
• 
Interpretability, the level of understanding and insight 
provided by the model (e.g., how and/or whether the 
model 
makes 
inferences 
about 
a 
particular 
prediction). 
IV. 
DATA PROCESSING 
 
After obtaining the data from the sensor installation, data 
processing was performed. Data processing aims to facilitate 
the data analysis. Data analysis techniques were of two types, 
namely, (1) descriptive analysis, and (2) inferential analysis. 
The descriptive analysis of mean, median, mode, and 
standard deviation was operationalized by using an Access 
database along with Structured Query Language (SQL) 
queries. The inferential analysis was based upon linear 
regression with two or more independent variables (i.e. a 
statistical method to determine the relationship of a variable 
with other variables). In this case, the linear regression test 
was performed using statistical software to ascertain the 
relationship between the solution of a constraint of particular 
field with other fields. 
A. Inferential Analysis - Regression 
Inferential analysis is performed to find the relationship 
between the variables and then make a determination 
regarding these variables. The inferential analysis used was 
linear regression with two or more independent variables, 
with the calculation analysis performed via statistical 
software. 
The linear regression test of two or more independent 
variables was used to predict a dependent variable Y based 
on two or more independent variables (X1, X2, and X3) in a 
linear equation: 
 
       Y= a + b1X1 + b2 X2 + b3X3                               (1) 
     
Where: 
Y  
 
= dependent variable 
X1, X2, X3 
= independent variables 
a  
 
= constants 
b1, b2, b3  
= regression coefficients 
 
In the regression, there are several tests that must be done 
which are autocorrelation test, collinearity test, coefficient 
test, 
hypothesis 
test, 
and 
significance 
test. 
The 
autocorrelation test was performed by the Durbin-Watson 
(DW) test as follows [10]: 
 
• 
Positive Autocorrelation Detection: 
If d < dL, there is a positive autocorrelation, 
If d > dU, there is no positive autocorrelation, 
If dL < d < dU, the test is inconclusive or cannot be 
concluded. 
• 
Negative Autocorrelation Detection: 
If (4 - d) < dL, there is a negative autocorrelation,  
If (4 - d) > dU, there is no negative autocorrelation, 
If dL < (4 - d) < dU, the test is inconclusive or 
cannot be concluded. 
 
Medium collinearity test is a test that shows whether there 
is a strong correlation between the independent variables. The 
method of variable selection on linear regression used the 
stepwise method. With regards to the stepwise method, for 
each stage, the independent variable that has the strongest 
correlation with the dependent variable is included in the 
model first. It is followed by other variables by testing 
whether the first variable entered is still maintained in the 
model. If the first variable probability is still significant in the 
model, then the variable is applied. If the probability of the 
first variable is not significant anymore, then the variable is 
excluded from the analysis. This process stops when there is 
no longer any independent variable that must be included or 
excluded from the equation. Furthermore, the regression 
equation is tested to determine whether the regression 
equation is valid or not. 
B. Support Vector Machine  
Support Vector Machine (SVM) uses a linear model to 
find the best hyperplane as a separator of two classes on a 
vector input. The best hyperplane can be determined by 
calculating the hyperplane margin value, which is the 
distance between hyperplane and the nearest pattern of each 
class. The pattern closest to the maximum margin of 
hyperplane is called a support vector. Both classes -1 and +1 
and hyperplane dimension d are defined as: 
 
 𝑤⃗⃗ ∙ 𝑥 ⃗⃗⃗ + 𝑏 = 0 
         
 
      (2) 
 
Pattern 𝑥𝑖⃗⃗⃗  for negative sample (-1) and positive (+1) can then 
be formulated: 
 
                             𝑤⃗⃗ ∙ 𝑥 ⃗⃗⃗ + 𝑏 ≤ −1  
 
      (3) 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-683-5
CYBER 2018 : The Third International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
 
                              𝑤
⃗⃗⃗⃗⃗ ∙ 𝑥 ⃗⃗⃗ + 𝑏 ≥ +1  
 
      (4) 
 
Quadratic programming is used to find the greatest margin 
value, i.e.  
1
‖𝑤⃗⃗ ‖  by finding the minimal point: 
 
𝑚𝑖𝑛
𝑤⃗⃗ 𝜏(𝑤) =
1
2 ‖𝑤⃗⃗ ‖2 
     
      (5) 
 
Using the Lagrange multiplier, the primal form of quadratic 
programming can be transformed into a dual form with the 
following equation: 
 
𝐿(𝑤⃗⃗ , 𝑏, 𝛼) =
1
2 ‖𝑤⃗⃗ ‖2 − ∑
𝛼𝑖(𝑦𝑖((
𝑙
𝑖=1
𝑥𝑖⃗⃗⃗ ∙ 𝑤⃗⃗ + 𝑏) − 1)       (6) 
 
Where (i = 1,2, ..., l) and αi are Lagrange multipliers that are 
either 0 or positive. The optimal value of the above equation 
can be calculated by minimizing L against 𝑤⃗⃗  and maximizing 
L against αi. Data correlated with a positive αi is called a 
support vector. 
 
The SVM concept can be seen in Figure 2, which uses the 
principle of Structural Risk Minimization (SRM) with the 
aim of finding the best hyperplane that separates two classes 
within the input space. 
 
 
Figure 2. Support Vector Machine Concept 
 
C. Prediction of Underground Fire Behavior System  
Generally, the prototype system design predicts 
underground fire behavior by estimating the potential rate of 
fire explosion, fuel consumption, fire intensity, and fire 
description. With the help of an elliptical fire growth model, 
a comprehensive estimate of the fire, via fire perimeter, the 
growth rate of fire, the behavior of the wing of fire, as well 
as the rear of the fire. The flowchart is shown in Figure 3.  
 
 
 
Figure 3. Research Flowchart 
 
 
The system was modularized into several components, which 
will be described as follows: Japan International Cooperation 
Agency (JICA) Sensors, 3D Printed (3DP) sensors, and the 
the Analytics on Analytics (A2O) system. 
a. JICA Sensors 
The sensors installed by JICA are categorized as a 
waterlogger or “Automatic Waterlogger Telemetry” sensors 
with the SESAME II brand, because the main function of this 
particular sensor is to monitor the condition of the ground 
water level in the peat area, although in its use, this tool also 
consisted of several other devices used to collect 
information/other parameters besides ground water level, 
namely the level of drought, soil surface, rainfall, and others.  
Automatic 
Waterlogger 
Telemetry 
JICA 
Sensors 
installed by the Regional Peat Restoration Team consisted of 
2 phases. The first phase was carried out in December 2016 
with 4 locations, and the second phase was carried out in June 
2017 with 6 locations. Once installed, the team started data 
collection, but the data obtained was not optimal because of 
problems with telephone lines which have an unstable 
communication. 
This 
phenomenon 
of 
unstable 
communications is not only happening in South Sumatra, but 
also in other various regions of Indonesia and in other 
ASEAN countries [11]. 
Currently, the JICA sensors are deployed, as shown in 
Figure 4. 
 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-683-5
CYBER 2018 : The Third International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
 
 
Figure 4. JICA Sensor Deployment [12] 
 
The following locations and coordinates of several 
sensors are distributed in South Sumatra Province, as shown 
in Table 1. 
 
TABLE 1. LOCATION AND COORDINATE POINT OF JICA 
SENSORS IN SOUTH SUMATRA [13] 
 
 
 
In June 2018, the team conducted checks and evaluations 
of the installed sensors. It turned out that from the ten sensors 
that had been installed, 2 sensors were lost/stolen. This 
resulted in a new destination within the data ⎯ locations that 
should be monitored but are not actually monitored. The form 
of the sensor installed can be seen in Figure 5 below. The 
sensor features a safety fence to avoid physical interference 
from the outside but was not always successful against theft. 
 
 
 
Figure 5. JICA Sensor Deployment 
 
From the tenth location of the sensor, data was obtained 
from sensors located in the Village of Cinta Jaya (Department 
Sepucuk), District Pedamaran, Ogan Komering Ilir and was 
labelled with the name of the sensor device “OKI 1.” The 
sensor measures the three main components of the 
temperature, ground water level and rainfall. The collection 
of sample data is based on the consideration that during July 
2018, there were recorded peatland fires involving 105 
hectares in the area [14], which were part of the company’s 
land. Data samples can be seen in Table 2, namely as many 
as 10 samples from the total number of 525 data from each 
component. 
 
TABLE 2. DATA SAMPLE FROM SENSOR OKI 1 
JULY 11th, 2018 – JULY 20th, 2018 [15] 
 
 
 
Low resolution remote sensing data has been widely used 
to monitor forest fires such as hotspot detection and burnt 
land scar mapping. In a study conducted by Indonesian 
National Institute of Aeronautics and Space (Lembaga 
Penerbangan dan Antariksa Nasional or LAPAN), the 
determination of the temperature threshold for hotspot 
detection was carried out using Landsat-8 TIRS (Thermal 
Infrared Sensor) data with a spatial resolution of 100 m was 
utilized so as to increase the accuracy of information with the 
objective of identifying the source of fire smoke. From these 
studies, obtained temperature limits that can be said to be 
potentially a fire are in the range of ≥43o C [16]. 
From the existing sample data, temperatures that 
exceeded the established threshold for those sensors at the 
Sepucuk area were not detected. At that time, peatland fires 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-683-5
CYBER 2018 : The Third International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
were occurring, which required serious and rapid handling by 
the 
firefighting 
team. 
However, 
given 
the 
sensor 
specifications, the sensor range was limited to 5-10 km, 
which was insufficient to reach the area where the fire 
occurred. 
The other weakness of this particular sensor type is that it 
cannot automatically analyze whether the area has the 
potential for fire or not. So, the government officers only 
monitor based upon existing data without being able to 
ascertain any fire pattern. In the case of underground fires / 
peatland fires, this sensor cannot be used optimally. 
b. 3DP Sensors 
The JICA Sensors are spread out throughout the province 
of South Sumatra, and the parameters collected are sparse. 
For this reason, 3DP Sensors, such as based upon those that 
were produced by South Sumatra government officials via 
the Joint Weather Sensor Team (JWST) for the 2018 Asian 
Games have great potential. After all, these sensors can 
collect many parameters, such as shown in Figure 6 and 7 
below. 
The 3DP Sensors assembled by the JWST are supported 
by the Center for Research on IoT, Data Science, and 
Resiliency (CRIDR) team; each sensor contains a cellular 
SIM card for the required Internet connectivity related to data 
collection. This avoided the JICA experienced problem of 
unstable telephones lines. 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Exemplar Components aboard 3DP Sensors 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Exemplar Components aboard 3DP Sensors 
c. Analytics on Analytics (A2O) System 
Among other modules of the A2O system, there is a Deep 
Learning module, which is based upon a modified [Deep 
Convolutional] Generative Adversarial Network (GAN). 
Each GAN is comprised of two neural networks, which are 
pitted again each other. This results in the “adversarial” 
aspect of an unsupervised machine learning paradigm. 
Unsupervised machine learning refers to the task of inferring 
a function that describes the structure of “unlabeled” data or 
data that has not been classified or categorized. The 
generative aspect is best described by contrasting it to a 
discriminative aspect. Whereas discriminative models 
endeavor to learn the boundary between classes (given the 
labels y and features x, the formulation p(y|x) equates to “the 
probability of y given x”), generative models endeavor to 
model the distribution of individual classes (the focus is on 
“how you get x,” and the formulation p(x|y) equates to 
“probability of x given y” or the probability of features given 
a class). GANs are well known for being able to, for example, 
find the roads on an aerial map, fill in the missing details of 
an image (up-sampling, given the edges), and construct an 
image, which postulates how a person might look when they 
are older. A2O utilizes a stacked GANS; hence the described 
paradigm is that of Stacked Generative Adversarial Network 
(SGAN) for the Deep Learning module of A2O. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
The result of this research was to provide an enhanced 
baseline analysis for regions of the Province of South 
Sumatra and determine the potentiality of fire for particular 
areas as well as their escalation potential. This was based 
upon the requisite characteristics for accelerating fire spread 
patterns within posited predetermined limits. However, the 
data from the available JICA sensors was too sparse, and 
more sensors are needed. Currently, the sparse data does not 
provide macro-trends or patterns. This is related to the 
number of constituent components of the JICA sensors and 
the current resolution of the constituent components. To 
produce a better assessment, more sensors are needed. As one 
line of effort, the utilization of 3DP sensors has potential, as 
they can be scaled in terms of volume (as well as desired add-
on components) at very low cost. The combination of both 
JICA and CRIDR 3DP would likely provide greater context 
for the analytical engines; A2O’s Deep Learning module was 
able to glean quite interesting and discerning trends for the 
locales where the sensors were located, but the few sensors 
and the far distances among the sensors were problematic.  
The location of the sensor installations greatly affected the 
data generated. Sensor locations play a critical role in many 
sensor network applications, such as environment monitoring 
and target tracking. Considering the cyber aspect, simplistic 
attack vectors, such as Denial of Service (DOS) can render 
the sensor inoperable. In essence, the location estimation at 
sensor nodes can be readily subverted and sensor networks 
can be readily taken off-line. For example, cyber-attackers 
may provide incorrect location references by replaying the 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-683-5
CYBER 2018 : The Third International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
beacon packets intercepted in different locations. Moreover, 
an attacker may compromise a beacon node and distribute 
malicious location references by spoofing the location or 
manipulating the beacon signals. In either case, non-beacon 
nodes will determine their locations incorrectly [17]. 
Based on the above, the sensors currently in South Sumatra 
Province have not been able to produce the requisite data so 
as to be able to determine an accurate pattern of fire 
distribution. Predictions of forest fires cannot be done 
precisely because of the many weaknesses pertaining to the 
quality of components and data, so it cannot be determined 
whether the monitored areas pose fire potential or not. 
Sensors of appropriate quantity and quality will greatly assist 
South Sumatera province as pertains to forest fires. 
After this research, it is expected that more high-quality 
sensors will be installed in South Sumatra and a system that 
can provide outcall notification to the control room and first 
responder smartphones will be implemented. This is aimed at 
preventing and handling forest fires more effectively and 
efficiently. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is supported by the Center for Research on 
IoT, Data Science, and Resiliency (CRIDR), an initiative of 
Decision Engineering Analysis Laboratory (DEAL) and The 
International Center for Theoretical Physics (ICTP), a United 
Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural (UNESCO) 
Category 1 Institution. 
The source of data in this research is derived from a 
cooperation between the Center for Research on IoT, Data 
Science, and Resiliency (CRIDR) and the South Sumatra 
Provincial Government via 3D Printed Sensors (3DP) as well 
as cooperation assistance between JICA (Japan International 
Cooperation Agency) and the South Sumatera Provincial 
Government, namely the installation of sensors at specific 
locations within South Sumatra that have the potential of 
forest fires. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] H. Smith, S. Jones, and M. Farrer, “Greece Wildfires: Scores 
Dead as Holiday Resort Devastated,” The Guardian, July 24th, 
2018. 
[2] Holmes, Oliver, “Forest Fires in Indonesia Choke Much of 
South-East Asia,” The Guardian, 5th October 2015, [accessed 
11th 
November 
2018, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/05/fore
st-fires-in-indonesia-choke-much-of-south-east-asia>. 
[3] Tamara L. Sheldon and Chandini Sankaran, “Transboundary 
Pollution in Southeast Asia: Welfare and Avoidance Costs in 
Singapore from the Forest Burning in Indonesia,” Department 
of Economics, University of South Carolina, 5th December 
2016. 
[4] Holmes, Oliver, “Forest Fires in Indonesia Choke Much of 
South-East Asia,” The Guardian, 5th October 2015, [accessed 
11th 
November 
2018], 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/05/fore
st-fires-in-indonesia-choke-much-of-south-east-asia>. 
[5] Nurhasim, Ahmad, “Smoke Disaster, 612 Thousand Hectares 
of Forests Burn in South Sumatra,” Tempo, 30th November 
2015, 
[accessed 
23th 
October 
2018],  
<https://nasional.tempo.co/read/723445/bencana-asap-612-
ribu-hektare-hutan-terbakar-di-sumatera-
selatan#DkYo0M3P4VRqUv8f.99>. 
[6] Nugroho and Bagus Prihantoro, “Review of Forest Fires, 
President Jokowi Attends the Land Line from Palembang,” 
Detik, 6th September 2015, [accessed 12th October 2018], 
<http://news.detik.com/berita/3011142/tinjau-kebakaran-
hutan-presiden-jokowi-tempuh-jalur-darat-dari-palembang>. 
[7] Aries, Maspril. “US Consul Offers Cooperation to the 
Governor of South Sumatra,” Republika, 10th February 2017, 
[accessed 
7th 
October 
2018], 
<http://nasional.republika.co.id/berita/nasional/daerah/17/02/1
0/ol6166377-konsul-as-tawarkan-kerja-sama-ke-gubernur-
sumsel.> 
[8] FFPCP, “Projects’s Final Workshop for Phase 1, 24-25 
February 1998 in Palembang, Input Papers form Project 
Experts. Ministry of Forestry and European Union, European 
Commission. NRI, BCEOM Indonesia, CIRAD Forest and 
SCOT Conseil,” 1998. 
[9] Santosa, Budi, “Applied Data Mining with Matlab,” 2007. 
[10] Jean-Marie, Dufour and Marcel G. Dagenais, “Durbin_watson 
Tests For Serial Correlation in Regressions with Missing 
Observations,” Journal of Econometrics no. 27, pp. 371-381. 
North-Holland, 1985. 
[11] Japan Forest Technology Association, Nippon Koei Co.Ltd, 
“Data Collection Survey on Forest and Peatland Fire Control 
and Peatland Restoration in Indonesia Final Report,” pp. 2-22-
2-24, October 2007. 
[12] Tarigan, Muara Laut, Peat Restoration Team, South Sumatra 
Provincial Government, 2018, unpublished. 
[13] Tarigan, Muara Laut, Peat Restoration Team, South Sumatra 
Provincial Government, 2018, unpublished. 
[14] Aji YK Putra and Reni Susanto, “305 hectares of land in OKI 
were burning badly”, Kompas. 18th July 2018. 
[15] Tarigan, 
Muara 
Laut, 
“SESAME_brg_oki_1.” 
Peat 
Restoration Agency, South Sumatra Provincial Government, 
2018, https://web.sesame-system.com/portal, unpublished. 
[16] Kustiyo and Ratih Dewanti Dimyati, “Determination of the 
Temperature Threshold for the Detection of Smoke Source for 
Forest / Land Fires from Landsat-8 Data (Case Study of the 
Kalimantan P. Region in the 2015 Spring Lake),” Prosiding 
Seminar Nasional Penginderaan Jauh 2015. LAPAN:Bogor, 
pp.755-763, 2015.  
[17] T. Kavitha, and D. Sridharan, “Security Vulnerabilities In 
Wireless Sensor Networks: A Survey,” Journal of Information 
Assurance and Security, no. 5, pp. 31-44, 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-683-5
CYBER 2018 : The Third International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

