Integrating Autonomous Vehicle Safety and Security
Giedre Sabaliauskaite
Centre for Research in Cyber Security (iTrust)
Singapore University of Technology and Design
Singapore 487372
Email: giedre@sutd.edu.sg
Jin Cui
Centre for Research in Cyber Security (iTrust)
Singapore University of Technology and Design
Singapore 487372
Email: jin_cui@sutd.edu.sg
Abstract—Safety and security are two inter-dependent key prop-
erties of autonomous vehicles. They are aimed at protecting the
vehicles from accidental failures and intentional attacks, which
could lead to injuries and loss of lives. The selection of safety and
security countermeasures for autonomous vehicles depends on the
driving automation levels, deﬁned by the international standard
SAE J3016. However, current vehicle safety standards ISO 26262
do not take the driving automation levels into consideration. We
propose an approach for integrating autonomous vehicle safety
and security processes, which is compliant with the international
standards SAE J3016, SAE J3061, and ISO 26262, and which
considers driving automation levels. It uses the Six-Step Model
as a backbone for achieving integration and alignment among
safety and security processes and artefacts. The Six-Step Model
incorporates six hierarchies of autonomous vehicles, namely,
functions, structure, failures, attack, safety countermeasures, and
security countermeasures. It ensures the consistency among these
hierarchies throughout the entire autonomous vehicle’s life-cycle.
Keywords–Autonomous vehicle; safety; security; ISO 26262;
SAE J3016; SAE J3061; Six-Step Model; attack tree; fault tree.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Autonomous Vehicles (AVs), the self-driving vehicles,
are safety-critical Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) – complex
engineering systems, which integrate embedded computing
technology into physical phenomena. Safety and security are
two key properties of CPSs, which share the same goal –
protecting the system from undesirable events: failures (safety)
and intentional attacks (security) [1].
Ensuring the safety of autonomous vehicles, i.e., reducing
the number of trafﬁc crashes to prevent injuries and save lives,
is a top priority in autonomous vehicle development. Safety
and security are interdependent (e.g., security attacks can cause
safety failures, or security countermeasures may weaken CPS
safety and vice versa), therefore they have to be aligned in the
early system development phases to ensure the required level
of protection [1][2].
Although AVs could be considered to be smaller and/or
less complex systems as compared to other CPSs, such as,
e.g., power plants or water treatment systems, they face some
unique challenges, which have to be taken into consideration
when analyzing their safety and security.
Firstly, there are six different levels of driving automation
ranging from no driving automation (level 0) to full driving
automation (level 5), as described by the international standard
SAE J3016 [3]. The levels describe who (human driver or
automated system) performs the driving tasks and monitors the
driving environments under certain environmental conditions.
Thus, AV safety and security depend on the driving automation
levels and the environmental conditions.
Secondly, the AV domain is relatively new, and therefore,
there are no international standards for AV safety and secu-
rity yet. Currently, the ISO 26262 standard, which describes
functional safety of road vehicles, is being used for AV safety
analysis [4]. However, it is not sufﬁcient for AVs, as argued
in [5][6]. ISO 26262 addresses the safety of each function, or
item, of the vehicle separately, since the driver is responsible
for everything what falls outside the item. However, in AV,
it is necessary to ensure safety at all times, especially at the
high automation levels, when there is no driver in the vehicle
[5]. Thus, hazard analysis of AVs should have the broader
scope and should analyze AVs functions together. Warg et al.
proposed an approach to extend ISO 26262 and to add generic
operational situation and hazard trees for comprehensive AV
safety analysis [5].
To address vehicle security needs, the SAE J3061 standard
has been developed [7]. It deﬁnes cyber-security lifecycle of
cyber-physical vehicle systems. However, the security lifecy-
cle, deﬁned in SAE J3061, is analogous to the vehicle safety
lifecycle described in ISO 26262, and therefore, it is not
sufﬁcient for AV cyber-security analysis.
How can we analyze AV safety and security throughout its
entire life-cycle in a consistent way, and provide required level
of protection?
In our previous work, we proposed a Six-Step Model for
modeling and analysis of CPS safety and security [8][9].
It incorporates six dimensions (hierarchies) of CPS, namely,
functions, structure, failures, safety countermeasures, cyber-
attacks, and security countermeasures. Furthermore, it uses
relationship matrices to model inter-dependencies between
these dimensions. The Six-Step Model enables comprehensive
analysis of CPS safety and security, as it utilizes system
functions and structure as a knowledge base for understanding
the effect of failures and attacks on the system.
In this paper, we propose an approach for AV safety and
security analysis, which uses the Six-Step Model as a backbone
for integrating and maintaining consistency among safety and
security processes and artefacts. The Six-Step Model consol-
idated safety and security artefacts, developed throughout the
entire AV life-cycle. The proposed approach is compliant with
the international standards SAE J3016, SAE J3061, and ISO
26262.
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-605-7
CYBER 2017 : The Second International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

The remainder of this paper is structured as follows.
Section II describes preliminaries. The proposed approach is
explained in Section III, and a Six-Step Model example is
included in Section IV. Finally, Section V concludes the paper
and describes our future work.
II.
PRELIMINARIES
A. Autonomous Vehicles’ Main Terms and Deﬁnitions
The real-time operational and tactical functions required
to operate the vehicle in on-road trafﬁc include lateral and
longitudinal vehicle motion control, monitoring the driving
environment, object and event response execution, maneuver
planning, and enhancing conspicuity via lighting, signaling,
etc. [3]. These functions are collectively called the Dynamic
Driving Task (DDT) [3]. AVs perform entire or part of DDT
depending of their automation level.
SAE International (SAE) has developed an international
standard, SAE J3016 [3], to describe various levels of vehicle
automation. The standard has been widely adopted by inter-
national organizations, such as the National Highway Trafﬁc
Safety Administration (NHTSA) [10].
There are six driving automation levels [3][10]:
•
Level 0 – the human driver performs entire DDT.
•
Level 1 – an automated system on the vehicle can
assist the human driver to perform either the lateral or
the longitudinal vehicle motion, while driver monitors
the driving environment and performs the rest of DDT.
•
Level 2 – an automated system performs the lateral
and the longitudinal vehicle motion, while driver mon-
itors the driving environment and performs the rest of
DDT.
•
Level 3 – an automated system can perform entire
DDT, but the human driver must be ready to take back
control when the automated system requests.
•
Level 4 – there is no human driver; an automated sys-
tem conducts the entire DDT, but it can operate only
in certain environments and under certain conditions.
•
Level 5 – there is no human driver; an automated
system performs entire DDT in all environments and
under all conditions that a human driver could perform
them.
Level 3-5 vehicles are called the highly automated ve-
hicles, since their automated systems (not a human driver)
are responsible for monitoring the driving environment [10].
Furthermore, level 1-4 vehicles are designed to operate only in
certain environments and under certain conditions, while level
5 vehicles - in all environments and under all conditions.
AV functions can be grouped into three main categories:
perception (perception of the external environment/context
in which vehicle operates), decision & control (decisions
and control of vehicle motion, with respect to the external
environment/context that is perceived), and vehicle platform
manipulation (sensing, control and actuation of the vehicle,
with the intention of achieving desired motion) [11][12]. A
standard for describing AV functions and functional interfaces,
SAE J3131, is currently under development.
AV structural architecture consists of two main systems:
a) cognitive driving intelligence, which implements perception
and decision & control functions, and b) vehicle platform,
which is responsible for vehicle platform manipulation [11].
Each system consists of components, which belong to four ma-
jor groups: hardware, software, communication, and human-
machine interface [12][13].
B. A Six-Step Model
In our earlier work [8][9], we proposed a Six-Step Model
to enable comprehensive CPS safety and security analysis (see
Figure 1) . The model is constructed using the following six
steps:
1)
The ﬁrst step is aimed at modeling the functional
hierarchy of the system. The functions are deﬁned us-
ing the Goal Tree (GT), which is constructed starting
with the goal (functional objective) and then deﬁning
functions and sub-functions, needed for achieving this
goal. A relationship matrix, F-F, is used to deﬁne the
relationships between functions, which can be high,
medium, low, or very low.
2)
In the second step, system’s structural hierarchy is de-
ﬁned using the Success Tree (ST) to describe system’s
structure as a collection of sub-systems and units.
Furthermore, the relationships between structure and
functions are deﬁned using a relationship matrix S-F,
as shown in Figure 1.
3)
The third step is focused on safety hazard analysis.
In this step, system’s failures are identiﬁed and added
to the model. In addition, the relationships between
failures, system structure and functions are identiﬁed,
and the corresponding relationship matrices – B-B,
B-S, and B-F – are added to the model.
4)
The fourth step focuses on security threat analysis.
In this step, attacks are identiﬁed and added to
the model along with the relationship matrices to
describe relationships between attacks, failures, struc-
ture and functions. Relationship matrix A-B (attacks
– failures) is used to determine which failures could
be triggered by a successful attack. In the original
version of the Six-Step Model [9], safety countermea-
sures have been identiﬁed in step 4, while attacks - in
step 5. However, we decided to switch the places of
these two steps in order to tackle system vulnerability
(hazard and threat) analysis ﬁrst, before moving to the
countermeasure selection, as safety countermeasures
can be used to detect and mitigate both the failures
and the attacks. Thus, it is convenient to have attack
identiﬁed before designing safety countermeasures.
5)
In the ﬁfth step, safety countermeasures are added
to the model and their relationships are identiﬁed.
Matrices X-A and X-B show the coverage of attacks
and failures by safety countermeasures, where white
rhombus indicates that the countermeasure provides
low protection from attack/failure; gray rhombus -
medium protection; black rhombus - full protection
(see Figure 1).
6)
Finally, in the last step, security countermeasures
are added to the model and their relationships are
established. Similarly to matrices X-A and X-B from
the previous step, two new matrices Z-A and Z-
B are added to deﬁne the coverage of attacks and
failures by security countermeasures. The security
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-605-7
CYBER 2017 : The Second International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

(1) Functions (F)
F1
F2
F3
(2) Structure (S)
S1
S2
S3
(3) Failures  (B)
B1
B2
B3
(5) Safety counter-
measures (X)
X1
X2
X3
(4) Attacks (A)
(6) Security 
counter-
measures (Z)
Caption:
Attack/failure 
coverage by 
countermeasures:
full
partial/ medium
partial/ low
nil
Relationship:
high
medium
low
nil/ very low
Relationship 
matrix:
Safety and security
countermeasure inter-
dependencies:
reinforcement
antagonism
independence
+
-
+
-
conditional 
dependency
x
A1
A2
A3
Z1
Z2
Z3
S-F
B-S
B-F
A-B
A-S
A-F
X-B
X-S
X-F
X-A
Z-B
Z-S
Z-F
Z-A
Z-X
F-F
S-S
B-B
A-A
X-X
Z-Z
NEW
x
Figure 1. The Six-Step Model.
countermeasures, added in this step, could be used
to protect the system from attacks and failures, not
covered by the safety countermeasures. Furthermore,
matrix Z-X is used to capture the inter-dependencies
between safety and security countermeasures, such as
reinforcement, antagonism, conditional dependency,
and independence, as deﬁned in [14].
After completion of steps 5 and 6, it is important to analyze
if there were any changes made to system’s structure, as
some countermeasures might require the use of additional
components, e.g., sensors or controllers. If the changes occur, it
is necessary to return to the step 2 to add the new components,
and then repeat steps 3-6.
The Six-Step Model, constructed throughout steps 1-6, in-
terconnects six hierarchies of the systems (functions, structure,
failures, attacks, and safety and security countermeasures) by
forming a hexagon-shaped structure of their relationships, as
shown in Figure 2. The relationships help to ensure alignment
between these hierarchies. The hierarchies and relationships
have to be maintained throughout the entire system’s life-cycle
to sustain their consistency and completeness.
C. AV Safety Analysis
The ISO 26262 standard [4] deﬁnes functional safety for
automotive equipment applicable throughout the life-cycle of
all automotive Electronic and Electrical (E/E) safety-related
systems. It aims to address possible hazards caused by the mal-
functioning behavior E/E systems. The safety process consists
of several phases, such as concept, product development, and
(1)
Functions
(2)
Structure
(3)
Failures
(4)
Attacks
(5) Safety
Countermeasures
(6) Security
Countermeasures
Figure 2. Relationships among hierarchies of the Six-Step Model.
production, operation, service and decommissioning. Hazard
Analysis and Risk Assessment (HARA) is performed during
the concept phase, where hazardous events, safety risks and
goals are identiﬁed. These goals are further reﬁned into the
safety requirements during the product development phase, and
the safety countermeasures are designed and implemented.
ISO 26262 requires the presence of the human driver inside
the vehicle to deal with the unexpected environments and
conditions [5]. In high automation AVs, where no human driver
is present, it is important to consider all driving environments
and conditions. In [5], Warg et al. proposed a AV hazard
analysis method, which extends vehicle safety analysis process
deﬁned by ISO 26262 [4]. It uses operational situation and
hazard trees as a knowledge base of potential situations and
hazards to investigate.
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-605-7
CYBER 2017 : The Second International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

Operational 
situation
Vehicle
Physical 
environment
Surroundings
Operational 
mode
Speed
Road 
surface
Weather
Obstacles
Road type
Road layout
Automatic drive
Manual drive
Low
High
Vehicle
Animal
Highway
Urban road
Rural road
Figure 3. Generic situation tree example [5].
Figure 3 shows an example of an AV operational situation
tree, borrowed from [5]. Three main aspects (tree leaves)
are identiﬁed, namely, vehicle, physical environment, and
surroundings, which a further reﬁned into properties, e.g.,
speed is decomposed into high and low speed (see Figure 3).
Operational situations for use in the hazard analysis are
composed by selecting and combining leaves from the tree.
If no leaf is selected from a particular aspect, the situation is
considered to be valid for all properties of that aspect. For level
5 vehicle, all operational situations have to be analyzed, while
for level 1-4 vehicle – only a subset of operational situations,
which includes the environment and driving conditions the AV
is designed to operate in. Figure 3 shows an example of a high-
level situation tree, which is further reﬁned throughout safety
lifecycle, as the new situations are identiﬁed.
The hazard tree is constructed similarly to the situation
tree. Two main levels of hazards are identiﬁed: tactical and
operative. Tactical hazard include foreseeable tactical mistakes,
while operative hazards - hazard related to situation awareness,
vehicle control, and environment. Each leaf of the tree repre-
sents a possible hazard that can be included in hazard analysis
[5].
Once the situation and the hazard trees are completed, each
hazard from the hazard tree is combined with each operational
situation from the situation tree to form hazardous events.
Subsequently, the risk assessment of these events is performed
and an Automotive Safety Integrity Level (ASIL) is assigned.
The risk assessment has to be updated any time a new or
modiﬁed situations/hazards are added to the situation/hazard
trees [5].
Hazardous events can be further reﬁned using the Fault
Tree analysis [13] in order to identify the conditions and events
that could lead to these events. Fault tree reﬁnes top level
hazardous event into intermediate events and basic events,
which are interconnected by AND and OR logical operators.
Bhavsar et al. [13] describe two fault trees for AVs: fault
tree of failures related to vehicular components, and fault
tree considering failures related to transportation infrastructure
components. Safety risks are deﬁned based on the results of the
hazard and failure analysis, which are then used for deﬁning
AV safety requirements and, subsequently, developing safety
countermeasures.
D. AV Security Analysis
SAE J3061 is a vehicle cyber-security standard, which was
developed using the ISO 26262 standard as a base. Thus,
both standards consist of similar phases. Security process,
deﬁned by SAE J3061, includes concept, product development,
and production & operation phases. Threat Analysis and Risk
Assessment (TARA) is performed during the concept phase,
where threats, security risks, and security goals are deﬁned.
In the product development phase, security requirements are
deﬁned based on the security goals, and the security counter-
measures are developed.
Attack tree analysis [7][15] is often used for performing
TARA. It helps to determine the potential paths that an attacker
could take to lead to the top level threat [7]. An attack tree is a
graph, where the nodes represent attack events, and the edges
- attack paths through system, which could be connected using
AND and OR gates.
Behavior diagrams, such as Data-Flow Diagrams (DFD)
[16] and Information-Flow Diagrams (IFD) [9] could be used
for identifying the attacks to be included in attack trees
analysis. DFDs include elements, such as processes, data ﬂows,
and data store, and are used to model data ﬂows between soft-
ware components. IFDs include units and information ﬂows
between them, and could be used to model information ﬂows
between software and hardware components, such as actuators,
controllers, sensors, etc. In [9], we proposed a method for
generating IFDs using the Six-Step model in order to identify
possible attacks on CPSs.
III.
INTEGRATED AUTONOMOUS VEHICLE SAFETY AND
SECURITY ANALYSIS APPROACH
This section proposes an approach for integrating AV de-
velopment with safety safety and security engineering, which
is compliant with the international standards SAE J3016, SAE
J3061 and ISO 26262. The integration is achieved by the
use of the Six-Step Model, which incorporates AV functions,
structure, safety failures, security attack, and safety & security
countermeasures. The Six-Step Model is the backbone for
achieving integration and alignment among safety and security
artefacts.
AV Safety Engineering
AV Security Engineering
Situation 
Trees
Hazard 
Trees
Hazardous 
Events
Fault 
Trees
Safety goals and 
requirements
Safety 
countermeasures
(5) Safety
Countermeasures
(6) Security
Countermeasures
(4)
Attacks
(3)
Failures
(2)
Structure
(1)
Functions
Six-Step Model
Safety 
risks
Attack surfaces
Attack 
Trees
Security goals and 
requirements
Security 
countermeasures
Security 
risks
Information/Data 
Flow Models
AV Standards (SAE J3016, SAE J3061, ISO 26262)
AV Development
Figure 4. The Six-Step Model as a backbone for integrated AV safety and
security analysis.
Figure 4 describes the proposed approach and shows
the relationships between steps of the Six-Step Model and
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-605-7
CYBER 2017 : The Second International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

various artefacts from AV development, safety engineering,
and security engineering processes.
The steps of the AV Six-Step Model are performed in the
following order:
•
Steps (1) and (2). Autonomous driving functions and
the systems (structure), which implement these func-
tions, are deﬁned during AV development process. As
the result, AV functional and structural hierarchies are
deﬁned and added to the Six-Step Model, along with
their relationships.
•
Steps (3) and (4). These steps correspond to AV vul-
nerability (hazard and threat) analysis. On the safety
side, HARA (as deﬁned by ISO 26262) is performed
in order to identify and evaluate hazardous events, and
deﬁne AV functional safety requirements. Additional
models, such as situation, hazard, and fault trees, are
used to ensure that all autonomous driving related
hazards are considered, as described in Section II-C.
At the end of the hazard analysis phase, failures,
which are considered in security requirements, are
extracted from the fault trees and added to the the Six-
Step Model (Step (3)). On the security side, TARA
(as deﬁned by SAE J3061) is performed in order
to evaluate security threats and derive AV functional
security requirements. The AV structural hierarchy,
deﬁned in step (2), could be used to deﬁne attack
surfaces and construct information-ﬂow models (see
[9]), which helps to identify possible attacks and con-
struct attack trees, as described in Section II-D. The
risks associated with each attack are then evaluated
and security requirements are deﬁned. Similarly to
failures, the attack, included in security requirements,
are extracted from the attack trees and added to the
Six-Step Model (Step (4)). The relationships between
attacks, failures, functions, and structures, are also
added to the Six-Step model.
•
Steps (5) and (6). During these steps, safety and
security countermeasures are selected and added to
the model along with their relationships to remaining
elements of the model. On the safety side, func-
tional safety requirements are reﬁned into technical
requirements and corresponding countermeasures are
designed for satisfying these requirements. Similarly,
on the security side, functional security requirements
are decomposed into technical requirements for secu-
rity countermeasures. The countermeasures from both
sides are added to the Six-Step Model to analyze their
relationships to the remaining elements of the model.
In particular, the matrices are useful to make sure
that each countermeasure is really needed (addresses
attacks/failures not completely covered by any other
countermeasures, shown in matrices X-A, X-B, Z-A,
and A-B), and that there are no contradictions among
countermeasures (matrix Z-X).
The AV Six-Step Model, constructed during steps (1)-(6), is
a backbone of AV vulnerability analysis. It supports three AV
processes, namely, AV development, AV safety engineering,
and AV security engineering, as shown in Figure 4. It enables
integration of safety and security artefacts, developed through-
out the entire AV life-cycle (such as failures, attacks, safety
and security countermeasures) into AV function and structure
hierarchies to assure their consistency and completeness.
The AV Six-Step Model has to be maintained throughout
the entire AV life-cycle. This is particularly important for
security, as new threats are continually identiﬁed and analyzed.
The following section shows a Six-Step Model example of
an AV.
IV.
SIX-STEP MODEL EXAMPLE OF AN AV
The AV, described in this example, performs three main
autonomous driving functions, i.e., perception, decision & con-
trol, and vehicle platform manipulation, as described in Section
II-A. The perception function can be further decomposed into
sensing, sensor fusion, localization, semantic understanding,
and world model (see [11]). These functions are added at
the top of to Six-Step Model and their inter-relationships are
identiﬁed, as shown in Figure 5.
Due to space limitations, only an excerpt of the Six-Step
Model is included in Figure 5. Furthermore, only the high
degree relationships between elements are shown.
The main systems of AV, which implement driving au-
tomation functions, are: cognitive driving intelligence, vehicle
platform, and communication system [11][12]. The cognitive
driving intelligence includes on-board computer and external
sensors for perception of environment, such as LIDAR, Radar,
cameras, and ultrasound sensors [17]. No sensor type works
well for all tasks and in all conditions, thus it is necessary to
provide sensor redundancy and perform sensor fusion. A com-
bination of LIDAR, Radar, and camera provides good coverage
of AV tasks in most of the environmental conditions [17]. The
vehicle platform includes controllers (ECUs), actuators, which
implement the desired motion. The communication system
includes in-vehicle and V2X (vehicle to vehicle, infrastructure,
and humans) communication networks. In this example, only
in-vehicle communication is considered. All these structural
elements are added to model in step (2).
In steps (3) and (4), we included LIDAR failure and
LIDAR attack. LIDAR is a laser sensor used in AVs for object
detection. As we can see from Figure 5, the main function
affected by either the LIDAR failure or attack is the sensing
function. Furthermore, there is a strong relationship between
LIDAR attack and failure, LIDAR attack is strongly related to
Ethernet (i.e., an attacker can attack LIDAR through Ethernet).
Attacks on LIDAR and security countermeasures are sum-
marized in [18]. An attacker could perform a relay attack
(relaying the original signal sent from target vehicle LIDAR
from another position to create fake echoes) or a spooﬁng
attack (replaying objects and controlling their position) on
LIDAR.
Radar is added to the model in step (5) as a safety
countermeasure. In case of of LIDAR failure, Radar and
camera will still be able to perform sensing of the driving
environment.
Security countermeasures could include redundancy: mul-
tiple LIDARs, or V2X communication to compare measure-
ments of target vehicle with other vehicles to detect inconsis-
tencies [18]. However, due to high cost of LIDAR, multiple
LIDARs are not considered in this AV. Furthermore, there is
no V2X communication in this AV example. If the vehicle
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-605-7
CYBER 2017 : The Second International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

Autonomous 
driving functions
Perception
Decision & Control
Vehicle platform 
manipuation
Sensing
Sensor fusion
Localization
Semantic understanding
World model
Autonomous 
driving system
Cognitive driving 
intelligence
Vehicle platform
Communication 
system
On-board computer
External 
sensors
Camera
LIDAR
GPS
Controllers (ECUs)
Internal sensors
Actuators
V2X communication
In-vehicle 
communication
WiFi
Ethernet
USB
CAN bus
AV failures
Hardware 
failure
Sensor 
failure
LIDAR 
failure
AV attacks
Cyber 
attack
Ethernet 
attack
Attack on 
LIDAR
Safety 
countermeasures
Security 
countermeasures
...
...
Additional sensors
...
LIDAR attack detection method, which 
uses Radar and camera readings
...
Step (1)
F: Functions
Step (2)
S: Structure
Step (3)
B: Failures
Step (4)
A: Attacks
Step (5)
X: Safety countermeasures
Step (6)
Z: Security countermeasures
...
...
...
...
Radar
Ethernet access control
x
+
F-F
S-S
S-F
...
B-S
B-F
A-S
A-F
A-B
X-B
X-S
X-F
X-A
Z-X
Z-A
Z-B
Z-S
Z-F
Caption:
Attack/failure 
coverage by 
countermeasures:
full
partial/ medium
partial/ low
nil
Relationship:
high
medium
low
nil/ very low
Relationship 
matrix:
Safety and security
countermeasure inter-
dependencies:
reinforcement
antagonism
independence
+
-
conditional 
dependency
x
Figure 5. An example of AV Six-Step Model.
had V2X communication, LIDAR attacks could be detected
by cross-comparing LIDAR reading of the nearby vehicles.
Various LIDAR attack detection and mitigation methods
can be implemented inside on-board computer, e.g., LIDAR
attacks can be detected by comparing LIDAR readings to
Radar and camera reading, while shorter or randomized LI-
DAR scanning interval could help in preventing the attacks
[18]. In Figure 5, a security countermeasure, ”LIDAR attack
detection method, which uses Radar and camera readings”, is
added. Additional countermeasure, ”Ethernet access control”,
is used to prevent LIDAR attacks.
Matrices X-A, X-B, Z-A, Z-B, and Z-X are very useful
for integrated safety and security analysis. X-B shows that
Radar provides partial coverage of LIDAR failure, as Radar
cannot fully replace LIDAR. Z-A and Z-B indicate that LIDAR
attack detection method will be able to provide coverage not
only for LIDAR attacks, but also failures, as it will detect
corrupt LIDAR readings, which could happen in either case.
Finally, Matrix Z-X shows the inter-dependencies between
safety and security countermeasures. As we can see from
Figure 5, Radar (safety countermeasure) and the LIDAR attack
detection method (security countermeasure) share a conditional
dependency (denoted by x), i.e., in order to implement the
attack detection method, we need a Radar; while Radar and
Ethernet access control mechanism reinforce each other.
As the new structural component, Radar, has been added
to the model in Step (5), it is necessary to return to the step
(2) to include it to AV structural hierarchy and to establish its
relationships to the remaining elements of the model.
V.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, an approach for integrated autonomous vehi-
cle safety and security analysis is proposed, which is compliant
with the international standards SAE J3016, SAE J3061, and
ISO 26262. It uses the Six-Step Model as a backbone for
achieving and maintaining integration and alignment among
safety and security artefacts throughout the entire autonomous
vehicle’s life-cycle. The Six-Step Model incorporates six hi-
erarchies of autonomous vehicles, namely, functions, struc-
ture, failures, attack, safety countermeasures, and security
countermeasures. An example of an autonomous vehicle Six-
Step Model is included to demonstrate the usefulness of the
proposed approach.
Future work will include the reﬁnement of the proposed
approach to facilitate its application in industry and the use
by other researchers. We are currently building a software
tool for constructing the Six-Step Model. Furthermore, we are
exploring the possibility to integrate our approach with the
safety analysis approach System-Theoretic Processes Analysis
(STPA), which has been designed for evaluating the safety of
complex systems [6]. We believe that a combination of these
two approaches could help to achieve roadworthiness of the
autonomous vehicles, and would contribute to the development
of standards for autonomous vehicles.
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-605-7
CYBER 2017 : The Second International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

REFERENCES
[1]
G. Sabaliauskaite and A. P. Mathur, Aligning Cyber-Physical System
Safety and Security.
Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2015,
pp.
41–53.
[Online].
Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-
12544-2 4
[2]
L. Pi`etre-Cambac´ed`es and M. Bouissou, “Cross-fertilization between
safety and security engineering,” Reliability Engineering & System
Safety, vol. 110, 2013, pp. 110 – 126.
[3]
SAE J3016: Taxonomy and Deﬁnitions for Terms Related to On-Road
Motor Vehicle Automated Driving Systems.
SAE International, Sep.
2016.
[4]
ISO26262-2:2011, Road Vehicles – Functional Safety – Part2: Manage-
ment of Functional Safety.
International Organization of Standardiza-
tion, ISO, 2011.
[5]
F. Warg et al., Deﬁning Autonomous Functions Using Iterative
Hazard Analysis and Requirements Reﬁnement.
Cham: Springer
International Publishing, 2016, pp. 286–297. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-45480-1 23
[6]
A. Abdulkhaleq et al., “A systematic approach based on stpa for devel-
oping a dependable architecture for fully automated driving vehicles,”
Procedia Engineering, vol. 179, no. Supplement C, 2017, pp. 41 – 51.
[7]
SAE J3061: Cybersecurity Guidebook for Cyber-Physical Vehicle Sys-
tems.
SAE International, Jan. 2016.
[8]
G. Sabaliauskaite, S. Adepu, and A. Mathur, “A six-step model for
safety and security analysis of cyber-physical systems,” in the 11th In-
ternational Conference on Critical Information Infrastructures Security
(CRITIS), Oct 2016.
[9]
G. Sabaliauskaite and S. Adepu, “Integrating six-step model with
information ﬂow diagrams for comprehensive analysis of cyber-physical
system safety and security,” in 2017 IEEE 18th International Sympo-
sium on High Assurance Systems Engineering (HASE), Jan 2017, pp.
41–48.
[10]
Automated Driving Systems 2.0. A Vision for Safety.
National
Highway Trafﬁc Safety Administration, NHTSA, U.S. Department of
Transportation, Sep. 2017.
[11]
S.
Behere
and
M.
T¨orngren,
“A
functional
reference
architecture
for
autonomous
driving,”
Inf.
Softw.
Technol.,
vol.
73,
no.
C,
May
2016,
pp.
136–150.
[Online].
Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.infsof.2015.12.008
[12]
S. Kato, E. Takeuchi, Y. Ishiguro, Y. Ninomiya, K. Takeda, and
T. Hamada, “An open approach to autonomous vehicles,” IEEE Micro,
vol. 35, no. 6, Nov 2015, pp. 60–68.
[13]
P. Bhavsar, P. Das, M. Paugh, K. Dey, and M. Chowdhury, “Risk anal-
ysis of autonomous vehicles in mixed trafﬁc streams,” Transportation
Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, vol.
2625, 2017, pp. 51–61.
[14]
L. Pi`etre-Cambac´ed`es and M. Bouissou, “Modeling safety and security
interdependencies with bdmp (boolean logic driven markov processes),”
in 2010 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man and Cyber-
netics, Oct 2010, pp. 2852–2861.
[15]
B. Schneier, Attack Trees.
Wiley Publishing, Inc., Indianapolis,
Indiana, 2015, in Book, Secrets and Lies.
[16]
Z. Ma and C. Schmittner, “Threat modeling for automotive security
analysis,” Advanced Science and Technology Letters, vol. 139, 2016,
pp. 333–339.
[17]
“Beyond the Headlights: ADAS and Autonomous Sensing,” 2016,
URL: http://woodsidecap.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/12/20160927-
Auto-Vision-Systems-Report FINAL.pdf [accessed: 2017-09-18].
[18]
J. Petit, B. Stottelaar, M. Feiri, and F. Kargl, “Remote Attacks on
Automated Vehicles Sensors: Experiments on Camera and LiDAR,” in
Black Hat Europe, Nov. 2015.
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-605-7
CYBER 2017 : The Second International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

