A Study on Introducing Cyber Security Incident Reporting Regulations
for Nuclear Facilities
Chaechang Lee
Korea Institute of Nuclear Nonproliferation and Control
Daejeon, Republic of Korea
Email: chiching@kinac.re.kr
Abstract—Industrial control systems have recently become easy
prey for cyber attacks as they expand to the Internet, beyond data
communication through the network. Among industrial control
systems, the systems used by nuclear facilities are especially at
high risk against cyber attacks because their dangerous assets
are used in managing nuclear materials. Most of the nuclear
licensees have recently established cyber security response plans
to protect their critical systems from cyber threats. To enable the
response plans, effective incident reporting procedures should also
be established and notiﬁed to personnel who has responsibilities
to discover and report an undesired event in a timely manner.
This study presents ongoing work, which is part of the study
for establishing a cyber security incident response framework
for nuclear facilities, and to introduce cyber security incident
reporting regulations at nuclear facilities in the Republic of
Korea.
Keywords–Cyber Security; Incident Response; Nuclear Facili-
ties; Reporting Regulation.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Cyber security threats to industrial control environments
have increased signiﬁcantly because industrial control systems
(ICSs) have changed from proprietary, isolated systems to PC-
based open architectures and standard technologies intercon-
nected with other networks and the Internet [1].
If a cyber attack occurs and results in damage, infras-
tructures such as public transportation, water, gas, as well as
general IT systems incur ﬁnancial losses or inconveniences to
public amenities. However, cyber attacks on nuclear facilities
threaten public safety and life by causing adverse effects on
the safety functions of nuclear facilities. Therefore, in order
to respond quickly and properly to cyber security incidents,
nuclear licensees are required to have a more detailed cyber
security incident response system than any other environmental
licensees and to prepare incident reporting regulations to
enable this. This paper, as a part of the research on building
a cyber security incident response system for nuclear facilities
in the Republic of Korea (ROK), presents the essential consid-
erations of a regulatory authority in the process of developing
and introducing incident reporting regulations.
It also uses practical contexts derived from consultations
between regulators and nuclear licensees. In Section 1, the
related works and contributions of this paper are presented. In
Section 2, the paper describes the difference between incident
reporting regulations for nuclear facilities compared to other
critical infrastructures or general IT systems. Considerations
to introduce incident reporting regulations at nuclear facilities
are also presented in Section 2. Section 3 concludes the paper.
Figure 1. Incident Response Life Cycle [2]
A. Related work
There are several related standards and documents that
guide cyber security incident response and reporting.
The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
suggests the standard process to response cyber security inci-
dents [2] and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
also cites it as the computer security incident response phases
[3]. Figure 1 shows the process of incident response. NIST also
demands the establishment of an incident report mechanism
that permits people to report incidents anonymously [2].
The European Network and Information Security Agency
(ENISA) describes good practices guide for the management
of network and information security incidents on incident
handling [4]. The main topic of the guideline is the incident
handling process. The guide includes the formal framework for
Computer Emergency Response Teams (CERTs, also known as
CSIRTs), roles, workﬂows, basic CERT policies, cooperation,
outsourcing, and reporting. However, the report guideline of
the publication is presented for senior managers on how to
manage incidents, and not for incident responses. ENISA also
presents proposals for incident reporting to public authorities,
private organizations and trust service providers, trying an
introduction of a new reporting scheme or an improvement of
standing procedures, under Article 19 of the electronic IDenti-
ﬁcation, Authentication and trust Services (eIDAS) regulation
[5][6]. Guidelines for managing and reporting cyber security
events presented by ENISA cover general IT environments.
However, responding to and reporting of cyber security inci-
dents that apply to nuclear facilities are distinct from general
IT environments and other critical infrastructures. A detailed
analysis is provided in Section 3.
In earlier studies, J. J. Gonzalez introduced a cyber security
reporting system to share cyber security data, such as intrusion
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-605-7
CYBER 2017 : The Second International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

attempts, successful intrusions, and incidents of all types.
He urged that it could lead to a more comprehensive and
effective cyber data collection and analysis [7]. C. W. Johnson
identiﬁed some of the challenges that frustrate the exchange of
lessons learned from cyber security incidents in safety-related
applications. He then argued for the integration of reporting
mechanisms for cyber attacks on safety-critical national in-
frastructures [8]. R. Leszczyna and M. R. Wrobel proposed an
approach to developing a data model for security information
sharing platform for the smart grid [9]. All these previous
research were focused on information sharing of security
data. They however did not introduce reporting regulations for
instant incident responses.
Especially at nuclear facilities, the IAEA states the goal and
challenges of reporting during the computer security incident
response process [3]. Additionally, the IAEA states that the
goal of reporting is to ensure that everyone who needs to know
about a computer security incident is informed in a timely
manner. The IAEA further presents that the determination of
the frequency of reporting and the level of detail required is a
challenge to organizations [3]. However, it focuses on phases
of incident response at nuclear facilities and analysis of the
incident, and reporting is only brieﬂy mentioned as one of the
phases.
The United States (US) and Nuclear Regulatory Commis-
sion (NRC) have already introduced and applied cyber security
event notiﬁcation in the form of Code of Federal Regulations
(CFR). [10] and [11] classify the cyber security events and set
a time limit for reporting according to its severity. They also
describe the process and method to notify the events in detail.
However, they are based on the incident response infrastructure
and systems in the US, and it is difﬁcult to apply it in a country
where the well-organized environment is not prepared.
This paper presents the essential items, based on experience
of practical regulation and policy introduction, to be consid-
ered by the countries and regulatory agencies that intend to
introduce reporting rules of responding to cyber incidents at
nuclear facilities.
II.
CONSIDERATIONS TO INTRODUCING THE POLICY
Cyber security incident response and reporting at nuclear
facilities are different from the ordinary IT environments and
other critical infrastructure.
•
Unlike a typical IT environment, when a cyber security
incident occurs at a nuclear facility, the personnel who
discover and respond to the incident must consider the
radiation effects. The activities that need to be done
between report and response depend on the nature of
the radiation effects, the content to report, and the
status of the person or extent of the organization re-
ceiving the report. Hence, subsequent reporting of the
situation is required whenever circumstances change.
•
Systems at nuclear facilities, such as PLC, DCS,
and HMI have a variety of accessible users: op-
erators, maintenance personnel, security personnel,
auditors, and contractors. Therefore, if anyone with
access to the system discovers an undesired event, a
standardized reporting form is required to accurately
communicate the situation. Additionally, because the
physical space of the facility is large, compared to an
IT environment and, additionally, because there are
dangerous areas where CERTs have restrict access,
it may be difﬁcult to directly assess the situation and
notify the appropriate authorities or experts. Therefore,
it is necessary to establish a clear reporting method
for all accessible users to report the situation to the
experts, and periodical training should be carried out.
•
Some systems at a nuclear facility may be out of date,
need to be updated, or run security programs such
as an antivirus software. In such a case, it may be
difﬁcult for the user to notice a malicious access to
the systems. If no security programs are run and no
security policies are set, it may be difﬁcult to detect
a malicious intrusion. The operator may suspect the
possibility of a compromise of the system only after
ﬁnding an abnormality in the operation of the facility.
Therefore, in order to conﬁrm a cyber attack, it is
necessary to consider not only notiﬁcations of cyber
threats but also notiﬁcations of an abnormal situation
related to the operation of the facility, such as rapid
pressure or temperature change.
•
In IT systems, data conﬁdentiality and integrity are
typically the primary concerns. For an ICS, human
safety and fault tolerance in preventing loss of life or
endangerment of public health or conﬁdence, regula-
tory compliance, loss of equipment, loss of intellectual
property, or lost or damaged products, are the primary
concerns. Therefore, incidents that should be reported
in the IT environment may not be necessary to report
because of their low severity at a nuclear facility.
Conversely, incidents that are overlooked in an IT
environment may be a serious incident that must be
reported at a nuclear facility.
Depending on the mission and nature of the organization
that is responsible for introducing cyber security incident
reporting policy, the purpose of creating the reporting re-
quirements is different. Accordingly, the considerations in
developing and introducing reporting regulations may vary.
This section presents the considerations that the organizations
should address to establish cyber security incident reporting
regulations.
A. Scope of cyber security incident
First, the scope of cyber security incidents that may arise at
a nuclear facility should be deﬁned to apply incident reporting
and incident response procedures. This means that assets, in
the same manner as systems and network at nuclear facilities,
should be identiﬁed to protect from cyber attacks by carrying
out planned response activities.
Nuclear facilities have various services from enterprise
business networks, including e-mail service, web server, and
the Internet, to process control instrumentation bus network
connected to sensors, actuators, and instrumentation. In ad-
dition, there are various systems, such as not only ofﬁce PCs
but also PLCs, DCSs, and HMIs located in the operations zone
of nuclear facilities. Licensees should identify and select the
essential assets among them to apply the established reporting
regulation. For example, the NRC deﬁned systems that perform
safety, security, and emergency preparedness functions as
critical digital assets that should be thoroughly protected from
cyber attacks [12].
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-605-7
CYBER 2017 : The Second International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

B. Subject of report
The person or entity to be responsible for the decision to
report an incidence should be taken into consideration. If a
reporting entity is not speciﬁed, it may result in unnecessary
time loss from the time of incidence report to an appropriate
response. As a reporting entity, the following persons may be
considered: Operators of the nuclear facilities who ﬁrst dis-
cover an undesired event; the team manager of the operators;
and cyber security experts at the nuclear facilities who can
determine whether the event was caused by digital threats.
Because the reporting entity affects the immediacy and the
concreteness of the reporting, it may vary according to the
mission and nature of the organization.
NIST requires at least one reporting mechanism that allows
for anonymous reporting [2].
C. Reportable incidents
It is not easy to damage nuclear facilities and disrupt
normal operation with cyber attacks. The control networks of
the nuclear facilities are usually separated from the external
network such as the Internet. The control systems of the
nuclear facilities have different platforms from the ordinary
personal computer and requires specialized skills to implement
malicious codes with the intent of compromising the control
system. Nonetheless, nuclear facilities are an attractive prey
to cyber terrorists because of their impact and inﬂuence.
Attackers would gather the necessary information to carry
out cyber attacks and inﬁltrate the control network based on
the collected information. Thereafter, they would attempt to
control the targeted systems and damage the nuclear facilities.
All these processes are referred to as Advanced Persistent
Threats (APT) attack.
When deﬁning the reportable events, the nuclear facilities
can categorize the cyber security events possible in the nuclear
facility and present them as reportable events according to each
stage of the APT attack: Preparation, Access, Resident, Harvest
[13].
However, it is difﬁcult for an on-site operator to deter-
mine immediately if the undesired events on the systems and
networks are caused by the harvest stage of an APT attack,
or by other causes such as mechanical or electrical faults,
malfunctions due to the lifetime of the device, and human error.
Therefore, when creating cyber security reporting regulations,
it is necessary to provide a criterion for judging an incident that
cannot be clearly determined as a cyber threat as a reportable
event.
The most representative event, detectable and reportable at
the stage of access or resident in an APT attack process, is
a discovery of malicious software, also known as a malware,
by an antivirus program. Even if the malicious effect of the
malware on the systems and networks of nuclear facilities is
difﬁcult to establish immediately upon discovery, it must be
reported because of the potential to adversely impact them.
Additionally, the malware need to be analyzed to ascertain
their inﬁltration routes and take preventive measures. Any
unauthorized activities including creation, deletion, and modi-
ﬁcation of an account ID/PW, programs, and processes, and the
alteration to conﬁgurations are also reportable events, which
can be discovered at the stage of access or resident stage.
The events that can be discovered and reported during the
preparation stage of the cyber attack include the collection of
information indicating a planned cyber attack against nuclear
facilities, such as a threatening message on SNS or a website
posting. Although these events may not yet have been initiated
and their severity and immediacy of response are relatively
low, they must be reported and a proactive approach should
be taken thereafter.
NRC has classiﬁed the reportable events into three cases
and presents example events for each case [11].
D. Report ﬂow
In cyber security reporting regulations, the organization or
agency to which report must be made after the discovery of a
cyber security incident should be deﬁned. The IAEA suggests,
as part of its goal of reporting, that everyone who needs to
know about a computer security incident should be informed
in a timely manner [3]. First, if the person who discovers an
undesired event cannot determine whether incident responses
are required with cyber security approaches, he or she should
notify a cyber security team who can determine whether it
is a result of cyber threats. The cyber security team should
determine whether a professional technical support is needed,
and report it to the incident handler or CSIRT. In addition,
because similar cyber attacks at other nuclear sites such
as cyber terrorism can occur simultaneously, it should be
reported to a regulatory authority and the relevant authorities
that manage and supervise nuclear facilities. The authorities
related to nuclear facilities should collect information about the
situation at other facilities and determine whether a national
cyber terrorism crisis is ongoing, then report it to a national
control center for the cyber crisis response.
The scope of the people who need to know about a com-
puter security incident can be extended as much as possible
according to the determinant of the situation being reported.
In particular, if it is deemed that there are possibilities of a
radiological damage due to a discovered incident, a radio-
logical emergency must be promptly declared and appropriate
the radiological disaster prevention organization, which imple-
ments appropriate protective measures, must be notiﬁed of the
situation.
E. Means and contents of reporting
Various means can be used to report, such as by means
of a phone, fax, or e-mail. Telecommunications is a useful
reporting tool to deliver the fastest in-the-ﬁeld situation. How-
ever, because of the nature of the information being dissem-
inated verbally, untrained reporters may omit the important
information that must be included in the report or may deliver
ambiguous semantics. In the case of faxes or e-mails, because
the recipients may not be reached in time or be aware of
the reporting, they are unsuitable for the initial reporting
of incidents. In particular, e-mails that require access to the
Internet can be an inappropriate reporting tool in some cases.
This is because the location of nuclear facilities where a cyber
security incident occurs may be situated far away from the
ofﬁce where the Internet service is available. Additionally, the
cyber attacks may have compromised the Internet connection
or the e-mail system. The contacts used for reporting should
always be kept up-to-date and multiple methods should be
prepared in advance [2].
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-605-7
CYBER 2017 : The Second International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

Figure 2. The correlations of the severity of the incident and the time limit
to report by the stage of an APT attack
A form of written reports should be prepared in a pre-
deﬁned form so that senders know in advance what kind of
information needs to be written and reported. The written
reports must include the name and contact number of the
reporter, the date and time when the event occurred or was
discovered, the affected systems and networks of the nuclear
facility, the actions that were taken, and the current status of
the facility [2][11].
F. Report process
Most reports do not get ﬁnalized on the ﬁrst attempt.
After the initial reporting of a discovered situation, follow-
up reporting is continuously required, based on changes in
circumstances or gathered information. When a cyber security
incident reporting regulation is enacted, a 2-step or 3-step
reporting procedure can be presented in conjunction with
the reporting method. Both processes take verbal reports as
the ﬁrst step in event reporting. When the event is initially
discovered, it is important to promptly report through the
available telephonic systems, such as by means of a telephone,
hotline, or mobile phone.
Thereafter, the 2-step reporting procedure, such as the one
implemented by the regulation of NRC, requires a detailed
description of the discovered incident and the corresponding
response activities in a single written report.
The 3-step reporting procedure requires, additionally, an
analysis of the incident, which may take a long time after
the licensee’s second report. It also includes a description of
corrective plans to take as preventive measures against similar
types of incidents. This method is useful for the regulatory
authority responsible for assessing and determining whether
the incident response activities and their corrective plans are
appropriate for the nuclear facilities.
The discovered cyber security incidents should be reported
in a timely manner, depending on the severity of the incident
to the nuclear facility. Time loss in collecting accurate infor-
mation can cause delays to a timely response. The more likely
an impactful incident on the safety of a nuclear facility, the
more desirable a fast report and quick response.
Figure 2 shows the correlations of the severity of the
incident and the time limit to report by the stage of the APT
attack.
G. Report on classiﬁed information
Cyber security incident reporting regulation should contain
the reporting method for sensitive information classiﬁed as
conﬁdential such as [11]. During the ongoing cyber attack,
reporting the incident through an open network, which is an
unprotected channel, can result in additional cyber security
damage such as information leakage. It is therefore best
to prepare a channel for secure communication that uses
asymmetric key encryption with a certiﬁcation for public key
veriﬁcation. However, if the dedicated systems are not pre-
pared for transmission and reception of sensitive information,
a guideline should be prepared to indicate the temporary
measures for reporting the classiﬁed information, such as using
a symmetric key to encrypt the ﬁle containing the information,
and transmitting the key via another channel.
H. Response and follow-up action
When introducing cyber security reporting regulations, it
should include the response and follow-up actions that each
team and organization received the report should perform.
Because the operator in charge of a system at the nuclear
facility always operates and manages the on-site system, he
or she has the primary responsibility to ﬁnd out the cause
of the abnormal situation when the undesired event was dis-
covered. The system operator should determine whether there
are radiological effects and evaluate the event according to
the International Nuclear and Radiological Event Scale (INES)
standards, based on the severity of the event, by checking the
status of the nuclear facility [14]. If there is no radiological
effect, the operator should check whether the undesired event is
the result of a simple mechanical or electrical fault, or whether
the guaranteed days of the system has expired.
A cyber security team at a nuclear facility has the re-
sponsibility of determining whether the abnormal situation
of the reported system is the result of cyber threats. Various
system logs can be used by the team as reasonable evidence
for cyber threats, such as the event log, the status of the
executed process, network conﬁguration, antivirus log, and
register values. The cyber security team also should determine
whether it is possible to deal with the cyber threats using their
own response capabilities. In the case of planned cyber attacks,
ongoing incidents, or incidents requiring the services of a
professional cyber security response team for an initial incident
investigation, the situation should be notiﬁed to CSIRT.
CSIRT, the special team for cyber security incident re-
sponses, protects nuclear facilities by preventing ongoing cyber
security attacks and analyzing the incidents. In the case of an
intended cyber attack, they ﬁnd possible suspects and hand
over the case to the appropriate law enforcement agencies. The
cyber security team and CSIRT should identify the cause of the
incident and establish corrective actions to take as preventive
measures against similar types of incidents in the future.
Figure 3 shows the report ﬂow with responses and follow-
up actions.
III.
CONCLUSION
This paper presented the issues that a regulatory body
should consider when introducing reporting regulations for cy-
ber security incidents at nuclear facilities. The regulator should
ensure that nuclear facilities not only establish cyber security
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-605-7
CYBER 2017 : The Second International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

Figure 3. The report ﬂow with responses and follow-up actions
incident response plans or procedures as preparatory measures
against increasing terrorism threats, but also pay attention to
prepare reporting regulations so that the prepared response
systems can be activated in a timely manner. The reporting
regulations should be created through thorough discussions by
the relevant personnel and authorities on the presented consid-
erations according to the role and nature of the organization
introducing the reporting regulation. In addition, established
regulations should be a practical guideline with continuous
cyber security education and incident response training. For
this, the subsequent study will discuss how incident reporting
regulations can be implemented effectively and how regulators
can identify unforeseen loopholes in the reporting system.
REFERENCES
[1]
“Cyber
Risks
for
Industrial
Control
Systems,”
2015,
URL:
https://www.if-insurance.com/ [accessed: 2017-06-08].
[2]
P. Cichonski, T. Mllar, T. Grance, and K. Scarfone, Computer Security
Incident Handling Guide: NIST Special Publication 800-61, Revision
2, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Ed.
USA, 2012.
[3]
International Atomic Energy Agency(IAEA), Ed., Computer Security
Incident Response Planning at Nuclear Facilities.
IAEA, 2016.
[4]
M. Maj, R. Reijers, and D. Stikvoort, Good practice guide for incident
management.
ENISA, 2010.
[5]
D. V. Ouzounis, Good practice on Reporting Security Incidents.
ENISA, 2009.
[6]
C. K. Dr. Konstantinos Moulinos, Dr. Marnix Dekker, Proposal for
Article 19 Incident reporting.
ENISA, 2015.
[7]
J. Gonzalez, “Towards a cyber security reporting system–a quality
improvement process,” Computer Safety, Reliability, and Security, 2005,
pp. 368–380.
[8]
C. Johnson, “Tools and techniques for reporting and analysing the
causes of cyber-security incidents in safety-critical systems,” 2014.
[9]
R. Leszczyna and M. R. Wrobel, “Security information sharing for
smart grids,” network, vol. 1, 2014, p. 3.
[10]
U.S Code of Federal Regulations, Ed., Physical Protection of Plants
and Materials, part 73, chapter 1, title 10.
USA, 2015.
[11]
U.S Nuclear Regulatory Commission(NRC), Ed., Regulatory Guides
5.83, Cyber Security Event Notiﬁcations.
USA, 2015.
[12]
NRC, Ed., Regulatory Guides 5.71, Cyber Security Programs for
Nuclear Facilities.
USA, 2010.
[13]
M. Li, W. Huang, Y. Wang, W. Fan, and J. Li, “The study of APT
attack stage model,” in 2016 IEEE/ACIS 15th International Conference
on Computer and Information Science (ICIS). IEEE Computer Society,
June 2016, pp. 1–5.
[14]
IAEA, Ed., The International Nuclear and Radiological Event Scale
User’s Manual.
IAEA, 2008.
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-605-7
CYBER 2017 : The Second International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

