  An Investigation on Forensic Opportunities to Recover Evidential Data from 
Mobile Phones and Personal Computers 
Philip Naughton and M A Hannan Bin Azhar 
Computing, Digital Forensics and Cybersecurity  
Canterbury Christ Church University 
Canterbury, United Kingdom 
Email: {p.naughton78, hannan.azhar}@canterbury.ac.uk 
 
Abstract— This paper is a summary of experiments conducted 
to explore forensic opportunities available to the Law 
Enforcement Agency in the recovery of artefacts resulting from 
criminal use of popularly chosen applications. The experiments 
were conducted using forensic examination tools and techniques 
on a mobile phone running an Android operating system (OS) 
and another using Apple’s OS, as well as a computer running 
Windows 10 OS. These examinations involved the forensic 
acquisition and analysis of artefacts resulting from simulated 
criminal use of common messaging applications, running on 
both mobile smart phones and personal computers. Many of the 
complexities and factors effecting successful forensic data 
acquisition, such as encryption and ephemeral burn functions 
were also explored together with data analysis. 
Keywords- Digital forensics; data acquisition; messaging 
applications; mobile phones and PCs . 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Increased data download speeds have made it possible for 
new social media applications (Apps), delivering rich content 
between users, to work effectively in a way that was not 
previously possible. By 2016, the improvements in mobile 
data speeds had resulted in 71% of all adults in the UK owning 
a smartphone, up from 66% in 2015 [1]. This growth in smart 
phone ownership combined with improvements in 4G 
network coverage across the UK and ever more sophisticated 
Apps in terms of functionality and content delivery, explains 
why there is continuous high demand for Apps from both the 
Apple and Google stores.  
Data recovered from digital devices is vital in identifying 
a suspect’s on-line activity to prove or disprove his/her alleged 
involvement in a criminal offence. Police forces utilise all 
their available intelligence sources to inform their decision 
making in order to prioritise which of the thousands of devices 
seized every day during criminal investigations will be 
examined for evidence.  They also must make decisions, based 
on demand pressures, which devices will not be examined at 
all, despite the potential possibility of evidence being on them.  
When reviewing forensic examination processes, Her 
Majesty’s Inspector of Constabulary (HMIC) reported 
negatively that during a review of a UK force, there were 
significant delays caused to investigations because computers 
and other media submitted to Digital Forensic Examiner 
(DFEs) were taking too long to forensically examine [2]. 
Despite all the best efforts of an intelligence led forensic 
prioritisation approach, the delays in examinations were 
potentially impacting negatively on the efficiency of serious 
crime investigations. So further studies were required to 
identify which platforms and Apps would offer more forensic 
opportunities to the Law Enforcement Agencies (LEAs) while 
recovering evidential data from a collection of suspect 
devices. This in turn could potentially assist the LEAs in their 
decision making and prioritising of the many devices 
submitted to them for forensic examination, which eventually 
would help with the case load management. This paper reports 
forensically sound analysis and results in gathering evidential 
data from the Apps commonly used in criminal activities and 
installed on both smart phones and personal computers (PCs).   
 Section 2 of this paper reviews existing work by academic 
and subject matter experts in relation to the topic of this 
research paper. A brief explanation on the methodology used 
will be discussed in Section 3. Results and analysis will be 
reported in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper.   
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
The literature review sought to identify known challenges 
and opportunities that tend to frustrate or enhance forensic 
opportunities for LEAs to recover digital evidence from 
devices (mobile smart phones and PCs). This paper 
considered a digital forensic opportunity to mean when a file 
or chat log sent by a criminal between devices could be 
acquired from these devices by employing forensic 
examination software tools to recover these artefacts. The 
topics covered in the research ranged from the scope and 
limitations of the forensic tools available to potential future 
hardware and software developments, such as cloud based 
technology. Understanding the differences between App types 
available on the market and any built-in anti-forensic features 
was important to be able to assess how their difference might 
impact on the results of this paper’s experiments.  
A. App types 
There are three main App types: Native, Web and Hybrid.  
‘Native Apps’ are built with a mix of platform-specific 
technologies running in most cases on either Android or iOS 
platforms. Each platform uses different technologies. Android 
programmers for example mainly build their Apps with Java 
[3], making occasional use of Python, whereas iOS developers 
use the Objective-C programming language. Secondly, ‘Web 
Apps’, which run on a device’s browser are rendered HTML 
web pages and look like an App. The third type of App is 
called a Hybrid. Here, developers build a standard Web App, 
primarily built using HTML5 and JavaScript, then insert it 
inside a thin native container that provides access to native 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-605-7
CYBER 2017 : The Second International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

platform features that allows it to function like a native App. 
WhatsApp reported that over 60 million recent downloads 
were made of their native Apps [4]. The constant ‘on’ state of 
native Apps may potentially result in creating more 
opportunities for DFE from devices that are capturing more 
records of user activity, for example location data. Although 
native Apps usually performs better than Web Apps, a recent 
empirical study [5] reported that in about 31% of the 
situations, Web apps perform much better than the native 
apps, when providing the same functionality.  
As Apps have become widely used, so too have the 
public’s concerns regarding security. This has led to several 
App developers incorporating additional features to protect 
user data. Although data security is a good thing, it can 
however often frustrate DFE efforts to pursue criminals. 
WhatsApp for example has now built in end-to-end 
encryption anti-forensic features. Others such as Snapchat 
reportedly provide users with ephemeral messaging, which is 
described as the mobile-to-mobile transmission of multimedia 
messages that automatically disappeared from the recipient's 
screen after the message had been viewed [6]. That is to say 
they were automatically and permanently deleted from the 
user’s device. However, other researchers were sceptical 
about Apps such a Snapchat’s claims to permanently delete 
messages, photos and videos contesting that at best, the data 
is recorded, used, saved and then deliberately deleted; but  at 
worst, the ephemeral nature is faked [7]. 
B. Law Enforcements’ ability to acquire digital evidence 
LEAs rely on physical and software inspection tools to 
conduct their forensic data acquisition and analysis of 
evidential data from digital devices. Commercially available 
forensic examination tools are constantly having to play catch 
up with the high frequency of App developer updates, as seen 
in Table 1, and this causes ongoing challenges in recovering 
evidential data from devices. 
TABLE I. APPS UPDATE VERSION HISTORY. 
Apps 
Number of times 
App updated 
Android 
iOS 
WhatsApp 
13 
4 
Facebook messenger 
5 
4 
Google photos 
5 
4 
Skype 
5 
1 
Twitter 
5 
5 
Instagram 
4 
6 
Kik 
3 
5 
Dropbox  
2 
3 
Snapchat 
1 
5 
 
There is a general lack of hardware, software, and/or 
interface standardization within the industry ranging from the 
storage media and file system to the OS [8]. Each 
manufacturer develops their very own bespoke versions of the 
android OS specific to its hardware, which means that App 
developers must ensure that their product will work with every 
Android phone OS version in addition to iOS devices. 
Individual Apps, as seen in Table 1, do not get upgraded at the 
same time or frequency across platforms. From Table 1, it can 
be seen that the Android version for WhatsApp was updated 
thirteen times in just two months (January  and February, 
2017), whereas the Apple iOS version of the same App was 
updated four times in the same period. App updates for PCs 
tend to be far fewer and less frequent. 
There are two types of physical data acquisition tools for 
mobile phones. They are used infrequently by LEAs due to 
the costs, both in conducting the processes and in replacing 
phones damaged during these processes, which tend to be 
destructive to the device. The first of these two techniques is 
called Chip-off, which is the process as involving the 
physically removing flash memory chips from a suspect’s 
mobile phone and then acquiring the raw data using 
specialized equipment [9]. The second physical technique 
used called Joint Test Action Group (JTAG) is the process of 
soldering wires directly to the test access ports [10] on a 
device’s circuit board. Again, this process is not widely used 
because of the risk of damage resulting from soldering 
contacts to the phone. 
C. Cloud based technology 
Cloud computing is the act of storing, accessing and 
sharing data Apps in remote locations [11]. In order to cope 
with the problem of limited storage capacity, mobile phone 
devices manufacturers recognise the need to use services 
which can seamlessly offload some of the tasks of a mobile 
application from the handset to servers [12]. However, others 
believe that because smartphones aren’t expected to do as 
many things as PCs can, and what they can do they must do 
on less power, that this is the real driver for the use of cloud 
technologies [13]. Accessing cloud data may produce 
different but no less significant challengers for DFEs. As a 
consequence, many of the forensic software tool companies, 
at the time of this paper, were tasking their developers to work 
on cloud data acquisition tools. 
PCs do not share the same storage issues as mobile phones. 
They typically stores several terabytes (TB) of data [14]. A PC 
with a storage drive of 3TB can hold roughly 360 videos, 
750,000 songs or 600,000 images. The sheer volume of the 
potential data on a drive of this capacity can cause DFE 
challenges when reviewing the data recovered during an 
examination of a suspect’s PC. Despite PCs not having the 
same storage issues, they still make some use of cloud storage 
to make backups of their contents or user data, such as photos 
sent and received via Apps.  
The Acquisition and Disclosure of Communications Data 
- Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000 [15] governs 
UK LEAs’ powers to acquire data. Although DFEs can 
technically acquire data from a cloud server in a foreign 
country using a suspect’s device via a connection with that 
server, they may breach laws in that jurisdiction because UK 
courts cannot authorise such action in foreign countries.  
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
During the experiments, a set of test files and chat 
messages were sent between the devices via a set of test Apps 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-605-7
CYBER 2017 : The Second International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

known to be commonly used to simulate potential 
communications between 
criminals. Experienced and 
qualified. Law enforcement forensic examiners were 
consulted in the planning and designing the experiments, so 
that the experiments were realistic and in accordance with 
what the professionals have to deal with in practice. To 
capture a representative sample of policing across the UK, 
fifteen forces were chosen to cover all the countries in the 
British Isles representing the diversity in policing experiences. 
The findings and conclusions from the experiments would 
therefore be comparable to those in real investigations.  
Oracle’s open source software VirtualBox [16] was used 
to create a virtual machine (VM) in a PC to be one of the three 
test devices. It was used rather than a physical machine 
because the VM PC had the advantage of only having a fresh 
Windows OS installed on it and the Apps needed for these 
experiments, which are detailed in Table 2. Therefore, the 
results found during the forensic examination of the device 
could not have been influenced by other software previously 
installed as could have been the case on an old re-used 
physical PC.  
TABE II. VM PC SETUP AND CONFIGURATION. 
 
The two mobile smart phones were also used during the 
experiments and are detailed in Table 3. The current versions 
of the same Apps detailed in Table 2 were also installed on 
both phones as of 6th January 2017. The iPhone was not 
jailbroken, neither was the Samsung rooted because these 
experiments did not involve the use of alternative Apps 
available outside of Apple or Android stores. No device OS or 
disk encryption were enabled on any of the test devices. 
TABLE III. MOBILE SMART PHONES CONFIGURATIONS. 
 
 
 
 
 
Two forensic workstations were set up to facilitate the 
forensic examination of all three devices being investigated. 
Forensic software tools were then used to examine devices to 
acquire and analyse the test sample data from them. One of 
the workstations used for investigation had Cellebrite UFED 
[17] software tool installed, which was used for examining all 
the Apps on both smart phone devices. Its job was to acquire 
artefact evidence from the mobile phones and analyse the 
recovered data. The second workstation had an open source 
forensic acquisition and analysis tool installed called Autopsy 
version 4.3.0 [18]. Autopsy is a digital forensics platform and 
graphical interface to digital forensics tools.  
The forensic examinations were conducted following the 
guidelines set by the Association of Chief Police Officers 
(ACPO) [19] namely the first principle, by not taking action 
to change the data, and the third principle, by keeping an audit 
trail, so that an independent third party could examine the 
procedures and achieve the same result. Tools which pose 
risks in breaching these principles were not used in the 
experiment. One example of such tools was RetroScope [20], 
which can recreate multiple previous screens of an Android 
App in the order they were displayed from the phone’s 
memory. But use of such tools may be considered as the 
breach of the first principle of the ACPO guidelines [19] due 
to the restructure of data and hence were not used in the study.  
The test files used during the experiments were selected to 
represent common illegal communications between criminals, 
such as the distribution of child pornography or documents 
detailing stolen bank account details. While consulting with 
the law enforcement processionals, it was found that MD5 
(message-digest algorithm) was widely used in their forensic 
laboratories. All test files used in the experiments had their 
MD5 hash value calculated before they were sent. These 
hashes were used to conduct keyword searching during the 
examination in order to manually trace and locate the test data 
files on the devices, which might not have otherwise been 
recovered during the use of a forensic tool’s automated 
examination process and in its basic reporting mechanism.  
Every time the forensic examination software located one 
of the sent test files and messages on the devices, which could 
be attributed to one of the test Apps, then a count was recorded 
for the App and its device. Once the first examinations were 
completed, the test data was deleted from each device, as is 
commonly done by criminals to hide their activity and 
incriminating files. Only the App’s general user interfaces 
were used during this data deleting phase. The forensic 
examination of each device was then repeated and once again 
test files recovered and attributable to test Apps were counted. 
The totals of the successfully recovered files were calculated 
and considered as positive forensic opportunities because each 
recovered test file represented a crime having been committed 
and therefore the recovery of such a file could potentially lead 
to the prosecution of an offender. 
IV. 
RESULTS AND ANALYSES 
This section outlines the results and analysis from the 
experiments conducted during this research exploring the 
difficulties and opportunities in forensically acquiring 
evidential data from Apps running on both phones and PCs.  
A. Cloud technology challenges 
Apps like Instagram store most of the users’ images and 
messages in the cloud and store cached links on the device to 
these images so that the user can find them again. The 
difficulty here for DFE is that the images may no longer be 
stored on the device itself for recovery via examination. None 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-605-7
CYBER 2017 : The Second International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

of the test files were recovered from the Instagram App across 
all three devices. 
B. Web forensic opportunities on PCs 
Web based Apps, such as Dropbox on PCs are now 
offering more evidence than in the past because of backups of 
files, documents and images from mobile phones and other 
devices being synchronised via the internet to the PC. This 
leaves a copy of the data, which can be potentially recovered 
by forensic examination of the PC. Only Dropbox and 
WhatsApp were found to offer consistent forensic 
opportunities to recover test files from across all three device 
types. 
C. App developer updates issues 
The forensic tools tended to check one App at a time for 
potential digital evidence as they worked through fully 
examining the mobile devices. If it came to an App that had 
been updated the tool could no longer recover data from it 
(because the data is was now stored in a different location on 
a different SQLite database than previously), and tended to 
finish the examination. Forensic tools data acquisition 
processes appear sensitive to the versions of operating 
software used on a device. On occasions data was found but 
not reported by the tool. These issues with the commercial 
forensic tools get fixed regularly, but until the glitch does get 
fixed evidential data could potentially be missed. 
The situation is however less severe with App updates on 
PCs because Microsoft regulate their operating systems and 
for Apps to run on them they have to comply with the 
operating system and fit with its controls. Therefore, there is 
not as much variance on PCs as on Android phones in 
particular and also iPhone. 
D. Ephemeral messaging challenges 
Snapchat, on both mobile phones and PCs, does not store 
images. After a very short period of time they are deleted by 
the software automatically. None of the test files were 
recovered, either pre or post file deletion, from this App. The 
recovery of data is low and only occurring when the message 
has not been already read. Although some users often screen 
capture the Snapchat message and store it on their device, this 
is often recoverable by examiners. 
It is noteworthy that phones back up files to a PC through 
a process of synchronisation. This process takes place so that 
the phone’s data can be later restored back to the phone if 
necessary, for example if it encounters an OS issue. Although 
not tested during these experiments, this synchronisation 
function facilitates opportunities to recover data that was once 
on a mobile phone, not from examining the phone itself, but 
from examining the PC where the phone’s data was backed 
up.  This approach by forensic examiners may capture user 
data, which may no longer be recoverable from the mobile 
phone itself because the user deleted it.  
E. Encrypted services 
WhatsApp was the only App tested during this paper’s 
experiments that purported to provide users with end to end 
encryption. Encryption is more common on mobile phones 
than on PCs but does not totally frustrate DFE. For example, 
sometimes thumb nail pictures still exist on a device, which 
can be viewed even if the criminal were to subsequently 
encrypt the photo. Despite WhatsApp encryption services, it 
was found to offer forensic opportunities across all three 
device types. 
F. Duplication of test files 
Large numbers of duplicate copies of the test data were 
found during the forensic examinations across all three 
devices both pre and post file deletion. There appeared to be 
duplicate files stored within all the Apps examined as well as 
in other locations on the devices not easily attributable to any 
App. The Apps themselves and/or the devices’ OS appeared 
to be creating and storing duplicates of the test data that had 
been sent.  Duplicate video files for example were found to be 
part copied and stored in the device’s cached memory 
resulting from what appears to be user video playback activity 
on the device. 
During the iPhone examination, significant numbers of 
files were recovered that had been saved in UNIX executable 
format. This occurs when files are originated from a non-
Apple operating system and no extension is put on the file. 
However, on some occasions this did not happen with files 
that were received on the iPhone from the PC because the files 
were received with extensions. Even though such files had lost 
their information of resource forks (type/creator codes, 
specifically) during transmission from the PC to the iPhone, 
iOS could still use the extensions to associate the specific file 
types. In such scenario, both the UNIX and reconstructed files 
were stored on the iPhone and could both be recovered. Both 
files had the same time stamps on them indicating that they 
were the same file as the one sent from the PC. 
Some of the recovered files on the iPhone had been saved 
within the “thumbs.db” files, which were created by Windows 
OS without user’s knowledge as per default settings. This type 
of file generates a quick preview of the content of a folder 
using a thumbnail cache. During experiments, such cache files 
appeared to have been sent along with the test video and 
picture files. Recovered artefacts from these files could be 
used to prove that illicit photos were previously stored on a 
suspect’s hard drive even after the deletion of the content.    
Backups of media contents in both Kik and WhatsApp 
were found to cause duplicates of photos and videos. For 
example, the exact same file was recovered from the Kik App 
stored in the folders “content_manager/data_chache” and also 
“attachments” 
within 
the 
path 
“Backup/Applications/ 
group.com.kik.chat/cores/private/41b3f76b03e54d9dac449d
1c1ab5955b/”. Photographs received from WhatsApp were 
found to be stored into Apple’s photos as well as in the App’s 
databases. During this process files stored in “bmp” and “gif” 
appeared to be duplicated into a “jpg” format before being 
stored in Apple’s photos.  
G. Device type factor 
Table 4 is a summary of the positive forensic examination 
results found by device type during experiments. The second 
column from the left shows the number of test files sent to the 
device and therefore could have been potentially recovered 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-605-7
CYBER 2017 : The Second International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

from it. Every time one of the test files was found that could 
be attributable to one of the test App, a note was recorded. 
This was done, pre and post deletion, for each of the devices.  
TABLE IV.   POSITIVE FORENSIC EXAMINATION RESULTS BY DEVICE TYPE. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The remaining columns in Table 4 show the actual number 
of files found both pre and post deletion.  As can be seen in 
the column on the far right of Table 4, the PC appeared to offer 
DFE the most forensic opportunities with 30% of the test 
sample files being recovered, which is similar to the number 
recovered from the iPhone. Only 16% of the test files were 
recovered from the android phone. 
Most PCs run Microsoft operating systems. The file 
structures and OS run on these devices’ hard drives are all the 
same despite the PCs and the hard drives being manufactured 
by numerous different companies. This may explain why, at 
78 files and 30% recovery, the PC offered most opportunities 
compared with the android phone. This is likely to be as a 
result of the frequency of upgrade of the android operating 
system, as shown in Table 1, and the lack of regulation and 
uniformity 
around 
its 
development 
between 
phone 
manufacturers. 
All the forensic examination tools used have had 
development updates since the experiments were conducted. 
However, the experiments were not repeated with the updated 
forensic software tools so it is not possible to say whether the 
updates to the tools may have improved the recovery of the 
test files, improving positive forensic opportunities. 
H. App type factor 
None of the test files recovered could be attributable to 
Instagram or Snap chat, which is likely to be because of their 
ephemeral security features. Table 5 shows the ranking of the 
Apps, in terms of the number of test files recovered on each 
device and across all devices. It was observed that across all 
devices, Google Photos, Dropbox and WhatsApp were the top 
three Apps which offered the most forensic opportunities to 
recover the test files.  
TABLE V. POSITIVE FORENSIC EXAMINATION RANKS  BY APP TYPE. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE VI. POSITIVE FORENSIC EXAMINATION RESULTS BY FILE TYPE. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 6 shows that Jpeg was the most widely recovered of 
all the test files. Jpeg files have two sub-formats, one of which 
is JFIF (Jpeg File Interchange Format). JFIF is often used on 
the web. In the mandatory JFIF APP0 marker [21], segment 
parameters of the image are specified and this is where an 
uncompressed thumbnail can be embedded. Because of the 
embedding of a thumbnail, the hash value for the file is 
changed, which explains why duplicates of the files look the 
same to the user but are in fact not identical. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Although some files could no longer be recovered after 
they had been deleted during the experiments, a significant 
number could still be recovered again. It was not possible to 
send all the test files to the smart phones. The iPhone was only 
capable of receiving 210 of the test files compared with 266 
to the PC because of OS and App differences. Of the test files 
that were successfully sent to the iPhone, 30% of those were 
successfully recovered. It was possible to send slightly more 
test files, in total 218, to the Samsung phone than the iPhone 
but only 16% were recovered. 
Duplicates of the test files resulting from OS and App 
processes were also recovered during the experiments. A law 
court may decide to take these into consideration, if found on 
a suspect’s device, even though these files may not always be 
easily associated with any particular App because, for 
example, they may be stored in unallocated space on the 
device’s memory. However, because of hash value differences 
between the file sent from one suspect’s device with that 
duplicate file recovered on the second suspect’s device, the 
DFE would need to be able to explain how and why the file 
had been altered to prove it actually came from the first 
suspect, thereby linking them together. 
None of the test files sent using ephemeral Apps, Snap 
chat and Instagram, were recovered. However, they may be 
recoverable using specific forensic examination processes 
[22]. This causes additional complexities for DFEs. If mobile 
phones, and in particular Android based phones, were to 
consistently offer fewer opportunities to recover evidence 
both now and in the future, then that would potentially 
represent a degradation in LEAs’ capabilities, given that large 
numbers of criminals are moving to using their phones as the 
primary device to connect to the internet. 
In future, a more longitudinal study will be necessary to 
take into account the impact of updates by OS and App 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-605-7
CYBER 2017 : The Second International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

developers on the tools. It will be worth conducting a 
statistical analysis to determine if the ability to retrieve data is 
related to the number of updates of the operating platform 
made by the developer. Establishing whether the OS continues 
to create and save duplicate files to the cloud despite the auto 
save function being disabled would be useful. Knowing the 
effects that such an action may have on the numbers of 
recoverable duplicate files and their storage locations, such as 
cache, would be helpful.   
REFERENCES 
[1] OFCOM, “Communications Market Report (UK)”, 2016, 
Available 
online: 
https://www.ofcom.org.uk/__data/assets/pdf_file/0024/26826/
cmr_uk_2016.pdf, Last accessed September 2017. 
[2] HMIC,  “National Child Protection Inspections”, 2014, 
Available 
online:https://www.justiceinspectorates.gov.uk/hmicfrs/wp-
content/uploads/greater-manchester-national-child-protection-
inspection.pdf,  Last accesed September 2017. 
[3] S. Bommisetty, R. Tamma, and H. Mahalik, “Practical Mobile 
Forensics”, Packt Publishing, 2014. 
[4] AppBrain, “WhatsApp Inc. summary”, Available online:  
http://www. appbrain.com/dev/WhatsApp+Inc./, Last accessed 
September 2017. 
[5] Y. Ma, X. Liu; Yi. Liu; Yu. Liu and G. Huang “A Tale of Two 
Fashions: An Empirical Study on the Performance of Native 
Apps and Web Apps on Android”, IEEE Transactions on 
Mobile Computing, ISSN: 1536-1233, doi: 10.1109/TMC. 
2017.2756633, in press. 
[6] J. B. Bayer, N. B. Ellison, S. Y. Schoenebeck and E. B. Falk, 
“Sharing the Small Moments: Ephemeral Social Interaction on 
Snapchat”, Information, Communication & Society, vol. 19, 
pp. 956-977, 2016. 
[7] F. Roesner, B. T. Gill and T. Kohno, “Sex, Lies, or Kittens? 
Investigating the Use of Snapchat’s Self-Destructing 
Messages”, Financial Cryptography and Data Security, Lecture 
Notes in Computer Science, vol. 8437. Springer, 2014. 
[8] J. Lessard and G. C. Kessler, “Android Forensics: Simplifying 
Cell Phone Examinations”, Small Scale Digital Device 
Forensics Journal, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1-12, ISSN: 1941-6164, 
September 2010. 
[9] V. Rao and A.S.N. Chakravarthy, “Survey on Android 
Forensic Tools and Methodologies”, International Journal of 
Computer Applications, vol. 154, no. 8, pp.17-21, 2016. 
[10] M. F.  Breeuwsma, Forensic imaging of embedded systems 
using JTAG (boundary-scan), Digital Investigation, vol. 3, pp. 
32–42, 2006. 
[11] D. T. Hoang, C.  Lee, D. Niyato and P. Wang, “A survey of 
mobile cloud computing: architecture, applications, and 
approaches”, 
Wireless 
Communications 
and 
Mobile 
Computing, vol. 13, pp. 1587-1611, 2013. 
[12] K. Yang, S. Ou and H. Chen, “On effective offloading services 
for resource-constrained mobile devices running heavier 
mobile 
Internet 
applications”, 
IEEE 
Communications 
Magazine, vol. 46, pp. 56-63, January 2008. 
[13] M. Lai, J. Wang, T. Song, N. Liu, Z. Qi and W. Zhou,  “VSP: 
A Virtual Smartphone Platform to Enhance the Capability of 
Physical Smartphone”, IEEE Trustcom, BigDataSE & ISPA, 
pp.1434-1441, August 2016. 
[14] A. Klein, “Hard Drive Stats for Q2 2017”, Available online: 
https://www.backblaze.com/blog/hard-drive-failure-stats-q2-
2017/,Last accessed September 2017. 
[15] Legistlation.gov.uk. “Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 
2000”, 2000, Available online: http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ 
ukpga/2000/23/contents, Last accessed September 2017. 
[16] VirtualBox tool, Available online: https://www.virtualbox.org,  
Last accessed September 2017. 
[17] Cellebrite 
UFED 
tool, 
Available 
online: 
http://www.cellebrite.com/Mobile-Forensics/Solutions,  Last 
accessed September 2017. 
[18] Autopsy tool, Available online: https://www.sleuthkit.org, Last 
accessed September 2017. 
[19] Association Of Chief Police Officers, “ACPO Good Practice 
Guide for Digital Evidence v5”, 2012,  Available online: 
http://www.digital-detective.net/digital-forensics-
documents/ACPO_Good_Practice_Guide_for_Digital_Eviden
ce_v5.pdf, Last accessed September 2017. 
[20] B. Saltaformaggio, R. Bhatia, X. Zhang, D. Xu., G. Richard III, 
“Screen after Previous Screens: Spatial-Temporal Recreation 
of Android App Displays from Memory Images”. In Proc. 25th 
USENIX Security Symposium (Security'16), Austin, TX, 
2016.  
[21] Jpeg 
file 
format, 
Available 
online:  
https://www.w3.org/Graphics/JPEG/jfif3.pdf,  Last accessed 
September 2017. 
[22] M. A. H. B. Azhar, and T. Barton, "Forensic Analysis of Secure 
Ephemeral Messaging Applications on Android Platforms" In: 
Jahankhani H. et al. (eds) Global Security, Safety and 
Sustainability - The Security Challenges of the Connected 
World. ICGS3 2017. Communications in Computer and 
Information Science, vol. 630, pp. 27-41, Springer, 2017.
 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-605-7
CYBER 2017 : The Second International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

