The Same, but Different: The Pentesting Study
Jan Roring, Dominik Sauer, Michael Massoth
Department of Computer Science
Hochschule Darmstadt — University of Applied Sciences Darmstadt
Darmstadt, Germany
E-mail: jan.roring@stud.h-da.de, {dominik.sauer,michael.massoth}@h-da.de
Abstract—When ordering a penetration test, customers assume
that they will receive the same results regardless of who performs
the testing. Although well-known standards are commonly used
to ensure that results of penetration tests are consistent and
reproducible, these results vary widely depending on the chosen
service provider. To evaluate this, we had two penetration tests
carried out on the same IT environment by independent service
providers. While there was some overlap, the results show that
the human component has a profound impact on the outcome of
a penetration test.
Keywords—penetration test; comparison; standards; human; soft
skills.
I. INTRODUCTION
As public reports of the German Federal Criminal Police
Ofﬁce show, cybersecurity incidents are on the rise [1]. To
protect themselves, more and more companies have the secu-
rity of their IT systems and applications checked by security
experts. In order to identify security vulnerabilities in these
technologies, it is common practice to carry out penetration
tests [2]. In addition to the identiﬁcation of threats, a pene-
tration test also includes a risk analysis of each vulnerability,
as well as remediation advice, which helps clients to address
the most critical issues ﬁrst [3][4]. In order to provide the
best possible added value, as many security vulnerabilities as
possible should be identiﬁed, so they can be ﬁxed by the client
to strengthen the company’s security posture.
This paper aims to show how much the quality of penetra-
tion tests varies depending on the tester. To show the variability
of outcome, two penetration tests are performed on the same
IT environment by two independent service providers. To
achieve the fairest comparison, the same general conditions
apply to both penetration testers. Thereafter, we evaluate how
much the results of the two penetration tests differ and what
inﬂuence the penetration testers have on them.
This paper is structured as follows: Section II provides some
background information on penetration testing. Section III
describes the experimental setup. The results will be presented
and discussed in Section IV. Section V contains our conclusion
as well as an outlook on further research opportunities.
II. BACKGROUND
The following section will be dedicated to the terminology
relevant to the paper. In addition to a deﬁnition of the
term ’Penetration testing’, it also includes commonly used
standards, as well as the skill set required of a penetration
tester.
A. Penetration testing
Penetration tests are used to check the security of applica-
tions, individual systems or entire networks by simulating an
attack by a hacker. The penetration tester uses the techniques
and tools of a hacker to uncover security vulnerabilities
in the IT environment under review. If possible, identiﬁed
vulnerabilities are exploited by the penetration tester to prove
their existence and investigate possible impacts to better assess
the threat potential of a vulnerability. Upon completion of
the penetration test, the customer receives a report listing
all vulnerabilities found, including a risk assessment and
recommendations for remediation. The aim is to ﬁnd and ﬁx
security vulnerabilities before a potential attacker can exploit
them [5]–[7].
B. Commonly used standards
While a hacker may only need a single vulnerability to
gain access, the penetration tester always tries to uncover
every possible vulnerability [8]. To ensure that no obvious
vulnerabilities are overlooked and results are reproducible, a
structured approach is required. Thus, most penetration testers
rely on well-known standard approaches when performing
penetration tests [9].
Several attempts have been made by governments and the
IT security community to standardize the penetration testing
process. Therefore, there is a wide choice of standards, each
with its own advantages and disadvantages. There is no
universal standard that is suitable for all types of penetration
tests. Government contracts often require compliance with
standards published by the respective national authorities, such
as the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
[5] in the US or the Federal Ofﬁce for Information Security
(BSI) [6] in Germany. In addition, there are established stan-
dards, such as the Open Source Security Testing Methodology
Manual (OSSTMM) [10] or the Penetration Testing Execution
Standard (PTES) [11] that are maintained by the IT security
community.
Apart from the differing terminology, the process described
in each of the previously mentioned standards always has
a similar basic structure [7]. It can be divided into several
phases, which can be seen in Figure 1.
Some approaches such as BSI [6], PTES [11] or OSSTMM
[10] give actionable instructions on what checks to perform
in each phase. A more detailed look at these checks reveals
that these standards are primarily designed to investigate IT
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-893-8
CYBER 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

Planning
Reconnaissance
Enumeration
Vulnerability Identiﬁcation
Exploitation
Post-Exploitation
Reporting
Figure 1. Penetration Testing Process
infrastructures [12]. When it comes to performing penetra-
tion testing for web applications, penetration testers typically
refer to the OWASP Web Security Testing Guide, which is
speciﬁcally tailored for this use case [2]. However, this is
almost exclusively limited to the technical aspects of web
application penetration tests, which is why some penetration
testers tend to combine it with one of the aforementioned
standards. In addition to such combinations, penetration testers
also frequently use their own individual approaches based on
the established standards [13][14].
The selection of an appropriate methodology is crucial for
the success of a penetration test, as it determines what should
be tested and how the penetration tester should proceed.
Since the commissioned penetration testers relied on the BSI
penetration testing model and the OWASP Web Security
Testing Guide, these will be described in a bit more detail
below:
a) BSI Penetration Testing Model: In 2003, the German
Federal Ofﬁce for Information Security presented a penetra-
tion testing model, which divides penetration tests into the
following ﬁve phases [6]:
1) Preparation
2) Reconnaissance
3) Analyzing information and risks
4) Active intrusion attempts
5) Final analysis
Throughout the preparation phase, the objectives, scope
and further general conditions of the penetration test, like
time frame and target systems, are deﬁned together with the
customer. In addition, a suitable penetration test is classiﬁed
and written approval is obtained from the client.
The reconnaissance phase is used to gather information on
the target. This includes performing ping and port scans, as
well as identifying operating systems and running services to
determine possible entry points for an attacker. The tests to
be performed are grouped into so-called I-modules. Suitable
modules are selected based on the classiﬁcation made previ-
ously.
In the subsequent phase (’Analyzing information and risk’),
the previously gathered information is evaluated and potential
risks are identiﬁed by looking for software versions with
known vulnerabilities. In addition, the penetration tester man-
ually searches for common types of vulnerabilities to identify
new or more complex vulnerabilities within systems and
applications.
To verify the actual existence of vulnerabilities, attempts
are made to exploit them in the fourth phase. Through ex-
ploitation, the penetration tester aims to gain access to the
affected system or read out sensitive data, which may help
to escalate privileges or compromise additional systems. So-
called E-modules comprise the tests that are carried out during
this phase. E-modules, as well as I-modules, are based on the
test points of the OSSTMM.
In the last phase (”Final Analysis”), the ﬁndings of the pen-
etration test are reviewed and the resulting risks are assessed,
depending on which sensitive data could be viewed and which
systems could be accessed. Additionally, an action plan is
developed with recommendations that can assist in addressing
the identiﬁed vulnerabilities.
Each phase of the penetration testing process is documented
to
ensure
the
reproducibility
of
the
test
results
and
ﬁndings. Based on this progress log, a ﬁnal report is
then prepared for the customer, which contains a list of all
identiﬁed vulnerabilities together with risk assessment and
recommendations.
b) OWASP Web Security Testing Guide: The Open Web
Application Security Project (OWASP) is a non-proﬁt organi-
zation that aims to improve the security of web applications.
To achieve this goal, OWASP works closely with the IT secu-
rity community and provides valuable tools and information
through open-source projects [15][16].
One of these projects is the OWASP Web Security Testing
Guide, which was released in version 4.2 towards the end
of 2020. In addition to the OWASP Testing Framework for
developing secure web applications, this guide also includes
the Web Application Security Testing Methodology, which can
be used to perform web application penetration tests.
The Web Application Security Testing Methodology is
divided into a passive and an active phase. During the passive
phase, the penetration tester explores the web applications
from a user’s point of view and tries to gain an understanding
of the application’s functionality and features. Throughout
the active phase, the penetration tester performs the actual
tests. For this purpose, the OWASP Web Security Testing
Guide offers a comprehensive collection of test points, which
are distributed across a total of twelve categories covering
different areas of a web application [2]:
1) Information Gathering
2) Conﬁguration and Deployment Management Testing
3) Identity Management Testing
4) Authentication Testing
5) Authorization Testing
6) Session Management Testing
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-893-8
CYBER 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

7) Input Validation Testing
8) Testing for Error Handling
9) Testing for Weak Cryptography
10) Business Logic Testing
11) Client-side Testing
12) API Testing
C. Penetration Testing Skill Sets
The selection of a suitable approach by itself is no guarantee
for a successful penetration test [17]. In order to maintain
adaptability to the customer’s needs and new types of tech-
nologies, standards should not be too restrictive [18][6]. While
a standardized approach can give guidance to the penetration
tester and point him in the right direction, at some point
the tester may need to deviate from this predeﬁned path.
Thereafter, the testing is reliant on the abilities of the tester,
which can not be covered by a standard.
Several of the previously mentioned standards describe the
required skill sets to successfully perform penetration tests.
In order to ﬁnd vulnerabilities in a system, the penetration
tester must understand how it works and how it can be abused.
This can require extensive technical knowledge. Furthermore,
performing penetration tests can have a negative impact on
the customer’s systems and networks. To prevent any damage,
they should only be carried out by people with experience in
IT security. According to BSI [6], penetration testers typically
need the following hard skills:
• Knowledge of system administration/operating systems
• Knowledge of TCP/IP and, if applicable, other network
protocols
• Knowledge of programming languages
• Knowledge of IT security products such as ﬁrewalls,
intrusion detection systems
• Knowledge of how to handle hacker tools and vulnera-
bility scanners
• Knowledge of applications/application systems
NIST [5] speciﬁes similar technical know-how as a prereq-
uisite, however, BSI also names ’creativity’ as an essential soft
skill. According to BSI [6], the creativity of the penetration
tester is decisive for the success of the penetration test.
Often, breaking into a system is only possible through creative
combination of received information, discovered vulnerabili-
ties, along with known tools and methodologies. OWASP [2]
also claims that creativity allows for better results in ﬁnding
vulnerabilities than fully automated tools. Creative penetration
testers would therefore be expected to achieve better results
than penetration testers who rely solely on the results of their
tools [2][6].
According to OSSTMM [18], it is also important that a
standardized approach does not interfere with the creativity of
the penetration tester and thus negatively affects the quality of
the outcome. However, OSSTMM [10] and BSI [6] also agree
that creativity should not lead to unsystematic and untraceable
penetration testing. Although intuition allows creativity to be
applied to penetration testing, it can also lead to mistakes
when a penetration tester relies solely on intuition by skipping
checks that seem unnecessary [10].
Certiﬁcates usually serve as proof of a penetration tester’s
skills. There is a wide range of certiﬁcation authorities that
offer IT security and, in particular, penetration testing cer-
tiﬁcates. To obtain such a certiﬁcate, participants must pass
an examination. Some of them are purely theoretical exams
that solely test knowledge and thus only assess hard skills.
However, others are more practical and require the successful
completion of a penetration test as an exam and thereby also
take into account soft skills [6][19].
III. APPROACH
A research project at Darmstadt University of Applied
Sciences called fast electronic identiﬁcation (SEIN) aims to
provide an identiﬁcation solution that enables fully automated
identity veriﬁcation via the account holder’s online banking
credentials [20]. To perform this type of identiﬁcation, several
web applications were implemented, which needed to be
analyzed for their security through a penetration test.
We took this opportunity to commission two independent
service providers to each conduct a penetration test of the
SEIN web applications. To make the results of both penetration
tests comparable, we made sure that the same conditions and
terms applied to both contractors.
Since the SEIN research funds were not intended for cyber-
security research, but only to ensure that required standards
such as ISO 27001 were met, the sample size was limited to
these two service providers. Both service providers are local
companies that have ties to the university through graduates
and lecturers. One provider was initially contracted to assist
with the implementation of an Information Security Man-
agement System (ISMS), and penetration testing was already
included in their proposal. The other service provider offered
a free initial penetration test as a promotional activity.
A. General conditions
Both contractors were given four days to perform the
penetration test, plus an additional day to create the ﬁnal
report. In addition, both parties have been provided with the
same technical documentation, including a list of the systems
to be tested with short descriptions, and a sequence diagram
to illustrate the identiﬁcation process. SEIN assured that no
changes have been made during the penetration tests, so that
the same conditions applied to both penetration tests.
The two service providers stated that the penetration tests
would be performed by certiﬁed professionals. Further, they
claimed that their methodologies are based on the BSI Pene-
tration Testing Model and the OWASP Web Security Testing
Guide.
The penetration tests were performed sequentially to ensure
that the penetration testers did not interfere with each other.
On completion of both penetration tests, the ﬁndings of the
two reports were reviewed and compared.
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-893-8
CYBER 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

B. Investigated web applications
Four web applications of the SEIN research project were
examined. These included a business portal, the business portal
API, a demo application, and the API of the SEIN backend
server.
• Business Portal
The Business Portal is a Javascript-based single-page
application that is connected to the Business Portal API.
Companies can register via the Business Portal to receive
an API key for the use of the SEIN Backend API.
• Business Portal API
The Business Portal API is based on Strapi, a headless
content management system. Strapi does not provide its
own web frontend, but solely provides a REST API that
allows content to be retrieved or edited. Using this API
the essential functions of the business portal are made
available.
• Demo Application
The demo application simulates a webshop where an
identity check of customers is performed via SEIN as
part of the ordering process. In the web store shopping
cart view, users are asked to enter their personal data.
The identiﬁcation process then starts. For this purpose,
the demo application communicates as a client with the
SEIN backend via the API provided. After the veriﬁcation
is completed, the results are displayed in the demo
application.
• SEIN Backend
The SEIN backend provides a REST API that can be
used to conﬁrm a person’s identity. After a client, such
as the demo application, has sent the data to be veriﬁed
to the API, the user is asked to select a bank. In the
next step, the user logs into the selected bank’s online
banking portal and grants SEIN access to the account
holder’s personal data for veriﬁcation purposes. The
SEIN backend then queries the required information and
performs a comparison with the previously provided data.
Finally, the result of this data comparison is sent back to
the client.
IV. RESULTS
The penetration testing reports of both service providers
were reviewed and the included ﬁndings were extracted. A
comparison of the aggregated results of both penetration tests
can be seen in Table I. The two right-hand columns indicate
whether the respective ﬁnding was listed in the corresponding
report of penetration test A or B.
Due to the fact that the contractors used similar approaches,
the results show some overlap. However, the direct comparison
illustrates that one service provider was able to identify
signiﬁcantly more vulnerabilities, especially more with high
or medium criticality. Most of these are among the OWASP
Top 10, a collection of the ten most common and critical
vulnerabilities in web applications, which is maintained by
OWASP to create awareness for web application security. The
TABLE I
COMPARISON OF THE IDENTIFIED VULNERABILITIES
Vulnerability
Risk
P.T. A
P.T. B
Stored Cross-Site-Scripting
High


Error-handling enables denial
of service
High


Plain text transmission of au-
thentication data
High


Support for TLS 1.0 and TLS
1.1 and cryptographically weak
cipher suites
High


Use of outdated software
Medium


Missing
attributes
in
HTTP
headers
Medium


SSH service allows login by
password
Medium


Incomplete implementation of
two-factor authentication
Medium


Publicly available API docu-
mentation
Medium


Meaningful error messages al-
low user enumeration
Medium


Internal services exposed
Medium


Bypass of the reverse proxy
possible
Medium


Use of self-signed certiﬁcates
Medium


Missing access control
Medium


Disclosure of software versions
and components
Medium


Long-lived access tokens
Medium


No deactivation of access to-
kens after a user logout
Medium


Link to registration conﬁrma-
tion contains valid access token
Medium


Disclosure
of
internal
error
messages
Medium


Lack of rate limiting in the
APIs
Medium


Sensitive data in URLs of the
demo application and the back-
end API
Medium


Cross-Origin Resource Sharing
for any origin
Medium


SSH weak MAC algorithms
Low


JSON Web Tokens use a sym-
metric algorithm for the signa-
ture
Info


Web
server
delivers
default
ﬁles
Info


Responding to ICMP times-
tamp requests
Info


Responding to TCP timestamp
requests
Info


68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-893-8
CYBER 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

document provides information about these vulnerabilities and
references other documents, such as speciﬁc OWASP Cheat
Sheets, that can assist in their investigation and remediation.
A closer look reveals that a large number of the vulnerabil-
ities, that have been overlooked by one of the contractors,
are actually covered by the OWASP Web Security Testing
Guide [2]. A variety of these are authentication and authoriza-
tion based vulnerabilities, which the OWASP Testing Guide
addresses in detail in the categories ’Identity Management
Testing’, ’Authentication Testing’ and ’Session Management
Testing’. Furthermore, the overlooked high-risk vulnerabili-
ties are covered by the chapters ’Input Validation Testing’
and ’Testing for Error Handling’ [2]. By fully applying the
OWASP Testing Guide and including the referenced Cheat
Sheets, these should have also been found by the second
service provider. Therefore, it is essential that the checks
described in the guide are carried out without exception. The
impact that skipping or forgetting individual checks can have
on the results of a penetration test can be seen in Figure 2.
High
4
Medium
18
Info
1
(a) Penetration Test A
High
2
Medium
7
Low
1
Info
3
(b) Penetration Test B
Figure 2. Overall vulnerabilities identiﬁed by the contractors
Further, the comparison also shows some vulnerabilities that
are not addressed by the OWASP Testing Guide. This indicates
that both penetration testers performed checks beyond the
OWASP Testing Guide as part of their individual approach.
This may be due to the fact that the OWASP Testing Guide
focuses primarily on the web application itself. Although the
chapter ’Conﬁguration and Deployment Management Testing’
also covers the conﬁguration of the webserver used, other
services that could run on the same system are not considered
here. Yet these could also be potential entry points for an
attacker, which is why they are also checked for obvious
vulnerabilities by some penetration testers. In that case, the
individual approach determines which checks are performed
beyond the OWASP Testing Guide to analyze these additional
services. Since the focus of a web application penetration test
lies on checking web applications, it must be decided where
the line is drawn to an external IT infrastructure penetration
test.
It appears that service provider B invested more effort into
performing these additional checks. This enabled them to
uncover a few minor misconﬁgurations, although they do not
add much value for the customer. This work might have been
better spent on processing the checks of the OWASP Testing
Guide.
V. CONCLUSION
Overlooking vulnerabilities has a direct impact on the qual-
ity of the penetration test and thus on the client’s security. To
prevent this, penetration testers usually rely on standards that
deﬁne which areas a penetration test should cover. However, a
standard is no guarantee for a successful penetration test. As
our studies have shown, the results of two penetration tests
conducted in the same environment under identical conditions
can still differ signiﬁcantly despite the use of established
standards. The decisive factor here was the human component,
precisely the penetration testers themselves, as one of them
was able to ﬁnd considerably more vulnerabilities and, above
all, more valuable ones in terms of risk.
As both were certiﬁed penetration testers, it is safe to
assume they have similar hard skills. However, it appears the
decisive factor was how they dealt with their creativity and
intuition. While it may enable penetration testers to archive
better results, it may also cause problems when they solely
rely on intuition and do not stick to the chosen approach. It
is important that all checks of this approach are performed
without exceptions.
Furthermore, it could be observed that the penetration testers
or their companies can add their own touch by using individual
approaches that are an extension of established standards.
This allows them to add value to the customer by performing
additional checks on top of the predeﬁned ones. Still, it is
important not to lose focus on the actual objectives of the
penetration test.
Future research could further investigate the interaction
between hard skills and soft skills of penetration testers and
their impact on penetration tests results. A larger sample size
could provide insight into how often major discrepancies be-
tween penetration tests occur. This could also indicate whether
it makes sense to always have penetration tests performed
by several independent service providers in order to achieve
better coverage. In addition, individual penetration testing
approaches seem to be widely used but little researched.
Further research could compare individual approaches with
standardized ones in terms of their effectiveness. It could also
be investigated whether combinations of standards are useful
and which combinations work well together.
REFERENCES
[1] Bundeskriminalamt
[in
English:
Federal
Criminal
Police
Ofﬁce],
“Bundeslagebild
Cybercrime
2020,”
Jul.
2021.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.bka.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/
DE/Publikationen/JahresberichteUndLagebilder/Cybercrime/
cybercrimeBundeslagebild2020.pdf?
blob=publicationFile&v=4
[retrieved: Aug, 2021].
[2] E. Saad and R. Mitchell, OWASP Web Security Testing Guide Version
4.2.
OWASP Foundation, Dec. 2020.
[3] S. Alavi, N. Bessler, and M. Massoth, “A Comparative Evaluation
of Automated Vulnerability Scans versus Manual Penetration Tests
on False-negative Errors,” in CYBER 2018: The Third International
Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems, 2018, pp. 1–6.
[4] P. Engebretson, The basics of hacking and penetration testing: ethical
hacking and penetration testing made easy, 2nd ed.
Amsterdam ;
Boston: Syngress, an imprint of Elsevier, 2013.
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-893-8
CYBER 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

[5] K. Scarfone, M. Souppaya, A. Cody, and A. Orebaugh, Technical guide
to information security testing and assessment.
National Institute of
Standards & Technology, 2008.
[6] Federal Ofﬁce for Information Security, “A Penetration Testing Model,”
2003.
[7] J. Andress, Foundations of information security: a straightforward
introduction, 1st ed.
San Francisco: No Starch Press, 2019.
[8] H. C. A. v. Tilborg and S. Jajodia, Eds., Encyclopedia of cryptography
and security, 2nd ed., ser. Springer reference.
New York: Springer,
2011.
[9] K. M. Henry, Penetration testing protecting networks and systems. Ely,
U.K: IT Governance Pub, 2012.
[10] P. Herzog, “OSSTMM 3-The Open Source Security Testing Methodol-
ogy Manual: Contemporary Security Testing and Analysis,” ISECOM-
Institute for Security and Open Methodologies, 2010.
[11] C. Nickerson et al., “The Penetration Testing Execution Standard,”
2014. [Online]. Available: http://www.pentest-standard.org/index.php/
Main Page [retrieved: Aug, 2021].
[12] R. Baloch, Ethical hacking and penetration testing guide.
Boca Raton:
CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group, 2015.
[13] T. P. Chiem, “A study of penetration testing tools and approaches,” PhD
Thesis, Auckland University of Technology, 2014.
[14] K. Cardwell, Building Virtual Pentesting Labs for Advanced Penetration
Testing, 2nd ed.
Birmingham: Packt Publishing, Limited, 2016, oCLC:
963293305.
[15] A. Shanley and M. Johnstone, “Selection of penetration testing method-
ologies: A comparison and evaluation,” 13th Australian Information
Security Management Conference, pp. 65–72, 2015.
[16] OWASP Foundation, “OWASP - Main Page,” 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://www.owasp.org/index.php/Main Page [retrieved: Aug, 2021].
[17] E. Rey, M. Thumann, and D. Baier, Mehr IT-Sicherheit durch Pen-Tests.
Wiesbaden: Vieweg+Teubner Verlag, 2005.
[18] P. Herzog, “OSSTMM 2.2–Open Source Security Testing Methodology
Manual,” ISECOM-Institute for Security and Open Methodologies, 2006.
[19] D. Bhattacharyya, “Penetration Testing for Hire,” International Journal
of Advanced Science and Technology, vol. 8, pp. 1–8, 2009.
[20] M. Massoth and S. L. Ahier, “Fast Electronic Identiﬁcation at Trust
Substantial Level using the Personal Online Bank Account,” in CYBER
2020: The Fifth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and
Cyber-Systems, 2020, pp. 94–99.
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-893-8
CYBER 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

