Cyber Security Controls 
The role of policy, collaboration and engagement in cyber security 
Leonie Shepherd 
Technology 
Objective Insight 
Australia  
anne.objectiveinsight@gmail.com 
 
 
 
 
Abstract— In Australia, Cyber-attacks are increasing with 
devastating impact to some business.  The Australian Signals 
Directorate’s Australian Cyber Security Centre (ACSC) [4] is 
running a survey to understand what small to medium sized 
businesses want or need to tackle cybercrime.  They report 
that “the level of knowledge about good cyber security 
practices remains fairly low with the majority of businesses 
believing they are safe from cybercrime because they use 
antivirus software”.  These companies would employ people 
who can assist in minimizing cyber-attacks when they are 
engaged via effective policies and frameworks with a focus on 
engagement between the owners and users of the policies to 
ensure they are fit for purpose, easy to understand and follow. 
The ACSC also drives cyber security awareness.  However 
enhanced collaboration across organizations and industry to 
combine skills and knowledge would further assist in effective 
cyber resilience with metrics help to focus people on the 
desired outcomes.   
Keywords-APRA; CPS234; policy; engagement. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Every person that accesses the systems and data in 
organizations represent some kind of cyber security risk.  
Organizations rely on their people to identify potential cyber 
risks and take the appropriate steps aligned to their 
requirements.  Therefore business and technology processes 
need to be regularly reviewed to identify where things can go 
wrong with a focus on the user of the policy and framework 
via workshops and awareness programs for example. 
The use of entity level controls will assist in minimizing 
cyber risks.  The nature of controls can be either preventative 
or detective and act as management’s primary line of 
defense.  This includes effective frameworks, policies and 
procedures that are fit for purpose and the reality of the 
situations they are meant to cover with options for 
contributions to assist in improving their effectiveness as a 
part of changing organizational culture to be more cyber 
resilient. 
A control is an action taken by management to mitigate 
an inherent risk and/or satisfy an obligation.  A control either 
reduces the likelihood of the risk occurring or reduces the 
potential impact if the risk occurs.  It needs to be 
proportionate to the risks faced and designed to support 
strategic objectives.  The ACSC survey highlights potential 
gaps and weaknesses in current processes and capabilities 
that result in cyber-attacks.  This is one of a number of 
initiatives by the Australia Government.  The Australian 
Prudential Regulatory Authority (APRA), who has a remit 
by the Australian government to regulate consumer banks, 
business 
banks, 
insurance 
companies, 
hedge 
funds, 
investment banks and superannuation providers, introduced 
Standard CPS234 for all APRA regulated entities effective 1 
July 2019.   The key obligation under CPS234 is that 
regulated entities must maintain information security in a 
manner commensurate with the size and extent of threats to 
its information assets, and which enables the continued 
sound operation of the entity. It applies to all information 
assets regardless of whether they are material business 
activities or not and assets managed by third parties [1].  
APRA regulated businesses also rely on their people to know 
and do the right thing to protect companies from cyber-
attacks.  The Office of the Australian Information 
Commissioner (OAIC) [2] report that only 5% of data 
breaches notified under the NDB scheme from 1 April 2018 
to 31 March 2019 were due to system faults however 35% 
were due to human error. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows; Section II 
introduces the need to focus on the people that organizations 
rely on to be more cyber resilient and the requirements of 
APRA regulated entities as cyber-attacks have increased on 
financial organizations Section III presents a proposal to 
more effectively collaborate and engage across and within 
organizations to help them to be more cyber resilient.      
Section IV concludes the paper. 
II. 
COLLABORATE AND ENGAGE 
Effective engagement between policy owners and the 
people required to understand and follow the policy will 
assist in minimizing potential cyber risks.  This includes 
creating a culture where people can and will work together to 
share specialized knowledge and experience just as the cyber 
criminals work together.  Furthermore, it is increasingly 
important for organizations to collaborate with each other 
and with their people to gain new insights and connections to 
better protect their systems and data as the cost of cyber-
crime increases.  This includes supporting effective 
governance 
of 
outsourced 
services 
and 
reviewing   
contracted arrangements aligned to policy and frameworks.  
A. APRA regulated organizations 
APRA regulated organizations, under CPS234, are 
required to ensure their policies, standards, guidelines and 
procedures pertaining to information security are in order 
and aligned to their exposure to threats.  An effective policy 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-743-6
CYBER 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

framework is important to manage potential risks, as it 
includes responsibilities of stakeholders to whom the 
framework applies including Board, senior management, 
governing bodies and individuals.  This would include 
categorizing 
and 
managing 
data 
classifications 
and 
supporting employees to understand and manage their data 
appropriately, particularly customer related or sensitive 
information.  Therefore, policies need to be accessible, 
effective, streamlined, simplified so that they are easy to 
understand and follow, enforceable, written in plain English 
and tied to employee metrics (key performance indicators) to 
support behavior changes. 
In an APRA regulated entity, Boards are ultimately 
responsible for information security.  However, they rely on 
their employees and sometimes on a third party provider to 
understand and adhere to their organizational policies and 
procedures.  They rely on frameworks being reviewed and 
tested by the framework owner on an annual or more 
frequent basis where required and effective governance. The 
use of outsourced service providers does not eliminate 
management’s responsibility for maintaining effective 
controls over material inherent risks or compliance with laws 
and regulations [1].   
B. Notifiable data breachess 
Process level controls need to be in place to ensure or 
verify that appropriate actions have been taken when 
executing a process or to recover from errors or 
irregularities.  For example, APRA says that the cyber 
security measures in CPS234 will help APRA-regulated 
entities to repel cyber adversaries, as well as handle incident 
response swiftly and effectively if a breach occurs [1].  This 
follows an increased number of cyber-attacks.  Since 
Australia’s Notifiable Data Breaches (NDB) scheme 
launched in February 2018, the Office of the Australian 
Information Commissioner (OAIC) advise that 964 data 
breaches were reported between 1 Apr 2018 and 31 March 
2019, which is a 712% increase in reported data breaches.  
The main sources of the data breaches were attributed to 
malicious or criminal attacks (60%), phishing and spear 
phishing (153), credentials obtained by unknown means 
(28%) and human error (35%).  OAIC report that 83% of 
data breaches affected fewer than 1,000 people. However, 
86% of notifications involved disclosure of contact 
information.  The finance sector accounted for 41% of data 
breaches compared to a 35% average for all sectors. OAIC 
advise “The predominance of human factors in data breaches 
emphasizes the importance of education and training for all 
employees who handle personal information.” [2] 
The goal of CPS234 is continued information security 
management and improvement, investment aligned to the 
sophistication of the cyber-attacks and risk management. 
APRA expects these entities to ensure the security of all 
customer data”.  APRA must be notified as soon as possible 
but no later than 72 hours after becoming aware of an 
information security incident that did or had the potential to 
materially affect a stakeholder [1].  OAIC report that “most 
data breaches—including those resulting from a cyber 
incident—involved a human element, such as an employee 
sending information to the wrong person or clicking on a 
link that resulted in the compromise of user credentials”. [2]. 
III. 
PROPOSAL 
Considering how long cyber security has been 
highlighted, yet more organizations are victims of cyber-
attacks, perhaps there is an opportunity to more effectively 
collaborate and engage across organizations and within 
organizations with a focus on the people they rely on to 
assist them to be cyber resilient, for example via awareness.  
This may include guidance on how organizations, which 
hold customer or sensitive data, could run a diagnostic gap 
analysis against their current cyber security governance 
framework.  For example, running an assessment to identify 
potential gaps and weaknesses in current processes and 
capabilities related to: 
1. Reviewing roles and responsibilities such as 
actionable roles and escalation processes  
2. Information security capability such as how 
internal and third party risk assessments are 
conducted.  How vendors are tiered according to 
risk  
3. Policy framework such as the location of the 
organisational frameworks covering vulnerabilities 
and threats – how is this stored and maintained, 
who has access to it in what format.  This includes 
the owner details correctly and clearly recorded for 
queries and feedback 
4. Implementation 
of 
controls 
such 
as 
how 
vulnerabilities and threats are detected then 
classified and measured. 
5. Review and update information security policies, 
procedures and controls for example including one 
or a combination of the following: 
a. Walk through processes from start to finish with 
the people performing the activities to collect 
evidence of how activities that minimise cyber 
security risks are performed.  This provides 
assurance that all controls and potential control 
gaps are identified.  Once controls are identified 
and documented, link them to the relevant risk. 
This includes ensuring adequate cyber security 
mechanisms where a supplier manages data or 
systems 
b. Ask 
questions 
aimed 
at 
getting 
relevant 
information from the people performing the 
activities in order to identify the points in the 
process where things can go wrong and the actions 
that have been designed to prevent, detect and 
recover from these errors. 
c. Review existing policies, procedures, standards and 
guidelines for adequacy of information security 
controls such as via conducting workshops to 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-743-6
CYBER 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

discuss changes to the business environment, risk, 
controls and any potential issues 
6. Review contracts with service providers.  Test their 
security controls and evaluate their governance 
processes if they manage organizational assets. 
7. Run awareness campaigns aimed at ensuring 
policies and frameworks make sense, clearly set 
out what is required, support delivery of what is 
necessary and clarify where and how to make a 
positive contribution to improve it.  Combine this 
with 
metrics 
supporting 
behavior 
changes.  
Ongoing monitoring would provide feedback on 
the effectiveness of the campaigns.. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
Using 
APRA 
CPS234 
guidelines 
or 
similar, 
organizational testing of information security capability and 
policy framework in terms of people, processes and 
technology at the most fundamental level is important to 
combine 
the 
various 
initiatives. 
 
Clearly 
defined, 
documented policies, standards and procedures with the end-
user in mind support management requirements (information 
threats, technical and procedural vulnerabilities).  Aim for a 
balance of benefit versus risk of each control when 
reviewing results as a part of ensuring confidentiality, 
integrity (accuracy and freedom from unauthorized change 
or usage) and availability (access and usability when 
required). 
REFERENCES 
[1] Australia 
Prudential 
Regulation 
Authority 
(APRA), 
“Prudential Standard CPS 234 - Information Security 
(Draft)”, 2018, Available from: https://www.apra.gov.au 
/sites/default/files/Draft-CPS-234.pdf 
[2] Office of the Australian Information Commissioner (OAIC)  
“Notifiable Data Breaches scheme 12-month insights report”, 
Available from:  https:///www.oaic.gov.au/privacy/notifiable-
data-breaches/notifiable-data-breaches-statistics/notifiable-
data-breaches-scheme-12month-insights-report// 
[3] Smart Collaboration: Breaking Down Silos - Heidi K. 
Gardner 
[4] The Australian Signals Directorate’s Australian Cyber 
Security 
Centre 
(ACSC), 
available 
via 
https://www.cyber.gov.au/ 
 
 
 
 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-743-6
CYBER 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

