 
 
Dynamic Trust Evaluation of Evolving Cyber Physical Systems 
 
 
Rainer Falk and Steffen Fries 
Siemens AG  
Technology 
Munich, Germany 
e-mail: {rainer.falk|steffen.fries}@siemens.com 
 
 
Abstract—The integrity of Cyber Physical Systems (CPS) as, 
e.g., industrial Internet of Things systems or automation and 
control systems for monitoring and controlling technical 
processes, has to be protected to ensure a reliable operation. 
This becomes increasingly challenging with systems that are 
flexibly updated and reconfigured to address evolving 
demands. This paper describes an approach for integrity 
monitoring for such dynamic systems. Instead of detecting 
changes to a CPS as integrity violation, the focus is on checking 
whether detected changes are in-line with a policy defining 
permitted changes. A key element is a reliable device lifecycle 
state attestation, so that a monitoring system can determine the 
current device configuration state and the way in which it was 
changed due to reconfigurations. 
Keywords–system integrity; trustworthiness; device integrity; 
attestation; lifecycle; resilience; cyber physical systems; Internet 
of Things; cyber security. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The integrity and resilience of Cyber Physical Systems 
(CPS), e.g., technical automation and control systems, is an 
important security objective. Specifically, through the use of 
more and more Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT) devices in 
critical infrastructures, this security objective often becomes 
a regulative requirement, as seen in the EU Network 
Information Security (NIS) directive. An approach for 
enhanced 
integrity 
monitoring 
of 
overall 
industrial 
automation and control systems, combining integrity 
monitoring from physical processes up to control and 
support systems, has been described in [1]. Enhanced attack 
resilience allows a cyber physical system to stay operational, 
possibly with some limitations, during an attack [2]. 
Particularly challenging are dynamically changing CPS, that 
come with the IIoT and Industry 4.0. Cyber systems will 
become more open and dynamic to support flexible 
production down to lot size 1 by supporting plug-and-work 
reconfiguration of manufacturing equipment and flexible 
adaptation of production systems to changing needs. This 
implies that also security has to support such dynamically 
cyber physical systems that are evolving over time.  
In the past, cyber physical systems and industrial 
automation systems have been often rather static. After being 
put into operation, changes to the configuration happen only 
rarely, e.g., to replace a defect component, or to install 
smaller upgrades during a planned maintenance window. To 
cope with increasing demands for flexible production and 
increased productivity, CPS will also become more dynamic, 
allowing for reconfiguration during regular operation. Such 
scenarios for adaptable, reconfigurable production have been 
described in the context of Industry 4.0 [3]. 
The flexibility starts at the device level, where smart 
devices allow for upgrading and enhancing device 
functionality by downloadable apps. But also the system of 
interconnected machines is reconfigured according to 
changing needs. Examples are Software Defined Networks 
(SDN) enabling a fast reconfiguration of the communication 
infrastructure to adapt flexibly to the communication needs. 
Another example relates to manufacturing systems (e.g., 
robots) in industrial automation systems, where smart tools 
are attached to a robot that in turn feature also a local 
communication network connecting to the robot’s network.  
The focus of cyber security is protection against cyber 
attacks, their detection, and the recovery from successful 
cyber attacks. An increasingly important further aspect is 
trustworthiness, where automated checks verify whether the 
overall systems and the used components meet the explicitly 
defined trustworthiness criteria. However, the concept of 
trustworthiness is subjective. The presented approach checks 
for changes within a CPS to determine whether the CPS is in 
a permitted, trustworthy state. 
After summarizing related previous work in Section II on 
protecting integrity of cyber physical systems and their 
components, the monitoring of reliable device lifecycle 
information based on lifecycle state attestations is described 
in Sections III and IV as specific additional criteria for 
monitoring CPS integrity, and evaluated in Section V. 
Section VI concludes the paper. 
II. 
CPS SYSTEM INTEGRITY PROTECTION  
Information Technology (IT) security mechanisms have 
been known for many years and are applied in smart devices 
(Internet of Things, Cyber Physical Systems, industrial and 
energy automation systems, operation technology) [6]. Such 
mechanisms target source authentication, system and 
communication integrity, and confidentiality of data in 
transit or at rest. System integrity takes a broader approach 
where not only the integrity of individual components 
(device integrity) and of communication is addressed, but 
where integrity shall be ensured at the system level of 
multiple interconnected devices, e.g., a CPS.  
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-996-6
CYBER 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
 
A. Industrial Security  
Protecting industrial automation and control systems 
against intentional attacks is increasingly demanded by 
operators to ensure a reliable operation, and also by 
regulation. The main relevant industrial security standard 
that describes security from a holistic view is IEC 62443 [6]. 
Security requirements defined by the industrial security 
standard IEC 62443 range from security processes, personal 
and physical security, device security, network security, and 
application security, addressing the device manufacturer, the 
integrator as well as the operator of the industrial automation 
and control system.   
Industrial security is also called Operation Technology 
(OT) security, to distinguish it from general IT security. 
Industrial systems have different security requirements 
compared to general IT systems. Typically, availability and 
integrity of an automation system have higher priority than 
confidentiality.  
Specific requirements and side conditions of industrial 
automation 
systems 
like 
high 
availability, 
planned 
configuration (engineering info), long life cycles, unattended 
operation, real-time operation, and communication, as well 
as safety requirements have to be considered when designing 
a security solution.  
B. Device Integrity 
The objective of device integrity is to ensure that a single 
device is not manipulated in an unauthorized way. This 
includes the integrity of the device firmware, of the device 
configuration, but also the physical integrity. The main 
technologies to protect device integrity are: 
− 
Secure boot: A device loads at start-up only 
unmodified, authorized firmware.  
− 
Measured boot: The loaded software modules are 
checked at the time they are loaded. Usually, a 
cryptographic hash value is recorded in a platform 
configuration register of a hardware of firmware 
Trusted Platform Module (TPM). The configuration 
information can be used to grant access to keys, or it 
can be attested towards third parties.  
− 
Protected firmware update: When the firmware of a 
device is updated, the integrity and authenticity of the 
firmware update is checked. The firmware update 
image can be digitally signed.  
− 
Application 
whitelisting: 
Only 
allowed, 
known 
applications can be started on a device. A whitelist 
defines which application binaries can be started.  
− 
Runtime integrity checks: During operation, the device 
performs a self-test of security functionality and 
integrity checks to verify whether it is operating as 
expected. Integrity checks can verify the integrity of 
files, configuration data, software modules, and runtime 
data as the process list, i.e., the list of currently 
executed processes.  
− 
Process isolation, kernel-based Mandatory Access 
Control (MAC): Hypervisors or kernel-based MAC 
systems can be used to isolate different classes of 
software (security domains). An attack or malfunction 
of one security domain does not affect other security 
domains on the same device.  
− 
Tamper evidence, tamper protection: The physical 
integrity of a device can be protected, e.g., by security 
seals or by tamper sensors that detect opening or 
manipulation of the housing. 
− 
Device integrity self-test: A device performs a self-test 
to detect failures. The self-test is performed typically 
during startup and is repeated regularly during 
operation.  
− 
Operation integrity checks: measurements on the device 
can be compared with the expected behavior in the 
operative environment. An example is the measurement 
of connection attempts to/from the device, based on 
parameters of a Management Information Base (MIB).  
The known approaches to protect device integrity focus on 
the IT-related functionality of a device (with the exception of 
tamper protection). Also, a strong tamper protection is not 
common at device level. The main protection objective for 
device integrity shall ensure that the device’s control 
functionality operates as designed. However, the integrity of 
input/output interfaces, sensors, and actuators are typically 
out of scope. In typical industrial environments, applying a 
strong tamper protection to each control device, sensor, and 
actuator would not be economically feasible. Therefore, 
protecting device integrity of used devices alone would be 
too limited to achieve the goal of protection the integrity of 
an overall CPS.  
C. Cyber Physical System Integrity Monitoring 
Classical approaches for protecting device and system 
integrity target at preventing any changes and compare the 
current configuration to a fixed reference policy. More 
flexible approaches are needed to protect integrity for 
flexibly reconfigurable and self-adapting CPSs. In previous 
work [1], we described an integrated, holistic approach for 
ensuring CPS integrity that is an extensible framework to 
include integrity information from IT-based functions and 
the physical world of a CPS. This allows integrating integrity 
information from the digital and the physical world. Trusted 
physical integrity sensors can be installed as add-on to 
existing automation and control systems. One-way gateways 
can be used to extract integrity monitoring information from 
closed control networks, while ensuring freedom from 
interference.  
Integrity does not only affect single devices, but also the 
overall system level comprising a set of interconnected 
devices. The main approaches to protect system integrity are 
collecting and analyzing information at system level [1]: 
− 
Device inventory: Complete and up-to-date list of 
installed devices (including manufacturer, model, serial 
number 
version, 
firmware 
version, 
current 
configuration, installed software components, location) 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-996-6
CYBER 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
 
− 
Centralized Logging: Devices provide log data, e.g., 
using 
Open 
Platform 
Communication 
Unified 
Architecture (OPC UA) protocol, Simple Network 
Management Protocol (SNMP), or syslog protocol, to a 
centralized logging system.  
− 
Runtime device integrity measurements: A device 
integrity agent provides information gathered during the 
operation of the device (see also point B above). It 
collects integrity information on the device and 
provides it for further analysis. Basic integrity 
information includes the results of a device self-test, 
and information on the current device configuration 
(firmware version, patches, installed applications, 
configuration). Furthermore, runtime information can 
be gathered and provided for analysis (e.g., process list, 
file system integrity check values, partial copy of 
memory). 
− 
Network monitoring: The network communication is 
intercepted, e.g., using a network tap or a mirror port of 
a network switch. A challenge is the fact that network 
communication is increasingly encrypted. 
− 
Physical Automation process monitoring: Trusted 
sensors provide information on the physical world that 
can be used to cross-check the view of the control 
system on the physical world. Adding trusted sensors to 
existing installation allows for a smooth migration from 
legacy systems to systems providing integrated sensors. 
− 
Physical world integrity: Trusted sensors (of physical 
world), integrated monitoring of embedded devices and 
IT-based control systems, and of the technical process 
allow now quality of integrity monitoring as physical 
world and IT world are checked together.    
The captured integrity information can be used for 
system runtime integrity monitoring to detect integrity 
violations in real-time. Operators can be informed, or actions 
can be triggered automatically. Furthermore, the information 
is archived for later investigations. This allows that integrity 
violations can be detected also later with a high probability, 
so that corresponding countermeasures can be initiated (e.g., 
plan for an additional quality check of produced goods). The 
integrity information can be integrated in or linked to data of 
a production management system, so that it can be 
investigated under which integrity conditions certain 
production steps have been performed. Product data is 
enhanced with integrity monitoring data related to the 
production of the product. 
An intelligent analysis platform performs data analysis 
(e.g., statistical analysis, big data analysis, artificial 
intelligence) and triggers suitable respondence actions (e.g., 
alarm, remote wipe of a device, revocation of a device, stop 
of a production site, planning for additional test of 
manufactured goods).  
Open Network 
(Office/Internet)
Automation 
Network
IoT Backend Platform:
System Integrity Monitoring Data
ID1 SD
ID2 SD
ID3 SD
ID4 SD
ID5 SD
System Integrity  
Validation Service
System Integrity 
Respondence
Validation
Policy
Device 
wipe
alarm
ID1
ID3
ID2
GW
ID4
ID5
 
Figure 1. CPS Integrity Monitoring System [1] 
Figure 1 shows an example for an IoT system with IoT 
devices (ID1, ID2, etc.) that communicate with an IoT 
backend platform. The devices provide current integrity 
monitoring information to the backend platform. The devices 
can 
be 
automation 
devices 
that 
include 
integrity 
measurement functionality, or dedicated integrity sensor 
devices. The device monitoring system itself has to be 
protected against attacks, following the industrial security 
standard IEC 62443.  
An integrity data validation service checks the obtained 
integrity measurement data for validity using a configurable 
validation policy. If a policy violation is detected, a 
corrective action is triggered. For example, an alarm message 
can be displayed on a dashboard. Furthermore, an alarm 
message can be sent to the IoT backend platform to 
terminate the communication session of the affected IoT 
device. Moreover, the device security service can be 
informed so that it can revoke the devices access 
permissions, or revoke the device authentication credential. 
The integrity monitoring events are analyzed using 
known data analysis tools. As stated before, in industrial 
environments, it is also important to have reliable 
information about the system integrity of a production 
system for the time period during which a certain production 
batch 
was performed. 
This allows performing the 
verification also afterwards to check whether during a past 
production batch integrity-violations occurred.   
The final decision whether a certain configuration is 
accepted as correct is up to human operators. After 
reconfiguration, or for a production step, the configuration is 
to be approved. The approval decision can be automated 
according to previously accepted decisions, or preconfigured 
good configurations.  
D. Resilience Under Attack 
Being resilient means to be able to withstand or recover 
quickly from difficult conditions [4]. It shifts the focus of 
“classical” IT and OT security, which put the focus on 
preventing, detecting, and reacting to cyber-security attacks, 
to the aspect to continue to deliver an intended outcome 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-996-6
CYBER 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
 
despite an adverse cyber attack taking place, and to recover 
quickly to regular operation. More specifically, resilience of 
a system is the property to be resistant to a range of threats 
and withstand the effects of a partial loss of capability, and to 
recover and resume its provision of service with the 
minimum reasonable loss of performance [5]. 
Risk management, the “classical” approach to cyber 
security, identifies threats and determines the risk depending 
on probability and impact of a potential attack. The objective 
is to put the focus of defined security measures on the most 
relevant risks. Resilience, however, puts the focus on a 
reduction of the impact, so that the system stays operational 
with a degraded performance or functionality even when it 
has been attacked successfully, and to recover quickly from a 
successful attack. Robustness is a further related approach 
that tries to keep the system operational without a reduction 
of the system performance, i.e., to withstand attacks. 
 
t
Absorb
Recover
Plan/Prepare
Adapt
Attack
System 
Performance / 
Functionality
 
Figure 2. Concept of Cyber Resilience [2] 
Figure 2 illustrates the concept of cyber resilience: Even 
if an attack is carried out, the impact on the system 
operation, i.e., the performance or functionality of the 
system, is limited [2]. The effects of an attack are 
“absorbed”, so that the system stays operational, but with 
limited performance or functionality. A recovery takes place 
to bring the system up to the regular operation. In adaptation 
of resilience, the system might be enhanced to better prepare 
for future attacks leading to a sort of self-healing 
functionality. In a cyber physical environment, a main 
objective is that the CPS stays operational and that its 
integrity is ensured. In the context of an industrial 
automation and control system, that means that (only) 
intended actions of the system in the physical world continue 
to take place even when the automation and control system 
of the CPS should be attacked. 
III. 
LIFECYCLE CONFIGURATION CHANGE MONITORING 
A main concept presented in this paper is an 
enhancement to the system-level integrity monitoring 
system, described in Section II.C. Instead of comparing 
integrity measurements to a fixed reference policy, the 
observed changes to device configuration along their 
lifecycle is validated. An integrity violation is detected if 
changes are detected that are not in-line with a policy on 
what and how changes are applied. 
Lifecycle state agents on the system components act as 
integrity sensors that collect lifecycle state information of a 
device and provide it in the form of a lifecycle state 
attestation to the system integrity monitoring system. The 
policy defining permitted changes of lifecycle states can be 
preconfigured. However, this would require significant 
effort. Therefore, an automated learning system, based on 
artificial intelligence, is proposed that learns from good 
examples of permitted changes. In an initial introduction 
phase, good changes (allowed changes from a system 
operation level) have to be marked by the OT personnel. 
Over time, the system learns from these good examples. This 
approach is similar to a network firewall for which the filter 
policy is determined automatically during a learning phase.  
Such a self-learning of permitted changes leads to an 
automated learning of what changes lead to a trustworthy 
CPS. It is in real-world practice often not easy to determine 
explicit rules on which specific properties make a component 
or a change being considered as trustworthy. By learning 
from good and bad examples, the attributes that are relevant 
for the trustworthiness evaluation can also be determined 
over time automatically. The system learns which attributes 
of a lifecycle state attestation are relevant for determining 
which changes are permitted. This self-learning approach 
allows also for subjective trust policies: Different users, i.e., 
operators of a CPS, can give examples of what they consider 
to be trustworthy or not so trustworthy. Depending on these 
examples, a trustworthiness evaluation policy is derived. The 
idea of this self-learning trust policy is conceptually similar 
to areas, e.g., firewalls with a learning mode. However, it is a 
more open approach where even the attributes (criteria) that 
are relevant for making trust decisions do not have to be 
predefined.  
 
CPS Lifecycle-Change Integrity Monitoring 
D
LCSA
D
LCSA
D
LCSA
Change 
Detection
Lifecycle Change 
Validation
Validation
Policy
Respondence
Production 
plan 
adaptation
alarm
Validation 
Engine
Change 
Monitor
History
DB
 
Figure 3. CPS Lifecycle Change Monitoring 
Figure 3 shows devices (D) that provide Life Cycle State 
Attestations (LCSA) to a CPS Lifecycle-change Integrity 
Monitoring system. It determines changes on device 
lifecycle states based on the provided attestations, and 
validates whether changes are in-line with a lifecycle change 
validation policy. If the policy is violated, e.g., an alarm can 
be generated, or the production plan can be adapted 
accordingly. 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-996-6
CYBER 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
 
IV. 
DEVICE LIFECYCLE STATE ATTESTATION 
Different lifecycle states of industrial IoT devices can be 
distinguished, including factory default state, commissioned, 
operational, failure, network connected, provisioned, repair, 
service, or being put out of service. The current lifecycle 
state of a device can be determined based on its current 
configuration data. Some security standards, e.g., ETSI 
EN 303645 on Consumer IoT Security includes an example 
of a device life cycle model [10]. Besides the life cycle phase 
information, also the parts of the specific configuration can 
be provided as part of the life cycle attestation and analyzed. 
It is not assumed that a common life-cycle model is 
explicitly supported by the devices, as in a real-world CPS, 
different 
device 
types 
originating 
from 
various 
manufacturers are used. Instead, the available information of 
the device configuration is taken as basis to derive/estimate 
the related life-cycle phase, at least if it is not provided 
explicitly. 
 
Device
LCSA
Device 
Configuration 
Manager
Lifecycle State 
Determination and 
Attestation Unit
Device 
Config
Control 
Function
IO
A
A
S
S
 
Figure 4. Control Device with Lifecycle State Attestation 
A device can determine its own lifecycle state and 
confirm it externally by a device lifecycle state attestation. 
Figure 4 shows a device, e.g., a control device for monitoring 
and controlling a technical process via sensors (S) and 
actuators (A) by a control function that interacts via an input-
output unit (IO) with the sensors and actuators, according to 
the 
device 
configuration 
established 
by 
a 
device 
configuration manager. The lifecycle state attestation unit 
determines the device lifecycle state based on the current 
device configuration and creates a cryptographically 
protected LCSA. Besides the current lifecycle state, also 
previous lifecycle states can be kept and attested, providing a 
more comprehensive information on the device lifecycle 
history. Alternatively, the lifecycle state may be determined 
and attested by an external add-on component, allowing that 
a LCSA can be provided also for legacy devices that do not 
have an integrated functionality for determining and attesting 
the device lifecycle state. 
The LCSA can be provided in a dedicated attestation data 
structure, i.e., a data structure that describes the current 
lifecycle state of the device, and that is protected by a 
cryptographic checksum, i.e., a digital signature or a message 
authentication code. However, it is also possible to encode 
the life cycle information in a device credential, e.g., a 
device 
authentication 
certificate, 
a 
device 
attribute 
certificate, a device authentication token, or a verifiable 
credential.  
V. 
EVALUATION 
From the perspective of a real-world CPS, the approach 
presented in Sections III and IV is not self-contained, but is 
an extension to other, well-established security measures to 
protect a CPS. The main advantage comes by the support for 
increasingly dynamic, evolving CPS. To ensure that a CPS 
and its components are in a trustworthy state, it is not 
ensured that the configuration corresponds to a fixed 
reference, but to check whether the detected changes are 
acceptable. This approach can compensate when classical, 
rather strict security controls preventing heavy changes to a 
CPS cannot be applied anymore in the same way as for static 
CPS deployments.  
The security of a cyber system can be evaluated in 
practice in various approaches and stages of the system’s 
lifecycle: 
− 
Threat and Risk Analysis (TRA) of cyber system 
− 
Checks during operation to determine key performance 
indicators (e.g., check for compliance of device 
configurations). 
− 
Security testing (penetration testing) 
During the design phase of a cyber system, the security 
demand is determined, and the appropriateness of a security 
design is validated using a TRA. Assets to be protected and 
possible threats are identified, and the risk is evaluated in a 
qualitative way depending on probability and impact of 
threats. The effectiveness of the proposed enhanced device 
authentication means can be reflected in a system TRA.  
The main evaluation using security tools is performed 
during secure operation, when as part of an overall 
operational security management appropriate technologies 
are deployed that, in combination, reduce the risk to an 
acceptable level. The new approach presented in this paper 
provides an additional element, integrated into the overall 
system security architecture that is used to reduce the risk of 
integrity violations, despite a dynamically changing CPS 
configuration.  
For the applicability to real-world CPS environments, the 
approach allows for: 
− 
Flexibility for updates: The device life cycle integrity 
monitoring system can be updated independently from 
the actual CPS. 
− 
It can be installed as add-on to existing automation 
systems (brownfield). It can be introduced stepwise, 
starting with lifecycle monitoring for most relevant 
devices. 
− 
It can be installed as an add-on system that does not 
endanger the reliable operation of a CPS or invalidate 
its certifications.  
Such non-technical properties simplify the adoption in real-
world CPS, and they are often important factors for 
acceptance by OT operators.  
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-996-6
CYBER 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
Ensuring device and system integrity is an essential 
security feature for cyber physical systems and the 
(industrial) Internet of Things. This must be ensured from the 
beginning using the security design principle of “defense in 
depth”. It allows to support system integrity based on the 
information provided from single components or devices that 
build the CPS.  
This paper proposed a framework for ensuring system 
integrity in flexibly adaptable cyber physical systems. With 
new concepts for flexible automation systems coming with 
Industrial IoT / Industry 4.0, the focus of system integrity has 
to move from preventing changes to device and system 
configuration to having transparency on the device and 
system configuration and checking it for compliance.  
The approaches for integrity monitoring in industrial 
automation and control systems described in this paper focus 
on the operation phase by relying on lifecycle attestations for 
single components building a CPS. This approach enhances 
the existing systems, with an attestation about a specific state 
in the lifecycle, which allows an industrial monitoring 
system to evaluate the current life cycle state with the 
expected one. This can be done in addition to classical 
system monitoring, which verifies configuration and system 
behavior against expected patterns.  
Integrity in a broader sense has to cover the whole life 
cycle, from development, secure procurement, secure 
manufacturing, and supply chain security up to the 
commissioning phase in the operational environment. This 
lifecycle information can then be used to enhance the current 
system state information. Due to the life cycle information 
available on the device or its associated management system, 
feedback to manufacturer can be provided in case of failure, 
in which the problem may be traced back to a specific 
production step. This also allows the manufacturer to better 
react in future versions of a device.  
Security-critical operations of a device, e.g., using for 
control operations, provisioning operational keys, or 
providing sensitive commissioning data is performed only 
for devices being in an expected state. A device can be used 
for regular operational purposes only if, according to its 
lifecycle, it is in a valid lifecycle state, and if this lifecycle 
state has been established in a permitted way. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Falk and S. Fries, “System Integrity Monitoring for 
Industrial Cyber Physical Systems”, International Journal On 
Advances in Security, volume 11, numbers 1&2, pp. 170-179, 
2018, 
[Online]. 
Available 
from 
https://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&articleid
=sec_v11_n12_2018_14 [retrieved August, 2022] 
[2] R. Falk and S. Fries, “Enhancing the Resilience of Cyber-
Physical 
Systems 
by 
Protecting 
the 
Physical-World 
Interface”, International Journal On Advances in Security, 
volume 13, numbers 1 and 2, pp. 54-65, 2020, [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&articleid=
sec_v13_n12_2020_5 [retrieved August, 2022]  
[3] Plattform Industrie 4.0, “Industrie 4.0 Plug-and-produce for 
adaptable factories: example use case definition, models, and 
implementation”, Plattform Industrie 4.0 working paper, June 
2017, [Online]. Available from: https://www.plattform-
i40.de/PI40/Redaktion/DE/Downloads/Publikation/Industrie-
40-Plug-and-Produce.pdf [retrieved August, 2022] 
[4] P. England, R. Aigner, A. Marochko, D. Mattoon, R. Spiger, 
and S. Thom, “Cyber resilient platforms”, Microsoft 
Technical Report MSR-TR-2017-40, Sep. 2017, [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.microsoft.com/en-
us/research/publication/cyber-resilient-platforms-overview/ 
[retrieved August, 2022] 
[5] Electronic Communications Resilience&Response Group, 
“EC-RRG resilience guidelines for providers of critical 
national telecommunications infrastructure”, version 0.7, 
March 
2008, 
available 
from: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/s
ystem/uploads/attachment_data/file/62281/telecoms-ecrrg-
resilience-guidelines.pdf [retrieved August, 2022] 
[6] IEC 62443, “Industrial Automation and Control System 
Security” 
(formerly 
ISA99), 
available 
from: 
http://isa99.isa.org/Documents/Forms/AllItems.aspx 
[retrieved August, 2022] 
[7] ISO/IEC 
27001, 
“Information 
technology 
– 
Security 
techniques – Information security management systems – 
Requirements”, 
October 
2013, 
available 
from: 
https://www.iso.org/standard/54534.html [retrieved August, 
2022] 
[8] IEC 62443-3-3:2013, “Industrial communication networks – 
Network and system security – Part 3-3: System security 
requirements and security levels”, Edition 1.0, August 2013 
[9] IEC 62554-4.2, “Industrial communication networks - 
Security for industrial automation and control systems - Part 
4-2: Technical security requirements for IACS components”, 
CDV:2017-05, May 2017 
[10] EN 303 645, “Cyber Security for Consumer Internet of 
Things: Baseline Requirements”, ETSI, V2.1.1 (2020-06), 
June 
2020, 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_en/303600_303699/303645/
02.01.01_60/en_303645v020101p.pdf 
[retrieved 
August, 
2022] 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-996-6
CYBER 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

