Resilient Communications Availability 
Inverting the Confidentiality, Integrity, and Availability Paradigm 
Steve Chan 
Decision Engineering Analysis Laboratory, VT 
San Diego, USA 
e-mail: schan@dengineering.org 
 
 
Abstract—Communications 
networks 
are 
subject 
to 
degradation due to a variety of factors from the cyber 
electromagnetic spectrum. Interference may be unintentional 
and/or intentional, but the consequences are comparable; 
communications availability may be affected. Although cellular 
carriers must abide by the Federal Communications 
Commission’s Enhanced 911 (E911) rules, poor radio 
frequency cellular coverage and intermittent connections 
remain problematic. As numerous communications networks 
transition to Internet Protocol-based operations, new service 
reliability vulnerabilities have emerged for, by way of example,  
911 location services, and poor wireless internet network 
(a.k.a. wi-fi) coverage may cause availability issues for 311 
(e.g., reportage of road damage), and 211 (e.g., facilitation for 
essential community services), among others. As society 
becomes more dependent upon wireless communications 
networks, it is vital to maintain acceptable service availability 
levels under prototypical circumstances as well as amidst 
incidents, including disruptions emanating from within the 
cyber electromagnetic spectrum ecosystem. In several cases, 
public safety systems, which have gone through full acceptance 
testing, have been adversely affected due to interference 
stemming from known systems (e.g., as they expand) as well as 
unknown systems (e.g., unregistered). Dropped calls, garbled 
messages, and blocked messages have been among the reported 
effects. Given these known phenomena, it is possible to 
interfere with both cellular and Voice over Internet Protocol 
(VoIP) 911 and first responder-related calls by the strategic 
placement of interfering nodes in the form of misused cellular 
boosters and/or strategically positioned femtocells, deliberate 
Bluetooth congestion so as to limit the number of frequency 
channels available and interfere with wi-fi and cellular 
network technologies (including spread spectrum), thereby 
affecting the involved communications paradigm. This string 
of effects has segued into a potential cyber kill chain (which 
comprise the phases of a cyberattack from reconnaissance to 
exploitation) paradigm, which is examined in this paper. 
Among other items presented, an alarming spike in the 
prevalence of non-compliant boosters is noted. In addition, the 
increasing number of incidents as pertains to “incidental 
radiators” and “unintentional emitters” of Radio Frequency 
Interference (RFI) is also noted. Overall, as the potential for 
RFI has increased, the potency of the described cyber kill 
chain also increases. An outcome of the paper is the 
recognition of this potential blindspot within current 
communications architectural paradigms. 
 
Keywords-Communications networks; Cyber electromagnetic 
spectrum; Radio frequency cellular coverage; Internet Protocol-
based 
coverage; 
Signal 
boosters; 
Oscillation 
detection; 
Oscillation 
prevention; 
Spectrum 
analyzer; 
Smart 
auto 
switching; Non-bonded single channel; Bonded multi-channel; 
Cyber kill chain. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Various government organizations, such as the U.S. 
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) 
Emergency 
Communications 
Division 
(ECD), 
have 
provided 
guidance 
(e.g., 
route 
diversity) 
for 
communications resiliency. In essence, it is vital to 
maximize both the reliability and resiliency of the involved 
communications network. While reliability represents the 
ability to continue operating at acceptable service 
availability levels, resiliency deals with the ability to 
recover from adversity. This paper will examine the notions 
of reliability and resiliency for communications networks 
amidst some known cyber electromagnetic spectrum 
phenomena, which can readily segue to a cyber kill chain. 
Indeed, the cyber kill chain described in the abstract has 
become even more potent amidst COVID-19 times. 
Misconfigured and/or poorly manufactured boosters can 
cause extensive interference, and the number of non-
compliant boosters has increased dramatically. The Federal 
Communications Commission (FCC)  notes that, “Although 
signal boosters can improve cell phone coverage, 
malfunctioning, poorly designed, or improperly installed 
signal boosters can interfere with wireless networks and 
cause interference to a range of calls, including emergency 
and 911 calls.” With the increase in mobile phone usage 
during COVID-19 times, it should be of no surprise that the 
market demand for boosters has increased dramatically. 
Along with the COVID-related increase in online purchases, 
e-commerce sites have been selling a high volume of signal 
boosters; however, not all of these signal boosters comply 
with FCC standards. Alarmingly, these non-FCC-compliant 
boosters have been noted as being top sellers in the signal 
booster category. To even further fuel this trend, there is an 
e-commerce tactic utilized, wherein sellers use reviews from 
other low-cost products to make the boosters appear more 
popular than they are, thereby inducing even more sales. As 
a further accelerant, on a related front of goods sold, some 
of the keiretsu-like structured manufacturers also sell 
equipment into the electrical grid sector. While the 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-818-1
CYBER 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

substantive portion of the Radio Frequency Interference 
(RFI) noise emanating from the electric utility equipment 
are construed as emanating from “incidental emitters,” it 
should be noted that there are no specific limits on the 
conducted or radiated emissions [1]; this represents a 
potential blindspot. 
This section introduced the subject matter. The remainder 
of this paper is organized as follows. Section II describes 
cellular and non-cellular communications coverage. Section 
III 
presents 
regulatory 
compliance 
and 
adherence 
considerations. Section IV discusses communications 
architectures that endeavor to mitigate against the 
interference 
issue 
and 
maintain 
acceptable 
service 
availability. Section V features the trend of ongoing societal 
predilection towards availability. Section VI goes into finer 
details with respect to some known cyber vulnerabilities 
within this facet of the communications ecosystem. Section 
VII presents some preliminary experimentation/simulation. 
Section VIII puts forth some concluding thoughts and the 
acknowledgement closes the paper. 
II. 
COMMUNICATIONS COVERAGE 
A. Cellular Coverage 
While a substantive portion of developed country internet 
users depend on hard-wired internet connections, the shift to 
wireless has increased tremendously over the past several 
years. According to a 12 June 2019 Pew Research Center 
Internet/Broadband fact sheet, approximately one-in-five 
American adults is dependent strictly upon smartphones for 
online access and no longer has traditional home broadband 
service. This phenomenon had transpired even prior to the 
advent of the first fairly substantial Fifth Generation (5G) 
technology standard for cellular network deployments in 
April 2019. To date, the attractiveness of relying upon 
smartphone cellular services to connect to the internet is the 
relative ubiquity of a cellular signal; however, the quality of 
the cellular signal varies greatly, and this is particularly 
noticeable with higher bandwidth digital media-related 
activities (e.g., watching streaming video, uploading 
pictures for social media, etc.), particularly when only one 
bar of a Fourth Generation (4G) cellular signal (in terms of 
the commonly accepted Received Signal Strength Indicator 
or RSSI, a signal typically ranges from full bars at -50db to 
no bars/dead zone at -120db) is available. 
The degradation in signal strength should be of no 
surprise. Cellular signals are radio waves, and as with all 
types of radio frequency waves, they are readily susceptible 
to interference. Outside Radio Frequency Interference (RFI) 
can be caused by, among others, mountains, hills, valleys, 
trees, and tall structures. The transition from an outside to 
an 
inside 
environs 
also 
experiences 
RFI; 
certain 
construction materials, which are the primary cause of poor 
cellular service, include concrete, brick, metal, glass, 
various energy-efficient materials (e.g., foam board, 
fiberglass batts, Leadership in Energy and Environmental 
Design or LEED certified glass), and conductive material 
(e.g., copper), among others. Internal interference can be 
caused by wood, plaster, drywall, plywood, electrical 
devices, and clutter.  
In addition to the exemplar cellular signal blocking 
materials provided, weather also has a tremendous impact 
on cellular coverage as does distance from a cellular base 
station (a.k.a. cell tower or cell site). For these cases, a 
cellular signal booster (a.k.a. amplifier or repeater) can 
assist matters by amplifying the weak signal. Typically, the 
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) has no issue 
with cellular signal repeaters extending the range of a 
cellular network in areas that, historically, receive poor 
cellular service [2]. 
B. Non-Cellular Coverage 
In addition to cellular means, non-cellular wi-fi is a 
method for devices, such as smartphones, to connect 
wirelessly to the internet via radio frequency waves. 
Generally speaking, wi-fi is faster than Third Generation 
(3G) and is sometimes faster than 4G mobile data; typically, 
bottlenecks stem from bandwidth limitations on the landline 
internet connection side. In contrast to cellular signals, wi-fi 
signals can readily pass through many materials (e.g., 
plywood, plaster, and drywall) that pose a problem for 
cellular signals. However, for certain cases, some walls are 
quite thick and may utilize reinforced concrete or other 
materials that block some of the signals. Hence, similar to 
cellular, as a radio wave, wi-fi is also susceptible to 
interference, such as from other wi-fi networks and other 
usages within the utilized bands. For these cases, a wi-fi 
repeater or extender can assist matters. As a wi-fi extender 
makes no use of a cellular signal, there must be an existing 
wi-fi signal for an extender to work.  
III. 
REGULATORY COMPLIANCE AND ADHERENCE 
The FCC has endeavored to ensure that cellular booster 
equipment does not interfere with the carrier network that it 
supports, and boosters must undergo a series of tests to be 
certified by the FCC. Carrier-specific boosters must adhere 
to a particular set of regulations while carrier-agnostic 
boosters adhere to a separate set of regulations. By way of 
example, for carrier-specific boosters, the amplifier gain 
(e.g., FCC-approved commercial cellular signal boosters are 
restricted to +70 dB gain), downlink output power (FCC-
approved boosters are restricted to 12 dBm) [3], and other 
technical limits are set by 47 CFR Ch. 1 §20.21. For carrier-
agnostic boosters, these characteristics, as well as other 
technical limits, have also been established. With a surge in 
the use of boosters, an interesting phenomenon has arisen.  
Malfunctioning and misused boosters have posed 
substantial interference problems for the cell tower sites of 
cellular carriers as well as the public safety emergency radio 
traffic that utilize the same frequency bands that signal 
boosters occupy. For this reason, various cellular carriers 
have lobbied the FCC so as to curtail the use of boosters and 
have requested the following constraints: (1) signal boosters 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-818-1
CYBER 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

are subject to the wireless licensee’s presumptive 
authorization (i.e., the booster is registered and able to be 
controlled by the licensee in the form of dynamic control 
over the booster’s transmit power for any reason at any 
time), (2) signal boosters may only be operated on a 
channelized basis on the proscribed frequencies utilized by 
the wireless licensee whose signal is being boosted (i.e., 
carrier-specific narrowband booster), (3) signal boosters are 
designed with oscillation detection and will terminate 
transmission when oscillation occurs, and (4) signal 
boosters are subject to the FCC’s equipment certification 
process, an industry certification process, and approval by 
the individual licensee. 
Section 510 of the International Code Council’s (ICC) 
2018 International Fire Code (IFC) affirms these points for 
signal boosters, such as: (1) Bi-Directional Amplifiers 
(BDAs) used in emergency responder radio coverage 
systems shall have oscillation prevention circuitry, and a 
spectrum analyzer or other suitable test equipment shall be 
utilized to ensure that spurious oscillations are not being 
generated by the subject signal booster, as well as (2) signal 
boosters shall have FCC or other radio licensing authority 
certification and be suitable for public safety use prior to 
installation. Despite the actions taken by the FCC and the 
guidance provided by the IFC, the preference of cellular 
carriers is to sell/provide femtocells (for use in a home or 
office) to customers. Interference remains a complex issue, 
and phenomena, such as inter-cell site and intra-cell site 
interference, remain problematic. Interference can be caused 
by a call on the same frequency from a neighboring cell, or 
a call on an adjacent channel in the same or neighboring cell 
[4]. For 4G, intra-cell interference is reduced by, among 
other 
techniques, 
Orthogonal 
Frequency-Division 
Multiplexing (OFDM) digital modulation and Orthogonal 
Frequency Division Multiple Access (OFDMA). In 
comparison,  inter-cell interference, which is caused by 
frequency reuse (the process of utilizing the same radio 
frequencies at cell sites within a geographic area that are 
separated by sufficient distance so as to minimize 
interference) and increased femtocell deployment. 
IV. 
COMMUNICATIONS ARCHITECTURES 
As is evidenced, cellular interference is a major issue, 
thereby necessitating a robust, reliable, and resilient 
communications architecture. In many cases, a layered 
approach is employed, and non-cellular wi-fi may be 
leveraged. 
A. Network Topology 
Although non-cellular wi-fi, particularly public wi-fi, is 
not necessarily stable in many cases (this often stems from 
congestion on the network), most of the time, non-cellular 
wi-fi tends to be faster than cellular [mobile] data 
connections. For this reason, contemporary smartphones 
employ smart auto switching between non-cellular wi-fi and 
mobile data. This smart network switching (a.k.a. adaptive 
wi-fi), in essence, connects to a wi-fi network and a cellular 
network concurrently. In some cases, instead of bonding 
them into a single channel (i.e., non-bonded single channel), 
traffic is sent on whichever connection is faster at the 
moment (i.e., switches back and forth between non-cellular 
wi-fi and cellular [mobile] data). Alternatively, multi-
channel bonding (i.e., bonded multi-channel) can be used, 
which leverages multiple internet connections (mobile data, 
wi-fi, Bluetooth, etc.) concurrently for increased throughput 
and redundancy.  
 
1) Types of Networks Leveraged:  
Accordingly, three types of networks are often leveraged: 
(1) Wireless Personal Area Networks (WPANs), which are 
short-range networks that utilize Bluetooth technology to 
connect a smartphone to a device (e.g., desktop computer, 
which has an Internet Protocol or IP connection); (2) 
Wireless Local Area Networks (WLANs), which are 
medium-range 
networks 
that 
typically 
utilize 
wi-fi 
technology and provide wireless access points that are 
connected to a wired network; and (3) Wireless Wide Area 
Networks (WWANs), which are long-range networks that 
typically utilize cellular technology and leverage the 
backbone provided by cellular service providers. 
 
2) Striving for Reliability and Resiliency:  
In addition, contemporary communications architectures 
might leverage three different layers for reliability and 
resiliency: (1) Cellular booster layer, which — depending 
upon the manufacturer — can boost 4G coverage ranging 
from 50,000 to 200,000 square feet with a potential +70 dB 
gain (for U.S. carriers) at various levels of signal strength 
(i.e., 5 bars, 3-4 bars, 1-2 bars) (the coverage will depend on 
the strength of the original signal, and the commonly 
accepted inflection point for booster viability is at about       
-105 dB outside signal); (2) Lorawan Wi-Fi layer, which 
can provide coverage ranges from the gateway ranging from 
about 800 meters at 100% data packets received to 
approximately 1500 meters at 98% data packets received in 
an urban environment [5]; and (3) 5G layer with three 
versions of wireless technology: low-band (part of the 
nationwide coverage), mid-band (faster speeds at longer 
ranges and limited indoors functionality), and millimeter-
wave (mmWave) (for extended indoors functionality, albeit 
walls, glass, and even a hand can block mmWave signal) 
[6], as well as spread spectrum technologies (e.g., chaotic 
sequence) combined with generalized frequency division 
multiplexing. 
B. The Amalgam of Network Layers 
Smart switching leverages both non-cellular wi-fi and 
cellular. Macrocells cover about 30 kilometers (km) radius. 
Microcells cover about a 2 km radius and lessen the load of 
the macrocell network as well as provide capacity and in-
building penetration. A metrocell covers about a 300 meter 
radius. A picocell covers about a 200 meter radius, and 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-818-1
CYBER 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

femtocells cover about a 10 meter radius (although the 
AT&T femtocell covers about a 12 meter radius). The irony 
of carriers preferring femtocells is that they are designed to 
maintain a connection to the femtocell as much as possible, 
but risk dropping a call, particularly if the call needs to be 
switched to a picocell, metrocell, microcell, or macrocell 
(which can readily occur for callers on the move). Hence, 
the barrier to entry to disrupt a call is rather low. For 
example, interfering with the wi-fi would obligate the smart 
switching to devolve to cellular; then, interfering with the 
femtocell (as just one example) can induce a dropped call or 
even prevent a 911 call. 
V. 
PREDELICTION TOWARDS AVAILABILITY 
The 9/11 Commission Report, originally published on 22 
July 2004, had recommended that the U.S. Congress 
provide for “the expedited and increased assignment of 
radio spectrum for public safety purposes,” as various 
blindspots in emergency communications infrastructure 
were illuminated when first responders from varying 
jurisdictions were unable to communicate with each other 
due to differences in equipment [7]. Furthermore, cellular 
service was quickly overwhelmed from use by both first 
responders and civilians. In the absence of a dedicated 
public safety network, first responders predominantly 
communicated, via Land Mobile Radios (LMRs) (wireless 
communications systems that support low-speed data 
communications and voice) and commercial cellular 
networks (wireless communications systems that support 
voice and high-speed data communications and access to 
communications, but cannot substantively deliver the 
equivalent security standards that LMRs can for “mission 
critical voice” communications). Traditionally, LMRs have 
been the most reliable and secure method of voice 
communications. However, LMRs operate on thousands of 
different networks, are often not interoperable because they 
operate on different spectrum frequencies, are encrypted in 
different ways, are non-standardized (i.e., customized) by 
vendors and/or agencies, and newer LMRs are often not 
backwards compatible. 
In 2008, the FCC auctioned licenses for segments of the 
700 MHz Band for commercial purposes. Carriers began  
using these segments of the spectrum to offer mobile 
broadband internet access services for smartphones, tablets, 
laptop computers, and other mobile devices. On 22 February 
2012, the U.S Congress enacted the Middle-Class Tax 
Relief and Job Recovery Act of 2012 (a.k.a. Spectrum Act), 
which directed the FCC to allocate the D-Block (758-763 
MHz/788-793 MHz) for a public safety nationwide 
broadband network. Title IV of the Spectrum Act formed 
the First Responder Network Authority (a.k.a. FirstNet) (an 
independent authority charged with establishing “a 
nationwide, 
interoperable 
public 
safety 
broadband 
network”) within the National Telecommunication and 
Information Administration (NTIA), an agency of the U.S. 
Department of Commerce. 
Initially, public safety officials endeavored to have a 
“dedicated public safety network” that was distinct and 
disparate from any commercial provider. However, while 
the U.S. Congress had allocated USD $7 billion to build a 
network, it turned out to be insufficient funding for the 
construction of a distinct and disparate network [8]. The 
estimated cost for constructing a new nationwide 4G 
network for the FirstNet system ranged up to USD $40 
billion, as infrastructure, such as cell towers, had to be built 
not only in dense urban areas, but also across all of rural 
America [9]. The magnitude of the project hinted at the need 
for public-public and/or public-private partnerships. In 
March 2017, FirstNet formed a public-private partnership 
with AT&T and awarded AT&T a 25-year contract to build 
out the network. Pursuant to this public-private partnership, 
AT&T obtained access to the 20 MHz segment of the Band 
14 spectrum (758–768 MHz/788–798 MHz) (a highly 
desirable segment of spectrum in the 700 MHz band that 
facilitates good propagation in urban/rural areas as well as  
penetration into buildings) allocated to FirstNet and can 
receive up to USD $6.5 billion by operationalizing network 
deployment milestones in a timely fashion; in turn, AT&T 
agreed to provide access to its existing infrastructure and to 
“spend about $40 billion over the life of the contract to 
build, deploy, operate and maintain the network” [10]. 
Please refer to Figure 1 below. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  FirstNet Licensed Portions of the 700 MHz Spectrum [11] 
 
As the main backbone of AT&T’s Long-Term Evolution 
(LTE) network (which has substantial nationwide coverage) 
previously consisted of a superset of Band 17 and Band 12 
(699-716 MHz/729-746 MHz), AT&T’s FirstNet cellular 
network soon comprised both Bands 12 and 14.  
First responders have priority on AT&T’s FirstNet 
cellular network, but the underlying legislation that created 
FirstNet allows for much more pervasive usage; any 
government user and certain commercial entities, under 
specific circumstances, have priority usage. According to 
the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), 
“public safety practitioners utilizing the forthcoming 
Nationwide Public Safety Broadband Network will have 
smartphones, tablets, and wearables at their disposal” … 
“although these devices should enable first responders to 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-818-1
CYBER 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

complete their missions, any influx of new technologies will 
introduce new security vulnerabilities” [12]. Near the turn of 
the year, NIST had noted that there were 163 FirstNet-ready 
(capable of accessing the private core FirstNet network 
running on Band 14) and FirstNet-capable devices (designed 
to share wireless space with AT&T’s commercial 
customers, whereby  FirstNet users receive priority and 
preemption access over non-FirstNet users). According to 
NIST and cyber practitioners, the preference towards 
availability and the looming vulnerabilities of having Band 
14 in so many devices (e.g., iPhone, iPad, Samsung Galaxy, 
Dell, etc.) constitutes a large attack surface area. Also, if the 
network is overloaded with public-safety use, it would not 
be available for citizen 911 calls or alerting by citizens, such 
as in accordance with “If You See Something, Say 
Something” [13]. Historically, high-profile networks have 
been subject to such cyberattacks. For example, Romanian 
hackers took over 123 of the 187 Washington D.C. police 
department’s outdoor surveillance cameras from 12-15 
January, just days before the U.S. presidential inauguration 
on 20 January 2017 [14]. 
For modern society, availability is central. For example, 
customers are increasingly influenced by the availability and 
Quality of Service (QoS) of high-speed wi-fi. Several 
studies shows that about two thirds of businesspeople assert 
that they would refuse to return to a location with sub-
standard wi-fi, and the dependencies upon availability seem 
to persist across the enterprise, small medium businesses 
(SMB), industrial, residential sectors, etc. Providing free wi-
fi service also has the complications of contending with 
squatters (people that “camp out” to gain access to the free 
wi-fi, but purchase very little, if anything), who impact the 
bandwidth; there is even the further complication of having 
squatters that may be infringing/downloading illegal content 
(albeit there are certain “safe harbor” provisions under §512 
of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act or DMCA for the 
provider of the free wi-fi) and even launching cyberattacks 
from the wi-fi network.  
VI. 
KNOWN CYBER VULNERABILITIES 
To demonstrate how Distributed Denial of Service 
(DDoS) or Telephony Denial of Service (TDoS) attacks 
could affect 911 call systems (and putting aside the known 
vulnerabilities of TeleTYpewriter or TTY services), 
researchers created both a detailed simulation of North 
Carolina’s 911 infrastructure as well as general simulation 
of the U.S. 911 infrastructure;  the researchers reported that 
with only 6,000 infected phones, it was possible to 
effectively block 911 calls from 20% of the state’s landline 
callers, half of the mobile customers, and per the simulation, 
although people called back four or five times, they still 
could not reach a 911 operator [15].  
By way of background information, when 911 is called, 
via a landline or mobile phone, the carriers facilitate the 
connection to an appropriate call center. Over time, to 
increase the capacity and avoid bottlenecks, carriers have 
transitioned from circuit-switched 911 infrastructure to 
packet-switched Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) 
infrastructure, which is referred to as Next Generation 911 
(NG911). Within the NG911 paradigm, load balancing 
among the approximately 6,200 public-safety answering 
points (a.k.a. Public-Safety Access Points) (PSAPs) 
improves reliability, and callers can also transmit text, 
images, video, and other data to the PSAPs. While the 
NG911 can indeed help mitigate against the DDoS problem 
by dynamically connecting to PSAPs around the country, 
the rate at which callers give up trying to call 911 (a.k.a. the 
“despair rate”), amidst a TDoS attack, is significant [15].  
Beyond being vulnerable to DDoS attacks, there are other 
attack vectors. For example, for those areas, wherein Band 
14-related towers for the FirstNet system are not viable to 
be deployed, it is envisioned that satellite systems will be 
deployed for the “last mile” [16]. However, satellite 
vulnerabilities have been of concern for quite some time. 
The issue of Assured Positioning, Navigation and Timing 
(A-PNT) (related to Global Positioning System or 
GPS/location spoofing) had been raised in the National 
Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) for Fiscal Year 2019 
and prior. Indeed, one of the central features of Enhanced 
911 (E911) (for Basic 911 service, the caller must inform 
the emergency operator as to the location, whereas for E911, 
the location is automatically displayed on the emergency 
operator’s 
screen) 
is 
location-determination. 
Yet, 
phenomenon, such as swatting (a tactic of deceiving 
emergency services to respond to a particular location via 
location spoofing) have been prevalent for quite some time. 
Typically, swatting involves calling 911 with a non-serviced 
“burner” or anonymous pre-paid phone; the burner phones 
are neither enabled nor linked to any account. Yet, under 
federal law, these Non-Service Initiated (NSI) devices (with 
no service plan) are still able to call 911. The popularity of 
VoIP has segued to an interesting vulnerability for the 911 
system; VoIP users manually provide their address (e.g., 
billing address) so as to populate the database of the VoIP 
service provider (VSP). When a 911 call is placed, the call 
is sent to an Emergency Services Gateway (ESG). 
Automatic Number Identification (ANI), and for some cases 
a pseudo-ANI (pANI) is involved, processes the number, 
and the ESG performs a search of the VSP database to 
ascertain the assigned PSAP. The call is forwarded to the 
assigned PSAP, which receives the location information 
provided by the VSP database. Automatic Location 
Information (ALI) returns an address (which might be false) 
that is associated with the number. Compromising location-
determination systems (e.g., modifying the VSP, ANI, or 
ALI records) could lead to first responders being directed to 
the wrong location. Altering the VSP, ANI, and/or ALI 
databases or denying service to the databases could also 
increase the credibility of the swatting call [17]. By 
misdirecting resources, swatters could delay first responders 
to a planned physical attack; in addition, a swatter could 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-818-1
CYBER 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

create an incident, which concentrates first responders in a 
specific location for the purposes of an ambush [18]. 
As an alternative to calling 911, the swatter could simply 
call one of the approximately 4,000 PSAPs (of the 
approximately 6,200), which serve as primary 911 call 
centers, whereby operators dispatch first responders directly 
[15]. Calls made directly to the PSAP do not use the VSAP, 
ANI, and/or ALI databases; rather, the operator simply asks 
the caller for the address. Please refer to Figure 2 below, 
which summarizes some of the described attack vectors. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Potential Attack Vectors to Spoof Location 
Generally, the phone numbers for PSAPs are closely held 
information. However, recorded 911 calls obtained by 
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) or the relevant public 
records act (e.g., for a particular state) contain the Dual-
Tone Multi-Frequency (DTMF) tones for the number of the 
PSAP when a call is transferred [19]. There are various 
DTMF decoders available on GitHub and other open source 
repositories to determine the numbers for the PSAPs. The 
National Emergency Number Association (NENA), an 
organization that serves as a public safety committee with 
regards to 911, is endeavoring to have the PSAP numbers 
protected (i.e., redacted) and non-extractable for 911 
recordings. In any case, the Confidentiality, Integrity, and 
Availability (CIA) triad must be carefully considered. A 
disclosure 
of 
previously 
private 
information 
or 
communications to unauthorized parties is a breach of 
confidentiality (e.g., the VSP, ANI, and/or ALI databases 
are compromised). A violation of the intended function of a 
system by unauthorized parties is a breach of integrity (e.g., 
misdirecting of emergency services by swatters). An attack 
(e.g., DDoS or TDOS) that leads to an unavailability issue 
(e.g., PSAPs being made unavailable to handle 911 calls) is 
a breach of availability, which seems to be of the highest 
concern amidst contemporary times. 
VII. EXPERIMENTATION/SIMULATION 
Beyond the described attack vectors, limiting the 
frequency channels available for use also creates honeypot 
observational space opportunities for a potent cyber kill 
chain, and this notion is shown in Figure 3 and 4 below. 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Limiting the channels available for use to create a more potent 
honeypot observational space cyber kill chain 
The described scenario was simulated on a GNU Octave 
platform, which is a numerical computation platform that is 
mostly compatible with MATLAB. However, as GNU 
Octave is released under a GNU GPLv3 license, the source 
code was modified so as to take advantage of Compute 
Unified Device Architecture (CUDA) multi-threaded 
parallel computing accelerants for the utilized Semi-Definite 
Programming (SDP) solver so as to quickly address the 
involved convex optimization problems.  
A. Cyber Kill Chain 
The simulation involved Bluetooth Adaptive Frequency-
Hopping (AFH) spread spectrum on twenty collocated 
WPANs. The Bluetooth usage engaged in changing 
channels up to 1600 times per second among 79 channels on 
the 2.4 GHz band. The simulation also involved wi-fi 
networks on twenty collocated WLANs. With the 2.4 GHz 
band heavily congested with Bluetooth traffic, the wi-fi 
networks were constrained to only a single channel on the 
2.4 GHz band (e.g., Channel 40) and the 5 GHz band. The 
emulated FirstNet-capable devices (which share wireless 
space with commercial customers) included cellphones 
(which generally have very weak Wi-Fi radios to maximize 
battery life and small antennas to minimize device size), 
tablets (compared to cellphones, they have have stronger 
Wi-Fi radios and better antennas), and laptops (compared to 
tablets, they have stronger Wi-Fi radios and better 
antennas). The specified effective range for the devices were 
as follows: 200 meters from a hub for cellphones, 400 
meters from a hub for tablets, and 900 meters from a hub for 
laptops. The effective range between a hub to another hub 
(i.e., remote hub) was established as 3 km. At 1.5 km, the 
bandwidth was 10 Million bits per second (Mbps); at 3 km, 
the bandwidth is < 5 Mbps. Every “hop” across a remote 
hub cut the available bandwidth in half (single radio hubs 
were emulated, and these cannot send and receive at the 
same time). More than three hops resulted in a bandwidth < 
1 Mbps. The urban/rural demarcation was set at 1.5 km. As 
the “urban” area was congested with Bluetooth traffic, the 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-818-1
CYBER 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

wi-fi avoided the 2.4 GHz and endeavored to utilize the 5 
GHz band. However, with twenty WLANs competing for 
the 5 GHz band, the lower portion of the Unlicensed 
National Information Infrastructure (U-NII-1) and upper 
portion (U-NII-3) quickly became congested. For the 
simulation, the remaining U-NII-2 was congested with 
portable weather radar (IEEE channel numbers 120, 124, 
128). IEEE channel numbers 52, 56, 60, 64, 100, 104, 108, 
112, 116, 132, 136, 140, and 144 of U-NII-2 was congested 
(at spreading factor 7, no packets were received, and even at 
spreading factor 12, no packets were received) so that 
communications, via smart auto switching, devolved to 
cellular mobile data, such as described in Figure 3. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Unlicensed National Information Infrastructure (U-NII) 
Segments and IEEE Channels on the 5GHz Wi-Fi Spectrum [20] 
 
Co-tier interference (between neighboring femtocells) and 
cross-tier interference (among different tiers of the network, 
such as between femtocell and picocell, metrocell, 
microcell, or macrocell) were also emulated so as to force 
the communications to return to Channel 40 (between 5170 
and 5250 MHz) on U-NII-1. The Berkeley Packet Filter 
(BPF) was utilized to monitor the channels, specifically 
Channel 40. Hence, the cyber kill chain was complete.  
B. An Even More Potent Cyber Kill Chain 
Industrial Systems (IS) are heavily dependent upon 
communications so as to be “smart.” As many IS are in 
remote 
areas, 
the 
communications 
is 
sparser 
and 
infrastructure deployment can be costly. Hence, signal 
boosters have been utilized to bridge the gap for this “last 
mile” paradigm. Ironically, these boosters can readily 
interfere with the existing communications used by system 
operators and linemen, who are servicing the involved 
critical infrastructure. It should also be noted that, in some 
cases, the keiretsu-like structured manufacturers of the non-
FCC-compliant are some of the more predominant 
purveyors of equipment into the electrical grid sector in 
certain locales. The ensuing risk is that these represent 
nodes/clusters of potential interference; two types are 
discussed briefly. 
 
1) Incidental 
Emitters: 
Generally 
speaking, 
the 
substantive portion of the noise emanating from electric 
utility equipment stems from incidental emitters. Yet, there 
are no specific limits on the conducted or radiated 
emissions. There are guidelines for these unlicensed 
emitters of Radio Frequency (RF) energy to not deliberately 
cause 
harmful 
interference 
[21], 
and 
the 
Federal 
Communications Commission (FCC) has mandated that 
utility companies rectify powerline-related interference 
problems within a reasonable time, particularly if the 
interference is caused by faulty electric utility equipment. 
Under FCC rules, most powerline and electric utility-related 
equipment are classified as “incidental radiators [22],” as 
the RF energy or noise created is simply an incidental part 
of its intended operation. However, historically, a number of 
electric utility chief executive officers have received letters 
from the FCC Enforcement Bureau pertaining to this type of 
violation [22]. 
 
2) Unintentional Emitters: A portion of the noise 
emanating from electric utility equipment stems from 
unintentional 
emitters; 
while 
this 
type 
of 
emitter 
intentionally generates an internal radio signal, it does not 
intentionally radiate/transmit it. Examples include some 
types of switched-mode power supplies (an electronic power 
supply that incorporates a voltage switching regulator —
which transforms the incoming power supply into a pulsed 
voltage that is then smoothed, via the utilization of 
capacitors, inductors, and other elements — to convert 
electrical power efficiently) as well as microprocessors 
utilized within some of the electric utility equipment.  
 
Depending upon the locale, the RFI emitters from the 
electrical grid can constitute a substantive source of 
interference and is clearly discernible, via a spectrum 
analyzer. Taking just one example of a potential impact, 
according to the FCC, location information must be 
available for at least 70% of wireless emergency assistance 
911 calls or location information must be accurate to within 
50 meters for 2020, and the requirements increase for 2021 
[21]. Yet, given the vulnerabilities and cyber kill chain 
described, the true operationalization of this mandate needs 
to be further explored, particularly as the simulated 
interference precluded this. 
VIII. CONCLUSION 
Modern communications architectures have shifted to 
accommodate the societal predilection for availability. The 
prototypical techniques for reliability (e.g., bonded multi-
channel communications) is well understood. The resiliency 
pathways (e.g., frequency hopping to available frequency 
channels) are also well understood. An attack (e.g., DDoS) 
that leads to PSAPs being made unavailable to handle 911 
calls is a breach of availability for emergency services, 
which seems to be of paramount importance in modern 
society. Yet, the bur availability architectures has not 
slowed; indeed, the architectures have greatly increased in 
number, and the described privatization of communications 
backbones has fueled the use of privately-owned signal 
boosters. Although boosters should adhere to a set of 
regulations (e.g., +70 dB gain, 12 dBm downlink output 
power), it is possible for rogue boosters to ignore these 
regulations, effectuate communications interference, and 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-818-1
CYBER 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

wreak havoc during emergencies. Likewise, congesting 
channels would rate limit the channels available/utilized for 
non-bonded single channel and bonded multi-channel 
communications alike. In particular, while the intent of 
NG911 is to facilitates 911 callers reporting incidents and 
the conveying of information (e.g., text, images, video) to 
the PSAPs, disruption of such communications networks 
would create a large blindspot for first responders. While 
the 
described 
preliminary 
experimentation/simulation 
involved WPANs and WLANs, future work will build upon 
the described experimentation/simulation by congesting 
WWANs as well. In this way, the notion of available for the 
various simulated resilient communications architectures 
can be better explored and examined. 
Overall, given the situation that communication 
networks are subject to degradation due to a variety of 
factors, it is possible to interfere with both cellular and voice 
over Internet Protocol (VoIP) 911 and/or first responder-
related calls by the strategic placement of interfering nodes 
in the form of misused cellular boosters and/or strategically 
positioned femtocells, deliberate Bluetooth congestion so as 
to limit the number of frequency channels available and 
intentionally 
interfere 
with 
wi-fi 
and 
last-mile 
communications 
technologies, 
thereby 
affecting 
the 
communications paradigm.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is supported by the Decision Engineering 
Analysis Laboratory, an Underwatch initiative, which has 
previously supported the FTA Program under the Assistant 
Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering, via 
participation at certain venues (e.g., IARIA). This is part of 
a VT white paper series on 5G-enabled defense applications, 
via proxy use cases, to help inform Project Enabler. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Chan, “Detecting Powerline Noise with Low-Cost Noise 
Sensors for Power Outage Mitigation,” 2020 IEEE Sensors 
Applications Symposium, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 2020, pp. 
1-6, doi: 10.1109/SAS48726.2020.9220027. 
[2] Federal Communications Commision. Indoor Location 
Accuracy Benchmarks. [Retrieved September 10, 2020] from: 
https://www.fcc.gov/wireless/bureau-divisions/mobility-
division/signal-boosters/signal-boosters-faq 
[3] Federal Communications Commision. Indoor Location 
Accuracy Benchmarks. [Retrieved September 10, 2020]  
from: https://www.fcc.gov/document/use-and-design-signal-
boosters-report-and-order 
[4] Y. A. Adediran, H. Lasisi, and O. B. Okedere, “Interference 
management techniques in cellular networks: A review,” 
Cogent 
Engineering, 
4:1, 
DOI: 
10.1080/23311916.2017.1294133 
[5] Smartmakers. LoRaWAN Range Part 2: Range and Coverage 
of LoRaWAN in Practice (Updated). [Retrieved September 
10, 2020] from: https://smartmakers.io/en/lorawan-range-part-
2-range-and-coverage-of-lorawan-in-practice/ 
[6] M. Yoshida, “MWC: Are Your 5 Fingers Blocking Your 
5G?” EE Times. [Retrieved September 10, 2020] from: 
https://www.eetimes.com/mwc-are-your-5-fingers-blocking-
your-5g/# 
[7] National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United 
States. The 911 Commission Report. [Retrieved September 
10, 
2020] 
from: 
https://www.9-
11commission.gov/report/911Report.pdf 
[8] National 
Telecommunications 
and 
Information 
Administration. Public Safety. [Retrieved September 10, 
2020] from: https://www.ntia.doc.gov/category/public-safety 
[9] A. Loh, “The State of FirstNet, America’s Public Safety 
Broadband Network,” Lawfare [Retrieved September 10, 
2020] 
from: 
https://www.lawfareblog.com/state-firstnet-
americas-public-safety-broadband-network 
[10] U.S. Government Accountability Office. Public-Safety 
Broadband Network. [Retrieved September 10, 2020] from: 
https://www.gao.gov/assets/710/704058.pdf 
[11] Federal Communications Commision. 700 MHz Public Safety 
Spectrum. 
[Retrieved 
September 
10, 
2020] 
from: 
https://www.fcc.gov/700-mhz-public-safety-narrowband-
spectrum 
[12] J. Franklin, G. Howell, S. Ledgerwood, and J. Griffith, 
“Security Analysis of First Responder Mobile and Wearable 
Devices,” NIST, pp. ii, May 2020, doi:10.6028/NIST.IR.8196 
[13] Federal Emergency Management Agency. Integrated Public 
Alert & Warning System. [Retrieved September 10, 2020] 
from:https://www.fema.gov/emergency-managers/ 
practitioners/integrated-public-alert-warning- system. 
[14] R. Weiner, “Romanian hackers took over D.C. surveillance 
cameras just before presidential inauguration, federal 
prosecutors say,” The Washington Post, December 28, 2017. 
[Retrieved 
September 
10, 
2020] 
from: 
https://www.washingtonpost.com/local/public-
safety/romanian-hackers-took-over-dc-surveillance-cameras-
just-before-presidential-inauguration-federal-prosecutors-
say/2017/12/28/7a15f894-e749-11e7-833f-
155031558ff4_story.html 
[15] M. Goebel, C. Dameff, and J. Tully, “Hacking 9-1-1: 
Infrastructure Vulnerabilities and Attack Vectors,” J Med 
Internet Res. 2019 Jul; 21(7), Jul. 2019, doi: 10.2196/14383 
[16] Senate Hearing 115-153. Investing in America’s Broadband 
Infrastructure: Exploring Ways to Reduce Barriers to 
Deployment. 
[Retrieved 
September 
10, 
2020] 
from: 
https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CHRG-
115shrg28640/html/CHRG-115shrg28640.htm 
[17] 2019 Michigan State Law Review 1133. Combatting the 
Swatting Problem: The Need for a New Criminal Statute to 
Address a Growing Threat. [Retrieved September 10, 2020] 
from: 
https://digitalcommons.law.msu.edu/cgi/viewcontent. 
cgi? article=1251&context=lr 
[18] Director of National Intelligence, Persistent Threat of 
Terrorist Ambush Attacks on First Responders. [Retrieved 
September 10, 2020] from: https://www.dni.gov/files/NCTC/ 
documents/jcat/firstresponderstoolbox/81_NCTC_DHS_FBI_
-_Ambush_Attacks.pdf 
[19] Federal Communications Commision. Task Force on Optimal 
PSAP Architecture. [Retrieved September 10, 2020] from: 
https://docs.fcc.gov/public/attachments/DA-16-179A2.txt. 
[20] C. Spain, “Winning Back the Weather Radio Channels Adds 
Capacity to 5GHz Wi-Fi Spectrum,” [Retrieved September 
10, 2020] from: https://blogs.cisco.com/networking/winning-
back-the-weather-radio-channels-adds-capacity-to-5ghz-wi-fi-
spectrum 
[21] “Part 15-Radio Frequency Devices § 15.3,” [Retrieved 
September 10, 2020] from: https:// www.ecfr.gov/cgi-
bin/text-idx?node=pt47.1.15&rgn=div5 
[22] M. Marcus, J. Burtle, B. Franca, A. Lahjouji, N. McNeil, 
“Federal communications commission spectrum policy task 
force,” E&UWG, 2002. 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-818-1
CYBER 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

