Cyber and Emergent Technologies 
Current and Future Ramifications 
Joshua A. Sipper 
Air Force Cyber College 
Air University 
Maxwell AFB, AL, United States 
Email: joshua.sipper.1@us.af.mil
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract— We as a cyber community are now living in a cyber 
meta-reality (a reality about realities) where scientific and 
technological 
advances 
such 
as 
microscopic 
machines, 
subatomic energy manipulation, and autonomous technologies, 
heretofore only imagined in science fiction tales are on the 
verge of practical use. As the need for new, better, and more 
secure methods of implementing cyber increases, the 
unfettered desire for greater bandwidth, stronger encryption, 
and more rapid processing naturally follows. If the cyber 
community is to capitalize on new technologies, however, we 
need to stay acquainted with these emergent technologies and 
understand their ramifications. Otherwise, we stand the 
chance of either missing opportunities to advance or being 
trampled by those who do. Today scientists and technologists 
are buzzing about quantum entanglement, non-linear wave 
propagation, and Metal Organic Frameworks (MOF).  The 
United States is in a race to the finish to make the potentialities 
of these amazing ideas, realities. This paper examines four very 
specialized technological areas and draws on these technologies 
to 
construct 
a 
cohesive 
narrative 
regarding 
their 
interoperability in order to highlight the necessity and 
ramifications of each area’s contribution to a holistic 
technological scaffold. Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine 
Learning (ML) are of course, an increasingly conjoined 
capability with great promise, yet not fully realized. Emergent 
technologies related to security such as quantum encryption 
and multi-factor authentication are rapidly finding their place 
in the cyber meta-reality. Quantum computing, related to the 
theory of quantum entanglement and quantum encryption, will 
likely deliver processing and bandwidth options far beyond 
current possibilities. Finally, nanotechnologies such as 
graphene and membrane technology are already in production 
in some applications and will no doubt become a critical 
enabler of the entirety of the aforementioned technologies. 
Additionally, the concept of the cyber microbiome is 
introduced for consideration. 
Keywords- 
quantum, 
nanotechnology, 
meta-reality, 
microbiome, artificial, machine. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
In the cyber community, emergent technologies are a 
huge factor to be considered as the pace of technological 
development not only advances cyber capabilities, but also 
rapidly adds layers of complexity to the already wicked 
cyber puzzle. Abounding studies, experiments, and research 
in fields like particle physics (quanta) continuing under the 
auspices of Conseil Européen pour la Recherche Nucléaire 
(CERN), coupled with emergent nanotechnologies such as 
graphene and MOF, point to a near future where processing 
speed, bandwidth, and the full spectrum implementation of 
ML and AI can become realities. These possibilities are 
currently being expressed mostly within their own 
frameworks as researchers continue to nail down their 
mechanics, interoperability, and necessary requirements. 
However, these once embryonic hypotheses are now being 
demonstrated 
as 
realities 
through 
scientific 
theory 
development within the traditional construct of reproducible 
laboratory experimentation.  
So, what does this mean for us in the cyber community 
and how can we as a community of practitioners, policy 
makers, 
and 
researchers 
benefit 
from 
these 
new 
technologies? How will these new technologies increase the 
power of cyber now and into the future? How will the cyber 
meta-reality (Figure 1) change and grow as a result of this 
technical dynamism? Perhaps most importantly, how will 
adversaries and threats to peace use the same technologies 
and how will we defeat them? We cannot pretend to have all 
of the answers, but we can begin the conversation and 
explore the possibilities.  
 
 
Figure 1. Cyber Meta-Reality. 
 
Of course, before we can begin to probe these questions, 
we must first have a basis of comprehension concerning the 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-818-1
CYBER 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

technologies that generated said questions. The theories, 
technologies, and capabilities are beyond doubt complex, 
still forming, and even dangerous. There are numerous 
technologies two or more decades old that are no longer 
emergent, but well established such as stealth, precision and 
machine automation, drone technology, and others. All of 
these have upended how warfare and other technologies are 
used and continue to develop. Developing technologies such 
as AI and ML are especially cogent contributors as they have 
been proven to increase efficiency and speed up decision 
cycles significantly [1]. The necessity and desire that 
accompanies human intellect drives them onward, moment 
by moment. Why would anyone want to understand the 
fundamental building blocks of matter? Because it answers 
important questions about the creation and inner workings of 
our cosmos. Because the power generated by separating 
these basic building blocks has led us into a resplendently 
wonderful and terrifyingly awful nuclear age. Because, we 
are curious.  
For the cyber community, it comes down to power; the 
power to continue the creation and expansion of and 
capabilities within the meta-reality we call cyberspace. The 
same can be said concerning the nanoparticle constructs of 
graphene and MOFs. The ability to use these types of nano-
constructs as waveguides, conductors, transistors, circuits, 
and many more applications can provide cool, fast 
processing and bandwidth operation impossible with the use 
of legacy electronics. Then, there is the consideration of how 
both quantum and physical nanotech affect the growth and 
application of AI and ML. What space will these 
potentialities grow to inhabit once they are enabled through a 
seemingly infinite power, processing, and dissemination 
stream? One might see visions of life, death, or something 
altogether unimaginable to us right now. But, either way the 
power offered through these capabilities will likely shape the 
future of cyber and global communications, politics, 
commerce, and conflict. 
In the following sections, we will first discuss AI and ML 
and their marked effects on technology no and into the 
future. Emergent security will be framed in the second 
section, relating how various technologies are leading to 
increased security across the cyber meta-reality. In the third 
section, the amazing rise and potential of quantum 
computing will be presented. Finally, nanotechnology will be 
explored in the fourth section, giving insight into how this 
field affects all of the other areas and has led in concert with 
these areas to another type of cyber meta-reality that includes 
a symbiotic, technological multiverse characterized as the 
cyber microbiome. 
II. 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND MACHINE LEARNING 
AI and ML are a developing construct still not fully 
realized within the greater cyber framework. Undoubtedly, 
even when the cyber meta-reality does finally capitalize on 
these capabilities, there will be another mountain to climb. 
However, we must for now consider the mountains before us 
in that AI and ML are certainly developing and growing in 
strength and power, capability and usability. With this 
growth comes several positive and negative ramifications. 
While AI increases the intelligence level of programs at an 
individual and collective level, it also adds layers of 
complexity that must be managed and mitigated (Kott, 
2018). AI and ML have been demonstrated on numerous 
occasions as tools useful in the areas of parsing and grouping 
data (ML) and actual decision-making (AI). “We have a 
variety of learning mechanisms for both symbolic and non-
symbolic AI that allow autonomous agents to improve their 
performance 
and 
adapt 
to 
changing 
environmental 
conditions” [2]. AI and ML have found some applicability in 
the field of intelligent autonomous agents such as the self-
driving car experiments conducted by Google and Tesla. 
Agencies such as DARPA are doubling-down on these 
studies by going forward with the application of AI and ML 
on the battlefield in the form of autonomous air, land, sea, 
space, and cyber capabilities such as drones and in the case 
of cyber, code. ML and AI are similar, but distinct concepts 
covering multiple capabilities and constructs. Therefore, it is 
important to understand their subtleties.  
In general, AI is divided into two varied approaches: 
symbolic and non-symbolic; each represents knowledge in 
fundamentally different ways, leading to outcomes specific 
to the respective approach [2]. It is important to understand 
these two categories in order to properly arrange AI and ML 
in a construct that supports co-functionality. “The systems 
developed as part of the DARPA Cyber Grand Challenge are 
primarily symbolic AI systems. These automated reasoners 
can identify vulnerabilities in software services, develop a 
patch, and deploy the patch at machine speed” [2]. The use 
of symbolic AI is labor intensive and includes the creation of 
a large matrix of interrelated information to get the AI 
started. However, as the AI begins to make connections and 
form heuristic bonds, the system can grow and adapt on its 
own. The same is true to a great extent for non-symbolic 
systems which focus instead on the patterns of learning in 
data for classifying objects, predicting future results, or 
clustering similar sets of data [2]. However, the true power 
of AI and ML is not their individual components, but what 
they can accomplish together. Such is the case in the world 
of intelligent autonomous agents. 
Intelligent autonomous agents have been in development 
for some time, but are only now coming to fruition as 
mechanisms capable of the complex decision-making 
processes necessary for optimal, real-world performance. 
“The proliferation of intelligent agents is the emerging 
reality of warfare, and they will form an ever-growing 
fraction of total military assets. The sheer quantity of 
targetable friendly agents… make intelligent, autonomous 
cyber defense agent a necessity on the battlefield of the 
future” [3]. With the overlap of AI, ML, and Deep Learning 
(DL) capabilities across the globe, U.S. and NATO 
capabilities must not only keep pace with this trend, but 
outstrip it in order to maintain a leading edge against 
adversaries. This overlap is represented in Figure 2 Artificial 
Intelligence, Machine Learning, Deep Learning Overlap for 
Autonomous Agents. Another way to accomplish this goal is 
through human-machine partnering through cyber interfaces 
interleaved with AI and ML capable technologies. Human-
machine teaming has become a huge topic of research and 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-818-1
CYBER 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

practice recently, especially as it relates to Defensive 
Cyberspace Operations (DCO). This teaming aspect has led 
to a marked need for autonomous, synthetic agents that can 
assist in processing, targeting, and gap-filling [2]. Through 
these human-cyber interactions, filtering, parsing, and 
decision-making can be funneled in such a way to speed up 
processes such as targeting and battle damage assessment, a 
vital feedback stream in today’s joint all-domain military 
environments. Of course, as with all emergent capabilities, a 
note of caution and reflection must be considered. Questions 
concerning whether autonomous agents might eventually be 
candidates for “personhood” and held liable for accidents or 
purposeful destruction have arisen in light of the trend 
toward cyber autonomy. The European Parliament has even 
gone so far as to publish a report with “recommendations to 
the Commission on Civil Law Rules on Robotics” asking 
questions regarding how to categorize AI and ML enabled 
autonomous agents [4]. Regardless of these questions, 
however, the journey toward AI and ML in myriad 
applications is underway and there is no turning back. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning, Deep Learning 
Overlap for Autonomous Agents. 
III. 
EMERGENT SECURITY 
Security issues will obviously continue to be paramount 
in importance as the cyber community goes forward. 
Protecting information from integrity attacks like man-in-
the-middle and infiltrations by using existing encryption 
standards will only work for so long as adversaries continue 
to develop more advanced cracking technologies, some of 
which will undoubtedly include quantum computing 
capabilities (to be discussed in the following section). 
Emergent capabilities such as quantum encryption and multi-
factor authentication offer the best options currently 
understood for defense against imminent cracking attempts.  
Quantum encryption is a tool still in development that 
has spurred from the underlying mathematical and physics 
modeling and applications of particle physics and quantum 
theory. “A quantum procedure known as quantum 
cryptography or quantum key distribution can do key 
distribution so that the communication security cannot be 
compromised. The idea is based on the quantum principle 
that observing a quantum system will disturb the system 
being observed” [5]. In quantum key distribution, the 
disturbance of the system occurs as a result of a relationship 
called 
quantum 
entanglement. 
Quantum 
computers 
implement superposition states and quantum entanglements 
to 
perform 
simultaneous 
calculations 
and 
produce 
consequential calculated results. The highly efficient 
character of quantum entanglement and superposition are the 
characteristics that enable quantum computers to be 
exponentially faster, consistently outperforming classical 
computers in several areas [5]. The idea is that when two 
particles of matter, in this case most probably subatomic 
particles called fermions, become related or entangled in a 
relationship-dependent state, if one particle changes in state, 
the other one does as well; this is true no matter how far 
apart the particles are in physical distance which makes the 
application of state changes between the particles especially 
useful for quantum encryption and computing.  
Multi-factor authentication is another area important to 
integrity within the cyber meta-reality. While the concept of 
two-factor authentication is presently in use across a wide 
array of devices and systems, multi-factor authentication is 
still a growing area. “Two-factor authentication has reduced 
incidences of fraud, including identity theft, in e-commerce. 
Consumers are no longer at high risk from thieves due to the 
compromise at a single point of failure in a transaction” [6]. 
However, as thieves and adversaries find ways to exploit 
weaknesses and circumvent two-factor authentication, the 
opportunity for deeper layering of authentication is growing. 
Several areas of authentication are possible according to 
Waters: location, possession, access, proximity, behavioral, 
confirmation, witnessed, and radio. By using these 
techniques together, multiple factors can add strength, 
thereby denying access to and possible manipulation of data. 
IV. 
QUANTUM COMPUTING 
Probably the most difficult expanse of emergent 
technology to comprehend and implement is quantum 
computing. This is due mostly to the profound and 
sometimes murky depths one must take into the areas of 
particle physics and applied mathematics, but also because 
the technologies that enable the manipulation of subatomic 
particles that make quantum computing possible are still 
developing and being modeled both mathematically and 
through actual laboratory experimentation. Information 
theory and quantum mechanics have historically been 
separate fields, unrelated in most research. However, it has 
been recognized as increasingly important and vital to bring 
these two scientific fields of study together in order to 
advance both. Only through the study of quantum 
information science can quantum states be understood and 
manipulated sufficiently and appropriately to perform 
information transmission and manipulation at the quantum 
level [7]. Five important concepts of quantum computing 
must be considered in order to understand how the capability 
is possible and why it is so powerful and applicable to the 
meta-reality of cyber. First, we must comprehend the basic 
fundamentals of a quantum system: “Quantum mechanics 
depicts phenomena at microscopic level such as position and 
momentum of an individual particle like an atom or electron, 
spin of an electron, detection of light photons, and the 
emission and absorption of light by atoms” [7]. These 
characteristics and the ability to manipulate the states of 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-818-1
CYBER 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

subatomic particles by molding these characteristics is what 
makes quantum computing possible. This leads to the second 
component of quantum computing, superposition quantum 
states. In quantum computing, the primary characteristic of 
superposition is in the computer’s ability to process 
information. In classical computing, the computer must 
handle ones and zeroes separately and sequentially. 
However, in quantum computing, the processor handles ones 
and zeros at the same time, handling matter in a state that 
sees it as a one and a zero simultaneously [7]. This 
interlacing of states between subatomic particles is what 
forms quantum entanglement (mentioned in the previous 
section). This ability to relate two particles together and 
make changes at a distance lead to the third area of quantum 
computing concepts, quantum circuitry: “A quantum 
computer can be created from a quantum circuit with 
quantum gates to perform quantum computation and 
manipulate quantum information” [7]. This capability can 
only be accomplished through the relationships formed 
between the particles in order to make necessary changes and 
distribute those changes throughout the quantum system (see 
Figure 3 Quantum Computing Model). This leads to the 
central and fourth concept of quantum entanglement: When 
two particles are entangled, they actually take on each 
other’s properties and behaviors, allowing them to not only 
change in close proximity, but at a distance by way of an 
invisible wave function that connects them [7]. This invisible 
interlinkage is what makes the changes in states over 
distances possible. This is a very sophisticated and difficult 
concept to grasp, only further complicated by the fifth and 
final 
concept 
of 
quantum 
teleportation: 
“Quantum 
teleportation is a process by which we can transfer the state 
of a qubit from one location to another, without transmitting 
it through the intervening space” [7]. It is important to 
understand that although information concerning the change 
of the state of one particle to another only transfers the 
change in state and not the particle itself, resulting in a pure 
information transfer without actually expending the energy 
and time it would take to transfer the particle as is currently 
performed in traditional electron transfer computing. 
 
 
Figure 3. Quantum Computing Model. 
 
Armed with this basic understanding of quantum 
computing, we can now explore a few of the possibilities 
conceived through the use of this emergent technology. One 
of the most valuable capabilities available through the use of 
quantum 
computing 
is 
termed 
“quantum 
speedup”. 
‘Quantum speedup’ is simply the phenomenon that is 
characteristic of quantum computing speeds that allow them 
to perform certain calculations much faster than traditional 
computers [8]. This concept evolves from the fact that 
operations can be accomplished through the use of 
instantaneous and efficient data state transfer, making the 
speed potential of quantum computing virtually incalculable. 
Another area in which quantum computing has been 
theorized to make an enormous impact is that of 
collaborative scientific scaffolding to create mechanisms 
heretofore unheard of: “in theory it would be possible to 
combine advances in biotechnology, nanotechnology, and 
quantum computer technology to ‘print’ new life” [9]. While 
this might smack of science fiction, this kind of capability 
may be closer to reality than most understand, as we will see 
in the following section on nanotechnologies. In fact, Google 
recently produced a paper about its 53 qubit quantum 
computer Sycamore, titled “Quantum supremacy using a 
programmable superconducting processor” subsequently 
reported by The Verge, in which was printed, “Google’s 
quantum computer was reportedly able to solve a calculation 
— proving the randomness of numbers produced by a 
random number generator — in 3 minutes and 20 seconds 
that would take the world’s fastest traditional supercomputer, 
Summit, around 10,000 years. This effectively means that 
the calculation cannot be performed by a traditional 
computer, making Google the first to demonstrate quantum 
supremacy” [10]. Add to these advances the impending wave 
of 5G technologies and the wireless and electromagnetic 
spectrum (EMS) concerns attached to this ethereal 
superstructure. Quantum computing offers options for 
quickly transmitting data at a distance that very well may 
lead to a quantum 6G capability that far outstrips or possibly 
supports the 5G instantiation. Quantum properties can 
likewise support bandwidth traversal between satellites to 
broaden global data transmission such that hard solutions 
like 
undersea 
cables 
and 
hard 
wired 
national 
communications infrastructures could become redundant if 
not obsolete. Suffice it to say, quantum computing is an area 
of deep and broad interest in basically every area of life, 
especially for those of us in the cyber community. 
V. 
NANOTECHNOLOGY 
With microcomputers shrinking to smaller and smaller 
sizes yet offering faster processing, larger storage, wider 
bandwidth, and greater power, Moore’s law is quickly 
approaching a breaking point. With this reality encroaching 
on 
manufacturers 
and 
consumers 
alike, 
numerous 
organizations are leveraging new scientific breakthroughs in 
nanotechnology to deliver the promise of continued lower 
cost and precipitous technological progress. Of course, the 
area that is seen to most probabilistically deliver is 
nanotechnology. Through the discovery and manipulation of 
such products as graphene and MOFs, materials capable of 
making the leap downward in size to a level capable of 
accommodating the attributes necessary for non-linear 
waveform 
manipulation, 
microscopic 
circuitry, 
and 
subatomic particle transmissions necessary for quantum 
computing are not only possible, but available for 
experimentation and eventual use. These advances also have 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-818-1
CYBER 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

direct applicability to advances in AI and ML as the 
processing, bandwidth, and other system requirements 
necessary to allow for the rapid acquisition, sorting, filtering, 
and decision making processes to continue AI and ML 
potentialities are vital to progression. Similarly, as quantum 
computing and AI/ML continue to grow, so too will quantum 
encryption capabilities.  
As with quantum computing, it is important to 
understand some of the mathematical and particle physics 
concepts 
undergirding 
the 
inner 
workings 
of 
nanotechnology. A great deal of workability is wrapped up 
in the graphene honeycomb structure (see Figure 4 Graphene 
Honeycomb Lattice) capable of providing waveform packet 
containment 
and 
direction 
for 
subatomic 
particle 
manipulation that makes quantum computing viable. “There 
has been intense interest within the fundamental and applied 
physics communities in [honeycomb] structures… Graphene, 
a single atomic layer of carbon atoms, is a two-dimensional 
structure with carbon atoms located at the sites of 
honeycomb structures” [11]. To further explain this concept, 
one must grasp a sometimes comical anecdotal example 
based on the “nonlinear Schrödinger (NLS) equation” [12]. 
The story goes that Austrian physicist Erwin Schrödinger’s 
concept of superposition (matter occupying two states 
simultaneously) can be described through the example of a 
cat in an enclosure such as a box and with it a device that has 
a 50% chance of killing the cat. The idea is that until we 
open the box, we can’t state with any degree of certainty 
whether the cat is alive or dead. So, the cat basically 
occupies two states (alive and dead) simultaneously. This is a 
very elementary description of the concept, but it serves as a 
basic principle of the same issue attached to the ability of a 
subatomic particle to occupy two states simultaneously 
which makes quantum entanglement, quantum states, etc. 
possible. This has been demonstrated in laboratory 
experiments and through mathematical models such as the 
ones posited by Fefferman and Weinstein, Ablowitz and 
Zhu, and Hirokawa and Kosaka. The third team states in 
their research, “We gave concrete formulae explicitly 
showing the one-to-one correspondence between every self 
adjoint extension of the minimal Schrödinger operator and 
the boundary condition of the wave functions of the 
Schrôdinger particle. We proved that the boundary 
conditions are classified into two types: one is characterized 
by the wave function’s perfect reflection at the boundaries 
and the other by the wave function’s imperfect reflection 
with penetration from one island to another island” [13]. To 
put this in simpler terms, the outcome was a graphene 
waveform packet conductor capable of transmitting state 
data between two subatomic particles whose states had 
become entangled, thus allowing them to share state data at a 
distance within a system. This capability is a fundamental 
part of what creates the conditions necessary for quantum 
computing. 
 
 
Figure 4. Graphene Honeycomb Lattice. 
 
A separate technology also useful for data transmission is 
MOFs. “Thin films of inorganic porous crystals, zeolites and 
MOFs, have been developed for use as sensors, electronic 
materials, micro-reactors, and separation membranes. In 
particular, zeolite membranes have been attracting intense 
research interest as separation materials in the past decades. 
MOFs have also been studied in the field of membrane 
research in recent years” [14]. The ability to use these types 
of materials as sensors, reactors, and other electronic 
materials highlights their potential in systems architecture, 
especially in the area of power transfer, have wide 
applicability in the field of computing. While this technology 
has been used for decades in other areas, new applications 
for energy storage such as batteries and high-volume 
capacitors shows promise in the areas of cyber-enabled 
electronic drones as well as micro-drone clusters, not to 
mention portable computing devices.  
More specifically as it relates to nanotechnology and 
nanomaterials is the question of their application to security 
within cyber systems. “Nanotechnology is expected to be a 
key enabling technology (KET) to sustain the development 
of future smart sensing systems and/or Cyber-Physical 
Systems 
(CPS) 
that 
will 
jointly 
integrate 
sensing, 
computation, communication and energy management 
functions” [15]. The applications vary widely with security 
applications at every layer of cyberspace. However, the most 
marked areas for advancement are probably authentication 
and cryptography systems. Currently, nano-optics are in 
development and have proven to be useful for the most 
sophisticated security authentication techniques. However, 
with the advancement of nano-enabled multi-parameter 
sensors, 
authentication 
may 
in 
the 
future 
include 
sophisticated access keys based on individualized multi-
parameter techniques, including biological signals, which 
would be difficult to reproduce [15]. The complexity 
involved in producing authentication systems such as these 
rests heavily on nano capabilities as do those involved in 
cryptography. However, the encryption techniques and 
methods stem from a different angle. Since quantum 
computers are based on the fundamental information 
component of the qubit, they actually process information at 
the atomic level. As quantum technology and computing 
advance, so will the complexity of encryption, pattern 
recognition, and other security capabilities, making current 
cryptographic systems obsolete, if not in drastic need of 
reengineering [15].  
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-818-1
CYBER 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

Perhaps one of the most exciting and far reaching nano-
enabled capabilities within the cyber meta-reality will be AI 
and ML. The United States, the National Strategic 
Computing Initiative (NSCI) made persistent demands on 
supercomputers to achieve incredible new levels of 
performance and power efficiency, insisting on the 
integration of new, more powerful exaflop supercomputers. 
Exaflop supercomputers will be about 30 times more 
powerful than today’s fastest machines, and their graphics 
processing units will be able to handle up to ten times more 
operations per unit of energy compared to existing 
computers [15]. With processing capabilities like this, AI and 
ML computation, sorting, filtering, decision-making, and 
heuristics can be increased dramatically, allowing systems to 
learn and grow at an exponential rate.  
The overall impact of nanotechnologies on the cyber 
meta-reality leads to amazing possibilities that are already 
breaching cyberspace and the physical domains as well. With 
such growth and impact, the introduction of the concept of a 
cyber microbiome may be of some interest and is worth 
additional thought and research beyond the scope of this 
paper. As the Earth and indeed human beings share their 
chemical/biological physicality with a host of enabling flora 
and fauna (Earth) and bacteria, fungi, protozoa, and even 
viruses (humans), the cyber meta-reality is growing into a 
type of non-physical, yet tangible sphere where stripping 
away or adding to it could have far-reaching ramifications 
yet understood. The human microbiome (Figure 5) has most 
recently been estimated to outnumber human cells by several 
orders of magnitude [16]. A cyber microbiome (Figure 6.) 
has already begun to take shape, characterized by viruses, 
archived data, dark Web outgrowths, and other symbiotic 
code and applications that will ostensibly grow rapidly as AI 
and ML begin to create additional code and data in the 
future. While the cyber microbiome may not be, in some 
cases, considered a direct part of the created domain we 
experience, it certainly must not be stripped away, 
eradicating the good along with the bad. The cyber 
microbiome is similar to its planetary and human corollaries 
in that it contains various undetectable components that serve 
to support its function in difficult to discern ways. For 
instance, the “dark web” as referenced in Figure 6 is much 
like the unseen portion of the iceberg under the surface. This 
indicates another way in which the cyber microbiome is so 
similar to its antecedents; the cyber microbiome is likely 
larger than visible cyberspace by many orders of magnitude. 
These basic understandings about the cyber microbiome 
serve as area of interest and concern and are worthy of 
further consideration. 
 
Figure 5. Human Microbiome. 
 
Figure 6. Cyber Microbiome. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
The world we encounter every day has an undercurrent of 
possibilities. There are new discoveries just below the skin of 
our reality and moving through and across what can be seen 
as the cyber meta-reality. With the rise of this cyber world of 
interconnections 
and 
technological 
upheaval, 
new 
capabilities are beginning to shape and expand the horizons 
of cyber and humans alike. AI and ML are reaching into 
areas and affecting systems in amazing and sometimes 
concerning ways. Quantum computing brings with it new 
capabilities 
including 
quantum 
encryption, 
enormous 
storage, unparalleled processing speeds, and seemingly 
infinite bandwidth. Nanotechnology and nanomaterials are 
critical enablers of all of these systems, providing the 
physical constructs to make them possible and practicable. 
Finally, with the almost organic, but silicone-based cyber 
meta-reality comes the emergence of a cyber microbiome; a 
symbiotic, construct yet unmapped that may lead to further 
understandings of the cyber meta-reality as well as our own 
physical one. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Guillot, "Emerging Technology: Creator of Worlds” 
Strategic Studies Quarterly, Emerging Technology Special 
Edition (FALL 2016), Vol. 10, No. 3, pp. 3-8, 2016. 
[2] F. Maymí and S. Lathrop, 2018. “AI in Cyberspace: Beyond 
the Hype,” The Cyber Defense Review (FALL 2018), Vol. 3, 
No. 3, pp. 71-82, 2018. 
[3] A. Kott. Intelligent Autonomous Agents are Key to  
Cyber Defense of the Future Army Networks, The Cyber 
Defense Review (FALL 2018), Vol. 3, No. 3, pp. 57-70, 2018. 
[4] L. Janssens, A Prospect Of The Future: How Autonomous 
Systems May Qualify as Legal Persons, Amsterdam 
University Press, 2018. 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-818-1
CYBER 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

[5] Y. 
Wang, 
“Quantum 
Computation 
and 
Quantum 
Information,” Statistical Science (August 2012), Vol. 27, No. 
3, pp. 373-394, 2012. 
[6] T. Waters, 2017. “Multifactor Authentication – A New Chain 
of Custody Option for Military Logistics,” The Cyber Defense 
Review (FALL 2017), Vol. 2, No. 3, pp. 139-148, 2017. 
[7] Y. 
Wang, 
“Quantum 
Computation 
and 
Quantum 
Information,” Statistical Science (August 2012), Vol. 27, No. 
3, pp. 373-394, 2012. 
[8] M. Cuffaro, “How-Possibly Explanations in (Quantum) 
Computer Science,” Philosophy of Science (December 2015), 
Vol. 82, No. 5, pp. 737-748, 2015. 
[9] M. Guillot, "Emerging Technology: Creator of Worlds” 
Strategic Studies Quarterly, Emerging Technology Special 
Edition (FALL 2016), Vol. 10, No. 3, pp. 3-8, 2016. 
[10] J. Porter, “Google may have just ushered in an era of 
‘quantum supremacy,” The Verge, accessed 8 October 2019 
from https://www.theverge.com/2019/9/23/20879485/google-
quantum-supremacy-qubits-nasa, 2019.  
[11] C. Fefferman and M. Weinstein. “Honeycomb Lattice 
Potentials and Dirac Points,” Journal of the American 
Mathematical Society (OCTOBER 2012), Vol. 25, No. 4, 
pp.1169-1220, 2012. 
[12] M. Ablowitz and Y. Zhu, “Nonlinear Waves in Shallow 
Honeycomb 
Lattices,” 
SIAM 
Journal 
on 
Applied 
Mathematics, Vol. 72, No. 1, pp. 240-260, 2012. 
[13] M. Hirokawa and T. Kosaka, “One-Dimensional Tunnel-
Junction Formula for The Schrödinger Particle,” SIAM 
Journal on Applied Mathematics, Vol. 73, No. 6, pp. 2247-
2261, 2013. 
[14] M. Sakai, M. Seshimo, and M. Matsukata. 2018. Membrane 
Technology: How, Where, and Why, Amsterdam University 
Press. 
[15] A. 
Ionescu, 
“Nanotechnology 
and 
Global 
Security,” 
Connections (Spring 2016),  Vol. 15, No. 2, pp. 31-47, 2016. 
[16] N. Fierer et al., “From Animalcules to an Ecosystem: 
Application 
of 
Ecological 
Concepts 
to 
the 
Human 
Microbiome,” Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and 
Systematics, Vol. 43, pp. 137-155, 2012. 
 
 
The views expressed are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of the Air Force, the Department of 
Defense, or the U.S. Government. 
 
DoD School Policy. DoD gives its personnel in its school environments the widest latitude to express their views. To ensure a 
climate of academic freedom and to encourage intellectual expression, students and faculty members of an academy, college, 
university, or DoD school are not required to submit papers or material that are prepared in response to academic 
requirements and not intended for release outside the academic institution. Information proposed for public release or made 
available in libraries or databases or on web sites to which the public has access shall be submitted for review. 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-818-1
CYBER 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

