Higher Education Institutions as Targets for Cyber-attacks: Measuring Employees 
and Students Cybersecurity Behaviours in the Estonian Academy of Security 
Sciences 
Kate-Riin Kont 
Internal Security Department, Estonian Academy of Security Sciences 
Tallinn, Estonia 
e-mail: kate-riin.kont@sisekaitse.ee 
 
 
 
 
Abstract — The purpose of this study is to identify the most 
common characteristics that make users vulnerable, either 
individually or in groups, and to determine whether there is a 
relationship between user behaviour and victimisation of a 
cyber-attack. This research should help characterise people 
who are more likely to become victims of various phishing and 
social attacks. For this purpose, students, employees and 
lecturers of the Estonian Academy of Security Sciences were 
investigated. A five-scale questionnaire was used as the 
methodology of the study, which considers the following 
behaviours: risky behaviour, conservative behaviour, risk 
exposure behaviour and risk perception behaviour. The results 
obtained show that users with risky behaviour are most 
exposed to social engineering attacks in social networks. 
Furthermore, the analysed groups of faculty and staff fall 
victim to these attacks less often than students. Finally, we 
concluded that people who spend more time in front of a 
computer and engage in riskier cyber behaviours are more 
vulnerable to attacks. 
Keywords 
– 
cyber 
security, 
user 
behaviour, 
risk, 
vulnerabilities, higher education institutions, staff, students. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Across Europe, the number and sophistication of cyber- 
attacks and cybercrime is increasing. While nearly every 
major industry faces significant cyber security challenges, 
higher education is particularly vulnerable for several 
important reasons. 
In particular, it has to do with the unique academic 
culture, known for its openness and transparency. Criminals 
can get into the researchers’ network and see what is 
happening, what is being tested, and how those tests are 
going. Several master’s and doctoral theses have taken place 
in closed defences, with no public access to them, although 
the university membership or a certain part of it has access. 
Such data is not only a target for espionage but also has 
economic value. 
Another reason has to do with history – specifically, that 
higher education institutions have been online for a very long 
time. Universities have always been the main targets of 
cyber- attacks because universities have had access to the 
Internet for a relatively long time. They have always offered 
free public access, as research centres in their field, not only 
to their members but also to anyone who wishes, e.g. 
through their libraries. As a result, they have long been 
visible targets, and cybercriminals are likely to know their 
weaknesses very well. A few examples of cyber-attacks on 
universities show that such an attack can be not only 
detrimental to relations between countries but even life-
threatening. 
The University of Helsinki was hit by an exceptionally 
extensive cyber-attack on 22.03.2022. During the day, up to 
2,500 comments were posted on the university’s social 
media accounts from what appeared to be new fake profiles 
with few posts and followers. The content of the messages 
was clearly anti-Russian. Among other things, they 
demanded the withdrawal of the right to study from Russian 
students. There were 10–15 identical messages, so it could 
be assumed that it was an automated robot attack. The 
Russian state was probably behind the attack, and the 
messages were used to give the university the impression 
that there are anti-Russian sentiments in Finland or the 
University of Helsinki. Such attacks could be successfully 
used, for example, in the Russian media against Finland. 
Such a large and organised cyber-attack was exceptional at 
the University of Helsinki [1]. 
The most serious attacks are those on health care, for 
example, hospitals. In the Czech Republic, a cyber-attack 
took place in the middle of March 2020 on a hospital 
performing corona tests in the city of Brno. The malware 
locked the hospital’s data and demanded a ransom to unlock 
it [2]. Another example had very serious consequences. 
Düsseldorf University Hospital failed to admit a woman 
brought by ambulance on 19.09.2020 after a cyber-attack 
froze the hospital’s information system. The woman later 
died in the ambulance as it was diverted to another hospital 
30km away. As claimed by Reuters, it was the first 
confirmed case anywhere in the world, in which a person has 
died as the direct consequence of a cyberattack [3]. 
However, it was not certain if the university hospital was the 
actual target of the attack or if it was collateral damage in an 
attack on the university. The ransom demands were aimed at 
Heinrich Heine University, not the hospital directly. The 
police contacted the attackers and informed them that the 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-113-8
CYBER 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

target of the attack was the hospital, not the university, and 
that the patient’s life was in danger. After that, the attack was 
stopped and the authorities were given the encryption key, 
but it was too late [4]. 
In summary, higher education institutions are targets for 
cyber-attacks because their data is valuable and easily 
accessible. In addition to the fact that the personal data of 
students and staff held by universities presents an 
opportunity for ransom attacks, the latest research findings 
could become a target for international espionage. Therefore, 
it is critical that academic institutions provide resources for 
cyber security and protect themselves against potential 
attacks. 
The current study examines the behaviour of students, 
lecturers (researchers) and employees of the Estonian 
Academy of Security Sciences regarding hybrid threats and 
possibilities to prevent risks related to cyber security. This 
study is part of a larger research conducted within the 
framework of the cooperation program on hybrid threats 
(HYBRIDC) between Estonian Academy of Security 
Sciences, 
Lithuanian 
Mykolas 
Romeris 
University, 
Academy 
of 
Public 
Security 
and 
Riga 
Stradins 
University. This questionnaire has been prepared in 
cooperation with the digital development department of the 
Estonian Academy of Security Sciences. The results of the 
study can be used to develop strategies and trainings to 
reduce errors related to the human factor in the cyber 
security of higher education institutions. " Th rest of the 
paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, we give a brief 
overview of how cyber security awareness among the 
members of higher education institutions has been studied 
so far, what have been the conclusions of these studies, and 
what recommendations have been made in the future. In 
Section 3 we shortly introduce the research design, 
methodology used, present the research questions and the 
course of the study. General results are pesented in Section 
4. Finally, we conclude our work in Section 5. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Security in a higher education institution is completely 
different than in the private sector because it is an open 
institution. There are many access points and a lot of 
personal information about employees and students. 
Information security training, awareness raising, and cyber 
behaviour monitoring are not always top priorities for 
educational institutions. The contribution of lecturers, 
researchers and employees who engage in research and 
teaching work or provide administrative support to these 
activities are often considered to be the central figures of a 
higher education institution. Information technology (IT) 
employees deal with security to the extent that they have the 
human and time resources for it. 
Several studies have shown that there is a human 
dimension to the causes of cyber-attacks in higher education 
institutions [5]-[9]. Analysing the data from these studies, it 
was discovered that the patron’s ignorance and carelessness 
in password management is common, which contributes to 
higher education institutions becoming targets for cyber-
attacks. The studies by Öğütçü et al. [5] and Benavides-
Astudillo et al. [9] aimed to identify common characteristics 
that make users vulnerable to social manipulation, either 
individually or in groups. For this purpose, they conducted a 
survey among the employees and students of the higher 
education institution. Four scales that consider the following 
behaviours were studied: Risky Behaviour Scale (RBS), 
Conservative Behaviour Scale (CBS), Exposure to Offence 
Scale (EOS) and Risk Perception Scale (RPS). Öğütçü et al. 
[5] results showed that respondents’ behaviour becomes 
more cautious the more they perceive threats. Respondents’ 
use of risky technologies increases their exposure to crime, 
which in turn increases caution. It also appeared that the 
score of the group that participated in security training was 
higher than the score of the group that did not attend such 
training. This finding clearly shows that such training 
increases people’s awareness. The data analysis showed that 
the respondents do not report the cybercrime they have 
experienced to the authorities because they do not know who 
to turn to. One of the most important findings of this study is 
that the higher the level of education, the greater their 
awareness of information security. A notable finding was 
that students (between the ages of 18 and 30) appear to be 
the group most at risk [5]. The results of a study conducted 
by Benavides-Astudillo et al. [9] with the same methodology 
showed that users with risky behaviour are most exposed to 
social manipulation attacks in social networks. It also 
concluded that the analysed faculty and staff groups fall 
victim to such attacks much less often than students and that 
people who spend more time online are more likely to fall 
victim to a social engineering attack [9]. 
III. 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
To find out the most common reasons that make 
everyday Internet users, such as students and employees of 
Estonian 
higher 
education 
institutions, 
undoubtedly 
vulnerable, either individually or in groups, the four-scale 
measure developed by Öğütçü et al. [5] was used. The RBS 
measures the risk behaviour of Internet users, e.g. whether 
various security measures are used to protect themselves as 
well as the people they live or work with. The purpose of the 
CBS is to measure the Internet user’s actions and actions in 
protecting his personal information. The purpose of the EOS 
is to measure the exposure of users to any cyber security 
threat, highlighting the user’s behaviour in relation to the 
risks, threats and effects resulting from the events. The RPS 
measures the level of risk or threat that befalls the Internet 
user and is related to the field of trust that the user has in the 
face of possible cyber-attacks [5], [9]. 
The scales and questions were developed based on 
existing literature and IT expert opinions of the Estonian 
Academy of Security Sciences. It is quite important to 
determine the level of awareness because awareness and 
behaviour are very closely related. According to this model, 
an individual’s behaviour is determined by the perception of 
a threat and actions to resolve that threat. Awareness is a 
powerful weapon against social engineering attacks, so this 
study allows universities of applied sciences to use these 
findings to focus their cyber security training priorities. The 
survey consists of five parts: 1) questions that collect 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-113-8
CYBER 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

respondents’ demographic data, 2) questions about user 
profiles related to IT and computer security, 3) questions 
dealing with risky issues related to IT behaviour, 4) 
questions 
about 
respondents’ 
behaviour 
regarding 
information security and threats, and 5) questions that 
address users’ exposure to cybercrime. 
Answers could be given according to a 5-point Likert 
scale. The proposed scales were formulated depending on the 
questions asked. Total respondent scores were calculated by 
assigning 5 points for “Always”, 4 points for “Often”, 3 
points for “Sometimes”, 2 points for “Rarely”, and 1 point 
for “Never” for the RBS and CBS questions. A higher score 
indicates that the respondent is very risk tolerant. For EOS, it 
is said that as the scores increase, the respondent is exposed 
to crime (negative experience) at a higher level. For RPS, 
“Very dangerous” is 5 points, “Dangerous” is 4 points, 
“Slightly dangerous” is 3 points, “Not dangerous” is 2 points 
and “I don’t know” is 1 point. As the scores increase, it is 
understandable that the respondent considers related 
technologies more dangerous [5]. 
Based on the two main studies of RBS, CBS, EOS and 
RPS [5], [9], the following research questions were raised: 
Is there a difference between the scales concerning their 
average score? 
Is there a difference between the surveyed groups 
(lecturers, administrative staff, and students) concerning their 
average score? 
Does the duration of time spent on the Internet affect the 
average score of the scales? 
Does the cyber security training attendance affect the 
average score of the scales? 
Invitations to participate were sent to the email addresses 
of 1,000 undergraduate students and 69 master students, 439 
faculty members and 271 staff. The survey was conducted 
using LimeSurvey and was administered by sending a link to 
the online survey. Data collection lasted for two months, 
during which repeated reminders were sent. There were 363 
total responses including non-completed. The data were 
screened and any results missing one or more responses were 
deleted, resulting in a sample size of n=277. 
 
IV. 
GENERAL RESULTS 
Tables 1 and 2, and Figures 1 and 2 show the results 
obtained based on the user’s general information. Table 1 
gives an overview of the demographic data of the users, and 
here information about the completed/uncompleted cyber 
training, the time spent on the Internet during the day, as 
well as the type of Internet access used can be found. Table 2 
shows the survey averages for all four defined categories – 
Risky Behaviour Scale (RBS), Conservative Behaviour Scale 
– (CBS), Exposure to Offence Scale (EOS) and the Risk 
Perception Scale (RPS). A score of 1 is considered the 
lowest value and 5 is the maximum value for each survey 
question. 
 
 
 
TABLE I.  
RESULTS OF THE USER PROFILE SECTION 
Characteristic 
Category 
Number 
of 
respondents 
Percentage 
Gender 
Male 
120 
43% 
Female 
157 
57% 
Age range 
19–25 
68 
30% 
26–30 
27 
9% 
31–40 
58 
19% 
41–50 
81 
27% 
51–60 
32 
11% 
61–70 
9 
3% 
70+ 
2 
1% 
Position 
Vocational 
student 
33 
12% 
Undergraduate 
student 
98 
33% 
Graduate 
student 
14 
5% 
Lecturers 
42 
15% 
Administrative 
staff 
71 
26% 
Other 
19 
7% 
Cyber 
security 
training 
completed 
Yes 
241 
60% 
No 
66 
40% 
Time spent on 
the Internet 
1–5 hours/day 
145 
52% 
6–10 
hours/day 
123 
44% 
11 or more 
hours/day 
9 
3% 
Type 
of 
Internet 
access 
Using Mobile 
Internet 
133 
48% 
Using public 
Wi-Fi network 
(Cafes, 
shopping 
centres) 
1 
1% 
Using private 
Wi-Fi network 
(Home) 
15 
5% 
Using remote 
connection of 
my 
organisation 
128 
46% 
 
TABLE II.  
NUMBER OF QUESTIONS AND AVERAGES OBTAINED BY 
SCALE 
Scale 
Number of questions 
Average score 
RBS 
20 
2.610469 
CBS 
10 
4.051264 
EOS 
7 
1.38886 
RPS 
17 
3.49777 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-113-8
CYBER 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
Figure 1.  Results of the completed cyber security training 
Figure 1 shows that the majority of students who have 
participated in cyber security training are master’s students, 
and among the employees of the higher education institution, 
those who have identified themselves as “others”, that is, 
research workers and external lecturers. Notably, 61% of 
vocational students and only 40% of applied higher 
education students have completed cyber security training. 
More than half of the teaching staff and employees have also 
completed the training. Nonetheless, this level is definitely 
not high enough. 
Figure 2 shows the most eager Internet users in every 
studied group separately. While undergraduate students and 
lecturers are the most diligent Internet users in both 1–5 
hours/day and 6–10 hours/day groups, the administrative 
staff is apparently overwhelmed with work in the 11 or more 
hours/day group. 
 
 
Figure 2. Time range of Internet use according to the position. 
 
 
 
 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
It is necessary to emphasise that people’s behavior can 
contribute to making it easier to become victims of cyber-
attacks, and it is by raising their awareness that it is possible 
to mitigate the consequences of cyber-attacks on universities. 
The model proposed here can be successfully applied to 
different higher education institutions – it helps quickly find 
out the cyber security training needs and develop the training 
policy which can be implemented at the right level of 
difficulty. Similarly, this model identifies the knowledge and 
skills of user groups, to deal with social engineering attacks. 
REFERENCES 
[1] K. 
Kirsi, 
“Helsingin 
yliopisto 
joutui 
laajan 
verkkohyökkäyksen kohteeksi: some-päivityksiin tullut jopa 2 
500 venäläisvastaista kommenttia” [in English: “The 
University of Helsinki was the target of a large-scale online 
attack: up to 2,500 anti-Russian comments were posted on 
social media”], YLE News, 2022, March 22. https://yle.fi/a/3-
12370984 
[2] C. Cimpanu, “Czech hospital hit by cyberattack while in the 
midst of a COVID-19 outbreak,” ZDNET, 2020, March 13. 
https://www.zdnet.com/article/czech-hospital-hit-by-cyber-
attack-while-in-the-midst-of-a-covid-19-outbreak/ 
[3] D. Busvine and T. Kaeckenhoff, “Prosecutors open homicide 
case after hacker attack on German hospital,” Reuters, 2020, 
September 18. https://www.reuters.com/article/us-germany-
cyber-idUSKBN26926X 
[4] M. Heikkilä, “Nainen kuoli ambulanssiin, kun kyberhyökkäys 
jumitti saksalaisen sairaalan tietojärjestelmän – syyttäjä avasi 
harvinaisen 
henkirikostutkimuksen,” 
Woman 
dies 
in 
ambulance after cyber-attack freezes German hospital's 
information system - prosecutor opens rare homicide 
investigation”], 
YLE 
News, 
2020, 
September 
19. 
https://yle.fi/a/3-11553530 
[5] G. Öğütçü, Ö. M. Testik and O. Chouseinoglou, “Analysis of 
personal information security behavior and awareness,” 
Computer 
& 
Security, 
2016, 
vol. 
56, 
pp. 
83–93. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2015.10.002 
[6] L. Muniandy, B. Muniandy and Z. Samsudi, „Cyber Security 
Behaviour among Higher Education Students in Malaysia,” 
2017, Journal of Information Assurance & Cyber Security, 
2017, pp. 1-13. DOI: 10.5171/2017.800299 
[7] J. Yerby and K. Floyd, “Faculty and Staff Information 
Security Awareness and Behavior,” 2018, Journal of The 
Colloquium for Information System Security Education 
(CISSE), 
vol. 
6(1). 
https://cisse.info/journal/index.php/cisse/article/view/90 
[8] Z. Othmana, N. Rahimb and M. Sadiq, “The Human 
Dimension as the Core Factor in Dealing with Cyberattacks in 
Higher Education,” International Journal of Innovation, 
Creativity 
and 
Change. 
2020, 
vol. 
11(1). 
https://ijicc.net/images/vol11iss1/11101_Othman_2020_E_R.
pdf 
[9] E. Benavides-Astudillo, L. Silva-Ordoñez, R. Rocohano-
Rámos, W. Fuertes, F. Fernández-Peña, S. Sanchez-Gordon 
and R. Bastidas-Chalan, “Analysis of Vulnerabilities 
Associated with Social Engineering Attacks Based on User 
Behavior,” 
in 
Applied 
Technologies. 
ICAT 
2021. 
Communications in Computer and Information Science, vol 
1535, M. Botto-Tobar, S. Montes León, P. Torres-Carrión, M. 
Zambrano Vizuete, B. Durakovic (eds) Springer, Cham. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-03884-6_26
 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-113-8
CYBER 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

