The Life of Data in Compliance Management
Nick Scope
College of Computing and Digital Media
DePaul University
Chicago, United States
Email: nscope52884@gmail.com
Alexander Rasin
College of Computing and Digital Media
DePaul University
Chicago, United States
Email: arasin@cdm.depaul.edu
Karen Heart
College of Computing and Digital Media
DePaul University
Chicago, United States
Email: kheart@cdm.depaul.edu
Ben Lenard
College of Computing and Digital Media
DePaul University
Chicago, United States
Email: blenard@anl.gov
James Wagner
Department of Computer Science
University of New Orleans
New Orleans, United States
Email: jwagner4@uno.edu
Abstract—Data privacy polices mandate requirements to pro-
tect the privacy of individuals, prevent fraud, and support
audits. Organizations also implement their own internal data
policies to minimize liabilities and protect user privacy. In
practice, it is difﬁcult (or impossible with most systems active
today) to achieve the desired purpose of these policies due to
technological limitations of storage systems. These limitations
are ultimately caused by the lack of native database support
for data privacy compliance. This paper surveys the principles
of data compliance and analyzes the requirements imposed on
organizations. We begin by deﬁning data compliance terminology
that must be shared between legal and technology domain
experts; legislation and litigation examples provide real-world
context and motivation for our analysis. Since the data life
cycle model is universally accepted in data management, we next
discuss how data compliance can be integrated into this model
to fully support data management policies. Finally, we consider
the open problems with current data storage systems and discuss
the requirements for automated privacy regulation compliance.
Keywords: Compliance Management; Privacy Regulations
I. INTRODUCTION
Data management by an organization is bound to data
governance policies (e.g., internal requirements or government
agency mandates) that deﬁne how the data must be stored
and used. These policies include data retention (how long the
data must be kept), data purging requirements (when the data
must be destroyed), and data consent (whether the data can be
used for a particular purpose). Failure to comply with these
policies could result in large ﬁnes, a loss of customers, and
an irrecoverable breach of customer data privacy.
Data policies set forth by legislation have been in place
for decades. Some examples include the Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) of 1996 [8]
(patient healthcare data) and the Gramm–Leach–Bliley Act
of 1999 [32] (business records of ﬁnancial institutions); ad-
ditionally, new policies are continuously introduced, such as
California’s Proposition 24 of 2020 [7] (which expanded on
the previous law “The California Consumer Privacy Act”).
Furthermore, there are also instances where organizations
must follow additional internal policies or policies of business
contacts [10]. We further discuss these motivating examples
and more in Section III.
A. Motivation
The data life cycle model is the state-of-the-art structure
for organizations to understand and manage their data as-
sets [25]. By examining the data life cycle phases, we can
clearly see how compliance must be considered throughout an
organization’s processes. Since published literature presents
several variations of the life cycle phases, we have abstracted
the relevant phases from [4], [13], and [23] in Figure 1. Our
phase deﬁnitions bridge the different goals of domain experts,
legal departments, and other stakeholders associated with the
data and legal requirements. These were developed to promote
discussion on where policy compliance must be considered.
For example, some data life cycles model “Usage” as multiple
phases (e.g., analysis, reporting). However, for the purposes
of privacy compliance, we believe that a single phase captures
all necessary aspects of “Usage”. To evaluate data lifecycle
outside the scope of policy compliance, alternative models
may be more applicable. For example, to analyze security
considerations, the transition of data between phases would
be modeled in further detail. Overall, we use our phases to
guide a discussion on future research necessary to remedy
the database software shortcomings and facilitate automated
compliance management.
Figure 1 illustrates the connections between data life cycle
management phases (we detail phase requirements in Sec-
tion IV). For example, archival phase follows data usage phase;
usage phase may also affect the decisions associated with
the storage phase. Adding to the complexity, not all data
goes through each phase. For example, data may be under an
indeﬁnite retention policy, staying in the archival phase and
never proceeding to the destruction phase.
B. Contributions
Current systems are missing key functionality, which pro-
hibits complete automated compliance; until these gaps are
ﬁlled, consumer privacy will suffer. Due to the limitations
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-893-8
CYBER 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

Figure 1. Data life cycle phases
in both research and technological implementations focusing
on policy compliance, we believe our discussion provides the
following contributions:
1) Surveys the current domain challenges and background
information on data privacy compliance.
2) Analyzes how compliance must be considered at each
phase of the data life cycle to satisfy legal requirements.
3) Discusses the current technological shortcomings that
must be explored to automate policy compliance.
II. DOMAIN CHALLENGES
A. Concepts
Business Record: Organizational rules and requirements
for data management are deﬁned in units of business records.
United States federal law refers to a business record broadly
as any “memorandum, writing, entry, print, representation or
combination thereof, of any act, transaction, occurrence, or
event [that is] kept or recorded [by any] business institution,
member of a profession or calling, or any department or
agency of government [...] in the regular course of business or
activity” [31]. In other words, business records describe any
interaction or transaction resulting in new data.
Business records can be represented using different logical
layouts. A business record may consist of a single document
for an organization (e.g., an email message). In a database, a
business record may span many combinations of rows across
multiple tables (e.g., a purchase order consisting of a buyer,
a product, and the purchase transaction from three different
tables). The process of mapping business records to underlying
data can vary depending on an organization and the data
storage medium.
Policy: A data policy is any formally established rule for
organizations dictating the requirements (i.e., how long data
must be saved, when data access requires consent, and when
data must be purged). Policies can originate from a variety of
sources such as legislation or as a by-product of a court ruling
(examples in Section III). Companies may also establish their
own internal data retention policies to protect conﬁdential data.
In practice, database administrators work with domain experts
and sometimes with legal counsel to deﬁne business records
and retention requirements based on the written policy.
Policies can use a combination of time and external events
as the criteria for data retention and destruction. For example,
retaining employee data until employee termination plus 5
years illustrates a policy criteria that is based on a combination
of an external event (employee termination) and time (5
years). The United States Department of Defense (DoD) “DoD
5015-02-STD” [2] outlines the minimum requirements and
guidance for any record system related to the DoD, which
includes how organizations must preserve and destroy data.
Moreover, multiple US government agencies, such as the
National Archives, use the same standards.
Policy compliance can be complex due to multiple over-
lapping policies or criteria for the same business record, or
due to different data points belonging to different business
records. For example, different rows or columns of a table
belonging to an order purchase could be governed by different
policies: purchase information (e.g., price) may fall under
different retention policies versus customer information (e.g.,
address). Policy mapping must also consider the potential
conﬂict between multiple policies with data retention and
destruction requirements.
Veriﬁcation: Data curators must be able to query the
policies and the status of all business records in storage.
Data storage systems must support a standard mechanism for
deﬁning the policies, listing or modifying current policies,
and checking for potential conﬂicts (e.g., policies requiring
retention and destruction of the same data) or overlap between
different policies. For example, if an organization is unable to
destroy data when requested by a customer, their refusal must
be justiﬁed.
Enforcement: Enforcing policies includes archiving and
deleting data as required as well as verifying consent when
processing data. Enforcing a policy maintains an organiza-
tion’s compliance. Current database management systems do
not incorporate automated robust data policy features; as a
result, organizations are forced to develop manual solutions for
policy compliance. Automated enforcement of policy require-
ments will both increase compliance and customer privacy.
B. Data Governance Topics
Retention: Retention deﬁnes the conditions when a business
record must be preserved. Some organizations may choose to
delete data once it is no longer needed to minimize liability
(e.g, data theft or requested through legal discovery). Others
may store the data longer than minimally required (in the gray
area between “must be retained” and “must be destroyed”).
DoD guidelines state that any storage system must support
retention thresholds such as time or event (Section C2.2.2.7
of [2]). Some retention requirements, such as HIPAA with
healthcare data, may require a complete historical log of any
and all business record updates (e.g., current address and full
history of address changes for a patient) [8]. Organizations
subject to this level of retention must archive the complete
business record before every update to ensure a complete audit
trail history was preserved.
Consent: Per GDPR Recital 40, “In order for processing to
be lawful, personal data should be processed on the basis of the
consent of the data subject concerned or some other legitimate
basis” [27]. Additionally, per Article 4(11), “Consent of the
data subject means any freely given, speciﬁc, informed and
unambiguous indication of the data subject’s wishes by which
he or she, by a statement or by a clear afﬁrmative action,
signiﬁes agreement to the processing of personal data relating
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-893-8
CYBER 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

to him or her.” The processing of these business records must
be veriﬁed according to customer’s consent (e.g., marketing
versus order processing). Not all processing requires consent;
data necessary to complete the business transaction for which
data was collected does not require explicit consent.
Purging: In data retention, purging is the permanent and
irreversible destruction of data in a business record [20].
Purging requirements establish when a business record must
be destroyed. A business record purge can be accomplished
by physically destroying the device which stored the data,
encrypting and erasing the decryption key (although the ci-
phertext still exists, destroying the decryption key makes it
inaccessible and irrecoverable), or by fully erasing data from
all storage. If any part of a business record’s data remains
recoverable or accessible in some form, then the data purge
is not considered to have been successfully completed. For
example, if a ﬁle is deleted through a ﬁle system, but can still
be recovered from the hard drive using a forensic tool, this
does not qualify as a purge [20].
Some policies require an organization to completely purge
business records either after the passage of time, at the
expiration of a contract, or purely when the data is no
longer needed. Additionally, there are an increasing number
of regulations, such as the European Union’s General Data
Protection Regulation (GDPR) [27], which require organiza-
tions to purge business records at the request of a customer.
Therefore, organizations must be prepared to comply with
purging policies as well as ad-hoc requests.
III. LEGAL PRECEDENT
Although it is beyond the scope of this paper to provide
an overview of all data privacy legislation across different
domains, we discuss some of the most impactful government
regulations. Private organizations (such as in the ﬁnancial
industry) may set additional policies for any companies that
do business with them [10]. Overall, we believe the following
examples offer the most signiﬁcant motivation to increase
database support of data privacy compliance.
General Data Protection Regulation: In the European
Union, the General Data Protection Regulation greatly ex-
panded consumer power over personal data. This regulation
was put into effect May 25, 2018, and is arguably “the
toughest privacy and security law in the world” [27]. Any
organization which is registered in the European Union, offers
goods or services, or monitors behavior of EU residents must
comply with GDPR requirements (regardless of whether the
organization is based in the EU).
One signiﬁcant addition to data privacy rights due to GDPR
is the “Right to be Forgotten” [12], which allows individuals
to request that companies delete all of their personal data. In
Recital 65, Recital 66, and in Article 17 GDPR states: “The
data subject shall have the right to obtain from the controller
the erasure of personal data concerning him or her without
undue delay and the controller shall have the obligation to
erase personal data without undue delay” [33].
Requesting data deletion does not guarantee that customer’s
data will be purged. When customers request their data to be
deleted, organizations must check if they are legally permitted
to do so. If an organization has a retention requirement on
this data, they will not be able to purge it despite the request.
Without automated veriﬁcation, organizations must manually
check for any applicable retention obligation when deleting
data. The “Right to be Forgotten” requests require a response
within a month. Thus, without an automated process, organi-
zations must manually process requests within a deadline.
GDPR non-compliance carries signiﬁcant penalties. On Jan-
uary 15, 2020, TIM was ﬁned AC27.8 million by the Italian data
protection authority, the Garante, for violations of GDPR [16].
A large number of complaints were ﬁled between January 1,
2017 until early 2019 due to TIM’s unwanted promotional
calls. Some customers (who did not consent) were contacted
over 150 times in a single month. Because TIM did not enforce
data consent, this eventually led to being ﬁned due to failing
to comply with GDPR.
California Consumer Privacy Act of 2018 & Proposition
24: California passed the California Consumer Privacy Act
of 2018 (CCPA) [6], which was greatly inspired by GDPR
and offers many similar privacy rights. CCPA went into effect
on January 1, 2020 and California Attorney General began
enforcing CCPA on July 1, 2020 [5]. Regardless, some privacy
advocates believe CCPA did not go far enough to protect data
privacy and are still pushing for additional regulations [11].
The California Secretary of State summarizes the position
of the advocates for Proposition 24, who believe that this
proposition will further increase consumer data privacy [7].
Data retention and management legislation is continuously
evolving as Proposition 24 [19] just passed in November 2020.
Proposition 24 exempliﬁes the continuous battle of pri-
vacy advocates against those who are concerned about too
much government regulation. Data retention is an evolving
ﬁeld where requirements are continuously changing; organi-
zations must be able to quickly adapt to new and changing
requirements. Because systems currently cannot easily add
retention protections, any organization which manually added
protections with CCPA now must manually update all of those
protections due to Proposition 24.
Zubulake v. UBS Warburg: Between 2003 and 2004 in
New York, the case of Zubulake v. UBS Warburg resulted in
many additional electronic record keeping requirements [34].
According to Li at ABAJournal.com, “Companies were put
on notice that they had a duty to preserve data once they
reasonably anticipated they might be sued. [...] Otherwise, the
consequences could be severe and a party could be hit with
sanctions [which] could cripple its ability to mount a defense”
[22]. In summary, this ruling clariﬁed that organizations are
required to retain all pertinent electronic data if they are
aware of a forthcoming lawsuit, even before being explicitly
requested to do so.
The plaintiff’s attorneys argued that they were not given
all of the relevant evidence to her case; the judge concluded
that UBS Warburg did not hand over all relevant data. It
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-893-8
CYBER 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

was determined that the only copies of some relevant data
was archived on tapes (which, in turn, made it expensive and
difﬁcult to acquire and review). This led to the judge’s opinion
that “anyone who anticipates being a party or is a party to a
lawsuit must not destroy unique, relevant evidence that might
be useful to an adversary” [34].
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act: In
1996, the United States passed a law that had a signiﬁcant
inﬂuence on the way privacy and retention of health care
data was managed. HIPAA imposes requirements for both
data retention as well as for purging. Per the United States
Department of Health and Human Services, HIPAA increases
healthcare recipients power over their own data in respect
to both privacy as well as transparency [30]. According to
research by Annas, HIPAA requires that “[...] a patient’s
entire medical record can seldom be lawfully disclosed without
the patient’s written authorization” [1]. HIPAA raised the
minimum standards of privacy and medical data, empowering
individuals to control their data.
For example, HIPAA Subpart D §164.504 “Uses and Dis-
closures: Organizational Requirements” [8], requires an indi-
vidual’s data to be destroyed at the expiration of a contract.
“At termination of the contract, if feasible, return or destroy
all protected health information received from, or created or
received by the business associate on behalf of, the covered
entity that the business associate still maintains in any form
and retain no copies of such information[....]” Therefore,
organizations must have a robust data purging process.
HIPAA also requires healthcare recipients in the United
States to be clearly informed of their privacy rights. Per
the United States Health and Human Services, “The HIPAA
Privacy Rule requires health plans and covered health care
providers to develop and distribute a notice that provides
a clear, user friendly explanation of individuals rights with
respect to their personal health information and the privacy
practices of health plans and health care providers” [18].
Currently, there is no automatic process in deployed database
systems to report all active retention policies and their relevant
business records. Any request on which retention policies
apply requires a manual lookup process.
IV. PRIVACY REQUIREMENTS IN THE DATA LIFE CYCLE
A. Creation
In most organizations, every transaction creates data that
could be stored and processed. Whether this data will move
on to the storage phase of the life cycle depends on the
requirements deﬁned by the owner. In certain industries, such
as the ﬁnancial industry, all transactional data must be stored.
The ﬁrst step of compliance is mapping the new data to
policy requirements. This process typically involves domain
experts working with the database administrators and legal
professionals. Choosing protections placed on the data must
be done immediately, lest retention compliance be violated
before protections have been implemented.
Currently, many organizations have standardized processes
which include data classiﬁcation, but this classiﬁcation is
orthogonal to data policy compliance. For example, organi-
zations may automatically label data generated from speciﬁc
sources as “Internal Only” or “Highly Conﬁdential”. These
labels indicate that the data must only be accessed by a
speciﬁc audience but may not align to policy requirements. For
example, “Highly Conﬁdential” does not align to any speciﬁc
requirement dictating when data must be purged.
B. Storage
After data is created, it enters a data storage management
system. A number of considerations are factored into the data
storage software choice. Organizations with large volume of
transactions and a consistent (structured) data will typically
deploy a relational database. For data which is less structured
and more dynamically evolving, organizations may choose
a NoSQL database [17]. Alternatively, keeping data in ﬁle
documents in a simpler database may satisfy an organization’s
data storage requirements.
The type of storage used can greatly impact the difﬁculty in
complying with data retention policies. When business records
are stored in documents, this task will be simpler. When
using advanced databases, the mapping of business records
to the stored data is much more complex. When retention and
purging requirements correspond to individual ﬁles, solutions
such as Amazon S3 (which offers a ﬁle-level object life-cycle
management) facilitate retention and purging compliance. The
DoD’s “Electronic Records Management Software Applica-
tions Design Criteria Standard” (DoD 5015-02-STD) requires
systems support both time or event criteria.
Furthermore, most storage solutions require ﬁner granu-
larity than storing a ﬁle per business record. As discussed
in Section II-A, businesses records may span multiple tuples
across tables in relational databases. Prior research addressed
retention [28, 3] and purging [29] in relational databases.
C. Usage
The use of data depends on the data owner’s policies as well
as the organizational need for the data. Common data uses
include storing customer information, running statistical anal-
ysis to discover underlying trends, and documenting business
transactions. Data may be continuously used for an extended
duration and for multiple purposes. For example, customer
records which are used for shipping orders may also be used
for analyzing trends in customer purchase patterns.
Data consent support must be an inherent part of data
privacy management. Databases neither offer functionality to
deﬁne business records (with respect to consent) nor ﬁlter on
consent for various processing uses (e.g., marketing). Because
data privacy regulations require organizations to acquire cus-
tomer consent when processing data for certain purposes, stor-
age systems must guarantee veriﬁcation of customer consent.
Business records which have not been allowed to be processed
must be excluded from the query output. Access control based
on the identity of data analyst would not facilitate compliance.
On May 25, 2018 (the day GDPR took effect), Google
was found in violation of GDPR [15], leading to a ﬁne of
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-893-8
CYBER 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

AC50 million. Google was convicted for lack of transparency
and failing to acquire user consent for data processing in an
instance where consent was required.
D. Archival
HIPAA [9] requires medical data to be retained for at least 6
years. Therefore, organizations have an increased obligation to
maintain archived data, even after the data is no longer needed
for their operation. Business records that are no longer needed
but must be preserved under a retention policy must be moved
to an archive until the retention criteria has expired.
In order to reach the archival phase of the data life cycle,
data from business records which are no longer needed in
usage phase must be under a retention policy. Archived data
is the data that has lost its primary relevance but is still
required to be available in storage (e.g., historical or reporting
purposes). Therefore, archived data does not require regular
updates nor is expected to be actively used. Instead, it is stored
in a separate repository until it is eligible for destruction (i.e.,
no longer requiring retention). As long as the data is subject
to at least one retention policy, it must remain archived.
Archived business records do not require any updates nor
should they be deleted while under retention. In rare situations,
data in archive may be returned to active storage for usage
(e.g., the result of a lawsuit). Any retention compliant system
must purge business records from the archive once they no
longer require retention and have a purge policy requirement.
E. Destruction
Once data is no longer needed and is not subject to retention
requirements it may enter the destruction phase of its life cycle.
Some organizations have data with a retention period “for
the life of the company” meaning that it will never enter the
destruction phase. On the other hand, some policies, including
those from government regulation, explicitly require business
records to be destroyed when no longer used nor requiring
retention. HIPAA Subpart D §164.504 requires organizations
to delete data at the end of a contract if there are no other
applicable retention requirements [8]. The Children’s Online
Privacy Protection Act states that personal information for
children can be retained “for only as long as is reasonably
necessary to fulﬁll the purpose for which the information was
collected” (Section 312.10 of [14]).
Google has been repeatedly ﬁned for violating GDPR’s
“Right to be Forgotten” [24]. Google refused to delete cus-
tomer data at their request despite having no legal basis for
retaining the data. France, Sweden, and Belgium have all
imposed ﬁnes for violations of failing to delete requested data.
To fully comply with purging requirements, systems must
implement functionality that allows organizations to deﬁne
business records and policies, which will automatically be
enforced across active databases and backups [29]. This
functionality must implement some form of secure deletion
to render the required data permanently and irrecoverably
destroyed. If any data belonging to a business record requiring
purging is recoverable (whether the data exists in the active
Figure 2. The relationship between life cycle phases and
requirements.
database, underlying database pages recoverable using forensic
tools, or in a backup), the purge policy has not been properly
enforced, and the system would not be considered compliant.
V. OPEN PROBLEMS
The complexity caused by data policy requirements coming
from a variety of sources (each with their own changes in
requirements) means manually achieving compliance is an
extremely difﬁcult task. Throughout this paper, we outlined
where in a data life cycle each type of compliance must be
implemented. Manually achieving compliance requires each
individual user to know which policies apply to which business
records for each purpose. Therefore, facilitating comprehen-
sive policy enforcement requires automated data policy com-
pliance tools. Regardless of policy type, legacy systems will
continue to be a difﬁcult challenge. In this section, we discuss
the requirements for the three main areas of data compliance
and how they overlap with data life cycle phases.
Retention must be considered during each phase of the
data life cycle. On the other hand, purging and consent must
only be considered during some of the phases. For example,
destruction does not require user consent (although users
can request their records to be deleted, they cannot prevent
required record purging). Figure 2 provides an overview on
where each phase aligns to each governance requirement.
In practice, DBAs work with domain experts and legal
counsel to deﬁne business records and retention requirements
based on policies. Automated systems typically assume that
data curators can express business records as a query or as a
collection of ﬁles. The initial process of mapping the business
records and retention policies to database tuples will always be
a manual process; any automated system then will reference
these deﬁnitions to enforce policy compliance.
A. Retention
Retention compliance is achieved by maintaining all rel-
evant business records until some criteria (time or event)
has been met. This can be achieved by either 1) blocking
transactions which would delete or update protected data or 2)
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-893-8
CYBER 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

automatically archiving business records in a separate database
before deleting or updating data. Either solution requires
guaranteeing that update and delete operations automatically
cross-reference deﬁned policies and retention criterion.
Databases do not currently offer functionality to enforce re-
tention and archival compliance. Currently, organizations build
ad-hoc solutions manually. If any data targeted by a delete or
update is protected by a policy, the automated system must
either archive the entire business record as-is before executing
the transaction [28] or block the transaction [3]. Systems must
automatically cross-reference deﬁned business records and
retention requirements to archive data when deletes or updates
would violate retention requirements. Systems proposed by
Scope et al. [28] and Ataullah et al. [3] use triggers in
relational databases to enforce retention policies.
Lawsuits may impose sudden and critical retention require-
ments on various business records. Zubulake v. UBS Warburg
expanded on the precedent of organizations being required
to retain any applicable business records for the duration of
the case [34]. Organizations must be able to easily retain and
archive all applicable records.
As shown in Figure 2, retention must be considered at each
phase of the data life cycle. Retention must be immediately
mapped at creation, and must protect data across storage,
usage, archival, and destruction phases. If data prematurely
enters the destruction phase from any of the other phases when
retention is still required, compliance has been violated.
B. Consent
Regulations such as GDPR require user consent for certain
types of data processing. Because the same analyst may
process data for a variety of purposes, user-based permissions
do not satisfy consent requirements. Therefore, research must
implement automated ﬁltering where business records require
consent for an input purpose.
Consent must deﬁned at data creation (although customers
can revoke or give consent at any time). Additionally, this
consent must be applied during data usage depending on
whether consent is required. On the other hand, consent
policies do not have to be considered during storage, archival,
and destruction phases.
One common paradox are customers who demand that all
of their data is deleted and to not be contacted in the future.
Although the customer is revoking their consent to use their
data, the organization cannot delete all of the data without
risking contacting them in the future. Thus, organizations must
maintain some data on a do-not-contact list, as long as the data
maintained on this list is only referenced as a ﬁlter.
Although detailed usage requirements are beyond the scope
of this paper, we also must note that consent is deﬁned
differently by different governing bodies. While some simply
require customers to be remain anonymous (but still allowing
their data to be used in aggregations), others do not allow
any customer data to be included without their permission.
Therefore, multiple independent solutions may be required to
satisfy the different deﬁnitions and requirements.
C. Purging
Purging requires that organizations irreversibly and irrecov-
erably destroy their data after some criteria has been met.
Database administrators must work with domain experts to
guarantee that these are mapped as to not conﬂict with
retention policies. If data is prematurely destroyed as the result
of a user input or automated policies, this does not violate
compliance (unless this violates retention).
Purging must remove data from both all backups (both
accessible and inaccessible) and from active storage. If data
is recoverable by forensic tools or by backup, compliance
has not been achieved. Because data requiring purging is
simultaneously stored in systems with data requiring retention,
simply destroying the physical storage would satisfy purging
compliance at the cost of retention compliance.
Multiple enhancements must be developed to achieve full
compliance. First, automated systems must automatically
delete all ﬁles or tuples in a database as necessary. Once the
ﬁles or tuples are deleted, they may still be recoverable via
forensic means. Therefore, the data must be deleted so that it
is no longer accessible to forensic tools. Finally, data must be
purged from all backups.
Reardon et al. [26] offered a comprehensive overview of
secure deletion, which both provides various approaches and
requirements for completely purging data from a storage
systems. In their paper, the authors deﬁned three user-level
approaches to secure deletion: 1) execute a secure delete
feature on the physical medium 2) overwrite the data before
unlinking or 3) unlink the data to the OS and ﬁll the empty
capacity of the physical device’s storage. For all three methods,
one requirement is the ability to directly interact with the
physical storage device. Therefore, these approaches are only
applicable for physically accessible databases (which may not
be possible for backups in storage).
Lenard et al. [21] provided an analysis on how long deleted
or updated data remains in underlying database pages, which
eventually leads to them being included in backups. Therefore,
to fully purge data from all storage, it is necessary to both
implement steps to remove the data from active storage as
well as backups. Scope et al. [29] proposed using a form of
cryptographic erasure to purge pertinent business records from
backups of relational databases.
D. Performance Considerations
Throughout this paper we outlined the requirements and
beneﬁts of automated compliance. This automation does have
an associated performance cost. Research by Scope et al. [28]
and Ataullah et al. [3] performed experiments detailing the
runtime overhead of their additional retention protections.
Balancing performance with automated enforcement is a
difﬁcult problem for future research. For example, ﬁnancial
organizations are heavily motivated by system performance.
Automated trading system measure execution time in mil-
liseconds. These systems use speed for a competitive trading
advantage, but they are also subject to extreme regulations by
both the exchanges as well as major government bodies. For
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-893-8
CYBER 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

these industries, implementing automated compliance will re-
quire optimization to minimize impact on system performance.
For the necessary functionality enhancements to be widely
adopted, these enhancements must both guarantee compliance
and minimize system performance overhead.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we outlined the data life cycle model and the
steps that must be Incorporated into the process to facilitate
privacy compliance. Recognizing the data retention needs at
each phase of the data life cycle provides a framework for
where additional research must be prioritized to satisfy compli-
ance management requirements. Current storage solutions do
not have the necessary functionality to automatically enforce
data governance policies. Until the necessary functionality is
implemented, ad-hoc manual solutions will continue to risk
violating privacy regulation requirements. Privacy compliance
is only continuing to grow in importance; these issues must
be addressed to increase user privacy protections.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partially funded by US National Science
Foundation Grant IIP-2016548 and CME Group. The authors
thank Thamer Al-Johani for comments on the paper draft.
REFERENCES
[1]
G. J. Annas. HIPAA regulations—a new era of medical-record
privacy? 2003. URL: https : / / pubmed . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov /
12686707/.
[2]
Assistant Secretary of Defense for Networks and Information
Integration. Electronic Records Management Software Appli-
cations Design Criteria Standard. https://www.esd.whs.mil/
Portals/54/Documents/DD/issuances/dodm/501502std.pdf.
Accessed: Aug. 2020. 2007.
[3]
A. A. Ataullah, A. Aboulnaga, and F. W. Tompa. “Records
retention in relational database systems”. In: Proceedings of
the 17th ACM conference on Information and knowledge
management. 2008, pp. 873–882.
[4]
A. Ball. Review of data management lifecycle models. Univer-
sity of Bath, IDMRC, 2012.
[5]
G.
A.
Brown.
CCPA
Enforcement
Begins
Today.
https://www.natlawreview.com/article/ccpa-enforcement-
begins-today. 2020.
[6]
California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA). Accessed: Aug.
2020. 2020. URL: https://oag.ca.gov/privacy/ccpa.
[7]
California Secretary of State. Proposition 24: Ofﬁcial Voter
Information Guide: California Secretary of State. URL: https:
//voterguide.sos.ca.gov/propositions/24/.
[8]
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. The Health In-
surance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA).
Accessed: Aug. 2021. 1996.
[9]
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services and others. The
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996
(HIPAA). Accessed: Sept. 2021. 1996. URL: http://www.cms.
hhs.gov/hipaa.
[10]
CME Group Rule 536.B.1. Accessed: Sept. 2021. 2020. URL:
https://www.cmegroup.com/rulebook/ﬁles/cme-group-Rule-
536-B.pdf.
[11]
G. Edelman. The ﬁght over the ﬁght Over CALIFORNIA’S
Privacy Future. 2020. URL: https://www.wired.com/story/
california-prop-24-ﬁght-over-privacy-future/.
[12]
European Parliament and of the Council. Regulation (EU)
2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council.
https://www.legislation.gov.uk/eur/2016/679. 2020.
[13]
J. L. Faundeen et al. The United States geological survey
science data lifecycle model. US Department of the Interior,
US Geological Survey, 2013.
[14]
Federal Trade Commission and others. Children’s online pri-
vacy protection act of 1998 (COPPA). Accessed: Sept. 2021.
1998.
[15]
C. Fox. Google hit with £44m GDPR ﬁne over ads. 2019. URL:
https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-46944696.
[16]
T. Garante. Provvedimento correttivo e sanzionatorio nei con-
fronti di TIM S.p.A. - 15 gennaio 2020 [9256486]. 2020. URL:
https : / / www. garanteprivacy. it / web / guest / home / docweb/ -
/docweb-display/docweb/9256486.
[17]
J. Han, E. Haihong, G. Le, and J. Du. “Survey on NoSQL
database”. In: 2011 6th international conference on pervasive
computing and applications. IEEE. 2011, pp. 363–366.
[18]
HHS Ofﬁce of the Secretary and Ofﬁce for Civil Rights. Model
Notices of Privacy Practices. Accessed: Aug. 2021. 2013.
URL: https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-professionals/privacy/
guidance/model-notices-privacy-practices/index.html.
[19]
A. Holmes. California just passed a major privacy law that
will make it harder for Facebook and Google to track people
and gather data. 2020. URL: https://www.businessinsider.com/
prop-24-privacy-california-data-tracking-facebook-google-
2020-11.
[20]
International Data Sanitization Consortium. Data Sanitization
Terminology and Deﬁnitions. Accessed: Feb. 2021. 2017.
URL: https : / / www. datasanitization . org / data - sanitization -
terminology/.
[21]
B. Lenard, A. Rasin, N. Scope, and J. Wagner. “What is lurk-
ing in your backups?” In: Springer International Publishing,
2021, 401–415.
[22]
V. Li. Looking back on Zubulake, 10 years later. 2015. URL:
https://www.abajournal.com/magazine/article/looking back
on zubulake 10 years later.
[23]
N. L. of Medicine. Date Lifecycle. URL: https://nnlm.gov/
data/thesaurus/data-lifecycle.
[24]
A. Nicodemus. Google ﬁned $670K for violating GDPR’s
’right
to
be
forgotten’.
2020.
URL:
https : / / www .
complianceweek.com/gdpr/google-ﬁned-670k-for-violating-
gdprs-right-to-be-forgotten/29186.article.
[25]
L. Pouchard. Revisiting the data lifecycle with big data
curation. 2015.
URL: https : / / www . researchgate . net /
publication/305095078 Revisiting the Data Lifecycle with
Big Data Curation.
[26]
J. Reardon, D. Basin, and S. Capkun. “Sok: Secure data
deletion”. In: 2013 IEEE symposium on security and privacy.
IEEE. 2013, pp. 301–315.
[27]
Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of
the Council. Accessed: Jun. 2021. 2020. URL: https://gdpr.eu/
tag/gdpr/.
[28]
N. Scope, A. Rasin, J. Wagner, B. Lenard, and K. Heart.
“Database Framework for Supporting Retention Policies”. In:
International Conference on Database and Expert Systems
Applications. (to appear). Springer. 2021.
[29]
N. Scope, A. Rasin, J. Wagner, B. Lenard, and K. Heart.
“Purging Data from Backups by Encryption”. In: International
Conference on Database and Expert Systems Applications. (to
appear). Springer. 2021.
[30]
Secretary, HHS Ofﬁce of the and (OCR), Ofﬁce for Civil
Rights. Your Rights Under HIPAA. 2020. URL: https://www.
hhs . gov / hipaa / for - individuals / guidance - materials - for -
consumers/index.html.
[31]
United States Congress. 28 U.S. Code §1732. Accessed: Aug.
2021. 1948. URL: https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/28/
1732.
[32]
United States Congress. Gramm–Leach–Bliley Act, Financial
Services Modernization Act of 1999. Accessed: Aug. 2021.
1999.
[33]
B. Wolford. Everything you need to know about the “Right
to be forgotten”. 2020. URL: https://gdpr.eu/right- to- be-
forgotten/.
[34]
Zubulake v. UBS WARBURG LLC. 2005. URL: https://sosmt.
gov/wp-content/uploads/attachments/E-ZubulakeV.pdf?dt=
1519325634100.
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-893-8
CYBER 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

