Consideration of Security Threats for Identification System in Internet of Things
Daewon Kim, Jeongnyeo Kim, and Yongsung Jeon 
 Information Security Research Department 
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute 
Daejeon, Korea 
emails: {dwkim77, jnkim, ysjeon}@etri.re.kr 
 
 
Abstract—During the last years, people have expressed and 
increased interest towards Internet of Things (IoT) technology. 
Among various systems in the IoT environment, the identifica-
tion system has an important role to recognize IoT things. 
However, current IoT identification systems do not consider 
security aspects carefully. This paper presents the security 
threats related to the IoT identification systems.  
Keywords-internet of things; identification; object identifier; 
security threats. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Things, which are constructing the Internet of Things 
(IoT) environment, can have various physical communica-
tion modules, such as ZigBee, Bluetooth, and so on [1]. The 
IoT environment needs higher level identification systems 
than physical module-level to recognize things and to com-
municate with each other. This is the role of the IoT identifi-
cation system. 
Current IoT identification systems are primarily focusing 
on interworking, interoperability, scalability, distributability, 
and performance, and they do not consider security aspects 
carefully [2], [4]. Therefore, researches related to IoT identi-
fication security are required to mitigate security threats due 
to vulnerable identification management. 
The nature of security problems related to the IoT identi-
fication is that it can be applied to authentication and author-
ization. As the purpose of our paper, we describes the details 
related to the security threats of IoT identification, and our 
challenge is to classify and analyze the sufficient contents of 
predictable threats for the secure implementation of identifi-
cation system. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, 
we describe the IoT environment, the necessity and role of 
IoT identification system, and the features of IoT identifica-
tion. In Section 3, for the IoT identification system, we pre-
sent the security threat, vulnerability, threat action, threat 
purpose, and threat result. Finally, we conclude the paper in 
Section 4. 
II. 
IOT IDENTIFICATION SYSTEM 
In this section, as the background to list the security 
threats of IoT identification system, we will describe the IoT 
environment, the necessity and role of the IoT identification 
system, and the features of IoT identification.  
A. IoT Environment 
IoT environment is the environment in which Internet-
connected physical and logical devices are interworked and 
interoperated. The interworking means that various devices 
can exchange information among them, and the interoperat-
ing means that various devices can use services mutually. 
The interoperating devices are in a common IoT platform, 
and if many IoT platforms can exchange information among 
them, a huge IoT environment is constructed. 
B. The Necessity and Role of IoT Identification System 
Even in a common IoT platform, there are various physi-
cal communication modules, and it is sure that a huge IoT 
environment includes even more, and more diverse, physical 
modules. Therefore, some identification methods, which are 
independent on physical layer communication, are required 
to recognize various IoT things and to communicate with 
each other. It is the reason for the necessity of IoT identifica-
tion system. 
The normal role of identification systems is to control 
identification information to identify physical and logical 
objects. Therefore, the identification information of IoT 
identification system has a role to identify physical and logi-
cal objects in the IoT environment. 
C. Features of IoT Identification 
In the communication environment including various 
physical modules, for the exact and smooth communication, 
the IoT identification system and information needs to have 
the following features. 
 
 From top-level things to bottom, unique identifiers are 
allocated to identify all things. In the sub-areas under 
the things with unique identifiers, independent identifi-
ers can be allocated only for the sub-areas. 
 Identification system and information are independent 
on various physical communication methods. 
 IoT identification system manages naming information 
to identify each thing. 
 IoT identification system manages addressing infor-
mation to find routes for things. 
 IoT identification system manages discovery infor-
mation to find the naming and addressing information 
that traces the mobility of things. 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-512-8
CYBER 2016 : The First International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
IoT identification system has a life cycle including 
generation, registration, searching, deletion, and so 
on. 
III. 
SECURITY THREATS OF  IOT IDENTIFICATION SYSTEM  
In this section, based on the background of Section 2, for 
IoT identification system and information we will present 
security threat (ST), identification threat (IT), and the threat 
description (TD) including vulnerability, threat action, threat 
purpose, and threat result. Among various identification 
pieces of information, in this paper, we focus on device iden-
tification such as Object IDentifier (OID) [3]. 
 
 ST: Device Malfunction, IT: Damaged Identification 
Information 
TD: It can occur when identification system and infor-
mation are vulnerable to the unauthenticated and unauthor-
ized accesses. It is possible to miswrite and delete identifi-
cation information. The threat purpose is to cause internal 
service troubles to vulnerable devices and systems. 
 ST: Out of Service Request, IT: Tampered Identifi-
cation Information 
TD: It can occur when identification system and infor-
mation are vulnerable to the unauthenticated and unauthor-
ized accesses, and cache poisoning. It is possible to change 
the identification information to that of the attacker. The 
threat purpose is to cause external service request troubles 
to vulnerable devices and systems. Since this is tampering 
with the identification information for connection to re-
mote servers, service requests may fail due to wrong desti-
nation. 
 ST: Denial of Service Attack, IT: Tampered Identi-
fication Information 
TD: It can occur when identification system and infor-
mation are vulnerable to the unauthenticated and unauthor-
ized accesses, and cache poisoning. It is possible to change 
the identification information to that of the attacker. Simi-
lar to tampering with the information for identifying desti-
nation devices, this may cause denial of service attacks to 
the tampered destination devices. 
 ST: Information Leakage, IT: Tampered Identifica-
tion Information 
TD: It can occur when identification system and infor-
mation are vulnerable to the unauthenticated and unauthor-
ized accesses and cache poisoning. It is possible to change 
the identification information to that of the attacker. Simi-
lar to tampering with the information for identifying desti-
nation devices, critical information can be leaked to the de-
vices compromised by attackers. 
 ST: Illegal Service Access, IT: Counterfeited Identi-
fication Information 
TD: It can occur when identification system and infor-
mation are vulnerable to the unauthenticated and unauthor-
ized accesses, and sniffing. After the device identification 
information is exposed to attackers, they can use the coun-
terfeited identification information. As illegally gaining the 
identification information from vulnerable devices and sys-
tems, attackers can illegally access critical services granted 
to legal users and devices. 
 ST: Illegal High Authority Access, IT: Counterfeit-
ed Identification Information 
TD: It can occur when identification system and infor-
mation are vulnerable to the unauthenticated and unauthor-
ized accesses, and sniffing. After the device identification 
information is exposed to attackers, they can use the coun-
terfeited identification information. As illegally gaining the 
identification information from vulnerable devices and sys-
tems, attackers can illegally access critical resources 
through high authority, such as the administrator. 
 ST: Information Eavesdropping, IT: Counterfeited 
Identification Information 
TD: It can occur when identification system and infor-
mation are vulnerable to the unauthenticated and unauthor-
ized accesses, and sniffing. After the device identification 
information is exposed to attackers, they can use the coun-
terfeit identification information. As illegally gaining the 
identification information from vulnerable devices and sys-
tems, attackers can eavesdrop messages in the communica-
tion area of the attacker device disguised through the coun-
terfeit identification information. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Identification is a very important component in IoT envi-
ronment. However, current IoT researches do not consider 
security aspects related to the identification carefully. In this 
paper, we described IoT environment, the necessity and role 
of IoT identification system, and the features of IoT identifi-
cation. Based on the background information, we presented 
security threat, identification threat, and the threat descrip-
tion including vulnerability, threat action, threat purpose, and 
threat result. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by Institute for Information & 
communications Technology Promotion (IITP) grant funded 
by the Korea government (MSIP) (B0190-16-2032, Devel-
opment of Operating System Security Core Technology for 
the Smart Lightweight IoT Devices). 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Katusic, et al., “Universal Identification Scheme in Machi-
ne-to-Machine Systems,” Proc. of 12th International Confere-
nce on Telecommunications (ConTEL), pp. 71-78, 2013. 
[2] European Research Cluster on The Internet of Things, “EU-
China Joint White Paper on Internet-of-Things Identification,-
” European Commission-Information Society and Media, Nov. 
2014. [Online]. Available from: http://www.internet-of-thing-
s-research.eu/pdf/IERC_Position_Paper_EU-China_IoT_Ide-
ntification_Final.pdf 2016.05.18. 
[3] International Telecommunication Union, “Information techn-
ology - Procedures for the operation of object identifier regist-
ration authorities: General procedures and top arcs of the 
international object identifier tree,” ITU-T X.660, July 2011. 
[4] oneM2M-TS-0003, “oneM2M Security Solutions Technical 
Specification,” V1.4.2, Mar 2016. 
 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-512-8
CYBER 2016 : The First International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

