Secure and User-friendly De-Registration of a Vehicle as Off The Road Using
Mobile Authentication with German eID Card and a NFC-enabled Smartphone
Michael Massoth
Department of Computer Science
Hochschule Darmstadt – University of Applied Sciences
Darmstadt, Germany
E-mail: michael.massoth@h-da.de
Abstract— Digitization is as important to public administration
as it is to the economy. Therefore, the German authorities
currently see an enormous need for action for digitization and
cybersecurity. Provided by the German electronic identity
(eID) solution, every German citizen has the ability to identify
himself against various electronic and mobile government
services. In this paper, we will present a new approach for a
mobile de-registration of a vehicle as off the road. The new
mobile de-registration service of a vehicle as off the road is
secure and user-friendly. The new approach implements a
strong two-factor authentication with German eID card and
the corresponding 6-digits personal identification number
(PIN), whereby a Near Field Communication (NFC) enabled
Android smartphone will be used as ubiquitous NFC card
reader.
Keywords-mobile authentication; identity management; strong
two-factor authentication; high trust level.
I.
INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION
Digital identities have gained more and more importance
due to the rapid increase of digitalization within our
administration, business, industry, and information society.
In this paper, we present a new mobile e-government
application using the new German National Identity Card
with the electronic identity (eID) function for Internet use.
In cooperation with the Hessian Ministry of the Interior
(Government of the Federal State of Hessen) [10], as well as
AUTHADA GmbH [11] and the ekom21 KGRZ Hessen
[12], a secure and user-friendly de-registration of a car as
off the road mobile e-government service will be presented.
The consumer research company GfK [13] determined
in May 2015 that only 5% of all Germans used their eID
function
of
the
National
Identity
Card
for
online
authentication services within the past 12 months [6]. Most
probably, there are two main reasons for that disappointing
result: First, there are only few services (164 in total, 2015-
05) with eID support available on the market. Thus, the
German citizen may not see a significant benefit in using
eID. Second, for the online authentication, there is a special
eID card reader needed, which costs between 30 and 160
Euros. For eID card holders, the need of an expensive card
reader may be the biggest barrier. We will overcome this
barrier and present a new approach where an NFC-enabled
Android smartphone is used as ubiquitous eID card reader.
In order to demonstrate a significant benefit for the
citizens and users, we implemented the new approach for a
very popular and useful online service, namely, the de-
registration of a vehicle as off the road. Therefore, an
Android app and a Website were implemented in order to be
able to carry out the complete process of the vehicle de-
registration in a mobile and user-friendly way in order to
provide the Hessian citizens the possibility to avoid the
annoying paperwork and the long waiting time. The de-
registration of a vehicle as off the road is also a good best-
practice example of an electronic government service with
required trust level “high”. The paper is structured as
follows. In Section II, some definitions of terms are given.
Section
III
shows
the
stationary
Internet-based
de-
registration of a vehicle as off the road. Following this,
Section IV introduces the new German National Identity
Card with eID function for Internet use. The stationary
online authentication process is shown in Section V. In
Section VI, the new mobile authentication process is
presented in detail. Section VII ends this paper with a
conclusion and outlook on future work.
II.
DEFINITIONS AND FUNDAMENTALS
Electronic government (e-government) [1] is the use of
electronic communications devices, computers and the
Internet to provide public services to citizens and other
persons in a country or region. Electronic authentication [2]
is the process of establishing confidence in user identities,
electronically presented to an information system. Digital
authentication
or
e-authentication
may
be
used
synonymously when referring to the authentication process
that confirms or certifies a person's identity and works.
AUTHADA ID Service [5] is a server operated by the
company
AUTHADA
GmbH.
This
provides
the
authentication
process
via
an
API,
or
a
software
development kit (SDK). The AUTHADA ID service serves
as an interface to a certified e-ID server, which is authorized
to read the data from the personal ID card. Within the
implemented representational state transfer (REST) server
[5], a Java library was included, which contains the calls to
the AUTHADA service. Near field communication (NFC)
[3] is a set of communication protocols which allow the
communication between two devices by bringing them
within 4 cm of each other. Quick Response Code (QR code)
[4] is a machine-readable optical label that contains
information about the item to which it is attached. A QR
code uses four standardized encoding modes (numeric,
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-605-7
CYBER 2017 : The Second International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

alphanumeric, byte/binary, and kanji) to efficiently store
data. Representational state transfer (REST) [5] relies on a
stateless, client-server, cacheable communications protocol -
- and in virtually all cases, the Hypertext Transfer Protocol
(HTTP) over Transport Layer Security (TLS) 1.2 is used,
also known as HTTP Secure (HTTPS). REST is often used
in
mobile
applications,
social
networking
Web
sites,
mashup tools and automated business processes. The REST
style emphasizes that interactions between clients and
services is enhanced by having a limited number of
operations (verbs). Flexibility is provided by assigning
resources (nouns) their own unique universal resource
indicators (URIs).
III.
INTERNET-BASED DE-REGISTRATION OF A
VEHICLE AS OF THE ROAD
Since January 1st 2015, it is possible to request the de-
registration of a motor vehicle (car) as off the road online.
The following prerequisites are hereby necessary:

New German National Identity card (Figure 5) with
activated online eID function for Internet use and a
correspondent card reader.

Certificate of approval Part I ("vehicle registration", in
German “Fahrzeugschein”) with concealed security
code, see Figure 1.

License plates (front and back) with new stamped chain
with concealed security code (vehicles which have been
registered or re-registered since January 1st, 2015), see
Figure 3.
Figure 1. Certificate of Approval Part I ("vehicle registration") with
concealed (left) and uncovered (right) security code.
The application is as follows:
(1) Take the Certificate of approval Part I ("vehicle
registration", see Figure 1). On the backside of the
approval certificate Part I (“vehicle registration”) there
is a seal label with the concealed security code (a
security code example is shown in Figure 2).
(2) Figure 2 shows three different states of scratching and
un-coveing the 7-digits security code of the seal label:
(On the left) original seal label on Certificate of
Approval
Part
I
("vehicle
registration"),
(middle)
scratched and partly un-covered security code, and
(right) the 7-digits security code completely scratched
and un-covered.
Figure 2. Seal label on Certificate of Approval Part I
("vehicle registration",)
Figure 3. License plates with seal labels, which contains the concealed
3-digits security codes, and Certificate of Approval Part I ("vehicle
registration", see Figure 1) with concealed 7-digits security code.
(3) Take both license plates (front and back) with the seal
labels, which contain the concealed security codes.
Scratch and un-cover the two 3-digits security codes of
the seal labels. (One security code is shown in Figure
4).
Figure 4. Seal label on license plate (left), scratching and un-cover the
security code (middle), 3-digits security code (right).
(4) Scan the security code or scan it as a data matrix code
(QR code).
(5) Online-Identification of the vehicle owner using the
German identity card (eID) with online function, or
electronic residence permit (eAT) with online function,
on the Website of the central, municipal or national
portal.
(6) Enter the vehicle registration code and the three
security codes in the application form of the portal.
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-605-7
CYBER 2017 : The Second International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

(7) Pay by ePayment system.
(8) A click and the vehicle is logged off and de-registered
as off the road with the date of the processing in the
approval authority after the data has been transferred to
the relevant approval authority (determined by the
indicator).
(9) The statutory off road notification (SORN) is served by
electronic mail.
The new German National Identity Card is therefore
mandatory for the Internet-based de-registration of a motor
vehicle (car) as off the road in order to secure the identity of
the car owner.
IV.
THE GERMAN NATIONAL IDENTITY CARD
One of the main problems in the implementation and
realization of electronic and mobile government services is
the secure and user-friendly authentication of the citizens.
Many administrative government services still require the
written form. However, the Administrative Procedure Act
(Verwaltungsverfahrensgesetz
VwVfG)
§3a
allows
the
written form to be replaced by the electronic form provided
that the law does not specify otherwise. A mandatory
prerequisite for this is that the sender can be unambiguously
identified and the integrity of the data is guaranteed. One
possibility for this is the electronic identity-proof using the
new German National Identity Card (eID), see Figure 5.
Figure 5. German National eID Card
The new German National Identity Card was introduced on
November 1st, , 2010.
It looks different from the former ID card
● 
Smartcard format
● 
Integrated NFC-chip
● 
eID function for Internet use, vending machines or
terminals
● 
Stored biometric passport photograph and
voluntary storage of fingerprints to clearly match
the ID card with the ID card holder
● 
Electronic signature function to electronically sign
binding contracts, applications, documents, etc.
(must be purchased separately)
● 
Enhanced security features
● 
Special protection of biometric data
A)
Data printed on the ID card
Like
the
former
ID
card,
the
national
ID
card
with eID function is an official photo ID with the personal
data of the ID card holder printed on the document: family
name, name at birth, given names, doctoral degree, date of
birth, place of birth, photograph, signature, height, eyes
color, address, postal code, citizenship, serial number,
religious, stage or pen name if applicable.
B)
Data stored in the NFC-Chip
The new German national ID card also contains a
contactless, readable biometric passport NFC-chip. This
NFC-chip stores all data which are printed on the ID card.
Additionally, this NFC-chip stores a biometric passport
photograph of the card holder and, if desired the biometric
fingerprints. The cardholder decides whether the fingerprint
data will be stored on the ID card or not.
C)
Applications of the eID Online Function
The eID online function is offered by service providers
that wish to make registration procedures easier and more
secure for users. This includes, for example, the online
services of banks and insurance companies. However, also
public authorities offer online identification, for instance
when you register your car or apply for child benefits. Users
can identify themselves not only on the Internet, but also at
vending machines and the self-service terminals in public
authorities.
V.
STATIONARY ONLINE AUTHENTICATION PROCESS
As
prerequisites
for
the
strong
two-factor
online
authentication process of a German citizen there are the
following ingredients needed: The new German eID card
with an activated online eID function and a corresponding
NFC card reader, or an NFC-enabled Android-smartphone.
A secure connection between the user's eID card and the
eID authentication system of the service provider is
established for online identification. The eID server ensures
reciprocal authentication of both sides.
The online authentication process with the eID card is as
follows (using the example of a Web service):
(1) The card holder opens the provider's Web service
requiring online authentication.
(2) The service transmits the authentication request to the
eID server.
(3) A secure channel is established between the eID server,
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-605-7
CYBER 2017 : The Second International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

the client software (e.g. AusweisApp2), the card reader
and the ID card's chip, and the authenticity of the
service provider and the authenticity and integrity of the
eID card (protection against forgery) are checked.
(4) The client software shows the card holder the service
provider's authorization certificate and the requested
personal data categories. The eID card holder decides
which personal data he/she wishes to transmit.
(5) By entering the 6-digits PIN the eID card holder
confirms the transmission of his/her data.
(6) The eID card data are sent to the eID server.
(7) The eID server sends an authentication response and the
eID card data to the service.
(8) The authentication response and the ID card data are
retrieved. The service checks the authentication results
and decides whether the authentication was successful.
A response is then sent to the user and/or the service is
provided.
VI.
MOBILE AUTHENTICATION APPROACH IN DETAIL
The high level architecture of the mobile de-registration
of a vehicle as off the road service is shown in Figure 6
below. At the beginning of authentication, the user has two
options available. Either he performs the complete process
through our Android app or he uses our QR Code Website
solution.
Figure 6. High level overview of the mobile de-registration of a vehicle
as off the road service
1.
Authentication through our Website
The complete process of de-registration of a vehicle as
off the road can be done with our QR code solution. This
means that the user performs the actual login process via our
Website and uses the app only to scan the generated QR and
set the displayed transaction number (TAN) into the
corresponding field in the Website.
A)
Technical infrastructure
A
Linux-based
virtual
machine
from
Darmstadt
University is used as server platform. A Tomcat Web server
was installed on this site, which serves as a container for all
developed Web applications. A MariaDB SQL database
[14] is used to store the authentication procedures, as well as
the vehicle data and log-off procedures. An AUTHADA
service is used as a third-party system for identification with
the new ID card.
B)
Rest – Server
To enable platform-independent communication with
various terminals, a REST server based on the Jersey
framework [15] was developed as a server application. The
task of the REST interface basically consists of two parts.
On one hand, it is used to authenticate a customer, using the
new ID card. It can also be used to log off a vehicle after
successful authentication. Further applications are possible
and could be integrated into the architecture. A sequence
and
message
flow
of
the
strong
two-factor
online
authentication of a citizen in order to logout of a vehicle can
be seen in Figure 7.
C)
Process
The authentication is started at AUTHADA via an
integrated library. The obtained data from AUTHADA are
first stored in a database and then passed to the caller. With
the information obtained, the actual authentication process
is now started via the smartphone app or via the Website.
The customer identifies himself with his personal ID using
the AUTHADA e-Service.
The result of the authentication is a so-called result
token. Together with the session information from the first
step, the result token is now sent to the server, which in
return transfers this information to the AUTHADA e-service
and, as a result, receives the read-out customer data from the
personal ID card. This data is then stored in the database
and linked to the current session. As a result, the REST
interface provides only here whether the process was
successful or not. In the next step, the customer data that
belongs to the respective session can then be retrieved. After
this step, the customer's authentication is completed and the
vehicle log-off process can be started. In order to request a
vehicle
cancellation,
the
vehicle
data
must
first
be
transmitted together with the session ID. These data must
contain at least the label, as well as the necessary security
codes. After transmission, the system checks whether the
transmitted security codes match the codes stored in the
database. For this purpose, some fictitious test codes
including security codes were created in the database.
Furthermore, it must, of course, be checked whether the
authenticated customer is at all entitled to cancel the desired
vehicle.
2.
Authentication via an NFC-enabled Android app
The complete authentication message flow between the
Android App and the eID authentication Server (eID-
Server) is shown in detail in Figure 7. The complete process
of the de-registration of a vehicle as off the road can also be
done with an Android using the AUTHADA SDK and an
NFC-enabled mobile, which serves as a reading device to
the new German identity card.
After the user decides to execute the login process via
the app, he has to accept the privacy policy. Only after this
he will be able to do the authentication. After a successful
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-605-7
CYBER 2017 : The Second International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

authentication the personal ID data are displayed and the
user receives an application form, which must be completed.
Before
submitting
the
form,
the
user's
inputs
are
immediately validated on the client side looking for an error
(for example, a security code can only be 3 digits), and the
corresponding input validation errors are displayed under
the input fields. If the form is valid, the user gets a list of the
charges incurred (data coming from the server). If he
accepts the costs by touching the button "Compulsory
vehicle logout", the log-off process is completed. The user
is shown a Success page and then redirected to the start
page. In addition, all transactions information (session
token) stored until then are removed from the shared
preferences (application stored data).
At each step, the user can safely cancel or terminate the
vehicle logout by tapping the back button. For this, a dialog
is displayed on his mobile terminal with the text "Do you
want to terminate the vehicle de-registration?". If the user
confirms this dialog with "Yes", he returns to the start page.
The session token is also removed from the shared
preferences.
The
following
main
steps
are
used
to
communicate with the eID authentication server (also called
eID-Server), see Figure 7:
•
Request of an Auth and Session Token
•
Transmission of the TAN after successful
authentication using the ID card
•
Request of the user's read-out ID card data
•
Transfer of the input form data
•
Confirmation of the vehicle decommissioning
For this purpose, a REST client was implemented, which
is able to address the specified REST API of our server. The
required data between the app and the server are exchanged
in JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) [15] format. Before
any request to the server, a check is made as to whether an
active Internet connection is available. If this is not the case,
the user is shown a message that he must activate his mobile
data or WLAN to continue and also he has the possibility to
open the settings directly from the app.
All HTTPS connections are implemented and realized
with TLS 1.2. If the server is not reachable, or if the
response cannot be processed or properly desterilized by the
server, the user receives an error message with the request to
try again later. From here, he has only the possibility to
close the process completely and then reaches the start page.
The user is then shown the message that he is not authorized
to log off this vehicle and can adjust his inputs again. In
order to still be able to use the app in the case of the
inadequate availability of our server or to run the logoff
process, a mock was developed for test purposes in addition
to the real implementation. Before the start of the vehicle
logging process, you have the possibility to choose for real
or mocked implementation. In the case of the muted variant,
the authentication is completely skipped by means of the
personal ID card. In addition, the REST requests do not run
against our server, but against a mock server [9], which
provides static data to successfully test the logoff process.
Figure 7. Detailed authentication message flowchart between Android App
and eID Authentication Server
VII.
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
We presented a new approach for a mobile de-
registration of a vehicle as off the road. The new mobile de-
registration service of a vehicle as off the road is secure and
user-friendly.
The new approach implements a strong two-factor
authentication with German eID card and the corresponding
6-digits PIN, whereby a NFC-enabled Android smartphone
will be used as ubiquitous NFC card reader. The new
solution overcomes the need to buy a specific NFC card
reader. Instead, a NFC-enabled Android smartphone will be
used.
The big advance for the citizen and users are, in
summary: They need not to drive to the government agency,
and they save the long waiting times at the agency. So in
practice, the citizen save to spend a vacation day for the de-
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-605-7
CYBER 2017 : The Second International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

registration of a vehicle as off the road and the Statutory Off
Road Notification (SORN). The mobile de-registration
service allows the citizens to register their vehicle as off the
road (SORN) easily via an Android Smartphone App. In
doing so, the electronic identity (eID) of their German eID
card will be transmitted via NFC directly via the Android
smartphone. Just a few clicks later, the user has registered
his/her vehicle as off the road (SORN).
Therefore, here is what the citizen and user needs, in
detail:
An
Android
smartphone
with
enabled
NFC
functionality, the German eID card with activated online-
function and the associated 6-digit PIN, as well as the
number/registration plates and vehicle registration license
(after 01.01.2015) with three security codes.
The user will find the three security codes on the back of
the vehicle registration license, and under the vehicle seal
labels on the license plates (front and back).
A strong two-factor authentication ensures the necessary
safety and unambiguous identification of the vehicle owner.
A screenshot of the new app, how to enter the vehicle
registration code and the three security codes in the
application
form,
is
shown
in
Figure
8.
The
main
advantages of the new mobile government solution (as short
overview) are the following:
 Quick and easily Statutory Off Road Notification
(SORN) of the Vehicle
 Mobile and secure using the Android smartphone app.
 Strong 2-factor authentication (with eID card + PIN).
 No need for an expensive eID card reader.
 Without biometry, TAN and media breaks.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the Hessian Ministry of the
Interior and Sports (HMdIS, Government of the Federal
State of Hessen), Project “Mobiles Servicekonto Hessen”.
REFERENCES
[1]
http://www.egov4dev.org/success/definitions.shtml, last access 4th
November 2017.
[2]
https://www.cryptomathic.com/news-events/blog/digital-
authentication-the-basics, last access 4th November 2017.
[3]
http://nearfieldcommunication.org/, last access 4th November 2017.
[4]
http://www.investopedia.com/terms/q/quick-response-qr-code.asp,
last access 4th November 2017.
[5]
http://rest.elkstein.org/, last access 4th November 2017.
[6]
GfK SE (2015) http://www.gfk.com/insights/news/fuenf-prozent-
nutzen-elektronischen-personalausweis, last access 4th November
2017.
[7]
F. Otterbein, T. Ohlendorf, and M. Margraf: “Mobile Authentication
with German eID”, IFIP Summer School 2016.
[8]
AusweisApp2 for download: www.ausweisapp.bund.de, last access
4th November 2017.
[9]
http://www.mocky.io, last access 4th November 2017.
[10] https://english.hessen.de, last access 4th November 2017.
[11] https://www.authada.de, last access 4th November 2017.
[12] https://ekom21.de, last access 4th November 2017.
[13] http://www.gfk.com, last access 4th November 2017.
[14] https://mariadb.org, last access 4th November 2017.
[15] https://jersey.github.io, last access 4th November 2017.
[16] http://www.json.org, last access 4th November 2017.
Figure 8. Screenshot of App how to enter the vehicle registration code
and the three security codes in the application form.
Kennzeicheninformationen =license plate information
Sicherheitscodes = security codes from seal labels on the license plates (front and back),
as well as from seal label on Certificate of Approval Part I (“vehicle registration”)
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-605-7
CYBER 2017 : The Second International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

