The Cyber Microbiome and the Cyber Meta-reality 
Joshua A. Sipper 
Air Force Cyber College 
Air University 
Maxwell AFB, AL, United States 
Email: joshua.sipper.1@us.af.mil 
 
 
 
 
Abstract— The cyber realm as an entity continues to evolve 
and grow. As the Earth and indeed human beings share their 
chemical/biological physicality with a host of enabling flora 
and fauna (Earth) and bacteria, fungi, protozoa, and even 
viruses (humans), the cyber meta-reality (a reality of realities) 
is growing into a type of non-physical, yet tangible sphere 
where stripping away or adding to it could have far-reaching 
ramifications not yet understood. The human microbiome has 
most recently been estimated to outnumber human cells by 
several orders of magnitude. A cyber microbiome has al­ 
ready begun to take shape, characterized by viruses, 
archived data, Dark Web outgrowths, and other symbiotic 
code and applications that will ostensibly grow rapidly as 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) begin 
to create additional code and data in the future. While the 
cyber microbiome may not be, in some cases, considered a 
direct part of the created domain we experience, it certainly 
must not be stripped away, eradicating the good along with the 
bad. The cyber microbiome is similar to its planetary and 
human corollaries in that it contains various undetectable 
components that serve to support its function in difficult to 
discern ways. For instance, the Dark Web is much like the 
unseen portion of the iceberg under the surface. This indicates 
another way in which the cyber microbiome is so similar to its 
antecedents; the cyber microbiome is larger than visible 
cyberspace by many orders of magnitude. This paper examines 
the concept of the cyber meta-reality with an in-depth analysis 
of the cyber microbiome and attempts to correlate the 
symbiotic relationships of these two entities through an 
examination of the cyberspace most people encounter and the 
vast underlying cyberspace of which most are oblivious. 
Keywords- cyber; microbiome; meta-reality; archive; code; 
malware. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The cyber meta-reality we currently experience includes 
several realities being experienced simultaneously. From 
gaming realities, to research realities, to family realities, and 
even into the darker realities like pornography and cheating 
Websites, the cyber meta-reality (see Figure 1) continues to 
grow and deepen, offering escapes, adventures, and 
resources unimaginable just a couple of decades ago. 
However, what many have not realized is alongside this ever 
growing cyber meta-reality entity exists another, symbiont; a 
cyber microbiome (see Figure 2) often unseen, yet integral to 
the shaping and growth of the surface layer of the cyber 
meta-reality most inhabit. This underlying cyber space is 
similar in many ways to the Earth borne and human related 
microbiomes that flourish and support both systems 
respectively. The concept of the microbiome has its roots in 
the earliest theories of Macarthur in 1955 [2] and was later 
taken up by Savage in 1977 who stated, “In terms of 
numerical bacterial cells likely outnumber human cells by at 
least an order of magnitude.” [3] This estimate was later 
extended by many orders of magnitude following further 
study. This concept usually shocks most people simply 
because the sheer enormity of microorganisms they suddenly 
realize inhabit and make up their bodies. We are under the 
impression that we are made up primarily of “human” cells, 
but this has been proven not only to be a false assumption, 
but the direct opposite with most of the body we share being 
made up of the microbiome. As scientists and medical 
professionals recognize, the human microbiome has 
fundamentally changed how they do research and practice 
medicine. Thus, this concept, while new to the formation and 
constitution of the cyber meta-reality is nevertheless one that 
must be considered, especially in light of the areas 
underlying and paralleling the cyberspace most see. The 
Dark/Deep Web alone accounts for a vast and overwhelming 
section of what can be termed the cyber microbiome, 
followed by malware, living archives, and code that populate 
the symbiotic Hadean realm we have yet to fully realize. In 
this paper, we will investigate these abysmal realms of the 
cyber meta-reality as we cross the digital River Styx. 
 
 
Figure 1. Cyber Meta-reality. 
 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-818-1
CYBER 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
Figure 2. Cyber Microbiome. 
II. 
THE DEEP DARK WEB 
The Deep Web or Dark Web as some call it is known to 
relatively few but connects with and influences many people 
without them even realizing it. While not an illegal space 
itself, the “Dark Web” is known as a lawless realm leveraged 
by the dark cyber powers to conduct “Dark Market” 
activities of a less than savory nature. In this Underworld of 
viruses, Worms, Trojans, malware, ransomware, and a 
plethora of other malicious code for hire, hackers find 
community and items for sharing or purchase that may be 
added to their bag of tricks. Botnets can be hired for a mere 
few hundred dollars or less, passwords are sold on the cheap 
like crack cocaine, Bitcoin transactions traverse Virtual 
Private Networks (VPN), further obfuscating the already 
uber-secure blockchain mechanisms in place. And yet, this 
black cyber Gehenna is more spacious in data and global 
reach than any government or international enclave in 
existence. “The terms Deep Web, Deep Net, Invisible Web, 
or Dark Web refer to the content on the World Wide Web 
that is not indexed by standard search engines. The deepest 
layers of the Deep Web, a segment known as the Dark Web, 
contain content that has been intentionally concealed 
including illegal and anti-social information” [4]. As use of 
this shadowy enclave continues to grow, more and more 
capabilities are being created and leveraged. The growth of 
the Dark Web is so rapid that keeping up with its evolution is 
virtually impossible. Some predict “There will be more 
activity in darknets, more checking and vetting of 
participants, more use of cryptocurrencies, greater anonymity 
capabilities in malware, and more attention to encryption and 
protecting communications and transactions. Twitter is 
becoming a channel of choice; Tor and VPN services are 
finding increased use” [5]. Indeed this deepening of black 
and gray market transactions has been observed occurring at 
an alarming rate. “A recent study found that 57% of the Dark 
Web is occupied by illegal content like pornography, illicit 
finances, drug hubs, weapons trafficking, counterfeit 
currency, terrorist communication, and much more” [4]. This 
trend is likely to continue as more and more miners of the 
Dark Web find lucrative enterprises. This influx of additional 
Dark Web tourists and residents will no doubt expand this 
ever growing dark segment of the cyber microbiome. 
“People are becoming more technically sophisticated; 
younger generations are using technology on a daily basis in 
school, learning digital technology at a very early age. In the 
words of one expert, ‘hacking has become little league: 
everyone starts out early, and spends a lot of time doing it’” 
[5]. Although the Dark Web has become a cyber reality 
associated with illegal activity and anti-social behavior, it did 
not begin this way. “To access material in the Dark Web, 
individuals use special software such as TOR (The Onion 
Router) or I2P (Invisible Internet Project). TOR was initially 
created by the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory as a tool for 
anonymously communicating online” [4]. The fact that TOR, 
now associated with and widely used by criminals, hackers, 
and terrorist groups to name a few, was originally created by 
a legitimate U.S. government entity is telling. The Dark Web 
and the bridges to and from it have evolved; morphed from 
one kind of thing into something entirely different and it 
continues to grow and change. This fact along with the 
imminent applications of technologies like AI, ML, quantum 
computing, and nanotech indicate a potential future growth 
of the Dark Web of astronomical proportions, indicating its 
continued significance as a fundamental part of the cyber 
microbiome. 
III. 
MALWARE WITH A LIFE OF ITS OWN 
What happens when a computer virus, Trojan, Worm, or 
other type of malware accomplishes its mission? Where does 
it go? Does it simply self-annihilate or does it live on as a 
part of the cyber microbiome underlying the cyber meta-
reality? Of course, the answers to these questions usually 
depend on how the malware was designed and what its 
purpose is. However, these answers are becoming more 
subjective as the cyber meta-reality continues to change due 
to hackers’ constantly fluctuating modus operandi and the 
impending implementation of AI and ML enabled malware 
that could lead to self-replication and even evolutionary code 
not yet fathomed. These kinds of effects can be seen in what 
are deemed “poisonous systems” where malware has 
infected and changed the most integral portions of said 
system. “Poisoned systems are distinct from systems infected 
with computer viruses, which allow malicious code to 
transfer to other systems when it meets various conditions 
through a self-replicating mechanism” [6]. The continued 
spread and replication in this case goes beyond such targeted 
malware as Stuxnet which had a specific purpose and target 
and was set to end once that objective had been met. Often, 
malware is also coded in such a fashion as to be easy to catch 
and defend against through patching and malware signature 
implementations. “[I]f an OCO capability is used against a 
target, several considerations must be considered. First, the 
capability cannot be used elsewhere globally as an anti-virus 
company will likely see it and create a signature for it” [7]. 
However, with the growth of malware, itself a persistent 
portion of the cyber microbiome, patching and signature 
implementation are becoming more and more difficult. “As 
one industry analyst observed: ‘IT analyst forecasts are 
unable to keep pace with the dramatic rise in cybercrime, the 
ransomware epidemic, the refocusing of malware from PCs 
and laptops to smartphones and mobile devices, the 
deployment of billions of under-protected Internet of Things 
(IoT) devices, the legions of hackers-for- hire, and the more 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-818-1
CYBER 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

sophisticated 
cyber-attacks 
launching 
at 
businesses, 
governments, educational institutions, and consumers 
globally’” 
[8]. 
Other 
advances 
have 
already 
been 
incorporated into malware by hackers who understand the 
subtleties of signature-based algorithms and patching trends. 
The capabilities associated with advanced malware are 
concerning, but also fascinating in light of their ability to 
change, grow, and reproduce, thus adding another layer of 
complexity to their presence within the cyber meta-reality as 
a portion of the cyber microbiome. “[N]ew security products 
incorporating ML and AI are easily added to his or her 
testing cycle. The malware is validated against the test 
matrix, ensuring no tested product detects it” [9]. With the 
continued advancement of AI and ML functions, malware as 
part of the cyber microbiome will continue to expand and 
morph in myriad ways. 
IV. 
LIVING ARCHIVES 
As the cyber meta-reality and cyber microbiome continue 
to grow and deepen, questions concerning the nature of 
existence within these spheres arise. Ever since the discovery 
of the double-helix meta-molecule deoxyribonucleic acid 
(DNA) was discovered, the fundamental building blocks of 
life have been understood in terms of an extremely complex 
computer code that uses information to construct all organic, 
carbon-based life as we know it. This fact has profound 
application when considering the information environments 
we traverse daily, perhaps never comprehending the amount 
of information or how it is growing, changing, being shaped, 
and shaping us as information constructed entities. This 
confluence of carbon and silicon-based information 
hybridization can be seen in the experimentation taking place 
in the life of Finnish artist, engineer, and composer, Erkki 
Kurenniemi. A Belgian art and media group named Constant 
“foregrounds the digital life of an archive by practicing what 
it calls an ‘active archive’. Unlike most online archive 
initiatives Constant places emphasis on the generative and 
active part of making an archive come alive” [10]. This 
living archive concept is based on recordings captured and 
archived that catalog and preserve Kurenniemi’s life. This 
odd, but intriguing venture was undertaken by Kurenniemi in 
an effort to potentially resurrect himself at some point in the 
future by using this “file/life.” “More precisely, Kurenniemi 
set out to create an archive of his own life for a possible 
artificial life resurrection in the future” [10]. Archives are 
seen by many as extensions of who we are individually and 
culturally. The information that makes up our personal and 
collective existence has now found itself displayed in many 
cases for the entire world to see. With social media and the 
internet in general, our lives are increasingly becoming an 
active archive. “[T]echnological advances in data collection 
and data science … allow data to be transferred, stored, 
organized, and analyzed in an efficient and timely manner” 
[11]. In some cases, this data is being looked at for the 
purpose of customization of legal norms for individuals, but 
they are also being increasingly indexed as a means of 
understanding the most intricate habits and perspectives of 
singular humans. “[N]umerous firms are investing in 
collecting, organizing, and analyzing data or in creating 
products, services, and technologies that rely on such data, 
giving rise to data capitalism” [11]. Obviously, by capturing 
so much data, some information is subject to being 
misplaced, forgotten, or even put away for specific purposes 
be they good or evil. “Digital cloud storage simplifies our 
lives by releasing us from dependency on hardware we must 
manage ourselves. But we can get lost in the clouds. And a 
provider may decide, unbeknownst to us, not to archive our 
data beyond a few years. We change computers, we close 
accounts, time passes, and we lose entire portions of our 
memory” [12]. This loss of information identity leads back 
to the consideration of the living archive and what it would 
mean in the case of Kurenniemi if his data were lost, 
misplaced, or forgotten. “As Eugene Thacker has concluded 
in an overview of these tendencies, our notions of life 
underwent important changes during these post-war decades: 
‘the advances in genetic engineering and artificial life have, 
in different ways, deconstructed the idea that life is 
exclusively natural or biological.’ This tendency in the 
sciences is crucial for understanding Kurenniemi’s idea that 
an archive of files or information about a life as it is lived 
can actually also be or become a life form” [11]. This has 
further ramifications in the cyber meta-reality and cyber 
microbiome as all of the data and metadata associated with 
such archives lives in multiple places and within an 
indeterminate timeline. One need not look far before seeing 
the outgrowths of the living archive within the frameworks 
of the cyber meta-reality and microbiome. 
 
V. 
CODENSTEIN 
Code is information. As mentioned above, information is 
the basic, fundamental chemical foundation of life in our 
physical reality. Within the cyber meta-reality and 
microbiome the same case can be made for an information-
based, ever growing, reproducing, and self-perpetuating 
existence. For centuries, the definition of what makes 
something alive has been debated. Of course, life and 
intelligent life are different discussions, however from a 
basic point of view, life is defined as something that 
consumes, grows, and can reproduce without destroying 
itself in the process. Based on this simple definition, things 
like fire and viruses existing within our physical space are 
not considered to be alive since neither can reproduce 
without effectively destroying themselves. However, as an 
entity, the cyber meta-reality and microbiome, much like the 
human microbiome (see figure 3), both appear to consume 
energy in the form of electrons, grow in information 
proliferation and extensibility, and reproduce in the 
formation of additional information enclaves, forms, 
archives, and code. It is the latter of these progeny that seems 
to be the most prolific and analogous to the life, 
reproduction, and evolution we encounter as carbon-based 
life forms. 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-818-1
CYBER 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
Figure 3. Human Microbiome. 
 
Code is an information-rich, complex series of 
instructions that is used to create, control, and connect other 
information together in such a way to allow or make certain 
events occur. Just as animals sometimes do unexpected 
things a la the horse with the mind of its own, sometimes 
code is observed moving outside of its expected parameters. 
“It can be said that a computer can be both ‘reliable’ (but not 
infallible) and yet perform functions without the authority or 
knowledge of the owner or software writer. This may be 
when the code happens to execute in a way, because of a 
strange or unforeseen conjunction of inputs, which neither 
the owner nor the writer had imagined” [13]. This attribute 
of the unexpected nature of an information-constructed entity 
is tantamount to any other form of life behaving 
unpredictably. “Code can be used to create programs that 
provide insight into the universe, the human body, and 
efficiencies in transportation, finance, communications, and 
an almost infinite number of fields. The aggregate benefits of 
code are immense” [14]. The immensity of code capability in 
the hands of a skilled code creator is one thing, but one must 
also consider the trends and precedents that have been set in 
programs that create code autonomously. “Advanced 
development environments generate code automatically, 
although writing software to perform complex functions that 
works well in all circumstances remains exceedingly difficult 
and challenging” [13]. This is one step closer to the level of 
code being considered a type of life, but what about the 
possibility of intelligent life through code expansion and 
reproduction? “It should be observed that the increasing use 
of machine-learning systems complicates this issue, because 
the software code is instructed to make further decisions 
when running, which increases the complexity. In addition, 
the veridicality of machine-learning systems like neural nets 
cannot be easily understood or verified” [13]. While the 
autonomous decision-making capabilities of code generators 
using AI and ML are expanding rapidly, the question of 
ethical and moral agency may still be far off, if not possible. 
However, what is evident is code as an instrumental entity 
within the greater cyber meta-reality and microbiome is a 
category-shattering being on the verge of becoming 
something much larger and more complex. 
 
 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
The cyber microbiome appears to be far more massive 
than anyone could have guessed. In this paper, we have only 
seen a few contributing areas that make up this symbiotic 
manifestation of the cyber meta-reality, but even then, the 
entity itself is enormous and extremely complex. As the 
interconnected cyber sphere continues to grow and change, 
so too will the Dark Web. In this dangerous, information-rich 
realm, people and machines will continue to create more 
narrow alleys of malware, code, and data that will potentially 
take on any number of byzantine existences. Malware that 
exists now and has been proliferated throughout systems will 
likely become smarter and more versatile, leaping into a new 
and more autonomous kind of existence that may grow into 
any number of malicious or potentially helpful expressions. 
As living archives continue to develop and evolve, the 
potential for advancement within this kind of file/life could 
be far-reaching, especially when factoring in AI and ML. 
Ultimately, all of these possibilities come down to code; the 
type, complexity, and growth of which could literally take on 
a life of its own. Through code that can write more code and 
learn and advance at rates soon to be enabled by quantum 
technology, nanotechnology, AI/ML, and any number of 
nascent capabilities, code will continue to develop through 
the seminal acts of human beings, potentially taking on a life 
of its own. All of these outgrowths and tectonic shifts only 
add to the propensity of the cyber microbiome to grow and 
change into the foreseeable future. 
REFERENCES 
[1] N. Fierer et al., “From Animalcules to an Ecosystem: 
Application 
of 
Ecological 
Concepts 
to 
the 
Human 
Microbiome,” Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and 
Systematics, Vol. 43, pp. 137-155, 2012. 
[2] R. Macarthur. 1955. “Fluctuations of animal populations, and 
a measure of community stability,” Ecology, 36:533- 536, 
1955. 
[3] D. Savage, “Microbial ecology of the gastrointestinal tract,” 
Annual Review Microbiology, 31:107-33, 1977. 
[4] G. Weimann, “Terrorist Migration to the Dark Web,” 
Perspectives on Terrorism (June 2016), Vol. 10, No. 3, pp. 
40-44, 2016. 
[5] L. Ablon, M. Libicki, and A. Golay, “Projections and 
Predictions for the Black Market,” RAND Corporation, 2014. 
[6] R. Stevens and J, Biller. 2018. “Offensive Digital 
Countermeasures: 
Exploring 
the 
Implications 
for 
Governments,” The Cyber Defense Review (FALL 2018), 
Vol. 3, No. 3, pp. 93-114, 2018. 
[7] M. Klipstein, “Seeing is Believing,” The Cyber Defense 
Review (SPRING 2019), Vol. 4, No. 1, pp. 85-106, 2019. 
[8] C. Downes, “Strategic Blind–Spots on Cyber Threats, Vectors 
and Campaigns,” The Cyber Defense Review (SPRING 2018), 
Vol. 3, No. 1, pp. 79-104, 2018. 
[9] B. Bort, “There IS No Cyber Defense,” The Cyber Defense 
Review (SPRING 2018), Vol. 3, No. 1, pp. 41-46, 2018. 
[10] E. Røssaak, FileLife: Constant, Kurenniemi, and the Question 
of Living Archives, Amsterdam University Press, 2017. 
[11] N. Elkin-Koren and S. Gal, “The Chilling Effect of 
Governance-by-Data on Data Markets,” The University of 
Chicago Law Review, Vol. 86, No. 2, Symposium: 
Personalized Law, 2019. 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-818-1
CYBER 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

[12] S. Abiteboul. Memory: The Digital Shoebox, Peter Wall 
Institute for Advanced Studies, 2018. 
[13] S. Mason, “The Presumption That Computers Are ‘Reliable’,” 
School of Advanced Study, University of London, Institute of 
Advanced Legal Studies, 2017. 
[14] A. Brantly, “The Violence of Hacking: State Violence and 
Cyberspace,” The Cyber Defense Review (WINTER 2017), 
Vol. 2, No. 1, pp. 73-92, 2017. 
 
 
DISCLAIMERS: 
 
The views expressed are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the official policy or position of the Air Force, the 
Department of Defense, or the U.S. Government. 
 
DoD School Policy. DoD gives its personnel in its school environments the widest latitude to express their views. To ensure a climate 
of academic freedom and to encourage intellectual expression, students and faculty members of an academy, college, university, or 
DoD school are not required to submit papers or material that are prepared in response to academic requirements and not intended for 
release outside the academic institution. Information proposed for public release or made available in libraries or databases or on web 
sites to which the public has access shall be submitted for review. 
 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-818-1
CYBER 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

