Interference Testing on Radio Frequency Polarization Fingerprinting 
 
Page Heller 
Endpoint Security Inc. 
College Station, Texas, USA 
email: heller@endpointsecurityinc.com 
 
 
Abstract— As nation state actors become more active in cyber-
attacks on infrastructure, they also become more sophisticated, 
choosing to target product quality over a plant shutdown, thus 
making it harder to detect an intrusion. To make cyber-attacks 
harder to initiate, naturally-occurring polarization in radio 
frequency signals is being explored as a means of authentication 
that doesn’t require digital data. By means of polarization mode 
dispersion, it is possible to protect the wireless channel (the path 
from sensor to access point) by identifying hostile actors who 
attempt to imitate authenticated devices to gain entry into a 
wireless network. In this article, recent test results are examined 
for their impact on the resilience of this type of wireless security. 
Specifically, performance in the case of low received-signal-
strength is analyzed. Also, troublesome presence of electrical 
interference from a microwave oven and fans is studied. 
 
Keywords-cybersecurity; authentication; wireless intrusion 
detection; radio frequency fingerprinting; interference. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
As nation state actors become more active in cyber-attacks 
on infrastructure, they also become more sophisticated [1]. 
Rather than shutting down a plant, for instance, they might 
target product quality, which is harder to detect. Rather than 
using dictionary attacks, they might employ man-in-the-
middle attacks or implement rogue access points because they 
are also harder to detect [2]. To stay out in front of the 
attackers requires a proactive approach that includes new 
systems of security for wireless edge devices. 
A new form of Wireless Intrusion Detection System 
(WIDS) has been developed that detects wireless intruders by 
the signal they send, rather than simply relying upon the data 
that the signal contains [3] [4]. By using polarization mode 
dispersion, it is possible to protect a wireless channel (that is, 
the path from sensor to access point) by identifying hostile 
actors who attempt to imitate authenticated devices to gain 
entry into a wireless network.  
In this article, recent test results are examined for their 
impact on the resilience of this type of wireless security. 
Specifically, performance in the case of low received signal 
strength is analyzed. Also, presence of electrical interference 
from a microwave oven and from fans is studied. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section II describes the test setup, including a description of a 
prototype device under test, and further describes a set of fixed 
transmitting devices emulating industrial sensors, the general 
environment in which tests are conducted and the condition 
under test, which may involve introducing a tertiary device. 
Section III describes the test performed with signals received 
that are characterized by low relative signal strength. Section 
IV addresses tests performed with different types of electric 
fans producing electrical interference near the transmitting 
devices. Section V covers a test performed with a microwave 
oven in operation near the transmitting devices and Section VI 
provides concluding remarks on the tests. The paper closes 
with references cited. 
II. 
TEST SETUP 
A prototype system (Figure 1) was previously developed 
and is employed here to monitor wireless signals and identify 
unique edge devices by a naturally occurring fingerprint 
comprised of polarization characteristics in the wireless 
analog signals they transmit. This fingerprint is quite unique 
and very stable for each fixed wireless device. When a set of 
devices are authenticated based on their fingerprints, a new 
device entering the area can be identified as an unknown 
device, even if the perpetrator is using the MAC address and 
password of an authenticated device to attempt connection 
with a network. In addition, devices of the same make and 
model will yield very different fingerprints, making the 
authentication device specific. 
Figure 1. Device under test: a prototype wireless intrusion detection 
system 
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-893-8
CYBER 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

Since the fingerprints are naturally occurring, this method 
of identifying wireless intrusion works with legacy devices, 
which may have little or no security measures embedded. It 
also works with any protocol and with any standard for 
communications, thus making it a potentially desirable 
mechanism to employ in sensitive industrial environments. 
However, most industries are electrically noisy and any new 
security system must be able to operate in an environment 
with high electrical interference. Thus, a study is needed to 
ensure its viability for industrial applications. 
Electrical interference can raise the noise floor of a 
received wireless signal. This may result in an otherwise 
satisfactory signal strength arriving with a low Signal-to-
Noise Ratio (SNR), causing problems for some receivers. In 
addition, electrical interference can result in sporadic 
increases in energy received, which may appear as new 
signals, or which may obfuscate desired signals. 
To test the prototype under these conditions, a 40-foot by 
80-foot metal warehouse was used to simulate a plant 
environment. It was set up with four sensors each based on the 
same make and model of microcontroller; in this case, 
Raspberry Pi 4Bs. The sensors alternately each sent a pair of 
wireless signals containing data.  
Two identical prototypes, each with a unique pair of 
antennas, were set up to monitor the incoming signals from 
the sensors for comparison of antenna types. Twelve tests 
were run using different signal gains and interference sources 
in varying forms of electrical noise within the field of the 
transmitting sensors. 
The wireless signals were received by each of the 
prototypes using orthogonally-polarized antennas; one set of 
RF Elements OARDSBX244 Omni Directional 2.4 GHz, 
4dBi antennas and one set of Bestkong Omni WiFi Booster 
2.4 GHz 5dBi antennas. The signals were sampled at 20M 
samples per second and were digitized with a 12-bit Analog-
to-Digital Converter. For this test case, they were recorded so 
they could be analyzed in off-line processing. In actual 
operating conditions, the inputs would be analyzed as they 
were received and a decision made as to whether or not they 
were authenticated, known sources.  
Received signals were band-pass filtered and converted to 
complex baseband in the Universal Software Radio Peripheral 
[5]. A proprietary pulse detection algorithm was then 
employed on the baseband signals, and a block of 4096 
samples was formed upon detection of a signal.  The block 
was transformed to the frequency domain using a Discrete 
Fourier Transform (DFT). Further processing, including an 
algorithm for finding the main spectrum lobe [6], was used to 
derive a polarization mode dispersion profile across the 
spectrum of the DFT, eliminating artifacts derived from 
spectral leakage. 
By averaging energy over many symbols within the 
received packet, one is able to mitigate concerns of incipient 
deviations, scalloping, unbalanced spectra and other fading 
phenomena which might influence the calculation of 
polarization mode dispersion. This computation produces a 
frequency-dependent fingerprint based on polarization mode 
dispersion across the signal bandwidth that is quite unique for 
each sensor. The fingerprint is compared to a bank of collected 
fingerprints to determine if the received input has been 
identified previously. This is done through a correlation 
process, concluding with a number between 0 and 1 that 
indicates the degree of confidence for each case where the 
fingerprint of the incoming signal is compared to each known 
source. 
III. 
LOW RELATIVE SIGNAL STRENGTH 
A. Setup 
In this series of experiments, three of the signals received 
from sensors each had an SNR of 20 dB and a fourth received 
signal had a 14 dB SNR. These signal strength levels are 
undesirable in communications and often reflect conditions 
where the bit-error rates increase to the point where packets 
fail and must be re-transmitted. Figure 2 depicts a dial which 
reflects, on average, when wireless communications are good 
and when they begin to fail. It should be noted that the range 
from 15 dB to 25 dB is referenced as “poor,” indicating that 
re-transmissions are frequent. Three of the sensors are 
transmitting signals that are received in this range. The fourth 
sensor resides in the range below that, denoted as minimum 
SNR, 10-15 dB. In this range, data may get through only 
periodically. The degradation is clearly evident in the actual 
recorded signal spectrum, shown in Figure 3, where the 
intensity across the spectrum is indicated with a relative 
intensity, in Volts, on the vertical axis for each frequency bin 
number on the horizontal axis. 
Typically, one would expect the average spectrum to be 
approximately symmetric around the center of the chart.   
Frequency-selectivity due to multipath in the propagation 
channel can result in signal levels that depend on the 
frequency, leading to an unbalanced spectrum.  
B. Results 
While this phenomenon and other frequency-selective 
fading can reduce signal levels and even cause bit-error rates 
to increase, the effect is not significant enough to negatively 
impact the ability to correctly match the fingerprint of a 
received signal with one of a set of known sources. Because 
the polarization dispersion measurement is averaged over 
multiple symbols within the packet, transient effects are 
minimized and an integration gain is achieved. 
Figure 2. A dial indicating how SNR impacts quality of signal 
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-893-8
CYBER 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
The following chart (Figure 4) is a ‘confidence matrix’, 
which is similar to a well-known confusion matrix, except, 
where a confusion matrix would have known sources along 
one axis and the same number of unknown sources along a 
second, the confidence matrix is designed with known sources 
in columns and each row containing a new, incoming source. 
In other words, the confidence matrix grows in length with the 
number of signals received in the test case. 
Column A contains the block number of the rising edge of 
each signal found. The first time a signal is seen, it is not 
successfully correlated with a known source, since there are 
no known sources, as yet. Thus, for block 1413 the correlation 
is 0.38, where 1.00 is a perfect match and 0.00 indicates no 
correlation.  
The confidence matrix shows no sources present in the test 
other than the four known sensors, shown in columns B, C, D 
and E. It also shows strong correlation with alternating pairs 
of signals arriving from each of four sensors. There are no 
false positive correlations, nor false negative correlations. The 
number in each cell represents the confidence in making the 
matching decision. Thus, all positive correlations are above 
0.95 indicating that the decisions are made with greater than 
95% confidence. In fact, this confidence matrix is from a test 
with received signals of low SNR and the average positive 
correlation for this test is 0.97 with a standard deviation of 
0.01. 
 
 
This statistic is important when illustrating prototype 
performance for signals with low SNR. The ability to maintain 
an average correlation with a confidence factor of 0.97 under 
low SNR conditions indicates that the fingerprints of wireless 
edge devices will remain strong even when communications 
begin to fail. 
Polarization measurements from the prototype may be 
plotted on a spherical coordinate system, called a Poincaré 
Sphere. Each frequency bin of the DFT contributes a unit 
vector ending with a single point location on the sphere’s 
surface. In research conducted at the University of Notre 
Dame, the polarization of a signal has been found to be 
frequency dependent, leading to a curve, like those shown in 
Figure 5, as each frequency bin of the DFT is traversed [7]. 
The fingerprint for a fixed, wireless device may be plotted 
on a sphere’s surface for purposes of visualization, although 
not necessary for the purpose of correlation. Fingerprints for 
two separate sensors in the aforementioned chart are color-
coded to indicate each device; one, red, and the other, blue. 
Each point of a fingerprint represents a frequency bin of the 
DFT. Thus, over the bandwidth of the received signal, a curve 
meanders around the spherical globe. 
Eight tests were run with signals of low SNR. All tests 
yielded results similar to the test shown above-- there were no 
false negatives and no false positives. 
IV. 
ELECTRICAL INTERFERENCE 
A. Setup 
Another set of tests was conducted for conditions 
involving electrically noisy environments. In these tests, 
noise-producing equipment was placed near the sensors, one 
at a time. A table-top rotating fan and a box fan were each 
used to introduce noise into the environment, one at a time. 
The tests involving fans present interesting cases for this 
technology, since they introduce both electrical interference 
Poincaré Sphere 
Figure 3. DFT of a signal with low SNR showing non-uniformity in 
symmetry (test 20210327103909-2G0202e) using relative intensity in Volts 
on the vertical scale compared at each frequency bin on the horizontal scale 
Figure 5. Fingerprints for two devices with low SNR are shown in red and 
blue curves on the surface of a sphere 
Figure 4. Confidence Matrix highlighting positive correlations made each 
pass between new and known sources, where column A contains the 
number of the block received; that is, the pass 
V 
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-893-8
CYBER 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

from the fan motor and motion interference from the rotation 
of the fan blades within the multi-path. 
Both fans were placed, one at a time, on the same counter 
top as the sensors for this test. This places a fan in close 
enough proximity to couple electrically with the wireless 
signals and introduce rotating reflectors in the multi-path 
environment. This test involved both Bluetooth and Wi-Fi 
signals, but only the Wi-Fi signals are discussed in this 
document for simplicity. It suffices to say that no difference 
was found in the two cases. 
B. Results 
The DFT of a Wi-Fi signal in this test case appears just as 
one would expect, with a single main lobe containing a center 
null. This is the same shape in the frequency response as one 
would find in a sufficiently strong Wi-Fi signal for good data 
demodulation. The main lobe is surrounded by two small side 
lobes, introduced by the finite nature of the DFT. The resulting 
signal spectrum is shown in Figure 6. 
 
 
Figure 6. DFT showing relative strength in Volts on the vertical axis and 
frequency bins on the horizontal axis for a Wi-Fi signal in a test case with a 
small fan nearby (test I201-F2462-R20-G20-SC16-BS2048-1b) 
There were no false positives and no false negatives found 
in this test case. The average confidence in positive 
correlations is 98.6% with a standard deviation of 0.01. 
As may be seen in Figure 7, which compares a case with 
no interfering devices, in part A, to the introduced fan, in part 
B, the noise floor is considerably higher with the fan. Even so, 
the electrical noise is largely non-polarized and, thus, is for 
the most part invisible to the algorithms used for 
fingerprinting. Part C of the figure will be discussed below. 
 
V. 
MICROWAVE OVEN INTERFERENCE 
A. Setup 
A test involving interference from a microwave oven is 
often considered one of the hardest tests to pass in wireless 
studies. The microwave produces high power signals exactly 
in the range of frequencies often encountered in the upper 
ranges of Wi-Fi 2.4 GHz channels. In this test case, we employ 
channel 11, which is often in the center of such interference. 
A microwave oven located near the sensors was turned on 
for the duration of the test. The result is a series of closely 
timed pulses which vacillated in amplitude overlaying the 
sensor signals. 
B. Results 
Figure 7 shows normal signal amplitude in the time 
domain in part A, a snapshot of the elevated noise floor from 
a fan motor in part B, and also a snapshot of microwave 
background radiation as seen by the receiving antenna on one 
of the prototypes in part C. 
The unusual pulses from the microwave have an effect 
similar to lowering the received signal SNR by introducing a 
floor resulting from the presence of the interference. As in the 
previous tests, the interfering microwave pulses do not seem 
to significantly influence either the frequency content of 
individual signals, nor the polarization. Instead, they result in 
the appearance of a raised noise-plus-interference floor that is 
not as stable as an environment with no interference. 
 
Taking a closer look at the phenomena, one can see in Figure 
8 that the signal spectrum appears as a well-balanced, fairly 
clean communications signal. Here, we see a main lobe with 
a null at the center, framed with small side lobes and only a 
very small amount of deterioration in the right half of the main 
lobe beginning to form. 
Certainly, however, the microwave signal is a major 
interfering signal and it is clearly seen the in Figure 7 (C) and 
clearly it lowers the ratio of signal-to-interference-plus-noise 
of the incoming signals. An examination of the relative 
intensity (the vertical axis) shows the signal at only half the 
level of the average intensity of the spectrum in Figure 7. 
Figure 7. Time domain views of (A) normal sensor activity, (B) fan motor 
raising the noise floor, and (C) pulses from a microwave raising the noise-
interference floor 
V 
V 
V 
V 
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-893-8
CYBER 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
Figure 8. A Discrete Fourier Transform of a signal subject to background 
microwave interference 
If one analyzes a very short period of time, it is possible to 
see that the background radiation is actually a series of pulses. 
This may be seen in Figure 9, where a handful of signals fall 
amidst a continuing series of low amplitude pulses. These do 
not contain data, of course, but rather are pulses of interfering 
energy. 
One might expect that microwave interference would also 
interfere with the polarization characteristics of the received 
signals from sensors. However, it was found that the pulses 
had little effect on the polarization calculation. The average 
confidence in positive correlation across the test file is 98.0% 
with a standard deviation of 0.03. Thus, the fingerprints for 
the identified signals appear to be stable. Fingerprints of the 
first two devices may be seen in Figure 10. A close 
examination reveals that the red curve moves very slightly, 
captured in this image showing the current fingerprint and the 
previous fingerprint it replaces. Overall, however, the 
fingerprints for both devices remained fairly stable throughout 
the test. As in the previous tests, there were no false positives 
and no false negatives found in this test. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In conclusion, the polarization methodology employed 
for fingerprinting RF signals from wireless edge devices 
revealed no false positives and no false negatives in 12 tests 
directed toward studying low SNR and electrical interference 
from fans and a microwave oven. The confidence of the 
positive correlations ranged from 97% to 99%, indicating the 
methodology is resilient to both conditions of low signal 
strength and electrical interference. Thus, it may be 
concluded that the fingerprinting of wireless signals using 
polarization characteristics is quite robust under conditions of 
low SNRs and electrical interference. In future work, it is 
recommended that similar tests be performed to study the 
effects of motion in the multipath on the methodology. 
 
 
Figure 10. Polarization-based RF fingerprints for two wireless edge devices 
subject to microwave interference 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 2019 Global ICS & IIoT Risk Report, published by CyberX, a 
MicroSoft Azure company, 2019, [retrieved: October, 2021]. 
Available from https://bit.ly/37wsnix 
[2] B. Alotaibi and K. Elleithy, “Rogue access point detection: 
taxonomy, challenges, and future directions,” Wireless 
Personal Communications, June 11, 2016, pp. 1261-1290, 
DOI: 10.1007/s11277-016-3390-x. 
[3] R. P. Heller, T. G. Pratt, J. Loof and E. Jesse, “RF biometric 
for wireless devices,” Proceedings of the Future Technologies 
Conference (FTC) 2018. FTC 2018. Advances in Intelligent 
Systems and Computing, vol 881. Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG, Cham., October 2018. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-
02683-7_65 
[4] P. Heller, “Wireless frequency data manipulation for 
embedded databases use in cybersecurity applications,” 
International Conference on Digital Communications, ICDT, 
April 18, 2021, pp. 36-42, ISBN: 978-1-61208-835-8. 
[5] J. Petrich, VHF-UHF-microwave SDR transceiver on the air, 
American Radio Relay League Northwestern Division 
Convention, SEA-PAC 2017, June 3, 2017. [retrieved: 
October, 
2021] 
Available 
from: 
https://seapac.org/seminars/2017/SEA-PAC2017-uhf-sdr-
transceiver.pdf 
[6] P. Heller, “Radio frequency fingerprinting with polarizaton 
mode dispersion,” a tutorial, Nexcom, Porto, Portugal, April 
18, 2021. Available from: https://youtu.be/zE2whBIoaAI. 
[7] T. G. Pratt and R. D. Kossler, “Input-to-output instantaneous 
polarizaton characterization,” IEEE Transactions on Antennas 
and Propogation, Vol. 67, No. 3, pp. 1804-1818, March 2019. 
 
Poincaré Sphere 
Figure 9. Microwave interference expanded in time shows a series of 
energy pulses 
V 
V 
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-893-8
CYBER 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

