Relevance of GRC in Expanding the Enterprise Risk Management Capabilities 
 
Alina Andronache 
Affiliation during research: Brunel 
Business School, Brunel University, 
current affiliation: University of the 
West of Scotland, London, UK, email: 
alina.andronache@partner.uws.ac.uk  
Abraham Althonayan 
Brunel Business School, Brunel 
University, London, UK, email: 
Abraham.Althonayan@brunel.ac.uk  
Seyedeh Mandana Matin  
Affiliation during research: Brunel 
Business School, Brunel University, 
current affiliation: University of the 
West of Scotland, London, UK, email: 
mandana.matin@partner.uws.ac.uk    
 
 
Abstract—This research explored the need for enhancing the 
Enterprise Risk Management concept. Thus, delved into 
challenges and drawbacks to acknowledge levels of maturity. 
In addition, it studied the reasoning for a paradigm shift, 
which aggregates “GRC” (Governance, Risk and Compliance) 
under its umbrella to increase concept capabilities to not only 
align or comply but to foresee, adapt, and create future-
oriented risk strategies. Overall, the key findings from 15 
qualitative 
interviews 
indicated 
that 
Enterprise 
Risk 
Management maturity has yet to achieve its full potential. It 
was found that in practice Enterprise Risk Management no 
longer suffice to an organisation’s needs. Stakes and risk-
return have consequently become considerably higher and 
broader in scope so the need to orchestrate the disjointed risk 
functions is higher. Given the significant drawbacks identified, 
this article suggests a value proposition of integrating GRC 
into Enterprise Risk Management to increase organisational 
risk capabilities. The joint approach is suggested to reinforce 
the effects of Enterprise Risk Management, and last but not 
least, enable maturity of the concept.  
Keywords—Enterprise Risk Management, GRC, align, risk 
compliance, maturity. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Given the increase in the number of organisational 
failures, previous studies have reported that managing risk 
has become essential for an organisation’s success [1][2]. 
Additionally, globalisation, uncertainties in the business 
environment, hyper-competition within industries, political 
risks, increased demand for compliance and governance, and 
heightened stakeholders’ expectations have articulated the 
necessity for strengthening a cross-dimensional risk function 
[2]-[4].  
Risks are continually evolving, and the ramifications of 
these changes have increased organisations’ interest in 
shifting from the traditional silo perspective that comes with 
conventional Risk Management (RM) towards the holistic 
approach of Enterprise Risk Management (ERM) in order to 
deal with risk in a more all-encompassing way [4]-[6].  
Intrinsically desirable, ERM has been recognised as an 
integrative risk oversight approach that helps organisations 
manage an extensive range of risks in a coordinated and 
comprehensive manner. Even though risk governance 
efficiency has been improved in recent years, attaining 
enterprise-wide risk governance remains a complex 
challenge for many scholars. ERM has a long history 
stemming from its capability to shift into aligning various 
organisational functions in a multi-strategy approach [7][8]. 
Likewise, successful ERM is driven by the alignment of risk 
oversight with strategic planning, respectively organisation 
strategy [5][8]-[10].  
ERM concentrates on ‘risk oversight’ value, articulating 
and embedding due diligence within an organisation’s 
strategy to establish a risk mindset across the organization 
[11]. Research on risk oversight has been growing, and there 
is clear evidence that the siloed practice of RM is being 
abandoned as an effect of the post-global financial crisis of 
2008 [12]-[14].  
Overall, the paradigm shift towards ERM supports a 
change in emphasis from tactical to strategic [1]. Moreover, 
the concept provides organisational effectiveness and 
preserves shareholder value on a continual basis [1][7]. The 
output of such a trend in recent years reinforces the value of 
a holistic approach delivered by ERM. Thus, this paper 
investigates 
the 
aptness 
of 
strategic 
planning 
and 
effectiveness of managerial risk control for improving 
resiliency, customised to an organisation’s specific needs and 
objectives rather than being a mere compliance burden or 
serving the tick-box approach. 
The benefits of ERM have been thoroughly discussed by 
many researchers [15]-[24]. However, questions regarding 
how mature/effective ERM implementation is, and how 
successful ERM has been in yielding its proactive 
capacity/maturity entirely, remain valid [9][10]. In spite of 
the ERM implementation, prior research has thoroughly 
investigated 
ERM 
adoption, 
implementation, 
and 
measurement. 
Nonetheless, 
little 
research 
has 
been 
conducted to show the limitations and challenges of ERM as 
encountered by organisations. A majority of prior researchers 
have failed to evaluate and identify ERM maturity, future 
direction, and potential solutions [21].  
Despite substantial theoretical legacy, ERM is still in a 
developmental stage in terms of alignment to an 
organisation’s strategic planning. Thus, several studies such 
as [6][8][9][14][24]-[26] have advocated a call for 
improvements in the designing and implementation 
processes due to a lack of strategic alignment, a lack of 
understanding 
of 
ERM 
benefits, 
an 
inappropriate 
understanding of risk, inadequate ways to report risks, an 
undeveloped risk culture, a lack of an ERM framework fit 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-893-8
CYBER 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

with organisations’ needs, a lack of accurate and unbiased 
data on corporate risk management activities, a lack of a 
constantly updated and reliable risk control system, a lack of 
constant environmental scanning, a lack of compliance with 
numerous and changing regulations, and an inability to 
capture risks holistically. 
While ERM has been a growing field over recent years 
[14][27], studies concerning why ERM remains immature 
are few. Surprisingly, there are only a few articles (e.g., 
[7][9][28]) that, apart from identifying the limitations of 
ERM, also open a debate to discuss whether ERM is 
sufficient to support an organisation’s vision and mission. 
For instance, [28] emphasises that the main success factors in 
implementing ERM are human factors, clearer guidance, the 
proper definition of risk appetite, proper performance 
metrics, and adaptability to challenging environments [29]; 
all of which contribute towards beneficial risk governance 
practices [25][28]. Additionally, some potential solutions 
have been suggested by [30], focusing on communication, 
articulated objectives, and understanding of potential impact 
and probability in order to render risk governance 
optimisation and risk functions prioritisation [30]. Moreover, 
[8] discusses that setting up a reliable risk control system 
along with continuous environmental scanning helps for 
more effective ERM implementation [8]. Similarly, it has 
been argued by [10] that organisations’ competitive 
advantage is contingent upon having their risk management 
integrated with a robust risk control system. Indeed, 
organisations with reliable risk control systems are more able 
to deal with today’s uncertainties [10]. 
Consequently, this paper investigates challenges among 
ERM practices. Despite its effectiveness, ERM remains 
immature in implementation (e.g., repeatability, processes, 
effectiveness, sophistication) [31]-[33]. Additionally, the 
immaturity of ERM encourages an extension of its principles 
and broadens further to GRC that incorporates ERM 
principles under its umbrella [24][34] along with additional 
functions of ‘risk governance’. There is scarce evidence in 
terms of ERM and GRC similarities [32]. ERM maturity has 
previously been analysed through the lens of practicality and 
not much attention has been paid to the ERM paradigm’s 
maturity conceptually [3]. Most existing literature has been 
based on descriptive and prescriptive aspects of how and 
why implementation should be achieved [20][35]. Whether 
ERM is theoretically mature is a question addressed in this 
paper.  
Based on the points presented so far, this paper argues 
that understanding ERM’s current conceptual maturity helps 
authors to enrich further their theory and better understand 
the dynamic capability of the new school of thought 
regarding ‘risk control’, ‘risk oversight’, and ‘risk 
governance’, in other words, the industry trend towards 
GRC. This paper corroborates ERM’s drawbacks to justify 
the necessity of ERM maturity for assuring the fulfilment of 
organisation strategy and objectives [32]. In this regard, this 
paper aims to explore the challenges and drawbacks of ERM, 
consciously acknowledge current maturity as well as 
exploring the justification rationality for a paradigm shift 
towards GRC. In the next section, a thorough analysis of the 
research background is provided. We will then delve into the 
research methodology and research findings. Lastly, we will 
contextualize the research results and discuss their 
implication and future work. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
ERM’s increased importance and popularity have ensued 
due to the Global Financial Crisis (GFC), 2008-2009, when 
organisations realised that business operations were 
becoming more complex and the number of risks in business 
markets were, and indeed still are, increasing.  
Moreover, numerous corporate fraud and financial 
scandals leading up to the GFC pressured institutional 
investors, rating agencies, legislators, and regulators into 
pushing organisations towards advancing their commitment 
to ERM and taking a more effective approach for dealing 
with 
risks 
that 
affect 
performance 
[3][4][8][36]. 
Accordingly, the catastrophes of the GFC have highlighted 
that silo RM needs to move towards a more holistic ERM 
[4][14][32]. The economic environment encounters rapid 
internal and external changes due to globalisation and 
increasing complexity of risks that can positively or 
negatively affect the achievement of an organisation’s 
strategic objectives [3][37]-[39]. The highly volatile post-
crisis period revealed the ineffectiveness of past RM 
approaches and proved that relying on a traditional approach 
of RM is no longer appropriate [3][8]. As a result, regulators, 
institutional investors, and rating agencies demanded 
organisations to evaluate their RM approaches and focus on 
more transparent and effective RM practices [8][30][40]. A 
more holistic approach of RM was encouraged to enhance 
effectiveness across organisations. Thus, over time, old 
practices of silo RM advanced to modern ERM practices, 
considered more accurate and multi-faceted [29]. Moreover, 
ERM has developed as an approach that incorporates 
existing strategies, resources, technology, and knowledge in 
order to evaluate and manage uncertainties that many 
organisations encounter [14][41][42]. The central focus of 
ERM is to identify, measure, mitigate, and manage risks that 
would otherwise hinder the achievement of organisational 
objectives [14][41][43]. 
Most 
researchers 
in 
the 
field 
agree 
that 
the 
implementation of ERM is driven by various determinants 
(i.e., internal and external, mandatory or discretionary) such 
as an organisation’s own willingness to improve its risk 
oversight, pressure from regulators, rating agencies and 
organisation executives, academic research, industry norms, 
stakeholders’ 
encouragement, 
technology 
shifts, 
and 
marketing competition [30][44][45]. Consequently, several 
studies have focused on the factors associated with effective 
ERM implementation. For instance, [15] proposes a 
framework of ERM and performance and reports that 
successful ERM implementation is conditioned by several 
internal and external factors such as business environment 
uncertainty, competition in the business area, organisation 
complexity, organisation size, and monitoring by senior 
managers and directors. The research presented in [46] in a 
financial firm that used S&P’s risk management rating found 
that having a reliable risk control system leads to effective 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-893-8
CYBER 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

organisational risk management. Likewise, [47] emphasises 
that the organisations where their Chief Executive Officers 
(CEO) pay more attention to the importance of risk and have 
an inclination towards effective risk management are more 
likely to employ Chief Risk Officers (CRO) and develop 
appropriate risk governance. Nonetheless, [48] outline 
factors such as an organisation’s size, type of ownership, 
income and profitability, leverage, and CRO employment as 
significant determinants that influence effective ERM 
implementation. 
Similarly, 
[49] 
argues 
that 
CRO 
appointment 
is 
a 
prerequisite 
of 
effective 
ERM 
implementation.  
Although the concept of ERM has evolved significantly 
over recent years a review of existing subject literature 
reveals the ineffectiveness of current ERM practices in 
protecting enterprise value. Existing literature on ERM 
includes some studies that have focused on different 
dimensions of ERM. For instance, several research works, 
such as [14][38][47][50], explore the factors that lead 
organisations to decide to implement ERM. Others, such as 
[10][49][51], 
evaluate 
the 
approaches 
of 
ERM 
implementation. Moreover, researchers such as [3][8][15], 
[17][33][38][50] evaluate the effect of ERM implementation 
on organisations’ value. Most of these researchers agree that 
ERM is stuck at its development stage and moving forward 
from this stage to become the driving force of organisational 
value and effectiveness requires more research and 
understanding. In fact, though the importance of ERM and 
its strategic role in organisations’ objective achievement has 
been admitted by previous researchers, the question of how 
the implementation of ERM can yield to organisations’ 
sustainability and increased value, still needs more attention. 
For instance, research carried out by [4] found a positive 
relation between ERM adoption and organisational value 
through empirical investigation in 649 firms from 2004 to 
2013, however, in this investigation, ERM is mostly 
considered as a close internal control activity rather than a 
risk management practice.  
COSO [52], as one of the most common ERM practices, 
positions ERM in the context of strategy by emphasising that 
ERM needs to be “applied in [a] strategy setting” in order to 
“provide reasonable assurance regarding the achievement of 
entity objectives”. Indeed, COSO highlights that ERM needs 
to be integrated into organisations’ strategic initiatives [10]. 
Risks are changing continually, and this brings both 
challenges and opportunities for organisations regarding the 
achievement of their strategic objectives [53][54]. Therefore, 
a continuous risk oversight is required as an evolving process 
for a critical assessment to provide updated information 
regarding emerging risks that might be considered as 
opportunities or threats towards an organisation in 
accomplishing its strategic objectives and ultimate goals.  
Hence, the output of an organisation’s ERM process should 
be used as an input for its strategic planning [53][55]. 
Despite this view, survey-based studies show that focus on 
strategic risks in organisations’ ERM process has been 
narrow and limited. For instance, a study by Gates [44], 
which is now over a decade old, concludes that only 16% of 
organisations under investigation have aligned ERM and 
strategic planning. 
Moreover, [51] carried out a survey that concluded 36% 
of surveyed organisations do not have any process for 
monitoring and identifying strategic risks.  [51] have come to 
understand from a large sample of participants (who are 
seniors and executives) that ERM’s strategic role is more 
effective when an organisation has a risk management 
committee, regular risk management training, a centrally 
updated risk system, and link among risk management and 
executive compensation. Research done by [20] focuses on 
high-level participants working in financial reporting process 
of 11 organisations. Based on [2] findings, Chief Financial 
Officers (CFOs) and members of audit committees pay much 
more attention to strategic risk management than do auditors. 
It was concluded that this is due to responsibilities being 
taken by seniors and directors versus auditors. Much 
progress has been made in managing risk, however, 
intervention to date has only moderated the siloed and 
reactive practice of managing risks and draws fundamental 
criticism. In the same vein, previous literature indicated 
limitations. 
While adoption of ERM is an approach to lower risk or to 
exploit opportunities, practice shows that one does not 
always leverage the expected results (unfit for purpose) 
[24][49]. Henceforth, it is believed that currently, ERM does 
not suffice an organisation’s needs. Consequently, the stakes 
and risk-return have become considerably higher and broader 
in scope. Recent years have shown that organisations are 
more and more concerned about finding a catalyst for risk 
foresight, thus exerting higher pressure to create holistic risk 
governance to predict risks [56]. Attaining enterprise-wide 
risk governance is a complex issue requiring the alignment 
of multiple functions and ramifications of an organisation. 
The problem is that the relational mechanism that manages 
risks and aligns with the business is missing or is partially 
applied/decentralised, and thus the risk is managed reactively 
and randomly, and most often it omits to correlate all 
functions. 
Even though risk governance efficiency has been 
improved recently, in many financial organisations, the 
benefits derived from ERM are not fully gained. This 
represents a mismanagement of risk, a siloed approach, 
duplication of risk management outlay, misuse of resources, 
duplication of effort and time, and/or inefficient capital 
allocation. 
Indeed, it is concluded from literature that organisations 
acknowledge the importance of ERM alignment with 
business strategy. However, the implementation of this 
alignment has remained a challenge for senior managers. The 
factors and challenges of failure of this alignment have not 
been investigated in depth. Additionally, existing researchers 
do not provide ERM champions’ insight that can help to 
better understand the efforts required to be able to align 
ERM with strategy.  
Moreover, the immaturity of ERM has encouraged an 
extension and incorporation of its principles and GRC [24]. 
GRC compounds different disciplines (governance, risk and 
compliance), which were initially adopted to deal with IS/IT 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-893-8
CYBER 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

management [57] and later evolved to ‘incorporate’ GRC. 
Perceived as an advancement of an organisation’s risk 
capability, with the aim of synchronising strategy, processes, 
technology, and people to enable organisations to function 
more efficiently [34][58]. GRC not only supports achieving 
an organisation’s objective, but also addresses uncertainty 
and integrity at a strategic level [26][59]. A lot of available 
evidence highlights that GRC is driven by principles of (G) 
‘directing, controlling and evaluating’, (R) ‘managing 
processes and resource’, and (C) ‘proving fulfilment of 
requirements’ [24][59][60]. 
Evidence shows that GRC emerged within industry 
practices because specific software systems were adopted. 
Besides, laws and guidelines such Sarbanes Oxley Act 
(SOX) and Basel II, among others, recommend adoption 
[61][62] and proliferation of systems vendors and thus 
innovation and propulsion of the domain. The term was 
initially proposed by PricewaterhouseCoopers in 2004 [61] 
as an automated solution. Moreover, frameworks such as 
OCEG Capability Model further promote GRC practices.  
The discussion above enables an understanding of risk 
practices evolution in terms of strategic approaches. 
Furthermore, Figure 1 compares the risk philosophy and the 
centrality of each approach towards risk mitigation and 
resiliency. 
 
 
Figure 1. Conceptual risk mitigation evolution 
 
As Figure 1 above illustrates, the approaches dealing 
with risks and threats have evolved in terms of practice. Both 
ERM and GRC disciplines are recognised within industry 
practices [63]. Even though ERM has been extensively 
researched both theoretically and empirically, GRC shows 
signs of being significantly adopted by practitioners [61], 
[64].  
Confusion in terms of what ERM and GRC can offer to 
organisations has been highlighted since early 2013 by the 
empirical findings of the Institute of Internal Auditors 
Research Foundation (IIARF) [63]. It has been found that 
60% of respondents perceive GRC as an umbrella for ERM, 
while the other 40% was unable to differentiate between the 
concepts. Referring to GRC as an umbrella function, Von 
[64] states that GRC sets the tone through its normative basis 
(rules, principles, conventions, roles). ERM applies the 
descriptive normative basis of GRC model in process and 
structure to address the mitigation response directly, 
cohesively, and holistically. In this regard, it explores why 
ERM encounter challenges and drawbacks in practice given 
that there is significant theory in place. This shall be done 
through the lens of interviews with ERM managers, 
discussed in Section 4, to complement the existing open 
debate found within literature and to explore ERM’s 
immaturity. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
The research approach is qualitative and aims to explore 
challenges and drawbacks of ERM, whilst exploring the 
paradigm shift towards GRC. 
      Evaluating prior research allowed the authors of this 
paper to create a list of main concepts relevant to the 
research questions. Exploration of the phenomenon was 
driven by the need to understand the current state of ERM, 
challenges of ERM and strategy alignment, and key factors 
for enterprise-wide implementation. Data was obtained from 
15 upper management individuals from UK small-medium 
enterprises organisations, who either were involved in the 
adoption or implementation process with ERM. Also, 
another important aspect in sample selection was the 
respondents’ years of experience. 
       The primary data was analyzed through Nvivo software 
and thematic analysis. 
IV. 
RESEARCH FINDINGS 
The research findings are grouped to respond to the three 
main questions below:  
 
(1) - What is the state of ERM and business strategy 
alignment? 
(2) - What are the challenges of ERM and strategy 
alignment?  
(3) - What are the organisational factors/initiatives critical 
for this alignment?   
 
The following subsections illustrate the key findings of 
the research. 
A. Maturity of ERM Alignment with Strategy 
The majority of the interviewed participants stated that 
their ERM alignment with strategic planning is limited and 
that ERM needs to be considered as a bigger part of an 
organisation’s strategic planning. Others agreed on the 
limitation of ERM alignment with strategy, but they 
mentioned signs of recent growth. 
Few participants stated that ERM is not properly aligned 
with strategic management as those in strategic planning 
sectors do not pay enough attention to insights provided by 
those in the ERM process even though they should. They 
stated that if organisations would like to achieve their 
ultimate objectives, they need to consider the result of ERM 
process in their strategic planning. Indeed, organisations 
need to employ the outcomes of their ERM process as input 
for their strategic planning. 
It was discussed by a few participants that different 
organisational departments mostly seek ERM when making 
decisions related to compliance matters. Indeed, the fact that 
ERM can support organisational strategic decisions and yield 
to value creation is admitted yet ignored in practice. Few 
others stated that ERM and strategy are still being dealt with 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-893-8
CYBER 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

separately and in silos. Organisations’ seniors claim that they 
align ERM with strategic planning but in practice these two 
are not integrated and risks are managed in silos. This is 
because seniors do not know how to align ERM with the 
organisation’s strategy in practice.  Three participants 
mentioned that ERM was recently aligned in the process of 
strategic planning, and then the outcomes of ERM are 
considered in strategic planning in a way that risk reports 
written by ERM committee affect the strategic decisions of 
their organisation.  
 
Key Findings  
      Most of the participants discussed that, in theory, ERM is 
considered an important part of their organisation’s strategic 
planning, but alignment is not strong enough. In fact, 
organisations adopt ERM mostly to respond to policies 
insisted upon by regulators and rating agencies. It seems that 
senior managers also struggle to understand the concept of 
ERM and the benefits of ERM alignment with organisational 
strategies and to find appropriate techniques for effective 
ERM alignment within the context of business strategy in 
practice. In some organisations, ERM might be considered 
more as an initiative of compliance than strategy.   
 
 
 
Figure 2. ERM maturity 
 
      As shown in Figure 2, 38.46% of respondents consider 
that risk governance is evolved but, partially implemented 
across units/departments (3). 23.08% state that mature risk 
governance is embedded at an enterprise level (4). 19.23% of 
respondents define maturity as developed, but not yet applied 
enterprise-wide (2), whilst only 11.54% declared themselves 
to be robust (5). 
 
     The next section segregates findings into two paths, A) 
challenges of ERM and strategy alignment and B) critical 
factors in ERM and strategy alignment. 
 
A) Challenges of ERM and Strategy Alignment 
 
     While almost all the research participants agreed on the 
benefits of ERM implementation and its alignment with 
business strategy, most of them stated that their 
organisations are struggling with challenges associated with 
effective ERM implementation and its successful alignment 
with strategic planning. 
 
Senior Managers’ Support  
      Most of the interviewees considered the lack of senior 
managers’ proper understanding of ERM concepts and 
benefits as well as appropriate knowledge of right principles 
as two challenging issues.  
Interviewees stated that implementation and success of any 
new managerial process need strong backing of boards and 
senior managers. Nonetheless, they argued that their seniors 
do not support this alignment strongly enough due to poor 
understanding of ERM benefits and inadequate knowledge 
regarding approaches of ERM and strategy alignment.  
 
Organisation Culture 
      The existence of a silo risk mindset was also stated by 
the vast majority of participants as a challenge of this 
alignment. Interviewees discussed that though ERM is 
progressively finding its place in organisations, a silo 
mindset of risk management remains a challenge for 
effective ERM implementation in organisations. Participants 
argued that, if a new process or function is being applied in 
the organisation, that function’s culture also needs to be 
integrated along with the process itself. Seniors in many 
organisations still believe that risks are confidential and 
should not be communicated among different organisational 
layers because of security issues. 
Another cultural issue mentioned by few participants was 
that people who hold top-level responsibility for specific 
tasks do not normally like to share their weaknesses and 
seek help. One reason might be the fear of losing power and 
position if others realize that they are not able to solve the 
upcoming problems. 
 
Centralised Framework for ERM  
       Another issue discussed by one particular research 
participant was the lack of an appropriate, centralised and 
formal ERM approach that should be followed by 
organisations’ C suites. Moreover, other participants 
mentioned the lack of extensive training regarding the 
benefits of ERM implementation and its influence on the 
achievement of business objectives.  Interviewees discussed 
those organisations mostly take an informal approach to 
implement ERM, and they do not appoint a wide range of 
training on appropriate ERM implementation and the 
ultimate benefit it could yield. This prevents the 
effectiveness of ERM and hinders understanding of the 
necessity of ERM alignment with business strategy.   
 
Fit of ERM into Organisation Structure 
      It was discussed by the interviewees that choosing the 
right ERM process to effectively fit into an organisation’s 
current structure has been one of the challenges faced by 
ERM champions. They argued that when their organisations 
are called by regulators or rating agencies for ERM 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-893-8
CYBER 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

adoption, senior managers just rush to respond as fast as  
possible. Many organisations adopt one of the common 
existing ERM approaches/standards without examining its 
applicability in that specific organisation’s structure. This 
leads to choosing and implementing a process used by other 
organisations without considering the difference in terms of 
many issues such as context, size, structure, etc. Indeed, it 
was believed by the participants that picking the right ERM 
process to fit an organisation’s situation is the foundation of 
its efficiency yet is often overlooked. 
 
Reluctance and Resistance to Change 
      The unwillingness to change in different business 
managerial sections was considered challenging by more 
than two-thirds of interviewees. Several interviews showed 
that top managers who are responsible for business strategic 
planning are not willing to let ERM oversight affect their 
process. ERM champions consider this process as strategic, 
but other initiatives view ERM as compliance-focused. This 
hinders the effective alignment of ERM and strategy. 
       Some others commented that sometimes managers are 
reluctant to accept and move towards change due to their 
weak understanding of new concepts. On the other hand, 
employees would not like to do more tasks than the ones 
they already do. This is because they do not consider 
themselves a part of the business and its success. 
Consequently, they prefer to apply minimum effort. 
 
Risk Centralisation 
      Lack of appropriate ERM structure along with reliable 
and unbiased risk data among entire organisations’ layers 
was another challenge mentioned by almost half of the 
participants. Interviewees argued that in order to have 
effective ERM implementation, organisations need to build 
a proper ERM committee that continually updates the 
system with reliable risks reports. Unfortunately, many 
organisations do not have a centralised risk system, which in 
turn makes it difficult to identify and manage organisational 
risks in time. It was evidenced that an accurate risk data 
system in an organisation is a crucial factor to understand 
the overall risk profile.  
       Participants further discussed that, for effective ERM 
and strategy alignment, organisations need to create (and 
continually update) a systematic list of key risk drivers 
identified by ERM processes based on the organisation’s 
strategic objectives. 
 
Real-world Alignment Guidance  
       A lack of practical guidance on how to align ERM and 
strategic planning was discussed by most of the participants. 
Indeed, several interviewees stated that having a practical 
guidance on how to align ERM process with their 
organisation strategic planning is a challenge and needs to 
be viewed accordingly. In fact, C suites need guidelines on 
how to shift from alignment theories (explored through 
several pieces of research) to practice. There is a need for a 
step-by-step 
implementation 
guide 
to 
enable 
the 
organisation to implement this alignment effectively.  
 
B) Critical Factors in ERM and Strategy Alignment 
After discussing the challenges of effective ERM 
alignment with strategy, research participants were asked to 
discuss the critical elements influencing the maturity of this 
alignment. A vast majority of interviewees considered strong 
support of senior management as a critical factor for 
effective ERM and strategy alignment. Almost all of the 
participants stated that if ERM does not receive strong 
support from senior managers, it becomes a risky process 
itself, losing its sustainability over time. This research 
revealed a lack of senior management involvement in 
organisations’ effective ERM development due to a poor 
understanding of ERM’s benefits pertaining to an 
organisation’s sustainability and lack of sufficient knowledge 
regarding the effective implementation of ERM. Senior 
managers of many organisations do not have the necessary 
knowledge of risk management. They might be able to take 
basic steps of ERM implementation through using available 
universal risk management frameworks/standards, however, 
when it comes to critical stages of the process, there is severe 
need for an expert team with related skills and experience 
appears.  
Therefore, in addition to the strong support needed from 
board directors, delegating a Chief Risk Officer (CRO) is 
also one of the most important factors of ERM and strategic 
alignment. The CRO is the most appropriate person and with 
relevant knowledge, skills, and experience to take 
responsibility of tackling these challenges; respectively, to 
execute, 
monitor, 
and 
ensure 
the 
effectiveness 
of 
organisational ERM process.  
Another critical factor identified by the research 
participants is their organisation’s culture.  It is recognised 
that ERM awareness has been increasing over the years. 
However, in practice, organisations are still following their 
old ways of dealing with organisational risks. In order to 
have successful ERM and effectively align it with business 
strategy, organisations need to change their risk management 
culture proactively. The findings suggest that alignment of 
all 
managerial 
functions 
shall 
ensure 
holistic 
and 
collaborative oversight across business units, avoiding silos, 
as well as understanding at the enterprise level which areas 
need improvements.  
Furthermore, participants considered ‘ERM Bases’ and 
‘Knowledge Management’ as critical factors for overcoming 
the lack of ERM structure and lack of systematic reliable risk 
data. Participants explained that to have a successful ERM 
implementation, organisations first require ‘ERM Bases’. 
This means developing organisational effective risk 
structures, policies and procedures, and a business continuity 
plan in order to enhance risk management capabilities. 
Secondly, it is necessary to have good ‘Knowledge 
Management’ to increase the understanding of businesses’ 
emerging risks and thus support organisations’ risk decision 
making. Other research works, such as [54][55][65]-[67], 
also demonstrate that ‘ERM Bases’ and ‘Knowledge 
Management’ are considered a strategic resource, increasing 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-893-8
CYBER 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

the success and sustainability of organisational risk 
management. ‘ERM Base’ helps C suites to build robust 
ERM infrastructure, leading to advance risk oversight, risk 
identification, 
and 
risk 
mitigation. 
‘Knowledge 
Management’ adds value to organisations by achieving 
positive outcomes through systematically coordinating 
organisations’ structure, people, technology, and the process. 
Individual’s judgement can fail to foresee and recognise 
emerging risks as uncertainty is created. Knowledge sharing 
has an important influence on avoiding emerging risks and 
enables C suites to recognise risks associated with their 
strategic business objectives.  
Literature has identified that much progress has been 
made in managing risk. However, intervention to date has 
only moderated the siloed and reactive practice of managing 
risk and draws fundamental criticism. Whilst it highlights the 
role of ERM, key benefits, and critical success factors, it 
continues 
to 
recommend 
a 
unified 
risk 
oversight. 
Nonetheless, within the applicability of ERM, the interview 
respondents stated that senior managers fail to understand 
ERM benefits. Nevertheless, literature also shows drawbacks 
in implementation (e.g., people expertise, training, culture, 
etc.), thus highlighting the rationale of practitioners that 
already adopt the GRC principles. Findings from both the 
empirical evidence (semi-structured interviews) and the 
literature review articulate that risk demands organisations to 
protect themselves proactively from greater risks. When 
GRC is adopted, the traditional ERM approach is integrated 
not only to ensure protection, but also to ensure performance 
and compliance assurance [59].  
This research explored how ERM is perceived and what 
renders adoption and implementation, both in theory and 
practice. Table 1 below summarizes key findings from 
interviews and demonstrates that ERM has strategic, cultural 
and technical implications. 
 
TABLE 1. SUMMARY OF KEY FINDINGS 
 
What is the state of ERM and 
business strategy alignment? 
Alignment is not strong enough 
What are the challenges of 
ERM and strategy 
alignment? 
Senior Managers’ Support 
Organisation Culture 
Centralised Framework for ERM 
Fit 
of 
ERM 
into 
Organisation 
Structure 
Reluctance and Resistance to Change 
Risk Centralisation 
Real-world Alignment Guidance 
What are the organisational 
factors/initiatives critical for 
this alignment?   
Strong support of senior management 
Delegating a chief risk officer (CRO) 
Organisation’s culture 
‘ERM 
Bases’ 
and 
‘Knowledge 
Management’ 
Knowledge sharing 
 
       As emphasized above, the governance, management, 
and assurance functions of GRC seem not only appropriate, 
but also imperative for enhancing an organisation’ long-term 
resiliency and viability. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper demonstrates that ERM maturity has yet to 
achieve its maximum. It presents evidence on deviations and 
the way in which organisations align risk functions remains a 
current challenge. Risks are continually evolving and the 
interrelated ramifications are thus increasing. Therefore, this 
research presents convincing arguments and contributes to 
the understanding of why the value proposition of ERM was 
not achieved due to various impediments in implementation, 
such as senior managers’ support, organisational culture, 
centralised framework/ERM approaches and training, the 
appropriate fit of ERM into the organisation’s structure, 
reluctance and resistance to change, appropriate ERM 
structure, central reliable risk data system and practical 
alignment guidance. 
Additionally, this paper explores the ambiguity regarding 
ERM’s successful factors, as investigated through the 
literature review and semi-structured interviews. The 
findings suggest that ERM needs to be consciously 
acknowledged in terms of its current level of maturity 
because there is evidence that organisations struggle with 
challenges associated with effective ERM implementation. 
As a result, the integrated approach of ERM is insufficient in 
today’s business context. Therefore, in light of drawbacks 
regarding ERM implementation, the GRC paradigm is 
understood to cover an organisation’s needs more efficiently. 
Despite the substantial focus on ERM value proposition and 
control, the extended risk oversight of GRC challenges the 
effectiveness of the ERM school of thought. As an all-
encompassing strategic function, GRC plays a supervisory 
role (governance) that integrates both RM function and risk 
compliance function (audit). This undeniably better positions 
an organisation for ensuring improved performance, 
viability, and resiliency. 
In conclusion, this research contributes to academia and 
the industry by shedding a contemporary light on the current 
state of literature and practice while suggesting an update to 
the body of knowledge that incorporates the lens of ERM 
and GRC. As such, GRC can play an important role in 
addressing the issue and ensuring maximisation in achieving 
organisational strategy, vision, and mission as well as 
helping to reduce/prevent the deficiencies of siloed controls, 
thus strengthening an organisation’s security posture and 
building enterprise-wide risk resiliency and foresight of 
risks.  
However, despite such advancement, more research is 
needed to determine the practicality of the alignment of 
ERM with GRC as a solution for risk complexity and 
challenges encountered by organisations. 
REFERENCES 
[1] I. J. Dabari, S. F. Kwaji and M. Z. Ghazali, “Aligning 
Corporate Governance with Enterprise Risk Management 
Adoption in the Nigerian Deposit Money Banks”, Indian-
Pacific Journal of Accounting and Finance, 1(2), pp. 4-14, 
2017. 
[2] J. Cohen, G. Krishnamoorthy and A.Wright, “Enterprise risk 
management and the financial reporting process: The 
experiences of audit committee members, CFOs, and external 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-893-8
CYBER 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

auditors”, Contemporary Accounting Research, 34(2), pp. 
1178-1209, 2017. 
[3] M. K. Shad, F. Lai, C. L. Fatt, J. J. Klemeš, and A. Bokhari, 
“Integrating sustainability reporting into enterprise risk 
management and its relationship with business performance: 
A conceptual framework”, Journal of Cleaner Production, 
2008, pp. 415-425, 2019. 
[4] J. R. Silva, A. F. D. Silva, and B. L. Chan, “Enterprise Risk 
Management and Firm Value: Evidence from Brazil”, 
Emerging Markets Finance and Trade, 55(3), pp. 687-703, 
2019. 
[5] A. Althonayan, J. Keith and A. Misiura, “Aligning enterprise 
risk management with business strategy and information 
systems”, in European, Mediterranean & Middle Eastern 
Conference on Information Systems 2011, Athens, Greece p. 
109-129, 2011. 
[6] G. Mensah and W. Gottwald, “Enterprise Risk Management: 
factors associated with effective implementation”, Risk 
Governance and Control: Financial Markets & Institutions, 
6(4), 2016. 
[7] M. Majdalawieh and J. Gammack, “An Integrated Approach 
to Enterprise Risk: Building a Multidimensional Risk 
Management Strategy for the Enterprise”, International 
Journal of Scientific Research and Innovative Technology, 
4(2), pp.95-114, 2017. 
[8] J. Sax and T. J. Andersen, “Making Risk Management 
Strategic: Integrating Enterprise Risk Management with 
Strategic Planning”, European Management Review, 2018. 
[9] T. R. Viscelli, D. R. Hermanson and M.S. Beasley, “The 
integration of ERM and strategy: implications for corporate 
governance”, American Accounting Association, 31 (2), pp. 
69-82. doi: 10.2308/acch-51692, 2017. 
[10] S. P. Saeidi, S. Sofian, M. Nilashi, and A Mardani, “The 
impact of enterprise risk management on competitive 
advantage by moderating role of information technology”, 
Computer Standards & Interfaces, 63, pp. 67-82, 2019. 
[11] N. Andrén and S. Lundqvist, “Incentive Based Dimensions of 
Enterprise Risk Management”, SSRN Electronic Journal, pp. 
1-48, 2017. 
[12] V. 
Stein 
and 
A. 
Wiedemann, 
“Risk 
governance: 
conceptualization, tasks, and research agenda”, Journal of 
Business Economics, 86(8), pp.813-836, 2016. 
[13] G. Mensah and W. Gottwald, Enterprise Risk Management: 
Effective Implementation, 2016. 
[14] J. Ogutu, M. R. Bennett and R. Olawoyin, “Closing the Gap: 
Between Traditional and Enterprise Risk Management 
Systems”, Professional Safety, 63(04), pp. 42-47, 2018. 
[15] L.A. Gordon, M. P. Loeb, and C. Tseng, “Enterprise risk 
management 
and 
firm 
performance: 
A 
contingency 
perspective”, Journal of Accounting and Public Policy, 28(4), 
pp. 301-327, 2009. 
[16] A. Fox and M. S. Epstein, “Why Is Enterprise Risk 
Management (ERM) Important for Preparedness?”, Risk and 
Insurance Management Society, 2010. 
[17] R. E. Hoyt and A. P. Liebenberg, “The value of enterprise risk 
management”, Journal of Risk and Insurance, 78(4), pp. 795-
822 2011. 
[18] J. DeLoach (2012) “Integrate the ERM Process With What 
Matters. Corporate Compliance Insights”.[Online]. Available: 
http://www.corporatecomplianceinsights.com/integrate-the-
erm-process-with-what-matters 
[19] J. DeLoach, (2013), “10 Questions You Should Ask About 
Risk Management. Corporate Compliance Insights”.[Online]. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.corporatecomplianceinsights.com/ten-questions-
you-should-ask-about-risk-management/ 
[20] J. L. Keith, ”Enterprise risk management: developing a 
strategic ERM alignment framework-Finance sector.” PhD 
diss.,  Brunel University London, 2014. 
[21] P. Bromiley,  M. McShane,  A. Nair and   E. Rustambekov, 
“Enterprise risk management:   review, critique, and   research   
directions”, Long   Range   Planning Journal, 48(4), pp. 265-
276. doi: 10.1016/j.lrp.2014.07.005, 2015. 
[22] C. Florio and G. Leoni, “Enterprise risk management and firm 
performance: The Italian case2, The British Accounting 
Review, 49(1), pp. 56-74, 2017. 
[23] M. 
Matin, 
“Alignment 
of 
ERM 
with 
performance 
management: the case study of automotive industry”. PhD 
diss., Brunel University London, 2017. 
[24] R. Agarwal and J.  Ansell, “Strategic Change in Enterprise 
Risk Management”, Strategic Change, 25(4), pp.427-439, 
2016. 
[25] American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA), 
“2017 the state of risk oversight: an overview of enterprise 
risk 
management 
practices”. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.aicpa.org/InterestAreas/BusinessIndustryAndGov
ernment/Resources/ERM/DownloadableDocuments/AICPA_
ERM_Research_Study_2017.pdf, 2017. 
[26] J. Ai, V. Bajtelsmit, and T. Wang, “The combined effect of 
enterprise risk management and diversification on property 
and casualty insurer performance”, Journal of Risk and 
Insurance, 85(2), pp. 513-543, 2018. 
[27] K. K. Alawattegama, “The Impact of Enterprise Risk 
Management on Firm Performance: Evidence from Sri 
Lankan Banking and Finance Industry”, International Journal 
of Business and Management, 13(1), pp. 225, 2017. 
[28] K. Dornberger, S. Oberlehner ans N. Zadrazil, “Challenges in 
implementing enterprise risk management”. ACRN Journal of 
Finance and Risk Perspectives, 3(3), pp. 1-14, 2014. 
[29] I. Jonek-Kowalska,  “Efficiency of Enterprise Risk 
Management (ERM) systems. Comparative analysis in the 
fuel sector and energy sector on the basis of Central-European 
companies listed on the Warsaw Stock Exchange”, Resources 
Policy, 62, pp.405-415, 2009. 
[30] F. Fraser and  B. Simkins, “The   challenges   of   and   
solutions   for   implementing enterprise   risk   management”, 
Business   Horizons, 59(6), pp.   689-698. doi: 
10.1016/j.bushor.2016.06.007, 2016. 
[31] M. Beasley, B. Branson, and B. Hancock, “Current State of 
Enterprise Risk Oversight and Market Perceptions of COSO’s 
ERM 
Framework”. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.coso.org/Documents/COSO-Survey-Report-
FULL-Web-R6-FINAL-for-WEB-POSTING-111710.pdf, 
2010. 
[32] D. Kerstin, O. Simone and Z. Nicole, “Challenges in 
implementing enterprise risk management”, ACRN Journal of 
Finance and Risk Perspectives, 3(3), pp. 1-14, 2014. 
[33] G. Aras, N. Tezcan, and O. K Furtuna, “Multidimensional 
comprehensive 
corporate 
sustainability 
performance 
evaluation model:  Evidence from an emerging market 
banking sector”, Journal of Cleaner Production, 185, pp. 600-
609, 2018. 
[34] R. Gupta, “Efficient operation of GRC processing platforms”, 
2008. 
[35] M. 
Matin, 
“Alignment 
of 
ERM 
with 
performance 
management: the case study of automotive industry”. PhD 
diss., Brunel University London, 2017. 
[36] S. A. Lundqvist, “Why firms implement risk governance – 
Stepping beyond traditional risk management to enterprise 
risk management”, Journal of Accounting and Public Policy, 
34(5), pp.441-466, 2015. 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-893-8
CYBER 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

[37] A. Althonayan, J. Keith, and A. Misiura, “Aligning ERM with 
Corporate and Business Strategies”. Birmingham: British 
Academy of Management, 2011b. 
[38] M. S. Beasley, R. Clune and D. R. Hermanson, “Enterprise 
risk management: An empirical analysis of factors associated 
with the extent of implementation”, Journal of Accounting 
and Public Policy, 24(6), pp. 521-531, 2005. 
[39] İ. Kaya, “Perspectives on Internal Control and Enterprise Risk 
Management”, in Eurasian Business Perspectives. Springer, 
pp. 379-389, 2018. 
[40] T. Aven, Risk management and governance. Heidelberg: 
Springer, 2010. 
[41] M. A., Hofmann, “Interest in enterprise risk management is 
growing”, Business Insurance, 43(18), pp. 14-16, 2009. 
[42] P. Burnaby and S. Hass, “Ten steps to enterprise-wide risk 
management”, Corporate Governance: The international 
journal of business in society, 9(5), pp. 539-550, 2009. 
[43] S. Francis and T. Richards, “Why ERM matters and how to 
accelerate progress”, Risk Management,  pp. 28, 2007. 
[44] S. Gates, “Incorporating strategic risk into enterprise risk 
management: a survey of current corporate practice”, Journal 
of Applied Corporate Finance, 18(4), pp. 81-90. doi: 
10.1111/j.1745-6622.2006.00114.x, 2006. 
[45] P. Bromiley,  M. McShane,  A. Nair and   E. Rustambekov, 
“Enterprise risk management:   review, critique, and   research   
directions”, Long   Range   Planning Journal, 48(4), pp. 265-
276. doi: 10.1016/j.lrp.2014.07.005, 2015. 
[46] M. K. McShane, A Nair, and E. Rustambekov, “Does 
enterprise risk management increase firm value?”, Journal of 
Accounting, Auditing and Finance, 26(4), pp. 641–658. doi: 
10.1177/0148558x11409160, 2011. 
[47] D. Pagach and R. Warr, “The characteristics of firms that hire 
chief risk officers”, The Journal of Risk and Insurance, 78(1), 
pp.185-211, 2011. 
[48] A. R. Razali, A. S. Yazid, and I. M. Tahir, “The determinants 
of enterprise risk management (ERM) practices in Malaysian 
public listed companies”, Journal of Social and Development 
Sciences, 1(5), pp. 202-207, 2011. 
[49] J. Ai, P.L. Brockett and T. Wang, “Optimal enterprise risk 
management and decision making with shared and dependent 
risks”, Journal of Risk and Insurance, 84(4), pp. 1127-1169, 
2017. 
[50] R. Baxter, J. C. Bedard, R. Hoitash, and A.Yezegel, 
“Enterprise risk management program quality: Determinants, 
value relevance, and the financial crisis”, Contemporary 
Accounting Research, 30(4), pp. 1264-1295, 2013. 
[51] M. Beasley, B. Branson, and D. Pagach, “An analysis of the 
maturity and strategic impact of investments in ERM”, 
Journal of Accounting and Public Policy, 34 (1), pp. 219-243, 
2015. 
[52] Committee on National Security Systems, Enterprise Risk 
Management 
(COSO)—Integrated 
Framework 
92014).[Online].Available: 
https://www.coso.org/documents/coso-erm-executive-
summary.pdf 
[53] T. R. Viscelli, D. R. Hermanson, and M.S. Beasley, “The 
integration of ERM and strategy: implications for corporate 
governance”, American Accounting Association, 31 (2), pp. 
69-82. doi: 10.2308/acch-51692, 2017. 
[54] N. Manab, S. Othman and I. Kassim, “Enterprise-wide risk 
management best practices: The critical success factors”, 
2012. 
[55] N. Manab and N. Aziz, “Integrating knowledge management 
in sustainability risk management practices for company 
survival”, Management Science Letters, 9(4), pp. 585-594, 
2019. 
[56] B. L. Handoko, I. E. Riantono and E. Gani, “Importance and 
Benefit of Application of Governance Risk and Compliance 
Principle”, Systematic Reviews in Pharmacy, 11(9), pp.510-
513, 2020. 
[57] N. Mayer and D. De Smet, “Systematic Literature Review and 
ISO Standards analysis to Integrate IT Governance and 
Security Risk Management”, International Journal for 
Infonomics, 10(1), pp.1255-1263, 2017. 
[58] N. Racz, E. Weippl, and A. Seufert, “A frame of reference for 
research of integrated governance, risk and compliance 
(GRC)”. 
In 
IFIP 
International 
Conference 
on 
Communications and Multimedia Security (pp. 106-117). 
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2010. 
[59] Open Compliance and Ethics Group (OCEG) “GRC 
capability 
model: 
version 
3.0”. 
[Online].Available: 
https://go.oceg.org/grc-capability-model-red-book, 2013. 
[60] K. Oliveira, M. Méxas, M. Meiriño and G. Drumond, 
“Critical success factors associated with the implementation 
of enterprise risk management”, Journal of Risk Research, 
pp.1-16, 2018. 
[61] A. Papazafeiropoulou and K. Spanaki, “Understanding 
governance, risk and compliance information systems (GRC 
IS): The experts view”, Information Systems Frontiers, 18(6), 
pp.1251-1263, 2015. 
[62] G. Miller, The Law of Governance, Risk Management, and 
Compliance.New York: Wolters Kluwer, 2017.  
[63] The Institute of Internal Auditors Research Foundation 
(IIARF) “Contrasting GRC and ERM: perceptions and 
practices among internal auditors”, 2013. 
[64] M. van Asselt and  O. Renn “Risk governance”, Journal of 
Risk 
Research, 
14(4), 
431-449, 
doi: 
10.1080/13669877.2011.553730, 2011. 
[65] P. 
Massingham, 
“Knowledge 
risk 
management: 
a 
framework”, Journal of knowledge management, 14(3), pp. 
464-485, 2010. 
[66] A. Mikes and R. S. Kaplan, “When one size doesn't fit all: 
Evolving directions in the research and practice of enterprise 
risk management”, Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, 
27(1), pp. 37-40, 2015. 
[67] T. Palermo, M. Power and S. Ashby, “Navigating institutional 
complexity: The production of risk culture in the financial 
sector”, Journal of Management Studies, 54(2), pp. 154-181, 
2017. 
 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-893-8
CYBER 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

