 
 
Mitigating Against a Succession of Hidden Failure Accelerants Involved in an 
Insider Threat Sequential Topology Attack on a Smart Grid  
Devising a Defensive Paradigm via a Bespoke Convolutional Adversarial Neural Network Module and 
Particle Swarm Optimization-based Enhanced Reinforcement Learning Component  
Steve Chan 
Decision Engineering Analysis Laboratory, VTIRL, VT 
Orlando, USA 
e-mail: schan@dengineering.org 
 
Abstract—Protection System Hidden Failures (PSHF)-induced 
sequential events have been shown to have higher impact and 
greater likelihood of segueing to major outages. Hence, a 
pragmatic mitigation approach is to intercede in the outage-
related successive event stream. From a cyber perspective, as 
pertains to the power grid, PSHF are comparable to a Zero-
Day attack (a.k.a. “0-Day”); accordingly, adequate mitigation 
is not yet in place. This problem is particularly interesting 
because of the involved paradox; although widely accepted to 
be comparable to a 0-Day, some form of apriori architected 
mitigation is crucial so as to prevent a major outage. This can 
be construed as contributory toward resiliency. Accordingly, a 
pseudo-inverse approach is taken to the optimal controllability 
problem (in this case, non-optimal controllability is sought, 
particularly in the case of an Insider Threat Paradigm or ITP) 
as a form of mitigation. In essence, the maximal optimum 
Control Signal Energy Cost (CSECopt) and reduction of the 
diffusion of malicious Control Signals (CS) and/or Augmented 
CS (ACS) is sought. The described problem space is non-
trivial, as Efficient Controllability Problems (ECP) have been 
shown to exhibit Non-deterministic Polynomial-time Hardness 
(NP-Hard), and likewise, countermeasure non-ECP are NP-
Hard. This paper advances matters by leveraging a bespoke 
Machine Learning (ML) paradigm, comprised of a multi-
Convolutional Adversarial Neural Network (CANN) Module 
and Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO)-based Enhanced 
Reinforcement Learning (RL) Component (ERLC), to better 
orchestrate Defensive Circuit Breakers (DCB) and leverage 
ML-based Protection Relay Selection (MLPRS) for more 
optimal Defensive Grid Re-configuration (DGR) so as to better 
obviate a PSHF-based ITP Sequential Topology Attack (STA). 
Although previously thought to be a High-Impact, Low-
Frequency (HILF) event, PSHF studies have shown that the 
associated distribution has an unusually fat tail; by 
endeavoring to reduce the fat tail, a principal contribution of 
this paper is to lessen the impact of the involved event. 
 
Keywords-Cyber; supply chain vulnerability; insider threat; 
zero-day type vulnerabilities; hidden defects/failures; protection 
system hidden failure; sequential topology attack; cascading 
failure; blackout; resiliency; control signal energy cost; artificial 
intelligence; machine learning; reinforcement learning.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Despite the numerous advancements in power grid 
protection systems, in many cases, these systems have 
constituted the actual problem and caused cascading failures 
resulting in power outages; in essence, they induced 
undesired effects in the very power grids they were tasked 
to protect. To further this irony, Protection System Hidden 
Failures (PSHF) are now recognized as a key amplification 
factor and cause of several recent major disturbances and 
outages. Although previously thought to be a High-Impact, 
Low-Frequency (HILF) event, PSHF studies now show that 
the associated distribution has an unusually fat tail; in 
essence, the frequency of manifestation has been much 
higher than its current classification. Some PSHF 
researchers construe the paradigm to actually be Very High-
Impact, Medium-Frequency (VHIMF) events. To compound 
this issue, for contemporary times, wherein cybersecurity is 
a prevailing societal issue, several research studies have 
shown that in the counterpoising between dependability 
(e.g., clearing a fault on a protected element) and security 
(e.g., mis-operating, such as clearing a fault when a fault has 
not yet occurred on a protected element), the bias is skewed 
towards dependability/reliability. On the surface, this seems 
quite reasonable. However, as the Operational Technology 
(OT) PSHF is the equivalent of the Information Technology 
(IT) “0-Day,” the dearth of robust progress in mitigating 
against PSHFs makes for a specious paradigm — PSHFs 
not only remain a critical security issue, but should PSHFs 
manifest, the involved power system reliability will 
experience a non-graceful degradation and likely be subject 
to a Bak–Tang–Wiesenfeld (BTW) cascading effect 
resulting in a cascading failure (i.e., outage).  
Among other “perfect storm” events in the cyber threat 
ecosystem, particularly as pertains to the power grid, a 
particularly ominous one is the triumvirate of: (1) an Insider 
Threat Paradigm (ITP), (2) a PSHF(s) paradigm known to 
the 
involved 
ITP 
actor(s), 
and 
(3) 
the 
requisite 
knowledge/ability to launch a targeted (based upon 
knowledge of the PSHF paradigm) ITP Sequential 
Topology Attack (STA) to effectuate a cascading failure 
paradigm (e.g., outage) of the involved power grid. The 
described scenario would be of tremendous concern to the 
involved system operators, power engineers, reliability 
engineers, protection engineers, cyber practitioners, and 
resiliency engineers, among others. Each of these three 
paradigms, 
collectively 
comprising 
the 
undesired 
triumvirate amalgam, is described below. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-996-6
CYBER 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
 
A. The ITP for the Smart Grid  
The ever-expanding modern “Smart” Grid (SG) creates 
an ever-larger attack surface area, as it incorporates a 
plethora of IT, the IT subset of Information and 
Communications Technology (ICT), the adjacent realm of 
OT, the OT subset of, among others, Industrial Control 
Systems (ICS), and the various nexuses. According to 
Accenture’s “State of Cybersecurity Resilience 2021,” cyber 
security-related attacks increased 31% from 2020 to 2021; 
more specifically, according to the Kaspersky ICS 
Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT), 39.6% of 
ICS were targeted in the second half of 2021. According to 
Claroty’s “Biannual ICS Risk & Vulnerability Report” and 
its Team82, ICS vulnerabilities increased by 41%, 61% of 
the vulnerabilities were remotely exploitable, and 71% were 
classified as high/critical vulnerabilities. To aggravate 
matters, according to ID Watchdog, 60% of data breaches in 
2020 were from ITPs. According to Techjury, 66% of 
organizations consider IPTs a more likely paradigm than 
external attacks. Also, according to Ponemon Institute’s 
“Cost of Insider Threats: Global Report,” over the last two 
years, the number of ITP incidents has increased by 47%. 
Suffice it to say, the ITP/ICS/SG amalgam within the cyber 
ecosystem seems to constitute a prevailing paradigm. 
B. PSHF within the SG 
In addition to the ITP, the SG is also beset with the 
equivalent of “Zero-Day” or “0-day” vulnerability exploits, 
which is used to describe a software, hardware, firmware, or 
paradigm-related vulnerability for which no mitigation yet 
exists; the ICS manifestation is referred to as Hidden 
Defects/Failures (HDF) and these include, among others, 
PSHFs that are not able to be detected under current 
Condition-Based Maintenance (CBM) instantiations. To 
compound the ominous nature of PSHF, according to 
Insights (as well as various contributors to the Carnegie 
Mellon University Software Engineering Institute), based 
upon statistics from the CERT National Insider Threat 
Center (NITC) Incident Corpus, “the percentage of insider 
incidents perpetrated by ‘trusted business partners’ typically 
ranges between 15% and 25% across all insider incident 
types and industry sectors.” According to MITRE and 
DTEX Systems, there has been a 72% increase in ITP 
incidents between 2020 and 2021. The implication is clear; 
if the “trusted business partner” (that provided the 
protection system-related device/component, which is also 
known as a Security and Stability Control Device or SSCD) 
constitutes the ITP, then the PSHFs could, potentially, be 
intentional and by design. For this case, the encompassing 
Security and Stability Control System (SSCS) or Electric 
Power Alarming and Coordinated Control System (EACCS) 
(for which the SSCD is a constituent component) could be 
considered compromised. The ensuing implications could 
potentially be quite profound. The North American Electric 
Reliability Corporation (NERC) has asserted that more than 
70% of major disturbances, which segue to system 
cascading collapses (e.g., outages), are caused by PSHF. In 
addition, Yankson et al. demonstrated that a 0-day can 
amplify the negative impact of a disturbance event by a 
factor of 86 with a major disturbance outcome [1]. Suffice it 
to say, the ITP-PSHF/ICS/SG amalgam within the cyber 
ecosystem seems to constitute an ominous threat. 
C. STA as a Targeted ITP Attack 
It was previously shown in [2], as well as by studies, 
such as by Guo et al. and others, that while certain Cyber 
Physical Systems (CPS), such as Cyber-Physical Power 
Systems (CPPS), can provide a modicum of resilience for 
high-indexed nodes, they are much less resilient to targeted 
attacks (e.g., ITP attacks) [3][4]. From a Supply Chain 
Vulnerability 
(SCV)/Cyber-Physical 
SCV(CPSCV) 
perspective, if a “trusted business partner” has intricate 
knowledge of the involved power grid (e.g., CPPS topology, 
EACCS, SSCS, SSCD, PSHF, etc.), then the associated 
CPPS (and involved EACCS and/or SSCS) resiliency 
against a targeted ITP attack could dramatically shift from a 
more desirable higher resilience number (e.g., resilience = 
10 for a minimally vulnerable CPPS, EACCS, SSCS, etc.) 
to an undesirable lower resilience number (e.g., resilience = 
0 for a maximally vulnerable CPPS) in a fashion alluded to 
by Silveira, et al [5]. Moreover, with such intricate 
knowledge, the targeted ITP attack might leverage the 
capability for sequential control to exploit the phenomenon 
in a fashion that, as Zhu et al. and others have noted, “the 
sequential attack is demonstrated to be statistically stronger 
than the simultaneous attack” [6]. Yan et al. and others seem 
to concur that the impact of the STA could be much more 
devastating than a concurrent attack and further point out 
that “sequential attacks require less concurrent resources to 
coordinate” and therefore have a lower effectuation cost 
(e.g., Control Signal Energy Cost or CSEC). It was 
previously discussed in [2] that sufficiently low CSEC for 
Large Complex Networked Systems (LCNS), such as CPPS 
or SG, may yield to an optimal controllability paradigm (in 
this 
case, 
advantageous 
for 
the 
ITP 
attacker 
to 
operationalize an STA); hence, the maximal optimum CSEC 
(CSECopt) is sought to block the Malicious Command and 
Control (C2) (collectively, MC2) of the ITP. Suffice it to 
say, the ITP-PSHF-STA/ICS/SG amalgam within the cyber 
ecosystem seems to constitute a “perfect storm.” 
Contending with this “perfect storm” amalgam is a non-
trivial feat. After all, mitigation actions, such as leveraging 
defensive SSCDs (e.g., Defensive Circuit Breakers or 
DCBs) and facilitating Defensive Grid Re-configuration 
(DGR), are non-trivial to effectuate. However, a mitigation 
module — to maximize CSEC at certain key nodes in the 
form of CSECopt) (so as to, indeed, effectuate a non-optimal 
controllability paradigm for the ITP attacker), obviate (via 
degrade, perturb, or disrupt) the involved “perfectly 
planned” STA strategy, and somewhat mitigate against the 
involved PSHF — is explored. Accordingly, the main 
contribution of the paper is to introduce a multi-
Convolutional Adversarial Neural Network (CANN) (i.e., 
CANN1 and CANN2) mitigation module designed for 
handling certain PSHF, whose potency can be somewhat 
blunted with the mitigation module’s Particle Swarm 
Optimization 
(PSO)-based 
Enhanced 
Reinforcement 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-996-6
CYBER 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
 
Learning (RL) Component (ERLC), which can better 
orchestrate DCBs and leverage ML-based Protection Relay 
Selection (MLPRS) for more optimal DGR so as to better 
obviate a PSHF-based ITP STA.   The paper is structured as 
follows. Section I introduces the “ITP-PSHF-STA” 
challenge. 
Section 
II 
presents 
relevant 
background 
information 
and 
discusses 
the 
current 
operating 
environment. Section III delineates the experimental 
strategy behind the multi-CANN mitigation module and its 
subordinate PSO-based ERLC, which collectively endeavor 
to contend with the referenced challenge, and compares 
certain solvers; some preliminary experimental findings are 
provided. Section IV concludes with some reflections, puts 
forth 
some 
envisioned 
future 
work, 
and 
the 
acknowledgements close the paper. 
II. 
BACKGROUND INFORMATION 
Contemporary society relies upon reliable and resilient 
Critical Infrastructures (CI), such as the power grid [7]. The 
advent and prevalent usage of ICTs has led to more 
connected and “smarter” CPS, such as CPPS and SG. 
Standards are still evolving, such as exemplared by the fact 
that International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) 62351 
addresses some of the security issues not addressed by IEC 
61850, which has been hitherto utilized to address some of 
the security issues of yet other standards (e.g., IEEE 
C37.118). Suffice it to say, the rapid convergence of IT and 
OT has revealed gaps in both the security and reliability 
paradigms. For example, The OT threat landscape presents 
challenges, as various cyber security professionals have 
noted that the current Common Vulnerability Scoring 
System (CVSS) is more suitable for IT than OT. According 
to Tenable Research, 56% of current vulnerabilities are 
scored as High (i.e., CVSS score of 7.0-8.9) or Critical 
(CVSS score of 9.0-10.0); however, more than 75% of the 
vulnerabilities with a score of 7 or above have “never had an 
exploit published against them.” Meanwhile, while there are 
indeed robust IT domain-centric projects, such as the 0-day 
Tracking Project (a.k.a., Project Zero), which keeps track of 
0-days 
with 
assigned 
Common 
Vulnerabilities 
and 
Exposures (CVEs) (e.g., for 2022, it lists 17 known 0-days, 
which have been subsequently patched, in 2021, it lists 58, 
in 2020, it lists 25, etc.), much more work needs to be done 
in the OT domain (e.g., ICS), particularly in the area of 
identifying, understanding, and mitigating against PSHFs 
(the OT equivalents of IT 0-days), which could lead to 
cascading failure of an involved SG. Without properly 
addressing PSHFs, security will remain problematic and 
reliability assessments can be specious; in essence, 
vulnerabilities in the OT domain may need to be re-
prioritized — with PSHF receiving a renewed emphasis. 
The current operating environs is delineated in subsections 
A through I below. 
A. The Notion of SG 
Cecati et al. noted that the SG is a “concept for 
transforming the electric power grid by using advanced 
automatic control and communications techniques and other 
forms of information technology” [8]. Wang et al. and 
others have reviewed SG communications architectures [9]. 
Fang et al. well noted that the U.S. Energy Independence 
and Security Act of 2007 directed the National Institute of 
Standards and Technology (NIST) to coordinate the 
research and development of a framework to achieve 
interoperability, efficiency, and reliability of SG systems 
(e.g., EACCS, SSCS) and devices (e.g., SSCD) [10]. 
Kawoosa et al. and others have reviewed SG cyber security 
[11], and Zhao et al. and others have reviewed PSHF in the 
context of security and stability of the SG. However, with 
regards to security and stability/dependability/reliability, 
Barnes et al. assert that the prevailing bias is skewed 
towards reliability, which may be quite specious in 
actuality, as the associated vulnerability paradigm actually 
makes the involved SG quite brittle [12]. 
B. SG Reliability 
Indeed, whether it be a SG or non-SG, reliability (i.e., 
“keeping the lights on”) has been central for the power grid. 
NERC was originally formed as the North American Electric 
Reliability Council in 1968 (prompted by the 1965 cascading 
failure and ensuing blackout in the northeastern part of the 
U.S.) to promote reliability standards within electric utility 
systems. Among other NERC promoted standards is TPL-
001-1 
“System 
Performance 
Under 
Normal 
(No 
Contingency) Conditions,” wherein Category A equates to 
“No Contingencies,” Category B equates to “Events 
resulting in the loss of a single system element,” Category C 
equates to “Event(s) resulting in the loss of two or more 
(multiple) elements,” and Category D equates to “extreme 
event resulting in two or more (multiple) elements removed 
or cascading out of service.” A Category B event (with 
continued performance after the loss of a single component) 
is known as an N-1 contingency. A Category C event (with 
continued performance after loss of two components) is 
further subdivided with regards to timing: (1) N-k (where 
k>=2) contingency for nearly simultaneous losses, and (2) N-
1-1 contingency for consecutive/sequential losses.   
C. Sequential Events in the SG 
Perhaps, in a counter-intuitive fashion, sequential events 
(e.g., attacks) turn out to have greater impact than 
simultaneous/concurrent events. In addition, Chen et al. 
illuminated the fact that the loss of one element immediately 
raises the likelihood of losing another element under the 
“cluster” probability distribution [13]. Along this vein, 
Salim et al. also noted that adjacent/neighboring lines or 
exposed lines (particularly those sharing the same bus) 
would have a higher probability of incorrect tripping 
(induced by the loss of the first element) [14]. Zhu et al. 
utilized an IEEE 39 bus system to show that the sequential 
failure of two links caused an 80% power loss, while the 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-996-6
CYBER 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
 
simultaneous failure of the links caused less than 10% 
power loss [6]. Yan et al. noted that, as an extension of the 
N-1-1 contingency, the specific targets, number of attacks, 
and timing of attacks (i.e., STA) could be determined by the 
attackers (e.g., who had knowledge of an involved PSHF 
paradigm) to maximize damage [15]. For this STA scenario, 
the involved [SCV/CPSCV] vulnerability chain (which 
represents the threats due to the manifestation of an existing 
vulnerability, such as PSHF, as well as the threats added due 
to the impotency of the available mitigation controls — 
none in the case of “0-day” or PSHF [5]) is likely to yield to 
the BTW cascading effect and an ensuing outage.  
D. Cascading Failure of the SG Induced by PSHF 
Prourbeik et al. have noted that “cascading outages are 
among the most severe threats to power grid stability.” [16]. 
One of the main causes of cascading outages for the most 
recent series major Western Systems Coordinating Council 
(WSCC) events, interestingly, involved PSHF that are not 
able to be detected under current CBM paradigms [17]. 
Salim et al. have noted that most of the major cascading 
collapses, have been caused by PSHF [14]. Elizondo et al. 
have described a PSHF as “a relay that is misconfigured or 
fault such that it will cause the inappropriate removal of 
system assets during an event” [18]. Others, such as Ree, et 
al. have delineated PSHF as “a permanent defect that will 
cause a relay or a relay system to incorrectly and 
inappropriately remove a circuit element(s) as a direct 
consequence of another switching event” [19]. Yet, in a 
broader sense, PSHF do not simply reside within relays; the 
PSHF phenomenon also resides with the various protection 
system-related components – SSCDs, in general. 
While contemporary power grids are fairly resilient 
against N-1 contingency single element issues, they remain 
highly vulnerable to N-k contingency (particularly where 
k>=2) multi-element issues [20]. Forensic examinations 
have found that several major outages were indeed caused 
by the PSHF of the involved Special Protection Schemes 
(SPS) or Remedial Action Schemes (RAS) (which are 
measures specifically designed to preserve the integrity of 
the CPPS or SG during aberrant operating conditions [21]) 
within the involved EACCS, SSCS, etc. The PSHF 
referenced are caused not only by inherent Protection 
Element Functionality Defects (PEFDs) within the SSCDs, 
but also by associated human factors (e.g., relay settings), 
which can lead to a degradation of the involved SPS.  
E. Classifying PSHF 
PSHF can be classified in a variety of ways, but they are 
often divided into: (1) the causes (e.g., hardware faults, 
software errors, logic errors, improper operation, improper 
maintenance, improper protection setting values, etc.), (2) 
the characteristics (e.g., static, dynamic, etc.), and (3) the 
defects — PEFDs — which are further classified as device-
related faults (a.k.a., PEFD-A) and human-related faults 
(e.g., protection setting-related) (a.k.a., PEFD-B)  [22]. 
PSHF have also been organized by their positioning and 
functional role within the EACCS or SSCS: (1) Measuring, 
(2) Strategy, (3) Setting, (4) Communication, and (5) Voting 
pattern [22]. Taking the latter issue of voting patterns, there 
are typically three: (1) 2 out of 3, (2) 2 out of 2, and (3) 1 out 
of 2. Currently, (3) is the most adopted. However, it is not 
able to prevent the mal-operation of the EACCS or SSCS, 
via the PSHF. (2) can be quite effective, as the involved 
SSCDs are serially connected and will only trip when both 
SSCDs act; this will effectively mitigate against PSHF in 
either of the SSCDs, but protection action failures are still 
possible. (1) can also be quite effective, as demonstrated by 
Sandoval et al. [23], but it is the least adopted due to the high 
cost, architectural intricacies, Operation and Maintenance 
(O&M) complexities, etc. Even if (1) were utilized, Albinali 
et al. demonstrated that it would not eliminate all PSHF mis-
operations [24]. In essence, current SGs are not architected 
to mitigate against PSHF. 
F. Ascertaining the Probability of PSHF 
To ascertain the possibility of PSHF manifesting, two 
distinct approaches are often used to ascertain the probability 
of its/their existence in the involved EACCS or SSCS: (1) 
probability statistical method, and (2) probability model 
method. The probability value obtained from (1) is a fixed 
value, which has a notional value at a particular snapshot in 
time, but unfortunately, a fixed value is not able to 
adequately reflect the changing probability of PSHF amidst 
real-time operating conditions. The probability value 
obtained from (2) is a non-fixed/variable value, which does 
indeed change to reflect different operating conditions (e.g., 
power flow, bus voltage, system frequency). (1) is utilized 
more often, as it has a lower computational cost and is more 
timely. However, it is not as accurate as methods utilized for 
(2), such as the Markov model method. Yet, the Markov 
model method, among other methods, requires many samples 
to ensure accuracy, is less timely, and an assumption is made 
that future states do not depend on past states (which may 
not necessarily be true).   
PSHF may also be inclusive of multiple SSCD, SSCS 
and/or EACCS, such as in the case of a [Protection System] 
Coordination Hidden Failure (PSCHF). It is difficult enough 
to detect PSHF by the occurrence of a single element issue, 
but when complicated multi-element issues occur (e.g., such 
as in the case of PSCHF), the involved fault judgment circuit 
is likely to be ineffective and cascading failures may follow.  
G. Attempts to Mitigate against PSHF and/or PSCHF 
To mitigate against potential PSHFs and/or PSCHFs, one 
approach, among others, is to identify the key lines affected 
by the potential PSHFs and implement mitigation measures 
to inhibit cascading failures and their ensuing wide-area 
disturbances. Artificial Intelligence (AI) has been brought to 
bear to help mitigate against these scenarios, with various 
Defect Diagnosis/Prediction Models (DDPM) proposed. AI 
approaches, such as those centered upon retraining, have 
been studied. By way of clarification, EACCS or SSCS and 
the involved SSCD functions — let us say, Protective 
Relaying (PR) — can be construed to be a Decision 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-996-6
CYBER 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
 
Engineering (DE) problem with a clear decision – to trip or 
not trip. Hence, Intelligent Protective Relays (IPR), which 
can retrain themselves so as to not trip inappropriately, 
reside within the realms of AI and DE; however, this 
research area is still nascent, and much works remain to be 
done. In brief, mitigation approach vectors for PSHF and/or 
PSCHF are far from robust. 
H. The Intensifying Protection Challenge and PSHF 
The literature shows that AI and DE research has been 
performed in the area of islanding detection (which 
endeavors to ascertain when the involved microgrid is 
disconnected from the main grid), which is just one of the 
various protection issues (e.g., undesired nuisance tripping, 
blinding problem involving a delay or non-tripping, etc.). 
Various Islanding Detection Techniques (IDT) are presented 
in the literature and have been reviewed by Khan et al. and 
others; however, IDT is, likewise, still a nascent area (as are 
other more complex protection issues, such as PSHF and 
PSCHF), and failed IDT are of critical concern for system 
operators, power/resiliency/security engineers, etc. [25]. 
To aggravate matters, the increase in highly distributed 
Renewable Energy Sources (RES) is increasing the need for 
IDT, thereby necessitating more EACCS, SSCS, and their 
constituent SSCD; in the case of high RES, because of the 
varying intermittencies, fault levels will vary, and this 
complexity has led to an increase in nuisance tripping (as 
well as associated sympathetic [nuisance] trippings) when in 
grid mode (i.e., false positive) and a decrease of requisite 
tripping (e.g., blinding problem) when in islanded mode 
(i.e., false negative); this is known as a loss of coordination 
from 
sequentially 
false 
operations 
(e.g., 
nuisance, 
sympathetic, blinding, etc.) of the relays from downstream 
to upstream feeders [26]. This might also involve reverse 
power conditions [27]. In essence, cascades can be 
comprised of a mixture of taxonomic (i.e., upstream to 
downstream) as well as folksonomic (i.e., downstream to 
upstream) effects. 
By way of contextualizing information, the International 
Energy Agency (IEA) asserts that by 2026, the global 
renewable electricity capacity is forecast to rise dramatically 
from 2020 levels. RES are set to account for a substantive 
portion of the global power capacity through 2026, and 
Solar PhotoVoltaics (PV) is expected to be a principal 
contributor. Some areas have increased their Renewable 
Portfolio Standards (RPS) target to 100% renewable before 
2045 (e.g., California, Hawaii) [28]. The United Nations 
(UN) Conference of the Parties (COP) 26 Summit 
accelerated action towards the goals of the Paris Agreement 
and the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC), which places an urgency on RES to 
operationalize 
the 
reduction 
of 
greenhouse 
gas 
emissions/concentrations (e.g., carbon dioxide) in the spirit 
of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The 
adoption of RES (a.k.a., “green energy”) has made matters, 
regarding CPPS or SG, more complex; after all, the RES 
Distributed Generation (DG) aspect introduces topological 
paradigms, such as islanded mode. Accordingly, the varied 
topology (e.g., grid mode, islanded mode) will affect the 
magnitude and direction of the fault currents within the 
microgrid in differing ways, and “the low fault current 
during islanded mode can lead to difficulties in fault 
detection or long tripping times for [Over Current] OC 
elements” [28]. Hence, the protection challenge, and that of 
the involved EACCS, SSCS, and their constituent SSCD, 
becomes much more complicated. 
To meet this challenge, an Adaptive Protection Scheme 
(APS) seems prudent, as APS endeavors to ascertain the 
state of the CPPS or SG and make adjustments to its 
configuration (e.g., changing relay settings), accordingly; 
after all, settings likely need to be different for different 
network operating topologies/different operating modes due 
to a large difference in fault currents [26][28]. Horowitz et 
al. and others point out the merits of APS. Others, such Gao 
et al. point out that even though APS might be able to 
reduce the potential for mis-operation (e.g., incorrect 
settings), such approaches will not help to protect against 
PSHF (and PSCHF), which are not detectable via self-tests 
(a.k.a., self-diagnostics) and are extremely difficult to detect 
even centrally/externally. 
The very real underlying danger of PSHF (which should 
be of interest, pursuant to the spirit of Critical Infrastructure 
Protection (CIP)-002-4 “Cyber Security – Critical Cyber 
Asset,” particularly as it relates to intentional/unintentional 
compromises of the power system [9]), is that they are 
hidden during normal CPPS, EACCS, SSCS, as well as 
SSCD operating conditions and only manifest when 
disturbances occur (e.g., overloads, faults, etc.). In a sense, 
they are comparable to the classically understood “0-day” 
vulnerabilities, as no mitigation is yet in place. PSHF are 
particularly ominous, as they can induce unnecessary 
outages of functional/operational SSCD, SSCS, EACCs, etc. 
upstream as well as downstream and are particularly 
pervasive; Zhang et al. provide an example of an SSCD — 
remote zone 3 protection relays (wherein the protection relay 
setting covers the first line, the longest second line, and 25% 
of the third line) — as being essential to power systems, but 
their false trips are also one of main causes related to 
cascading outages [29]. PSHF variations have also been 
increasing at an alarming rate.  
By way of background, Liptak et al. nicely articulate the 
fact that the “the IEC 61850 logical device model allows a 
single physical device to act as a proxy or gateway for 
multiple devices[,] thus providing a standard representation 
of a data concentrator” [30]. The underpinning basic 
element, for devices and functions, is the Logical Node (LN). 
As the LNs are associated with a Substation Configuration 
Description (SCD) file, any shift in the SCD may result in 
Configured [Intelligent Electronic Device] IED Description 
(CID) changes, thereby increasing the potentialities of PSHF. 
I. 
Devising a Detection Schema for Certain PSHF 
To adequately contend with the burgeoning corpus and 
potentialities of PSHF, we first look at the gamut of SSCDs. 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-996-6
CYBER 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
 
The NERC Standard Protection and Control (PRC)-005-6 
organizes the SSCDs as follows: (1) Protective Relay (Table 
1-1), (2) Communications Systems (CS) (Table 1-2), (3) 
Voltage and Current Sensing Devices Providing Inputs to 
Protective Relays (Table 1-3), (4) Protection System Station 
Direct Current (DC) Supply (PSSDCS) (Table 1-4), and (5) 
Control Circuitry Associated with Protective Functions 
(Table 1-5) (includes CBs — which includes DCBs  —and 
other interrupting devices) [31].  
First, for the Protective Relay (and constituent Time 
Delay Relays or Delay Timers), when the operating 
condition of the overarching SSCS changes, and the setting 
of the involved Relay does not change accordingly (e.g., 
thereby resulting in an outdated Relay setting), the Relay 
may not be able to accurately detect the status of the SSCS 
and mis-operate; with regards to the delay timers, they could 
fail in the “closed” position [12].  Second, for the CS, Gao 
et al. pointed out the heavy dependence on CS greatly 
reduces the reliability of the involved EACCS, SSCS, etc. 
[31]. Third, for the Voltage and Current Sensing Devices, 
we first take the Current Transformer (CT); for the CT, after 
a fault occurs, fault currents may cause the CT core to segue 
to a saturation situation, wherein the secondary current of 
the CT is no longer a viable proxy for the primary current. 
Next, we take the Voltage Transformer (VT); for the VT 
(e.g., Capacitor Voltage Transformer or CVT/Coupling 
Capacitor Voltage Transformer or CCVT), after a fault 
occurs, the system voltage may decrease dramatically from 
its prototypical baseline level to a very low-level paradigm, 
wherein, the secondary voltage level of the VT is no longer 
a viable proxy for the primary voltage level. Fourth, for the 
PSSDCS, were it to fail, there would likely be no power 
provided to the involved SSCDs in the event of an 
fault/outage. Fifth, for the “Control Circuitry Associated 
with Protective Functions, we take the Circuit Breaker (CB) 
(and CB’s subordinate trip circuit) among others; Yang et 
al. explored Circuit Breaker Trip Mechanisms (CBTMs) and 
found that CB-related PSHF dramatically decrease the 
involved EACCS, SSCS, et al. reliability level; PSHF in the 
CBTM can cause CBs/DCBs to fail to open (i.e., trip) when 
required, which would obviate their usefulness [32].  
The commonality of (1) through (5) is that they are all 
subject to, among other attack vectors, a code attack, data 
attack, or PSHF. It is critical that (1) and (3) provide accurate 
measurement data (i.e., analog data). It is also vital that (2), 
(4), and (5) provide an accurate status of their operational 
health (i.e., status data). In essence, analog data equates to 
measurement of system states (e.g., voltage, frequency), 
which are emblematic of system dynamics (which can be 
affected by a data attack). Status data equates to topological 
measurements describing the connectivity of the SG (which 
can be affected by a code attack). Analog and status data are 
both used for operational DE. A mal-operation that induces 
deceptive analog and/or status data can be construed as a 
contingency event [33]. The proper orchestration of (1) 
through (5) is what allows the involved EACCS, SSCS, and 
SSCD to operate as intended. 
For this paper, the devising of a mitigation module will 
be limited to the Protective Relay-related Paradigm (PR2P), 
as various researchers, such as Cheng et al. have noted that 
the majority of outages have been PSHF/protective relay-
related. Moustafa, et al., have noted that PSHF cause about 
75% of EACCS and SSCS-related events [35]. Salim et al. 
concurs by noting that PSHF “have been identified as one of 
the main causes of system cascading collapse resulting in 
power system instability” [14]. Furthermore, NERC data 
underscore the prior assertions by illuminating the fact that 
the distribution of cascading failures have a “fat tail instead 
of an exponentially falling tail, as in a normal distribution” 
— meaning that it occurs far more often than thought [36].  
III. 
EXPERIMENTATION 
To contend with the ominous PR2P paradigm, Wang et 
al. and others have posited that RL can be advantageous 
when contending with these Multi-Stage DE Problems 
(MSDEP) (e.g., to trip or not to trip), particularly in those 
cases involving a high degree of uncertainty (e.g., potential 
ITP) [9]. However, prototypical instantiations of RL 
necessitate a reward function, and studies have found that it 
is difficult for an RL agent to avoid stagnation at local 
optima. 
It was previously shown in [37], as well as by certain 
other studies, that PSO could be advantageous (given the 
reduced number of hyperparameters to tune while providing 
“good enough” near-optimum solutions in relatively few 
iterations for solving the involved Mixed Integer Non-
Linear Programming or MINLP problems), if Adaptive 
Inertial Weighting (AIW) (such as effectuated via a 
modified GNU Octave numerical computational platform, 
as discussed in [38]) is utilized to prevent stagnation at local 
optima. This approach helps to overcome the challenge of 
instantiating PSO aboard a Deep Convolutional Generative 
Adversarial Networks (DCGAN), wherein the continuous or 
discontinuous hyperparameters must be converted to 
discrete values (e.g., integers) [39], but rounding the 
calculated velocities to discrete integer values lends to 
creating an artificial paradigm, whereby particles may 
stagnate prematurely at local optima [40]. As the AIW-PSO 
approach has a suitably high efficacy for avoiding local 
optima and attaining a more globally optimal solution, the 
utilization of modern RL techniques, such as Multi-Agent 
RL (MARL) and Asynchronous Actor-Critic (AAC) 
(wherein multiple actors are efficiently trained in parallel 
with varying exploration policies [e.g., Novelty Search or 
NS, Quality Diversity or QD, etc.] [41] and whose 
parameters are globally contextualized by the collective 
actors/agents), among others, becomes viable with relatively 
high efficacy. Given the PSO-based ERLC, we now refer to 
the involved schema as AIW-PSO-ERLC.  
Efficient support for MARL, ACC, etc., with the 
overarching MSDEP, often necessitates contending with 
nonconvex optimization problems; these are, in essence, 
nonconvex MINLPs, which need to be transformed to 
convex optimization problems, via certain relaxation 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-996-6
CYBER 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
 
techniques. However, the involved transformations may 
spawn yet other nonconvex optimization problems, thereby 
necessitating the use of an Enhanced Robust Convex 
Relaxation (ERCR) framework for the tightest possible 
relaxation (as previously delineated in [2] and [37], among 
others). Interestingly, preliminary findings indicate that a 
specific APS IPR schema with ERCR & AIW-PSO-ERLC 
atop CGAN-CANN1-CANN2 (with the Bespoke Numerical 
Stability Implementation or BNSI discussed in [2] and [37]) 
well supports MARL, AAC, etc. for MSDEPopt (as well as 
Non-Efficient Controllability Problems or NECP for CSECopt 
and AI/ML DDPM for DCBopt+MLPRSopt+DGRopt), as 
shown in Figure 1 below. This seems to be in tandem with 
the posits of Ly et al., Alhazmi, et al., and Namei et al.; they 
contend that leveraging DCBs, [MLPRS], and DGR can 
mitigate against MC2 and enhance the overall SSCS, 
EACCS, and CPPS/SG reliability, security, as well as 
resiliency [42][43][44].  
 
 
Figure 1.  ERCR and AIW-PSO-ERLC atop DCGANN-CANN1-CANN2 
with BNSI Framework 
In 
essence, 
CSECopt, 
MSDEPopt, 
and 
DCBopt+MLPRSopt+DGRopt, among others,  are — for all 
intents and purposes — MINLP to be resolved by the ERCR 
& AIW-PSO-ERLC atop DCGAN-CANN1-CANN2 with a  
BNSI 
Framework 
(hereinafter, 
referred 
to 
as 
the 
“Experimental Testbed” or ET). In resolving these particular 
MINLP, some mitigation of STA (for which Control Signals 
or CS/Augmented CS or ACS are now obviated), HDF 
(which includes PSHF/PSCHF), and ITP (which likely 
involves MC2) is effectuated. By diminishing the likelihood 
of PSHF/ PSCHF, the probability of a BTW cascading effect 
is also decreased (thereby reducing the probability of a 
cascading failure/outage). 
In terms of some quantitative metrics, some fairly 
stringent experimental parameters were utilized.  While 
certain latencies can range up to 80ms (e.g., computational 
processing/algorithmic execution time along with CB time) 
for the first zone and 500ms for the second zone [45], a 
maximum reporting time of 8.3ms was utilized for the 
involved experimentation (some Ultra-High Speed or UHS 
protective relays can operate at 1.5ms [46]) [47]. For 
practical use, the involved PR/IPR must have an Operational 
Time Interval (OTI) (e.g., 1.5ms < OTI < 8.3ms) that is less 
than the CB Interruption time, any Breaker Failure 
Protection (BFP) time delay (e.g., 200ms), and the Critical 
Clearing Time (CCT). In accordance with international 
standards, the PR/IPR OTI should not be much “faster than a 
half-cycle of power-frequency (i.e., 10ms for 50 Hz and 
8.3ms for 60 Hz)” [46]; if it were, the involved CBs might 
not be able to operate properly [48]. Hence, a high sampling 
frequency (>= 1 MHz) with 1.5ms < OTI < 3ms was not 
desired/considered (and clearly, UHS would not be as well), 
as this OTI range was too fast. On the flip side, low sampling 
frequency PR/IPR (e.g., <1kHz to <4 kHz) with 8.3ms < OTI 
< 20ms was not desired/considered, as this OTI range was 
too slow. Medium sampling frequency PR/IPR (4 kHz to 10 
kHz) with 3ms < OTI < 8.3ms had the desired OTI range.  
To achieve the desired OTI range, certain nonconvex 
MINLP solvers and convex solvers were examined 
(nonconvex MINLP problems were reformulated as convex 
MINLP) as part of the experimentation. Comparing the 
nonconvex and convex solvers together, although seemingly 
not an equitable comparison, highlighted the potential 
selection bias (even as general solvers), for the described 
environs described herein, towards nonconvex treatment; if 
so, these needed to be quickly eliminated, as OTI adherence 
is crucial. PAVER 2.0, an open-source environment for 
automated performance analysis of benchmarking data, was 
utilized. An Experimental Solver Set (ESS) A was 
winnowed, and certain solvers, such as Jump Nonlinear 
Integer Program Solver (Juniper) were removed from further 
consideration due to the algorithmic execution time per 
problem of approximately 36 milliseconds per problem (at a 
batch size of 25) and about 95 milliseconds per problem (at a 
batch size of 100); these results were consistent with those 
found by Kronqvist et al [49]. The solvers of resultant ESS 
B, which included Basic Open-source Nonlinear Mixed 
Integer Programming (Bonmin), Convex Over and Under 
ENvelopes for Nonlinear Estimation (Couenne), mbnb, mqg, 
mqgpar, mglob, and Supporting Hyperplane Optimization 
Toolkit (SHOT), were compared; mbnb, mqg, mqgpar, are 
mglob are solvers available as part of the Mixed-Integer 
Nonlinear Optimization (Minotaur) Toolkit. The results were 
quite similar with regards to algorithmic execution time per 
problem — approximately 4 milliseconds per problem (at a 
batch size of 25); however, at a batch size of 100, the 
performance was quite different. Bonmin was eliminated, as 
performance ranged from 14ms+. Couenne was eliminated, 
as performance was at about 80ms+. Interestingly, the 
solvers from Minotaur all achieved performances of about 
sub 5ms. Likewise, the performance of SHOT was at about 4 
ms. To ensure a robust resultant ESS C, the experimentation 
was repeated in various increments. This allowed the various 
solvers to both return the optimal solution and to verify 
optimality within the desired OTI range. In addition, the 
settings used by [49], as pertains to gaptol, was also utilized 
herein. The resultant ESS C was then further compared for 
performance on the ET. Of the Minotaur solvers tested, mqg 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-996-6
CYBER 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
 
and mqgpar had the most consistent performance. 
Separately, SHOT also had consistent performance. This is 
shown in Figure 2 below. Hence, it seems that, for use with 
ET, the MILP decomposition-based solvers had better 
performance than Branch and Bound (BB)-based solvers; 
this was an interesting finding. Hence, the involved 
quantitative experimentation (which was partially inspired by 
[49]) atop ET, with the resultant ESS D, hints at the potential 
of certain MINLP solvers achieving near optimal solutions 
consistently. 
 
 
Figure 2.  MINLP Experimentation atop ET  
Taking the example of SHOT, it has the advantage of having 
robust performance for subclasses, such as Mixed Integer 
(MI) Nonlinear Programming (NLP) and Quadratically 
Constrained 
Quadratic 
Programming 
(QCQP). 
The 
significance of this centers upon the fact that an MINLP 
problem is often construed as convex when its continuous 
relaxation results in a convex NLP problem. Hence, SHOT’s 
intrinsic subclass handling of the transformation from 
nonconvex to convex may, potentially, be more harmonious 
with ET, as both nicely handle those cases, wherein the 
involved transformations spawn yet other nonconvex 
optimization problems and the tightest possible relaxation is 
needed. Mqg and mqgpar are, likewise, quite robust. 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The OT PSHF approximates the IT “0-Day,” and should 
PSHF manifest, it is likely to induce a BTW cascading 
effect, serve as a key amplification factor, and segue to 
cascading failure (i.e., outage). Moreover, PSHF/PSCHF-
induced STA have been shown to have higher impact and 
cause more pervasive failures than concurrent events. This 
seems to be counterintuitive for many, but this lesson 
learned is consistent with the previously referenced findings 
of Zhu et al., Yan et al., and others, who have noted that the 
STA has greater impact than a concurrent attack (which 
requires a higher CSEC and more concurrent resources to 
coordinate). A further lesson learned is that PSHF/PSCHF-
related events are not necessarily HILF events. Indeed, they 
seem to more closely approximate VHIMF events; this 
particular lesson learned seems to be affirmed by NERC, 
which has noted that the distribution of cascading failures 
occurs more frequently than envisioned. Along this vein, it 
seems that PSHF/PSCHF are currently underprioritized and 
that efforts in this area are still nascent. This seems to beget 
the notion that the priorities within the OT domain are quite 
different from those within the IT domain. A yet further 
lesson learned is that for certain cyber thematics, such as 
ITP, the prioritization seems to be higher in the IT domain 
than that for the OT domain. 
Among other obstacles in the OT domain, leveraging 
ML-based workstreams and incorporating higher-level 
cybersecurity paradigms, amidst the predilection for 
seeming reliability, seems to be a challenge. An example of 
a higher-level paradigm is that of an apriori architected 
mitigation paradigm to address the ITP-PSHF-STA 
triumvirate amalgam. However, this seems to be absent for 
current SGs. This paper posits that, among others, a 
prospective pragmatic mitigation approach — against PR2P 
STA, PSHF/PSCFH, and ITP — is to intercede in the 
successive event stream by effectuating the maximal 
optimum Control Signal Energy Cost (CSECopt) for 
reducing the diffusion of CS/ACS as well as other MC2. To 
best 
mitigate 
against 
PR2P 
ITP, 
deriving 
DCBopt+MLPRSopt+DGRopt will contribute toward reducing 
the efficacy of MC2 (and the associated constituent 
CA/ACS). This same bespoke APS IPR schema with ET 
and ESS D well supports deriving MSDEPopt to mitigate 
against PR2P HDF (e.g., PSHF/ PSCHF). Central to this 
mitigation approach is not only the AIW-PSO support for 
ERLC (e.g., MARL, AAC, etc.), but the encompassing 
bespoke multi-CANN module. Finally, the ET and ESS D 
also nicely address CSECopt for Non-ECP so as to mitigate 
against CS/ACS (i.e., STA). Overall, by endeavoring to 
reduce the fat tail, it is the hope that the involved incidence 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-996-6
CYBER 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
 
level will return to the currently anticipated/classified HILF 
or even better — Medium or even, ideally, Low-Impact, 
Low-Frequency (LILF). Future work will involve more 
quantitative experimentation in this area, particularly in the 
area of extrapolating upon the experimentation contained 
herein. First, further experimentation (inspired by Kronqvist 
et al.) involving the benchmarking of various MINLP 
solvers atop ET is needed. Second, further experimentation 
(inspired by Zhu et al., among others, which demonstrated 
that sequential failure of key elements causes a multiple 
factor greater power loss that that for simultaneous failures 
of the same key elements) involving the benchmarking of 
the STA multiple factor phenomenon is needed as well. 
Accordingly, mitigation approaches that satisfy the 
prevailing OTI constraint, such as explored herein by way 
of ET and ESS D, warrant further examination. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is supported by the Decision Engineering 
Analysis Laboratory (DEAL), an Underwatch initiative of 
VTIRL, VT. This is part of an ongoing VTIRL technical 
series, on behalf of the Quality Assurance/Quality Control 
(QA/QC) unit, to advance the involved TRLs.  
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Yankson and M. Ghamkhari, “Transactive Energy to Guard 
again a Zero-Day Load Altering Attack on Power Distribuion 
Systems,” 2019 IEEE 7th International Conference on Smart 
Energy Grid Engineering (SEGE), 2019, pp. 171-177, doi: 
10.1109/SEGE.2019.8859794. 
[2] S. Chan, “Enhanced Robust Convex Relaxation Framework 
for Optimal Controllability of Certain Large Complex 
Networked Systems: An Accelerant Amalgam and Bespoke 
Numerical Stability Paradigm for a Decoupled and Sequenced 
Control Strategy on Dense and Homogeneous Temporal 
Networks,” The 2022 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in 
Science, Technology, Services, and Applications, ISBN: 978-
1-68558-017-9. 
[3] A. Guo, Y. Han, C. Guo, F. Lou, and Y. Wang, “Modeling 
and vulnerability analysis of cyber-physical power systems 
considering network topology and power flow properties,” 
Energies, 
vol. 
10, 
no. 
1, 
p. 
87, 
2017, 
doi: 
10.3390/en10010087. 
[4] A. Dey, Y. Gel, and H. Poor, “What network motifs tell us 
about resilience and reliability of complex networks,” Proc 
Natl Acad Sci, vol. 116, no. 39, pp. 19368-19373, doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1819529116. 
[5] M. Silveira, D. Dolezilek, S. Wenke, and J. Yellajousla, 
“Attack tree analysis of a digital secondary system in an 
electrical substation,” 16th International Conference on 
Developments in Power System Protection (DPSP 2022), 
2022, pp. 152-157, doi: 10.1049/icp.2022.0929. 
[6] Y. Zhu, J. Yan, Y. Tang, Y. Sun, and H. He, “The Sequential 
Attack Against Power Grid Networks,” 2014 IEEE 
International Conference on Communications (ICC), 2014, 
pp. 616-621, doi: 10.1109/ICC.2014.6883387. 
[7] Y. Fang and E. Zio, “Optimizing the Resilience of 
Interdependent Infastructure Systems against Intentional 
Attacks,” 2017 2nd International Conference on System 
Reliability and Safety (ICSRS), 2017, pp. 62-67, doi: 
10.1109/ICSRS.2017.8272798. 
[8] C. Cecati, G. Mokryani, A. Piccolo, and P. Siano, “An 
overview on the smart grid concept,” IECON 2010 - 36th 
Annual Conference on IEEE Industrial Electronics Society, 
2010, pp. 3322-3327, doi: 10.1109/IECON.2010.5675310. 
[9] W. Wang, R. Wang, H. Zhang, Z. Zhou, and Y. He, 
“Matching Learning-Based Relay Selection for Substation 
Power Internet of Things,” Wireless Communications and 
Mobile 
Computing, 
vol. 
2022, 
Feb. 
2022. 
https://doi.org/10.1155/2022/6795205. 
[10] X. Fang, S. Misra, G. Xue, and D. Yang, “Smart Grid — The 
New and Improved Power Grid: A Survey,” IEEE 
Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 944-
980, 
Fourth 
Quarter 
2012, 
doi: 
10.1109/SURV.2011.101911.00087. 
[11] A. Kawoosa and D. Prashar, “A Review of Cyber Securities 
in Smart Grid Technology,” 2021 2nd International 
Conference on Computation, Automation and Knowledge 
Management 
(ICCAKM), 
2021, 
pp. 
151-156, 
doi: 
10.1109/ICCAKM50778.2021.9357698. 
[12] A. Barnes, “The Risk of Hidden Failures to the United States 
Electrical Grid and Potential for Mitigation,” 2021 North 
American Power Symposium (NAPS), 2021, pp. 1-6, doi: 
10.1109/NAPS52732.2021.9654709. 
[13] Q. Chen and J. McCalley, “A cluster distribution as a model 
for estimating high-order event probabilities in power 
systems,” 2004 International Conference on Probabilistic 
Methods Applied to Power Systems, 2004, pp. 622-628. 
[14] N. Salim, et al., “Determination of available transfer 
capability 
with 
implication 
of 
cascading 
collapse 
uncertainty,” IET Generation, Transmission & Distribtuion, 
vol 
8, 
no. 
4, 
pp. 
705-715, 
Apr. 
2014, 
doi: 
https://doi.org/10.1049/iet-gtd.2013.0395.  
[15] J. Yan, H. He, X. Zhong, and Y. Tang, “Q-learning Based 
Vulnerability Analysis of Smart Grid against Sequential 
Topology Attacks,” IEEE Transactions on Information 
Forensics and Security, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 200-210, Jan. 2017, 
doi: 10.1109/TIFS.2016.2607701. 
[16] P. Pourbeik, P. Kundur, and C. Taylor, “The anatomy of a 
power grid blackout – root causes and dynamics of reent 
major blackouts,” IEEE Power and Energy Magazine, vol. 4, 
no. 
5, 
pp. 
22-29, 
Sept.-Oct. 
2006, 
doi: 
10.1109/MPAE.2006.1687814. 
[17] J. Zhang, “Research on Hidden Failure Reliability Modeling 
of Electric Power System Protection,” Energy and Power 
Engineering, vol. 5, 2013, doi: 10.4236/epe.2013.54B261. 
[18] D. Elizondo, J. Ree, A. Phadke, and S. Horowitz, “Hidden 
failures in protection systems and their impact on wide-area 
disturbances,” 2001 IEEE Power Engineering Society Winter 
Meeting, 
2001, 
pp. 
710-714, 
doi: 
10.1109/PESW.2001.916941. 
[19] J. Ree, Y. Liu, L. Mili, A. Phadke, and L. DaSilva, 
“Catastrophic Failures in Power Systems: Causes, Analyses, 
and Countermeasures,” in Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 93, 
no. 
5, 
pp. 
956-964, 
May 
2005, 
doi: 
10.1109/JPROC.2005.847246. 
[20] K. Bae and J. Thorp, “A Stochastic Study of Hidden Failures 
in Power System Protection,” J. Decis. Support. Syst., vol 24, 
no. 
304, 
pp. 
259-268, 
1999, 
 
doi: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0167-9236(98)00069-4. 
[21] P. Hines, H. Liao, D. Jia, and S. Talukdar, “Autonomous 
agents and cooperation for the control of cascading failures in 
electric grids,” 2005 IEEE Networking, Sensing and Control, 
2005., pp. 273-278, doi: 10.1109/ICNSC.2005.1461200. 
[22] L. Zhao, et al., “Review and prospect of hidden failure: 
protection system and security and stability control system,” 
J. Mod. Power Syst. Clean Energy, vol. 7, pp. 1735–1743, 
2019. doi: 10.1007/s40565-015-0128-9. 
[23] R. Sandoval, et al., “Using Fault Tree Analysis to Evaluate 
Protection Scheme Redundancy,” 37th Annual Western 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-996-6
CYBER 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
 
Protective Relay Conference, 2010, Accessed: Aug. 14, 2022. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Using-Fault-Tree-
Analysis-to-Evaluate-Protection-Sandoval-
Santana/584230d9f12239cae3e1d1b58b590138710980b7. 
[24] H. Albinali et al. “A Centralized Substation Portection 
Scheme that Detects Hidden Failures,” 2016 IEEE Power and 
Energy Society General Meeting (PESGM), 2016, pp. 1-5, 
doi: 10.1109/PESGM.2016.7741559. 
[25] M. Khan, A. Haque, V. Kurukuru, and M. Saad, “Islanding 
detection techniques for grid-connected photovoltaic systems-
A review,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, vol. 
154, 2022, doi: 10.1016/j.rser.2021.111854. 
[26] V. Telukunta, J. Pradham, A. Agrawal, M. Singh, and S. 
Srivani, “Protection Challenges Under Bulk Penetration of 
Renewable Energy Resources in Power Systems: A Review,” 
CSEE Journal of Power and Energy Systems, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 
365-379, Dec. 2017, doi: 10.17775/CSEEJPES.2017.00030. 
[27] V. Papspiliotopoulos, G. Korres, and N. Hatziargyriou, “An 
adaptive protection infrastructure for modern distribution 
grids with distributed generation,” CIGRE Science & 
Engineering, February 2017, Accessed: Aug. 14, 2022. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://e-
cigre.org/share/publication/503/C6-108_2016. 
[28] T. Patel and J. Hernandez-Alvidrez, “Adaptive Protection 
Scheme for a Real-World Microgrid with 100% Inverter-
Based Resources,” 2020 IEEE Kansas Power and Energy 
Conference 
(KPEC), 
2020, 
pp. 
1-6, 
doi: 
10.1109/KPEC47870.2020.9167527. 
[29] J. Zhang and Y. Dong, “Preventing False Trips of Zone 3 
Protection Relays in Smart Grid,” Tsinghua Scient and 
Technology International Journal on Information Science, vol 
20, 
no. 
2, 
pp. 
142-154, 
2015, 
doi: 
10.1109/TST.2015.7085627. 
[30] B. Liptak and H. Eren, “Instrument Engineers’ Handbook: 
Process Software and Digital Networks,” Research Triangle 
Park, NC, CRC Press, 2016. 
[31] X. Gao, J. Thorp, and D. Hou, “Case Studies: Designing 
Protection 
Systems 
That 
Minimize 
Potential 
Hidden 
Failures,” 2013 66th Annual Conference for Protective Relay 
Engineers, 
2013, 
pp. 
384-393, 
doi: 
10.1109/CPRE.2013.6822053. 
[32] F. Yang, A. P. S. Meliopoulos, G. J. Cokkinides, and Q. B. 
Dam, “Effects of Protection System Hidden Failures on Bulk 
Power System Reliability,” 2006 38th North American Power 
Symposium, 
2006, 
pp. 
517-523, 
doi: 
10.1109/NAPS.2006.359621. 
[33] S. Tan, D. De, W. Song, J. Yang and S. Das, “Survey of 
Security Advances in Smart Grid: A Data Driven Approach,” 
in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 19, no. 1, 
pp. 
397-422, 
First 
quarter 
2017, 
doi: 
10.1109/COMST.2016.2616442. 
[34] Y. Cheng, X. Chen, J. Ren, X. Xuan and X. Li, “Study on 
hidden failure of relay protection in power system,” 2013 
IEEE International Conference on Cyber Technology in 
Automation, Control and Intelligent Systems, 2013, pp. 434-
439, doi: 10.1109/CYBER.2013.6705485. 
[35] M. Moustafa and C. Chang, W. Song, J. Yang and S. Das, 
“Preventing cascading failure of electric power protection 
systems in nuclear power plant,” Nuclear Engineering and 
Technology, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 121-130, Jan. 2021, doi: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.net.2020.06.010. 
[36] H. Liao, J. Apt, and S. Talukdar, “Phase Transitions in the 
Probability of Cascading Failures,” Physics, 2004, Accessed: 
Aug. 
14, 
2022. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Phase-Transitions-in-
the-Probability-of-Cascading-Liao-
Apt/28a8ca494e5af264152c6191f6abf5b201582d39. 
[37] S. Chan, M. Krunz and B. Griffin, “AI-based Robust Convex 
Relaxations for Supporting Diverse QoS in Next-Generation 
Wireless Systems,” 2021 IEEE 41st International Conference 
on Distributed Computing Systems Workshops (ICDCSW), 
2021, pp. 41-48, doi: 10.1109/ICDCSW53096.2021.00014. 
[38] Chan, Steve, “Mitigation Factors for Multi-domain Resilient 
Networked Distributed Tessellation Communications,” The 
Fifth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and 
Cyber-Systems (CYBER 2020), 2020, p. 66-73, Accessed: 
Aug. 
14, 
2022. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3789770. 
[39] X. Liu, Q. Wang, H. Liu, and L. Li, “Particle swarm 
optimization with dynamic inertia weight and mutation,” 2009 
Third International Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary 
Computing, 
Feb 
2010, 
pp. 
620–623, 
doi: 
10.1109/WGEC.2009.99. 
[40] C. Worasucheep, “A particle swarm optimization with 
stagnation detection and dispersion,” 2008 IEEE Congress on 
Evolutionary Computation (IEEE World Congress on 
Computational Intelligence), Hong Kong, June 2008, pp. 424-
429, doi: 10.1109/CEC.2008.4630832. 
[41] E. Conti, V. Madhavan, F. Such, J. Lehman, K. Stanley, and 
J. Clune, “Improving exploration in evolution strategies for 
deep reinforcement learning via a population of novelty-
seeking agents,” Proceedings of the 32nd International 
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems 
(NIPS), 
Dec. 
2018, 
pp. 
5032-5043, 
doi: 
https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/3327345.3327410. 
[42] K. Ly, K. Kwiat, C. Kamhoua, L. Njilla and Y. Jin, 
“Approximate Power Grid Protection Against False Data 
Injection Attacks,” 2017 IEEE 15th Intl Conf on Dependable, 
Autonomic and Secure Computing, 15th Intl Conf on 
Pervasive Intelligence and Computing, 3rd Intl Conf on Big 
Data Intelligence and Computing and Cyber Science and 
Technology 
Congress 
(DASC/PiCom/DataCom/CyberSciTech), 2017, pp. 527-533, 
doi: 10.1109/DASC-PICom-DataCom-CyberSciTec.2017.97. 
[43] M. Alhazmi, P. Dehghanian, S. Wang and B. Shinde, “Power 
Grid Optimal Topology Control Considering Correlations of 
System Uncertainties,” in IEEE Transactions on Industry 
Applications, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 5594-5604, Nov.-Dec. 2019, 
doi: 10.1109/TIA.2019.2934706. 
[44] M. Nazemi, P. Dehghanian, and M. Lejeune, “A Mixed-
Integer Distributionally Robust Chance-Constrained Model 
for Optimal Topology Control in Power Grids with Uncertain 
Renewables,” 2019 IEEE Milan PowerTech, 2019, pp. 1-6, 
doi: 10.1109/PTC.2019.8810440. 
[45] M. Eissa, “Resilient wide-area monitoring and protection 
scheme with IEEE Std. C37.118.1-2011 criteria for complex 
smart grid system using phase diagram,” 2019 IET Smart 
Grid, vol 2, no. 2, pp. 309-317, 2019, doi: 10.1049/iet-
stg.2018.0247. 
[46] S. Zubic, Z. Gajic and D. Kralj, "Line Protection Operate 
Time: How Fast Shall It Be?," in IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 
75608-75616, 2021, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3081993. 
[47] H. Wu, K. Tsakalis, and G. Heydt, “Evaluation of time delay 
effects to wide-area power system stabilizer design,” IEEE 
Transactions on Power Systems, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 1935-
1941, Nov. 2004, doi: 10.1109/TPWRS.2004.836272. 
[48] B. Kasztenny and J. Rostron, “Circuit breaker ratings—A 
primer for protection engineers,” 2018 71st Annual 
Conference for Protective Relay Engineers (CPRE), 2018, pp. 
1-13, doi: 10.1109/CPRE.2018.8349782. 
[49] J. Kronqvist, D. Bernal, A. Lundell, and I. Grossman, “A 
review and comparison of solvers for convex MINLP,” 
Optimization and Engineering, vol 20, pp. 397-455, 2019, 
doi: 10.1007/s11081-018-9411-8. 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-996-6
CYBER 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

