 
Comparisons of Forensic Tools to Recover Ephemeral Data from iOS Apps Used for 
Cyberbullying  
Aimee Chamberlain and M A Hannan Bin Azhar 
School of Engineering, Technology and Design 
Canterbury Christ Church University 
Canterbury, United Kingdom 
e-mail: aimee.chamberlain@yahoo.co.uk; hannan.azhar@canterbury.ac.uk 
 
Abstract—Ephemeral 
applications 
are 
growing 
increasingly popular on the digital mobile market. However, 
they are not always used with good intentions. Criminals may 
see a gateway into private communication with each other 
through this transient application data. This could negatively 
impact criminal court cases for evidence, or civil matters, such 
as cyberbullying where evidence could be useful. To find out 
if messages from such applications can indeed be recovered or 
not, a forensic examination of the device would be required by 
the law enforcement authority. This paper reports 
forensically sound recovery of evidential data, in relation to 
cyberbullying, from three popular ephemeral applications 
using an iOS mobile device. Examinations were performed to 
evaluate two popular mobile forensic tools, Oxygen and 
MOBILedit,  using parameters from the National Institute of 
Standards and Technology’s (NIST) mobile tool test 
assertions and test plan. The results from the investigation 
recovered various artefacts from the mobile device as well as 
revealing 
some 
interesting 
forensic 
data 
related 
to 
cyberbullying.  
Keywords— Mobile forensics; NIST measurements; 
Oxygen Forensics; MOBILedit forensic; Ephemeral APPS; 
Cyberbullying. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Mobile phones are an essential part of modern-day life. 
According 
to 
the 
Global 
System 
for 
Mobile 
Communications [1], there were 5 billion mobile users in 
the world by the second quarter of 2017, with a prediction 
that another 620 million people will become mobile phone 
users by 2020, together that would account for almost three 
quarters of the world population. Due to the increasing 
popularity in mobile phones, there is naturally an increasing 
concern over mobile security and how safe communication 
between individuals or groups is.  
Criminals usually use mobile phones to communicate 
with each other. They may use regular chatting applications, 
but there is a growing opportunity within the mobile 
application market for criminals to use ephemeral 
applications, 
which 
allow 
users 
to 
send 
messages/multimedia, etc., to each other with the messages 
only lasting for a certain period of time [2]. Barker [3] 
reported that criminals are moving away from dark web 
interactions and on to ephemeral applications, such as 
WhatsApp, Snapchat, Telegram, etc. Data in these 
applications is known to delete itself which is prime for 
criminal communications. For example, Snapchat allows 
users to send ‘Snaps’ to each other containing pictures, 
which are deleted once the recipient user closes the message 
[4]. 
Since ephemeral applications only hold data for a certain 
period of time, an individual or group could easily send a 
hateful message to somebody and there would be no 
evidence of it. Moreover, more serious issues can be hidden 
through these types of applications, such as self-harm, and 
sexting. Charteris  et al. [5] reported that out of 276 primary 
and secondary school professional staff that observed the 
application ‘Snapchat’ [6] being used at school, a total 
percentage of 26.9% of professionals reported Snapchat was 
used for bullying/harassment, sending inappropriate 
images/text, sexting, and self-harm. The results were from a 
viewpoint of teachers, counsellors, etc., which means there 
may have been a lot more students suffering from the same 
issues, but they did not come forward. According to Cook 
[6], 11%  parents reported their children had been a victim 
of cyberbullying in 2011, an increase followed of 15% in 
2016, and another increase followed of 18% in 2018. It 
appears that as the cyber world evolves and develops, the 
rate of cyberbullying increases. 
With all the opportunities for new crimes to be 
committed through growing technology, it is crucial to 
ensure that the law enforcement agencies have the 
appropriate software and methods to deal with these crimes. 
There is a gap in literature in relation to comparisons of tools 
to recover evidential data, specifically focusing on 
ephemeral applications relating to cyberbullying. This paper 
will attempt to fill this gap by comparing two popular 
forensics tools, Oxygen [7] and MOBILedit [8] in 
recovering ephemeral data from popular mobile apps used 
for cyberbullying. Furthermore, this paper focuses on an 
iOS device, as there is already a large body of research on 
forensic investigations into Android devices [4][9][10]. 
The remainder of the paper will be organised as follows: 
Section 2 will discuss existing research in relation to mobile 
phone forensics, including forensic tools and ephemeral 
data. The methodology used during the analysis process will 
be discussed in Section 3, including logical acquisition and 
analysis of mobile forensic data and tool comparisons. 
Section 4 will cover the results of the analysis. Finally, 
Section 5 will conclude the paper and include possible 
future work. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
There is already a vast amount of research on mobile 
forensics in general, which includes comparing forensic 
tools, performing different types of mobile acquisitions and 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-743-6
CYBER 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
focusing on particular pieces of data within the mobile 
device.  There is also work completed on non-ephemeral 
applications, such as Ovens et al. [11] conducted a forensic 
analysis on Kik Messenger on iOS. While there has been 
similar studies in a wide range of apps, the focus of this 
review is to highlight the findings in extraction of artefacts 
from the apps which are specifically ephemeral. 
Al-Hadadi et al. [12] forensically investigated a mobile 
device, an iPhone 4 running iOS 5.0.1 previously jailbroken 
by the mobile phone owner, as a part of a real legal case. 
The case was from the Sultanate of Oman, and the aim of 
the investigation was to forensically examine the iPhone to 
determine if the device had been hacked and sent messages 
over the application ‘WhatsApp’ out to the owner’s contact 
list. In the investigation, the ISP report of the device was 
observed and examined, and two forensic tools were used to 
extract and examine mobile data, one tool being the 
Universal Forensic Extraction Device’s (UFED) physical 
analyser Cellebrite, and the other being the Oxygen 
Forensic Suite. The credibility of both tools is highly 
regarded by computer forensic experts. Results showed that 
Cellebrite recovered more forensic evidence than Oxygen, 
including call log artefacts, SMS messages, web history, etc.  
Azhar et al. [13] conducted a forensic experiment of two 
ephemeral messaging applications: Telegram and Wickr 
using Autopsy and logically acquiring a database file, as 
well as performing a RAM dump. Results showed that the 
application ‘Wickr’ stored received messages in encrypted 
“.wic” files. The RAM dump recovered username 
information from Wickr and artefacts from Telegram. This 
investigation compared ephemeral applications on Android 
platforms. The investigation more looked into packages and 
files within the application itself instead of using a mobile 
forensic tool. Performing similar investigatory analysis on 
an iOS platform would be an interesting study as a future 
work.  
Umar et al. [14] tested three different forensic tools on a 
Samsung Galaxy S4 GT-I9500 using the application 
WhatsApp. The tools included WhatsApp DB/Key 
Extractor (open source), Belkasoft Evidence (trial version 
and proprietary) and Oxygen Forensic (proprietary). The 
forensic tools were tested against the NIST Mobile Device 
Tool Test Assertions and Test Plan ver. 2. Researchers in 
[14] forensically tested the mobile device using the tools, 
each either completed a logical or physical acquisition. 
WhatsApp DB/Key extractor performed a 
logical 
acquisition and Belkasoft Evidence was used alongside it to 
open the result from the acquisition. The results showed that 
the WhatsApp contact list was recovered, as well as a text 
message artefact including the sender and recipient of the 
message, as well as the time stamp. Belkasoft Evidence 
performed a logical acquisition, the acquisition was unable 
to recover the WhatsApp contact list but found multimedia 
and document artefacts. Oxygen forensic could perform 
both physical and logical acquisition. Oxygen forensic 
recovered the WhatsApp contact list as well as a text 
message artefact including the sender and recipient 
information, content of the message and a time stamp. 
As can be seen from this brief review of the literature, 
there is a significant gap in extraction of ephemeral artefacts 
on iOS platforms and there has not been any research 
reported primarily focusses on artefacts related to 
cyberbullying. This paper will contribute to investigate in 
these aspects to fill the gap.  
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
The focus of the investigation was recovering data from 
ephemeral applications due to their uses by Internet “trolls” 
[15], also known as digital bullies. This paper is going to 
investigate how much data can be recovered from these 
types of applications from two different tools as listed in 
Table 1; the mobile device and applications are listed in 
Table 2.  
TABLE I.  
FORENSIC TOOLS 
Name 
Forensic tools 
Cost  
Version 
Oxygen 
Forensic 
Detective Enterprise 
APPROX 
£1,100-
£2000 
10.3.0.100 
MOBILedit Forensic 
Express 
APPROX £76 for 
one mobile device, 
£1,150 
for 
full 
license 
6.1.0.15480 
TABLE II.  
MOBILE DEVICE AND APPLICATIONS 
Mobile used 
Ephemeral Apps 
App Name  
Version 
iPhone 
6s 
NOT-
JAILBROKEN 
Snapchat 
10.55.1 
Cyberdust 
5.6.1.1049 
Confide 
8.3.1 
 
The investigation was carried out according to the four 
good practice guidelines of the Association of Chief Police 
Officers (ACPO) [16]. For example, the third principle of 
the guidelines state that an audit trail should be recorded 
throughout the investigation in a manner which a third party 
could recreate the steps taken in the investigation. 
A. Ephemeral Apps for Cyberbullying  
The three applications as listed in Table 2 were all 
chosen for different reasons. Snapchat is one of the most 
popular ephemeral applications. According to Omnicore 
[17], more than 25% of mobile phone users are on Snapchat, 
with 71% of the users being aged between 17 to 24. For this 
application, three contacts were added and two of those 
contacts had communication sending picture messages, as 
well as written messages back and forth. Ten picture 
messages were exchanged, three written messages were 
marked as ‘saved’, while one of other messages was not 
saved. The username for the mobile owner was 
‘aimee_test19’. For the Snapchat, the ephemeral artefacts 
were the picture messages for the investigation. 
The next application, Cyberdust, was chosen due to the 
difference in its ephemeral features compared to other apps. 
The encrypted messages within the app delete themselves 
between users after 24 hours of it being sent [18]. The 
application also has other uses, such as a “watchdog” feature 
where users can check their email addresses to see if any 
data breaches have been completed. Another feature is 
known as “Stealth Search”, where users can search the 
Internet privately, supposedly without any cookie trackers 
or trace remnants. This application was selected for the 
investigation as it creates ephemeral data, and it has many 
different functions, which allows the user to use the 
application 
for 
multi-purpose 
functions. 
For 
the 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-743-6
CYBER 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
investigation’s purpose, only the secure messaging feature 
was used, where messages were encrypted and deleted after 
24 hours. A total of eleven messages were exchanged. Two 
of the messages were picture messages. The username for 
the mobile owner was linked directly to the mobile number. 
The final application, Confide [19], was chosen because 
of its end to end message encryption between users. 
Furthermore, the application does not allow screenshots to 
be taken from users. The messages between users are self-
destructing once the recipient has read the message, and the 
user can only read the message by swiping down on the 
message on the screen to view it. Furthermore, the user can 
adjust the settings to change the ephemeral nature of the 
messages, if a message is not opened within 48 hours, the 
content of the message will delete itself regardless. All of 
these features would create an interesting investigation, as 
the application advertises very strong messaging security, 
so it would be intriguing to test the security through this 
forensic investigation. For the investigation purpose, this 
application was used to test the message encryption and data 
recovery from the application. A total of seven messages 
were exchanged. Like Cyberdust, here also the username for 
the mobile owner was linked directly to the mobile number.  
B. Forensic Tools 
Forensic tools used in the investigation were Oxygen 
Forensic Detective Enterprise [7] and MOBILedit Forensic 
Express [8]. Both tools have reputations to be able to 
forensically examine mobile devices and are widely used by 
professional investigators [20]. Oxygen is a more well used 
tool within Law enforcement, military operations and 
professional investigatory cases, with uses of the tool in 
over 100 countries [7]. MOBILedit Forensic is also popular, 
but it is used a little less, it is used in approximately 70 
countries and is used in military investigations and law 
enforcement [8]. The mobile device was extracted on both 
tools using logical acquisition and then the analysis was 
conducted in forensic workstations. Oxygen Forensic 
Detective Enterprise was running on Windows 7 Enterprise 
version 6.1.7601. The MOBILedit was running on a 
Windows 10 Home version 10.0.17134. Both tools were 
tested against NIST test assertions from ‘MDT-CA-01’ to 
‘MDT-CA-09’ as detailed in [21].  Throughout the 
investigation, nine NIST test assertions were closely 
followed and the forensic tools were tested according to the 
measurements. 
Oxygen Forensic outputs a GUI home page which 
displays the kinds of information that has been extracted, 
allowing an investigator to navigate around the mobile 
contents easily. The ‘Applications’ tile was selected to 
investigate the three Ephemeral applications mentioned 
previously, including any data the applications held of the 
user, conversation data, etc. Once the ‘Applications’ tile 
was examined, the ‘Passwords’ tile was selected and 
examined. This was to see if any passwords were stored 
within the three ephemeral applications to test the general 
security of the applications.  
The same extraction process was completed in 
MOBILedit Forensic Express [8]. Unlike Oxygen, 
MOBILedit outputs the mobile device extraction into a 
report. However, there was a contents page produced within 
the report. There was also a separate section for both 
‘Applications’ and ‘Passwords’ similarly to Oxygen. Both 
of those sections were examined,.  
In the next stage of the examination, a general keyword 
search was made within the Oxygen and MOBILedit in 
search for artefacts. The keywords searched included 
‘Snapchat’, ‘Dust’ and ‘Confide’. This was completed in 
case any other information relating to the applications was 
extracted and missed previously. The application names 
were used for the searches, as in a real-life scenario the 
digital forensic investigator may not know the contents of 
the messages, and may be left with no other search options 
other than the application names. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
The results analyse the key findings from the 
methodology. The results are presented with regards to the 
four categories:  Oxygen Forensic Detective Enterprise; 
MOBILedit Forensic Express,  Evaluation of findings and 
NIST measurements. 
A. Oxygen Forensic Detective Enterprise 
A list of applications on the mobile device was found in 
the ‘Applications’ tile using Oxygen.  Snapchat was the first 
application to be investigated [4]. Figure 1 shows Snapchat 
data. Four areas were highlighted within the figure. This 
included the login user name ‘aimee_test19’, that was used 
to log into Snapchat and detection of an ‘offensive words’ 
used in messages. The next highlighted section was the 
evidence that there was messaging communication between 
a user ‘aimee_test19’ and another user. The final 
highlighted section shows a chat deletion message count 
with a value of one, which indicates that a message was 
deleted by the user, which was a true case. A general search 
of the extracted mobile device was conducted using the 
search feature on Oxygen Forensics. The findings included 
general application data within the file browser, such as the 
Snapchat library, stickers, etc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Snapchat artefacts in Oxygen. 
The next application investigate was Cyberdust [18]. 
Previously, Snapchat appeared in the ‘Applications’ tile on 
Oxygen displaying itself as a normal application. However, 
with Cyberdust only the application folder was recognised, 
and Cyberdust was not acknowledged as a full application 
like Snapchat, however the folder proved there was 
evidence of an application called Cyberdust being present 
on the mobile device. This could be because the application 
did not require a username and password to log in, rather the 
user’s mobile number instead, which therefore meant the 
phone did not identify it as an application in the same way 
as Snapchat, where it requires a username and password. 
Figure 2 shows results from a general search of the word 
‘dust’. 
 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-743-6
CYBER 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
Figure 2. Cyberdust general search Oxygen 
The results from the file browser show private folder 
pathway names. This acknowledges the existence of the 
application itself within the mobile device, but it does not 
have definitive messages between two users. However, as 
Figure 
2 
highlights, 
both 
‘Google’ 
and 
‘FireBaseMessaging’ were in the private folders. FireBase, 
formerly known as google cloud messaging, is a cross-
platform cloud solution for messaging [22]. This means that 
the data from the application could be deleted on the mobile 
device itself, but data may be uploaded elsewhere in the 
cloud and therefore access could be granted through that, 
but this needs to be explored further. For this investigation 
however, it was proven that the application, Cyberdust, was 
a messaging application, but there was no evidence of 
messages between two users. Additionally, Figure 2 
highlights a ‘Generic’ password in the search. This shows 
that the application has stored a password, most likely the 
user’s password, but has encrypted it with a token. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Confide general search Oxygen. 
The last application investigated was Confide [19]. 
Similarly, to Cyberdust, there was little evidence to prove 
the application Confide existed under the ‘Applications’ 
tile. Unlike Snapchat, the only data Confide showed within 
the Applications tile was a private pathway. Figure 3 shows 
results from a general search of the word ‘Confide’. The 
results showed general application files in private folders 
within the file browser. The number ‘+17752040571’ in 
Figure 3 is a verification text message from the application 
itself to verify the user's account. Even though there was 
evidence that the Confide was installed in the phone, no 
application specific communication between users or user 
log in details was  recovered. There were however, four 
passwords that were linked to the application Confide. 
Three being generic and one being an Internet password. 
The passwords could have been the user login password, but 
the passwords were encrypted. Therefore, the passwords 
weren’t visible and were secure for the user’s account. 
B. MOBILedit Forensic Express 
The next part of the investigation was to examine the 
mobile device and the applications under examination using 
MOBILedit Forensic Express. Once the report generated 
from MOBILedit, the next step in the investigation was to 
navigate to the applications section of the report focusing on 
Snapchat, Cyberdust and Confide. The first application 
investigated was Snapchat [4]. Figure 4 shows the accounts 
used to log in to Snapchat and the list of contacts and the 
pathways to “plist”, where the contact’s information was 
stored. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Snapchat data in MOBILedit. 
 
Figure 4 proves that the mobile device was linked to a 
Snapchat account with the username ‘aimee_test19’, and 
both victim and suspect were likely to had communication 
as the names (username blackened out) appeared on the 
contact log of the phone. This finding would let further 
interrogation to the suspect during the investigation. 
Similarly to Oxygen, MOBILedit also found general 
application artefacts under private folders, but nothing 
significant that contributed to the investigation. 
The next application that was looked at within 
MOBILedit was Cyberdust [18]. Figure 5 shows Cyberdust 
pplication data and the account the mobile device linked to 
the application. As Figure 5 displays, one account was 
evidently linked from the mobile device to the application. 
This proves the mobile user did use the application and also 
had an account. However, there were no account details 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-743-6
CYBER 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
recovered from that section of the report and unlike 
Snapchat, no contacts were found either, when the user did 
in fact have one contact on the application. However, this 
may be because the user contact was directly through a 
mobile number, which was already in the mobile user’s 
general phone contact list. Therefore, the contact may not 
have been stored on the application itself. 
Figure 5. Cyberdust application in MOBILedit. 
Some data was recovered from the ‘Passwords’ section 
within the generated report as shown in Figure 6. The 
“Password” had the label of “PhoneNumber”. The data 
itself was the mobile user’s unencrypted phone number. No 
other data was found in the passwords section of the report. 
Since the phone number was stored by the application, it 
shows evidence of a user account on the mobile device. 
 Figure 6. Phone number recovery in Cyberdust. 
The last application MOBILedit investigated on the 
mobile device was Confide [19]. Figure 7 displays Confide 
within the application list generated by MOBILedit. Unlike 
Snapchat and Cyberdust, the generated report displayed no 
information on contacts or accounts within Confide. Similar 
to the finding by Oxygen, Figure 6 suggests that there was 
little evidence that the mobile device had an account with 
the application. 
 
Figure 7. Confide application data MOBILedit. 
Figure 8. Phone number and password artefacts in Confide. 
Figure 8 displays the mobile number and the password 
artefact recovered from the application. The account was the 
mobile user’s unencrypted phone number, and the password 
was the user password for the created account for the 
application. The password was also unencrypted. This 
suggested that the application have stored the user password 
unsafely. 
C. Evaluation of findings   
Both tools used in the mobile investigation output 
slightly different results. While neither recovered messages 
from the ephemeral applications tested, both of them 
recovered artefacts elsewhere. Oxygen and MOBILedit 
successfully recovered data on all applications: Snapchat, 
Cyberdust and Confide. While different artefacts and data 
were detected, the fact that no physical copies of messages 
were recovered in any application, using either of the 
forensic tools, proves how efficient ephemeral applications 
are at protecting user privacy. Oxygen detected offensive 
words being sent/received, this would be useful within a 
cyberbullying case, even though the message itself was not 
recovered. The evidence detected of communication 
between the mobile user and another contact would also 
prove useful as the application would be able to tell 
detectives who the mobile user had been in contact with. 
This would also be useful in a cyberbullying case, as there 
would be evidence the ‘bully’ had contact with the victim. 
Furthermore, the detection of Cloud messaging within 
Cyberdust suggested that although physical messages were 
not recovered within the application, the messages could 
have been uploaded elsewhere to a Cloud network and 
access could be gained through the network. This would 
provide a chance for messages to perhaps be recovered in a 
cyberbullying case.  
For Confide, Oxygen displays the password in 
encrypted format, while the MOBILedit shows it in 
unencrypted format. MOBILedit also recovered an 
unencrypted version of the registered mobile number, which 
Oxygen could not. For the Snapchat, MOBILedit detected 
account data, such as the mobile user’s username and the 
contact list within the application. However, MOBILedit 
failed to detect other evidences, such as offensive words, 
evidence of communication between the mobile user and 
another contact, and the evidence of a message being 
deleted. 
D. NIST Measurements 
MOBILedit 
met 
all 
nine 
NIST 
measurement 
requirements tested in this research, while Oxygen did not, 
yet Oxygen did meet most of them. Comparisons of all nine 
test cases have been reported in Table 3.  
TABLE III.  
NIST TEST  RESULTS 
Measurements 
tested 
NIST test assertions applications 
Were the requirements met?  
(Y = Yes N = No) 
Oxygen Forensic 
Detective 
Enterprise 
MOBILedit 
Forensic Express 
MDT-CA-01 
Y 
Y 
MDT-CA-02 
N 
Y 
MDT-CA-03 
N 
Y 
MDT-CA-04 
N 
Y 
MDT-CA-05 
Y 
Y 
MDT-CA-06 
Y 
Y 
MDT-CA-07 
Y 
Y 
MDT-CA-08 
Y 
Y 
MDT-CA-09 
Y 
Y 
Oxygen provided the user with a “Select All” individual 
data 
objects 
(MDT-CA-02) 
while 
completing 
the 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-743-6
CYBER 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
logical/filesystem acquisition, it also provided the ability to 
“Select Individual” data objects (MDT-CA-03) for 
acquisition; in both of these cases MOBILedit failed. In 
another test case (MDT-CA-04), where Oxygen had a 
success over MBOILedit was during data acquisition,  when 
connectivity between the mobile and tool was  disrupted; a 
notification was given to alert the user. Both tools could 
successfully present all supported data elements in useable 
formats via preview pane or generated report, as required by 
NIST measurement test id MDT-CA-05. Both tools also 
reported other test cases, such as reporting equipment 
related information (MDT-CA-09) and hash values for the 
data objects (MDT-CA-09).  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
To conclude, this forensic investigation was successful 
in how it was carried out, it followed professional ACPO 
guidelines [16], the tools were tested against NIST 
measurements, and the whole investigation was forensically 
sound. However, no full ephemeral messages were 
recovered with either of the tools, but other significant 
artefacts were found which proved rather interesting to the 
investigation and to potential cyberbullying cases. One 
significant finding was that of the Snapchat’s ‘offensive 
words’ detection, which may help aid evidence in 
cyberbullying cases to prove inappropriate language may 
have been used towards a victim. In forensic investigations, 
the investigators have to look very deep into the data and 
have a lot of patience, as one small piece of evidence could 
change the case, such as the offensive word. On reflection, 
a physical acquisition may have provided a much more 
thorough investigation to recover deleted data, but that can 
be tested in future work. Also, in the future more tools can 
be compared in recovering evidential data from a wide 
range of ephemeral applications.  
REFERENCES 
[1] GSMA, Number of Mobile Subscribers Worldwide Hits 5 
Billion. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.gsma.com/newsroom/press-release/number-
mobile-subscribers-worldwide-hits-5-billion/ 
[Accessed: 
07- Aug- 2019]. 
[2] C. Cotta, A.J. Fernandez-Lelva, F. Fernandez de Vega and 
F. Chavez, “Application Areas of Ephemeral Computing: A 
Survey” in ‘Transactions on Computational Collective 
Intelligence’: David Camacho, University of Malaga, pp. 
155-157, 2016.  
[3] I. Barker, Cyber criminals turn to messaging apps following 
dark web crackdown, Betanews, 2017. [Online]. Available 
from: 
https://betanews.com/2017/10/25/criminals-turn-to-
messaging/ [Accessed: 07- Aug- 2019] 
[4] T. Alyaha and F. Kausar, “Snapchat Analysis to Discover 
Digital Forensic Artefacts on Android Smartphone”, 8th 
International Conference on Ambient Systems, Networks 
and Technologies, ANT-2017 and the 7th International 
Conference on Sustainable Energy Information Technology, 
SEIT 2017, 16-19 May 2017, Madeira, Portugal, pp. 1035-
1040, 2017. 
[5] J. Charteris, S. Gregory, Y. Masters and M. Maple, 
“Snapchat at school – 'Now you see it…': Networked affect 
– cyber bullying, harassment and sexting”, Innovation, 
Practice and Research in the Use of Educational 
Technologies in Tertiary Education 33rd International 
Conference, University of South Australia, Adelaide, 
Australia, pp. 111-114, November 2016. 
[6] S. Cook, Cyberbullying facts and statistics for 2016-2018, 
2018. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.comparitech.com/internet-
providers/cyberbullying-statistics/ [Accessed: : 07- Aug- 
2019] 
[7] Oxygen Forensics, Oxygen Forensic Detective Enterprise, 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.oxygen-
forensic.com/en/products/oxygen-forensic-detective-
enterprise [Accessed: : 07- Aug- 2019]. 
[8] MOBILedit Forensic, MOBILedit Forensic Express, 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.mobiledit.com/online-store/forensic-express 
[Accessed: : 07- Aug- 2019]. 
[9] D. Walnycky, I. Baggili, A. Marrington, J. Moore and F. 
Breitinger, “Network and device forensic analysis of 
Android social-messaging applications”, The Proceedings of 
the Fifteenth Annual DFRWS Conference, USA, pp. S77-
S84, August 2015.  
[10] V. Vijayan, Android Forensic Capability and Evaluation of 
Extraction 
Tools, 
2012. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.academia.edu/1632597/Android_Forensic_Ca
pability_and_Evaluation_of_Extraction_Tools [Accessed : 
07- Aug- 2019] 
[11] K. M. Ovens and G. Morison, Forensic analysis of kik 
messenger on ios devices. Digital Investigation, vol. 17, pp. 
40-52, 2016. 
[12] M. Al-Hadadi and A. AlShidhani, “Smartphone Forensics 
Analysis: A Case Study”, International Journal of Computer 
and Electrical Engineering, vol. 5, pp. 577-579, 2013. 
[13] M. A. H. B. Azhar and T. Barton,  “Forensic Analysis of 
Secure Ephemeral Messaging Applications on Android 
Platforms”, Jan. 2017, doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-51064-4.  
[14] R. Umar, I. Riadi and G. Zamroni, “Mobile Forensic Tools 
Evaluation for Digital Crime Investigation”, International 
Journal on Advanced Science, Engineering and Information 
Technology, vol. 8, pp. 949-955, 2018. 
[15] Panda Security, What is an online troll?, 2017. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.pandasecurity.com/mediacenter/security/what-
is-an-online-troll/ [Accessed: 07- Aug- 2019]. 
[16] ACPO, ACPO Good Practice Guide for Digital Evidence, 
2012. [Online]. Available from: https://www.digital-
detective.net/digital-forensics-
documents/ACPO_Good_Practice_Guide_for_Digital_Evid
ence_v5.pdf [Accessed: 07- Aug- 2019]. 
[17] Omnicore , Snapchat by the Numbers: Stats, Demographics 
& 
Fun 
Facts, 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.omnicoreagency.coma/snapchat-statistics/ 
[Accessed: 07- Aug- 2019]. 
[18] Dust,  The APP that protects your assests, [Online]. 
Available from: https://usedust.com/ [Accessed: 07- Aug- 
2019]. 
[19] Confide, Your Confidential Messenger, [Online]. Available 
from: https://getconfide.com/ [Accessed: 07- Aug- 2019] 
[20] Forensic Focus, MOBILedit Forensic Express From 
Compelson, 
2018. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://forensicfocus.com/c/aid=229/reviews/2018/mobiledi
t-forensic-express-from-compelson/ [Accessed: 07- Aug- 
2019] 
[21] National Institute of Standards and Technology, Mobile 
Device Tool Test Assertions and Test Plan, 2016. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.nist.gov/sites/default/files/documents/2017/05/
09/mobile_device_tool_test_assertions_and_test_plan_v2.0
.pdf [07- Aug- 2019]. 
[22] FireBase Messaging, Firebase Cloud Messaging, [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://firebase.google.com/docs/cloud-
messaging [Accessed: 07- Aug- 2019] 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-743-6
CYBER 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

