Fusion or Fantasy 
Is Cyber Fusion Living Up to the Dream? 
Anne Coull 
Flinders University 
Sydney, Australia  
email: anne.coull@proton.me  
 
Abstract— The Cyber Fusion Centre has evolved from a 
military and antiterrorist intelligence gathering centre to 
become an intelligence focus for collating information and 
facilitating cyber incident management in organisations. Some 
benefit is being realised in Australia’s larger banks as they 
manage the challenge of coordinating cyber response across 
disparate and siloed teams. These simple Cyber Fusion Centres 
provide basic, manual, reactive coordination of cyber incidents 
by generating open communication between response teams. 
This basic fusion model being implemented in Australian 
banks, and documented in the FS-ISAC whitepaper, is miles 
from the visionary Cyber Fusion Centre models described in 
the literature. These theoretical centres of response excellence 
incorporating strategic threat intelligence, orchestration, crisis 
simulations and ultimate real-time response-capability are well 
beyond the current reality. The answers for closing the gap 
between theory and practice can be found by looking into the 
original military fusion centres. 
 
Keywords- 
Cyber 
Fusion 
Centre; 
Intelligence; 
Counterinsurgence 
Operations; 
Counterterrorism; 
Crisis 
Management. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
As the coordination centre for cyber intelligence and 
response within an organisation, the Cyber Fusion Centre 
would appear to be the logical place from whence to drive 
accelerated response to cyber security incidents. The 
literature describes the Cyber Fusion Centre as a 
collaboration between threat intelligence, incident response, 
threat hunting, and vulnerability management, with the 
purpose of accelerating identification and response to 
security threats. A fusion centre of this nature will enable an 
organisation to accelerate response by removing delays 
through orchestrating cyber response activities that span 
multiple departments and teams. By sharing strategic 
intelligence, it will allow the organization to be more 
proactive in their cyber response, pre-emptively preparing 
for and mitigating the emerging threats, rather than just 
responding to threats after the alerts have been generated, 
and the incidents have occurred. 
The Cyber Fusion Centre emerging in Australian banks, 
and documented in a whitepaper by the Financial Services 
Information Sharing and Analysis Center (FS-ISAC), is a 
simple model of collaboration between security, service 
management, and customer service. The fusion centre 
team’s role is to coordinate response activities involving 
these and other operations and technical support teams. This 
model is based on Cyber Fusion Centre capabilities 
operating in banks and organisations in the United States, 
Canada, Singapore, and Australia. Utilising fusion in this 
way reduces potential threat impact by decreasing time to 
identify complex and critical incidents and time to respond, 
but it does not deliver the scale of uplift nor the benefits 
anticipated in the literature. 
Section 2 outlines the evolution of fusion centres from 
military coordination centres to intelligent Cyber Fusion 
Centres. Section 3 assesses the cyber fusion theory versus 
the reality. Section 4 looks at how Cyber Fusion Centres 
have been implemented in Australia and delves into a 
specific instance in a large Australian bank to highlight 
opportunities for improvement, and Section 5 provides 
insight into how the gap between the theory and reality can 
be closed. 
II. CYBER FUSION EVOLUTION 
       Fusion centres have functioned as operations’ response 
coordination centres since mankind participated in multi-
domain warfare. Over time, the fusion centre model has 
evolved into a centre for intelligence, co-ordination, and 
information sharing, in response to terrorist incidents and 
the growth of cyber-crime. 
A. Military Fusion Centres  
For decades, fusion centres have operated in the 
military as Joint Operations Centres, to co-ordinate 
operations across the multiple domains of war: land, sea, air, 
and space, and more recently cyberspace [1][7][11][13][14] 
(see Figure 1).  
 
 
Figure 1. Military Fusion Centre. 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-113-8
CYBER 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

Military fusion has enabled more efficient and effective 
offensive and defensive operations by providing broad 
situational awareness and facilitating coordination of 
activities across different regions, regiments, and domains.  
 
B. Counterinsurgency 
Operations’ 
Intelligence 
Fusion and Flow 
Counterinsurgency operations (COINOPS) take this 
need for intelligence fusion and flow to a high level. To stay 
abreast of enemy movements, COINOPS need tangible real-
time intelligence. This sensitivity is driven by COINOPS 
role working closely with both military and civilian 
populations. Insurgencies involve mixtures of conflict and 
tactics 
across 
multiple 
domains, 
topographies, 
and 
offensives. 
Information 
flow 
is 
critical 
during 
counterinsurgency operations’ when this information needs 
to be disseminated from/to headquarters (HQ) and the front-
line troops and commanders in real-time. Rather than having 
all the intelligence capabilities centralised in military HQ, 
the key is to have technology and personnel, with the 
necessary capabilities, implanted through all layers of the 
intelligence information flow, from front line platoons and 
commanders to HQ. These may be specialised language 
translators and intelligence analysts, or military personnel 
holding these skills [11] (See Figure 2). 
 
 
Figure 2. COINOPS Model. 
 
C. Counterterrorism Intelligence Fusion Centres 
Following the New York twin tower attacks on 
September 11, 2001, in the U.S., fusion centres evolved 
from wartime and operational co-ordination centres into 
centres for collating and correlating terrorist intelligence. In 
the U.S., the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) was 
created at the national level, to bring together intelligence 
and law enforcement. Correspondingly, law enforcement, 
public security, and emergency response were also 
centralised at the state level. Fusion centres were created to 
connect the local and state intelligence centres with federal 
intelligence organisations and services. This amalgamated 
model facilitates the flow of counterterrorism (CT) 
intelligence from/to local to/from federal [15] (See Figure 
3). The purpose of creating a combined model of 
intelligence, law enforcement and emergency response was 
to drive more efficient and effective offensive and defensive 
intelligence-enabled security, public safety, and emergency 
response, through communications, collaboration, and 
coordination across these different capabilities at the state 
and national levels [15]. 
 
 
Figure 3. DHS Fusion Centres [15]. 
 
D. Intelligent Cyber Fusion Centres 
As security leaders moved from roles in military 
defence into business, they saw the need, in their new 
organisations, for Intelligent Cyber Fusion Centres to drive 
more efficient and effective intelligence-enabled cyber 
response and incident management, through integrated 
intelligence and operations. As a result, Cyber Fusion 
Centres have been established in a number of larger 
organisations across the United States of America, and in 
some of the larger Australian Banks.  
A Cyber Fusion Centre (CFC) is described in the 
literature as a physical or virtual entity created through 
collaboration between threat intelligence, incident response, 
threat hunting and vulnerability management, with the 
purpose of identifying, managing, and rapidly responding to 
security threats. This may be a separate team, a virtual team 
with representation from the local response teams, or a 
blend, with a small group of individuals facilitating and 
coordinating aggregation, collation, and distribution of 
information across the participating teams, and analysing 
this integrated information to identify themes and 
correlations [1][3][4][15][16]. The theoretical Cyber Fusion 
Centre accelerates threat response by bringing together: 
1. Technical Threat Intelligence such as attack 
vectors, suspicious domains, malware hashes, and 
exploited vulnerabilities to assess the cyber threats 
facing the organization;  
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-113-8
CYBER 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

2. Strategic Threat Intelligence to map attack trends, 
motivations, and characteristics; 
3. Analysis of this intelligence to generate insights 
about threats and adversary behaviours, Tactics, 
Techniques and Procedures (TTPs), and Indicators 
Of Compromise (IOC) [1]-[3]. 
4. Cyber incident management [6]. 
 
As it matures, the fusion centre will extend to deliver: 
1. Security Orchestration, Automation and Response 
(SOAR), with automated operational workflows to 
facilitate incident triage, threat pattern analysis, and 
automated threat response capabilities; 
2. Response plan testing and crisis simulations to 
prepare for major incidents; and 
3. Short and long-term recovery planning [2][3][15] 
(See Figure 4).  
 
 
Figure 4. Intelligent Cyber Fusion Centre model [3]. 
 
III.  CYBER FUSION THEORY VERSUS PRACTICE 
The accelerated response enabled by Intelligent Cyber 
Fusion Centres should enable organisations to move 
towards proactive control and near real-time containment of 
cyber threats [1]-[6][10]. But Cyber Fusion Centres 
implemented in Australian businesses differ considerably 
from their theoretical counterparts. 
 
A. Objectives & Benefits 
Financial Services Information Sharing and Analysis 
Centre (FS-ISAC) is a collaborative not-for-profit venture 
whose mission is to “advance cybersecurity and resilience in 
the global financial system, protecting financial institutions 
and the people they serve” [8]. The 2023 whitepaper 
released by FS-ISAC and authored by a subcommittee of its 
members, provides recommendations for establishing and 
implementing a Cyber Fusion Centre in a bank. According 
to the FS-ISAC whitepaper, the CFC’s primary benefit is 
derived from sharing information during an incident, by 
“synchronising response activities across different regions, 
business units, and other Fusion Centers.” In addition, the 
whitepaper highlights that the CFC establishes a common 
language, streamlining communications between responders 
and leadership prior to and during security events, and 
improving c-suite risk reporting. The expected benefits 
revolve around the resultant uplift in response capability 
based on: 
- 
“Standardised, repeatable, incident response and 
management processes; 
- 
Enhanced transparency into tactical reactions to 
events; 
- 
Dedicated, trained, and experienced incident 
commanders; 
- 
Improved adherence to regulatory disclosure 
requirements; 
Demonstrated 
overall 
security 
posture 
to 
regulators/clients/and executives” [9]. 
B. Fusion Centre Participants 
The FS-ISAC whitepaper on Cyber Fusion Centres 
(2023) describes a centralised, co-located or distributed, 
virtual 
model 
focused 
on 
response 
and 
incident 
management, where multiple areas in the business are 
impacted [9] (See Figure 5). 
FS-ISAC recommends the core participants in the 
fusion centre include representatives from: 
• 
Security Operations Centre (incl. Cyber & 
Technology) 
• 
Incident & Crisis Management 
• 
Fraud Management 
• 
Physical Security   
• 
Intelligence  
• 
Third Party Management 
• 
Communications 
• 
Compliance, and   
• 
Legal 
A secondary group of participants are recommended to 
participate when an incident is relevant to their areas of 
responsibility. These secondary members include: 
• 
Accounting 
• 
Anti-Money Laundering (AML)  
• 
Business Continuity 
• 
Digital Protection & Forensics 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-113-8
CYBER 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

• 
Data Privacy / Breach Incident Response  
• 
Human Relations 
• 
Group Insurance 
• 
Internal Investigations (Insider Threat) 
• 
Risk  
• 
Public Relations 
• 
Security Architecture  
• 
Security Awareness  
• 
Service Management (Eg Payments, Customer 
Service, Internet Banking), and  
• 
Vulnerability Management [9]. 
 
 
Figure 5. FS-ISAC Cyber Fusion Centre Model, based on [9]. 
 
C. Implementation Model 
The 
FS-ISAC 
paper 
outlines 
the 
method 
for 
implementing a Cyber Fusion Centre starting with a daily 
check-in, where participants share observations and insights 
from the previous 24 hours. The purpose of the daily check-
in is to facilitate collaboration between participating teams 
and capture the updates they provide. Participants raise 
items of interest, question one another, and look for 
common elements and themes. The coordinating CFC team 
documents and tracks items raised and actions involving 
multiple participating teams. As the CFC matures, trends 
and patterns may be identified and tracked [9].  
IV.  IMPLEMENTATION OF CYBER FUSION CENTRES IN 
AUSTRALIA 
The few fusion centres in Australia are concentrated in 
the larger banks. These organisations are highly complex, 
heavily regulated, and potentially lucrative targets for threat 
actors [4].  
A. Size and complexity matters 
Industry research indicates that only the big-4 banks in 
Australia are implementing or considering implementing 
Cyber Fusion Centres. In these large-scale organisations, the 
complexities of communicating between multiple teams 
who participate in cyber, fraud, and service management 
incident detection and response, with their different 
perspectives and priorities, can hamper fluid information 
flow. The large security departments that have evolved in 
these banks naturally segregate into silos, with each team 
focusing on their local accountabilities [2].  
Two of the big-4 Australian Banks have attempted to 
implement cyber fusion centres. In these organisations, the 
CFC has played a role in bridging the gaps across disparate 
teams, facilitating open communications, and creating an 
integrated perspective for response activities. The first of the 
big 4 banks to implement Cyber Fusion, established a 
virtual capability where people from different teams across 
security came together to facilitate incident response. This 
virtual model was disbanded when the Chief Information 
Security Officer (CISO) who championed its creation, 
exited the organisation. 
In another of the largest Australian banks, the CFC 
was established with an initial focus on facilitating 
information flow. The central fusion team coordinates daily 
communications forums each morning, with representatives 
from the different teams across cyber and physical security, 
fraud, IT service management priority incident response, 
crisis management, supplier management, and customer 
service (See Figure 6). These specialised teams have been 
functioning independently prior to the creation of the CFC. 
Coming together daily to share updates and insights on what 
they have seen in the previous 24 hours has facilitated 
greater cooperation between the teams. The CFC has been 
active in encouraging this cooperation, involving themselves 
when an incident spans multiple domains.  
Beyond initial benefits elicited from the sharing of 
insights and improved cooperation, the value being derived 
from the CFC has been limited. While the non-cyber teams 
share their experiences openly, the core-cyber teams 
continue to show resistance to imparting any real 
information. The updates provided by these participants do 
not include detailed technical threat intelligence regarding 
the threats facing the bank, nor corresponding alerts, nor 
strategic threat intel showing trends, motivations and 
characteristics, and adversary behaviours. This is impacting 
the depth of situational awareness across the participants, 
which continues to be limited and localised. Further work is 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-113-8
CYBER 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

needed to develop trust and a sense of shared purpose for 
the cyber teams.  
The expected benefits from the CFC, such as 
accelerating threat response, are not yet being seen. The 
CFC has not played a role in developing SOAR capabilities, 
nor have they made plans to facilitate practice sessions in 
preparation for major or significant incidents, nor are they 
involved in short- and long-term recovery planning. While 
the CFC team supports incident management spanning 
multiple 
domains, 
the 
majority 
of 
cyber 
incident 
management continues to be accomplished locally within 
the specialist teams.  
Observational analysis indicates that, to a large degree, 
the development and success of the CFC is being hindered 
by the inexperience of the CFC leader and their lack of 
knowledge and understanding of cybersecurity, fraud, 
and/or financial crime. In addition, progress is stymied by 
the absence of a rousing vision, coupled with an inability to 
lead diverse teams and drive organisational change through 
inspirational leadership.  
Without a clear vision and roadmap to propel them 
forward, in this instance, the CFC is falling prey to 
operating at the task level. Continued aversion to 
implementing performance measures, to focus their actions 
on outcomes, may make it challenging for them to justify 
their value over time.  
 
 
Figure 6. Cyber Fusion Centre in Australian Bank. 
 
B. Crisis Management 
In the Australian bank, where the CFC facilitates a 
daily standup with representatives from the areas illustrated 
in Figure 6, observations are discussed, insights are shared, 
and areas of overlap and interdependence are highlighted. 
Where interdependencies are more complex and broader-
reaching incidents are revealed, the CFC team steps up to 
try to ensure an integrated response approach.  
High Priority cyber incidents emerging from these 
collaborative sessions, whose scale of impact or potential 
impact exceeds an agreed threshold, are handed over to the 
Crisis Management Team (CMT). The CMT coordinates 
crisis management across IT support and operations, service 
management, 
suppliers, 
customer 
service, 
corporate 
communications, and business leaders to ensure a consistent 
approach. They receive tip offs from various sources, 
including the CFC daily standups. They have clear 
accountabilities and established, direct communication with 
senior management and the C-suite. The CFC team leans-in 
to provide day-to-day support to the Crisis Management 
Team during a crisis situation (See Figure 7).  
 
 
Figure 7. Fusion and Crisis Management 
in an Australian Bank. 
 
C. Vulnerability Remediation 
Vulnerabilities 
and 
remediation 
requirements 
identified through this bank’s Crisis Management process 
are captured through the crisis management process. These 
vulnerabilities are prioritised, funded, and remediated to 
ensure similar situations are not repeated. Many of these 
vulnerabilities are known, reported and documented prior to 
the incident, but not prioritised or funded. These larger scale 
incidents, and the resultant crises, provide appropriate 
visibility and senior management focus to the potential 
risks, and the funding follows. 
D. Small Scale 
Smaller 
organisations 
can 
rely 
on 
open 
communications and close interpersonal relationships when 
coordinating their response efforts, but this is not scalable. 
The smaller scale organisations that were assessed in the 
energy and financial sectors did not see a need for a CFC, as 
communications and coordination during high priority 
incidents was straightforward. Analysis found that the 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-113-8
CYBER 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

communications within smaller organisations, such as those 
within the insurance and energy sectors, is naturally more 
open and less arduous. With only a handful of individuals 
involved in incident management and cyber response, it is 
easy for each participant to have a deep understanding of 
their own area of accountability, as well as visibility across 
the cyber and business landscape. In these smaller 
organisations, there is less opportunity for information to 
fall through the gaps. 
V. ADDRESSING THE GAP 
 
The lack of maturity observed in the existing Cyber 
Fusion Centres in Australia is reflected in the benefits they 
deliver. These fall far short of the goal. But the level of 
capability uplift described in the literature is attainable. The 
keys to addressing the gap between Cyber Fusion Centre 
theory and practice can be found in the fusion models that 
have been most successful in military operations; the 
COINOPS intelligence fusion and flow model. This model 
highlights the need for: 
1. A Shared Vision 
The COINOPS commander in the field is clear 
on their direction, with a strong vision of the 
mission objectives. The vision of a cohesive mature 
CFC function, that brings together every aspect of 
cyber: intelligence; vulnerability management; 
detection; response; and recovery, with technology, 
and customer support, for complete situational 
awareness, is exciting. The CFS vision needs to be 
clearly and inspiringly communicated from the top 
echelons of leadership through the CFC leader, to 
the analysts and response teams working day-to-
day with the CFC.  
 
2. The Right Skills and Leadership Capability 
Cyber Fusion effectiveness relies on the right 
mix of skills and capabilities, in the same way the 
COINOPS effectiveness relies on the right mix of 
skills for intelligence fusion and flow. The 
effective 
COINOPS 
platoon 
in 
the 
field 
incorporates 
both 
military 
specialists 
and 
professionals who understand the environment, 
with language and technology specialists, and 
intelligence 
analysts 
who 
generate 
situation 
awareness 
[11]. 
The 
platoon 
commander’s 
understanding of the civilian and military context, 
in that moment, in the field, is crucial. Their depth 
of experience and capability is reflected in their 
ability to lead a diverse team of specialists, through 
challenging 
situations; 
distilling 
intelligence, 
providing direction; and retaining grasp of the goal 
while flexing to fit with the constantly changing 
circumstances [11].   
The 
fusion 
centre 
leader 
requires 
an 
equivalent level of contextual appreciation, depth 
of leadership capability and experience, focus on 
outcomes, and the ability to distill information and 
lead diverse teams of specialists through potentially 
challenging situations.  
 
3. Clear Information Flow and Accountabilities 
The DHS Counterterrorism Fusion model 
illustrates how different accountable teams can be 
brought together into fusion centres to work more 
collaboratively and to facilitate information flow 
from state to/from national level [15]. The 
COINOPS model has taken this to the next level, 
accelerating 
the 
flow 
of 
information 
and 
intelligence through the layers of command to 
enable and empower the platoon commanders in 
the field to make informed decisions, in the 
moment [11]. Similarly, the effectiveness and 
efficacy of Cyber Fusion and Incident Response in 
organisations relies on clear accountabilities and 
fluid flow of information and intelligence, 
vertically and horizontally. 
 
4. Robust Strategy and Roadmap 
Turning the Cyber Fusion Centre vision into 
reality relies on having a roadmap that outlines the 
steps to get from the current, manual, reactive 
reality, to the proactive, informed real-time 
intelligent fusion analytics and integrated response 
capability. This roadmap needs to include all the 
relevant changes needed for policies, processes, 
technology and people. 
Significant performance uplift can be attained 
by strategically utilising existing technology and 
intelligence 
already 
available 
within 
the 
organization, to facilitate situational transparency 
and awareness across the response teams. As it 
matures, CFC will be required to leverage 
technology for timely information flow, integrated 
intelligence analytics, and orchestrated response 
capability.  
 
5. Practice 
Regular simulated crises will build the skills to 
manage large scale and broad reaching incidents, 
uplifting response capability and building business 
readiness [12][16]. 
 
6. Collaborative Working  
Utilizing capable leadership to overcome 
resistance to the new ways of working is the most 
challenging aspect of building a fusion centre. The 
CFC is a shared responsibility with potential 
benefits 
that 
span 
the 
business. 
Effective 
organisational change management, with visible 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-113-8
CYBER 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

senior-leader sponsorship, and hands-on and 
capable leadership from the CFC, will inspire and 
encourage teams to participate, learn from one-
another, build mutual trust, and share in the 
collective gain of fusion [3].  
 
7. Performance Measures 
Performance measures help team members to 
focus on the elements that make a difference. To 
demonstrate how the CFC can accelerate cyber 
threat response, performance metrics such as: 
the Mean Time To Detect (MTTD), Mean Time To 
Respond (MTTR), and Mean Time To Contain 
(MTTC) need to be baselined and tracked 
[6].  Improvements in these measures will highlight 
the CFC’s value, as well as point to areas requiring 
their attention.   
 
VII.  CONCLUSION 
The Cyber Fusion Centre holds great promise for 
organisations faced with coordinating multiple divisions and 
departments when responding to cyber incidents. The 
literature paints a picture of Cyber Fusion Centres as hubs 
of intelligence, knowledge, and response coordination 
excellence; where expertise comes together to problem 
solve and drive actionable outcomes. The reality is much 
simpler and more basic. The Cyber Fusion Centres 
described 
in 
the 
FS-ISAC 
whitepaper 
and 
being 
implemented in Australian banks, focus on basic manual 
and reactive response coordination through daily standups 
where representatives share their observations and insights 
with one another. While this has provided some benefit 
through open information sharing across teams, it is not 
delivering the anticipated improvements.  
Building a mature intelligence-enabled cyber fusion 
capability and realising the associated benefits, requires 
visionary and strategic leadership, a broad appreciation of 
cyber security in all its aspects, an ability to engage and 
inspire cyber professionals to join-in, and a deep understand 
of the problems the fusion centre is addressing, along with 
the skills to make it happen.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Anomali, What is a Cyber Fusion Centre, Available from: 
https://www.anomali.com/blog/what-is-a-cyber-fusion-center, 
accessed July 2023. 
[2] Cyware, What is a Cyber Fusion Center Center and how is it 
different from Security Operations Center (SOC)?, August 
2018, 
Available 
from: 
https://cyware.com/security-
guides/cyber-fusion-and-threat-response/what-is-cyber-
fusion-center-and-how-is-it-different-from-security-
operations-center-soc-b13a, accessed June 2023.  
[3] Cyware, Building a Cyber Fusion Center, November 2020, 
Available from: https://cyware.com/educational-guides/cyber-
fusion-and-threat-response/building-a-cyber-fusion-center-
ae08/, accessed June 2023. 
[4] Cyware, Why are Financial Institutions Adopting Cyber 
Fusion 
Strategies, 
May 
2022, 
Available 
from: 
https://cyware.com/security-guides/cyber-fusion-and-threat-
response/why-are-financial-institutions-adopting-cyber-
fusion-strategies-57b5, accessed June 2023.  
[5] Cyware, How Can You Improve Your Security Posture with 
Cyber 
Fusion?, 
June 
2022, 
Available 
from: 
https://cyware.com/security-guides/cyber-fusion-and-threat-
response/how-can-you-improve-your-security-posture-with-
cyber-fusion-3afb, accessed June 2023. 
[6] Cyware, How Cyber Fusion Provides 360-degree Threat 
Visibility? 
July 
2020, 
Available 
from: 
https://cyware.com/security-guides/cyber-fusion-and-threat-
response/how-cyber-fusion-provides-360-degree-threat-
visibility-8fda, accessed June 2023 
[7] D. P. Fidler, Inter arma silent leges Redux? The law of armed 
conflict and cyber conflict, Cyberspace and national security 
threats, opportunities, and power in a virtual world, 
Georgetown University Press / Washington, DC 2012. 
[8] FSISAC1, Financial Services Information Sharing and 
Analysis Center, Available from https://www.fsisac.com/, 
accessed June 2023. 
[9] FSISAC2 Fusion Council, Considerations for Implementing a 
Fusion Operating Model in Financial Services– Whitepaper, 
Financial Services Information Sharing and Analysis Centre 
(FS-ISAC) 
May 
2023. 
Available 
from 
https://www.fsisac.com/, accessed June 2023. 
[10] K. L. Mclaughlin, Cybersecurity and fusion centers, The 
EDP Audit, Control, And Security Newsletter 2023, vol. 67, 
no. 
4 
2023, 
Available 
from: 
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/pdf/10.1080/07366981.202
3.2205689, accessed June 2023. 
[11] A. Mishra, Synchronising Counterinsurgency Ops with 
Effective 
Intelligence, 
Available 
from: 
https://theforge.defence.gov.au/publications/synchronising-
counterinsurgency-ops-effective-intelligence, accessed July 
2023. 
[12] A. Reeves and D. Ashenden, Understanding decision making 
in security operations centres: building the case for cyber 
deception 
technology, 
2023. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.researchgate.net/search.Search.html?query=secu
rity+operations+centre&type=publication, 
accessed 
June 
2023. 
[13] S. Reveron, An introduction to National Security and 
Cyberspace, Cyberspace and national security threats, 
opportunities, and power in a virtual world, Georgetown 
University Press / Washington, DC 2012. 
[14] J. B. Sheldon, Toward a theory of cyber power: Strategic 
purpose in peace and war, Cyberspace and national security 
threats, opportunities, and power in a virtual world, 
Georgetown University Press / Washington, DC 2012. 
[15]  J. E. Steiner, Needed: State-level, Integrated Intelligence 
Enterprises, Studies in Intelligence vol. 53, no. 3 (Extracts, 
September 
2009), 
Available 
from:  
https://www.cia.gov/static/Needed-State-Level-
Integrated.pdf, accessed June 2023. 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-113-8
CYBER 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

[16] J. Steinke et al., Improving Cybersecurity Incident Response 
Team Effectiveness Using Teams-Based Research, Security 
and Privacy: building dependability, reliability, and trust, 
Multidisciplinary Security, July/August 2015, vol. 13, no.4, 
Available 
from: 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/281467215_Impro
ving_Cybersecurity_Incident_Response_Team_Effectivenes
s_Using_Teams-Based_Research, accessed September 2023. 
 
 
 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-113-8
CYBER 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

