 
 
Surveying and Enhancing Grid Resilience Sensor Communications:  
An Amalgam of Narrowband, Broadband, and Hybridizing Spread Spectrum 
 
Steve Chan, Ika Oktavianti Najib*, Verlly Puspita 
Center for Research on IOT, Data Science, and Resiliency (CRIDR) 
San Diego, CA 92192, USA 
*Email: inajib@cridr.org 
 
 
Abstract—Distribution 
utilities 
engaged 
in 
the 
operationalization of more “resilient, adaptable architectures” 
have 
begun 
to 
instantiate 
amalgams 
of 
broadband, 
narrowband, and hybridizing techniques (e.g., spread 
spectrum, among others) to bridge the gap between broadband 
and narrowband (e.g., by enhancing the resiliency of 
narrowband signals) by lowering power requirements while 
extending coverage so as to develop a more robust 
communication network; this more resilient communications 
paradigm better facilitates “expeditious outage response 
capabilities.” This paper presents such an architectural 
instantiation. 
 
Keywords—Grid 
resilience; 
broadband; 
narrowband; 
hybridizing techniques; spread spectrum; communication 
network; expeditious outage response capabilities. 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Various splinter lines of efforts (e.g., weather sensors) 
related to the grid resiliency efforts in the Indo-Asia-Pacific 
have led to successful instantiations of amalgams of 
broadband, narrowband, and hybridizing techniques (e.g., 
spread spectrum, among others) to bridge the gap between 
broadband and narrowband (e.g., by enhancing the 
resiliency of narrowband signals) by lowering power 
requirements while extending coverage. Hyper-locale 
weather sensors have served as a common thematic for 
Oceania and Southeast Asia and associated working 
sessions have increased in cadence. These hyper-locale 
weather sensors, as just one exemplar, are emblematic of the 
need for honed communications techniques, so as to fully 
enable the reliability and economic potential, for ecozones 
(e.g., Oceania, [Brunei [Darussalam]-Indonesia-Malaysia-
Philippines East [Association of Southeast Asian Nations] 
ASEAN Growth Area] BIMP-EAGA, etc.) that are 
comprised 
of 
geographically 
disparate 
and 
varied 
characteristics.  
Hyper-locale weather information (without resorting to 
the need for reach-back processing) has served as a 
fundamental requirement for local fisherman and remote 
businessmen, alike; accordingly, hyper-locale weather 
sensors (which only the locals would have) provide 
incredible insight into the pattern of life for upcoming days 
and weeks (e.g., it is a good day for fisherman to put out to 
see, it is a good day for businessfolk to trade/travel, etc.). 
Contextual awareness is a common thematic (in terms of 
need) for Oceania and Southeast Asia. As regional cohesion 
between Oceania and Southeast Asia Increases (e.g., 2022 
Asian Games to includes athletes from Oceania), the 
investment potential in Oceania is at an inflection point; the 
correct amalgam of Broadband, Narrowband, and 
Hybridizing Techniques (a.k.a. BNHT) can help facilitate 
this potential. The purpose of this paper is not to choose 
singularly among the various IoT devices, but to utilize an 
appropriate amalgam of existing IoT devices according to 
the situation and conditions, so that the stability and quality 
of 
the 
involved 
communications 
network 
closely 
approximates what is desired. 
Section I provided an introduction. The remainder of 
this paper is organized as follows. Section II describes 
related works regarding narrowband, broadband, and spread 
spectrum. Section III provides details regarding the Internet 
of Things (IoT) and non-IoT, and Section IV discusses the 
Long Power Wide Area (LPWA) technologies such as 
Narrowband-IoT (NB-IoT), Long Range Wide Area 
Network (LoRaWAN), LoRaWAN Extended, and SigFox. 
Section V is explained about smart switch and finally, 
interim conclusions are summarized in Section VI. 
II. NARROWBAND, BROADBAND, AND SPREAD SPECTRUM 
Communication sensors that are built according to the 
theme in this study consist of 3 types, namely narrowband, 
broadband, and hybridizing techniques (e.g., spread 
spectrum). 
A. Narrowband  
Transmission technologies differ according to how much 
of the wireless spectrum the associated signal utilizes (e.g., 
whether a wireless service uses narrowband or broadband 
signalling). For narrowband, a transmitter concentrates the 
signal energy at a single frequency or in a very small range 
of frequencies [1].  For a communication system utilizing 
narrowband transmission technology, the system will keep 
the bandwidth as narrow as possible to transmit the signal. 
The disadvantages of narrowband transmission are that it is 
highly susceptible to jamming and interference. This is due 
to the limited bandwidth utilized. Jamming relates to 
network interference caused by a very large power that 
transports signals that are not needed through the same 
bandwidth as the signal needed. Consequently, a signal with 
lower power will be marginalized/blocked. Examples of 
narrowband technology are the IEEE-802.15.4g standard 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-743-6
CYBER 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
 
utilizing a 12.5 kHz, T-1 at 1.54 Mbps via fibre optic, 
infrared, microwave, or two pairs of cables. 
B. Broadband  
Broadband has been central community networks around 
the world for over a decade and can be regarded as one of 
the mainstay technologies amidst the evolution of the 
internet network. Both the technologies and products of 
broadband internet networks are developed by Internet 
Service Providers (ISP). The trending of broadband makes 
internet access relatively inexpensive and easy (but quality 
is another issue). Historically, broadband technology has 
influenced the widespread use of the Internet [2]. There are 
two kind of broadband technologies: fixed broadband 
technology and mobile broadband technology. Fixed 
broadband is a technology wherein the end user must be at 
the same location to utilize the broadband service, while the 
mobile broadband technology (e.g., third generation or 3G, 
fourth generation or 4G, and fifth generation or 5G) can 
utilize the broadband service from any physical location. 
Fixed broadband technology has several ways, namely 
Digital Subscriber Line (DSL) Fixed Wireline Broadband, 
Cable Fixed Wireline Broadband, and Fiber Fixed Wireline 
Broadband. Figure 1 describes the traditional DSL services 
(e.g., Asymmetric Digital Subscriber Line (ADSL), Very 
High Bit Rate Digital Subscriber Line (VDSL), etc.) is one 
way to have fixed wireline broadband services [1]. In DSL 
access, the traditional copper lines of the telephone network 
are equipped with digital subscriber line technology. 
Currently, in many countries in the world, DSL is the most 
common access network technology and is most commonly 
used by the public. 
 
 
Figure 1. DSL Deployment and the Component [3] 
 
Broadband utilizes wider frequency bands of the wireless 
spectrum and offers higher throughputs compared to 
narrowband technologies. A narrowband frequency is 3-500 
kHz and a broadband frequency is 1.8-86 MHz. 
 
 
Figure 2. Narrowband and Broadband Signal [4] 
Narrowband communication channels have long been 
used in many applications that depend on achieving reliable 
links in different operating environments, such as military 
tactical radios and industrial monitoring requirements. But 
because more information has to be conveyed between the 
two points by wireless means, such as for video streaming 
and 
sophisticated 
surveillance 
systems, 
broadband 
communication channels with greater data capacity are 
becoming more attractive. 
Figure 2 explains that narrow band signals occupy much 
less frequency spectrum and require less transmit power for 
a given application than wide band signals, while Ultra-
Wideband (UWB) signals are short pulses that send 
information while briefly occupying a large part of the 
traditional communication frequency spectrum. This is done 
to send and receive more voice, video, and data over a wider 
bandwidth frequency channel, which means it costs money, 
because a wider part of the frequency spectrum also 
contains more noise sources and higher noise levels [4]. 
C. Spread Spectrum  
Spread spectrum is a form of wireless communication 
that utilizes multiple frequencies to transmit a signal. Spread 
spectrum technologies provide robustness to a variety of 
unintentional forms of interference that are found to impact 
a communications system, such as interception of signals, 
jamming, and multipath. One of the advantages of spreading 
a signal over a wide frequency band is that is requires less 
power per frequency than narrowband signalling [5]. 
Spread spectrum techniques were originally utilized by 
military communications system during World War II. 
Spread spectrum is more secure than narrowband and 
broadband signalling because, by way of example, the 
frequency hopping channel numbers are only known to the 
authorized receiver and transmitter of the information. The 
receiver must utilize the exact same hopping sequence to 
receive information from the transmitter. Consequently, it is 
extremely difficult for unauthorized receivers to decode and 
access the information. The two most common forms of 
spread spectrum are Frequency Hopping Spread Spectrum 
(FHSS) and Direct Sequence Spread Spectrum (DSSS). 
 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-743-6
CYBER 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
 
 
Figure 3. Model of Spread Spectrum Digital Communication System [6] 
 
In FHSS transmission, the existing frequency is divided 
into multiple parts and then sent across the air in a random 
pattern of radio frequencies, hopping from frequencies to 
frequencies at fixed intervals. During that interval, some 
number of bits is transmitted utilizing some encoding 
scheme. Both transmitter and receiver channel utilize the 
same code to tune into a sequence of channels in 
synchronization.  
In DSSS, the original data signal is multiplied with a 
pseudo random noise spreading code. The spreading code 
spreads the signal across a wider frequency band in direct 
proportion to the number of bits used. This spreading code 
has a higher chip rate, which results in a wideband time 
continuous scrambled signal. Different variants of spread 
spectrum techniques are used. Long Rang (LoRa) utilizes 
Chirp Spread Spectrum (CSS) while IEEE-802.15.4g (a 
standard 
for 
Smart 
Utility 
Network 
or 
SUN 
communications, which are an essential part of the smart 
grid), Ingenu (Low Power Wide Area network or LPWAN 
implementation), and Weightless-P (ultra-high performance 
LPWAN) utilize Direct Sequence Spread Spectrum (DSSS). 
Figure 3 explains the general model of spread spectrum 
digital communication system. First, Spread Spectrum input 
the data into a channel encoder. Then, the data produces 
analog signal with Narrow Band width. Signal is further 
modulated using sequence of digits, spreading code, and 
spreading sequence. Spreading code generated by pseudo-
noise or pseudorandom number generator. The effect of this 
process is demodulation which is used to increase the 
bandwidth of the signal to be sent and recovered data [6]. 
 
III. IOT AND NON-IOT 
An Internet of Things (IoT) platform is a set of 
technology-enabled entities including physical smart 
objects, as well as systems and software services that are 
connected together [7].  There are four main components of 
an IoT system, namely the “thing” or object (e.g., sensors, 
actuators, etc.), the local network (e.g., gateway), the 
Internet, and back-end services (e.g., personal computer [PC] 
or mobile devices). The communication network for IoT can 
be construed in two parts: cellular and non-cellular. Cellular 
IoT hardware is typically equipped with Subscriber Identity 
Module (SIM) cards and connected to networks via 2G, 3G, 
and 4G, while non-cellular IoT are connected via wireless 
network. 
The “things” in IoT need Internet Protocol (IP) address, 
as the “things” are mostly servers, switches, firewalls and 
routers, laptops, phones, and tablets with IP to IP 
connectivity. An IP address is an address or numeric identity 
that is given to a device so that the device is identified and 
can communicate with other devices. IP addresses can be 
further sub-divided in two, namely IP static and IP dynamic. 
IP Static is an IP address that is set or manually set by a 
network admin so that this IP address will not change 
automatically, unless it is manually changed by the network 
admin. The advantages of utilizing IP Static on 
communication network are that it is easy to remember a 
host, it is suitable for small-scale networks, and the router is 
set up with a static IP as well. IP Dynamic is an IP address 
that is set or set through a router that has been set up as a 
Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) Server, 
where the DHCP Server functions to provide an IP address 
automatically to each host connected to the network so that 
a computer connected to the network does not need to set 
the IP address again because it has been given one by the 
router. The advantages of utilizing IP Dynamic on 
communication networks are that it is suitable for large-
scale networks, it facilitates the networks admin setting IP 
addresses, and no IP address collision will likely occur. 
IV. LOW POWER WIDE AREA (LPWA) TECHNOLOGIES 
LPWA technologies are a generic term for a group of 
technologies, which enable wide area communications at 
lower cost point and improved power consumption.  LPWA 
has become one of the fastest growing area within IoT. 
Many LPWA technologies have developed in both the 
licensed and unlicensed bands, such as Narrow Band (NB-
IoT), Long Range (LoRa), SigFox, etc. Solutions based 
upon the LP-WAN paradigm have a long coverage range of 
about 10 km and high-power efficiency that facilitates 
lifetimes for end-devices to about 10 years [8].These 
achievements are attained by making use of the following 
strategies: transmitting data at very low bitrates, making use 
of low frequency bands (sub-GHz bands), and limiting the 
communication capabilities of the end-devices (number of 
messages per day) [9]. 
A. Narrowband Internet of Things (NB-IoT) 
NB-IoT is a new 3rd Generation Partnership Project 
(3GPP) technology released in June 2016. NB-IoT is 
designed to achieve excellent co-existence performance 
with General Packet Radio Service (GPRS), Global System 
for Mobile (GSM), and Long-Term Evaluation (LTE). NB-
IoT can provide 50-100 times access to the existing wireless 
technology. NB-IoT has a 200 kHz wide carrier, which 
contains 12 Orthogonal Frequency-Division Multiplexing 
(OFDM) (a method of digital signal modulation in which a 
single data stream is split across several separate 
narrowband channels at different frequencies to reduce 
interference and crosstalk) subcarriers and unlicensed 
frequencies in the 700, 800, or 900 Mhz bands to assist with 
signal penetration in-building. NB-IoT increases the gain of 
20dB and expects to cover the inaccessible places, such as 
underground pipelines, basements, etc [10]. NB-IoT 
supports three different operational modes: stand-alone 
operation, guard-band operation, and in-band operation. 
The NB-IoT communication protocol is considered to be 
a new air interface for LTE. NB-IoT reduces LTE protocol 
functionalities to the minimum and enhances them as 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-743-6
CYBER 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
 
required for IoT applications [11]. For example, the LTE 
backend system is used to broadcast information that is 
valid for all end devices within a cell. As the broadcasting 
back-end system obtains resources and consumes battery 
power from each end device, it is kept to a minimum in size, 
as well as in its occurrence. It was optimized to small and 
infrequent data messages and avoids the features not 
required for IoT purposes, e.g., measurements to monitor 
the channel quality, carrier aggregation, and dual 
connectivity. Therefore, the end devices require only a small 
amount of battery, thus making it cost-efficient [11]. 
B. LoRaWAN 
LoRa is a network technology solution for wireless 
battery-operated devices. LoRa uses unlicensed Industrial, 
Scientific, and Medical (ISM) bands, i.e., 868 MHz in 
Europe, 915 MHz in North America, and 433 MHz in Asia. 
LoRa allows long range communication (between 2-8 km in 
urban areas and 15-20 km in rural areas) with low power 
consumption. LoRa has the goal of providing secure 
bidirectional communication [12]. LoRa utilizes a chirp 
spread spectrum spreading modulation technology (can use 
one or more channels), which enables low energy 
consumption, end-to-end secure communication with low 
data rates [13]. The spread spectrum provides orthogonal 
separation between signals by using unique spreading factor 
individual signal. This method provided an advantage in 
managing data rate [14]. The resulting signal has low noise 
levels, enabling high interference resilience, and is difficult 
to detect or jam [15]. LoRa does not deploy a LBT (Listen-
Before-Talk) feature; instead, it utilizes the duty cycle 
restrictions required by regulation and the maximum dwell 
time [16]. 
The technology is presented in two parts: Lora (the 
physical layer) and LoRaWAN (the communication layer), 
which an open source communication protocol defined by 
the LoRa Alliance. One of the most interesting features of 
LoRaWAN is the possibility of configuring certain 
transmission configuration parameters, enabling longer 
coverage ranges, greater transmission bit rates, and 
enhanced communication robustness [17]. LoRaWAN 
defines three classes for end point devices to address the 
different needs reflected in the wide range of possible 
application: Bi-directional end devices (Class A), Bi-
directional end devices with scheduled receive slots (Class 
B), and Bi-directional end devices with maximal receive 
slots (Class C). LoRa and LoRaWAN layers can be seen in 
Figure 4 below. 
 
 
Figure 4. LoRa and LoRaWAN layer [18] 
The system architecture comprises end devices, gateways, 
and a network server. End devices transmit directly to all 
the gateways within range utilizing LoRaWAN. LoRaWAN 
gateways correspond to base station in a cellular network, 
as well as communications between the end devices and the 
network server based upon Internet Protocol (IP). The end 
devices typically have sensors, LoRa transponders to 
transmit signal, and a micro-controller. Figure 5 presents the 
LoRaWAN architecture.  
 
 
 Figure 5. LoRaWAN Architecture [19] 
C. LoRaWAN Extended 
Low-power wireless networks are a key enabler for the 
Internet of things (IoT), but familiar options such as 
Bluetooth, Zigbee, Wireless Fidelity (WiFi), or cellular, 
lack an acceptable combination of extended range and 
battery life. To address this, new sub-GHz specifications are 
being offered, one of which is LoRaWAN.  
LoRaWAN can achieve a 15 km range at power 
consumption levels low enough to enable 10-year battery 
life. Further, the availability of an off-the-shelf development 
kit lets designers quickly bring up the complete LoRaWAN 
network application with minimal effort. All seven layers of 
the OSI stack have a scope of LoRaWAN certification 
services with new LoRa Radio Frequency (RF) antenna 
performance requirements. In order to improve the range in 
a network with LoRaWAN technologies, the following 
aspects should be considered [20]: 
• 
Gateway location: utilize outdoor antennas and 
increase the height of the antennas. 
• 
Antenna selection 
• 
High-quality 
connectors 
(N-connectors) 
and 
cables (LMR 400 or equivalent) 
• 
Co-localization: avoid strong interference, for 
example from surrounding Global System for 
Mobile Communications (GSM) or Universal 
Mobile Telecommunications System (UMTS) 
stations. 
• 
Installation of a LoRaWAN gateway should also 
ensure sufficient surge and lightning protection 
D. SigFox 
SigFox is a LPWAN network that utilized Binary Phase-
Shift Keying (BPSK) modulation in a 100 Hz Ultra-narrow 
Bandwidth (UNB) sub-GHz band carrier to send small 
messages. SigFox utilizes unlicensed ISM bands, namely 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-743-6
CYBER 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
 
868 MHz bands in Europe, 915 MHz bands in United States, 
and 433 MHz in Asia. SigFox utilizes the frequency 
bandwidth efficiently and experiences very low noise levels, 
high receiver sensitivity, very low power consumption, and 
has a low-cost antenna [21]. Initially, SigFox only utilized 
uplink communications, but eventually advanced by 
utilizing the bidirectional technology. The Ultra Mobile 
Broadband (UMB) modulation has limited data rates (100 
bits per second), the maximum payload length for every 
uplink message is 12 bytes, and the maximum payload 
length for every downlink message is 8 bytes with a protocol 
overhead of 26 bytes. Despite the limitation, SigFox is 
suitable for IoT applications that are not time-crucial (e.g., 
monitoring water meters, air quality sensing, etc.). 
Similar to LoRaWAN, the UNB modulation does not 
utilize LBT but applies duty cycle limitations per 
transmitter. The SigFox network architecture comprises 
devices and SigFox servers for an execution process in a 
cloud schema. Hence, the SigFox system is a cloud-based 
network system where data is passed to the backend server 
and customer portal directly [22]. The SigFox cloud system 
can automatically forward the messages utilizing a callback 
system. As the base stations can receive messages 
simultaneously over all the channels and observe the entire 
system bandwidth to detect and decode uplink data. The end 
device can randomly choose a frequency channel to transmit 
their messages. This simplifies the end device design and 
reduces its cost. Figure 6 presents the architecture of a 
SigFox network. 
 
Figure 6. SigFox Architecture 
Figure 7 explains the differences in NB-IoT, LoRaWAN, 
and SigFox technologies from several IoT requirements. 
Some 
IoT 
requirements 
consist 
of 
modulation, 
standardization, bandwidth, date rate, frequency, typical 
range, battery life, cost, and bidirectional. In the bandwidth 
category, LoRaWAN is better than NB-IoT and SigFox, 
which is 125 kHz and 250 kHz. Another advantage is that 
the battery life of LoRaWAN is much longer, i.e., up to 18 
years and the cost is cheap. Behind the advantages of 
LoRaWAN, the weakness is in the data rate, which is only 
50kbps, less than the NB-IoT 200 kbps and SigFox100 kbps. 
Sensor communication can be broken down into 3 types, 
namely narrowband, broadband, and spread spectrum 
(hybridized technologies). For narrowband, wideband audio 
is one of the derivatives that show the development of 
narrowband technology. While broadband consists of 2 
types, namely Fixed Broadband Technology (FBT) and 
Mobile Broadband Technology (MBT). Spread spectrum is 
hybridized techniques which can be categorized into IoT (IP 
address) and Non-IoT (Non-IP address). Figure 8 shows 
Architectural Instantiation of Sensor Communications, 
where in the spread spectrum derivative graph, LoRaWAN 
belongs to the category of IoT non-cellular. 
 
 
 
Figure7. Comparison of NB-IoT, LoRaWAN, and SigFox Technologies 
 
 
Figure 8. Architectural Instantiation of Sensor Communications
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-743-6
CYBER 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
 
V. SMART SWITCH 
Power utility companies utilize communication network so 
as to conduct real-time 
monitoring, protection, 
and 
optimization of the involved grid components including 
generation, transmission, and distribution. The planning and 
implementation of a communications network require the same 
attention as the installation of the power grid system itself. The 
communications infrastructure of power grid can be wired (e.g., 
fiber optic) or wireless. The advantages of the wireless 
infrastructure compared to the wired infrastructure are low 
costs and simple connection to distant and unreachable areas 
[23], whereas fiber optic can be expensive especially when 
deployed 
at 
the 
distribution 
level 
in 
large 
scale. 
Communication standards, such as Bluetooth, ZigBee, Z-wave, 
IPv6, wired Ethernet, cellular network, and wireless Ethernet 
(e.g., Wi-Fi) are a few of the standards that can be considered 
for adding connectivity to a power grid system. 
The main challenges for a communications network system 
are loss of communication, data loss or latency, denial of 
service, as well as jamming of the Radio Frequency (RF) signal 
[24]. A smart network switch can be utilized with regards to 
loss of communications or latency problems. Smart network 
switching enables the system to automatically switch from an 
unstable Wi-Fi network (non-cellular) to cellular data or mobile 
network. This allows the system to preserve a consistent 
network connection and maintain a high level of connectivity.  
The smart network switch is capable of transmitting and 
receiving signals to and from other devices (modules). Smart 
network switch utilizes requirements to support the system, 
such as multiple transceiver types or speeds including control, 
flexible low latency data inspection and data path manipulation 
capabilities, comprehensive and fast configuration and 
diagnostic interface (e.g., modes, queues), fast start-up 
including configuration, and powerful switch core. Additional 
requirements required by a smart network switch are time 
synchronization, Quality of Service (QoS), and security [25]. 
Smart switch consists of smart routing controller, open flow 
hybrid switch, and protocol convert module (see Figure 9) [26].  
Smart routing controller executes the packet decision, open 
flow hybrid switch receive the decision command from open 
flow controller, and protocol converter module is a device 
utilized to convert standard or protocol.  
 
 
Figure 9. Smart switch architecture 
 
Figure 10 below presents a general communication network 
and smart switch network embedded into a power grid system. 
 
Figure 10. Communication network in power grid system 
In Figure 9, the power grid system consists of power 
transmission infrastructures, communication networks, data 
management systems, and power grid monitoring and control 
center [27]. The information collection network is essentially a 
compound network consisting of satellite communications, Wi-
Fi, cellular network, and internet. Smart network switches are 
embedded into the communication network system. Phasor 
Measurement Units (PMUs) are deployed over the power grid 
to monitor the state of the system. PMUs receive a common 
time reference from the Global Positioning System (GPS) 
satellites. The measurements from several PMUs are reported 
to a Phasor Data Concentrator (PDC). All collected data from 
the PDC are analyzed at a data management center for utilized 
for decision support. The power grid monitoring and control 
system receives instructions from the data management center 
and actuates the power system in real-time. 
 
VI. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we presented a study on communications 
network 
technologies 
and 
recent 
trends 
of 
network 
technologies (e.g., Internet of Things [IoT] and Low Power 
Wide Area [LPWA] technologies, such as LoRaWAN, NB-IoT, 
and Sigfox) to develop a more robust communications system 
within a power grid. This paper discusses amalgams of 
narrowband, broadband, and hybridizing techniques (e.g., 
spread spectrum) for enhancing grid resilience sensor 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-743-6
CYBER 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

 
 
communications and provides an architectural instantiation for 
more robust sensor communications. In addition, the smart 
network switch has also been discussed, so as to resolve the loss 
of communications and/or latency problems within a power 
grid system. Overall, this paper presented an amalgam of 
broadband, narrowband, and hybridizing technique (e.g., 
spread spectrum) to bridge the gap between broadband and 
narrowband (e.g., by enhancing the resiliency of narrowband 
signals) by lowering power requirements while extending 
coverage so as to develop a more robust communication 
network; this more resilient communications paradigm better 
facilitates “expeditious outage response capabilities” for 
distribution utilities constitutes a more “resilient, adaptable 
architectures.” 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT  
This research is supported by the Center for Research on IoT, 
Data Science, and Resiliency (CRIDR), an initiative of 
Decision Engineering Analysis Laboratory (DEAL) and The 
International Center for Theoretical Physics (ICTP), a United 
Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization 
(UNESCO) Category 1 Institution.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
T. Dean, Network+ Guide to Networks, 5thed., USA: Course Technology, 
pp. 369, 2010. 
[2] 
Bobby. Introduction to Broadband Internet and Types of Connections.  
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://bobbyfiles.wordpress.com/2008/12/03/pengenalan-internet-
broadband-dan-jenis-jenis-koneksi/. 2008.12.03. [retrieved: June, 2019] 
[3] 
O. Ergun,.Broadband Network Architecture-Access Network Models. 
[Online]. Available from: https://orhanergun.net/2017/03/broadband-
network-architecture-access-network-models/. 2017.03.29. [retrieved: 
June, 2019]  
[4] 
Microwaves&RF. What’s the Difference Between Broadband and 
Narrowband 
RF 
communications? 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.mwrf.com/systems/what-s-difference-between-broadband-
and-narrowband-rf-communications. 2014.11.15. [retrieved: June, 2019]  
[5] 
T. Dean, Network+ Guide to Networks, 5thed., USA: Course Technology, 
pp. 370, 2010. 
[6] 
W. Stallings, Advanced Data Communications and Networking Data 
and Computer Communications, USA: Pearson Higher Ed, pp. 276, 
2013. 
[7] 
M. Fahmideh and D. Zowghi, “An Exploration of IoT Platform 
Development,” Information Systems Elsevier, vol. 87, pp. 1-25, 2019. 
[8] 
O. Georgiou and U. Raza, “Low Power Wide Area Network Analysis: 
can LoRascale?” IEEE Wireless Communication, vol.6, no. 2, pp. 162-
165, 2017. 
[9] 
R. S. Iborra, J. S. Gomez, and A. Skarmeta, “Evolving IoT Networks by 
the Confluence of MEC and LP-WAN Paradigms,” Future Generation 
Computer System, vol. 88, pp. 199-208,2018. 
[10] G. Zhang, C. Yao, and X. Li, “Research on Joint Planning Method of 
NB-IoT and LTE,” 8th International Congress of Information and 
Communication Technology, pp. 985-991, 2018. 
[11] K. Mekki, E. Bajic, F. Chaxel, and F. Meyer, “A Comparative Study of 
LPWAN Technologies for Large-Scale IoT Deployment,” ICT Express, 
vol. 5, issue 1, pp. 1-7, 2019. 
[12] O. Liberg, et al., Cellular Internet of Things, 2nd ed., London: Academic 
Press, pp. 219, 2019. 
[13] M. Loriot, A. Aljer, and I. Shahrour, “Analysis of the Use of LoRaWAN 
Technology in a Large-Scale Smart City Demonstrator,” in 2017 Sensor 
Networks Smart and Emerging Technologies (SENSET) conf.  Beirut, 
Lebanon, September 2017, pp. 1-4, ISBN: 978-1-5090-6011-5. 
[14] R. S. Sinha, Y. Wei, and S. H. Hwang, “A Survey on LPWA Technology: 
LoRa and NB-IoT,” ICT Express, vol. 3, issue 1, pp. 14-21, 2017. 
[15] B. Reynders, W. Meert, and S. Pollin, “Range and Coexistence Analysis 
of Long-Range Unlicensed Communication,” in 2016 International 
Conference on Telecommunications (ICT), Thessaloniki, Greece, June 
2016, pp. 1-6, ISBN: 978-1-5090-1990-8.. 
[16] O. Liberg, et al., Cellular Internet of Things, 2nd ed., London: Academic 
Press, pp. 342, 2018. 
[17] R. S. Iborra, J. S. Gomez, and A. Skarmeta, “Evolving IoT Networks by 
the Confluence of MEC and LP-WAN Paradigms,” Future Generation 
Computer System, vol. 88, pp. 199-208, 2018. 
[18] P. Ram, LPWAN, LoRa, LoRaWAN and the Internet of Things, [Online]. 
Available from: https://medium.com/coinmonks/lpwan-lora-lorawan-
and-the-internet-of-things-aed7d5975d5d.  2018.08.07 [retrieved: July, 
2019] 
[19] SimpleSoft, Using Simple IoT Simulator to Simulate LoRaWAN 
Networks, 
[Online]. 
 
Available 
from: 
https://www.simplesoft.com/SimpleIoTSimulatorForLoraWan.html. 
[retrieved: July, 2019]. 
[20] Smartmakers, “LoRaWAN range, part 1: The Most Important Factors 
for a Good LoRaWAN Signal Range,” [Online]. Available from: 
https://smartmakers.io/en/lorawan-range-part-1-the-most-important-
factors-for-a-good-lorawan-signal-range/. 
2019.03.10 
[retrieved: 
July,2019]. 
[21] N. I. Osman and E. B. Abbas, “Simulation and Modeling of LoRa and 
Sigfox Low Power Wide Area Network Technologies,” in 2018 
International Conference on Computer, Control, Electrical, and 
Electronic Engineering (ICCCEEE), Khartoum, Sudan, August 2018, pp. 
1-5, ISBN:978-1-5386-4123-1. 
[22] Y. Chung, J. Y. Ahn, and J. D. Huh, “Experiments of a LPWAN 
Tracking (TR) Platform Based on SigFox Test Network,” in 2018 
International 
Conference 
on 
Information and Communication 
Technology Convergence (ICTC), Jeju, South Korea, October 2018, pp. 
1373-1376, ISBN:978-1-5386-5041-7.. 
[23] D. Baimel, S. Tapuchi, and N. Baimel, “Smart Grid Communication 
Technologies,” Journal of Power and Energy Engineering, vol.4, pp.1-
8, 2016. 
[24] G. Bag, L. Thrybom, and P. Hovila, “Challenges and Opportunities of 
5G in Power Grids,” In 24thInternational Conference and Exhibition on 
Electricity Distribution (CIRED), IET, October 2017, pp. 2145-2148, 
ISSN: 2515-0855. 
[25] M. Ziehensack and M. Kunz, Smart Ethernet Switch Architecture, IEEE-
SA Ethernet-IP @ Automotive Technology Day, San Jose, 2017. 
Available from: hhtps://standards,ieee.org 
[26] J. Chiu, A. Liu, and C. Liao, “Design the DNS-Like Smart Switch for 
Heterogeneous Network Base on SDN Architecture,” International 
Computer Symposium (ICS), Chiayi, 2016, pp. 187-191, ISBN: 978-1-
5090-3438-3. 
[27] M. Qiu, H. Su, M. Chen, Z. Ming, and L. T. Yang, “Balance of Security 
Strength and Energy for a PMU Monitoring System in Smart Grid,” 
IEEE Communication Magazine, pp. 142-143, 2012. 
 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-743-6
CYBER 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

