Reviewing National Cybersecurity Awareness in Africa: An Empirical Study 
Maria Bada 
Department of Computer Science, Global 
Cyber Security Capacity Centre, 
University of Oxford 
Oxford, UK / Academy for Computer 
Science and Software Engineering 
University of Johannesburg, 
Johannesburg, South Africa 
e-mail: maria.bada@cs.ox.ac.uk 
Basie Von Solms 
Academy for Computer Science and 
Software Engineering University of 
Johannesburg, 
Johannesburg, South Africa 
e-mail: basievs@uj.ac.za 
  
 
Ioannis Agraﬁotis 
Department of Computer Science, Global 
Cyber Security Capacity Centre, 
University of Oxford 
Oxford, UK 
e-mail: ioannis.agraﬁotis@cs.ox.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract—Over 
the 
last 
years, 
there 
has 
been 
an 
unprecedented increase in cybercrime globally. Africa is a 
region with one of the highest rates of cybercrime and 
signiﬁcant ﬁnancial losses. Yet, awareness of risks in 
cyberspace amongst citizens of African countries is in its 
infancy and capacity building initiatives focusing on designing 
and implementing such campaigns are lacking. As part of the 
Global Cybersecurity Capacity Centre (GCSCC) programme, 
we visited six countries and assessed their cybersecurity 
posture based on the Cybersecurity Capacity Maturity Model 
for Nations (CMM) developed by the GCSCC. In this paper, 
we analyse qualitative data collected by conducting focus 
groups with experts in awareness campaigns during our visits. 
We reﬂect on best practice approaches for developing 
campaigns and draw conclusions on what the current state of 
African countries is regarding awareness in risks from 
cybercrime, what are the main obstacles in combating 
cybercrime and how countries should identify and prioritise 
their actions. We believe that our paper contributes in research 
concerned with how to mitigate cybercrime.  
Keywords-cybersecurity national strategies; cyber threat 
awareness; risk. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Over the last years, there has been an unprecedented 
increase in cybercrime globally [1] [2]. Africa is a region 
with one of the highest rates of cybercrime aﬀecting the 
strategic, economic and social growth development of the 
region [3]. Reports suggest that, inter alia, estimated costs 
have soared up to $550 million for Nigeria, $175 million for 
Kenya and $85 for Tanzania [3]. One of the factors creating 
a permissive environment for cybercrime is the lack of 
awareness in the African public regarding risks when using 
cyberspace [3]. Additionally, the level of development of 
digital infrastructure in African countries directly influences 
their security posture. Reports suggest that cyber criminals 
rely on the very poor security habits of the general 
population [4] and urge policy makers to engage in 
awareness campaigns [3] since there is strong evidence that 
such initiatives can eﬃciently lower the success rate of 
cybercrime [5]. More speciﬁcally, there are white papers 
estimating that an investment in security awareness and 
training can potentially change user’s behavior and reduce 
cyber-related risks by 45% to 70% [5]. It is evident that 
Cybersecurity Awareness is a very important step in the ﬁght 
against cybercrime in Africa. For that reason, it is essential 
for any African country that intends to implement 
interventions in this area to have a holistic understanding of 
the level of Cybersecurity Awareness in that country. 
Towards this direction, there have been eﬀorts to capture the 
status of Cybersecurity Awareness (understanding on cyber 
threats and risk, cyber hygiene, and appropriate response 
options) in Africa [6], and in general, the ﬁndings suggest 
that the absence of awareness campaigns regarding 
cybersecurity and Internet safety create a lax environment for 
information security [6]. In this paper, we analyse qualitative 
data from six African countries that was collected when 
applying the Cybersecurity Capacity Maturity Model for 
Nations (CMM) developed by the Global Cybersecurity 
Capacity Centre (GCSCC) at the University of Oxford [7]. 
We reﬂect on best practice approaches for developing 
campaigns and draw conclusions on what the current state of 
African countries is regarding awareness in risks from 
cybercrime, what are the main obstacles in combating 
cybercrime and what actions countries should prioritise in 
order to increase awareness of risks from cybercrime in their 
population. In what follows, Section 2 provides a literature 
and best practice review on developing cybersecurity 
awareness campaigns and existing eﬀorts in Africa. Section 
3 provides a brief overview of the CMM and the CMM 
methodology when deployed in a country. Section 4 
describes the results from the CMM reviews in six African 
countries and our analysis of the qualitative data obtained 
from focus groups during these reviews. As this paper 
concentrates on Cybersecurity Awareness, which is one 
component of the CMM, only the results of this component 
will be discussed. No countries will be referenced, but a 
general overview of the outcome will be described. Section 5 
discusses the results of our analysis and Section 6 concludes 
the paper. 
II. 
CYBERSECURITY AWARENESS RAISING 
CAMPAIGNS  
According to the UK Her Majesty's Government (HMG) 
Security Policy Framework [8], it is government’s role to 
raise cybersecurity awareness within a country. ‘People and 
behaviours are fundamental to good security. The right 
security culture, proper expectations and eﬀective training 
are essential. Everyday actions and the management of 
people, at all levels in the organisation, contribute to good 
security’. Awareness is used to stimulate, motivate, and 
remind the audience what is expected of them [9]. This is an 
important aspect of cybersecurity policy or strategy because 
it enhances the knowledge of users about security, changes 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-683-5
CYBER 2018 : The Third International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

their attitude towards cybersecurity, and their behaviour 
patterns. 
A. Developing Cybersecurity Awareness Raising 
Campaigns 
There is an abundance of best practice approaches 
describing principles in designing and implementing an 
awareness-raising campaign. Little emphasis, however, was 
put on how to strategically decide the areas where awareness 
campaigns should focus. NIST [10] is one of the pioneers in 
this ﬁeld. Their framework provides three alternatives on 
how organisations should be structured, detailing for each 
category the processes for an eﬀective and eﬃcient 
campaign. For all three approaches, namely centralised, 
partially decentralised and fully decentralized, NIST 
provides information on how a ‘needs assessment’ should be 
conducted; a strategy should be developed; an awareness 
training program be designed; and an awareness program be 
implemented.  
Focusing on the design and implementation of 
awareness-raising 
campaigns, 
literature 
suggests 
that 
successful awareness campaigns need to be a ‘learning 
continuum’ [10], commencing from awareness, evolving to 
training and resulting in education. According to OAS [11], 
it is of paramount importance that stakeholders from the 
public 
and 
private 
sector, 
Non-proﬁt 
Government 
Organisations 
(NGOs), 
and 
technology 
and 
ﬁnance 
corporations must be involved. Once stakeholders are 
identiﬁed, the next steps in the OAS model provide 
instructions on how to deﬁne the goals of the campaign, the 
audience it targets and the strategy via which the campaign 
will be implemented.  
Even by following best practise, several diﬃculties exist 
when it comes to creating a successful campaign: a) not 
understanding what security awareness really is; b) a 
compliance awareness program does not necessarily equate 
to creating the desired behaviours; c) usually there is lack of 
engaging and appropriate materials; d) usually there is no 
illustration that awareness is a unique discipline; e) there is 
no assessment of the awareness programmes [12]; f) not 
arranging multiple training exercises but instead focusing on 
a speciﬁc topic or threat does not oﬀer the overall training 
needed [13].  
Perceived control and personal handling ability, the sense 
one has that he/she can drive speciﬁc behaviour, has also 
been found to aﬀect the intention of behaviour but also the 
real behaviour [14]. Culture is another important factor for 
consideration when designing education and awareness 
messages [15] as it can have a positive security inﬂuence to 
the persuasion process. Moreover, even when people are 
willing to change their behaviour, the process of learning a 
new behaviour needs to be supported [15]. 
B. Cybersecurity Awarness Rasising Campaigns in Africa 
A review in cybersecurity policies in African countries 
[16] shows that awareness raising is key issue either as a 
separate factor or as part of the role of the proposed National 
CSIRT. A cybersecurity policy and strategy may not be in 
place yet for all countries in Africa. However, there are 
already a number of organisations that have identiﬁed the 
need 
for 
continental 
coordination 
and 
increased 
cybersecurity awareness including the African Information 
Society Initiative (UNECA/AISI) [17], The Internet 
Numbers Registry for Africa (AfriNIC) [18], ITU/GCA [19], 
Interpol, The Southern African Development Community 
(SADC) [20] and ISG-Africa [21].  
There are existing eﬀorts in Africa such as the ISC Africa 
[22]. This is a coordinated, industry and community-wide 
eﬀort to inform and educate Africa’s citizens on safe and 
responsible use of computers and the Internet, so that the 
inherent risks can be minimised and consumer trust can be 
increased. Also, Parents’ Corner Campaign [23] is intended 
to co-ordinate the work done by government, industry and 
civil society. Recently Facebook has also announced 
partnerships with over 20 non-governmental organisations 
and oﬃcial agencies from the DRC, Ghana, Kenya, Nigeria 
and South Africa in support of Safer Internet Day (SID) 
marked on 6 February [24]. SID advocates making the 
internet safer, particularly for the youth, and is organised by 
the joint Insafe-INHOPE network with the support of the 
European Commission and funded by the Connecting 
Europe Facility programme (CEF).  
Usually, most of oﬃcial awareness-campaign sites 
include advice, which usually comes from security experts 
and service providers, who monotonically repeat suggestions 
such as use strong passwords. One of the main reasons why 
users do not behave optimally is that security systems and 
policies are often poorly designed [25]. There is a need to 
move from awareness to tangible behaviours. 
III. 
THE CYBER SECURITY CAPACITY MATURITY 
MODEL FOR NATIONS (CMM) 
The CMM of the Global Cybersecurity Capacity Centre 
(GCSCC) at the University of Oxford is a comprehensive 
framework which assesses the cybersecurity capacity 
maturity of capabilities which are foundational to building 
resilience of a country over 5 diﬀerent dimensions: 1) 
Cybersecurity Policy and Strategy; 2) Cyber Culture and 
Society; 3) Cybersecurity Education, Training and Skills; 4) 
Legal 
and 
Regulatory 
Frameworks; 
5) 
Standards, 
Organisations, and Technologies.  
Every Dimension consists of a number of Factors which 
describe what it means to possess cybersecurity capacity. 
Each Factor is composed of a number of Aspects that 
structure the Factor’s content. Each Aspect is composed of a 
series of indicators within ﬁve stages of maturity. These 
indicators describe the steps and actions that must be taken to 
achieve or maintain a given stage of maturity in the 
aspect/factor/dimension hierarchy. These 5 maturity stages 
are: 1) Start up; 2) Formative; 3) Established; 4) Strategic; 5) 
Dynamic. The progressive nature of the model assumes that 
lower stages have been achieved before moving to the next.  
In this paper, we focus on the factor ‘Cybersecurity 
Awareness Raising’. The Aspects, within this factor are 
‘Awareness Raising Programmes’ and ‘Executive Awareness 
Raising’ with various Indicator speciﬁcations for every 
Maturity 
Stage. 
The 
Aspect 
‘Awareness 
Raising 
Programmes’ examines the existence of a national 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-683-5
CYBER 2018 : The Third International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

coordinated programme for cybersecurity awareness raising, 
covering a wide range of demographics and issues, while the 
Aspect ‘Executive Awareness Raising’ examines eﬀorts 
raising executives’ awareness of cybersecurity issues in the 
public, private, academic and civil society sectors, as well as 
how cybersecurity risks might be addressed. The CMM 
model was developed by conducting systematic reviews on 
best practice approaches which are publicly available, as 
well as consulting experts from various disciplines.  
So far, the CMM has been deployed at the national level 
(rather than at the company/enterprise level), and 54 
countries have been evaluated through engagement and 
collaboration with international organisations and the host 
country.  
The CMM employs a focus group methodology since it 
has been acknowledged to oﬀer a rich set of data compared 
to other qualitative approaches [26]-[28]. Stakeholders are 
identiﬁed based on their expertise in each one of the 
components of every Dimension of the CMM. Focus groups 
sessions are led by the CMM Review Team. 
IV. 
CMM RESULTS FOR AWARENESS RAISING IN 
AFRICA 
In Africa, a team from the GCSCC has reviewed and 
evaluated 6 countries based on the CMM and following the 
methodology described in Section 3. These countries were 
selected for a review at the time because they were in the 
process of drafting a cybersecurity strategy. Therefore, the 
review would assist this process. These reviews have been 
conducted during the period June 2015 to January 2018.  
Regarding the Aspect ‘Awareness Raising Programs’ and 
‘Executive Awareness Raising’, 12 focus groups have been 
conducted in total. The stakeholders who participated in the 
focus groups are from the following sectors: Public Sector 
Entities; Legislators/Policy Makers; Criminal Justice and 
Law Enforcement; Armed Forces; Academia; Civil Society; 
Private Sector; CSIRT and IT Leaders from Government and 
the 
Private 
Sector; 
Critical 
national 
infrastructure; 
Telecommunications Companies; and Finance Sector. Each 
focus group session had approximately 10-15 stakeholders 
and lasted on average 2 hours.  
In order for the stakeholders to provide evidence on how 
many indicators have been implemented by a nation and to 
determine the maturity level of every aspect of the model, a 
consensus method is used to drive the discussions within 
sessions. During focus groups, researchers use semi-
structured questions to guide discussions around indicators. 
During these discussions, stakeholders should be able to 
provide or indicate evidence regarding the implementation of 
indicators, so that subjective responses are minimised. 
A. Analysis of maturity level data 
Three countries have been identiﬁed to be at a start-up 
stage of maturity, two countries have been identiﬁed at a 
formative stage and one at a start-up stage with few of the 
indicators from the formative stage of maturity being 
present. 
The results clearly indicate that the majority of examined 
countries in Africa are identiﬁed at a start-up stage of 
maturity. This translates into lack of a national programme 
for cybersecurity awareness raising. The need for awareness 
of cybersecurity threats and vulnerabilities across all sectors 
is not recognised, or is only at initial stages of discussion. 
Furthermore, awareness raising programmes (if existing) 
may be informed by international initiatives but are not 
linked to a national strategy.  
Finally, it was identiﬁed that awareness raising 
programmes, courses, seminars and online resources might 
be available for target demographics from public, private, 
academic, and/or civil sources, but no coordination or scaling 
eﬀorts have been conducted. In the next Section, we provide 
further details, based on our qualitative analysis, on these 
initial ﬁndings. 
B. Qualitative analysis of results 
We have transcribed all the recordings from focus groups 
and conducted a thematic analysis on the qualitative data for 
each country. We adopted a blended approach (a mix of 
deductive and inductive approach) to analyse focus group 
data and used the indicators of the CMM as our criteria for a 
deductive analysis. The inductive approach is based on ‘open 
coding’ meaning that the categories or themes are freely 
created by the researcher, while the deductive content 
analysis requires the prior existence of a theory to underpin 
the classification process. 
Excerpts that did not ﬁt into themes were further 
analysed to highlight additional issues that stakeholders 
might have raised during the focus groups or to inform our 
understanding on what the next steps should be for a country.  
Overall, we identiﬁed eight themes in our qualitative 
analysis for every country. Four themes were based on the 
aspects described in the CMM model and four themes 
emerged from the inductive approach. The themes from the 
inductive approach pertained information on what actions 
African countries should implement next. Since these eight 
themes were common for all six countries, we merged the 
excerpts for each theme from every country. We further 
examined these excerpts to identify common areas which 
hindered progress in cybersecurity awareness raising as well 
as key actions which countries should implement next to 
improve their cybersecurity posture in awareness raising.  
More speciﬁcally, the four main themes that emerged 
from the deductive approach are: a) the lack of national level 
programmes; b) the existence of ad-hoc initiatives; c) the 
relationship between ICT literacy (the ability to use digital 
technology and tools) and awareness and d) executive 
awareness. In a similar vein, the inductive approach 
identiﬁed four themes which revolved around the same 
concepts described in the deductive analysis; the diﬀerence 
being that excerpts in the inductive themes pertained 
information about recommendations and next steps. 
1) Deductive Theme Analysis: For all countries, it is 
evident that a national programme for cybersecurity 
awareness raising is absent. In many cases, stakeholders 
mentioned that ‘lack of awareness is an institutional 
problem, not a user problem’ and also that ‘a proper cyber 
awareness programme is needed’. The importance for such a 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-683-5
CYBER 2018 : The Third International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

programme 
was 
acknowledged 
across 
the 
various 
stakeholders in all countries reviewed in Africa. A main 
hindrance for the implementation of a national programme is 
the general lack of cybersecurity awareness outside the 
technical communities, which stakeholders pointed that its 
origin is the low ICT literacy in the population of these 
countries.  
It 
was 
further 
emphasised 
that 
awareness-raising 
programmes need to be developed alongside other capacity 
enhancements, such as incident response, training for 
cybersecurity 
educators, 
national 
and 
organisational 
cybersecurity policies, etc. 
Regarding the initiatives theme, there are ad-hoc initiatives 
in cybersecurity awareness raising that are supported by 
various institutions. These are being oﬀered from various 
organisations such as Facebook while the ﬁnancial sector, 
civil society and academia organise programmes for schools 
to raise awareness. According to a stakeholder, ‘some 
telecommunication companies and banks are engaged in 
awareness activities which includes messages via the media, 
directed to end-users, e.g. password security’.  
These initiatives, however, are not yet coordinated at the 
national level. Therefore, it was widely recognised that a 
more centralised awareness-raising programme would 
greatly expand a fundamental understanding of cybersecurity 
capacity.  
Often, civil society actors initiate eﬀorts into targeted 
cybersecurity awareness-raising. Diﬀerent stakeholders agree 
that a ‘common ground’ between government, private sector 
and civil society could enable the proliferation of awareness 
raising to the broader society. Moreover, often it was 
mentioned that the government needs to work alongside 
existing eﬀorts in academia to ensure that new initiatives 
capitalise from the academic experience. Such synergy is 
critical to ensure that awareness-raising eﬀorts are eﬃcient 
and eﬀective.  
As often mentioned by stakeholders ‘people trust social 
media and do not expect that someone will harm them, we 
are brothers!’. A stakeholder also noted that ‘It is common in 
African countries that mobile phones are used to access the 
Internet, use social media, for e-banking services etc. but 
people who use online services are not aware of risks’. 
Often, lack of awareness leads to a sense of ‘blind trust 
online. A stakeholder noted that ‘users trust social media 
and think that their information is secure, although often 
websites are still insecure’.  
Another interesting theme that emerged from the analysis 
of data is the low ICT literacy rate in Africa. Stakeholders 
indicated that awareness of the eﬀective use of ICT is still 
only gaining initial traction and that security is seen as only 
relevant once ICT and Internet literacy is suﬃcient.  
Regarding the theme revolving around awareness among 
executives, both in public and private sectors, cybersecurity 
awareness is very limited, which is one reason why 
cybersecurity awareness raising is not yet perceived as a 
priority. This has been identiﬁed as an important gap, as 
executives are usually the ﬁnal arbiters on investment into 
security.  
Some major telecommunications companies conduct 
internal awareness raising trainings across all levels, but 
there is not a publicly available initiative which targets 
executives. As mentioned by a stakeholder, ‘the reason for 
that is that there is limited awareness for cybersecurity 
threats and risks in the private sector overall, unless in 
major international organisations, in particular in the 
banking and telecommunications sectors which face 
strategic implications of cybersecurity’.  
It was commonly stated that there is a sharp disconnect 
between the terminology and priorities of the engineers 
working in IT systems and security, and those at the higher 
level seeking to make sound business decisions based on 
risk. 
2) Inductive Theme Analysis: Stakeholders mentioned 
during focus group sessions that ‘aspects of cybersecurity 
need to be introduced in the school curricula and improve 
ICT literacy’. It was also noted that ‘even in universities, 
people are not aware of the possible risks and procure 
without following standards’. Integrating cybersecurity 
awareness eﬀorts into ICT literacy courses could provide an 
established vehicle for cybersecurity awareness campaigns.  
Culture is another factor that can impact the eﬀectiveness 
of cybersecurity awareness programmes. As seen above, the 
collectivist 
cultural 
aspect 
that 
characterises 
oﬄine 
behaviour in Africa, is also pertained in online behaviour 
[29].  
Currently, due to the lack of national level awareness 
programmes, ‘being hacked brings awareness usually’ as a 
stakeholder noted. Therefore, the development of such a 
programme with speciﬁed target groups focusing on most 
vulnerable users is identiﬁed as necessary [30]. Also, 
appointing a designated organisation (from any sector) to 
lead the cybersecurity awareness raising programme and 
engaging relevant stakeholders from public and private 
sectors in the development and delivery of the awareness 
raising programme is crucial. As stakeholders mentioned in 
one of the reviews in Africa ‘The government realises that 
lack of awareness is crucial and recognises the importance 
of a multi-stakeholder approach towards this goal’. 
Moreover, it was noted that ‘People access social media 
through their smart phones and security is the last thing on 
their mind and that convenience is usually coming ﬁrst’.  
Regarding the executive awareness raising aspect, 
developing a dedicated awareness raising programme for 
executives within the public and private sectors is essential. 
A stakeholder noted that ‘diﬀerent levels of authority need 
diﬀerent kind of awareness in order to promote 
collaboration 
as 
well’. 
Currently, 
executives 
and 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-683-5
CYBER 2018 : The Third International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

management are being called upon to address cyber risk 
alongside other risks that businesses face. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
Reﬂecting on the results presented in Section 4, the lack of 
a central authority, which is crucial in all modes of operation 
as presented by NIST model [31], is evident. The absence of 
such authority prohibits the execution of holistic ‘needs 
assessments’, ampliﬁes the diﬃculties in prioritising the 
areas in which campaigns should be implemented and 
renders the design of ad-hoc campaigns by a limited number 
of stakeholders the only alternative. It is imperative that 
African countries allocate an authority to conduct a national 
needs assessment, identify the areas where campaigns should 
focus ﬁrst, develop a strategy for how these campaigns will 
be designed and implemented, and coordinate the ad-hoc 
eﬀorts of diﬀerent stakeholders.  
Focusing on the design and implementation of awareness-
raising campaigns, literature suggests that successful 
awareness campaigns need to be a ‘learning continuum’ 
[31], commencing from awareness, evolving to training and 
resulting in education. Our results highlight the need of 
African countries to involve stakeholders which are 
established in all the aforementioned sectors. Our analysis 
suggests that the audience of the campaigns should prioritise 
smartphone users, employees of SMEs and board members. 
The goals should be to communicate the risks from 
cybercrime, illustrate the need for better security controls 
and practices, and the need to establish a chief information 
security officer (CISO), respectively.  
This means that businesses and government agencies 
should start to take steps to increase their awareness and 
understanding of cybersecurity with a view of the potential 
impact on overall business performance. Lack of boardroom 
expertise makes it challenging for directors and councilors to 
eﬀectively oversee management’s cybersecurity activities.  
Cybersecurity awareness should reach all levels and 
inform all users of the internet – from vulnerable, school-
going children to families, industry, critical national 
infrastructures, governments and the African continent with 
its unique needs [31]-[34]. This will enhance resilience 
against cybercrimes and attacks and inform African policy 
development.  
If a country has already developed a national cybersecurity 
strategy, or is working towards that goal, then linking the 
development of the programme to that Strategy will facilitate 
the coordination of diﬀerent capacities towards the 
development 
of 
the 
programme 
and 
its 
eﬀective 
implementation.  
Regarding the implementation of these campaigns, there 
are several organisations with ad-hoc initiatives that could 
facilitate the design and implementation of cybersecurity 
campaigns, such as ISC Africa [22] and Parents corner [23]. 
To conclude, it is worth mentioning that the timing for the 
development of these campaigns coincides with eﬀorts in 
African countries to increase ICT literacy. As our ﬁndings 
underline, it is a unique opportunity for all African countries 
to combine ICT development with cybersecurity awareness. 
In contrast to western societies, where cybersecurity 
campaigns endeavour to change the norms on how users 
currently behave online (behaviour shaped since the 
inception of the Internet), campaigns in Africa can reﬂect on 
best practice and create new norms which will encompass 
cybersecurity requirements.  
Moreover, enacting evaluation measurements to study 
eﬀectiveness of the awareness programme will not only lead 
to the assessment of the programme but also identify 
possible gaps that need to be addressed [10] [30]. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
Several reports are depicting a bleak picture regarding 
the unprecedented increase of cybercrime in Africa. Yet, 
eﬀorts to raise cybersecurity awareness in the general public 
are in an embryonic stage. In this paper, we conducted 
twelve focus groups in six diﬀerent African countries to shed 
light into the current situation and identify critical actions 
which can signiﬁcantly decrease the success rate of 
cybercriminals.  
Our results suggest that all six African countries do not 
possess a national programme for raising awareness, there 
are extremely low ICT literacy levels which hinder any 
design of cybersecurity campaigns and that executive 
members in organisations myopically underestimate the 
problem. To better defend against cybercrime, African 
countries need to establish a central authority which will 
coordinate the existing ad-hoc eﬀorts in awareness 
campaigns and identify the target groups of these campaigns 
with particular focus on SMEs, mobile-phone users and 
executive board members. We believe that African countries 
have a unique opportunity to combine ICT literacy 
campaigns with cybersecurity principals and shape the norms 
of the society towards best practice.  
As part of our future work, we intend to explore the 
eﬀectiveness of a national coordinated cybersecurity 
awareness programme and how it relates to the actual 
security posture of a country. Our future work will be based 
on data from developed countries where the CMM has 
already been applied, as well as on data collected by other 
international organisations such as the ITU - GCI [35], 
Australian Strategic Policy Institute - ASPI [36], The 
Potomac Institute for Policy Studies (PIPS) - CRI [37], WEF 
- Global Competitive Index [38] and others. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The 
authors 
would 
like 
to 
thank 
Ms. 
Eva 
Ignatuschtschenko, Ms. Eva Nagyfejeo, Mr. Taylor Roberts 
and Ms. Carolin Weisser from the GCSCC for conducting 
ﬁeld work and data collection. We are also immensely 
grateful to Prof. Sadie Creese and Prof. Michael Goldsmith 
for their comments on an earlier version of the manuscript. 
 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-683-5
CYBER 2018 : The Third International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

REFERENCES 
[1] Trend Micro: “Is there a budding west african underground 
market?” 
https://www.trendmicro.com/vinfo/us/security/news/cybercri
me-and-digital-threats/westafrican-underground, 
2017. 
[retrieved: July 2018]. 
[2] O. Tomi: “Cyber-crime is africa’s ’next big threat’, experts 
warn”. 
http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-34830724, 
2015. [retrieved: July 2018]. 
[3] Serianu: 
“Africa 
cyber 
security 
report”. 
http://www.serianu.com/downloads/AfricaCyberSecurity 
Report2016.pdf, 2016. [retrieved: June 2018]. 
[4] Symantec: “Cyber crime and cyber security trends in africa”. 
https://www.thehaguesecuritydelta.com/media/com 
hsd/report/135/document/Cybersecurity-trends-report-Africa-
en.pdf, 2016. [retrieved: June 2018]. 
[5] Wombat Security Technologies (Wombat) and the Aberdeen 
Group: “African union cybersecurity proﬁle: Seeking a 
common 
continental 
policy”. 
https://jsis.washington.edu/news/africanunion-cybersecurity-
proﬁle-seeking-common-continental-policy/, 
2016. 
[retrieved:June 2018]. 
[6] T. Skye: “The last mile in it security: Changing user 
behaviors”. 
https://www.sbs.ox.ac.uk/cybersecuritycapacity/system/ﬁles/
CMM%20revised%20edition 
09022017 
1.pdf, 
2016. 
[retrieved: May 2018]. 
[7] Global Cyber Security Capacity Centre: “Cybersecurity 
capacity maturity model for nations (cmm): Revised edition”. 
https://www.wombatsecurity.com/press-releases/research-
conﬁrmssecurity-awareness-and-training-reduces-cyber-
security-risk, 2016. [retrieved: June 2018]. 
[8] HMG: 
“Security 
policy 
framework”. 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/ 
attachment data/ﬁle/316182/Security Policy Framework - web 
- April 2014.pdf, 2016. [retrieved: June 2018]. 
[9] T. R. Peltier, “Implementing an information security 
awareness program”, Information Systems Security, vol. 
14(2): pp. 37–49, 2005. 
[10] National Institute of Standards and Technology: “Framework 
for 
improving 
critical 
infrastructure 
cybersecurity”. 
https://www.nist.gov/sites/default/ﬁles/documents/cyberframe
work/cybersecurityframework-021214.pdf, 2014. [retrieved:  
June 2018]. 
[11] Organization of American States: “Cybersecurity awareness 
toolkit”. 
https://www.sbs.ox.ac.uk/cybersecuritycapacity/system/ﬁles/2
015%20OAS%20%20Cyber 
%20Security%20Awareness%20Campaign%20Toolkit%20%
28English%29.pdf, 2015. [retrieved: June2018]. 
[12] B. Khan, K. S. Alghathbar, S. I. Nabi, and M. K. Khan, 
“Eﬀectiveness of information security awareness methods 
based on psychological theories”, African Journal of Business 
Management, vol 5(26), pp. 10862, 2011. 
[13] I. Winkler and S. Manke, “Reasons for security awareness 
failure”, CSO Security and Risk, 7. 
[14] I. Ajzen, “Perceived behavioral control, self-eﬃcacy, locus of 
control, and the theory of planned behavior”, Journal of 
applied social psychology, vol 32(4), pp. 665–683, 2002. 
[15] M. W. Kreuter and S. M. McClure, “The role of culture in 
health communication”, Annu. Rev. Public Health, vol. 25, 
pp. 439–455, 2004. 
[16] I. Dlamini, B. Taute, and J. Radebe, “Framework for an 
African policy towards creating cyber security awareness”, 
The Southern African Cyber Security Awareness Workshop 
(SACSAW) 2011, pp. 15-31. 
[17] United Nations: Economic Commission for Africa, “The 
african information society initiative (aisi) - a decades 
perspective”. 
https://www.uneca.org/publications/african-
informationsociety-initiative-aisi-decade2015. 
[retrieved: 
June 2018]. 
[18] AfriNIC: “The internet numbers registry for africa”. 
https://www.afrinic.net/, 2018. [retrieved: June 2018]. 
[19] International 
Telecommunication 
Union: 
“Towards 
a 
common 
future”. 
https://www.itu.int/en/action/cybersecurity/Pages/gca.aspx, 
2018. [retrieved: June 2018]. 
[20] The Southern African Development Community: Global 
cybersecurity agenda (gca). http://www.sadc.int/, 2018. 
[retrieved: June 2018]. 
[21] Information 
Security 
Group 
of 
Africa: 
Proﬁle. 
http://pressoﬃce.itweb.co.za/isgafrica/ 
proﬁle.html, 
2018. 
[retrieved: June 2018]. 
[22] ISC: “Internet safety campaign”. http://iscafrica.net/, 2018. 
[retrieved: June 2018]. 
[23] Parents Corner: “Digital curfews — what are they & do your 
kids need one? ”  https://parentscorner.org.za, 2017. 
[retrieved: June 2018]. 
[24] L. Masibulele: “Africa rallies in support of safer internet 
day”. 
http://www.itwebafrica.com/ict-and-governance/523-
africa/242730-africa-rallies-in-supportof-safer-internet-day, 
2018. [retrieved: June 2018]. 
[25] J.R.C. Nurse, S. Creese, M. Goldsmith, and K. Lamberts, 
“Guidelines for usable cybersecurity: Past and present”. In 
Cyberspace Safety and Security (CSS), 2011 Third 
International Workshop pp. 21–26, IEEE.. 
[26] M. Williams, “Making sense of social research. Sage, 2002. 
[27] J. Knodel, “The design and analysis of focus group studies: A 
practical approach”, Successful focus groups: Advancing the 
state of the art, vol. 1, pp. 35–50, 1993. 
[28] R. A. Krueger and M. A. Casey, “Focus groups: A practical 
guide for applied research”. Sage publications, 2014. 
[29] H. C. Triandis, Cultures and organizations: Software of the 
mind”, 1993. 
[30] M. Bada and A. Sasse, “Cyber Security Awareness 
Campaigns: Why do they fail to change behaviour?”, in 
proceedings of the International Conference on Cyber 
Security for Sustainable Society (CSSS, 2015) Coventry, UK, 
pp. 118-131.  
[31] E. Kritzinger, M. Bada, and J.R.C. Nurse, “A study into the 
cybersecurity awareness initiatives for school learners in 
south africa and the uk”, in IFIP World Conference on 
Information Security Education, Springer, 2017, pp. 110–120.  
[32] H. Twinomurinz, A. Schoﬁeld, L. Hagen, S. Ditsoane-Molefe, 
and N. A. Tshidzumba, “Towards a shared worldview on e-
skills: A discourse between government, industry and 
academia on the ict skills paradox”, South African Computer 
Journal, vol. 29(3), pp. 215–237, 2017. 
[33] E. Kritzinger, “Growing a cyber-safety culture amongst 
school learners in south africa through gaming”, South 
African Computer Journal, 29(2), 2017. 
[34] E. Kritzinger, “Short-term initiatives for enhancing cyber-
safety within south african schools”. South African Computer 
Journal, vol. 28(1), pp. 1–17, 2016. 
[35] International 
Telecommunication 
Union: 
“Global 
cybersecurity 
index”. 
https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-
D/Cybersecurity/Pages/GCI.aspx, 
2018. 
[retrieved: 
June 
2018]. 
[36] Australian Strategic Policy Institute: “Cyber maturity in the 
asia 
paciﬁc 
region”. 
https://www.aspi.org.au/, 
2017. 
[retrieved: June 2018]. 
[37] The Potomac Institute for Policy Studies: “Cyber readiness 
index 2.0”. 
http://www.potomacinstitute.org/images/CRIndex2.0.pdf, 
2015. [retrieved: June 2018]. 
[38] The Global Competitiveness Report:  
         https://www.weforum.org/reports/the-global-competitiveness-  
        report-2017-2018 [retrieved: June 2018].
 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-683-5
CYBER 2018 : The Third International Conference on Cyber-Technologies and Cyber-Systems

