What Do You Call Your Analytical Endeavours? 
An Analysis of Term Usage in German Job Openings from 2017 to 2022 
Finja Below 
Department of Computer Science 
NORDAKADEMIE 
Elmshorn, Germany 
finja.below.i16a@nordakdemie.org 
Uwe Neuhaus 
Department of Media Education 
Europa-Universität Flensburg 
Flensburg, Germany 
uwe.neuhaus@uni-flensburg.de 
Michael Schulz 
Department of Computer Science 
NORDAKADEMIE 
Elmshorn, Germany 
michael.schulz@nordakademie.de 
 
 
Abstract—This paper examines which terms are used for 
analytical information systems in business practice and how 
their use has developed over time. For this purpose, a total of 
3,000 German job openings from 2017 to 2022 are subjected to 
a frequency analysis. Eight relevant generic terms are identified 
and divided into first- and second-order generic terms based on 
their definition of relevance to practice. A detailed examination 
of the common occurrence of the generic terms and the change 
in their use over time shows that the traditional term Business 
Intelligence continues to dominate in practice and that the terms 
Artificial Intelligence and Data Science are becoming 
increasingly established in a more technical context. More 
specific terms, such as Advanced Analytics, Machine Learning 
and Data Mining, on the other hand, are becoming less 
important for describing analytical information systems. 
Keywords: 
Analytical 
Information 
Systems; 
Business 
Intelligence; Artificial Intelligence; job openings; frequency 
analysis. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Procedures used for data analysis to support decision-
making in a business context have existed for decades [4] [6]. 
Over time, different terms for such Analytical Information 
Systems (AIS) have emerged. These emphasize certain 
aspects, focus on a specific application area, or pick up on 
currently "fashionable" terms [11]. When new terms emerge, 
it usually takes a while for standardized definitions and a 
common image to take hold [8]. In addition, the use of terms 
often differs in the scientific literature and in business practice 
[11]. 
This article analyzes which terms are used for AIS in 
business practice. German job openings from 2017 to 2022 are 
used for the analysis. It is assumed that job openings are a 
suitable source of data, as (a) they contain current data and (b) 
companies need to formulate tasks and requirements for 
applicants realistically in order to find suitable employees 
[14]. 
The aim of this work is to identify the Generic Terms (GT) 
used currently in business practice. These are determined with 
the help of a frequency analysis. In addition, the relationship 
between the GT and the changes in term usage over time are 
examined. Not part of this article is the explanation of the 
identified practice definition and relevance shifts over time. 
These will be analyzed in later research.  
This paper is divided into five sections. Following this 
introduction, Section 2 defines the terms relevant to this 
article. Next, Section 3 explains the data basis used for the 
study. Subsequently, Section 4 presents the results of the data 
analysis. The article concludes with an outlook on future 
research in Section 5. 
II. 
DEFINITIONS OF TERMS 
The job openings studied are from the AIS sector.  With 
such systems, analyses can be carried out to support 
management in decision-making. They are usually based on 
large volumes of data that have to be processed depending on 
the analysis objective [7]. The examination of job openings 
described in the following sections revealed that a variety of 
GT is used in business practice. In particular, the terms used 
emphasize the scope of the analyses, their degree of 
complexity, or their methodology. In the following, the most 
frequently occurring GT are presented. 
The term Business Intelligence (BI) describes concepts 
and methods for supporting managers in decision-making 
with the help of IT systems [11]. The main objective of BI is 
to make data available and prepare it for analysis [9]. As a 
result, there is a close connection to the term Business 
Analytics (BA). It is often regarded as an extension of BI to 
include more advanced forms of analysis [9]. According to 
other sources, on the other hand, the term represents an 
addition to BI of these advanced analysis methods (cf. e.g. 
[1]). 
To emphasize the increasing complexity of analytics, 
some authors use the term Advanced Analytics (AA) [3]. With 
its mathematically and algorithmically sophisticated methods, 
AA goes beyond the traditional data analysis of BI and BA 
[1]. The term Data Analytics (DA), on the other hand, 
emphasizes 
the 
importance 
of 
increasingly 
large, 
multifaceted, and frequently changing data sets for decision 
making. DA encompasses the entire process from data 
collection and analysis to the presentation of results [13]. 
While the terms BI and BA emphasize the economic 
context, the terms Data Science (DS), Artificial Intelligence 
(AI), Data Mining (DM) and Machine Learning (ML) focus 
more on the methods used. DS is an interdisciplinary field in 
which insights are extracted semiautomatically from 
sometimes complex data [12]. It thus has great intersections 
with AI. This term covers methods that enable a system to 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-111-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Data Analytics

interpret data and use it to learn patterns [10]. Subfields of AI 
are DM, which provides methods and algorithms to discover 
previously unknown relationships in large data sets [2], and 
ML, which allows computers to improve automatically based 
on experience [5]. 
III. 
DATA BASIS  
This study continues the work of [14] and adds a temporal 
component to it. 
Job openings collected once a year from 2017 to 2022 on 
the largest job portals in Germany serve as the data basis. 
Since the goal of this study is to identify GT used in business 
practice, a search that was too narrow - e.g., for terms such as 
BI or AI - could have resulted in relevant information being 
overlooked. For this reason, "analy*" was used as the search 
term, with the asterisk replaced by any string that combined to 
form a German- or English-language word. Only job openings 
in which the entered term was mentioned in the job title and 
which were written in German were considered. 
Furthermore, job openings that clearly do not fall into the 
area of analysis with the goal of decision support were 
eliminated for the following investigations. This eliminated 
primarily job openings from the natural sciences and those 
that focused on classic software development tasks. This 
elimination step was carried out independently by all three 
authors in order to minimize the degree of subjectivity in the 
compilation of the data basis. Divergent decisions were 
discussed to arrive at a mutually accepted result. As a final 
data set, 500 job openings were used for each year under 
consideration. 
Based on the resulting 3,000 job openings, a frequency 
analysis was performed. In this work, terms were chosen as 
the unit of analysis, formed either by single words or by n-
grams. 
Only terms that appear in more than 5% of all job openings 
were considered relevant GT. Candidates that are mentioned 
in 3-5% of the job openings and thus just miss the threshold 
are the terms Predictive Analytics, Digital Analytics, Web 
Analytics, Big Data Analytics, and Data Engineering. 
IV. 
DESCRIPTIVE DATA ANALYSIS 
Figure 1 shows the development of the GT under 
investigation from 2017/2018 (starting point of the arrows) to 
2021/2022 (end point of the arrows).  For the analysis, the data 
of two consecutive years were combined. Data of the years 
2019/2020 are not shown for reasons of clarity. The value on 
the x-axis indicates what proportion of sole use of GT is 
accounted for by the respective term. Sole use means that none 
of the other GT considered was mentioned in the job openings. 
In 2021/2022, sole mention of GT was identified in 298 job 
openings (2017/2018: 293, 2019/2020:353).  
The y-axis shows the proportion of the respective terms in 
job openings in which more than one GT was mentioned. 
The area below the diagonal (Area I) thus contains those 
GT whose share of sole use is greater than the share of their 
use in combination with other GT. They can be defined as GT 
of the first order. They are GT that are sufficiently 
comprehensive and precise to fully describe an analytics area. 
The area above the diagonal (Area II), on the other hand, 
contains those GT whose share of common use with other GT 
is higher than the share of their stand-alone use. They are 
defined as second-order GT; depending on the context, they 
often cannot stand alone but require other GT for 
specification. 
2017/
2018
2021/
2022
Sole term usage of the respective GT in %
Combined use of the respective GT in %
10
100
10
100
0
I
II
Data Analytics
Business Intelligence
Business Analytics
Advanced Analytics
Machine Learning
Artificial Intelligence
Data Science
Data Mining
 
Figure 1.  GT development from 2017/2018 to 2021/2022. 
The diagram shows the practice definition and practical 
relevance shift of GT in the period under consideration: 
• 
The practice definition of GT is said to be stable if 
the ratio between sole and joint use does not change, 
i.e., there is no shift over time or a shift parallel to 
the diagonal. 
• 
An increase (decrease) of the practical relevance can 
be determined by the fact that the distance of an GT 
to the origin of the coordinate system increases 
(decreases) with respect to Figure 1. 
Area I of Figure 1 contains the two terms that form GT of 
the first order: DA and BI. Even though BI alone has lost 
shares, it remains the most frequently used term overall. In 
2021/2022, it was included in 32.5% of job openings 
(2017/2018: 32.8%, 2019/2020: 39.3%). DA, on the other 
hand, did not change in its practice definition during the 
period under consideration, but its relevance did: While the 
term was included in 12.6% of job openings in 2017/2018, it 
was already 21.4% in 2021/2022. 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-111-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Data Analytics

Data Analytics
Business Intelligence
Business Analytics
Advanced Analytics
Machine Learning
Artificial Intelligence
Data Science
Data Mining
Business Intelligence
Artificial Intelligence
-100%
0%
100%
-100%
0%
100%
  
Figure 2.  Interrelationships of the GT. 
The greater number of GT examined are positioned in Area II 
of Figure 1 and are thus second-order GT. Only the practice 
definition and relevance of the term BA remained almost 
stable over the six years under consideration. The terms AA, 
which was insignificant as a stand-alone term during the entire 
period under consideration, and DM have lost relevance while 
the practice definition has remained unchanged.  
The term ML has also lost importance overall, but has 
gained slightly as a stand-alone term; its practice definition 
has shifted accordingly. The terms AI and DS, on the other 
hand, gained overall relevance. The practice definition of DS 
has remained stable, while AI has become more established as 
a stand-alone term. 
Figure 2 uses Chord diagrams for the years 2021/2022 to 
show which GT appear in the job openings in combination 
with which other GT. The bar charts show the deviation of the 
identified individual relationships from the relationships when 
all GT are considered (a priori probability). The first part of 
the figure shows the BI relationships, since this is the most 
frequently used first-order GT, and the second part the AI 
relationships, since the relevance of this second-order GT 
increased the most in the period under review. 
The frequency with which GT is mentioned is made clear 
by the size of the respective occupied circle section in the 
Chord diagram. In the case of BI, it can be seen that the term 
is most frequently mentioned on its own (34%). If it occurs 
together with other terms, these are in particular DA (20%), 
DS (16%) and BA (10%), where the correlation is slightly 
weaker in each case than would have been expected when 
considering the a priori probability. Mention of BI together 
with more specialized and more technical generic terms such 
as ML (7%), AI (5%) and DM (3%), on the other hand, are 
significantly less frequent. 
The generic term AI rarely stands alone (6%); it is very 
often accompanied by other GT that specify the focus of the 
job openings. The most frequent combinations are DS (22%), 
ML (22%) and DA (21%). The first two also occur 
significantly more frequently than might have been expected 
(DS +84%, ML +71%). At -52% significantly less frequently 
than would have been expected when considering the a priori 
probability, AI is mentioned in the job openings together with 
BI (15%). The term AA occurs 97% more frequently in 
combination with AI than would have been expected. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH 
In this article, the terms most intensively used by 
companies at present for AIS were identified. For this 
purpose, 3,000 job openings serves as analytical data basis. 
Furthermore, it was examined to what extent the practical 
definition and practical relevance of GT changed from 2017 
to 2022. Using the terms Business Intelligence and Artificial 
Intelligence as examples, it was shown which GT are 
frequently or rarely used in combination with other GT. 
In the future, more in-depth text analytics will be applied 
based on the described data set from 2017 to 2022. The job 
openings contain further information that allows a better 
understanding of the focus and developments of the use of AIS 
in operational practice. This includes the qualifications 
required of applicants in the various phases of data analysis, 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-111-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Data Analytics

the analysis software skills needed, and the planned areas of 
application and types of tasks. Frequently, the ads also name 
the driving developments underlying the analytics desire (e.g., 
digitalization, Industry 4.0, or Internet of Things). It is 
planned to extract and cluster this information so that its 
relevance can be determined and significant changes over 
time can be shown. 
This more detailed investigation will also make it possible 
to work out more concretely how the GT under consideration 
are used in operational practice. On this basis, an attempt can 
then be made to explain the shifts in practice definition and 
relevance presented in this article and to determine whether 
there has been a fundamental change in data analysis for 
decision support or whether it is simply a shift in the trend of 
terms used. 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. Chamoni, “Data Science - Entwicklungslinien und Trends” [in 
English: “Data Science - Lines of Development and Trends“] in D. 
Frick, A. Gadatsch, J. Kaufmann, B. Lankes, C. Quix, A. Schmidt and 
U. Schmitz, (Eds.), Data Science: Konzepte, Erfahrungen, Fallstudien 
und Praxis [in English: Data Science: Concepts, Experiences, Case 
Studies and Practice], Springer Fachmedien, pp. XII–XVI, 2021. 
[2] J. Cleve and U. Lämmel, Data Mining (3. ed.). De Gruyter, 2020.  
[3] C. Dittmar, “Die nächste Evolutionsstufe von AIS: Big Data” [in 
English: The next evolutionary stage of AIS: Big Data] in P. 
Gluchowski and P. Chamoni (Eds.), Analytische Informationssysteme: 
Business Intelligence-Technologien und -Anwendungen [in English: 
Analytical Information Systems: Business Intelligence Technologies 
and Applications], (5. ed., vol. 51). Springer Gabler, pp. 55-65, 2016.  
[4] G. A. Gorry and M. S. S. Morton, “A framework for management 
information systems”, Sloan Management Review, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 
56-79, 1971. 
[5] M. I. Jordan and T. M. Mitchell, “Machine learning: Trends, 
perspectives, and prospects”, Science, Vol 349, Issue 6245, pp. 255-
260, 2015. 
[6] P. G. Keen, “Decision support systems: a research perspective” in 
Decision support systems: Issues and challenges: Proceedings of an 
international task force meeting, pp. 23-44, 1980.  
[7] H. Kempter, Betriebliche Informationssysteme: Datenmanagement 
und Datenanalyse [in English: Business Information Systems: Data 
Management and Data Analysis]. Kohlhammer Verlag, 2017. 
[8] J. H. Kroeze, M. C. Matthee and T. J. D. Bothma, “Differentiating data- 
and text-mining terminology” in J. Eloff (Ed.), ACM Conferences. 
Proceedings of the 2003 annual research conference of the South 
African institute of computer scientists and information technologists 
on Enablement through technology, South African Institute for 
Computer Scientists and Information Technologists, pp. 93-101, 2003. 
[9] E.-P. Lim, H. Chen and G. Chen, “Business Intelligence and 
Analytics”, ACM Transactions on Management Information Systems, 
vol.  3, no. 4, pp. 1–10, 2013.  
[10] P. Mikalef and M. Gupta, “Artificial intelligence capability: 
Conceptualization, measurement calibration, and empirical study on its 
impact on organizational creativity and firm performance”, 
Information & Management, vol. 58, no. 3: 103434, 2021. 
[11] S. Negash, “Business Intelligence”, Communications of the 
Association for Information Systems, vol. 13, no. 15, pp. 177-195, 
2004. 
[12] M. Schulz, et al., “Introducing DASC-PM: A Data Science Process 
Model”, ACIS 2020 Proceedings, vol. 45, 2020. 
[13] C.-W. Tsai, C.-F. Lai, H.-C. Chao amd A. V. Vasilakos, “Big data 
analytics: a survey”, Journal of Big Data, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1-32, 2015. 
[14] U. Neuhaus and M. Schulz, “Wie nennt ihr, was ihr da tut? Der Begriff 
“Analytics” in der betrieblichen Praxis” [in English: “What do you call 
what you're doing? The term ‘Analytics’ in operational practice”, 
NORDBLICK, no. 6, pp. 4-29, 2018.  
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-111-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Data Analytics

