  
Technology Roadmap for Hawaii Resiliency 
Resiliency and Sustainability through Advanced Analytics 
 
Thomas J. Klemas and Steve Chan 
Sensemaking Fellowship, Swansea University Network Science Research Center  
Swansea, Wales 
email: tklemas@alum.mit.edu, stevechan@post.harvard.edu 
 
 
Abstract—The state of Hawaii faces numerous challenges 
that threaten its survival. Tsunamis, weather-induced 
mud-slides, and global climate change impacts are just a 
few of the threats that could cripple Hawaii.  The state is 
increasingly vulnerable because of aging infrastructure 
and the fact that its economy is highly dependent on 
tourism and construction, military, or government 
projects.  To improve Hawaii's resilience, this effort 
proposes steps that will enable analytics based decision 
support to combat the major threats.  In this paper, we 
describe a technology roadmap that will guide Hawaii to 
pioneer 
a 
sound 
resiliency 
approach, 
facilitate 
implementation of a resiliency plan, develop the required 
resiliency technologies, deploy the resiliency technology 
and improve Hawaii's infrastructure, and foster growth of 
a technology-based resiliency industry that will sustain 
Hawaii's resilience. As a successful pathfinder for 
resiliency, Hawaii will be positioned to lead the way for 
many other cities, states, nations, and even regions of the 
world that face similar threats.   Keywords—resiliency; 
sustainability; technology roadmap; analytics; decision 
support; high performance computing; hyper-local weather 
forecasting. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
 
In industry, the concept of formulating a technology 
roadmap in order to envision the future, articulating a desired 
end-state, and developing a plan of action to reach that end-
state is valuable to align the key players and motivate them to 
mobilize their resources towards a common goal. The 
technology roadmap provides a valuable mechanism for 
communication between all parties involved and enables key 
decisions, such as standards, and other required preparations, to 
take place in advance of arriving at the end-state goals.  Since 
none of the key players in this Hawaiian resiliency initiative 
possess sufficient resources to execute the plan individually, a 
Public Private Partnership Initiative (P3I) is the best 
mechanism to achieve this goal. In this paper, we will show 
how we adapted the technology roadmap concept, borrowed 
from industry, formed a public private partnership aimed to 
achieve Hawaiian resiliency, and developed the roadmap 
details.   
 
The central element of the technology roadmap is the vision 
or desired end-state.  As hinted in the previous paragraph, the 
end-state for this roadmap targets improvements in Hawaii 
resiliency.  However, the future envisioned for Hawaii is even 
greater, proposing that Federal, State, and local authorities 
team with academic and industrial partners to construct and 
implement a plan that will position Hawaii to be a pathfinder 
and world leader in developing resiliency technologies. The 
motivation for this ambitious end-state is to counter serious 
threats that pose grave danger to Hawaii's very survival.  
 
Hawaii faces several major, imminent threats. The first 
threat is an impending economic downturn that will be 
compounded by dependence upon a tourism-heavy economy 
[1].  The second threat is the weather and environment [9] [10] 
[11].  These threats are deeply compounded by Hawaii's 
isolated location and aging infrastructure. The third threat is the 
emerging cyber-threat that is shared by the entire globe and 
could cripple Hawaii's economy even if steps are taken to avert 
the predicted economic downturn and could be wielded by an 
adversarial actor(s) to intentionally attack elements of Hawaii's 
economy or difficult-to-defend critical/strategic infrastructure, 
or to hamper Hawaii's emergency response mechanisms.   
 
It is important to note that these threats are linked.  
Achieving resiliency requires a stable economy, and a stable 
economy requires resiliency. Conversely, the coupling 
magnifies the potential impact of any of these threats and poses 
severe challenges to Hawaii's resiliency.  In a sense, the 
combined threats facing Hawaii represent the “perfect storm” 
that is looming in the not-too-distant future, darkening the 
horizon.  To make matters worse, there seems to be universal 
agreement that Hawaii is under-prepared to meet these 
challenges should they should solidify and that should any of 
the threats materialize, it would exact a terrible toll.   
 
To fully understand the Hawaiian resiliency vision and 
technology roadmap end-state, it is necessary to describe each 
major threat in detail.  Section II will endeavor to do so.  
Section III will present the technical solutions required to 
counter the threats facing Hawaii and repair its vulnerabilities.  
This section will present a technology roadmap that 
implements the required solutions as part of a comprehensive 
approach to develop a new resiliency industry that will sustain 
and extend Hawaii into the future.  Section IV will present the 
status and progress towards achieving Hawaiian resilience, 
Section V will describe the technology roadmap, and Section 
VI will detail future steps that remain to be executed.  Finally, 
the summary section will highlight the main points of the 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

  
document 
and 
present 
reasons 
why 
the 
successful 
implementation of this technology roadmap is of strategic 
importance to the U.S. and the rest of the world.  
II. DETAILED CHALLENGES 
A. Environmental Challenges 
The Hawaiian islands are the most isolated chain of islands 
in the world, located in the middle of the Pacific Ocean and 
quite exposed to the impacts of mother nature. As such, Hawaii 
faces tremendous challenges due to hostile weather and 
environmental phenomena like hurricanes, tsunamis, storms 
and related flooding, volcanic eruptions and lava flows, mud 
slides, global climate change, and more. 
The danger posed by a tsunami is well-known and widely 
feared.  On March 11, 2011, the Tohoku earthquake triggered a 
tsunami that inundated the Fukushima Nuclear Power Plant on 
the coast of Japan and resulted in the Fukushima Daiichi 
nuclear disaster when 3 of the 6 nuclear reactors melted down.  
While most of the direct damage of a major tsunami cannot be 
averted, certain measures to prepare can indeed reduce some of 
the secondary impacts, if there is sufficient warning.  Often a 
major storm or tsunami will take down the power grid.  In fact, 
the power grid can be shut down intentionally in anticipation of 
an impending tsunami. Pumping stations for water distribution 
and waste water sewage can be prepared with extra fuel for 
backup generators to allow water pumping to continue when it 
is most necessary, particularly with the proviso that there is 
sufficient warning to do so. With regards to the tsunami 
warning buoys placed in the Pacific to warn Hawaii of 
impending tsunami, the National Research Council of the 
National Academies have called for a replacement strategy. 
Furthermore, the antiquated technology on the buoys are more 
of a liability to Hawaii than as the intended functionality of a 
safety mechanism, for the buoys have no robust protection 
mechanism to defend against hackers attempting buoy spoofing 
as well as other adverse actors that could trigger a warning and 
induce decision-makers to shut down the power grid in Hawaii.    
Hawaii struggles to produce sufficient, affordable, and 
stable power. Outages occur due to demand combined with 
infrastructural issues, vegetation overgrowth, and other 
phenomenon affect the islands. Such interruptions incur 
economic penalties, but also can have deadly consequences 
when emergency equipment ceases to run, pumping stations 
fail, and similar shutdowns occur.  Not only from the result of 
severe weather events, on a daily level, Hawaii faces a 
continuous occurrence of adverse micro-weather affects that 
may have causal impacts. While Hawaii has enthusiastically 
adopted solar technologies to leverage its tropical sunshine to 
produce energy, unanticipated micro-changes in cloud cover 
can profoundly affect matters. As a result, the switching points 
between solar and fossil-fuel based electricity production can 
indeed be better optimized so as to cope with these micro-
weather changes.  
 
As a longer-term threat, global climate change threatens to 
elevate sea level and the consequences could be dire for 
Hawaii. In Hawaii, a rising sea level could lead to increased 
soil salinity levels in coastal areas along the perimeter of all the 
islands. This change in soil chemistry could potentially force 
insects, such as termites to higher grounds, thereby impacting 
telephone poles and similar infrastructures that were previously 
not as vulnerable.       
 
B. Economic Challenges 
 
Economic challenges are not usually direct threats to 
existence, but in the case of Hawaii, economic issues elevate 
Hawaii's vulnerability and compound the impact of the 
environmental threats.  Upgrades to aging infrastructure so as 
to counter the threats require a significant amount of funds.  
Sustainment of the upgraded infrastructure will require long-
term economic stability. Along this vein, longer-term economic 
stability depends upon a broad-based economy supported by 
more than just tourism and the construction, military, and 
government projects that have traditionally boosted Hawaii's 
economy. Thus, in order to achieve sustained resiliency, 
Hawaii needs to foster new technology-based drivers for its 
economic growth that will allow it to compete favorably in the 
increasingly global marketplace even when its traditional 
sources of funds are less available.   
 
Due to its geographical location, Hawaii is the most 
isolated island state in the world.  As such, it has always faced 
steep economic challenges.  For one, any enterprise in Hawaii, 
whether individual, commercial, or government, raw materials 
and energy cost significantly more. Solar energy may offset 
some of the additional cost of energy, but as of yet (despite its 
enormous potential), it does not make up the difference.  
Electricity can cost 3-4 times the price it does on the mainland. 
Furthermore, climate change and global warming impacts will 
place more drag on the economy by forcing Hawaii to respond 
to the changing conditions to well protect its infrastructure. By 
depending upon tourism and construction, military, and 
government projects to drive the economy for many years, 
Hawaii has not kept pace with the increasingly global and 
competitive marketplace. Thus, Hawaii's economy is highly 
vulnerable and dependent on numerous factors beyond its 
control.    
 
Many of the aforementioned disadvantages described above 
already disfavor industry investment in Hawaii and lead new 
companies to take root elsewhere than in Hawaii. However, 
there is yet another far more significant factor that threatens to 
drive away future business opportunities. Hawaii lags in certain 
critical/strategic infrastructure to support the burgeoning 
Internet bandwidth need that is crucial to the modern global 
marketplace, and its current trans-oceanic cables faces physical 
degradation by traditional end-of-life factors. Streaming video 
can be problematic because bandwidth is so limited, which 
means that tele-meeting technologies, such as video 
teleconferencing (VTC), educational opportunities for remote 
learning, and many other high-bandwidth data streaming 
applications may be impacted.   
 
Model predictions indicate that Hawaii will face an 
extended economic downturn in less than 5 years, if no 
measures are taken.  In order to minimize impacts of the 
downturn and, conversely, actually drive the economy, it is 
imperative to incorporate new growth factors that will broaden 
Hawaii's economy beyond its current pillars of tourism, 
construction, military, and government. In particular, to 
compete in the increasingly competitive and global market 
place, it is vital that Hawaii rejuvenate its economic engine by 
both attracting and starting technology innovation.  One means 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

  
to accomplish this crucial revitalization of the economy is for 
Hawaii to boldly address its resiliency problems by developing 
innovative and comprehensive solutions, fostering a novel 
resiliency industry, and committing education and training 
resources to train others.  In doing so, Hawaii would become a 
world leader in resiliency, and serve as a resource from which 
others can learn. Due to its unique property as being the most 
isolated island chain in the world, Hawaii is, in essence, a 
bounded problem set and is an ideal “living lab” for industry. 
III. APPROACH TO OVERCOME CHALLENGES 
Hawaii does have several resources and advantages that it 
can leverage to overcome the challenges threatening its future.  
For one, Hawaii is a relatively closed system that makes it 
easier to attack the resiliency problem from a comprehensive 
perspective. Second of all, Hawaii is still on solid economic 
footing, so there are economic resources to utilize in improving 
its resilience posture. Additionally, Maui still is the home of 
the Maui High Performance Computing Center (MHPCC), 
which greatly enhances Hawaii's ability to build up the 
sophisticated analytic-based decision support aids that are 
required to implement a smart-grid, smart-buoy defense 
system, and —ultimately — smart-cities.   
 
To counter the dangers outlined in the previous section, a 
number of inter-related improvement efforts must be initiated.  
First, the tsunami-warning buoy system must be upgraded.  
According to the 2010 Report “An Assessment of the U.S. 
Tsunami Program and the Nation’s Preparedness Efforts,” by 
the National Research Council of the National Academies, the 
current system, known as the Deep-ocean Assessment and 
Reporting of Tsunamis (DART), which services the U.S. (and 
Hawaii) as well as 50 other countries, is unreliable. For 
example, “of the 39 stations deployed in 2008 only an 
estimated 60 percent were operational by 2009.” New sensors 
and security must be incorporated into the buoys to truly 
improve the tsunami defense, improve Hawaii's defensive 
posture, and reduce security risks. These buoys sensors will 
collect data that will have to be transmitted to a central location 
for analysis and decision support. One proposed solution is to 
utilize Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) communications to 
create a network that ultimately connects the buoys to the 
MHPCC, perhaps in conjunction with satellites. Second, the 
broadband initiative is critical to replace existing broadband 
before it reaches saturation and/or physically degrades. 
Interruption in Internet capabilities would expose Hawaii's 
security and economy to grave risks.  Furthermore, due to the 
time required for such an upgrade, the time to act on this 
upgrade is quite limited. Third, Hawaii's grid and other 
infrastructure must be instrumented appropriately to enable 
smart-grid and smart-city capabilities.  Finally, many of the 
new sensors must be connected, ultimately, to the Maui High 
Performance Computing Center, so as to enable analytic 
engines to derive insights from the raw data, and edge analytic 
systems must be deployed in those situations where such 
connection is not feasible.    
 
To process the live data streams, the MHPCC will be 
equipped with advanced software systems that comprise a 
crucial component of a modeling and analytics infrastructure 
that is aiming to achieve lasting resilience for the State of 
Hawaii.  These computational capabilities will be both enabled 
and sustained by increased bandwidth resulting from new data 
channels provided by the Hawaii Broadband Initiative. To 
support resilience, this data analytics architecture will support 
connections to a variety of data streams, including data from 
sensors from a future smart-grid utility infrastructure, the future 
replacement 
sensor 
buoys 
for 
the 
aging 
storm-
warning/tsunami-detection buoys, processing satellite imagery 
from the existing Earth Observation System, sensor data from 
existing and future weather balloons, and potentially many 
other sources.   
 
To 
enhance 
Hawaiian 
resilience, 
MHPCC 
high 
performance computing systems will host software algorithms 
that are designed to accept real-time data streams, analyze the 
data within a suitable historical context by leveraging available 
meta data, automatically detect patterns from which insights 
may be derived, infer relationships from interconnections 
between data elements, and provide advanced decision-making 
tools that will help local, state, and federal leaders to protect 
Hawaii's electrical grid, provide hyper-local weather prediction 
in addition to alarm for storms, tsunamis, mud slides, and other 
adverse environmental events. These same analytic tools can, 
ultimately, be harnessed to empower a growing technology 
based economy.  
 
Initially, the most critical of the myriad of challenges to 
tackle seems to revolve around the weather challenges.  This 
sub-challenge benefits from the fact that the technical 
approach, computing approach, and sensors already exist. The 
IBM Deep Thunder system offers technology that has been 
developed to provide local, high-resolution weather predictions 
customized to weather-sensitive specific operations. For 
example, it could be used to predict situations ranging from 
flooding and/or damaged power lines to anticipating cloud 
cover over the Hawaiian island of Maui. 
IV. STATUS AND PROGRESS OF RESILIENCE 
INITIATIVE 
There has been significant progress related to the resiliency 
initiative.  As a Public Private Partnership Initiative (P3I), the 
resiliency initiative is a combined effort among the State of 
Hawaii, 
U.S. 
Pacific 
Command 
(PACOM), 
Swansea 
University’s Network Science Research Center, IBM Smarter 
Cities and Safer Planet, Mehta Tech, Synerscope, and others. 
On July 7, 2014, State of Hawaii Senate Bill 2742 (Act 229) — 
co-sponsored by then Senator David Ige (now Governor for the 
State of Hawaii) — was signed into law by then Governor Neil 
Abercrombie. The 28th Legislature of the State of Hawaii is 
currently working on legislation related to the Pacific-Asia 
Institute for Resiliency and Sustainability (AIRS) mission, 
including explorations for a new trans-oceanic broadband 
connection. In addition, PACOM co-sponsored a Resiliency 
Symposium in Honolulu, Hawaii, which featured presentations 
by the Sensemaking-PACOM Fellowship.      
V. TECHNOLOGY ROADMAP 
Outlining the process to develop a technology roadmap is 
itself an important element of achieving success.  In this 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

  
paper, we adapt the steps defined in [3] from the industry 
context to the Hawaii Resiliency problem space. First, it is 
important to ensure that developing a technology roadmap will 
actually yield benefits to the parties involved.  After all, we 
have already identified strong candidate solutions to the 
problems that threaten Hawaii's future.  Do we really need a 
resiliency technology roadmap?  In this case, the motivation 
for developing a technology roadmap is two-fold.  From a 
resiliency perspective, while potential solutions have been 
identified to many of the threats described earlier, some of the 
technologies have not been fully developed to achieve the 
sustained resiliency that Hawaii aims to achieve. For example, 
cyber-technology seems to lack the required level of maturity.  
Therefore, to achieve Hawaii's resiliency vision, it will be 
essential to develop a new resiliency technology base. As 
such, the technology roadmap will be of great value to outline 
the steps to achieve this. Additionally, the logic is similar from 
a sustainment point of view that in order to maintain the 
fledgling resiliency technology industry, which will provide 
the necessary latent stability, it will actually be advantageous 
to grow much of the resiliency technology locally. This will 
effectuate a sustained econometric framework that will serve 
as a sustained driver to Hawaii's economy and will help 
insulate Hawaii's isolated islands from the uncertainties 
inherent in the historical principal economic dependence on 
tourism, construction, government, and military projects. 
  Once the benefit of a technology roadmap is established, it 
is important to select champions that have the know-how, 
resources, and leadership to bring about the benefits 
envisioned by the roadmap.  In order to achieve Hawaiian 
Resiliency, the optimal choice is a Public-Private Partnership 
Initiative, involving the state of Hawaii, local leaders, 
PACOM, MHPCC, AIRS, the Sensemaking Fellowship, 
several academic institutions, and several industry partners. 
None of these parties alone have the resources to effectuate 
the desired outcome, but together in partnership, many of the 
foundational pieces that will be required by the resiliency 
technology roadmap are already being put in place.  To enact 
this resiliency vision for Hawaii, critical resource elements are 
required, 
which 
include 
political 
capital, 
funding, 
computational resources, subject matter expertise, academic 
support, and a strong network of relationships with potential 
candidate technology partners, some of which might help 
realize the vision.   Many of these elements are provided by 
the P3I members, some of whom are referenced in the 
February 7, 2014 and October 31, 2014 Hawaii Department of 
Defense press releases regarding their participation with 
PACOM and others on methods to improve energy efficiency 
and grid operations. The process that will be used to develop 
the technology roadmap has already started.  This may seem 
counter-intuitive, but the vision of the technology roadmap 
described above represents a sustained resilience approach that 
is clearly a super set of the solutions developed to mitigate the 
immediate threats posed by an aging tsunami-warning system, 
aging infrastructure, looming global climate change effects, 
and broadband end-of-life. Thus, essentially, the resilience 
initiative has evolved to achieve a sustainable solution that 
involves growth of an entire industry.    
 
The process has included a hybrid expert and local 
workforce-based approach. PACOM co-hosted a Hawaii 
resilience symposium organized in a workshop setting that 
highlighted a fairly comprehensive resilience approach. The 
Senate Majority Leader discussed legislative progress related 
to various elements of the resiliency initiative.  Subject matter 
experts from the Sensemaking Fellowship and AIRS discussed 
aspects of the resilience approach with audience members 
which included officials, legislators, and department members 
from the state of Hawaii, local officials, representatives of the 
MHPCC, academic leaders, and other interested parties.   
Subsequently, the Sensemaking Fellows met individually with 
representatives of many of these groups to explain technical 
components, highlight requirements of the overall approach, 
and solidify the crucial elements of the technology roadmap.   
 
As discussed before, this technology roadmap has been 
developed to achieve sustained resilience, evolving far beyond 
simple mitigation of several of the immediate threats, so as to 
help position Hawaii as a leader at the forefront of resilience 
technologies and to demonstrate this leadership by example, 
such that the rest of the world will look to Hawaii for 
resilience solutions.  The components of the roadmap were 
adapted from [3] and [4] to fit within the P3I approach.  The 
technical roadmap in [3] included 5 major components: 
“Goals”, “Milestones”, “Gaps and Barriers”, “Action Items”, 
and “Priorities and Timelines.” The elements of the 
technology roadmap presented in [4] were greater in number 
and more specific and focused on long-term benefits from 
primarily an industry point of view.  The technology roadmap 
presented here differs from [3] and [4] because it has both a 
primary goal of solving the Hawaiian resilience challenges 
and a secondary goal of positioning Hawaii — for sustained 
resilience — as the leader in resilience by fostering a local 
technology industry and building local training programs, both 
academic and otherwise, related to resilience technologies.   
 
The first section of the technology roadmap is an analysis 
of the specific challenges facing Hawaii, a summary of 
existing technologies available to counter those challenges, 
aspects of the threats for which no solution exists that will 
require research and innovation to overcome, and an 
evaluation of resilience technologies and industry trends.  The 
threats facing Hawaii were discussed in section II and 
solutions to overcome those challenges were presented in 
section III.  These aforementioned threats do not fully describe 
or address the hurdles that exist for Hawaii to attract 
technology companies; there are fairly generous tax credits for 
companies to locate in Hawaii, but there are severe 
disadvantages as well.  Businesses seeking to locate within 
Hawaii face difficulties ranging from its geographical 
remoteness to its relatively high energy costs (more expensive 
than the mainland for electricity) high cost of living, high cost 
for businesses, challenge of recruiting, and a limited venue for 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

  
venture capital.  In light of these obstacles for an individual 
company, the goal of growing an entire new technology 
industry in Hawaii represents a steep hill to climb.  
   In the next step, it is important to determine resilience 
technology and expertise focus areas in which Hawaii already 
has an edge or that a potential budding Hawaiian resilience 
industry could excel and also directly support Hawaii's 
resilience needs.    
In this case, the Hawaii island of Maui already hosts one of 
5 DoD super computing sites, the Maui High Performance 
Computing Center (MHPCC).  The MHPCC supercomputers 
already host numerous tools for computational modeling, many 
of which can be of great value for design of new systems, 
enabling rapid prototyping and significant savings. New 
network science and analytic tools can be added [6] atop hyper-
local forecasting capabilities, such as Deep Thunder. Deep 
Thunder is a research project by IBM, being offered in this 
instance by the IBM Center for Resiliency and Sustainability, 
which aims to improve short-term local weather forecasting 
through the use of high-performance computing. It is part of 
IBM's Deep Computing initiative that also produced the Deep 
Blue chess computer. Deep Thunder is intended to provide 
local, high-resolution weather predictions customized to 
weather-sensitive specific operations. For example, it could be 
used to predict situations ranging from the wind velocity at an 
Olympic diving platform to flooding and/or damaged power 
lines. Additionally, the Sensemaking Fellowship provides 
expertise in numerous science and technical areas that will 
directly support these efforts. For example, members of the 
Sensemaking Fellowship already have experience running 
complex computational electromagnetic modeling simulations 
[5] on high performance computer systems similar to the 
MHPCC, conducting information theory and network science 
[2] research highly relevant to the analytic systems that will be 
required for the resiliency initiative, and currently study many 
of the topics that are directly relevant to the resilience 
initiative. Another participant, Hawaii Pacific University 
intends to start a Resilience Masters program for future 
Sensemaking Fellows in conjunction with Swansea University.   
These kinds of shifts resulting from initiating a resiliency 
industry could stimulate significant growth and improvement 
in the quality of the overall high technology workforce and 
related educational institutions.   
The threats facing Hawaii and solutions to those threats 
were described earlier, but it is also important to describe the 
principal obstacles that will hamper both the Resilience 
initiative and a potential new resilience technology industry in 
Hawaii.  Primary of these, are inertia effects, such as political 
inertia, the fact that currently Hawaii has no technology 
industry to speak of, disadvantages posed by the high cost of 
materials, energy and operating budget, a lack of top quality 
technical talent currently existing on the islands, and high costs 
of the its isolation. For those that live in Hawaii, paying 
significantly more for gas, milk, bread, housing, and many 
other daily needs are only part of the penalty for living in 
paradise.  The aforementioned financial penalty is compounded 
by other related impacts of Hawaii's isolation. Technology 
companies are reluctant to translocate themselves to the 
isolated environment, which has a ripple effect.  The lack of 
technology industry translates to a  technical workforce with 
fewer graduate degrees in technical topics. The result of this 
shortage equates to a decreased number of highly skilled 
engineers, scientists, and mathematicians to sustain a high 
quality education system related to any of these topics. This 
problem is self-reinforcing because families of highly skilled 
technologists are less likely to choose to raise children in a 
weaker academic setting.   
It is important to identify crucial steps of the plan that 
imperil the entire initiative if these elements fail. For the 
Hawaii resilience initiative, showstopper failure steps include 
passage of pertinent legislation, critical tsunami-warning buoy 
replacements/upgrades and related UAV support to transmit 
data to analysis centers, the smart grid upgrade, deployment of 
the hyper-local forecasting analytic engine, execution of the 
full scope of the broadband initiative, and assimilation of 
critical cybersecurity measures.  For any plan, it is helpful to 
employ success metrics to evaluate progress. The initial 
performance metrics for the resilience initiative are mostly 
discrete in nature.  These  include, successful passage of the 
legislative elements, validation tests for the smart grid, 
validation tests for the hyper-local weather forecasting,  
demonstrations and validation tests for the tsunami-warning 
buoy system, a tangible and sizeable increase in the number of 
technology companies initiating business in Hawaii to support 
the resiliency initiative as well as related training companies, a 
significant increase in the number of students completing the 
resiliency academic programs,  significant level of commerical 
leasing of the new broadband fibers, and measures that assess 
the cybersecurity posture of Hawaii.  So, it is crucial that this 
stage of the initiative produce the measures described above.   
To achieve sustained resilience, it is important to develop a 
plan 
to 
build 
and 
foster 
the 
industry, 
maximize 
commercialization of resulting technologies, advertise the 
resulting new technologies, training programs, and expertise, 
and to acquire or otherwise build and grow the budding 
industry.  This is already the approach that is underway.  The 
state, AIRS, and PACOM have used numerous open forums to 
advertise the initiative broadly and provide training, including 
multiple 
Resiliency 
and 
Sustainment 
Symposiums, 
conferences, workshops, and meetings.  Table 1 lists 
numerous of these activities and events.  
 
Table 1: Sustainment and Resiliency Outreach Activities 
Date Range 
Venue 
06/22/14 to 
06/25/14 
Naval Postgraduate School’s Cyber 
Endeavour/Cyber X-Games in Monterey, 
CA 
09/09/14 to 
09/10/14 
IBM i2 Summit in Washington DC 
09/29/14 to 
10/03/14 
TAG Summit in San Diego, CA 
07/23/14 to 
07/27/14 
Aspen Security Forum in Aspen, CO 
10/14/14 to 
10/16/14 
The 4th National Conference on Building 
Resilience through Public-Private 
Partnerships in Washington DC 
 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

  
Of note, the TAG’s attendance in Cyber Endeavour/Cyber 
X-Games at the Naval Postgraduate School resulted in a 
mutually beneficial exchange with the CIP practitioners from 
the mainland. Parties from the State of Hawaii and the 
mainland acknowledged ongoing vulnerabilities, such as the 
San Jose attack on critical infrastructure as well as the Chicago 
Aurora Radar Center fire, which devolved operations to other 
airports. Unanticipated issues were discussed, such as those 
delineated in the recent publication, “Milk or Wine: Are 
Critical Infrastructure Protection Architectures Improving with 
Age?”  Additionally, the TAG Summit utilized a Hawaii-
centric approach, and the outlined engineering pathway is 
consistent with the spirit of DOD High Performance 
Computing Modernization Program (HPCMP) and the 
aforementioned EOs and PPDs. 
Finally, this section of the strategic roadmap describes the 
Public Private Partnership Initiative that has been assembled 
for the resilience initiative and outlines roles for the various 
participants. Excerpts of this can be found on the Hawaii DOD 
websites [7] [8]. 
  These documents outline the Public-Private Partnership 
for the Resiliency and Sustainment Initiative.   
VI. CONCLUSION 
This paper has presented a technology roadmap that 
outlines the path to achieve Resilience and Sustainability for 
Hawaii.   This technology roadmap is a key element of the 
resiliency and sustainment initiative, which will lead 
development of these industries.    
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT  
The authors would like to thank the Cyber Futures Center, an 
initiative 
of 
the 
Sensemaking-U.S. 
Pacific 
Command 
Fellowship, IBM Center for Resiliency and Sustainability, and 
the Dr. Steve Chan Center for Sensemaking — one of the 
centers of the Asia-Pacific Institute for Resilience and 
Sustainability (AIRS), which is jointly anchored at Swansea 
University’s Network Science Research Center and Hawaii 
Pacific University — for the opportunity to study the 
challenges facing Hawaii and to contribute towards the Public 
Private Partnership Initiatives aimed at developing solutions to 
overcome those challenges.   
References 
[1] State of Hawaii Department of Business, Economic 
Development, & Tourism, “Research and Economic 
Analysis: 
Outlook 
for 
the 
Economy”, 
dbedt.hawaii.gov/economic/qser/outlook-economy/, 2015.   
[2] D. Rachwald and T. Klemas, “Evolutionary Clustering 
Analysis of Multiple Edge Set Networks used for 
Modeling 
Ivory 
Coast 
Mobile 
Phone 
Data 
and 
Sensemaking” 
Data 
Analytics 
2014, 
The 
Third 
International Conference on Data Analytics, pp. 100-104, 
August 2014.  
[3] Industry Science Resources, “Technology Planning for 
Business Competitiveness, A Guide to Developing 
Technology Roadmaps”, Emerging Industries Occasional 
Paper 13, Aug 2001.  
[4] International Energy Agency, “Energy Technology 
Roadmaps, 
A 
guide 
to 
Development 
and 
Implementation”, 2014 Edition.  
[5] Farnoosh, N., Polimeridis, A.G., Klemas, T. ; Daniel, L. , 
“Accelerated Domain Decomposition FEM-BEM Solver 
for MRI via Discrete Empirical Interpolation Method”, 
VLSI Design, Automation and Test Conference, pp. 1-4, 
2014. 
[6] M. Newman, “Networks, An Introduction”, Oxford, 
Oxford University Press, 2010.   
[7] http://dod.hawaii.gov/blog/news-release/new-partners-
join-collaborative-effort-to-explore-methods-to-improve-
energy-efficiency-and-grid-operations/, October 2014. 
[8] http://dod.hawaii.gov/blog/news-release/state-of-hawaii-
department-of-defense-office-of-homeland-security-
hawaiian-electric-ibm-mehta-tech-incpacific-disaster-
center-and-u-s-pacific-command-explore-methods-to-
improve-energy-efficien/, February 2014.  
[9] http://www.to-hawaii.com/natural-disasters.php, 2014. 
[10] http://www.honolulu.hawaii.edu/instruct/natsci/geology/b
rill/gg101/Programs/program11%20Tsunami/program11.
html, 2014. 
[11] http://www.voanews.com/content/hawaii-vulnerable-yo-
tsunamis-prepares-for-the-worst/2631262.html, 2015.  
 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

