Use of Social Microblogging to Motivate Young People (NEETs) to Participate 
In Distance Education Through www.eBig3.eu  
 
 
 
Dace Ratniece  
Liepaja University, Latvia 
ratniece.dace@gmail.com 
 
 
 
Abstract -Young people, who are the fundamental asset of our 
economies and societies across the world, face a real and 
increasing difficulty in finding a decent job with each day. Three 
additional merging factors are worsening the youth employment 
crisis even further, causing challenges while transiting to decent 
jobs, namely (i) numbers of discouraged youth, in other words, 
young people, who are neither in education nor in employment 
or training (NEETs) are increasing, (ii) unemployment among 
university graduates  of tertiary education in general are rising 
and (iii) potential NEET group students, especially in the 1st 
year, who, apart from reduced study fees, require extra 
motivation and moral support from educators. What can be 
done to solve the dropout crisis with microblogging 
possibilities? Many educators have found that microblog 
Twitter is a great help tool to increase student participation and 
further engagement in lifelong education once they have left the 
classroom. The use of e-learning in itself does not constitute an 
enhancement of the quality of teaching and learning, but it is a 
potential enabler for such enhancement. The provided examples 
of good practice illustrate how certain initiatives address 
challenges and seek to effectively engage learners. The study aim 
- to make young people NEET problem analysis in order to 
understand their motivation to engage in distance learning 
process. The first insurance against unemployment is quality 
education and training. Distance learning project eBig3 is 
example of unique way to promote reintegrating young people 
into the labour market and education too. 
 
Keywords–youth; NEET group; microblogging; Twitter; e-
learning; distance education;  www.eBig3.eu. 
I.      INTRODUCTION 
The immediate future of Europe depends upon 94 million 
of Europeans aged between 15 and 29. Apart from the 
challenges that young people have been facing for 
generations while embarking upon adult life, this generation 
lives in the era of all embracing globalization and has to cope 
with responsibility for ageing population. So it is a matter of 
great concern that these young people have been hit so hard 
by the economic crisis, said at the document “The Youth 
Employment crisis: Highlights of the 2012 ILC Report, 
International Labour Office (ILO), 2012” [1]. In 2011, only 
34% of young people were employed; this is the lowest figure 
that Eurostat has ever recorded. Unemployment figures also 
testify significant difficulties that young people face while 
entering the labour market; since the start of recession, youth 
unemployment has increased by 1.5 million reaching 5.5 
million (21%) in 2011. 
Serious as these statistics may be, they do not adequately 
capture the situation of young people because many are 
students, and hence, are classified as out of the labour force. 
For this reason, European Union (EU) policymakers have 
been increasingly using the NEETs concept: ‘not in 
employment, education or training’. This concept is included 
in document “NEETs: Young people not in employment, 
education or training: Characteristics, costs and policy 
responses in Europe, 2012 “[2]. In principle, the definition is 
straightforward; it refers to those who currently do not have 
a job, are not enrolled in training or are not classified as 
students. It is the measure of disengagement from the labour 
market and perhaps from society in general. 
The European Parliament has expressed ‘serious doubts’ 
about the scale of the actions proposed by the European 
Commission (EC) to address a high rate of youth 
unemployment that the EU is facing now when the average 
rate of youth unemployment has reached 23.7% and is 
affecting many member states. Since 2010, on the initiative 
of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and the 
Committee on Culture and Education of the Parliament, 
practical actions aimed at promoting youth employment have 
been regularly proposed. All recommendations of the 
Parliament 
will be included in the report Youth 
Unemployment: Possible Ways Out prepared by Joanna 
Katarzyna Skrzydlewska (2013/2045 (INI) (in progress). 
One of the main targets of the Europe 2020 Strategy is that 
the share of early school leavers should be under 10%. 
      Unfortunately, youth policy is still not high priority in 
Latvia, although the EC has already adopted a very important 
document, the European Parliament resolution of 18 May 
2010 on “An EU Strategy for Youth – Investing and 
Empowering” (2009/2159(INI). 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-358-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2014 : The Third International Conference on Data Analytics

 
 
     This report on the Baltic youth policy in line with the EU 
strategy for youth, as a contribution to the creation of the 
Baltic youth policy statement, was published. 
Report-research (100 pages and references) on youth 
policy in the Baltic states was drafted by Dace Ratniece [3], 
in 2012. 
     According to ILO data for 2011, there are 1.2 billion 
young people between the ages of 15 and 24 in the world and 
about 90% of them live in developing countries. The current 
population of young people is the largest the world has ever 
seen [1]. 
Let us look at some data on youth unemployment in 
Latvia. 
January 2013: The total number of unemployed people in 
Latvia was 107.488. 11.001 (10%) of all unemployed people 
are young people between the ages of 15 and 24. The majority 
of them, 7.074 (64%), have been unemployed for up to six 
months. 
Long-term unemployment in Latvia is continuing to rise. 
Do we have any specific ideas how to save this “lost 
generation”, while there is still time to do so? 
A. The aim of the study 
The aim of this study is to identify potential scenario 
of distance learning and self-development of youth using 
a variety of collaborative and motivational approaches, 
microblogging and social networking on Twitter and the 
digital environment as distance learning tools. 
 
B.  Research object 
The object of this research is to explore motivation 
that enhances advancement of young people in the 
NEETs group and participation in the distance learning 
process. Social network microblog Twitter could become 
a successful digital media tool to involve NEETs in 
distance learning by using appropriate pedagogical and 
psychological methods of motivation. 
 
C.  Objectives of the research 
 
•  
To analyze philosophical, pedagogical and 
psychological literature as well as articles on 
computer science that evaluate e-learning. 
•  
To study self-expression and self-development 
of young people microblogging on Twitter. 
•  
To 
define 
pedagogical 
and 
psychological 
techniques of motivating Twitter users NEETs to 
participate in distance learning. 
•  
To identify drawbacks of distance learning 
courses. 
•  
To develop distance learning courses by taking 
into account the needs of NEETs and thus ensure 
their integration into society. 
 
D.    Expected results 
•  
Self-expression skills of NEETs will increase and 
that will lead young people to further 
professional development (microblogging on 
Twitter and digital distance learning tools). 
•  
Self-development capabilities of NEETs will 
increase. 
•  
NEETs will become more aware of their own 
potential, belief in their own abilities will 
increase and their motivation to study and 
develop further will be stimulated. 
After this introductory part, we present in Section II the 
general position of our work in the field of NEETs problems 
solving through cyberspace. In Section III we present results. 
Section IV concludes the paper. 
 
II. 
GENERAL POSITION 
 
     While preparing the report [3], we have drawn particular 
attention to the issue of young people in the NEET group. 
Young people are giving up on the job search altogether 
because of low prospects of ever finding a job during the 
crisis or low prospects of finding a decent job according to 
their skills. School dropouts exposed to gang culture and 
drugs at a young age or young people from deprived socio-
economic backgrounds also face diminished chances of 
gaining employment. 
     Unemployment among university graduates, graduates of 
tertiary education institutions in general has been rising [1]. 
That is either because of the deterioration of education 
standards or a mismatch between graduates’ skills and 
available jobs. This phenomenon causes concern for several 
reasons: 
•  
Contradicts the assumption that higher education 
increases employability. 
•  
Suggests that high-cost investment into higher 
education is wasteful because social return from 
unemployed graduates is low. 
•  
Increases “brain drain” of skilled youth from many 
developing economies. 
•  
Causes personal and political frustration. 
Some important features that NEETs share: 
1)  
They have gained skills and knowledge outside the 
formal system. 
2)  
They more often tend to be at disadvantage in terms 
of, for example, capabilities, level of education, background 
(imigrant families) or economic conditions. 
3)  
They more often tend to remain unemployed, their 
integration into the labor market is more difficult, concludes 
 Researcher G.Pollock at the article "Youth Transitions: 
Debates over the social context of Becoming an adult [4]. 
Cyberspace helps young people find someone to share their 
interests and needs with. It is the new medium of 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-358-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2014 : The Third International Conference on Data Analytics

 
 
communication and parents are often unaware of what 
information teens share on social media. Teenagers explore 
their identities, experiment with behavioral norms, date and 
build friendships Correa  at al. [5]. 
Many young people like microblogging on Twitter. 
Twitter it is one of the fastest growing social networks in the 
world. What is better than to post information in 140-
character tweets? Compared to other complicated platforms, 
Twitter is engaging and simple. Its development was inspired 
by cell phone text messaging and its creators instinctively or 
knowingly became the inventors of the most uncomplicated 
social media systems said in the project “Our Featured 
Projects, NJI Media” [6]. 
Twitter provides a social platform for discovery of new 
connections, weak links according to sociologist Mark 
Granovetter. If Granovetter is right, it is through weak links 
that we learn about new ideas, are exposed to different 
concepts and our status quo is shaken up. Twitter is 
characterized as a simple tool for personal or professional 
use, an outlet for keeping up with the news, sharing of 
information, crowdsourcing [7]. 
  D. Ratniece started microblogging on Twitter and got 
involved in problems that NEETs face. This inspiration came 
from analyzing the aspects of microblogging Y. Amichai-
Hamburger [8]. For good microblogging one firstly needs to 
know how to build a profile. The ideas of profile building are 
as follows [9]: 
1) Create a unique identity: a Twitter profile is very 
important. How to make tweets more personable and human? 
People are more likely to communicate with real people so 
you should add a little of your character to your tweets and 
make some genuine connections. Establishing a personality 
means creating a character, if you have not got one yet. It is 
important to have a good profile page with a Picture and a 
descriptive bio (Fig. 1.) 
2) Tweet regularly: tweeting on a regular basis will keep you 
in contact with your followers and that will also keep your 
page active. The optimum number of tweets per day may 
vary; but daily tweeting, 1-4 tweets per day, works for most 
users. 
 
Figure 1.        Effect of a profile picture on followers [10] 
 
3) Encourage your followers to retweet: it is not always 
easy to get your information retweeted by other users but 
there are a few ways how to maximize. Use a Twitter 
Timeline to analyze your most successful retweeting periods, 
which could indicate the best time for you to tweet. 
Interacting with other users will help you build beneficial 
relationships and those who consider you a friend are 
probably more likely to retweet your information on a regular 
basis. 
4) Be interesting: if you want to have more followers who 
care about you and what you share, make sure your tweets 
are interesting. Use «Tweeteffect» to get a detailed look at 
which of your tweets are gaining followers and which are 
causing to lose them. The result could be random or you 
could discover a pattern. 
5) Interact and share: if you want people to share your 
tweets, you have to return the favor. Interact and share with 
other people and you will get ‘thanks’ in return. Join in big 
conversations and use the hash tag (#) to take part in trending 
topics but always stay relevant to maintain follower retention. 
Given the above conditions, D. Ratniece [11] started 
talking to young people, microblogging on Twitter, and 
invited them to start training in distance education. 
Microblogging on Twitter attracts young digital media 
communicators and that may be used to identify and motivate 
youngsters, youth in the NEET group aged 13-25 years, to 
participate in distance education. Understanding the 
problems of NEETs may lead to solutions for distance 
learning and it would be more likely to generate involvement 
when free distance learning courses are offered by Kapenieks 
[12] and Ratniece [11]. 
EC report „Opening up education: innovative teaching 
and learning for everyone through the use of new 
technologies and open educational resources” [13] highlights 
that nowadays students need more personalized contact with 
teachers, greater cooperation and better links between formal 
and non-formal education, which can largely be implemented 
by school learning using digital technologies. In this respect 
the EU risks falling further behind other regions of the world. 
      In order to transform their education and training, the 
United States and some Asian countries are investing in ICT 
strategies. These countries are transforming their education 
systems by modernizing them and making them accessible 
internationally, thus achieving remarkable results regarding 
the accessibility to education and study fees, pedagogical 
practice and gaining of a global recognition. For example, a 
large proportion of digital content is provided by the market 
participants from outside the Europe, including educational 
institutions that offer training programs on a global scale 
through massive open online courses (MOOC) [12]. 
      There is a particular need to worry about third group –   
potential NEET group students, especially in the 1st year, 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-358-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2014 : The Third International Conference on Data Analytics

 
 
who, apart from reduced study fees, also require extra 
motivation and moral support from educators. 
      Therefore, it is necessary to deal with the three groups of 
young people NEET: 
1) Those who belong to NEET group. 
2) Those who discontinued their university studies due to 
financial reasons and started a full-time job. 
3) Potential NEET group of universities students, especially 
in the 1st year. 
All three target groups share the same need: to gain 
experience or receive educational opportunities in order to 
get a steady job and sustain themselves financially. Are there 
any initiatives to address this situation, and if so, have they 
been successful? Of course, there are also extreme measures, 
such as migration, but would it help in the long run? 
That is the case of the Latvian-Lithuanian cross-border 
project eBig3 (Fig. 2). The project aims to create a network 
for cross-border research cooperation in technology 
enhanced learning (TEL) and to develop a strategy for 
educational business promotion service. The Project 
combines three kinds of TEL in a complementary way: 
1)  E-learning – mainly computer and/or internet-based 
learning. 
2)  T-learning: TV based learning. 
3)  M-learning: learning with a use of mobile devices; to 
produce an effective and innovative cross-media learning 
delivery system (eBig3) that goes beyond traditional web-
based learning approaches. 
This is an innovative project of open and distance 
learning. The developed solutions includes integration of 
technical issues for cross-media learning content delivery, 
refinement of pedagogic considerations, development of 
shared understanding of target users learning contexts in 
border areas, production of learning content and organizing 
course pilots. This is a unique way to promote reintegrating 
young people into the labour market and education too.  
.
 
Figure 2.   Latvian-Lithuanian cross-border project eBig3  
 
 
III. 
RESULTS 
 
     We participated in 2013 in the examination of 1st year 
students 
of 
program 
“Telecommunications 
(Distance 
Learning e-course) of Riga Technical University (RTU).  
     During the exam, the author conducted a survey, asking 
107 students to fill in a questionnaire - Assessment of the 
effectiveness of the learning methods practiced on a scale 
from 1 (the lowest) to 10 (the highest), and a short 
commentary. Table 1 of this study shows the students’ 
evaluation of the efficiency of the learning form used in this 
course which reflects students’ support for both traditional 
forms - learning and e-learning. 
      Respondents very carefully evaluated both the negative 
and the positive aspects of both methods based on their 
personal experience, and were able to provide an objective 
feedback in regards to what situations required a direct 
contact with teacher, and when e-learning was the best and 
most efficient learning option. That is reflected in the 
questionnaires that were submitted at the end of semester: 
"E-learning is not a substitute for the traditional learning 
methods at the moment, but it can be a good additional tool 
for learning."  
"E-learning is very useful when one needs to obtain lecture 
files and other study materials, and it’s especially great for 
those who cannot attend lectures because of work or other 
commitments."  
"I find E-learning very convenient because of its reduced 
costs and innovative learning environment. Nevertheless, it is 
also important to keep the traditional aspects of learning as a 
part of it in order to maintain the diversity of the course”.  
"Traditional forms of studies are definitely very important, 
because the presence of a teacher can contribute to a better 
understanding of the subject."  
  "E-learning should be available for all the subjects, because 
it is very convenient." 
Respondents indicate that e-learning and traditional forms 
of study need to be kept in balance, because e-learning 
provides a great advantage to learn anywhere, anytime. A 
successful guidance through the study process, however, is 
just as important, and can only be ensured when a teacher is 
present. Respondents were also asked to state the core 
competences of the teacher:  
1) responsive, intelligent, able to establish a good contact 
with students; sociable, friendly yet demanding when it 
comes to the quality of students’ performance; understanding, 
able to listen and motivate their students;  
2) possesses the ability to initiate discussions, to prepare a 
training plan, has a comprehensive understanding of different 
study subjects, ability to keep students motivated and 
interested in the particular subject of study;  
 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-358-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2014 : The Third International Conference on Data Analytics

 
 
TABLE I STUDENTS EVALUATION OF THE EFFECTIVENESS  OF THE FORM 
Form of study  
Low 
rating  
Average rating 
High rating 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
Lectures 
  
  
  
3 
6 
16 
34 
29 
11 
6 
Discussions 
  
  
2 
3 
5 
13 
18 
35 
21 
8 
Assignment  
preparation 
and insertion in 
ORTUS system* 
  
  
1 
  
7 
11 
19 
35 
15 
17 
Teachers’ 
comments in 
ORTUS system 
  
  
1 
2 
7 
12 
15 
33 
17 
18 
e-portfolio utility 
9 
5 
6 
3 
10 
16 
26 
16 
10 
4 
* RTU portal «ORTUS» (www.ortus.lv), which provides e-learning 
environment 
 
According to the students, just as important as experience 
in their field and professionalism, are positive traits of 
character, suggesting the need to develop a positive 
communication between the students and the teacher. 
 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
 
     1.  Being NEET is not only a personal problem for those 
affected, but constitutes a challenge to society as a whole. 
This is very important given the size of the NEET population 
today, which may seriously undermine the sustainability and 
stability of the societies concerned. Governments have been 
very active in promoting policies for re-engaging young 
people in the labour market and the education system. 
    2.  In addition to increasing access to education, greater use 
of new technologies and open educational resources can also 
help reduce the costs of educational institutions and students, 
particularly for disadvantaged groups, including existing and 
potential NEET group of people.  
    3. Educational institutions should combine the traditional 
forms of study and e-learning, as e-learning provides the 
opportunity to learn anywhere, anytime. However, a direct 
contact between the teacher and the student plays a very 
important role in acquiring a quality education, and should by 
no means be left out. 
     4. Latvian-Lithuanian cross-border project eBig3 is a 
unique way to promote reintegration of young people into the 
labour market and education. It is therefore necessary to 
develop distance learning courses by taking into account 
the needs of NEETs and thus ensure their integration into 
society. Social network microblog Twitter could become 
a successful digital media tool to involve NEETs in 
distance learning by using appropriate pedagogical and 
psychological methods of motivation. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1]   The Youth Employment Crisis: Highlights of the 2012 ILC Report, 
Geneva, International Labour Office, 2012, pp.44 
https://www.google.lv/#q=The+Youth+Employment+Crisis%3A+Hig
hlights+of+the+2012+ILC+Report [retrieved: 08.2014] 
 [2] NEETs: Young people not in employment, education or training: 
Characteristics, costs and policy responses in Europe, Luxembourg: 
Publications Office of the European Union, 2012, pp.171, 
file:///C:/Users/Admin/Downloads/EF1254EN.pdf 
http://www.eurofound.europa.eu/pubdocs/2012/54/en/1/EF1254EN.
pdf  [retrieved: 08.2014) 
[3]    D. Ratniece, “Report-research on the Baltic youth policy in line with 
the EU strategy for youth as a contribution to the creation of the Baltic 
youth policy statement”, 2012, pp.100 (unpublished). 
[4] 
G. Pollock, “Youth transitions: Debates over the social context of 
becoming an adult”, Sociology Compass, 2008, 2(2), pp. 467–484. 
[5] 
T. Correa, W.H. Amber, and H.G. de Zúñiga, “Who interacts on 
theWeb?: The intersection of users’ personality and social media use”, 
Center for Journalism & Communication Research, School of 
Journalism,University of Texas at Austin, USA, Computers in Human 
Behavior, 2010, 26, pp. 247–253. 
[6]    Our Featured Projects, NJI Media.. http://njimedia.com/infographic-
5-12-best-twitter-practices/ [retrieved:  08.2014] 
[7]   M.S. Granovetter, “The Strength of Week Ties”, American Journal of 
Sociology, Vol. 78, Issue 6, May, 1973, pp. 1360-1380.  
http://sociology.stanford.edu/people/mgranovetter/documents/granstr
engthweakties.pdf. [retrieved: 08.2014] 
[8] 
Y. Amichai-Hamburger, “Internet and personality”, Computers in 
Human Behavior, 2002, 18(1), pp. 1–10. 
[9] 
N.Arceneaux, A.Schmitz Weiss, “Seems stupid until you try it: press 
coverage of Twitter”, 2006–9, New Media & Society, 2010 12(8), pp. 
1262–1279. 
[10] D. Zarella, Twitter accounts with a profile picture have 10 times more 
followers than those without, 2010 
http://blog.hubspot.com/blog/tabid/6307/bid/5811/Twitter-Accounts-
with-a-Profile-Picture-Have-10-Times-More-Followers-Than-Those-
Without.aspx [retrieved: 08.2014] 
[11]  D. Ratniece, “Social microblog TWITTER use to motivate young 
people (NEETs) to involve in distance education”. Proc. of the 
international Scientific Conference “Society, Integration, Education,” 
May 24th – 25th, 2013 (Rezekne Higher Education Institution, Faculty 
of Education and Design, Personality Socialization Research Institute 
in Collaboration with University of Udine, Italy), Vol. II, Rezekne: 
Rezekne Higher Education Institution, 2013, pp.449-464, ISSN 1691-
5887.  
 
[http://www.ru.lv/ckfinder/userfiles/RAweb/Saturs/zinatne/zinatniski
e_instituti/personas_socializacijas_petijumu_instituts/izdevumi/2013/
II%20da%C4%BCa.pdf  [retrieved: 08.2014] 
[12] A. Kapenieks, B. Žuga, G. Štāle and M. Jirgensons, “E-ecosystem 
Driven E-learning vs Technology Driven E-learning”, Proc. of 4th 
International Conference on Computer Supported Education (CSEDU 
2012). Portugal, Porto, 16-18 April, 2012, pp. 436-439. 
[13] Opening up education: innovative teaching and learning for everyone 
through the use of new technologies and open educational 
resources”/COM/2013/0654, Brussels. pp. 13 
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=C 
ELEX:52013DC0654&from=EN [retrieved 08.2014] 
 
 
 
 
 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-358-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2014 : The Third International Conference on Data Analytics

