A Framework for Call Center Decongestion Using Sequential Pattern Analysis 
 
Eugene Rex L. Jalao  
Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research 
 University of the Philippines Diliman 
Quezon City, Philippines 
e-mail: eljalao@up.edu.ph 
 
 
Abstract— In an effort to improve its customer service, mobile 
telecommunication companies implemented various customer 
service channels like call center hotlines, text messaging, email 
or web self-service where subscribers conduct various after-
sales transactions. Nowadays, a hotline call center via a 
customer service representative is the top choice alternative 
preferred by subscribers. However, it is noted that the cost of 
each call when transacting on a hotline is much greater than 
the cost of the other channels. Furthermore, subscribers get 
easily irritated when they need to wait for a long time to avail 
the services. In order to address the problem of reducing 
hotline calls, as well as to reduce the cost of customer service 
transactions, subscriber call transactions are analyzed in this 
paper to predict the next type of call that the subscriber will 
transact. A sequential pattern analysis methodology is applied 
and frequent sequences of calls are collected. Given the 
frequent sequences, the sequences of transaction calls are 
identified and a corresponding campaign is introduced to 
intercept the new calls and divert the transaction to less costly 
customer service channels.   
Keywords: call center; decongestion; hotline; sequential pattern 
analysis;  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Delivering good customer service particularly in the 
telecommunications or telco industry is a must to keep its 
customers from churning. In this industry, customer service 
is captured from pre-sales research, to in-life transactions 
and finally to the renewal of the plan through the 
procurement of new or upgraded handsets. Basically the 
entire subscriber life cycle is covered. Hence, to stay with the 
subscribers every step of the way, these telcos implemented 
various traditional customer service channels, e.g., physical 
retail stores, fax numbers, email and contact center hotlines. 
Subscribers would just transact their needs in one of these 
channels through the aid of customer service representatives 
(CSRs). 
 
However, these traditional channels are expensive to 
maintain and operate. Operating costs include: labor costs of 
CSRs, rent, and other overhead expenses. In the Philippines, 
given that the average call and wrap up time metric from the 
International Finance Corporation is 6 minutes [1], and 
operating costs of a call center hover from $8 – $14 per hour 
[2], an average call would cost the telco company $0.8 – $1.4 
per customer transaction. If the hotline receives 100,000 calls 
per month, this would lead to approximately $80,000 to 
$140,000 operating costs for the telco.  
 
Hence, in an effort to reduce transaction costs, telcos 
implemented alternative self-service channels to divert 
subscribers from using the aforementioned traditional costly 
channels. Some examples of these alternative channels 
would be: web applications, SMS, and smartphone apps self-
service channels. Some companies even utilize social media 
through official pages to reach their customers.  Yet, not all 
transactions can be deployed in all channels. For example, 
disputes on billing can only be addressed when talking to a 
CSR. On the other hand, simple transactions like bill balance 
inquiry can be done on any channel. The paper by Kumar 
and Telang [3], presented that the cost of transacting through 
self-service channels (< 1$ per transaction) is way cheaper 
than traditional channels with CSRs (between $5 and $10).  
 
On the other hand, a survey by McCarthy and Giles [4] 
asserts that a phone call with a CSR is the top preferred 
channel by approximately 75% of the respondents. 
Additionally, the top most frustrating thing about customer 
service is the long waiting time to speak to a CSR. 
Therefore, it is prudent for telcos to keep operating these call 
centers but on the other hand, having a congested hotline 
would also lead to negative impacts to their customer 
service. In essence, telcos would want transactions that can 
be transacted through self-service channels be diverted from 
these costly customer service channels.  
 
Given this background, this paper attempts to profile 
telecommunication subscribers in an effort to decongest call 
center hotlines and divert possible self-service transactions to 
other low cost self-service channels. This paper is further 
divided as follows: Section II provides an overview of 
current published methodologies, Section III presents the 
framework of the model while Section VI shows the results 
and discussion when applied to a local telecommunications 
company. Section V provides the conclusions and further 
research.  
II. 
REVIEW OF RELATED LITERATURE 
There have been several attempts to decongest a call 
center hotline through various predictive and prescriptive 
analytics methodologies.  
 
Forecasting methodologies are considered in [5] - [8]. 
These models specifically forecast the volume of calls that 
arrive at a single time interval. These are mainly for 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

operational issues and mainly address the issue of how much 
work they have to do.  
 
A lot of call centers deal with highly erratic demand that 
is also time-based. The time-based component is relatively 
easy to handle by adjusting agent staffing [9]. Some 
examples would be in [10], where a proposed framework 
that combines linear programming with simulation to 
recommend a schedule.  Search methods are developed 
which used queueing theory to produce agent schedules for a 
multi-skill call center is done in [11]. However, it’s the 
random component that contributes to the complexity of the 
demand.   
 
Other models tried to reduce the call demand by limiting 
calls admitted to the hotline. A paper by Omeci et al. [12] 
proposed a selective form of call admission by selectively 
admitting calls according to their relative importance to the 
organization.  
 
Given these solutions, a methodology that could predict 
the most likely next transaction call type of the subscribers 
would be beneficial such that low priority transactions can be 
routed to other low cost channels. A methodology that fits 
this bill is Sequential Pattern Analysis (SPA). Agrawal and 
Srikant [13] defined SPA as a methodology to extract 
frequent sequences within a set of transactions. There have 
been several applications that used the SPA algorithm: Choi 
et al. in [14] applied SPA on online-product recommendation 
systems, Huang et al. in [15] proposed a knowledge-assisted 
sequential pattern analysis framework to identify the patterns 
of the uterine contractions as well as labor contractions. 
Chen et al. [16] in proposed to use SPA to forecast potential 
customers by identifying attributes with high level of 
association. 
 
 Given the multitude of applications of SPA, this paper 
hypothesizes that the use of SPA in determining the frequent 
sequences of calls of subscribers on a hotline can be done to 
address hotline decongestion.  
III. 
PROPOSED FRAMEWORK 
The proposed hotline decongestion framework is 
composed of three components. These are defined as: (1) the 
Preprocessing Component, (2) SPA Component and the (3) 
Campaigns Design Component. This section provides an 
overview of the different components as follows.  
A. Preprocessing Component 
Call transaction data is extracted from the call database 
with the following dataset structure as presented in Fig. 1: 
 
 
Figure 1.  Dimensional Model of required data 
The proposed dataset for the SPA component would 
require to have a granularity of: one row per call with 
corresponding subscriber and transaction type ID. Hence the 
following dataset, that joined multiple tables are presented in 
Fig. 2 as follows: 
 
 
Figure 2.  Proposed Dataset Required 
Invalid transactions like prank calls, dropped and 
abandoned calls are likewise eliminated from the dataset 
leaving only valid transactions. The clean dataset is then sent 
to the SPA component of the framework.  
 
B. SPA Component 
In this component, the SPADE (Sequential PAttern 
Discovery using Equivalence) algorithm proposed by Zaki 
[17] 
is 
utilized 
on 
a 
R 
Platform. 
The 
package 
“arulesSequences” is utilized as the main library to compute 
for the frequent subsequences.  
The output of this component is a set of frequent 
sequence of transactions with format as presented in equation 
(1).  
                <{transA},{transB},{transC},> support =s  
    
C. Campaigns Design Component 
 
Given the result of the SPADE algorithm, corresponding 
campaigns need to be designed to identify the types of future 
calls of the subscribers. If the type of call can be done in 
other low-cost channels, a system is in place to intercept that 
call and divert that transaction.  
 
To illustrate given the frequent transaction in equation 
(1), if the subscriber called for  {transA}  then subsequently 
called for {transB}, and if {transC} can be done in other 
channels, a text message from the network can be sent to the 
subscriber to avail of {transC} in other self-care channels 
instead of calling the hotline. This would hopefully 
encourage the subscriber to avail of {transC} in other 
channels, thus reducing calls in the hotline.  
IV. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
To test the framework, hotline transactions from a 
leading telecommunications company here in the Philippines 
are considered and extracted for preprocessing. From the 
third quarter of 2015, a total of 245,162 calls are extracted 
from the hotline data warehouse coming from 122,462 
unique subscribers. Of the total calls, 23,812 calls are 
considered invalid since these are invalid transactions and 
thus are eliminated from the dataset. A snapshot of the final 
dataset is shown in Fig. 3: 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

 
Figure 3. Dataset Preview of the Data 
 
This dataset is fed into the SPADE algorithm with 1% 
minimum support setting. Results from the dataset showed 
that there are 22 sequences of length one transaction and 13 
sequences of length two. The 13 sequences are presented in 
Fig. 4.  
 
 
Figure 4. The 13 frequent sequences of length 2.  
 
Given the results from figure 4, we examine the 
sequential rule in equation (2) as follows: 
    < {Account Details}, {Billing Inquiry}> support =1.2%  

 This can be interpreted as: 1.2% of 122,462 or 1470 
unique subscribers can be intercepted on the transaction 
“Billing Inquiry” if they called for “Account Details” 
beforehand. This could lead to a reduction of at least 1470 
calls within a given quarter. The other 12 rules can be 
designed to maximize the use of the framework to further 
reduce the number of repeat calls. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE STUDIES 
The hotline decongestion framework, composed: (1) 
preprocessing, (2) sequential pattern analysis, and (3) 
campaigns design components, is able to profile subscribers 
in terms of the call type sequences. Frequent call sequences 
can be extracted and corresponding campaigns can be 
developed to intercept and divert call transactions to 
alternative lower cost self-service channels.  
 
Further improvement of the framework is considered in 
terms of analyzing the inter-arrival time of the calls. The 
framework currently studies the sequence of calls but not the 
amount of time in between calls made by the subscriber.    
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
IFC, “Call Center Pricing,” 2016. [Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/75ce96004cf8
5d4f8752c7f81ee631cc/Tool+9.4.+Measuring+Call
+Center+Performance.pdf?MOD=AJPERES. pp. 1 
[Accessed: 06-Jul-2016]. 
[2] 
World Wide Call Centers, “Call Center Pricing,” 
2016. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.worldwidecallcenters.com/call-center-
pricing/. pp. 1 [Accessed: 06-Jul-2016]. 
[3] 
A. Kumar, and R. Telang, “Does the web reduce 
customer service cost? Empirical evidence from a 
call center,” Inf. Syst. Res., vol. 23, no. 3 PART 1, 
pp. 721–737, 2012. 
[4] 
C. Mccarthy, M. Giles, W. W. W. O. Com, and C. 
Mccarthy, “Customer Service : Where are Telcos 
Investing ? About the authors,” Ovum Signatue Res., 
no. pp 1-2, November, 2011. 
[5] 
J. 
Taylor, 
“Short-term 
electricity 
demand 
forecasting using double seasonal exponential 
smoothing,” J. Oper. Res. Soc., vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 
799–805, 2003. 
[6] 
R. Soyer and M. M. Tarimcilar, “Modeling and 
Analysis of Call Center Arrival Data: A Bayesian 
Approach,” Manage. Sci., vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 266–
278, 2007. 
[7] 
J. Weinberg, L. D. Brown, J. R. Stroud, J. W. 
Einberg, L. D. B. Rown, and J. R. S. Troud, 
“Bayesian 
Forecasting of an Inhomogeneous 
Poisson Process With Applications to Call Center 
Data,” J. Am. Stat. Assoc., vol. 102, no. June, pp. 
1187–1199, 2007. 
[8] 
H. Shen, and J. Z. Huang, “Interday Forecasting and 
Intraday Updating of Call Center Arrivals,” Manuf. 
Serv. Oper. Manag., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 391–410, 
2008. 
[9] 
Z. Aksin, M. Armony, and V. Mehrotra, “Customer 
Behavior Modeling in Revenue Management and 
Auctions: 
A 
Review 
and 
New 
Research 
Opportunities,” Prod. Oper. Manag., vol. 16, no. 6, 
pp. 665– 688, 2007. 
[10] 
M. T. Cezik, and P. L’Ecuyer, “Staffing Multiskill 
Call 
Centers 
via 
Linear 
Programming 
and 
Simulation,” Manage. Sci., vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 310–
323, 2008. 
[11] 
A. N. Avramidis, A. Deslauriers, and P. L’Ecuyer, 
“Modeling Daily Arrivals to a Telephone Call 
Center,” Manage. Sci., vol. 50, no. 7, pp. 896–908, 
2004. 
[12] 
H. E. Ormeci, E. L., and A. N. Burnetas, 
“Admission policies for a two class loss system with 
random rewards,” IIE Trans. \, vol. 34, no. 9, pp. 
813–822., 2002. 
[13] 
S. Agrawal, and Rakesh; Ramakrishnan, “Mining 
sequential patterns,” Proc. Elev. Int. Conf. Data 
Eng., pp. 3–14, 1995. 
[14] 
K. Choi, D. Yoo, G. Kim, and Y. Suh, “A hybrid 
online-product recommendation system: Combining 
implicit rating-based collaborative filtering and 
sequential pattern analysis,” Electron. Commer. Res. 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

Appl., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 309–317, 2012. 
[15] 
Z. Huang, M. L. Shyu, J. M. Tien, M. M. Vigoda, 
and D. J. Birnbach, “Prediction of uterine 
contractions using knowledge-assisted sequential 
pattern analysis,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 
60, no. 5, pp. 1290–1297, 2013. 
[16] 
W. C. Chen, C. C. Hsu, and J. N. Hsu, “Optimal 
selection of potential customer range through the 
union sequential pattern by using a response 
model,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 38, no. 6, pp. 7451–
7461, 2011. 
[17] 
M. J. Zaki, “SPADE: An efficient algorithm for 
mining frequent sequences,” Mach. Learn., vol. 42, 
no. 1–2, pp. 31–60, 2001. 
 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

