Data-Driven Approach for Analysis of
Performance Indices in Mobile Work Machines
Teemu V¨ayrynen, Suvi Peltokangas, Eero Anttila, and Matti Vilkko
Department of Automation Science and Engineering
Tampere University of Technology,
Korkeakoulunkatu 10, Tampere, Finland
e-mails: ﬁrstname.lastname@tut.ﬁ
Abstract—This paper presents a data-driven approach for the
analysis of performance indices in mobile work machines. Per-
formance analysis and optimisation of mobile work machines
has become increasingly important in recent years. The mobile
work machine optimisation is performed based on performance
measurements. One of the most interesting and potential ap-
proach for improving the quality of the performance analysis
is the utilisation of Big Data and data-driven analysis methods,
such as machine learning. This study utilises a machine learning
algorithm, Classiﬁcation and Regression Trees (CART), in the
performance analysis of the mobile work machines. The most
signiﬁcant beneﬁt of the presented method is that it provides a
statistical reference of the machine performance for the operators.
The method enables operators to compare performance against
reference ﬂeet of machines working in similar operating condi-
tions. This feature can lead to more informative and reliable
interpretations and analysis of the performance values. The
results of this paper demonstrate how the presented method was
used to analyse the performance of a mobile work machine ﬂeet.
Keywords–performance; mobile work machine; regression tree;
CART.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Performance analysis and optimisation of mobile work
machines has become an increasingly important trend within
the industry in the recent years [1], [2]. Both, the mobile
work machine manufacturers as well as the operators have
started to pay more attention to the performance optimisation
of the machines. Optimising the performance of the mobile
work machine results in increased productivity and efﬁciency.
However, the optimisation of the mobile work machine is
difﬁcult if the performance of the machine cannot be measured
and analysed accurately. The importance of the performance
analysis is the main motivation for this work.
The objective of this work is to present a data-driven
approach that utilises machine learning to assist the operators
in the performance analysis of the mobile work machines. The
approach is a combination of data preprocessing and Classi-
ﬁcation and Regression Trees (CART). CART is a supervised
machine learning algorithm, that constructs classiﬁcation and
regression trees to model systems [3]. In this work, CART
is used to model the relation between the different operating
conditions and the performance of the machines based on the
data of a mobile work machine ﬂeet. The predictions of the
model enable operators to compare the performance against
reference ﬂeet of machines working in similar operating con-
ditions. This feature can provide more informative and reliable
interpretations and analysis of the performance values.
The performance analysis of a mobile work machine is
a challenging task due to the various factors affecting the
performance. These factors are, e.g. objectives of the work,
operating conditions, skill level of the operator, work load,
technical properties of the mobile work machine, and control
parameters. Figure 1 describes the factors affecting the perfor-
mance of the machines. This work focuses on analysing the
relation between the operating conditions and the performance
of the mobile work machine.
Figure 1. Factors affecting the performance of a mobile work machine. The
main focus of this work is delimited by the dotted lines in the ﬁgure.
Improved performance analysis enables the operators to
optimise the operations of the mobile work machine by tuning
the control parameters of the automation system. Depending
on the complexity of the machine, the automation system can
allow operators to customise hundreds of parameters based on
their personal preferences and requirements of the operating
conditions. These parameters have a major impact on the
operational performance of the mobile work machine in terms
of efﬁciency and productivity.
Conventionally, parameter optimisation has been performed
based on the rules of thumb developed by skilled instructors
and machine operators. The proper tuning of a mobile work
machine is an extremely difﬁcult and time-consuming task
especially for an inexperienced operator [4]. Various measure-
ment and performance values can be presented to the operators
via the graphical user interfaces of the machines. However, the
interpretation of the performance values is most often left to
the operators.
These interpretations are often made without proper under-
standing about the relation between the operating conditions
and the performance of the machine. Also, due to the restricted
performance analysing capabilities of the human operators, the
results of the analysis might be incorrect. However, by utilis-
ing reference data and advanced data analysis methods, the
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

operators gain valuable information to support their analysis
of the machine performance.
Originating from the described situation, the research prob-
lem of this work focuses on improving the analysis of the
performance values in mobile work machines. Derived from
the identiﬁed problem, the research question of this work is:
How can the analysis of performance values be improved in
mobile work machines?
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
addresses the state of the art in analysis of performance values
and describes the requirements set for the solution. Section
III introduces data preprocessing and the CART algorithm.
Section IV describes the design of experiment and the results.
Section V sums up the work and proposes future research
topics.
II.
STATE OF THE ART AND REQUIREMENTS
This section introduces the state of the art in the analysis
of the performance values in mobile work machines. The
requirements set for the solution method are also introduced
in this section.
A. State of the art
A wide range of methods have been applied to analyse
the performance values of mobile work machines. These
methods vary from simple monitoring of measurement values
to more sophisticated and holistic analysis. The requirements
of the data analysis and the application speciﬁc features of
the data determine which method is most suited to the given
application.
Data-driven performance analysis methods, which require
domain expert knowledge, have been presented for mobile
work machines and industrial processes [1], [2]. Various other
research papers have addressed the problem of analysis and
optimisation of performance values in mobile work machines
[5]–[9]. These studies have used such methods as statistical
data analysis, modelling, root-cause analysis, and optimisation
to improve the operational performance of the mobile work
machines. Previous research with machine learning algorithms
has provided promising results also in the ﬁelds of agriculture
and industry [10]–[12]. Due to privacy policy of the mobile
work machine industry, it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd up-to-date infor-
mation about data analysis methods utilised in the analysis of
performance values in mobile work machines.
B. Requirements set for the data analysis method
The requirements set for the data analysis method is derived
from the objectives of this work. The identiﬁed requirements
are:
•
The method should be able to predict typical per-
formance values for machines in different operating
conditions.
•
The method should enable easy updating of the model
as more measurement data is acquired.
•
The model structure should be easy to interpret and
utilise in the performance analysis and optimisation.
•
The method should select the most relevant input vari-
ables for modelling, without extensive prior knowl-
edge about the data.
In the present study, we selected a combination of data
preprocessing and CART algorithm to analyse the performance
values. CART was selected for this study because it meets
the described requirements and also provides features such as
nonparametric modelling, robust handling of outliers, compu-
tational speed, etc. [3]
III.
METHODS
This section introduces the data preprocessing and CART
method utilised in this work. We also adress the regression
tree complexity selection.
A. Data preprocessing
Among the most important factors affecting the perfor-
mance of machine learning algorithms are the quality and the
quantity of the data. In order to create accurate and reliable
models from the data, the amount of irrelevant, erroneous,
and redundant data should be low. The main goal of data
preprocessing phase in this work is to provide a high-quality
data set for the machine learning algorithm. [13] There is
no standard method for data preprocessing; instead, a set of
general guidelines and procedures have been proposed. The re-
quirements for data preprocessing are set by the characteristics
of the data and the objectives of the data analysis. [13]
Factors that need to be considered while performing data
preprocessing include variable selection, detection and removal
of outliers, missing value handling, discretization, resampling,
data normalisation, and dimension reduction. Application-
speciﬁc knowledge of the data preprocessing requirements
is usually required. This knowledge can be acquired from
machine operators, mathematical models, or by examining the
characteristics of the data. [13]
The quality of the data used with the machine learning
algorithms is important [13]. The original data is divided into
two subsets: training data and validation data. The training data
is used for creating the model and validation data is used to
validate the prediction accuracy of the model. In order to model
the system comprehensively, the variables in the training data
need to have a sufﬁcient amount of variation and scale. The
correct and incorrect selections of training data is presented in
Figure 2.
0
25
50
75
100
Variable 1
Set 2
 
 
0
25
50
75
100
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
Variable 1
Set 1
Frequency
Validation
Training
Figure 2. Incorrect (left) and correct (right) selection of training data sets.
The distributions in Figure 2 describe an example of an
operating condition measurement in the data. On the right side
of Figure 2, variable in the training data covers the whole
scale of the validation data. The incorrect selection of training
data is presented on the left side of Figure 2. Variable in the
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

training data does not cover the same scale as the validation
data. Therefore, the model, which is generated by a machine
learning algorithm, is expected to lack prediction accuracy as
some parts of the validation data are not included in the model.
B. Classiﬁcation and Regression Trees (CART)
CART is a supervised machine learning method that was
originally presented by Breiman et al. [3]. CART constructs a
model called a decision tree between input and output variables
of the data. Two decision tree types are classiﬁcation trees
and regression trees. If the output variable has discrete and
predetermined values (that is, classiﬁcation problem), CART
constructs a classiﬁcation tree. However, if the output variable
has continuous values (that is, the regression problem), CART
constructs a regression tree. [3] In this work, CART is used
to model the relation between the measurement variables
describing the operating conditions and the performance of
a mobile work machine.
The ﬁrst stage of utilising regression tree in modelling is
the selection of a data set. The data set consists of input and
output variables, where inputs are parts of measurement space
and outputs are real-valued numbers. The input variables are
also known as predictor or independent variables. The outputs
are called response or dependent variables. Regression tree
creates a real-valued prediction function between the predictor
and the response variables. The prediction function can be
utilised in two different purposes: to predict the responses
based on new predictor measurements, and to understand the
relations between the response and predictor variables. [3]
A decision tree is constructed by splitting the data into
subsets that are also known as nodes. The building of the
decision tree starts from a root node that contains all of the
data. A binary split is performed for the root node in a way that
the split minimises the ﬁtting error between response values
and the predictions of the model in the two child nodes. The
splitting variable (that is one of the predictor variables) and its
value are the ones that minimise the ﬁtting error. The splitting
is then performed recursively for each child node. [3] An
example structure of a decision tree is illustrated in Figure
3.
Root Node
Root Node
Leaf 1
Leaf 1
X1≥ 5
X2<7
X2≥7
X3<2
X3≥2
X3<4
X3≥4
Node 2
Node 2
Node 3
Node 3
Node 4
Node 4
Leaf 2
Leaf 2
Leaf 3
Leaf 3
Leaf 4
Leaf 4
Leaf 5
Leaf 5
X1<5
 
Figure 3. An example of a decision tree structure.
The splitting is continued until the proposed child nodes no
longer decrease the ﬁtting error of the regression tree or one of
the user-speciﬁed stopping criteria is reached. Various stopping
criteria can be applied to the splitting, e.g. maximum number
of terminal nodes and minimum number of measurement
values in each terminal node. The terminal nodes of the
regression tree are called leaves. In each leaf, the predicted
response value is the average of the response values in the
leaf. The following pseudocode describes basic procedure for
creating the prediction function with regression tree. [3]
1)
SELECT the data used for modelling
2)
INSERT the data into the root node of the regression
tree
3)
SPLIT the data of the node into two child nodes in
a way that the ﬁtting error is minimized
4)
END IF one of the stopping criteria is met or every
node holds only identical response values
5)
SELECT the node that has the greatest potential for
ﬁtting error reduction
6)
CONTINUE from step 3
As presented in the pseudocode, the regression tree con-
tinues the splitting of the data until every leaf holds only
identical response values or one of the user-deﬁned stopping
criteria is met. If the stopping criteria are not used, the result
of the modelling is a highly complex and over-ﬁtted regression
tree structure. The increased complexity of the regression tree
does not necessarily result in improved prediction accuracy
with new data. Therefore, while utilising a regression tree in
practical applications, a compromise between tree complexity
and prediction accuracy is often desired. The required balance
between these features is considered to be application-speciﬁc.
[3]
The selection of tree complexity can be performed with
previously described stopping criteria and with pruning meth-
ods. Pruning methods can be used to simplify complex regres-
sion trees. The basic principle of the regression tree pruning is
to decrease the number of leaves in the regression trees. The
number of splits in the regression tree is pruned starting from
the split that has the least effect on the ﬁtting error. The level
of pruning is selected subject to the desired complexity of the
regression tree. [3]
The prediction accuracy of the regression tree can be esti-
mated with the following procedure. First, the regression tree
is created with a training data set and it is pruned to a desired
level. Regression tree enables the estimation of prediction
accuracy with resubstitution error and cross-validation error.
The prediction accuracy of the regression tree is also validated
with a validation data set. The validation data is measured
from the same system as the training data, but it is not used
in the creation of the regression tree. Comparing the original
responce values of the validation data and the predictions of
the regression tree, one can estimate the prediction accuracy
of the model. [3]
IV.
RESULTS
This section is divided into two subsections. The ﬁrst
subsection describes the design of the experiment and the
utilised data. The second subsection introduces the results of
the experiment.
A. Design of experiment
The purpose of the experiment is to test how the perfor-
mance of a mobile work machine ﬂeet can be analysed with
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

TABLE I. THE METRICS OF THE EXPERIMENT DATA
Type of metrics
Amount
Description
Machines
17
Preclassiﬁed machines, 10 training
and 7 validation machines
Training data
2,254,901
Approximately 66 per cent of data for
training and 34 per cent for validation
Validation data
1,178,485
Predictor variable
8
Operating condition measurements
Response variable
1
Performance measurement
the regression tree. The scope of the experiment is focused
on modelling the relation between the operating conditions
and the performance values of the mobile work machines, as
presented in Figure 1.
In this work, the regression tree is used to perform three
consecutive actions. The following steps demonstrate an ex-
ample of an approach that could be used in the performance
analysis of a mobile work machines.
1)
Model the relation between the operating conditions
and the performance based on the data of a mobile
work machine ﬂeet.
2)
Assign typical performance values for each operating
condition.
3)
Utilise the typical performance values in the perfor-
mance analysis of an individual mobile work ma-
chine.
In order to test the proposed method, a mobile work
machine data base was collected. The data for the experiment
was acquired from a global mobile work machine manufac-
turer. A data set including 17 mobile work machines was
selected for this work. The machines were selected based on
preclassiﬁcation criteria which were the same machine model
and same country of operations. This kind of preclassiﬁcation
was performed to decrease the undesired variations in the data.
These variations are caused by the different performance stan-
dards and operating conditions between the countries. Table I
presents the metrics of the data set used in the experiment.
The data set used in the experiment was generated by
combining data from measurement data bases. Additional data
preprocessing methods applied to the data set were resampling,
missing value handling, and data normalization. The data was
then divided into training and validation sets as presented in
Section III. Approximately 66 per cent of the data was used
as training data and 34 per cent as validation data. Due to the
privacy policy of the company that provided the data, all of
the variable names are changed and values are normalised in
this work.
B. Evaluation of results
The regression tree was applied to the preprocessed data
and the model between the different operational conditions and
the performance of the mobile work machines was created.
Data preprocessing and analysis were performed with MAT-
LAB software. Figure 4 presents the structure of the regression
tree after the pruning procedure. The pruning of the tree was
performed as presented in Section III. The original tree was
constructed of 22,697 nodes, and then pruned to 41 nodes
x8<83.33        x8>=83.33
x8<83.33        x8>=83.33
x2<0.66        x2>=0.66
x2<0.78       x2>=0.78
x8<50        x8>=50
x8<50         x8>=50
x8<50       x8>=50
x2<0.39       x2>=0.39
x3<13.3      x3>=13.3
x3<13.3      x3>=13.3
x2<1.72        x2>=1.72
x4<1.14      x4>=1.14
38.33
45.11
52.10     47.68
42.93
57.50
51.75      55.36
59.64         66.51
x4<4.84       x4>=4.84
x5<16.7        x5>=16.7
x4<7.01      x4>=7.01
x3<22.4     x3>=22.4
x3<26.8       x3>=26.8
65.54
72.87       77.10
70.14
x2<3.16       x2>=3.16
x5<16.7     x5>=16.7
x3<20.2      x3>=20.2
48.38
58.58
59.14       62.10
70.50
66.82       70.82
Figure 4. The regression tree constructed with CART.
– this was a compromise between prediction accuracy and
complexity.
By looking at the structure of the regression tree, the most
signiﬁcant predictor variables in terms of modelling capability
can be found in the upper nodes of the tree. In this work the
variables x2, x4, x5, and x8 were identiﬁed to be the most
important predictor variables. Additional predictor variables
can be found in the lower nodes of the tree. The predictor
variable signiﬁcance in the regression tree structure was very
well in line with the knowledge of the experienced mobile
work machine operators. Also, the predictor variables with
minor signiﬁcance on the performance are not used for splitting
in the pruned regression tree.
The prediction capability of the regression tree was ﬁrst
analysed by comparing how well the model is ﬁtted to the
training data. The resubstitution error of the tree is 19.83
and the 10-fold cross validation error of the tree is 16.29.
Figure 5 presents the performance values of the mobile work
machines in the training data and the predictions of the
regression tree model. As Figure 5 illustrates, the predictions
of the model and the original performance values correlate
well on machines 1, 4, 6, 7, 8, and 9. The differences between
the measurements and the predictions of the other machines
are most likely caused by the pruning of the tree and the
affects of non-operating condition related factors, such as the
tuning of control parameters of the machines. Especially, the
machine number 5 outperforms the typical performances of
the machines mainly due to the advanced tuning of control
parameters.
The model is then used to predict the reference perfor-
mance values for the machines in the validation data. Figure 6
presents the performance values of the mobile work machines
of the validation data and the predictions of the model. Based
on the measurements of the operating conditions, the model
predicts different performance values for the machines. These
predictions are regarded as typical performance values for
speciﬁc operating conditions. If the performance value of an
individual mobile work machine is greater than the prediction,
the machine has outperformed same types of machines work-
ing in the similar operating condition, and vice versa.
The following information can be observed from Figure 6:
The measured performance values of the machines 12, 15, 16,
and 17 are mostly similar to the predictions of the regression
tree, which indicates average performance in given operating
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

Data point
#106
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Performance value
30
40
50
60
70
80 1
2 3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Prediction
Measurement
Figure 5. Performance predictions and the measured performance values of the training machines. Data is ﬁltered for visualization.
Data point
#105
0
2
4
6
8
10
Performance value
30
40
50
60
70
80
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
Prediction
Measurement
Figure 6. Performance predictions and the measured performance values of the validation machines. Data is ﬁltered for visualization.
conditions. During the measurement periods, there are also
better and worse performances compared to the predictions
with the previously mentioned machines. These occasional
variations can be considered normal, due to various factors,
such as unmeasured variations in the operating conditions,
temporary decrease in the technical condition of the machine,
performance and skill level variations of the operators, etc.
As presented in the Figure 6, the machine number 11 has
worse performance compared to the prediction during most
of the measurement period. If comparison information about
the performance would have been available for the operator,
the declined performance could have been spotted and actions
taken to improve the performance of the machine. Also the
machine number 13 has at ﬁrst worse performance than the
predictions, but then due to actions taken by the operator, the
machine reached an average performance in given conditions.
On the other hand, the machine number 14 has on aver-
age better performance compared to the references. However,
the machine number 14 operates alternately in two different
operating conditions. This can be noticed since the value of
the performance prediction changes between two main levels.
While operating in the environment that typically results in
higher performance values, the measurement and the prediction
are similar. However, while operating in the other operating
condition, the measured performance is higher than the predic-
tion. This is caused by the better control parameter selection.
The utilisation of regression tree enables more detailed
analysis of the performance values. Figure 7 presents the
performance distributions of the training data and machine
number 13, for a speciﬁc operating condition. For demonstra-
tive purposes, the selected operating condition is the one where
the machine number 13 lacks performance compared to the
training data. The distributions illustrate that the performance
values of the machine number 13 are concentrated on the
leftmost section of the original training data distribution.
Comparison information such as that presented in Figure
7 can be used to assist the machine operators to analyse
the performance of the mobile work machine in different
operating conditions. With the reference information about
similar machines, the operator can analyse the performance
of the machine with increased accuracy and reliability. There
can be various reasons for the similarities and differences in
the performance values between the machines. Depending on
the work objectives of the machines, the differences can be
explained with logical reasons, e.g. efﬁciency and productivity
priorities set by the machine operators. However, the decreased
performance is often a result of declined technical condition
of the machine, low skill-level of the operator, or improper
control parameter tuning.
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

Performance value
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Frequency
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
Training data
Machine number 13
Figure 7. Performance distributions of the training data and the machine
number 13, for a speciﬁc operating condition.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The objective of this work was to research how to im-
prove the performance analysis of mobile work machines.
The most signiﬁcant contribution of this study is the data-
driven approach for analysing performances of mobile work
machines. The presented approach is a combination of data
preprocessing methods and the CART algorithm. The analysis
of the performance is executed in three phases: modelling
the relation between the operating conditions and performance
values, predicting the typical performance values in speciﬁc
operating conditions, and utilising the performance predictions
as a reference values in the performance analysis of an
individual mobile work machine.
The proposed method utilises a data-driven modelling
approach. All of the operating conditions and performance
values in the model are measured from machines working
in various operating conditions. As more measurement data
is collected, the regression tree can be updated to include
new operating conditions and to increase the reliability of the
performance predictions. One of the most important beneﬁts of
the presented method is the ability to model systems without
extensive knowledge of the input-output variable relations in
the data.
The results of this study indicate the potential of the
presented method in the performance analysis of mobile work
machines. However, further research is still required in data
preprocessing, modelling, and analysis phases of the topic.
Interesting topics related to data preprocessing are dimension
and redundancy reduction. Further research topics concerning
the modelling phase, include adding new input variables to
regression tree modelling and testing new data analysis meth-
ods. The analysis phase is the most interesting part, since
it enables the development of many practical applications
designed for optimisation and root-cause analysis of the mobile
work machine. The next step of the research is to increase the
volume of the mobile work machine data and to evaluate the
performance analysis in practice.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The research work was funded by Tekes (D2I – Data
to Intelligence) and Academy of Finland (HOPE – Human
Operator Modelling And Performance Evaluation In Human-
machine Interaction) research programs.
REFERENCES
[1]
V. H¨oltt¨a, M. Repo, L. Palmroth, and A. Putkonen, “Index-based
performance assessment and condition monitoring of a mobile working
machine,” in Proceedings of the 2005 ASME International Design
Engineering Technical Conferences and Computers and Information in
Engineering Conference. Long Beach, California, USA: ASME, IEEE,
2006, pp. 615–622, the 2005 ASME International Design Engineering
Technical Conferences and Computers and Information in Engineering
Conference, Long Beach, California, USA, September 24-28, 2005.
[2]
V.
H¨oltt¨a,
“Plant
performance
evaluation
in
complex
in-
dustrial
applications,”
Ph.D.
dissertation,
Helsinki
University
of
Technology,
Espoo,
Finland,
2009.
[Online].
Available:
http://lib.tkk.ﬁ/Diss/2009/isbn9789522480927/isbn9789522480927.pdf
[3]
L. Breiman, J. Friedman, R. Olshen, and C. Stone, Classiﬁcation and
Regression Trees.
Monterey, CA: Wadsworth and Brooks, 1984.
[4]
L. Palmroth, K. Tervo, and A. Putkonen, “Intelligent coaching of mobile
working machine operators,” in Proceedings of the IEEE 13th Interna-
tional Conference on Intelligent Engineering Systems. Barbados: IEEE,
2009, pp. 149–154, iEEE 13th International Conference on Intelligent
Engineering Systems 2009 - INES 2009, Barbados, April 16-18, 2009.
[5]
R. H. Macmillan, “The mechanics of tractor-implement performance:
theory and worked examples: a textbook for students and engineers,”
2002, p. 166.
[6]
T. Jokiniemi, H. Rossner, J. Ahokas et al., “Simple and cost effective
method for fuel consumption measurements of agricultural machinery,”
in Agronomy Research, vol. 10, no. Special Issue I. Estonian Research
Institute of Agriculture, 2012, pp. 97–107.
[7]
S. Park, Y. Kim, D. Im, and C. Kim, “An assessment of eco driving
system for agricultural tractor,” Journal of Agricultural Science and
Technology, 2011, pp. 906–912.
[8]
F. Inns, Selection, Testing and Evaluation of Agricultural Machines and
Equipment: Theory, ser. FAO agricultural services bulletin.
Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 1995, no. 115.
[9]
Z. Ismail and A. Abdel-Mageed, “Workability and machinery perfor-
mance for wheat harvesting,” Misr J. Ag. Eng, vol. 27, no. 1, 2010, pp.
90–103.
[10]
J. Lu, Y. Liu, and X. Li, “The decision tree application in agricultural
development,” in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Computational Intelligence.
Springer, 2011, pp. 372–379.
[11]
T. Waheed, R. Bonnell, S. O. Prasher, and E. Paulet, “Measuring per-
formance in precision agriculture: CART – A decision tree approach,”
Agricultural water management, vol. 84, no. 1, 2006, pp. 173–185.
[12]
M. Li, S. Feng, I. K. Sethi, J. Luciow, and K. Wagner, “Mining
production data with neural network & CART,” in Data Mining, 2003.
ICDM 2003. Third IEEE International Conference on.
IEEE, 2003,
pp. 731–734.
[13]
S. Kotsiantis, D. Kanellopoulos, and P. Pintelas, “Data preprocessing for
supervised leaning,” International Journal of Computer Science, vol. 1,
no. 2, 2006, pp. 111–117.
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

