 
 
 A Novel Approach to Information Spreading Models for Social Networks  
 
Burcu Sayin, Serap Şahin 
Department of Computer Engineering, Izmir Institute of Technology, Izmir, Turkey 
Email: burcusayin@iyte.edu.tr, serapsahin@iyte.edu.tr
 
 
Abstract— Analyzing and modelling the spreading of any 
information through a social network (SN) is an important issue 
in social network analysis. The proposed solutions for this issue 
do not only help with observing the information diffusion, but 
also serve as a valuable resource for predicting the 
characteristics of the network, developing network-specific 
advertising, etc. Up-to-date approaches include probabilistic 
analysis of information spreading and the information cascade 
models. In this paper, we propose a hybrid model, which 
considers an information spreading model, and combines it with 
cascades and social behavior analysis. We propose a new hybrid 
usage approach to represent a real-world modelling for the 
information spreading process. 
Keywords-social network analysis; information spreading; 
information cascades. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Information spreading on social networks (SNs) is getting 
more popular in social network analysis. Thanks to the 
developing technology, information has become quickly 
accessible, especially via SNs. This situation creates new 
domains on SNs, such as advertising, marketing, etc. Hence, 
it is important to have an information spreading model for 
predicting the effect of the information on SNs. 
In the literature, there are many models that either support 
or modify the Susceptible – Infected – Removed (SIR) model 
[1], [2], [3] or adopt it to new approaches. We selected some 
of the most current ones and presented them in Section 3. 
However, it is hard to find a model that matches real-life 
scenarios because SNs are dynamic platforms and SN users 
act with their emotions. Therefore, models should also 
represent SN users’ real behaviors. Developing such a model 
serves as a solution to problems in many areas, like security. 
For example, in the case of any malicious information existing 
in the network, we can predict its spreading area and pattern. 
In this way, we can take precautions against a possible crisis. 
These are the reasons for which we would like to propose a 
real-world information spreading model.  
In this paper, we present out work in progress as well as 
our opinion. The existing models do not provide a complete 
solution to reflect real SN user’s decisions for spreading the 
information. We point out the deficient points on proposed 
studies and propose an alternative hybrid model.  
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 proposes 
some of the current requirements for a realistic information 
spreading model. Section 3 gives an overall explanation of the 
basis information spreading model “SIR” in the literature and 
its current applications, with some modifications and new 
approaches. Section 4 includes our proposed hybrid solution 
for a real-world modelling of information spreading. We 
conclude the paper and outline our future research directions 
in Section 5. 
II. 
IDENTIFIED REQUIREMENTS OF A REALISTIC 
INFORMATION SPREADING MODEL 
As SNs have a dynamic characteristic, it is hard to model 
the spreading of information only with a probabilistic 
approach. Current information spreading models should 
focus on a user-specific approach and consider SN users’ 
behavioral effects, because SN users shape the diffusion of 
any information on the network. 
Based on our research, we noted some requirements, as 
listed below, for a realistic information spreading model with 
behavioral analysis: 
• 
Popularity of the source: Popularity level of the 
information source affects SN users’ decisions on 
whether to spread that information or not. This factor 
can also be related with the trustworthiness and 
credibility of the source. 
• 
Strength of relations among users: Strong 
relations/features (such as similar political views, 
education, gender, etc.) among SN users cause 
information to spread faster. 
• 
Content of the information: If a SN user gives 
importance to the content of any information, he/she 
is more likely to spread it. 
• 
Personal interests: If a SN user’s interests are related 
to the information, he/she becomes more likely to 
spread it. 
• 
Privacy preferences: Privacy preferences of a SN 
user in his/her profile have an impact on information 
spreading. For example, if the user is conservative 
about his/her privacy, then he/she is more likely to 
abstain from spreading information. 
Each mentioned requirement affects the information 
spreading on SNs with a probability. However, the value of 
this probability may vary according to each user. Hence, 
developing models for information spreading should take 
into account these real-world conditions. 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-603-3
DATA ANALYTICS 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Data Analytics

 
 
III. 
INFORMATION SPREADING MODELS 
In SNs, information spreads via posts from one user to 
another. This spreading continues until it loses actuality and 
attractiveness to users. In literature, researchers proved that 
the information spreading process and epidemics resemble 
each other [4]. Hence, the SIR model reflects epidemics. We 
present this model in the following section and then provide 
an overview of up-to-date information spreading models. 
A. SIR Model 
The SIR Model is based on epidemics. Epidemics spread 
for a time and then lose their effect. The size of the area 
affected by the epidemics depends on population size.  It is 
obvious that the probability of the disease spreading in a 
crowded area is higher than in a deserted area. Hence, 
population size is an important determinant in the spreading 
process of epidemics [5]. Similarly, in SNs, a post spreads 
quickly if the owner of the post has lots of connections.  
In epidemics, time evolution of a disease is managed by a 
threshold; information spreading also has a threshold theorem. 
The Threshold Theorem of Kermack–McKendrick [1], [2] 
defines the evolution process of epidemics. This theorem 
models the population with three types: Susceptible (S), 
Infected (I), and Removed (R), which constitutes the SIR 
model. Each variable/state refers to the number of people in 
the related group. Susceptible ones are ignorant, which means 
that they are not yet infected but have a potential to be an 
Infected. Infected ones have the disease and they can infect 
the Susceptible ones. Removed ones have recovered from the 
disease and stopped the spreading process.  
 The theorem consists of two differential equations which 
define transitions between S, I and R states [1], [2]: 
• 
Transition from Susceptible state to Infected state, 
• 
Transition from Infected state to Removed state.  
A critical point here is to model the transition from the 
Infected state to Removed. Researchers first proposed a 
counter value (ctr) to control this process [4], [6]. The main 
idea behind this value is that it counts the number of users who 
became infected, and it stops spreading when this number 
reaches to the ctr value. The value is determined before the 
spreading process and is valid for each user in the network. 
Unsurprisingly, if we choose a big value for ctr, information 
reaches a bigger portion of the network, but more rounds are 
required to complete the spreading process. Eventually, 
ctr controls the termination of the spreading process and the 
size of spreading area in a network.  
In addition, information can be observed in two different 
ways within a spreading process; (i) static information and 
(ii) dynamic information. During the whole spreading 
process, if the information does not have any revision, it is 
accepted as static information. In the contrary case, it 
becomes dynamic information [7]. When we consider this 
concept in SNs, users may revise someone’s post and publish 
it as a new post, so information in SNs is dynamic. Hence, 
we need some modifications to the SIR model, or we need 
new approaches to model the current information spreading 
processes. 
B. Current Information Spreading Models 
Although most current studies consider the SIR model as 
a baseline and modify it according to today’s requirements, 
some of them also propose new approaches, such as cascades. 
Information cascades allow us to predict how well the 
information will spread. This section first summarizes the 
studies that focus on the adaptation of the SIR model and then 
describes an information spreading model with cascades. We 
do not provide an algorithmic comparison between the 
current studies, because our aim is not to find an algorithm 
which provides the best performance. Instead, we focus on 
how well the proposed algorithms represent real-world 
circumstances. In this study, we consider the effectiveness of 
the algorithms as the achievement level of realistic 
modelling. 
Bao et al. [8] criticizes the SIR model in terms of the idea 
behind the Infected state. They propose that an infected user 
does not have to believe/accept the information; may also 
oppose that information. Hence, they divided the infected 
state into two distinct ones: (i) positive infected (supports the 
information) and (ii) negative infected (opposes the 
information). They named this model Susceptible – Positive 
Infected – Negative Infected – Removed (SPNR). According 
to the SPNR model, when an ignorant user receives 
information from a positive/negative spreader, becomes a 
new positive/negative spreader with a probability value [8]. 
In the same way, there is a probability that a positive spreader 
may affect a negative spreader or vice versa. If a 
positive/negative spreader gets the information from a stifler 
(removed user), becomes a stifler, also with a probability. 
They define the transition from a spreader state to a removed 
one with a spreading threshold. This model is an enhanced 
version of SIR that takes into account users’ decisions to 
believing the information. However, they only use this 
decision as a probabilistic value; they do not consider the 
mentioned requirements.  
Serrano et al. [9] consider that a SN user may have a first 
impression about an information before being infected by 
other users. In this model, they modified SIR and proposed 
the following four states: (i) neutral (initial state), (ii) infected 
(believe the information), (iii) vaccinated (believe the anti-
information before being infected) and (iv) cured (believe the 
anti-information after being infected). According to this 
model, all users are initially neutral. Then, they assign some 
of them as infected. Infected ones start to infect their neutral 
neighbors with a given probability. To simulate cured or 
vaccinated ones, they define a time as delay. At that time, a 
randomly selected infected user starts to spread anti-
information, which says the opposite of the original 
information in the network. Hence, they try to cure or 
vaccinate their neighbors with a probability of accepting or 
denying (probAcceptDeny). Finally, cured and vaccinated 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-603-3
DATA ANALYTICS 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Data Analytics

 
 
ones try to cure or vaccinate their neighbors with the value of 
probAcceptDeny. This model uses an agent-based modelling 
so that it can reflect the real world better than SIR. However, 
it is still insufficient to be applied to SNs today. 
Cordasco et al. [10] consider the infected state of the SIR 
model from a different aspect. They propose that a user may 
not immediately start spreading just after it is infected; they 
define a new state for this situation: “aware”. They claim that 
there should be a threshold that controls the transition from 
being aware to start spreading. This model resembles the 
Susceptible – Exposed – Infected – Removed (SEIR) 
epidemic model [11], which differs from SIR model with the 
additional “Exposed” state. This state contains people who 
had contact with an infected user but have not yet started to 
infect other people. Similarly, Cordasco et al. [10] propose 
three states: (i) ignorant, (ii) aware and (iii) spreading. As 
usual, all users are ignorant at the beginning. When an 
ignorant user takes information from a spreader, it becomes 
aware. To be a spreading one, any aware user should take the 
information from more than a pre-defined number (threshold 
value) of spreading users. This model has no state for 
removed, but they define a termination rule in the original 
paper [10]. Although this model considers the transition 
process from being aware to start spreading, the model is not 
sufficient to represent today’s information spreading process. 
Tong. et al. [12] describes an information cascade model 
in SNs. First, they provide an extensive study on cascade 
scales, the scope of the cascade subgraphs, and topological 
attribute of spread tree. Then, based on the evaluation results, 
they analyze the spread of the user’s decisions for city-wide 
activities. Decisions include “want to take part in the activity” 
and “be interested in the activity”. This study introduces three 
mechanisms to use for making a decision:  
• 
Equal probability: A user has an equal probability 
to make any of two decisions. 
• 
Similarity of users: Similarity of users is the 
criteria to make a decision for any user. 
• 
Popularity of users: Popularity of users affects 
users’ decision. 
Experimental results show that the popularity of users is 
an important criterion for information spreading. Although 
this study evaluates some user-specific parameters, such as 
popularity of the information source and similarity of users 
to model information spreading on SNs, it does not satisfy all 
the requirements proposed in Section 2 and it does not 
consider an epidemic approach.  
When we examine the existing studies, we notice that most 
of them consider a behavioral effect/model on the 
information spreading process and so modify the SIR model 
to represent this effect in some way. However, they do not 
propose the factors that affect this behavioral model; they just 
take it as a probabilistic value for the behavior decision. 
Indeed, there are many factors (some of which were proposed 
in Section 2 as the requirements) that affect SN users’ 
behavior on the information spreading process, and they are 
completely interrelated. Hence, we need to consider them all 
as a complete impact on users’ decisions for the spreading 
process. 
IV. 
A HYBRID INFORMATION SPREADING MODEL 
We propose to develop a hybrid model, which considers 
the models of Bao et al. [8] and Cordasco et al. [10] but 
modifies their threshold idea by using information cascade 
characteristics to meet requirements mentioned in Section 2. 
Novelty comes from using such a hybrid model, which 
combines epidemic models with up-to-date approaches like 
cascades to represent behavioral effect on SNs. Considering 
this effect together with the proposed requirements is so 
important to observe information spreading on SNs because 
it affects users’ decision on spreading the specific 
information or not. By using this approach, we can make 
more realistic transitions between different states of our 
model. In addition, we will use the idea of Bao et al. [8] 
regarding the infected state. We will also divide our infected 
state into two: positive infected and negative infected, 
because there is a probability that a user will reject an 
information. 
Figure 1 shows the state transitions of our model. The 
proposed model includes the following properties: 
• 
There will be five states: (i) ignorant (user is not aware 
of the information), (ii) aware (user is aware of the 
information but he/she has not started to spread it), 
(iii) positive infected (user believes the information 
and spreads it) (iv) negative infected (user opposes the 
information and tries to convince other people in this 
way) and (v) removed (user stops spreading). 
 
    Figure 1. A Hybrid Information Spreading Model 
 
• 
Initially, we assume that all users are ignorant. Then, 
some of them are selected as positive infected and 
some as negative infected. This selection may be 
important for some domains. For example, if we are 
working in the advertising or marketing sectors, it is 
important to reach more users in a short time. Hence, 
the selection process of initial positive/negative 
infected users should be performed according to the 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-603-3
DATA ANALYTICS 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Data Analytics

 
 
topology of the network. After this selection, 
information starts to be spread in the network.  
• 
If an ignorant user takes the information from a 
positive/negative infected user, he/she becomes 
aware. After being an aware, the user passes to one of 
three possible states: (1) he/she may believe that the 
information is true and pass to a positive infected state 
via function “t(𝑎𝑃𝐼): transition from aware state to 
positive infected state”, (2) he/she may refuse the 
information and decide to infect others negatively by 
passing to a negative infected state via function 
“ t(𝑎𝑁𝐼) : transition from aware state to negative 
infected state”, and (3) an aware user may prefer not 
to infect any other user either positively or negatively. 
In this case, that user may pass directly to the removed 
state via transition function t(𝑎𝑅).  
• 
After being a positive/negative infected, there may be 
a transition between those two infected states, which 
can be controlled with “t(𝑁𝐼𝑃𝐼): transition function 
from negative infected state to positive infected state” 
or “t(𝑃𝐼𝑁𝐼): transition function from positive infected 
state to negative infected state.” Alternatively, they 
may pass to removed state via “t(𝑁𝐼𝑅): transition 
function from negative infected state to removed 
state” and “t(𝑃𝐼𝑅): transition function from positive 
infected state to removed state”.  
• 
All transition functions will have a threshold value, 
including the effect of cascading mechanisms and 
behavioral effects to meet all five requirements. 
Hence, these functions will depend on a user-specific 
approach. We will first analyze each user based on the 
requirements and define user-specific behavioral 
effect values for them (training phase). This means 
that each SN user will have a behavioral impact value 
and this value will be used in the information 
spreading process. Hence, users will make a decision 
based on this impact value for any transition in our 
model.    
Consequently, we will base our hybrid model on the 
modified version of the SIR model and generate a new 
formulation by also using information cascades and users’ 
social behavior analysis. To verify our model, we will 
implement both referred models [8], [10] and our proposed 
model in a real SN dataset to observe effectiveness, and then 
we will compare them in terms of success and failure rates on 
real-world modelling. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we discussed the main information spreading 
model SIR and the current modifications of it. We also 
emphasized that information cascades are important to adjust 
information spreading models to SNs to create more realistic 
structures. Hence, we are working on developing a hybrid 
information spreading model which can meet the presented 
requirements and dynamism of SNs. Because users’ decisions 
on spreading any information also depend on social 
behavioral factors, we will include behavioral analysis of SN 
users in our model. What we expect from this research is that 
anyone will be able to use our model to predict the spreading 
area and pattern of an information so that they can measure 
the effect of it on SNs. Additionally, this model can be used 
for interaction analysis among SN users. 
As this paper proposes our preliminary work, we roughly 
provided our model. We will continue with the formulation, 
validation, and simulation phases of the model. 
REFERENCES 
[1] W. O. Kermack, and A. G. McKendrick, “A Contribution to 
the Mathematical Theory of Epidemics”, Proceedings of the 
Royal Society of London A: Mathematical, Physical and 
Engineering Sciences, Volume 115, pp. 700-721, 1927. DOI: 
10.1098/rspa.1927.0118. 
[2] F. Brauer, “The Kermack–McKendrick epidemic model 
revisited”, Mathematical Biosciences, Volume 198, Issue 2, 
pp. 
119-131, 
ISSN 
0025-5564, 
2005. 
DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.mbs.2005.07.006. 
[3] C. Nowzari, V. M. Preciado, and G. J. Pappas, "Analysis and 
Control of Epidemics: A Survey of Spreading Processes on 
Complex Networks," IEEE Control Systems, Volume 36, Issue 
1, pp. 26-46, 2016. DOI:10.1109/MCS.2015.2495000. 
[4] A. Demers et al., “Epidemic algorithms for replicated database 
maintenance”, In Proceedings of the sixth annual ACM 
Symposium on Principles of distributed computing (PODC 
'87), Fred B. Schneider (Ed.). ACM, New York, NY, USA, pp. 
1-12, 
1987. 
DOI=10.1145/41840.41841 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/41840.41841. 
[5] D. J. Daley and D. G. Kendall, “Stochastic Rumours”, IMA 
Journal of Applied Mathematics (Institute of Mathematics and 
Its 
Applications) 
1, 
pp. 
42-55, 
1965. 
DOI: 
10.1093/imamat/1.1.42. 
[6] N. T. J. Bailey, “The Mathematical Theory of Infectious 
Diseases and its Applications”, Hafner Press, Second Edition, 
1975. 
[7] Y. Zhang, S. Zhou, Z. Zhang, J. Guan, and S. Zhou, “Rumor 
Evolution in Social Networks”. Physical Review E, vol. 87, no. 
3, Article ID 032133, 2013. 
[8] Y. Bao, C. Yi, Y. Xue, and Y. Dong, “A new rumor 
propagation model and control strategy on social networks”, In 
Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE/ACM International Conference 
on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining 
(ASONAM '13). ACM, New York, NY, USA, pp. 1472-1473, 
2013. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2492517.2492599. 
[9] E. Serrano, C. Á. Iglesias, and M. Garijo, “A Novel Agent-
Based Rumor Spreading Model in Twitter”, In Proceedings of 
the 24th International Conference on World Wide Web (WWW 
'15 Companion). ACM, New York, NY, USA, pp. 811-814, 
2015. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2740908.2742466.  
[10] G. Cordasco, L. Gargano, A. A. Rescigno, and U. Vaccaro, 
“Brief Announcement: Active Information Spread in 
Networks”, In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Symposium on 
Principles of Distributed Computing (PODC '16). ACM, New 
York, 
NY, 
USA, 
pp. 
435-437, 
2016. 
DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2933057.2933069. 
[11] J. Zhang, J. Li, and Z. Ma, “Global Dynamics of an SEIR 
Epidemic 
Model 
with 
Immigration 
of 
Different 
Compartments”, Acta Mathematica Scientia, Volume 26, Issue 
3, 
pp. 
551-567, 
ISSN 
0252-9602, 
2006. 
DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0252-9602(06)60081-7. 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-603-3
DATA ANALYTICS 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Data Analytics

 
 
[12] C. Tong, W. He, J. Niu, and Z. Xie, “A novel information 
cascade model in online social networks”, Physica A: 
Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, Volume 444, pp. 
297-310, 2015. DOI:10.1016/j.physa.2015.10.026. 
 
 
 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-603-3
DATA ANALYTICS 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Data Analytics

