A Use Case-oriented Framework for the Evaluation of In-Memory IT-Systems
Stephan Ulbricht∗, Marek Opuszko∗, Johannes Ruhland∗, Sven Gehrke∗
∗Friedrich Schiller University Jena
Department of Business Informations, Jena, Germany
Email: stephan.ulbricht@uni-jena.de, marek.opuszko@uni-jena.de, johannes.ruhland@uni-jena.de, sven.gehrke@uni-jena.de
Abstract—After a comeback in recent years, In-memory systems
are now among several candidate solutions to solve future IT
challenges. Despite the increased interest in the technology,
however, there is a hesitant spread. One reason could be the
lack of practical application scenarios that decision makers can
apply to their business context. The aim of this work is to
introduce a framework to support the evaluation of potential In-
memory applications. Relevant factors that inﬂuence a possible
In-memory use were evaluated using the Multi-Attribute Utility
Theory approach, accompanied by an expert survey and therefore
create a base for the framework. The framework is then used
to evaluate 10 complex real-world In-memory use case scenarios.
The results show that the presented approach in this work is
suitable to both assess possible use cases and determine cases
with high potential.
Keywords–In-Memory IT-Systems; Business Value; Analytic
Hierarchy Process (AHP); Multi-Attribute Utility Theory.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Enterprises are faced with the challenge of constantly grow-
ing data volumes, increasing competition pressure and the per-
manent need to instantly react to events. This is one of the main
reasons why choosing the”‘right”’ IT-systems has become a
major strategic decision for companies. The selection of the
appropriate system may determine the success of a company
or in other words, the selection of the wrong system might
lead to serious business disadvantages [1]. The challenges and
possibilities associated with the term Big Data characterizes
today’s IT landscapes. In this context, In-Memory IT-systems
(IMIS) represent a key technology [2]. Despite promising
expectations, the technology has not yet been signiﬁcantly
established in the industry. Companies mainly criticize the lack
of reproducible use cases [3][4]. Since the beginning of the
boom of the technology, a whole series of application scenarios
have been propagated. Based on these examples, which were
often tailored to speciﬁc sectors and ﬁelds of application,
many companies could not derive their own beneﬁts and lead
in-memory techniques to fruition. According to a study by
the consulting company Pierre Audoin Consultants [5], many
companies see great potential in the technology, yet there
are only a few cases where the beneﬁts are exploited. This
is interesting in contrast to the expectations placed on the
technology to create business value along all steps of the value
chain. This accounts for a vertical integration, as well as a
horizontal. In addition to these open issues in the corporate
sector, there is a clear need for a generalizable reference model
to analyze and evaluate in-memory scenarios [6][7] from a
scientiﬁc perspective. Hence, a universal evaluation tool is
needed to determine whether IMIS is beneﬁcial or not suited
in a speciﬁc scenario and vice versa.
The decision whether to use an IMIS in a company or not
is a complex and multi-criteria decision problem. Beside IT
requirements numerous other aspects like the relation with,
i.e., employees, customers or suppliers have to be consid-
ered. Furthermore, possible massive change in the company’s
infrastructure [8] has to be evaluated. The representation of
this complexity requires a corresponding model which covers
all these different aspects. In this work, we will therefore
introduce a framework which reﬂects both the industrial as
well as the scientiﬁc claims. We will create a design science
based system, able to identify and evaluate potential IMIS
scenarios. Due to the versatility of the IMIS technology and its
potential use in different use cases, the scenarios may strongly
differ among each other. Some aspects may be speciﬁc and
unique, meaning only relevant for a certain scenario. These
aspects are directly linked to the creation of business value
and are therefore called value-creation dependent. On the other
hand there will be aspects of a scenario that are not directly
linked. These are called value-creation independent. According
to their speciﬁc characteristics the weightings of the value-
creation independent factors are determined by the analytic
hierarchy processing and the dependent factors are determined
by the direct ranking method. The evaluation and interpretation
of the presented framework is based on 10 cross-industrial use
cases.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces the
research background, the existing literature in the ﬁeld of IMIS
and the overall structure of the framework. Section III presents
the research methodology including the analytic hierarchy
process (AHP) and the direct ranking method (DRM). In
section IV the application of the framework is shown. The
ﬁnal section summarizes the contributions of this work.
II.
RESEARCH BACKGROUND
For a better understanding of the evaluation framework it
is necessary to gain a deeper understanding of the technical
characteristics of IMIS. The idea of using main memory for
the storage of data goes back to the 1980’s [9] and 1990’s
[10]. Caused by the high costs and relatively low storage
sizes IMIS was basically a niche technology in the past years.
With the introduction of the SAP HANA platform [11], the
technology experienced some kind of a comeback. Originally,
the SAP HANA platform was developed for accelerated and
ﬂexible analysis of large data sets. This new generation of
IMIS includes a totally different storage concept in comparison
to relational databases. The data in In-Memory Systems is
mainly stored in a column-based manner [12]. The advantage
is a better data compression [13][14], due to the fact that the
data of the same type is stored in a column. In the recent years
the focus on analytical tasks has been extended to hybrid IT-
systems. The idea is to store the operational and analytical
data entirely in a main memory database [15][16]. These
hybrid systems are referred to as Online Mixed Workload
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-603-3
DATA ANALYTICS 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Data Analytics

Processing (OLXP) [17] and Hybrid Transactional/Analytical
Processing (HTAP) [18]. Common data storage expansive and
time consuming extract, transform, load (ETL) processes from
the transactional into the analytical system are no longer
necessary [13]. As a result, operational data can be used for
analysis without major time delays.
Due to the different characteristics of analytical and opera-
tional tasks, problems and difﬁculties arise for hybrid systems.
The column-based storage of data was originally designed for
read-oriented and read-only analysis tasks. A higher proportion
of write access typically characterizes operational systems,
i.e., enterprise resource planning systems. The merging of
these two approaches is often associated with complex join
procedures [19]. In read-oriented environments, this can reduce
the maximum possible performance improvement promised by
IMIS.
A. Problem Context and Related Work
The majority of the early publications in the ﬁeld of IMIS
were characterized by the strong focus on rather technical
aspects. To a great proportion, only technical features, such
as the column-based storage of data [12], data compression
[14] or the persistence of volatile storage media [20] were
investigated. The dominance of technical investigations still
illustrates the strong technologically driven development. De-
spite it’s potential, only few studies about the evaluation of
IMIS use cases have been published to date. The ﬁrst studies in
this ﬁeld have been carried out by Piller and Hagedorn [6][21].
The authors evaluate ﬁrst case studies in the retail sector. The
case studies were evaluated with the aid of various inﬂuencing
factors. Based on the factors, ﬁrst application patterns were
derived. Another approach to characterize and classify in-
memory systems was presented by Winter et al. [22]. They
identiﬁed stereotypical patterns based on the data volume and
the degree of hybrid workload. An alternative approach for
the analysis of In-memory applications addresses the business
process characteristics of IMIS use cases. Pioneers in this
area were vom Brocke et al. [23][24][25]. They developed
a value-creation model, which considers ﬁrst- as well as
second-order effects. They conclude that the value-creation is
closely related to process change. The evaluation of several
IMIS use cases by B¨arenf¨anger et al. [26] conﬁrmed this
results. Another approach focused on the cost beneﬁt effects
of IMIS. In this context, Meier et al. developed a model
for the economical evaluation of IMIS. Like vom Brocke et
al. they distinguish into direct and indirect beneﬁts. In their
publication, [27] Ulbricht et al. tried to combine the ﬁndings
of the different approaches. They presented a structured model
for the evaluation and analysis of IMIS use cases, taking
various factors into account. Despite the different focuses, one
thing all approaches have in common. They all consider the
characteristics of IMIS use cases from a quite abstract level.
The degree of dissemination in individual sectors, however,
indicates the different importance of the particular inﬂuencing
factors. The question arises, why this technology has already
been used quite frequently in some sectors and is hardly ever
noticed in other areas.
B. Approach
As mentioned before, the evaluation and analysis of IMIS
use cases is a complex, multi-criteria decision problem. In
order to represent and solve the decision problem the model of
the multi-attribute utility theory (MAUT) is used. This model
allows to consider both the system requirements as well as
the corresponding importance. To determine the total utility
U, the additive model (1) of the MAUT [28] is applied. In
this model the system requirements are represented as xi and
the signiﬁcance (importance) as wi.
U =
n
X
i=1
wixi
(1)
In order to provide a better complexity handling, we
characterize the several inﬂuence factors and bring them into a
hierarchy in a ﬁrst step. In the second step, we select suitable
methods for the determination of the signiﬁcance depending
on the characteristics of the inﬂuence factors. The different
characteristics of the factors lead to a trade off between the
operability of the methods and the quality of the results. In
the ﬁnal step, we reveal the results of the utility methods and
evaluate the overall framework based on 10 case studies. In
this part we demonstrate the feasibility of our concept. The
creation of the framework follows the concept of the design
science research [29]. Both practical and theoretical aspects
are considered in the design process. The several steps of the
design process are shown in the following sections. The created
artifact is represented by a framework. The overall approach
is summerized in Figure 1.
Phase 1
Phase 2
Selection of decision methods:
 success dependent factors: direct scoring method
 success independent factors: Analytic Hierarchy Process
Phase 3
Phase 4
Creation and Evaluation of the Framework
 Based on 10 Use Cases
Processing of the decision methods:
 DSM: 25 Participants
 AHP: 10 IMIS-Experts 
Characterization of the Influence Factors:
 Separation into: case dependent + case independent factors
 Hierarchy Creation for a better problem solving
Figure 1. Overview of the Research Methodology
C. Characterization and Categorization of the Inﬂuence Fac-
tors
In [8], DeLone et al. divided the inﬂuencing variables of
information systems into success dependent and independent.
Analogous to this approach we categorized the inﬂuence
factors in our framework into value-creation dependent and
independent. The whole categorization is presented in the fol-
lowing section. The starting point of the considered inﬂuence
factors is the IMIS evaluation model from Ulbricht et al. [27].
An overview of the developed framework is given in Figure 2.
1) Value-creation-dependent inﬂuence factors: This cate-
gory includes the factors, which are most relevant for the value-
creation of a use case. Due to the strong impact on the business
success, they are particularly important for corporate decisions.
These factors comprise the internal as well as the external
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-603-3
DATA ANALYTICS 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Data Analytics

realization conditions, e.g., the capability to realize the results
from the IT-system in an appropriate time. Another inﬂuence
factor is the potential beneﬁt regarding the use of IMIS. This
means value-creation through faster data processing or more
detailed analysis. In most cases, business value is the most
important decision criteria for companies. In this consideration,
this point also includes non-monetary beneﬁts and second-
level effects like an improved customer satisfaction. In order
to achieve independence of the factors, it is important that
the potential value generation is considered independent of
the other factors. Independence is the prerequisite for the later
conducted application of decision methods [30].
2) Value-creation-independent inﬂuence factors: This cate-
gory includes factors which are from a solely business perspec-
tive of minor importance. This means that these factors have no
direct relation to the value-creation. An economically oriented
decision maker is in most cases not interested in the underlying
data volume or the data structure. On the other hand, these
factors play a very important role for the technical evaluation
of In-Memory Systems. In order to consider all relevant aspects
for the evaluation, company representatives, scientists as well
as IMIS vendors are involved in the determination of these
factors. In addition to these stakeholder-oriented factors, this
+ effects of data changes
+ flexibility of analysis
+ complexity of analysis
+ hybrid workload
- source systems
+ data volume
+ data complexity
- internal realization conditions
+ target group willingness
- technical realization conditions
- legal realization conditions
+ potential added value
+ degree of detail
In-Memory-
System decision 
factors
data factors
analysis factors
economic factors
+ frequency of change
+ range of variation
+ urgency
Legend
+ positive impact
value creation dependent
-  negative impact
value creation independent
value creation 
dependent
value creation 
independent
value creation 
dependent
value creation 
dependent
value creation 
independent
data dynamic
value creation independent
Figure 2. Overview of the analysis and evaluation framework (adapted
according to [27])
category also includes technical aspects, which are related to
the value-creation. These include, for example, the frequency
of change and the range of variation. One of the probably
most important advantages of IMIS is the capability of fast
data processing. Expert interviews and case studies in this area
have shown, however, that the requirements regarding, e.g., the
urgency vary signiﬁcantly between different business areas.
III.
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
After the basic features of the framework have been
described in the previous section, the question arises how
the respective relevance regarding the evaluation of IMIS is
represented. For this purpose, an additional weighting factor
is added to the framework. The respective weights are de-
termined by selected multi-critical decision-making methods.
The directly scoring method is used for the value-creation
dependent factors. To determine the signiﬁcance of the value-
creation independent factors the AHP method is utilized.
The selection criteria and methodology are explained in the
following section.
A. Direct Ranking Method
The direct ranking procedure is one of the simplest methods
for the determination of the importance of attributes. At the
same time, this method produces the least accurate results of
the weight determination methods. In practical environments,
the direct ranking is frequently used because of its simple
and fast applicability. Compared to other procedures, it is
not possible to check the consistency or plausibility of the
answers. The evaluation is carried out by assigning ordinal
scaled preference values. In our framework, we use a range
from 1 to 10 for the scale. Due to the normalization of the
values, the range of the scale is of minor importance. The
weighting of the particular factors is obtained by dividing the
individual preferences pi by the total sum of the preferences.
The equation for the determination of the weighting is shown
in 2.
wi =
pi
nP
i=1
pi
(2)
In spite of the missing methodological variety the direct
ranking method suits well for the usage in corporate environ-
ments due to its simple applicability. For these reasons, this
method was selected for the determination of the value-creation
dependent inﬂuence factors. To determine the independent
parameters more complex methods are necessary.
B. Analytic Hierarchy Process
The analytic hierarchy process, developed by Saaty [31],
is a widely used method for multi-criteria decision problems.
This method has been applied in comparable decision problems
like the selection of enterprise resource planning [32] or the
selection of software as a service products [33]. It uses a
pairwise comparison of the alternatives to determine ratios
and scale priorities. The factors are judged on a 1 to 9
scale. Each factor is compared with every other factor. This
kind of comparison improves the decision making within
sophisticated problems. On the other hand, with numerous
alternatives this leads to an increasing complexity. To reduce
this, the alternatives are divided into hierarchies in the AHP.
A major advantage with this method is the possibility to
check the results for inconsistencies. Through the avoidance
of inconsistent answers, it is possible to obtain qualitative
better results. However, this requires an increased degree of
attention from the participants of a study. The explanation of
the particular calculations is omitted at this point.
Despite the relatively simple use of pairwise comparisons,
the AHP method can produce reliable results. Due to the high
complexity and the high demands placed on the participants,
this procedure is only to a limited extent suitable for the
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-603-3
DATA ANALYTICS 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Data Analytics

utilization in companies. The AHP was chosen to determine
the signiﬁcance of the value-creation independent inﬂuence
factors. As in already mentioned, a total of 10 experts from
different sectors participate in the assignment of these factors.
The possibility to detect inconsistent answers helps to ensure
the quality of the results. Through the existing segmentation of
the framework into hierarchies, the complexity of the decision
problem can be reduced.
IV.
APPLICATION OF THE FRAMEWORK
In this section, we present application examples of our
IMIS evaluation Framework. For the evaluation of the frame-
work we conducted and analyzed 10 case studies. Thereby,
a wide range of companies were involved. This includes,
for example, a smaller IT service provider, a medium-sized
online travel provider up to a large retailing company. For
reasons of space, we only present the results of 3 use cases.
The characteristics of the use cases are shown in table I.
Aimed by the characteristics the evaluation becomes more
comprehensible. In the ﬁrst part, we determine the weightings
of the inﬂuence factors, applying the direct ranking method
and the AHP. Afterwards, we demonstrate the results of the
case studies.
TABLE I. CHARACTERISTICS OF THE ANALYZED USE CASES
 
Local Weight 
Use Case 1 
Local Weight 
Use Case 2 
Local Weight 
Use Case 3 
Category Factor 
Analysis of 
POS-Data 
Real-Time 
Reporting 
Finance 
Reporting  
Analysis 
Urgency 
Few minutes 
Near real-time 
Near real-time 
Flexibility of analysis 
Ad-hoc 
Standard 
Standard 
Degree of detail 
Medium 
Very detailed  
High 
Hybrid workload 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Complexity of analysis 
High 
Very high 
Medium 
Source systems 
2 
1 
2 
Data 
Data volume 
Extremely high Extremely high 
Medium 
Data complexity 
Only structured 
data 
Mostly 
structured 
Mostly 
structured 
Data dynamic 
 
Frequency of change 
Rarely 
Frequently 
Frequently 
Effects of data 
changes 
Low 
High 
High 
Range of variation 
Moderate 
Strong changes Moderate 
Economic 
Internal realization conditions 
Months or 
longer 
Hours 
Days 
Potential added value 
High 
Very high 
Medium 
Target group willingness 
Medium 
High 
Medium 
Technical realization conditions 
Low 
Low 
Medium 
legal realization conditions 
Only little 
regimentation 
No 
regimentation 
Highly 
regimented 
 
A. Weightings for the Value-Creation Dependent Factors
To determine the business-related signiﬁcance of the value-
creation dependent factors, it was necessary to include only
experts with an appropriate extent of knowledge in the ﬁeld of
data analytics. Therefore, we asked corporate representatives
in senior analytic-aware IT positions to rank the importance of
each IMIS inﬂuence factor. The application of our framework
is shown based on 3 selected use cases. The sample use cases
have been chosen considering their business and technical
characteristics. So, it is possible to illustrate all aspects of a
IMIS use case evaluation. The resulting weightings of the use
cases are shown in table II.
It becomes clear that the signiﬁcance of the inﬂuence
factors vary only a bit in the analysis and data categories.
TABLE II. WEIGHTINGS OF THE VALUE-CREATION DEPENDENT FACTORS
Category 
Factor 
Local Weight 
Use Case 1 
Local Weight 
Use Case 2 
Local Weight 
Use Case 3 
Analysis 
Urgency 
0.306 
0.316 
0.304 
Flexibility of analysis 
0.421 
0.367 
0.353 
Degree of detail 
0.272 
0.316 
0.342 
Data 
Data dynamic 
 
Frequency of change 
0.286 
0.333 
0.300 
Effects of data changes 
0.286 
0.333 
0.400 
Range of variation 
0.429 
0.333 
0.300 
Economic 
Internal realization conditions 
0.177 
0.204 
0.239 
Potential added value 
0.431 
0.442 
0.324 
Target group willingness 
0.104 
0.119 
0.140 
Technical realization conditions 
0.190 
0.219 
0.257 
legal realization conditions 
0.098 
0.017 
0.039 
 
Signiﬁcant differences can be seen within the economic fac-
tors. As easily predictable, the potential added value is the
most important attribute. Nevertheless, the weighting varies
quite strongly. The relatively high inﬂuence of the other factors
illustrates the need for an overall assessment.
B. Weightings for the Value-Creation Independent Factors
As already mentioned in section III-B, the mainly techno-
logically driven factors are more complex in their examination.
A one-sided investigation from a business perspective does not
cover all relevant aspects. It is necessary to involve a broader
ﬁeld of knowledge and experience in this consideration. For
this reason, we have included both business experts, scientists
and experts from system providers to determine these factors.
A strength of the conducted AHP method is the possibility
to detect inconsistent answers. The unanimous opinion about
the consistency is that only answers with a consistency ratio
lower or equal 0.1 has to be considered. For this reason, in
each category 2 responses had to be excluded. The aggregated
TABLE III. WEIGHTINGS OF THE VALUE-CREATION INDEPENDENT
FACTORS
Category 
Subcategory 
Subcategory 
Weight 
Factor 
Local 
Weight 
Analysis 
Value-Creation 
independent 
0.38 
Complexity of analysis 
0.42 
Hybrid workload 
0.44 
Source systems 
0.14 
Value-Creation 
dependent 
0.62  
 
Data 
Value-Creation 
independent 
0.55 Data volume 
0.81 
Data complexity 
0.19 
Value-Creation 
dependent 
0.45  
 
 
results of the AHP in table III reveal that for the evaluation of
the value-creation independent analysis factors the complexity
of analysis and the hybrid workload have the main impact.
The amount of source systems is in this context only of
minor importance. A quite more notable tendency can be seen
between the data volume and the data complexity. For the
evaluation of the value-creation independent data factors the
data volume plays is most relevant.
C. Evaluation Examples
The ﬁrst chosen example comes from an early adapter
of IMIS systems. The analysis of point of sales data in the
retail section is one of the ﬁrst examples in this area. The
company participating on our case study is one of the leading
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-603-3
DATA ANALYTICS 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Data Analytics

retailers in Germany. For reasons of space and legibility we
only show some key attributes of the example. The example
is characterized by a high demand regarding the urgency,
data volume and the complexity of analysis. The calculation
includes transactional as well as analytical tasks. Due to the
rare and minor data changes, the requirements in this area are
quite moderate. The most important obstacle concerning the
realization of the potential added value is the long implemen-
tation duration.
The second example from the insurance area is character-
ized by very high requirements in the analysis as well as in
the data area. For this use case, it is necessary that the results
are based on up-to-date data and are processed in near real-
time. The analyzes are based on large amounts of data directly
from the transaction system. From an economic point of view,
this case is characterized by a very high added value. There are
neither internal nor external obstacles that avoid the realization
of the results. For this reasons, this example is assessed very
high in all categories.
The last example shows very clearly the diverging signif-
icance of the inﬂuencing factors. The use case comes from
a supplier company in the medical ﬁeld. This company uses
IMIS to improve their ﬁnancial and controlling reports. Despite
relatively small changes to the data base, it is important that the
data is up-to-date and the results of the analyzes are available
very quickly. In comparison to the other use cases, the overall
technical requirements are a bit smaller. The same is true for
the economical factors. Especially the high legal regimentation
stiﬂe/obstruct the economical assessment.
1,5
2
2,5
3
3,5
4
4,5
5
2,8
3
3,2
3,4
3,6
3,8
4
4,2
Analysis Requirements
Data Requirements
"other Use Cases"
Finance Reporting
Real-Time Reporting
Analysis of POS-Data
Figure 3. Results of the Use Case Analysis
For a better clarity and easier interpretation we assigned
the results of the use case evaluation to a portfolio chart
(Figure 3). This chart is comparable to the strategic portfolio
matrix of the Boston Consulting Group [34]. The advantage
of this chart is the possibility to have a visual indicator for
the evaluation of the complex underlying decision problem.
The dimensions of the chart are based on the categories of
the presented framework. The analysis and data requirements
are building the axes of the chart. The radius of a data point
reﬂects the economical assessment as seen in Table I. The
chart is an easy to use tool to indicate promising use cases.
As seen in Figure 3 the assessment of the use cases is quite
diverse. The use case Finance Reporting for instance may be
characterized by a rather low economical assessment on side,
having medium to low data and analytical requirements on
the other side. Although an assessment of a use case scenario
is still subjective to the decision maker’s assumptions and
weights, the chart provides a tool to either choose, rule out or
change possible use cases. This may also lead to the decision
to only use IMIS in parts of the originally planned scenario or
to switch to substitute technologies. So, the process of the
application scenario deﬁnition, which could be a repetitive
process, may also be supported by the framework.
V.
CONCLUSION
Recent research as well as practical applications of In-
memory systems has shown a research gap concerning the
structured consideration of IMIS use cases. To address all
relevant aspects regarding this consideration, a multi-criteria
decision framework was introduced. Previous IMIS examples
have shown a strongly varying importance of the individual
inﬂuencing factors. In order to map all factors and their
signiﬁcance, a multi-attribute utility theory model was used. In
addition, the factors were subdivided into the two categories
value-creation dependent and value-creation independent. The
methods for the determination of the weightings were selected
according to these categories. The presented framework allows
to examine existing, as well as exemplary future use cases
with regard to the inﬂuence factors of In-memory based IT
systems. The approach allows to consider both, the system
requirements and the corresponding importance. This makes it
possible for decision-makers to investigate IMIS scenarios for
their application potential.
In future work, the framework should be extended to other
industries. A broad selection framework is also conceivable
that shows reasonable conditions for the use of the In-memory
technology. With the aid of the framework, catalogs could be
created for suitable and tested application scenarios.
REFERENCES
[1]
J. Peppard and J. Ward, “Beyond strategic information systems: towards
an is capability,” The Journal of Strategic Information Systems, vol. 13,
no. 2, 2004, pp. 167–194.
[2]
“Top
10
Hot
Big
Data
Technologies,”
2016,
URL:
https://www.forbes.com/sites/gilpress/2016/03/14/top-10-hot-big-
data-technologies/ [accessed: 2017-07-11].
[3]
“SAP
fehlen
echte
HANA-Business-Cases,”
2015,
URL:
http://www.cio.de/a/sap-fehlen-echte-hana-business-cases,2940526
[accessed: 2017-07-24].
[4]
“Lack of SAP HANA use cases stiﬂing demand among ASUG mem-
bers,” 2014, URL: http://diginomica.com/2014/08/08/lack-sap-hana-
use-cases-stiﬂing-demand-among-asug-members/ [accessed: 2017-07-
24].
[5]
“SAP
Business
Suite
powered
by
SAP
HANA,”
2014,
URL:
https://www.pac-online.com/download/9757/125462 [accessed: 2017-
07-12].
[6]
G. Piller and J. Hagedorn, “Business beneﬁts and application capabil-
ities enabled by in-memory data management.” in IMDM, 2011, pp.
45–56.
[7]
R. Sch¨utte, “Analyse des einsatzpotenzials von in-memory-technologien
in handelsinformationssystemen.” in IMDM, 2011, pp. 1–12.
[8]
W. H. DeLone and E. R. McLean, “Information systems success: The
quest for the dependent variable,” Information systems research, vol. 3,
no. 1, 1992, pp. 60–95.
[9]
H. Garcia-Molina and K. Salem, “Main memory database systems:
An overview,” IEEE Transactions on knowledge and data engineering,
vol. 4, no. 6, 1992, pp. 509–516.
[10]
D. J. DeWitt, R. H. Katz, F. Olken, L. D. Shapiro, M. R. Stonebraker,
and D. A. Wood, Implementation techniques for main memory database
systems.
ACM, 1984, vol. 14, no. 2.
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-603-3
DATA ANALYTICS 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Data Analytics

[11]
F. F¨arber, S. K. Cha, J. Primsch, C. Bornh¨ovd, S. Sigg, and W. Lehner,
“Sap hana database: data management for modern business applica-
tions,” ACM Sigmod Record, vol. 40, no. 4, 2012, pp. 45–51.
[12]
D. J. Abadi, P. A. Boncz, and S. Harizopoulos, “Column-oriented
database systems,” Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, vol. 2, no. 2,
2009, pp. 1664–1665.
[13]
H. Plattner and A. Zeier, In-memory data management: technology and
applications.
Springer Science & Business Media, 2012.
[14]
D. Abadi, S. Madden, and M. Ferreira, “Integrating compression and
execution in column-oriented database systems,” in Proceedings of the
2006 ACM SIGMOD international conference on Management of data.
ACM, 2006, pp. 671–682.
[15]
H. Plattner, “A common database approach for oltp and olap using an in-
memory column database,” in Proceedings of the 2009 ACM SIGMOD
International Conference on Management of data.
ACM, 2009, pp.
1–2.
[16]
A. Kemper and T. Neumann, “Hyper: A hybrid oltp&olap main memory
database system based on virtual memory snapshots,” in Data Engineer-
ing (ICDE), 2011 IEEE 27th International Conference on. IEEE, 2011,
pp. 195–206.
[17]
P. Loos, J. Lechtenb¨orger, G. Vossen, A. Zeier, J. Kr¨uger, J. M¨uller,
W. Lehner, D. Kossmann, B. Fabian, O. G¨unther et al., “In-
memory-datenmanagement
in
betrieblichen
anwendungssystemen,”
Wirtschaftsinformatik, vol. 53, no. 6, 2011, pp. 383–390.
[18]
M.
Pezzini,
D.
Feinberg,
N.
Rayner,
and
R.
Edjlali,
“Hybrid
transaction/analytical processing will foster opportunities for dra-
matic business innovation,” Gartner (2014, January 28) Available
at https://www. gartner. com/doc/2657815/hybrid-transactionanalytical-
processing-foster-opportunities, 2014.
[19]
D. J. Abadi, “Query execution in column-oriented database systems,”
Ph.D. dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2008.
[20]
T. Winsemann and V. K¨oppen, “Kriterien f¨ur datenpersistenz bei
enterprise data warehouse systemen auf in-memory datenbanken.” in
Grundlagen von Datenbanken, 2011, pp. 97–102.
[21]
G. Piller and J. Hagedorn, “In-memory data management im einzel-
handel: Einsatzbereiche und nutzenpotentiale,” in Multikonferenz
Wirtschaftsinformatik, 2012.
[22]
R. Winter, S. Bischoff, and F. Wortmann, “Revolution or evolution?
reﬂections on in-memory appliances from an enterprise information
logistics perspective.” in IMDM, 2011, pp. 23–34.
[23]
J. vom Brocke, S. Debortoli, and O. M¨uller, “In-memory database
business value,” 360 - The Business Transformation Journal, vol. 3,
no. 7, 2013, pp. 16–26.
[24]
J. vom Brocke, “In-memory value creation, or now that we found love,
what are we gonna do with it?” BPTrends, vol. 10, 2013, pp. 1–8.
[25]
J. vom Brocke, S. Debortoli, O. M¨uller, and N. Reuter, “How in-memory
technology can create business value: insights from the hilti case,”
Communications of the Association for Information Systems, vol. 34,
no. 1, 2014, pp. 151–167.
[26]
R. B¨arenf¨anger, B. Otto, and H. ¨Osterle, “Business value of in-memory
technology–multiple-case study insights,” Industrial Management &
Data Systems, vol. 114, no. 9, 2014, pp. 1396–1414.
[27]
S. Ulbricht, M. Opuszko, J. Ruhland, and M. Thrum, “Towards an
analysis and evaluation framework for in-memory-based use cases,”
in The Twelfth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the
Global Information Technology.
IARIA, 2017, pp. 22–27.
[28]
G. P. Huber, “Multi-attribute utility models: A review of ﬁeld and ﬁeld-
like studies,” Management Science, vol. 20, no. 10, 1974, pp. 1393–
1402.
[29]
A. R. Hevner, S. T. March, J. Park, and S. Ram, “Design science in
information systems research,” MIS quarterly, vol. 28, no. 1, 2004, pp.
75–105.
[30]
R. Klein and A. Scholl, Planung und Entscheidung. Vahlen, M¨unchen,
2004.
[31]
T. L. Saaty, “What is the analytic hierarchy process?” in Mathematical
models for decision support.
Springer, 1988, pp. 109–121.
[32]
C.-C. Wei, C.-F. Chien, and M.-J. J. Wang, “An ahp-based approach to
erp system selection,” International journal of production economics,
vol. 96, no. 1, 2005, pp. 47–62.
[33]
M. Godse and S. Mulik, “An approach for selecting software-as-a-
service (saas) product,” in Cloud Computing, 2009. CLOUD’09. IEEE
International Conference on.
IEEE, 2009, pp. 155–158.
[34]
D. C. Hambrick, I. C. MacMillan, and D. L. Day, “Strategic attributes
and performance in the bcg matrixa pims-based analysis of industrial
product businesses1,” Academy of Management Journal, vol. 25, no. 3,
1982, pp. 510–531.
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-603-3
DATA ANALYTICS 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Data Analytics

