Twitter Sentiment Analysis: A Survey in Cricket
and Bollywood
Nayantara Kotoky∗, Smiti Singhal†, Anushka Sharma‡ and Dhara Ajudia§
∗Applied Neurocognitive Systems, Fraunhofer Institute for Industrial Engineering, Germany
†‡§Department of Computer Engineering, Pandit Deendayal Energy University
Gandhinagar, India
Email: ∗nayantara.kotoky@gmail.com, †smitis2000@gmail.com, ‡anushkas0706@gmail.com, §dhara.ajudia1108@gmail.com
Abstract—Twitter has been the voice of the public for a long
time now. With the rise in the usage of Twitter, the active partic-
ipation of its users in expressing their views across all domains
has significantly increased. This paper aims to perform sentiment
analysis and study the influence of Bollywood and Cricket
celebrities on Twitter users. Three different types of information
are extracted from the tweets using sentiment analysis, namely,
(1) sentiments of people towards cricket, cinema (Bollywood), and
gender, (2) identifying the highly discussed individuals and events
for each category, and (3) co-occurrence analysis for identifying
closely discussed celebrities belonging to different categories. Our
analysis identifies that females in the cricket sport are not as
popular as compared to their male counterparts whereas females
in the entertainment industry (Bollywood) are equally popular
as the males. We also identify current trends that are the target
of discussion in Twitter using Network of Words analysis. In
addition, the co-occurrence analysis shows very high association
between Male Cricketers and female Bollywood stars. In essence,
we try to determine the emotional tone of people to gain an
insight of the hidden attitudes and opinions expressed in a tweet
regarding cricket and Bollywood.
Keywords—Twitter;
Sentiment
analysis;
Text
mining;
Co-
occurrence Network.
I. INTRODUCTION
Twitter is a micro-blogging site that has become a public
forum for anyone who wants their voice to be heard. People
post their views in the form of short messages consisting of
words, images, or videos, up to 280 words, and these posts are
famously known as tweets. The recent numbers suggest that
over the years, the Twitter market has seen notable growth
in its number of users in all major developing or already
developed countries. Hence, big companies and brands try to
understand the sentiments of people through the variety of
views from a plethora of tweets. These sentiments are studied
in order to get meaningful results that help them understand
the collective opinion on their services.
Twitter has been widely used for performing sentiment
analysis on various topics like politics [1] [10], entertain-
ment [11], etc. A large number of researchers have studied
Twitter sentiment analysis on the basis of a number of factors
such as polarity, or sentiments like anxiety, anger, etc. Several
tools have been created for identifying various sentiments,
some of which include Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count
(LIWC) [1], TextBlob [8], Valence Aware Dictionary for
Sentiment Reasoning (VADER) [5] [10], and Orange [2].
In this paper, we have collected data from Twitter for two
categories - Entertainment and Cricket, to perform sentiment
analysis and classify them on the basis of the emotions
attached to those tweets. The objective of this research is
to understand the influence of cricket sport and Bollywood
cinema, two very popular sources of entertainment in India,
and understand how they can be utilized as media to influence
the masses and bring societal changes. Our work analyzes
public sentiments associated with individuals in these two
groups as well as a collective outlook into cricket and Bol-
lywood. With the insights drawn from several analyses on
tweets regarding these topics, we identify a few ways in which
people’s emotions are impacted.
We have collected a total of 6000 tweets using Tweepy
which included 20 hashtags for every category. The col-
lected tweets are tagged as Cricket, Bollywood, male and
female depending on the subject of the tweet. Using the
tweets, we have identified the sentiments of people regarding
the four categories cricket-male, cricket-female, bollywood-
male, bollywood-female and then recognized the celebrities in
Cricket and Bollywood which are two groups that are very
influential among the people in India. Furthermore, an in-
depth analysis of co-occurrence in the four different categories
was performed to determine the association between these
categories and to investigate which categories are mentioned
together and why.
The main contributions of this research work are:
• Sentiment analysis is performed on the tweets using
VADER and Tweet Profiler. The results show that the
tweets consisting of the happiest emotion of the people
are shown for the category of women actresses and
women cricketers.
• KH Coder [16] (named after the developer Koichi
Higuchi) is used to carry out performance analysis of the
celebrities in the four categories using their corresponding
tweets where they are mentioned. The analysis uncovers
tweets in support and criticism of certain people showing
close correspondence to real-life phenomena.
• Co-occurrence analysis of the four categories of tweets
is performed using Jaccard Coefficient. The results show
that bollywood-male and bollywood-female are the two
categories that are highly associated with Twitter discus-
sions.
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-994-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Data Analytics

Outline: The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 gives
insights into the research done in this domain and the various
papers published in this area. Section 3 briefly describes the
objective and implementation details and guides through the
approach. Next, Section 4 covers in detail the results obtained
and the interpretations of the analysis. Section 5 concludes the
paper.
II. RELATED WORK
In this section, we mention specific articles which are
used for this research purpose. The literature contains twitter
analysis performed for understanding people’s emotions for
various domains and their use. This section also discusses
certain tools and their utility in performing sentiment analysis.
A. Predicting Elections with Twitter: What 140 Characters
Reveal about Political Sentiment
Tumasjan et al. [1] determine whether Twitter can be used
to predict the result of the federal election of the national
parliament in Germany. 104300 political tweets were first
translated from German to English and the text analysis
software ”Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC)” was
used to get the results. In conclusion, the results depicted that
Twitter can be undoubtedly regarded as a plausible indicator
of political opinion.
B. Content Analysis of Dark Net
Nattuthurai and Aryal [9] used KH Coder to analyze the
data from the darknet using Co-occurrence network analysis.
The data collected was categorized into business-related and
non-business-related data. Multi-Dimensional Scaling and Co-
occurrence network analysis were performed on the dataset to
uncover a higher frequency of negative words associated with
both categories.
C. Analysis of Data Using Data Mining tool Orange
Kukasvadiya et al. [2] discuss the concept of data mining
and how the Data Mining tool Orange performs when sub-
jected to any kind of data. The paper provides a practical
implementation of Orange. It concludes how Orange is easier
than others and can perform a wide range of data analysis
using its widgets such as sentiment analysis, visualizing Time
series data and plotting heatmaps.
Marcu et al. [12] analyzed data related to educational
aspects collected from various high schools using Orange
and classified them according to Ekman and Plutchik models
of emotions. Tweet Profiler, a feature provided by Orange,
classified the data based on these models and both the results
were compared to find the best solution for sentiment analysis.
Thange et al. [13] have worked upon a COVID-19 dataset
of India and have visually represented the relationships in the
dataset using Orange. As a result of their analysis, it has
been found that there have been more cases of infection in
men compared to women and maximum number of infected
patients are in the 30 years age-group.
D. KH Coder: An exploratory analysis of the text mining of
news articles about “water and society”
Hori [3] aims to discover social interest in the issues of
water and society from media reports and to compare it
in Japanese and international media. This research uses the
online databases of two newspapers: the Japan News and
the International New York Times. The social interest is
discovered by cluster analysis, that is, to derive clusters that
have value with respect to the problem being addressed. The
articles extracted from those databases are analyzed using KH
Coder and the generated co-occurrence network.
E. Twitter Sentiment Analysis Using Natural Language Toolkit
(NLTK) and VADER
Elbagir et al. [10] aim to compare two powerful sentiment
analysis tools - NLTK and VADER on the data collected for
the 2016 US presidential elections from the microblogging
service Twitter. The analysis concludes how VADER was an
effective and better choice for sentiment analysis classification.
III. PROPOSED WORK AND IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
The purpose of the paper is to analyze the tweets and
compare the influence, joint mentions, and other different
aspects of the text to get meaningful results. The three main
experimental analysis are as follows:
1) Classification of sentiments
2) Twitter as a reflection of performance
3) Relative frequency of joint mentions inter-category and
intra-category
A. Data Collection
Around 6000 tweets were collected as part of the dataset.
The time span considered is January 2021 to November
2021. It is to be noted that the collected tweets span for the
specific time frame and for the specific categories of interest,
that is, Indian cricket and Bollywood (Indian cinema). The
methodology used for data collection is as follows [4]:
• Importing Tweepy - an easy-to-use Python library for
accessing the Twitter API
• Authentication for Twitter Developer account
• Defining list of hashtags for every category
• Defining the date since date as a variable
• Filtering retweets
• Output data as .csv file
With the use of Twitter API, recent tweets for most
popular persons of all 4 categories were collected and
merged together. For instance, #ViratKohli, #RohitSharma
for cricket-male, #SmritiMandhana, #HarmanpreetKaur for
cricket-female, #RanbirKapoor, #KartikAaryan for bollywood-
male, #AliaBhatt, #DeepikaPadukone for bollywood-female, to
name a few hashtags considered. The distribution of the data
for each category can be seen in Figure 2.
In order to verify the actuality of the data collected, docu-
ment map was used. Document map, a feature in the Orange
Tool for text mining, shows geolocation from the textual
data (here, tweets). It finds the mentions of countries/capitals
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-994-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Data Analytics

(whenever it is present in a tweet) and displays the frequency
of occurrence in the world map. Around 125 tweets mentioned
the name of a country/capital which is used to create the
document map.
In Figure 1, we can see that the number of mentions of
India (red) is considerably higher than the other countries and
these countries have been accurately displayed because of the
2021 T20 World Cup (T20 is an international cricket world
cup tournament which consists of 16 teams competing with
each other in a twenty-over cricket match. India was one of
the top 12 teams to play in the 2021 T20 world cup and thus
was vigorously discussed on Twitter). The participants in the
T20 World cup were Namibia, Pakistan, Afghanistan, England,
Bangladesh, Australia, etc. which are highlighted on the world
map too.
B. Classification of sentiments
The tools we used for sentiment analysis were TextBlob [8],
Empath, Pattern, Sentiwordnet and VADER. The most precise
results were shown by VADER [5], which accurately catego-
rized the sentiments into positive and negative.
C. Twitter as a reflection of performance
Orange tool [6] was used for the sentiment analysis of
tweets based on the seven basic emotions proposed by Ek-
man [14]: fear, anger, joy, sadness, disgust, appreciation, and
surprise.
D. Relative frequency of joint mentions inter-category and
intra-category
KH Coder is a text mining tool which is typically used for
finding the potential relationships between entities represented
within a document [7]. Here, we first load the required file as
the data and then pre-process it as a necessity for analysis.
The tool is implemented to obtain co-occurrence matrices and
networks to get insights into major themes from the text and
analyze the associations between the text that appear together.
IV. RESULTS AND INTERPRETATIONS
A. Classification of sentiments
1) Visualizations between categories: Figure 2 shows the
amount of positive and negative emotions for all the four
categories. From the figure, we observe that:
• The positive sentiments for the almost same amount of
tweets are the highest for Female Bollywood Stars.
• The negative sentiments reflected through the tweets are
the highest for Male Cricketers.
This suggests that people publicly post their opinion about
celebrities and, even though Male Cricketers are the most
famous personalities, as we see them more frequently in
other social media discussions and advertisements, it does not
discourage people from openly sharing negative views about
them.
B. Twitter as a reflection of performance
1) Results for Male Cricketers: Figure 3 shows the polarity
of sentiments of the tweets for individual Male Cricketers. We
observe the following:
Highly Appreciated: MS Dhoni
In light of the 2021 T20 World Cup, people were excited
and happy because of Dhoni’s presence as the mentor for Team
India.
Involved in Negative Discussion:
Axar
Patel
and
Krunal
Pandya
Board of Control for Cricket in India (BCCI) [15] had
announced through their social media handles that Axar Patel
would be replaced by Shardul Thakur in the T20 matches. This
did not go well with a lot of people and hence people shared
their disappointment through Twitter. Negative emotions were
shared using Axar Patel as the topic, although the negativity
was not necessarily targeted toward him. On the other hand,
the negative emotion towards Krunal Pandya is due to his poor
performance in the Indian Premier League (IPL) matches that
made the Twitterati furious. Here, we see negative emotions
being expressed but under two different circumstances, the first
one supporting the player and the second one being targeted
toward the player.
2) Results for Male Bollywood Stars: Figure 4, visualiza-
tion for Male Bollywood Stars, shows the following results:
Highly Appreciated : Ranbir Kapoor
Despite any recent project announcements or any other
controversies, Ranbir Kapoor still remains the most highly
appreciated actor because of his huge fan following.
Involved in Negative Discussion: Nawazuddin Siddiqui
Nawazuddin Siddiqui’s statement garnered attention due
to its critical comment on racism being a bigger issue in
the Bollywood Industry as compared to nepotism. People
supported him and highly criticized the Bollywood Industry.
3) Results for Female Celebrities (Cricketers and Bolly-
wood Stars): On a similar pattern, the other 2 categories
showed the following results.
As shown in Figure 5, Yastika Bhatia, under Female Crick-
eters category, received huge appreciation for her brilliant
innings in one of the league matches. Also, it can be clearly
seen that no female cricketer received harsh criticism.
Among female Bollywood Stars, as per Figure 6, Ananya
Pandey being highly active on social media was amongst the
favourites while news of Nora Fatehi being involved in money
laundering led to unfavourable discussions.
4) Sentiment Analysis using TweetProfiler:
Tweet Pro-
filer, a widget provided by orange, retrieves information
about the emotions attached to the sentiment by sending
data to the server where a model calculates the emotion
scores/probabilities according to the text. This is then plotted
with the help of a Box Plot. This analysis provides seven dif-
ferent sentiments in comparison to only positive and negative
sentiments.
Sentiment Analysis of Female Cricketers using Tweet Pro-
filer is shown in Figure 7. The figure clearly explains that
Yastika Bhatia and Priya Punia have the highest percentage
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-994-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Data Analytics

Fig. 1. Document Map for Male Cricketers.
Fig. 2. Visualizations between categories.
of joyful tweets while the tweets mentioning Shikha Pandey
depicted highest percentage of surprise emotion.
Yastika Bhatia and Priya Punia are indicated as having
the highest positive sentiments using VADER (Result IV-B3,
Figure 5) as well as the most joyful emotions using Orange
(Figure 7).
C. Relative frequency of joint mentions inter-category and
intra-category
This analysis clusters the nodes that have similar occur-
rence. In this work, it means that nodes which are often
mentioned together by people’s tweets are clustered, where
nodes represent individuals from the four categories. The rep-
resentation shows the words with similar appearance patterns,
that is, with high degrees of co-occurrence, connected by lines.
To determine edge strength, Jaccard coefficients are calculated
for all possible combinations of target words. It was carried
out on a combined document for all categories. Figure 8
shows the network of words showing clusters of closely
discussed individuals. From these clusters, we can identify
real-life events that led to the discussion. The following are
the interpretations for Figure 8:
1) Network of Words:
• Green (03) - Shows the discussions regarding the an-
nouncement of the film “Vikram Vedha” starring Hrithik
Roshan and Saif Ali Khan.
• Light Orange (12) - This cluster depicts the discussions
on the recent film Sooryavanshi, and it can be concluded
that through these tweets we can correctly make out the
major cast and director of this film.
• Blue (01) - Talks on the T20 World Cup 2021.
• Orange (02) - This cluster comprises the tweets related to
KKR Vs DC semi-finals and KKR vs CSK finals having
the common factor, KKR in IPL.
2) Network of Codes: This analysis plots a network dia-
gram to explore the association of people of different cate-
gories.
Male and Female Cricketers: Figure 9 shows the associa-
tion between male and Female Cricketers. The network shows
how rarely the Female Cricketers are mentioned along with
the Male Cricketers. There is a clear separation of categories
of Female Cricketers yellow (02) and orange (06) and the link
with the Male Cricketers green (01) and blue (05) is extremely
weak. Additionally, the size of the circles also shows that the
frequency with which the Male Cricketers are discussed with
each other within the category is much greater than when
they are mentioned with the Female Cricketers. Also, the
frequency with which the Female Cricketers are mentioned
together within their category is much lower in frequency
(which can be deduced by the size of the circle), indicating that
Female Cricketers do not receive as much popularity among
the Twitter people as Male Cricketers.
Male and Female Bollywood stars: Figure 10 shows the
network of codes for the Bollywood fraternity. This analysis
shows an intricate connection between the males and the
females which brings us to the conclusion that these categories
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-994-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Data Analytics

Fig. 3. Visualization of positive and negative sentiments for Male Cricketers using VADER.
Fig. 4. Visualization of positive and negative sentiments for Male Bollywood stars using VADER.
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-994-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Data Analytics

Fig. 5. Visualization of positive and negative sentiments for Female Cricketers using VADER.
Fig. 6. Visualization of positive and negative sentiments for Female Bollywood Stars using VADER.
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-994-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Data Analytics

Fig. 7. Sentiment Analysis of Female Cricketers using Tweet Profiler.
Fig. 8. Network of Words for all categories combined.
are often mentioned together and are not under-shadowed by
each other. Unlike the case of the cricket sport, the entertain-
ment industry enjoys similar popularity and discussion among
the Twitter people for both males and females. For example,
the green cluster (01) consists of the cast of Sooryavanshi,
and Ranbir (male) and Alia (female) are mentioned together
Fig. 9. Network of Codes for Male and Female Cricketers.
in many tweets.
3) Co-occurrence Matrix: Figure 11 shows the Jaccard
coefficient that shows the association of two individuals with
respect to how much they are discussed together in the tweets.
In Figure 11, the red circle depicts the Jaccard coefficient
for Virat Kohli (male cricketer) and Smriti Mandhana (female
cricketer).
The co-efficient is calculated as follows:
|V irat T Smriti|
|V irat S Smriti| = 0.004
(The number of times both were mentioned together divided
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-994-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Data Analytics

Fig. 10. Network of Codes for Male and Female Bollywood stars.
Fig. 11. Co-Occurence Matrix.
by the number of times either of them was mentioned)
We counted the results, which lie between 0 and 1 (ex-
clusive), to get the count of the number of cases where the
celebrities were mentioned together for all cases and they were
combined to get the final results. The final count for the co-
occurrence matrix is shown in Figure 12. We observe:
• While the maximum joint mentions are of Male Crick-
eters with fellow Male Cricketers (count=233), the joint
mentions of Female Cricketers with female actors (1) and
male actors (2) are negligible.
• It can be concluded that Female Cricketers, in general,
were tweeted much less with other men as well as women
compared to Male Cricketers. The popularity of Female
Cricketers is less among the Indian Twitter people.
Fig. 12. Co-Occurrence Matrix Result.
• It is observed that there are quite a high number of tweets
mentioning male and female actors together (count=176).
This analysis shows resonance to the real-life phe-
nomenon where movies include both genders (unlike
cricket teams), and hence their count of joint mentions is
much higher than the other category.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we present three different analyses on how
discussions are held regarding Indian actors and cricketers
using Twitter as a platform of expressing opinions. Here,
Sentiment Analysis was performed mainly using 3 tools -
VADER, Orange, and KH Coder on a dataset of around 6000
tweets, collected with the help of Twitter API Tweepy. With
three distinct analysis methods, we have identified several
interpretations of how the Twitter people view the four cate-
gories, that is, Male Cricketers, Female Cricketers, male actors
and female actors.
Interpretations were drawn based on the outputs obtained
from the experiments. Some significant observations were the
less mention of women cricketers compared to other categories
(Section IV-C2) and the noteworthy association between Bol-
lywood (Females and Males) and Cricket (Males) Figure 12.
Also, analyzing the most appreciated and criticized celebrities
helps the brands publicize their products to customers by
connecting with those celebrities for marketing purposes. This
eventually helps the brands in making their product famous
by attracting customers. Furthermore, we also observed that
a well-balanced overview of current affairs can be acquired
by looking at the significant amount of tweets in light of the
latest happenings. This leads us to believe that Twitter can be
seen as a reliable platform to view the actual sentiments of
the people given our current analysis and context.
The findings of this study strengthen the fact that Twitter
is an effective platform for resonating with the audience.
Twitter Sentiment Analysis lets users ascertain the vibe of
a conversation and gives leverage to users as they are able
to delve deeper into the emotions involved in interactions.
Although the analysis is performed at the Indian context, the
methodology is generic and can be extended to other countries
or world-wide topics. In addition, the analysis techniques
can be used for identifying people’s emotions on various
other topics like war, usage of specific technology, natural
phenomenon like climate change, etc.
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-994-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Data Analytics

REFERENCES
[1] A. Tumasjan, T. Sprenger, P. Sandner, and I. Welpe, “Predicting Elec-
tions with Twitter: What 140 Characters Reveal about Political Senti-
ment,” The International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media
16 vol.4, No.1, May 2010, pp. 178-185, doi:10.1609/icwsm.v4i1.14009.
[2] M. Kukasvadiya and N. Divecha, “Analysis of data using data mining
tool orange,” International Journal of Engineering Development and
Research 5.2, June 2017, pp. 1836-1840, ISSN - 2321-9939.
[3] S. Hori, “An exploratory analysis of the text mining of news articles
about water and society,” WIT Transactions on The Built Environment,
168, 2015, pp. 501-508, doi:10.2495/SD150441.
[4] Automate Getting Twitter Data in Python Using Tweepy and API Ac-
cess [Online], Available from: https://www.earthdatascience.org/courses/
use-data-open-source-python/intro-to-apis/twitter-data-in-python/
[5] A.
Beri,
“Sentimental
Analysis
Using
Vader,
interpre-
tation
and
classification
of
emotions”.
[Online]
Avail-
able
from:
Aditya
Beri,
https://towardsdatascience.com/
sentimental-analysis-using-vader-a3415fef7664 [retrieved: November,
2022].
[6] Orange widget catalog, https://orangedatamining.com/widget-catalog/
text-mining/twitter-widget/ [retrieved: November, 2022].
[7] KH Coder 3 Reference Manual, Available from: https://khcoder.net/en/
manual en v3.pdf[retrieved: November, 2022].
[8] Sentiment
Analysis
using
TextBlob.
Parthvi
Shah.
Available
From:
https://towardsdatascience.com/
my-absolute-go-to-for-sentiment-analysis-textblob-3ac3a11d524.
[9] P. Nattuthurai, and A. Aryal, “Content Analysis of Dark Net: Academic
Journals from 2010-2017 Using KH Coder,” ACET Journal of Computer
Education and Research 11, 2018, pp. 25-35.
[10] S. Elbagir and J. Yang, “Twitter sentiment analysis using natural lan-
guage toolkit and VADER sentiment.” Proceedings of the international
multiconference of engineers and computer scientists. Vol. 122, 2019,
pp. 16.
[11] Y. Yu and X. Wang, “World Cup 2014 in the Twitter World: A big
data analysis of sentiments in U.S. sports fans’ tweets, Computers in
Human Behavior”, Volume 48, 2015, pp. 392-400, ISSN 0747-5632,
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2015.01.075.
[12] D. Marcu and M. Danubianu, “Sentiment Analysis from Students’
Feedback : A Romanian High School Case Study,” 2020 International
Conference on Development and Application Systems (DAS), 2020, pp.
204-209, doi:10.1109/DAS49615.2020.9108927.
[13] U.
Thange,
V.
Shukla,
R.
Punhani
and
W.
Grobbelaar,
“An-
alyzing COVID-19 Dataset through Data Mining Tool Orange,”
2021
2nd
International
Conference
on
Computation,
Automa-
tion and Knowledge Management (ICCAKM), 2021, pp. 198-203,
doi:10.1109/ICCAKM50778.2021.9357754.
[14] P. Ekman, Basic emotions Handbook of cognition and emotion, 1999,
pp. 16.
[15] BCCI Official Website. [Online]. Available from: https://www.bcci.tv/
[16] KH Coder. [Online]. Available from: http://khcoder.net/en/
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-994-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Data Analytics

