Electric Vehicle Charging Locations for Uber in
New York City
Victor Salazar Ramos, Andreea Mateescu, Elisabeth Fokker, Jacky P.K. Li, and Sandjai Bhulai
Faculty of Science
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Email: vss920@vu.nl, mmu680@vu.nl, efr330@vu.nl, jacky.li@vu.nl, s.bhulai@vu.nl
Abstract—Electriﬁcation is widely considered an attractive
solution for reducing the oil dependency and environmental
impact of road transportation. This paper examines the viability
of the current charging stations with the assistance of taxi
service strategy optimization. We study charging station data
along with ride pickup data. Our methodology is to model the
pickup location data and the charging station data by K-means
clustering and to determine the optimized distance between the
pickup locations and the charging stations. Consequently, we shed
light on the number of charging stations that can improve the
efﬁciency of using electric taxis.
Index Terms—Electriﬁcation; K-means clustering; electric
taxis; charging stations.
I. INTRODUCTION
Transportation accounts for nearly 70 percent of U.S. oil
consumption and 28 percent of the country’s greenhouse gas
emissions, according to U.S. Energy Information Adminis-
tration [1]. This makes it a prime target for technological
improvements that can reduce emissions and combat cli-
mate change. Electriﬁcation of transportation represents one
of the highest impact strategies to help achieve that goal.
In particular, public vehicles (e.g., taxis) provide a crucial
opportunity for electriﬁcation. Despite the beneﬁts of eco-
friendliness and energy efﬁciency, the adoption of electric
taxis faces several obstacles. This includes constrained driving
range, long recharging duration, limited charging stations, and
low gas prices, all of which impede taxi drivers’ decisions to
switch to electric taxis. To contribute to a sustainable future,
Uber Technologies Inc. has recently released the ‘Uber Green’
option, which connects potential customer(s) with electric or
hybrid-electric vehicles [2]. However, the ‘Uber Green’ option
can be an alternative to fuel-based driving only in the presence
of an optimally distributed web of charging stations.
Previous studies have focused on developing electric taxi
strategy optimization compared to conventional taxis with an
internal combustion engine. Tseng et al. [3] studied empiri-
cally under various battery capacities and charging conditions
to conquer the long charging period and optimize the number
of taxis needed to satisfy the demands.
Raboaca et al. [4] propose a new operational model for
the mobile charging station through temporally stationing it at
different places for certain amounts of time. Their model is
built by a queuing process. The goal is to place a minimum
number of temporary service centers to minimize operating
costs. Jung et al. [5] compare the revenue differences between
electric and non-electric taxis. The research concentrates on
individual versus whole-ﬂeet policies. This concludes the
advantage of non-electric taxis over electric taxis due to the
long charging periods.
Wang et al. [6] investigate the effectiveness of the charging
stations over the taxi demand. Their research contains ﬁve
years of taxi transaction data, charging station data, and the
distance traveled after each charge. This research provides the
evolving patterns of electric taxi networks and also charging
stations. Wang et al. [7] also research Large-Scale Electric Bus
Fleets. Their research invents a real-time charging scheduling
system to optimize the charging time and usage for the electric
bus ﬂeet.
Scorrano et al. [8] investigate the taxi data of Florence,
Italy. The city of Florence and many European cities have
lower vehicle tax in order to encourage taxis to switch from
a combustion engine to fully electric. Their research evaluates
the impact of the annual distance traveled, purchase subsidy,
and new revenue loss.
In terms of using K-means clustering research in electric
taxi ﬂeeting, Zhang et al. [9] create two stages of charging
stations for electric taxis and electric vehicles to solve the long
charging period. Dong et al. [10] concentrate on the optimal
location model in the service region to calculate the optimal
sites of the charging stations to maximize the operational efﬁ-
ciency and charging convenience. Jia et al. [11] investigate the
large-scale Cellular Signaling Data and illustrate the method to
generate the 24-hour travel demand for each electric vehicle.
This paper examines the viability of the current charging
stations with the assistance of taxi service strategy optimiza-
tion. We investigate the distribution of the charging station
data along with the Uber pickup trip data. Our methodology
is to model the pickup location data and the charging station
data by K-means clustering and to determine the optimized
distance between the data. Consequently, we shed light on the
number of charging stations that can improve the efﬁciency of
using electric taxis.
The paper is structured as follows. In Section II, we analyze
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-891-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Data Analytics

FigXUe 1: SXmmaU\ of Whe aSSlied daWa ZUangling meWhodV.
1. DaWa PUeSaUaWiRQ
The UbeU SickXS daWa ZaV iQiWiall\ VeSaUaWed b\ PRQWh. HeQce, Ze cRQcaWeQaWed Whe
PRQWhl\ daWa iQ RQe daWafUaPe Zhich haV fRU iQde[ Whe daWe aQd WiPe Rf Whe SickXS.
The chaUgiQg VWaWiRQ daWa ZaV Uead aV a JSON file.
IQ RUdeU WR ZRUk ZiWh VSaWial daWa, Ze XVed Whe geRSaQdaV libUaU\[4]. ThXV, Ze had WR
cRQYeUW all Whe daWafUaPeV iQ GeRDaWaFUaPeV b\ cUeaWiQg a GeRSeUieV cRlXPQ WhaW iV
UefeUUed WR aV Whe GeRDaWaFUaPe¶V geRPeWU\ aQd iQdicaWeV Whe laWiWXde aQd lRQgiWXde
Rf a GPS cRRUdiQaWe. Ne[W, Ze UePRYed all Whe cRRUdiQaWeV WhaW ZeUe RXWVide NeZ
YRUk CiW\ aQd RQl\ added Whe fiYe bRURXghV Rf NeZ YRUk CiW\: BURQ[, BURRkl\Q,
MaQhaWWaQ, QXeeQV, SWaWeQ IVlaQd. IQ RUdeU WR YiVXali]e Whe PaS Rf NeZ YRUk CiW\
ZiWh bRWh Whe SickXS SRiQWV aQd Whe chaUgiQg VWaWiRQV, Whe OSPQ[ Sackage[5] fRU
VSaWial YiVXali]aWiRQV ZaV XVed. The backgURXQd fRU WhiV YiVXali]aWiRQ ZaV Whe VWUeeW
PaS Rf NeZ YRUk CiW\, Zhich caQ be iQWeUSUeWed aV fRllRZV: Whe QRdeV UeSUeVeQW
iQWeUVecWiRQV aQd Whe edgeV UeSUeVeQW VWUeeW VegPeQWV.
2. DaWa AQaO\ViV
IQ RUdeU WR geW a beWWeU idea Rf Whe hRW VSRWV fRU bRWh SickXSV aQd chaUgiQg VWaWiRQV,
Ze XVed k-PeaQV clXVWeUiQg[6]. FiUVW, Ze geQeUaWed elbRZ cXUYeV WR WXQe aQd RSWiPi]e
Whe k h\SeU-SaUaPeWeU. BaVed RQ Whe UeVXlWV, Ze aVVigQed 5 diffeUeQW clXVWeUV fRU Whe
SickXS daWa (FigXUe 2) aQd 4 diffeUeQW clXVWeUV fRU Whe chaUgiQg VWaWiRQV daWa (FigXUe
3). The ViPilaUiW\ Rf Whe ceQWURidV Rf Whe k-PeaQV clXVWeUiQg aQal\ViV VXggeVWV a high
cRQceQWUaWiRQ Rf bRWh SickXSV aQd chaUgiQg VWaWiRQV iQ MaQhaWWaQ aQd WeVW
BURRkl\Q.
Figure. 1. Data wrangling methods.
the Uber dataset from April 2014 to May 2015 and the charg-
ing station data of New York City of 2021. This provides the
input for our analysis and visualizations, which are explained
in Section III. Finally, the paper is concluded in Section IV.
II. DATASET
In our research, we are investigating the ride-hailing service
and the charging stations in New York State. The ﬁrst data
source consists of Uber trip data from April of 2014 to
September of 2014. The data are separated by month for New
York State. The data consist of 4.5 million ride demand records
which contain the date, time, and detailed location with the
latitude and longitude of each pickup. This dataset is retrieved
from Kaggle [12]. The second data source consists of the
electric vehicle charging station records in New York State.
The data contains 2,347 registered stations as such and various
location information, including the zip code, the borough,
latitude, and longitude. It can be found on the government
website of the New York State [13] dated 29th of January
2021. In order to answer the research question, we assume all
Uber vehicles were operated by electric vehicles in 2014, and
multiple data wrangling techniques were engaged. Figure 1
summarizes these techniques.
A. Data preparation
To prepare the data, the Uber pickup data was initially
separated by month. Hence, we concatenated the monthly data
into one data frame and ranked the date by the index, the date,
and the time of the pickup location. The charging station data
was read as a JSON ﬁle.
In order to work with spatial data, we converted all the
dataframes in GeoDataFrames. This was done by creating a
GeoSeries column that is referred to as the GeoDataFrame’s
geometry and indicates the latitude and longitude of a GPS
coordinate using the geopandas library [14]. Next, we removed
all the coordinates outside New York City. We only added the
ﬁve boroughs of New York City: Bronx, Brooklyn, Manhattan,
Queens, and Staten Island. To visualize the map of New York
City with both the pickup points and the charging stations,
the OSmnx package [15] for spatial visualizations was used.
The background for this visualization was the street map of
New York City, which can be interpreted as follows: the
nodes represent intersections, and the edges represent street
segments.
B. Data analysis
To have a better understanding of the hot spots for the
time-dependent pickup locations and charging stations, the K-
means clustering algorithm [16] is employed. The objective
is to build a clustering model of the pickup data and the
charging stations, by which we generated elbow curves to
estimate and optimize the hyperparameter K. Based on the
results, we assign ﬁve different clusters for the pickup data,
which we display in Figures 2 and 3. There are four different
clusters for the charging station data, which we display in
Figures 4 and 5. The similarity of the centroids of the K-
means clustering analysis suggests a high concentration of
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-891-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Data Analytics

Figure. 2. Elbow curve for the Uber pickup location data.
Figure. 3. Clusters for the Uber pickup location data.
Figure. 4. Elbow curve for the charging station location data.
Figure. 5. Clusters for the charging station location data.
both pickups and charging stations in Manhattan and the west
of Brooklyn.
When analyzing the distribution of the minutely arrivals of
Uber, the data present substantial noise and could not depict
a solid trend of the moving average [17]. However, the trend
becomes strongly positive when moving to hourly and daily
distributions of arrivals, suggesting the increasing popularity
of Uber services in Figures 6, 7, and 8.
Next, we analyze the average number of Uber pickups per
weekday in Figure 9. We notice the presence of two peaks: the
morning rush hour and the leaving-work in the afternoon rush
hour. We observe a clear distinction for Fridays and Saturdays.
There is a distinct peak during the night, probably caused by
the happy hour on Friday and stay out later in the evening.
When comparing averages for the ﬁve boroughs, there is a
distinguishable indication that the majority of trips take place
in Manhattan, followed by Brooklyn, Queens, and ultimately
the Bronx and Staten Island.
III. VISUALIZE DISTANCES TO NEAREST CHARGING POINT
In order to assess the improvements that can be made at
the charging station level, we must investigate the distances
between pickups and the charging stations. To calculate the
nearest charging point from each pickup location, we allocate
each coordinate to the nearest node in the graph. We then
minimize the travel times between the pickup and the charg-
ing locations using Dijkstra’s algorithm [18]. However, due
to the large number of calculations required, this approach
would take approximately 13 years of run time, which is not
feasible for a research as such. Therefore, we used a good
enough approximation method with the help of the ball tree
algorithm [19].
We approximated the ten nearest charging stations with the
Manhattan distance [20]. We managed to reduce the running
time from 13 years to 3.5 days when running Dijkstra’s
algorithm on the ten nearest stations. The data consists of 4.4
million pickup locations and 266 charging stations. The results
are somewhat intuitive, as suggested by the hot spot analysis.
As expected, Manhattan has by far the shortest travel distances,
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-891-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Data Analytics

Figure. 6. Minutely Uber arrivals from April to September, 2014.
Figure. 7. Hourly Uber arrivals from April to September, 2014.
Figure. 8. Daily Uber arrivals from April to September, 2014.
Figure. 9. Average number of Uber pickups per weekday per borough.
hinted by the fact that it had the most pickup locations and
a high concentration of charging stations. Table I presents the
number of times the rank of the stations with the smallest
Manhattan distance have the smallest Dijkstra’s distance. The
charging station with the 10th smallest distance according to
the Manhattan distance covers only 0.07% of the smallest
Dijkstra’s distance, indicating that ten nearest charging stations
is a good cut-off point.
Next, we investigate which charging stations are the most
utilized and in which places there is a need for more charging
stations. In Figure 10, a visual utility analysis plots four
categories of charging stations, ranging from highly utilized
indicated by dark red toward a light cream color to indicate
slightly used charging stations. A conclusion drawn from
the utility analysis suggests that more charging locations
are needed at the Southside of Manhattan, the Westside of
Brooklyn, and the center of Queens.
In Figure 11, a complementary visual analysis plots the
distances from the pickups to the nearest charging stations.
The dark green color of the ﬁgure represents short distances
between pickup points and charging locations. Furthermore,
the red color represents longer distances between the pickup
points and the charging locations. From this analysis, we
depict that overall, Manhattan has small distances from pickup
points and charging stations which makes common sense as
Manhattan has the highest density in North American Cities.
The predominantly yellow coloring in the Southeast of Queens
and the North of Staten Island, culminating with intense
red coloring in the Southeast of Queens, clearly suggests
that more charging stations are needed. To provide a better
understanding of the pickup locations versus the charging
stations, we separated each Borough and created 5 histograms
that represent the cumulative amount of the distance between
pickup location and charging station at each Borough.
Figures 12, 13, and 14 provide the shortest distance to the
nearest charging stations in Staten Island, Bronx, and Queens,
respectively. These three ﬁgures provide insufﬁcient evidence
about the distance due to the insufﬁcient number of pickup
locations for one year in those areas. On the other hand,
Figures 15 and 16 indicate that the majority of the pickup
locations of Uber in 2014 are in Brooklyn and Manhattan.
The majority distance between the pickup location and the
charging stations is less than 2,000m. In order to investigate
further, Figure 17 displays a complementary visual analysis
from the pickups to the nearest charging stations in Manhattan.
The ﬁgure indicates the further distance in upper Manhattan
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-891-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Data Analytics

TABLE I
PERCENTAGE OF OCCURRENCES WHERE THE TEN NEAREST MANHATTAN DISTANCES EQUAL THE SHORTEST PATH DISTANCE BASED ON DIJKSTRA’S
ALGORITHM.
Rank station
smallest
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Manhattan distance
% station
smallest
61.64%
19.28%
8.50%
6.67%
1.98%
0.99%
0.48%
0.22%
0.16%
0.07%
Dijkstra’s distance
4
6.67%
9
0.16%
5
1.98%
10
0.07%
Table 1: Percentage of occurrences where the 10 nearest Manhattan distances equal
the shortest path distance based on Dijkstra’s.
Next, we wondered which charging stations are the most utilized or in which places
there is a need for more charging stations. A visual utility analysis plots 4 categories
of charging stations, ranging from highly utilized indicated by dark red to slightly
used indicated by light cream (Figure 6a). A conclusion drawn from the utility
analysis suggests that more charging locations are needed at the south side of
Manhattan, the west side of Brooklyn and the center of Queens.
Figure 6a: Charging station utility map.     Figure 6b: Distance to nearest charging
station map.
A complementary visual analysis plots the distances from the pickups to the nearest
charging stations (Figure 6b). For this, dark green represents short distances
between pickup points and charging locations and red represents long distances
between the pickup points and the charging locations. From this analysis, we depict
that overall, Manhattan has small distances from pickup points and charging
stations. The predominantly yellow coloring around East, South Queens and North of
Staten Island, culminating with intense red coloring in the East Queens clearly
suggests that more charging stations are needed.
Figure. 10. Charging station utility map.
5
1.98%
10
0.07%
Table 1: Percentage of occurrences where the 10 nearest Manhattan distances equal
the shortest path distance based on Dijkstra’s.
Next, we wondered which charging stations are the most utilized or in which places
there is a need for more charging stations. A visual utility analysis plots 4 categories
of charging stations, ranging from highly utilized indicated by dark red to slightly
used indicated by light cream (Figure 6a). A conclusion drawn from the utility
analysis suggests that more charging locations are needed at the south side of
Manhattan, the west side of Brooklyn and the center of Queens.
Figure 6a: Charging station utility map.     Figure 6b: Distance to nearest charging
station map.
A complementary visual analysis plots the distances from the pickups to the nearest
charging stations (Figure 6b). For this, dark green represents short distances
between pickup points and charging locations and red represents long distances
between the pickup points and the charging locations. From this analysis, we depict
that overall, Manhattan has small distances from pickup points and charging
stations. The predominantly yellow coloring around East, South Queens and North of
Staten Island, culminating with intense red coloring in the East Queens clearly
suggests that more charging stations are needed.
Figure. 11. Distance to nearest charging station map.
Figure. 12. Shortest distance to nearest charging station in Staten Island.
Figure. 13. Shortest distance to nearest charging station in the Bronx.
and east of Manhattan (East Harlem area).
IV. CONCLUSION
This research examines the viability of the current charging
stations with the ride-hailing service of Uber by addressing
(1) the distributions of charging and Uber pickup locations
and (2) the distances between the pickup locations and their
nearest charging station. According to cluster centroids, the
pickup locations and charging locations are mostly distributed
in Manhattan and the West of Brooklyn. Manhattan has the
smallest charging station distances, while the distances from
pickup locations in the East of Queens, the South of Queens,
and the North of Staten Island to the nearest charging station
is further away.
In conclusion, we performed multiple visual and hot spot
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-891-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Data Analytics

Figure. 14. Shortest distance to nearest charging station in Queens.
Figure. 15. Shortest distance to nearest charging station in Brooklyn.
Figure. 16. Shortest distance to nearest charging station in Manhattan.
Figure. 17.
A visual analysis of the shortest distance to the nearest
charging station in Manhattan.
analyses, which conclude that more charging stations are
needed in the Northwest of Brooklyn, upper Manhattan, mid-
dle of the Bronx, the Southwest of Queens, and the North
of Staten Island. The favorable behavior of middle Manhattan
shows that there are enough charging stations for Uber Inc. to
be fully electric based on the 2014 data.
As for future discussion, Uber pickup data consists of
4.4 million data points measuring the closest distance with
10 nearest charging stations out of 266 charging stations
using Dijkstra’s algorithm. This creates the ﬁrst glance of
electriﬁcation with ride-hailing in New York City. With 4.4
million ride-hailing data points which only counters 15% of
total New York City pickups in 2014 [21]. To fully understand
the signiﬁcance of the charging stations and the movement
of the New Yorkers, a future study can combine the New
York taxi data with Uber data to analyze and optimize the
driving distance and charging period of each vehicle. This
study attempts to present an image of the electric driving scene
for Uber, and the granularity of data serves the purpose well.
REFERENCES
[1] EIA,
“Oil
and
petroleum
products
explained:
Use
of
oil,”
Jan
2021,
Last
access
date:
30
September
2021.
[On-
line]. Available: http://www.eia.gov/energyexplained/oil-and-petroleum-
products/use-of-oil.php
[2] K. Korosec, “Uber expands green rides option to 1,400 cities
– Techcrunch,” Jan 2021, Last access date: 30 September 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://techcrunch.com/2021/01/12/uber-expands -
green-rides-option-to-1400-cities/
[3] C.-M. Tseng, S. C.-K. Chau, and X. Liu, “Improving viability of electric
taxis by taxi service strategy optimization: A big data study of New York
city,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 20,
no. 3, pp. 817–829, 2018.
[4] M.-S. R˘aboac˘a, I. B˘ancescu, V. Preda, and N. Bizon, “An optimization
model for the temporary locations of mobile charging stations,” Mathe-
matics, vol. 8, no. 3, p. 453, 2020.
[5] J. Jung and J. Y. Chow, “Effects of charging infrastructure and non-
electric taxi competition on electric taxi adoption incentives in New
York city,” Transportation Research Record, vol. 2673, no. 4, pp. 262–
274, 2019.
[6] G. Wang, X. Chen, F. Zhang, Y. Wang, and D. Zhang, “Experience:
Understanding long-term evolving patterns of shared electric vehicle
networks,” in The 25th Annual International Conference on Mobile
Computing and Networking, 2019, pp. 1–12.
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-891-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Data Analytics

[7] G. Wang, X. Xie, F. Zhang, Y. Liu, and D. Zhang, “bcharge: Data-driven
real-time charging scheduling for large-scale electric bus ﬂeets,” in 2018
IEEE Real-Time Systems Symposium (RTSS).
IEEE, 2018, pp. 45–55.
[8] M. Scorrano, R. Danielis, and M. Giansoldati, “Mandating the use of
the electric taxis: The case of ﬂorence,” Transportation Research Part
A: Policy and Practice, vol. 132, pp. 402–414, 2020.
[9] S. Zhang, H. Wang, Y.-f. Zhang, and Y.-Z. Li, “A novel two-stage
location model of charging station considering dynamic distribution of
electric taxis,” Sustainable Cities and Society, vol. 51, p. 101752, 2019.
[10] Y. Dong, S. Qian, J. Liu, L. Zhang, and K. Zhang, “Optimal placement of
charging stations for electric taxis in urban area with proﬁt maximiza-
tion,” in 2016 17th IEEE/ACIS International Conference on Software
Engineering, Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Networking and Parallel/Distributed
Computing (SNPD).
IEEE, 2016, pp. 177–182.
[11] J. Jia, C. Liu, and T. Wan, “Planning of the charging station for electric
vehicles utilizing cellular signaling data,” Sustainability, vol. 11, no. 3,
p. 643, 2019.
[12] Kaggle,
“Uber
pickups
in
New
York
city
–
Kaggle,”
Feb
2018,
Last
access
date:
30
September
2021.
[Online].
Available: https://www.kaggle.com/ﬁvethirtyeight/uber -pickups-in-new-
york-city?select=uber-raw-data- apr14.csv
[13] N. Y. State, “Electric vehicle charging stations in New York — state
of New York,” Feb 2018, Last access date: 30 September 2021.
[Online]. Available: https://data.ny.gov/Energy-Environment /Electric-
Vehicle-Charging-Stations-in-New-York /7rrd-248n
[14] T.
Russell
and
M.
Fleis,
“Geopandas:,”
Jan
2021,
Last
access
date:
30
September
2021.
[Online].
Available:
https://github.com/geopandas/geopandas
[15] G. Boeing, “OSMnx: A Python package to work with graph-theoretic
OpenStreetMap street networks,” Journal of Open Source Software,
vol. 2, no. 12, 2017.
[16] P. S. Bradley and U. M. Fayyad, “Reﬁning initial points for k-means
clustering.” in ICML, vol. 98.
Citeseer, 1998, pp. 91–99.
[17] J. Durbin, “Efﬁcient estimation of parameters in moving-average mod-
els,” Biometrika, vol. 46, no. 3/4, pp. 306–316, 1959.
[18] E. W. Dijkstra, “A note on two problems in connexion with graphs,”
Numerische Mathematik, vol. 1, pp. 269–271, 1959.
[19] S. M. Omohundro, Five balltree construction algorithms.
International
Computer Science Institute Berkeley, 1989.
[20] E. F. Krause, “Taxicab geometry,” The Mathematics Teacher, vol. 66,
no. 8, pp. 695–706, 1973.
[21] T. W. Schneider, “Analyzing 1.1 Billion NYC Taxi and Uber Trips,
with a Vengeance,” Jan 2015, Last access date: 30 September
2021. [Online]. Available: http://toddwschneider.com/posts/analyzing-
1-1-billion-nyc-taxi-and-uber-trips-with-a- vengeance/
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-891-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Data Analytics

