 
 
 
  A Data-Driven Approach for Eye Disease Classification in Relation to 
Demographic and Weather Factors Using Computational Intelligence Software    
 
Amna Alalawi1, Les Sztandera2, Parth Lalakia3, Anthony Vipin Das4, Gumpili Sai Prashanthi5 
 
1DMgmt in Strategic Leadership Program, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA 
Email: Amna.Alalawi@Jefferson.edu 
 
2Kanbar College of Design, Engineering, and Commerce, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA 
Email: Les.Sztandera@Jefferson.edu 
 
3Global Affairs, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA 
Email: Parth.Lalakia@jefferson.edu 
 
4 Department of EyeSmart EMR & AEye, Indian Health Outcomes Public Health and Economics Research Centre (IHOPE), 
LV Prasad Eye Institute, Hyderabad, Telangana, India 
Email: vipin@lvpei.org 
 
5 Department of EyeSmart EMR & AEye, Indian Health Outcomes Public Health and Economics Research Centre (IHOPE), 
LV Prasad Eye Institute, Hyderabad, Telangana, India 
Email: saiprashanthi.g@lvpei.org 
 
 
Abstract – Big data is the new gold, especially in health 
care. Advances in collecting and processing Electronic 
Medical Records (EMR), coupled with increasing 
computer capabilities have resulted in an increased 
interest in the use of big data in health care. Big data 
promises more personalized and precision medicine for 
patients with improved accuracy and earlier diagnosis, 
and 
therapy 
geared 
to 
an 
individual’s 
unique 
combination of genes, environmental risk, and precise 
disease phenotype. Ophthalmology has been an area of 
focus where results have shown to be promising. The 
objective of this study was to determine whether the EMR 
record in LV Prasad Eye Institute (LVPEI) in India can 
contribute to the management of patient care, through 
studying how climatic and socio-demographic factors 
relate to eye disorders and visual impairment in the State 
of Telangana. The study was designed by merging a 
dataset obtained from the Telangana State Development 
Society to an existing EMR of approximately 1 million 
patients, who presented themselves with different eye 
symptoms and were diagnosed with several diseases from 
the years (2011-2019). The dataset obtained included 
weather and climatic variables to be tested alongside eye 
disorders. Microsoft Power BI was used to analyze the 
data through prescriptive and descriptive data analysis 
techniques to read patterns that can dig deeper into high-
risk climatic and socio-demographic factors that 
correlate to eye diseases. Our findings revealed that there 
is a high presence of Cataract in the state of Telangana, 
mostly in rural areas and throughout the different 
weather seasons in India. Men tend to be the most affected 
as per the number of visits to the clinic, while home 
makers make the most visit to the hospital, in addition to 
employees, students, and laborers. While cataract is most 
dominant in the older age population, diseases such as 
astigmatism and conjunctivitis are more present in the 
younger age population. The study appeared useful for 
taking preventive measures in the future to manage the 
treatment of patients who present themselves with eye 
disorders in Telangana. In addition, this research created 
a pathway for new methods in the study of how EMRs 
contribute to new knowledge in ophthalmology. 
 
Keywords –big data; ophthalmology; ocular diseases; artificial 
intelligence. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
India is home to over 8.3 million people with Vision 
Impairment (VI), the highest in the world [3]. Even though, 
in 1976, India became the first country in the world to start a 
national program for control of blindness for the goal to 
reduce blindness prevalence to 0.3 percent by 2020, the 
prevalence of blindness still stands at 1.99 percent, according 
to the National Blindness and Visual Impairment Survey, 
released in October 2019 [1] by the Union Ministry of Health 
and Family. The prevalence of blindness and visual 
impairment is one of the highest in Telangana, a state in 
Southern India, as inferred from survey [1]. The significant 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-816-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Data Analytics

 
 
reasons indicated in the survey were due to cataract and 
refractive error [2].  
All surveys in the country have shown that cataract is the 
most common cause of blindness and all prevention of 
blindness programs have been “cataract-oriented.” However, 
it has recently been recognized that the visual outcome of the 
cataract surgeries as well as the training of ophthalmologists 
has been less than ideal.  
This study uses Artificial Intelligence (AI) and machine 
learning techniques to explore a dataset containing 
information on 873,448 patients who visited LV Prasad Eye 
Institute (LVPEI), a multi-tier ophthalmology hospital 
network, based in Hyderabad.   The data was extracted from 
EyeSmart, the hospital’s Electronic Medical Record (EMR) 
and health management system, and then merged with 
climatic factors to test the correlation between climatic 
variables and ocular diseases presented by the patients [3]. 
Studying risk factors, primarily associated with climate and 
the environment can lead to a better understanding of the 
causes, diagnosis and treatment of several eye diseases [5]. 
In healthcare, ophthalmology deals with the diagnosis and 
treatment of eye disorders. Some known diseases in 
ophthalmology are cataracts, retinal disorders, macular 
degeneration, and others. The relatively rapid and recent 
adoption of EMRs in ophthalmology has been associated 
with the promise that the accumulation of large volumes of 
clinical data would facilitate quality improvement and help 
answer a variety of research questions. Given that EMRs are 
relatively new in most practices and that clinical data are 
inherently more complex than other fields that have been 
altered by the digital revolution, these proposed benefits have 
yet to be realized [4]. 
With the rise of big data, it has now become easier to 
study how culture, race, climate, and other socio-
demographic factors correlate to the spread of ocular 
diseases. This has shed light on recent research in medicine 
and ophthalmology. An investigation has been conducted 
with an aim for the application of artificial intelligence (AI)-
based hierarchical clustering as a tool to optimize the in total 
excellence, values, and the security for the Adult Spinal 
Deformity Surgery (ADS) [16]. It has been observed that 
prior to this the ADS classification was based on certain 
radiographic parameters which have been correlated with the 
patient related outcomes. But the problems faced immensely 
by the researchers is to separate out the patients and the 
patterns manually that is in turn was based on hundreds of 
data parameters and the process was considered to be 
practically not feasible. Therefore, as a methodological 
approach for every probable cluster of patient (N) done on the 
basis of (M) surgery were normalized for two year 
enhancement and the massive rate of complication were 
computed. Thus, this particular study has therefore, 
highlighted that unsubstantiated hierarchical clustering of the 
patterns of findings that helps to initiate the prior operative 
judgment making by formulating a two year risk benefit grid. 
In this way the novel AI-ASD pattern of classification and 
identification have helped to diminish the risk and overall 
improvement [16]. It should be mentioned that smaller cities 
faces a lot of difficulties to maintain the sustainable welfare 
of countries in amalgamation with notable standards of living 
[17]. In another investigation, the emergency bases of 
hospitalization along with the all driven causes of mortality 
were utilized as the replacements of frailty. The researchers 
used to two different models to assign the deteriorating risk 
score to every subjects of the elderly population residing 
within the Municipality of Bologna, Italy [17]. The study 
design was a cohort study with of 58 789 subjects as sample 
size for overall six years with four year monitoring period. 
The 
study 
findings 
reported 
excellent 
power 
of 
discrimination along with calibration that demonstrated an 
excellent anticipating ability of the models utilized [17].  In 
this respect another study could also be illustrated that had 
utilized the application of health administrative databases 
along with authenticated algorithms to show a correlation in 
between the residential proximity towards foremost 
roadways along with the prevalence of three major 
neurological diseases like dementia, multiple sclerosis, and 
Parkinson’s disease [18]. This particular study design was 
also a cohort study based on two different populations having 
the age group in the range of 20–50 years with sample size of 
4.4 million suffering from multiple sclerosis and the matured 
adult groups having the age range of 55–85 years with sample 
population size of 2·2 million suffering from dementia or 
other Parkinson’s disease. The researchers of the study 
estimated the associations among the following parameters 
such as the traffic proximity, incidence of dementia, 
Parkinson’s disease, and the multiple sclerosis using the 
model of Cox proportional hazards which would also take 
into consideration of certain individualistic contextual 
parameters such as any injury to brain, diabetes, and the local 
income [18]. The study demonstrated the successful 
application of the health record databases along with the 
specialized analytical tool for the categorization of patterns 
of large or big data [18].  In today’s world the relationship 
based on function in between the ncRNAs and the varied 
types of human diseases is considered to be a central task 
within the field of modern research for the formulation of 
eryeffective therapeutic approaches.  
 In Section 2 of this paper, we discuss and highlight 
different statistical tools and methods used to investigate the 
study of several demographic and climatic factors that impact 
upon the individuals in Telangana. While Section 3 focuses 
on providing a thorough analysis of the data findings, Section 
4 highlights key findings and trends, and Section 5 includes 
conclusion and recommendations pertaining to the use of big 
data and data merging in EMR to reveal new insights in the 
study of visual impairment and eye disorders in Telangana. 
Visual impairment has continually exhibited an escalating 
trend in underdeveloped countries over the past years, and in 
India, the burden of visual impairment is high in urban and 
rural areas. Eye-care services should be accessible and 
affordable to individuals in need. This study intends to 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-816-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Data Analytics

 
 
discover how socio-demographic and climatic factors 
correlate to the number of individuals affected using 
Artificial Intelligence tools. It is extremely important to 
mention that hardly any investigation had been conducted 
with the application of AI tools to categorize the huge data 
based on parameters like demographics and the weather in 
the field of ophthalmology. So it can be considered that this 
scientific article is considered to be a significant contribution 
in terms of novelty or originality and also considered to be a 
significant progress in the field of scientific research as the 
approach is unconventional and a novel one with successful 
outcomes.  
II. 
METHODOLOGY 
To gain insight into the climatic and socio-demographic 
factors that correlate to the risk of ocular diseases in the State 
of Telangana,  we used multiple approaches utilizing AI and 
statistical software and programming languages, including 
Microsoft Power BI and Python to explore the dataset, which 
contained information on 873,448  patients complaining of 
eye disorder symptoms across multiple categories of ocular 
diseases. Publicly available climatic variables were obtained 
and aligned to the dataset through a process called column 
mutation, and then examined by Microsoft Power BI, which 
heavily relies on visual illustrations and statistical 
storytelling to present findings and new insights. It should be 
noted that Power BI is considered to be an assortment of 
software or apps which all together works in amalgamation 
to transform the unrelated sources of data into a visually 
pattern oriented, continuous and dynamic insights. Column 
mutation, which is the merging of datasets, was done through 
Python, an interpreted, object-oriented programming, that 
codes the columns in a language called Syntax. It works out 
on the principle of logical and arithmetic computation. This 
tool has an advantage to handle large and complex datasets. 
The process was however timely given the large volume of 
patients. The process was repeated more than once to ensure 
minimal error in the merging process. Microsoft Power BI 
was then used to model the data in order to obtain the 
visualizations and insights. 
The master dataset or the big data, which was explored 
and analyzed, covered clinical visits are from the year 2011-
2019, and included demographic information of the patient, 
including age, gender, profession, data of visit, district of 
resident, and symptoms and diagnosis of the patient in 
relation to eye disease. To look further into this issue, we 
merged climate variables to the dataset to explore the 
relationship with eye disorders. The AI approach can be of 
varied 
types 
namely 
conventional symbolic 
AI, 
Computational intelligence, and statistical tools or the 
combination of all of the above. Here in the present 
assignment the Computational intelligence approach has 
been adopted for the analytical purpose [22].  
The climate variables we examined were average 
temperature, minimum temperature, maximum temperature, 
humidity, rainfall, and solar radiation. This data was retrieved 
from the Telangana State Development Planning Society in 
the state of Telangana. The findings that relate to temperature 
and its effect on Cataract in older age was consistent in high 
and low temperatures.  
 
III. 
ANALYSIS 
It has proven valuable to first observe which diseases are 
the most prevalent in the different areas of Telangana, and 
what age and gender are most affected to get a full 
understanding of the criticality of the eye disorder epidemic 
and to provide a baseline against which to compare the 
climate and patient demographic variables examined.  
The use of EMRs in generating new insights has been an 
increasing trend in the area of ophthalmology. Research in 
ophthalmology has benefited greatly from the use of EMRs 
in expanding the breadth of knowledge in areas such as 
disease surveillance, health services utilizations and 
outcomes. In addition, the quantity of data available has 
increased, that it is now highly recommended to work on data 
linkage systems in eye research, as such data can offer 
insights into advantages and limitations for future direction 
in eye research [5]. 
The timespan of this dataset is between 2011-2019, a total 
of 8 years. There has been consistency to already known 
information through the analysis, specifically on gender and 
age-related eye conditions. Creative featuring techniques 
have been used to shed the light on the most critical variables 
through trial and error of testing for relationship in 
accordance to eye disease. 
 
IV. 
FINDINGS AND TRENDS 
This section highlights key findings of the study, as well 
as trends in relation to the subject matter as per the 
demographic and climatic variables tested. 
 
A. 
Gender and Eye Disorders 
 
 
Figure 1. Clinical Visits by Gender (2011-2019) 
        Figure 1 indicates that between the years 2011-2019, 
53% of the patients were male patients who were seen for eye 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-816-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Data Analytics

 
 
disorders, and 47% were female patients. This finding is in 
line with the gender study that was conducted on 2.3 million 
patients of all those who presented to LV Prasad Institute 
from the years 2011-2019 [3]. Globally, one of the social 
determinants of health that has been universally identified is 
gender. In India, health inequalities between men and women 
have played a pivotal role in disease development, including 
eye disorders. With respect to eye care, women have been 
generally cited to have higher rates of blindness in India and 
are less likely to access appropriate eye services [6][7]. 
However, as we can see from the study which was focused 
on Telangana, this is not the case, as male patients exceeded 
female patients, and this could be for the reason that 
Telangana has been ranked as one of the top ten innovative 
and developed states in India according to the India 
Innovation Index 2019 [15] where access to healthcare is 
available and appreciated by both male and female.  
India has been one of the countries where efforts to 
strengthen the evidence-base for blindness control has 
received significant attention from policy planners and 
program managers. Over the past four decades, a series of 
population-based blindness and visual impairment surveys 
have been undertaken in India, using different survey 
methods. This included detailed eye examination surveys, as 
well as rapid assessments [8].  
 
B. 
Occupation and Clinical Visits  
 
 
 
Percentage of Clinical Visits by Occupation  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Clinical Visits by Profession (2011-2019) 
 
In addition, when studying the correlation between 
profession and clinical visits, it appeared that home makers, 
employees in the government and private sectors, and 
students make the top three categories of those are who most 
affected. Figure 2 depicts this analysis and portrays the top 
six professions taken from the analysis. We can also see that 
workers in Agriculture and manual laborers tend to present 
themselves with eye disorders as well, and that could be to 
the nature of the job, in which they are exposed to certain 
chemicals, dust, and usually work in heated environments. 
Recent estimates from the World Health Organization 
indicate that 90 per cent of all those affected by visual 
impairment live in the poorest countries of the world [9]. 
India is home to one‐fifth of the world's visually impaired 
people and therefore, any strategies to combat avoidable 
blindness must take into account the socio‐economic 
conditions within which people live [9].  
Home-makers could also translate to housewives, who are 
at higher-risk of visual disorders, and this is in line with a 
study that was conducted in 2009 on women in Indian culture, 
where it showed that housewives are more likely to suffer 
from heart diseases than working women, and that is due to 
lack of education, lifestyle that is based on obesity and 
cultural myths that do not focus on women’s health. Having 
a similar study related to eye disorders and visual 
impairment, as per the study based on the sample of the 
population from Telangana, the same pattern can be seen and 
it can potentially be from these similar reasons [10]. 
 
C. 
Location and Eye Disorders in Older Age (41-70) 
 
     Number of Visits by Location (Age 41-70) 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Location and Eye Disorders in Older Age Population 
 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-816-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Data Analytics

 
 
Figure 3 shows the locations that people with eye 
disorders come from and is focused on the older age 
population. Cataract seemed to be the most disease that has 
affected older age in Telangana, which is the clouding of the 
natural human lens. Cataract is a condition known to affect 
older age, and this study revalidates the information. 
 
D. Location and Eye Disorders in Younger Age (11-20) 
 
 
Number of Visits by Location (Age 11-20) 
 
 
 
     
 
 Figure 4. Location and Eye Disorders in Younger Age Population 
 
        Figure 4 shows the location that people with eye 
disorders come from and is focused on the younger age 
population. Astigmatism, which is an irregularity of the shape 
of the cornea was present in younger age population. 
Astigmatism has been linked to being a hereditary condition 
in ophthalmology. 
In both contexts, it appeared to be that eye disorders are 
mostly concentrated in residents from the district of 
Paloncha, and even though this district has a higher literacy 
rate than state average is 77%, 10% higher than that of the 
state average which is at 67%, it has been reported that it has 
been hit with pollution and contaminated water in 2015. The 
state-run thermal power plant installed in 2015 caused 
pollution and health disorders including eye disorders [11]. 
Residents complained of gray water, and doctors in Paloncha 
confirmed that the prolonged exposure to air and water 
pollution has led to higher incidences of respiratory diseases, 
tuberculosis, skin diseases, blurring of vision and irritation in 
the eyes, such as Cataract, Cornea, Anterior Segment, Retina, 
and Glaucoma [11].  
 
 
 
 
 
 
E. Consistent Prevalence of Cataract in Rainfall  
 
Number of Visits for Right-Eye Diseases by Cumulative 
Rainfall 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Right Eye Diseases in Relation to Rainfall 
 
Figure 5 shows the diseases that affect the right eye the 
most when tested alongside rainfall. Globally, cataract is the 
single most important cause of blindness, and the second 
most common cause of moderate and severe vision 
impairment (MSVI) according to the Global Burden of 
Disease, Injuries and Risk Factors Study, and it is most 
predominant in Southeast Asia. Cataract contributed to a 
worldwide 33.4% of all blindness and 18.4% of all MSVI. 
Translating the same into actual numbers, cataract caused 
blindness in 10.8 million of overall 32.4 million blind and 
visual impairment in 35.1 million of 191 million visually 
impaired individuals [13]. 
The close relationship between climate, environment and 
the development of Cataract is crucial to understand for 
future preventative measures. In Telangana, it shows that 
Cataract is the disease most prevalent in rainfall.  
 
F. Consistent Prevalence of Pterygium in Relation to 
Global Radiation  
Right-Eye Diseases as Influenced by Global Radiation 
 
 
Figure 6. Right Eye Diseases in Relation to Global Radiation 
 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-816-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Data Analytics

 
 
   Figure 6 shows the diseases that affect the right eye the 
most when tested alongside global radiation. We analyzed 
patients who presented with degeneration symptoms, and 
correlated the diagnosis to climatic factors, such as humidity, 
rainfall, temperature and global radiation. The above analysis 
shows the top 5 most prevalent degeneration right-eye 
diseases as impacted by global radiation. Pterygium shows to 
be most prevalent at over 46% of the total global radiation 
value.  The analysis was done on a patient basis and not a 
disease basis, as the data showed that one patient can develop 
more than one disease. 
 
 
G. Consistent Prevalence of Pterygium in Relation to 
Windspeed  
Right-Eye Diseases as Influenced by Windspeed 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Right Eye Diseases in Relation to Windspeed 
 
Figure 5 shows the diseases that affect the right eye when 
tested alongside windspeed. The analysis above shows the 
top 5 most prevalent right-eye diseases with degeneration as 
a symptom and how the diseases are influenced by maximum 
windspeed. Pterygium was also the most present among 
patients and concentrated at average maximum windspeed of 
between 10.2 and 10.9. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION  
This data analytics study provides an expanded 
exploration of how socio-demographic and climatic factors 
affect the prevalence of visual impairment and eye disorders 
in Telangana. Applying several statistical techniques, 
including pattern recognition, and generating other data 
visualizations, we were able to validate previously identified 
findings about gender’s relation to eye disorders in 
Telangana. We found the tools we used to be very useful for 
a discovery research to better understand the sample set of 
patients and to generate informative and understandable 
visuals.  
      Big data can serve to boost the applicability of clinical 
research studies into real-world scenarios, where population, 
race, and climate create a challenge. It equally provides the 
opportunity to enable effective and precision medicine by 
performing patient stratification. This is indeed a key task 
toward personalized healthcare. A better use of medical 
resources by means of personalization can lead to well-
managed health services that can overcome the challenges of 
a diverse population where poverty is high. Thus, creative 
featuring and data merging for health management of EMRs 
can have an impact on future clinical research.  
      From a systems perspective, we observe that a patient is 
influenced by several co-factors that result in the 
development of eye disorders, and that is significant in 
studying patient care from a holistic standpoint. AI tools 
create the pathway to merging publicly available data and 
aligning multiple variables as part of the overall influence.  
This technique is widely applied in decision-making and 
outcome assessment for an enhanced healthcare experience, 
in which modeling knowledge and expert experience are 
studied more thoroughly for new pattern recognition. 
However, variables must be minimized in order to capture the 
underlying knowledge, or otherwise patterns will be harder 
to spot. Thus, we attempt to apply this in the future with less 
variables to overcome the challenges in the first phase or data 
merging.  
     We recommend that the authorities spend more time and 
funds on creating awareness to educate individuals and 
families about the visual impairment crisis in Telangana. 
Creation of awareness is one of the most comprehensive 
approaches to sensitize communities concerning the 
consequences of eye disorders, but also one of the avenues to 
equip individuals with knowledge, skills and correct attitudes 
towards a healthier lifestyle.  
      Besides creation of awareness, this study also 
recommends ophthalmologists’ understanding of all factors 
that influence a disease other than medical history, and to 
look at each patient uniquely in terms of social income, 
cultural upbringing and offer a more individualistic approach 
in educating a patient from the criticality of self-care, to help 
patients deviate away from high risk situations that can cause 
eye disorders, and to find ways from an earlier age for more 
effective preventative results that can reduce the number of 
affected individuals with vision impairment in Telangana.
 
 
       
 
 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-816-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Data Analytics

 
 
 
 
 
       REFERENCES 
[1] G. Rao, N. Khanna, and A. Payal, “The global burden of 
cataract,” Current Opinion in Ophthalmology, 22 no. 1, pp. 4-
9, 2011. 
[2] A. Das, P. Kammari, and S. Ranganath Vadapalli, “Big data 
and the eyeSmart electronic medical record system-An 8-year 
experience from a three-tier eye care network in India,” Indian 
Journal of Ophthalmology, 68 no. 3, pp. 427, 2020. 
[3] S. Marmamula, R. Khanna, and G. Rao, “Unilateral visual 
impairment in rural south India–Andhra Pradesh Eye Disease 
Study (APEDS)”, International Journal of Ophthalmology, 9 
no.5, pp.763, 2016. 
[4] M. 
V. 
Boland, 
“Big 
data, 
big 
challenges,” Ophthalmology, 123 no.1, pp. 7-8, 2016. 
[5] A. Clark, J. Ng, N. Morlet, and J. Semmens, “Big data and 
ophthalmic research,” Survey of Ophthalmology, 61 no.4, pp. 
443-465, 2016. 
[6] E.M. Messmer, “The pathophysiology, diagnosis, and 
treatment 
of 
dry 
eye 
disease,” Deutsches 
Ärzteblatt 
International, 112 no.5, pp. 71, 2015. 
[7] D. Matthews, “How gender influences health inequalities,” 
Nursing Times, 111 no.43, pp. 21-23, 2015. 
[8] N. Diaz-Granados, K. B Pitzul, L. Dorado, F. Wang, S. 
McDermott, M.B. Rondon, and D. Stewart, “Monitoring 
gender equity in health using gender-sensitive indicators: a 
cross-national study,” Journal of Women's Health, 20 no.1 pp. 
145-153, 2011. 
[9] G.V.S Murthy, S.K. Gupta, D. Bachani, R. Jose, and N. John, 
“Current estimates of blindness in India,” British Journal of 
Ophthalmology, 89 no.3, pp.257-260, 2005.  
[10] S.K Angra, G.V. Murthy, S.K. Gupta, and V. Angra, “Cataract 
related blindness in India and its social implications,” The 
Indian Journal of Medical Research, 106, pp. 312-324, 1997. 
[11] A. Janati, H. Matlabi, H. Allahverdipour, M. Gholizadeh, and 
L. Abdollahi, “Socioeconomic status and coronary heart 
disease,” Health Promotion Perspectives, 1 no.2, pp. 105, 
2011. 
[12] S. Kumar, “National security environment,” India's National 
Security, pp. 25-236, Routledge India, 2016. 
[13] S.G. Honavar, “Eliminating cataract blindness: Are we on 
target?” Indian Journal of Ophthalmology, 65 no.12,  pp. 
1271, 2017. 
[14] G. Bakshy https://www.jagranjosh.com/current-affairs/india-
innovation-index-2019-karnataka-tops-the-list-followed-by-
tamil-nadu-and-maharashtra-1571375106-1, 2019, (Accessed 
on 07.09.2020). 
[15] C.P. Ames, J. Smith, F. Pellisé, M. Kelly, A. Alanay, E. 
Acaroglu, and Jr. C. Shaffrey, “Artificial intelligence based 
hierarchical clustering of patient types and intervention 
categories in adult spinal deformity surgery: towards a new 
classification scheme that predicts quality and value,” 
Spine, 44 no.13,  pp. 915-926, 2019. 
[16] F. Bertini, G. Bergami, D. Montesi, G. Veronese, G. 
Marchesini, and P. Pandolfi, “Predicting frailty condition in 
elderly 
using 
multidimensional 
socioclinical 
databases,” Proceedings of the IEEE, 106(4), 723-737, 2018. 
[17] H. Chen, J. Kwong, R. Copes, P.J. Villeneuve, A.  Van 
Donkelaar, and A.S. Wilton, “Living near major roads and the 
incidence of dementia, Parkinson's disease, and multiple 
sclerosis: 
a 
population-based 
cohort 
study,” 
The 
Lancet, 389(10070), pp. 718-726, 2017. 
[18] E.P. Barracchia, G. Pio, D. D’Elia, and M. Ceci, “Prediction 
of new associations between ncRNAs and diseases exploiting 
multi-type hierarchical clustering,” BMC bioinformatics, 21 
no.1, pp. 1-24, 2020. 
[19] B. Familiar and J. Barnes, “Data Visualizations, Alerts, and 
Notifications with Power BI. In Business in Real-Time Using 
Azure IoT and Cortana Intelligence Suite,” pp. 397-473, 
Apress, Berkeley, CA, 2017. 
[20] M. Lutz, “Programming Python: powerful object-oriented 
programming,” O'Reilly Media, 2010. 
[21] G. Marcus and E. Davis, “Rebooting AI: Building artificial 
intelligence we can trust,” Pantheon, 2019.
 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-816-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Data Analytics

