Hold the Drones 
Fostering the Development of Big Data Paradigms through Regulatory Frameworks 
Robert Spousta III 
Dr. Steve Chan Center for Sensemaking, AIRS 
Swansea University’s NSRC and Hawaii Pacific University 
Swansea, Wales 
Email: spousta@mit.edu 
Steve Chan 
Dr. Steve Chan Center for Sensemaking, AIRS 
Swansea University’s NSRC and Hawaii Pacific University 
Swansea, Wales 
E-mail: s_chan@mit.edu
 
Abstract—We are at a critical phase in the proliferation of 
unmanned aircraft systems as a transformative technology, 
and the shape of regulatory policy for the broad civil use of 
these systems will be a determining factor in our ability to 
leverage pervasive remote sensing as a strategic national 
capability. In this paper, we explore the state of policy for civil 
unmanned aircraft systems and employ historical hindcasting 
of trends for comparably transformative technologies to gain 
insights into the role of public policy and regulation in the 
development of strategic capabilities. While the absence of a 
regulatory framework for unmanned aircraft operations has 
been a blind spot negatively impacting the growth of non-
military unmanned aircraft capabilities to date, a prospective 
framework must strike a difficult balance between freedom 
and security. On the one hand, the American unmanned 
aircraft industry requires the freedom to experiment with 
innovative designs and applications. On the other hand, the 
American citizenry demands security against the potential 
threats posed by the misuse and malicious use of these systems. 
As we demonstrate with the example of space exploration, a 
clear vision of the goals to be achieved with a strategic 
capability is needed to drive the development and sustainment 
of that national capability, lest resources be wasted and control 
over it be ceded to competing nations. Similarly, the history of 
car making illustrates the danger of establishing policy that 
facilitates technological stagnation and systemic brittleness by 
absolving private industry of the imperative to innovate 
competitively and in the public interest. In light of these 
lessons, we find that a resilient regulatory framework must 
capitalize on the potential benefits of this promising technology 
while respecting the danger it poses. 
Keywords- Big Data, Blind Spots, Brittleness, Pervasive 
Remote Sensing, Resilience, Unmanned Aircraft System 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Pervasive remote sensing is a significant enabling 
capability for conducting critical infrastructure protection 
and other vital missions in a Big Data paradigm [1]. In turn, 
the rise of Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) is the 
primary driver of the transition from satellite-based remote 
sensing to a pervasive remote sensing capability, and 
represents an area of rapidly evolving technology around the 
world [2]. While the United States has enjoyed a relative 
monopoly on such technology for military applications in 
the first decade of the 21st century, the slow development of 
a regulatory framework for their broader domestic use 
represents a blind spot that has hampered the nation’s 
ability to maintain a qualitative edge over the use of UAS as 
a critical enabler for a variety of strategic capabilities. While 
the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and other U.S. 
Government (USG) entities have limited the use of UAS for 
public and commercial use for the time being, the 
development of a regulatory framework that fosters UAS 
growth and outlines a strategic vision for their broader role 
in national capabilities will generate wealth and serve the 
public 
good. 
While 
closely 
related 
and 
often 
complementary, 
national 
and 
commercial 
strategic 
capabilities are distinguishable primarily by their ultimate 
purpose; whereas commercial capabilities are developed to 
generate financial profit, national capabilities are developed 
in order to serve a public need, such as defense. Commercial 
capabilities can and frequently are marketed to governments 
in support of a national capability (i.e., the defense 
industrial base, commercial satellite imagery providers, 
contractors and private consultants for many Information 
and Communication Technology (ICT)-related functions, 
etc.).  
Nations that embrace UAS through the development of 
robust regulatory frameworks will be postured to leverage 
the benefits of pervasive remote sensing and to mitigate the 
threats posed by the employment of UAS for malicious 
purposes. Such frameworks must incorporate a wide variety 
of social and technical considerations, from the potential for 
misuse of UAS platforms and the significance of individual 
air rights, to the latent brittleness of next-generation 
communications infrastructure that relies upon a particular 
frequency of the radio spectrum that is highly sensitive to 
atmospheric conditions (e.g., Ka Band).  The current gap in 
U.S. policy with regard to UAS represents both a lost 
commercial economic opportunity and a potential erosion of 
national security.  
In this paper, we aim to demonstrate how the 
development of policy and regulation regarding UAS 
impacts the U.S. at a national strategic level, in particular its 
ability to employ pervasive remote sensing within a Big 
Data paradigm. We begin in Section II by establishing a 
systemic context for understanding the impact of policy and 
regulation on the advancement of transformative technology 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

through historical hindcasting of automobile manufacturing 
and space exploration. The history of car making illustrates 
the 
danger 
of 
establishing 
policy 
that 
facilitates 
technological stagnation and systemic brittleness by 
absolving private industry of the imperative to innovate 
competitively and in the public interest. Similarly, the 
example of space exploration demonstrates the need for 
long term strategic vision to drive the development and 
sustainment of national capabilities, lest resources be wasted 
and control over them be ceded to competing nations. We 
go on in Section III to survey past and present 
implementation of UAS, and in Section IV we conduct a 
comparative analysis of national and international legal 
precedents which may bear relevance for UAS regulation. 
We find that while UAS have a significant military 
deployment history, as applications have expanded for their 
public and commercial domestic use, a commensurate 
regulatory framework has taken longer to develop in the 
U.S. While the absence of a regulatory framework for 
unmanned aircraft operations has been a blind spot 
impacting growth of non-military unmanned aircraft 
capabilities to date, a prospective framework must strike a 
difficult balance between freedom and security. On the one 
hand, industry requires freedom to experiment with 
innovative designs and applications. On the other hand, 
citizens demand security against threats posed by misuse 
and malicious use of these systems. We explore the 
consequences of this trend, and propose ways to improve 
leverage over UAS as a key enabling technology. We 
conclude in Section V that while current UAS policy is 
negatively impacting the economy and security of the U.S., 
such a trend is reversible. We also begin turning towards 
additional areas of strategic import in which a Big Data 
paradigm could be beneficially applied.  
II. FROM CARS TO SPACESHIPS: SYSTEMIC CONTEXT FOR 
TRANSFORMATIVE TECHNOLOGY AND CAPABILITY 
DEVELOPMENT 
In order to better appreciate the influence of policy on the 
development of pervasive remote sensing as a strategic 
national capability; it is illuminating to hindcast similar 
historical parallels. In doing so, we consider the rise of 
comparably transformative technologies; outlining the role 
they have played in national security and economic welfare. 
In particular, we take automobile manufacturing and space 
exploration as two areas which exemplify the importance of 
sustained 
innovation 
and 
forward-looking 
policy 
development.  In both of these cases, we see that large 
investments fueled — initially — significant U.S. 
accomplishments, followed by a decrease in progressive 
momentum 
perpetuated 
by 
a 
mutually 
interactive 
combination of lax regulatory policy and industry malaise. 
The resulting lack of sustained innovation in both space 
capability and automobile manufacturing offered footholds 
for international competitors to capitalize on adaptations or 
expansions of early American achievement. In turn, the rise 
of international competition in both space endeavors and car 
making has born significant economic and national security 
consequences for the U.S. that help to illustrate the 
importance of fostering hospitable conditions to expand 
UAS capabilities in a Big Data Paradigm.  
A. Automobile Manufacturing: the engine of innovation 
The 20th century was a breakout era for mankind’s 
advance in technological invention and critical problem-
solving, which reached a crescendo with our arrival on the 
moon. Yet before mankind could reach into space, the car 
had to take him down the road. The production of the 
automobile begins as a story of individual rivals locked in a 
heated yet solitary contest to innovate, and unfolds as a 
lesson in the strength of group decision engineering. As 
illustrated below in Figure 1, automobile manufacturing was 
dominated by U.S. firms going into the second half of the 
last century, and yet the North American auto industry’s 
doom appeared all but certain a few short years ago. The 
events that transpired during the intervening period show 
that while incremental innovation by individuals can yield 
significant technological breakthrough, it takes a whole 
society integrated around the technology’s processes to truly 
maximize its value. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The first car was born out of competition to unify 
chemistry with physics and mathematics to achieve 
combustion-driven transportation. Whereas steam engines, 
wind power, and other power sources have remained 
common in transportation and other human processes, the 
first 
combustion 
engine 
fundamentally 
transformed 
individual human mobility.  Two Germans, Carl Benz and 
Gottlieb Daimler each invented their own versions of an 
internal combustion engine mounted on wheeled vehicles 
within months of each other in 1896, working less than 100 
miles apart [3]. However, it was roughly 4000 miles west 
0
5
10
15
20
25
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
2014
China
Germany*
Japan
U.S.A.
Figure 1. Annual Motor Vehicle Production (millions) 
Sources: OICA; JAMA; U.S. Bureau of Transportation Statistics 
*West Germany prior to 1990  
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

and 20 years later that Henry Ford’s vision of the Model T 
truly revolutionized transportation by socializing the 
construction of vehicles on a massive scale.  
Ford’s breakthrough was in making cars affordable and 
widely available by adapting mass production techniques 
from other industries in his design of a modular platform 
[4]. Early car making was a time consuming and expensive 
process that resulted in a product which only the wealthy 
few could afford. However, by the early 1920s, Ford was 
producing 2 million Model Ts per year at a price that 
average citizens could pay for. Yet, such a breakthrough 
would not have been possible without the advent of the 
electric utility industry, the socialization of production, and 
the development of global supply chains, which facilitated 
the transition from belt-shaft networks of water wheels and 
coal-powered steam engines to more efficient unit drive 
assembly lines powered by large teams of skilled workers 
and electric motors [5]. Ford’s role as an innovator is 
particularly notable not for his technological inventions, but 
for his integration of existing technologies and human skills 
that allowed him to achieve unprecedented production levels 
at a low cost. Similarly, Edward Budd’s development of 
metal stamping improved assembly line efficiency, and 
Alfred Sloan’s development of a comprehensive business 
model for the auto industry established the blueprint for 
how car makers could best market their products and 
maximize profits by employing ever larger groups in the 
auto ecosystem [6]. A single individual invented the first car 
on Earth, but now the global auto industry system comprises 
50 million members of networked teams that bring 165 
thousand new cars to market each day.     
For the first half of the 20th century, American car 
manufacturers led the global auto industry by adhering to 
the model established by early leaders like Ford and Sloan, 
but their inability to sustain innovation compromised their 
position as a world leader. After World War II, the Japanese 
government instituted policies to protect the growth of 
Japanese auto makers by limiting the import of foreign cars 
to 1% of the domestic market, while manufacturers 
continually improved  production efficiency through the 
adoption of just-in-time production techniques and 
decreasing worker specialization in favor of flexibility [7]. 
By the mid 1960s, Japanese productivity levels matched and 
surpassed that of its U.S. competitors. A critical factor for 
maximizing Japanese productivity was the horizontal 
integration of a highly organized network of component 
suppliers and assemblers, or keiretsu [8]. By engendering 
trust through exclusive transactions, close coordination, and 
information sharing, these keiretsu facilitated high levels of 
cooperative specialization between sectors of Japan’s auto 
industry [8]. The keiretsu also enhanced the resilience of 
Japan’s auto industry, as evidenced in 1997 by the Toyota 
group’s ability to coordinate the actions of over 200 
individual firms and quickly redirect production of a crucial 
brake system component after a fire destroyed the plant that 
had been the component’s sole producer [9].  Meanwhile, 
U.S. production, characterized by vertically integrated and 
comparatively disorganized supplier-assembler networks 
remained largely constant into the 1980s, at which time 
Japanese production efficiency levels were vastly superior. 
U.S. manufacturers were path dependent, falsely assuming 
that their production efficiency either could not or did not 
need to be improved.  
By the time of the worldwide economic crisis of 2007, 
the decline of the U.S. auto industry was drawn into sharp 
relief in contrast to skyrocketing Chinese production, 
begging the question of government’s role in private 
industry. The bankruptcy of America’s Big Three car 
makers (General Motors, Chrysler, and Ford) threatened to 
inflict the loss of one million jobs on the national economy, 
and the USG was forced to intercede with the Automotive 
Industry Financing Program, an $80 billion conditional 
industry bailout in 2009 [10]. Following in the tradition of 
technology-forcing legislation, such as the Clean Air 
Amendment Act of 1970 that mandated a reduction in 
carbon emissions [11], the conditional nature of the bailout 
enabled the USG to further induce U.S. automakers to 
embrace areas of innovation, particularly hybrid and electric 
vehicles, in order to increase their global competiveness. 
Nonetheless, the potential for a government bailout was 
itself a component of the American car industry’s 
brittleness, in that the Big Three knew they could safely 
rely upon the precedent of bailouts established by the 1980 
Chrysler Loan Guarantee Act, the post 9/11 airline industry 
bailout, and many other instances of the USG rescuing 
private companies from financial collapse [12]. Having 
established a universally known precedent for bailouts, the 
USG — in effect — dis-incentivized car makers from 
adapting their production to meet an evolving market.  
The American experience in automobile manufacturing 
illustrates the imperative for continuous innovation, and the 
consequences for failing to heed that imperative. The early 
success of American auto makers led the U.S. to become a 
car-dependent society, but the ability of foreign auto makers 
to produce better cars at a cheaper price ultimately 
undermined the U.S. economy. Events like the 2009 bailout 
demonstrate that while industries cannot be forced to act 
strategically, government action and public policy play an 
important role in the development of technology. The 
history of car making also demonstrates the value of 
complementary technology, in that just as electricity 
facilitated mass production, UAS can facilitate pervasive 
remote sensing in a Big Data paradigm.  
B. Outer Space: the sky is not the limit 
The space race of the mid 20th century pushed the U.S. to 
achieve one of humanity’s greatest accomplishments in 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

successfully journeying onto the moon and back, via the 
Apollo Program. Yet, little more than half a century later, 
the cession of American supremacy in space appears to be a 
near-term inevitability. What happened?  
Driven by the Cold War urgency of winning the battle in 
space against the Soviet Union, the Apollo Program was a 
massive research and development effort with a single 
focus; getting to the moon first. However, the U.S. lacked a 
strategic vision of what to do with its hard-won space 
capability after achieving that feat, and was therefore 
challenged to follow up its huge investment with coherent 
progression.  Although successive U.S. space programs 
have benefited from a more  deliberate approach, they have 
also generally continued on Apollo’s trajectory of 
increasingly complex and aggregated projects, which are 
expensive and subject to long development timelines [13].  
Meanwhile, with the help of U.S. policies, other countries 
have developed notable space capabilities of their own. 
During the 1960s, the U.S. led the development of a 
regulated commercial space industry, with universal 
standards promoted by organizations like the International 
Telecommunications 
Satellite 
Organization 
(Intelsat). 
However, beginning in the early 1970s with the launch of 
the Open Skies initiative, the progressive deregulation of the 
satellite industry fueled the growth of global competition in 
space and gave rise to an increase in the number of  small 
private firms in favor of large conglomerates like Intelsat 
[14]. At the same time that U.S.-led deregulation helped to 
increase the number of countries venturing into space, 
stringent export control laws severely limited the ability of 
American companies to capitalize on the expanding global 
market [15]. In addition, the refusal to carry foreign 
satellites into orbit aboard U.S. launch vehicles forced other 
countries to develop their own launch capability. A prime 
example of this dynamic is France’s Arianespace, which 
was the first and remains among the world’s largest 
commercial space launch providers [16].   
While the development or acquisition of a space capability 
still requires significant national resources, including robust 
scientific and technological human capital, over 50 
countries now have satellites in space and 12 have 
demonstrated a space launch capability [17]. To determine 
America’s standing in this celestial mix, a review of two 
basic indicators is informative: where spacecraft are built 
and where they are launched from. Of the spacecraft 
launched in 2013, only 27% were manufactured in the U.S., 
compared with 41% in 2009 [18]. In the period 2000-2011, 
80% of commercial low-earth orbit satellites and 90% of 
commercial geosynchronous earth orbit satellites were 
launched outside the U.S. [19]. These trends produce 
interesting outcomes, such as when the Department of 
Defense (DoD) is forced to rely on Chinese satellites to 
meet the communications requirements of U.S. Geographic 
Combatant Commands [20]. Yet, as commercial space 
operations have expanded and the nature of space 
capabilities have transformed, the U.S. has demonstrated its 
ability to continue making important breakthroughs in 
space. In contrast to other U.S. strategic space capabilities 
that rely on a small amount of large and hard to defend 
assets, the Global Positioning System (GPS) developed by 
the DoD leverages a distributed architecture consisting of a 
variety of assets that lend to the system’s resilience by 
avoiding single points of failure [21]. Yet after 20 years in 
development, and despite becoming the world’s primary 
navigation utility, GPS has not generated revenue to help 
offset U.S. investments in space and the system is 
vulnerable to a variety of threats including spectrum 
encroachment, jamming, spoofing, and space weather [22]. 
In addition, competing systems like Europe’s Galileo, 
Russia’s Global Navigation Satellite System (GLONASS) 
[23], and China’s BeiDou Satellite Constellation [24] are all 
competing technologies with the potential to overtake the 
now aging GPS in the areas of accuracy and reliability.  
Today, space assets are more vital to national security than 
ever before for their role in collecting and distributing 
information, but the U.S. ability to safeguard these assets is 
also more challenged than ever before [25]. While products 
of the Cold War space rivalry have been combined to 
achieve a monumental feat of global scientific and 
technological cooperation in the form of the International 
Space Station [26], emerging rivalries threaten to upset the 
extraterrestrial balance of power. In particular, China’s 
rapidly expanding space program represents a potentially 
significant destabilizing force for U.S. space operations 
[27]. Since terminating its manned space shuttle program in 
2011 in exchange for commercial crew and cargo programs, 
the U.S. has adopted a space strategy that relies on the 
cooperation and capabilities of private industry and other 
nations [28]. This policy shift has introduced a potential 
blind spot for the USG, in that it has divested itself of an 
engineering capability which took several generations to 
attain, and would ostensibly take several generations to 
reclaim.  Meanwhile, China’s national space program 
continues to progress along a deliberate and independent 
trajectory, gaining in sophistication with each mission [29]. 
Although the consequences of these divergent approaches to 
space have yet to fully materialize, it is clear that space is an 
area of increasing vulnerability for U.S. national security. 
As unmanned aircraft technology advances, several key 
lessons from the ongoing American saga in space remain 
salient. First, a strategic vision of the broader capability to 
be achieved is a prerequisite for guiding the incremental 
development of scalable technology that will ultimately lead 
to that capability. Second, establishing a robust regulatory 
framework that accounts for both national security and 
revenue generation will ensure that a critical defense 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

capability does not have to sacrificed, because it is too 
expensive. This includes the ability to reconcile export 
control restrictions and allow industries to compete globally 
by marketing their technology overseas. Humanity’s arrival 
in outer space is arguably among the most historically 
significant events in Earth’s history, and the ecosystem of 
teams that can harness the potential of unmanned aircraft 
will propel the trajectory of exploration and capability into 
even as-yet unknown moments of innovation [30].     
III. A BRIEF HISTORY OF UNMANNED AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS 
Having seen how automobiles transformed ground 
transportation, we now move on to explore how the rise of 
unmanned aircraft and related systems is transforming 
aviation. Similar to the development of space capabilities, 
we will see how UAS grew from a national security tool 
into a ubiquitous technology. We will first trace the roots of 
early UAS application in war fighting and proceed to 
enumerate the diverse variety of devices and applications 
that have since evolved. Unmanned flight is not a recent 
development, but the increasing omnipresence of unmanned 
systems and their continually expanding functionality is 
novel. UAS, which include Unmanned Aerial Vehicles 
(UAVs) or drones, Remotely Piloted Aircraft (RPA), and 
other related technology refer to an aircraft and its 
associated elements that can operate without a human pilot 
onboard [31].  
The history of unmanned flight is closely tied to 
international conflict and the evolving requirements of 
military operations. Indeed, the genesis of Unmanned 
Aircraft (UA) dates back nearly a century, to when 
American, British, and German inventors worked to develop 
aircraft like the Curtiss Speed-Scout and Kettering Bug for 
use in World War I [32]. During World War II, the British 
Queen Bees, American Denny Drones and German V-1 
Buzzbombs were employed as pilot training aids in target 
practice and explosive ordinance delivery systems [33]. As 
the conclusion of the Second World War segued to a more 
protracted Cold War, Intelligence, Surveillance, and 
Reconnaissance (ISR) became a vital national capability. 
With the downing of U2 spy planes and capture or death of 
their pilots in 1959 over the Soviet Union and Cuba in 1962, 
the U.S. was forced to recognize the value of unmanned 
reconnaissance aircraft, and the Air Force and Central 
Intelligence Agency coordinated through the National 
Reconnaissance Office (NRO) to develop multiple variants 
of the Ryan Firebee, which were flown extensively during 
the Vietnam War in order to conduct surveillance and battle  
damage assessments [34]. While the intelligence community 
was a significant contributor to the development of 
unmanned capability, via the NRO, through the 1970s and 
into the 1980s, the U.S. reduced its focus on UAS in favor 
of satellite reconnaissance, and by 1991, the U.S. looked to 
Israel’s Pioneer unmanned platform for ISR support over 
Iraq [35]. While satellites are a vital component of national 
intelligence capability, they are constrained in their ability 
to adapt to mobile objects of interest. The re-commissioning 
of SR-71 Blackbirds into military service in the mid 1990s 
demonstrates the unchanging need for a responsive and 
flexible reconnaissance capability, which satellites simply 
cannot fulfill in light of their fixed orbits [36].  
As a result of Pioneer’s significant contributions during 
the Persian Gulf War, the DoD increased its own research 
and development efforts for unmanned systems, and fielded 
the Predator in operations over the Balkan Peninsula in the 
mid 1990s. Imagery generated by the Predator and other 
remote sensing assets was so useful during negotiations of 
the 1995 Dayton Peace Accords that the National Imagery 
and Mapping Agency (NIMA) was created the following 
year, combining personnel from eight agencies to lead the 
integration of cartographic imagery and intelligence analysis 
[37]. The USG continued to increase its investment in UAS 
into the new millennium, and NIMA’s transformation into 
the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA) in 2003 
represents the vital role that remote sensing has come to 
play in national security.    
While NGA is the USG’s lead integrator of remote 
sensing imagery, including that collected with unmanned 
aircraft, each of the military services now employ a large 
and diverse fleet of UAS for a variety of long-endurance 
and high-risk missions. These include ISR, force protection, 
resupply, signals collection, and direct strikes [38]. In fact, 
the DoD’s inventory of UA is fast approaching that of 
manned aircraft, at roughly 7,500 and 10,700, respectively 
[39]. And these unmanned assets are generating vast 
amounts of data; at the height of U.S. campaigns in both 
Iraq and Afghanistan, UAS generated 24 years’ worth of 
surveillance in a single year [40]. The operation of just one 
Global Hawk UAS generates 500 megabits of data per 
second, which is about five times the satellite-relayed data 
flow or bandwidth used by the entire U.S. military during 
the Persian Gulf War [41]. The explosion in data throughput 
requirements brought on by UAS capability has introduced 
its own set of challenges, as the expansion of fiber optic 
cable networks have stunted the growth of satellite 
bandwidth. During early deployments at the onset of 
Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan, operators of 
the Global Hawk frequently had to lower its video 
resolution and cope with fuzzier images in order to avoid 
overwhelming the capacity of communication systems. 
Indeed, the availability of satellite bandwidth will continue 
to be an important consideration for both military and civil 
UAS operations going forward.  
While the technical achievements of UAS in war are 
significant, it is important to note that their use for kinetic 
operations or direct strike missions is not without 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

controversy [42]. The United Kingdom’s Ministry of 
Defence has acknowledged that unmanned direct strikes 
may actually undermine military campaigns by giving 
adversaries a “potent propaganda weapon” [43]. The 
precedent which the U.S. and its coalition partners have 
established by using UAS overseas for targeted killings 
raises important questions about international regulation in 
light of recent developments in Pakistan and elsewhere [44]. 
We will explore this issue further in the following section. 
While the military service record of UAS for carrying out 
dull, dirty, and dangerous missions is well-established, their 
employment for non-military use represents an area of 
potentially enormous expansion. As demonstrated below in 
Figure 2, military applications continue to dominate UAS 
sales, and the civil UAS market is controlled by a small 
number of manufacturers. Within non-military UAS 
applications, the FAA delineates three broad civil 
categories: public (i.e. governmental), commercial, and 
private. UAS use is growing rapidly in each of these areas, 
as we will further explore below. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Employing UAS as remote sensors holds promise for 
many 
public 
services; 
because 
it 
enables 
civilian 
government agencies to collect information that otherwise 
would be prohibitively expensive to gather using manned 
aircraft or satellite surveillance. Such a capability can be 
particularly valuable in safeguarding critical infrastructure 
and responding to natural disasters. For example, the early 
detection and continuous tracking of forest fires is a 
perennial challenge due to the inaccessible and mountainous 
terrain in which many fires occur. However, by using UAS 
to detect the outbreak and monitor the path of forest fires, 
state and federal responders are able to safely and more 
effectively 
stop 
their 
spread 
[45]. 
Similarly, 
law 
enforcement officers are beginning to use drones to detect 
illegal activities and track perpetrators, a capability that was 
historically limited by the cost of manned helicopters [46]. 
The Department of Homeland Security has been using UAS 
since 2004 to help close the gap in its ability to monitor 
isolated portions of the southern U.S. land and littoral 
borders, and today operates a fleet of 10 UAS platforms, 
with plans to expand the program in the future [47]. UAS 
can also play a pivotal role in environmental monitoring and 
enhancing our ability to understand and predict extreme 
weather phenomena by enabling scientists to collect more 
precise and complete climatic data, with the National 
Aeronautic and Space Administration’s Helios project being 
one notable example [48]. Similarly, natural resource 
management efforts, including analysis of the effects of 
livestock grazing on the health of rangeland ecology are 
benefitting from UAS capabilities [49]. Remote sensing via 
UAS is also enabling federal and state Departments of 
Transportation to conduct traffic surveillance, assess road 
conditions, analyze travel patterns, and detect emergencies 
[50]. These examples are only a glimpse of the many 
potential benefits to be gained by the public use of UAS. 
Commercial applications for UAS are equally varied, 
with only a small portion of potential uses having been 
realized thus far. In addition to the potential for UAS to 
enhance critical infrastructure protection, which combines 
aspects of public safety and commercial benefit, there are 
many opportunities for improved business efficiency. In 
Japan, 90% of all precision pesticide-spraying is done with a 
fleet of over 2500 unmanned helicopters [51]. Other 
examples include real estate mapping, aerial news and 
sporting event coverage, movie and television production, 
and cargo transportation. As UAS technology becomes 
more affordable, it is reasonable to expect that pervasive 
remote sensing itself will be marketed as a commodity in 
much the same way that smart phones have given rise to 
novel data-driven services [52]. 
Private UAS use carries on a well-established tradition 
of model aircraft piloting for recreational purposes, but also 
represents a significant threat if used for malicious purposes. 
As we have demonstrated in earlier research, UAS represent 
an important component in Improvisational Malignant 
Devices (coined as IMDs), which are characterized by low 
levels of sophistication and required resources, yet can yield 
significant destabilizing impact on complex systems such as 
critical infrastructure. While the U.S. has demonstrated 
some success in averting plans to employ UAS in malicious 
acts [53], events like the recent White House fly over and 
crash landing underscore the challenges associated with 
quickly detecting and responding to such acts as they occur 
[54].  
IV. 
COMPARING U.S. AND INTERNATIONAL LEGAL 
PRECEDENT TO INFORM UAS REGULATION  
Having established the comparatively long history of UA 
operations, and the wide variety of applications into which 
their employment has expanded, we now turn to the policies 
and regulations which govern their use. While Congress has 
mandated that regulations be developed to govern the 
 
Figure 2. Estimated 2014 UAS Market Characteristics, Sources: 
Bloomberg News; Teal Group Corporation
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

operation of UAS in the National Airspace System (NAS) 
before the end of this year, the policy of the FAA for the last 
ten years has been to broadly prohibit the operation of UAS 
for public or commercial purposes, instead regulating their 
exceptional limited use by issuing special air worthiness 
certificates and certificates of waiver or authorization [55].  
This tact contrasts sharply with the U.S. Commercial 
Remote Sensing Policy, which asserts that maintaining the 
nation’s leadership in remote sensing activities and 
enhancing the industry will protect national security and 
foster economic growth [56]. A more deliberate policy 
linkage between remote sensing and UAS could go a long 
way to reconciling this divergence, and promoting the 
advance of national capabilities in pervasive remote sensing. 
The FAA’s recent release of a notice of proposed 
rulemaking for operation and certification of small UAS is a 
promising first step towards opening a sliver of the NAS to 
commercial unmanned activities [57]. The proposal reflects 
a balanced incremental approach, as it would place narrow 
limits on UAS operations and institute safe guards such as 
security threat assessments for prospective operators and 
mandatory device registration.   
With regard to private operations, FAA’s guidance for 
model aircraft from 1981 has been applied to UAS, advising 
that aircraft be operated away from populated areas at no 
higher than 400 ft above the ground, at least three miles 
from airports [58]. However, as with the proposed small 
UAS rule, such an advisory relies largely on the ability of 
local law enforcement to detect the misuse of UAS, and 
does not establish a systematic mechanism for addressing 
misuse or malicious use. As Figure 3 illustrates, there are a 
variety of complex dynamics at play in UAS regulation.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Indeed, any robust regulatory framework for unmanned 
aircraft operations must address the blind spot of 
maliciously-employed UAS as an emerging threat vector.   
To be sure, the development of policy for the broad civilian 
use and commercialization of domestic unmanned flight is 
no simple task. The difficulty of this task is compounded by 
the need to ensure harmony with a variety of contending 
issues as depicted in Figure 3, not to mention the technical 
complexity of UAS themselves. 
While the FAA has rightly focused on the practical 
mechanics of  safe operation, such as sense and avoid 
protocols, airworthiness standards, and pilot certification 
[59], a host of broader existential challenges also loom. For 
example, the case law for air rights establishes that the 
owner of a property also owns and is entitled to exclusive 
use of as much of the uncontrolled airspace above that 
property as they are reasonably capable of using [60].With 
the advent of UAS, property owners are now capable of 
using much more of their airspace. Therefore, a careful 
balance must be struck to ensure that public and commercial 
UAS are able to operate effectively without infringing on 
citizens’ rights to their own airspace. Meanwhile, defining 
what constitutes acceptable use of one’s airspace is also a 
central concern. As the State Department has encountered 
resistance from host nations regarding the U.S. authority to 
collect and disseminate data from the airspace above its 
embassies [61], it is clear that enhanced data collection 
capability will require more sophisticated forms of 
regulation.  
In addition to reconciling potential conflict with existing 
law, UAS regulations must also complement the FAA’s 
larger 
Next 
Generation 
Air 
Transportation 
System 
(NextGen) transformation effort [62]. NextGen aims to 
leverage satellite communication to supersede the currently 
overburdened radar systems in order to increase air traffic 
volume, safety, and efficiency. But, how to achieve these 
goals while integrating UAS is an open question, albeit one 
that appears to lend itself well to a Big Data paradigm based 
on effective management of increased data availability. In 
the NextGen system, more networked communication 
between air traffic controllers, aircraft pilots, and aircraft 
themselves will result in much larger amounts of data being 
generated, which raises important socio-techno concerns. 
Broadly speaking, we must determine how the roles of man 
and machine in air traffic control operations should evolve. 
More specifically, we must determine whether trends such 
as the Federal Communications Commission’s support of an 
industry-wide shift from the Ku to Ka frequency bands for 
satellite links with UAS and other earth stations is 
introducing brittleness into the national communications 
infrastructure in light of Ka band’s demonstrated 
vulnerability to signal attenuation in moist atmospheric 
conditions [63].  
Although the tenets of international UAS regulation are 
perhaps even more ambiguous than those of U.S. policy, a 
review of legal precedent is instructive. The basic freedoms 
of the air established in the Chicago Convention and 
promoted by the United Nations (UN) International Civil 
Aviation Organization (ICAO) address issues of passenger 
aircraft, providing that states may grant each other the 
privileges of flying across, landing in, taking on, and putting 
Figure 3. Sample of competing systemic factors impacting the 
development of comprehensive UAS policy
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

down traffic between states [64]. The ICAO has identified 
preliminary steps to bring UAS under the Chicago 
Convention rubric, but the transformative nature of the 
technology may warrant an even more fundamental 
restructuring of the framework governing air operations.   
In this regard, the principles guiding maritime affairs 
potentially offer insight. In particular, Admiralty Law 
governing maritime navigation and shipping establishes that 
a ship’s flag determines the source of law, such that vessels 
traveling outside their own national waters remain subject to 
the laws of their home nation. Assuming the U.S. and other 
nations develop regulations for the use of UAS in their own 
borders, applying the Admiralty principle to unmanned 
operation in international airspace appears logical. In 
addition, the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (LOS) 
[65] establishes territorial seas in which the sovereignty of a 
state is extended 12 miles beyond its shore, including 
airspace above the water. Foreign vessels are permitted 
innocent or transitory passage through another nation’s 
territorial waters, but solely for the purpose of traversal. 
Notably, conducting any survey activities during the 
passage of another nation’s territorial waters is construed as 
prejudicial to the peace of that nation, and therefore illegal. 
The Convention also establishes Exclusive Economic Zones 
(EEZs) extending 200 nautical miles from a sovereign 
nation’s shore in which that nation enjoys exclusive 
commercial and exploratory rights. Any area outside the 
territorial seas and EEZs are designated as the high seas, and 
are open to all states for peaceful purposes.  
Extrapolating from the LOS, international airspace 
correlates neatly to the high seas and controlled national 
airspace correlates to territorial seas, but what about 
exclusive economic zones? As remote sensing capabilities 
expand with UAS, public and commercial applications 
requiring global circumnavigation will undoubtedly emerge. 
U.S. national airspace above 60,000 feet is currently 
designated Class E, the least regulated of any of the six 
airspace classes. Looking above the atmosphere, the Outer 
Space Treaty establishes that all nations and non-
governmental organizations have the right to freely explore 
outer space without any discrimination [66]. From this 
context, an upper limit of nationally controlled airspace 
above which nations could freely navigate UAS is 
conceivable.  
The employment of UAS across international borders for 
military operations is governed by established laws of 
armed conflict such as the 1949 Geneva Convention, yet 
new precedent is unquestionably being established by the 
U.S. amidst its global pursuit of Al-Qa’ida and affiliated 
entities [67]. Whether the protracted deployment of UAS for 
worldwide low intensity applications of force is indeed 
conducive to a stable international system is somewhat 
doubtful. In contrast, the Antarctic Treaty System (ATS) 
offers a more viable alternative. It establishes that as the 
only continent with no recognized or disputed claims of 
sovereignty, Antarctica will be used solely for peaceful 
purposes, namely scientific investigation and cooperation 
between its 50 signatories. While conflicts regarding the 
ATS do arise, such as the dispute between militant 
conservationists and whale “research” vessels [68], the 
cooperative spirit of the ATS lends credibility to a similarly 
open arrangement for globally operating UAS. Enabling the 
use of UAS for pervasive remote sensing increases our data 
collection capacity, this in turn increases our understanding 
of complex phenomena and contributes to enhanced 
resilience. However, addressing the privacy and security 
ramifications of a global pervasive remote sensing 
capability will be of chief importance to future international 
UAS regulations.   
Although the exact form of UAS regulation has yet to 
crystallize, several facts are clear. First, the de-facto ban on 
public and commercial operations in the U.S. has confined 
the development of non-military UAS production. It is 
estimated that growth of the civil UAS industry will 
generate 70 thousand jobs in the first three years of 
integration and $80 billion over the next ten years, with each 
day of non-integration representing nearly a $28 million loss 
[69]. Indeed, the world’s top two producers of commercial 
UAS are outside the U.S., and in an ironic turn of events, 
the platform being touted as the “Model T of unmanned 
aircraft” – The DJI Phantom – is being produced in the 
Silicon Valley of the East; Shenzhen, China [70]. Second, as 
UAS become more widely available, their potential to 
destabilize brittle systems through accidental misuse or 
deliberate malicious action will increase. Although they are 
areas for future research, geo-fencing and mandatory device 
registration are two possible components of a technical 
solution to UAS malicious use. More generally, developing 
policies and regulations that foster innovation and harness 
UAS as pervasive remote sensors can both mitigate the 
potential threat of blind spots posed by such technology 
while leveraging it to enhance resilience. Most importantly, 
creating a strategic vision that builds on the military and 
intelligence value of UAS by incorporating the technology 
into each of the remaining elements of national power can 
strengthen the nation’s economy and expand its diplomatic 
reach.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
From the assertion that Big Data is essential to building 
critical infrastructural resilience, we have come to the 
question centering upon how that capability is actually 
developed at a national strategic level through public policy 
and regulation. We are at a critical phase in the proliferation 
of unmanned aircraft systems as a transformative 
technology, and the shape of regulatory policy for the broad 
civil use of these systems will be a determining factor in the 
fate of pervasive remote sensing as a strategic national 
capability. UAS offer a potential doorway to pervasive 
remote sensing in a Big Data Paradigm. But, in order to 
unlock the door, public policy must catch up with 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

technology. Our historical hindcasting of trends in 
international space capability and automobile manufacturing 
underscore the influence that policy and regulation exert on 
the development of transformative technology. Through 
these cases, the potential for blind spots in public policy to 
introduce brittleness into critically important national 
capabilities is clear. A resilient civil UAS regulatory 
framework can and must capitalize on the potential benefits 
of this promising technology while respecting the danger it 
poses. Unmanned aircraft systems have shown significant 
success as a tool for generating Big Data to inform overseas 
military and intelligence operations, yet as applications are 
quickly expanding worldwide for their civil use, a 
commensurate regulatory framework for the systematic 
integration into the national airspace system has taken 
longer to develop. This constitutes a significant blind spot 
that is resulting in a loss of economic opportunities and 
degradation of national security.  
While unmanned aircraft pose a unique set of policy 
challenges, the development of a robust regulatory 
framework for their civil operation is not an insurmountable 
task. In order to be effective, such a framework must outline 
a strategic vision for employing UAS as a national 
capability while directly addressing the security threats 
posed by such technology. In particular, sound UAS policy 
will include mechanisms that incentivize industry to develop 
technology that is both commercially competitive in the 
global marketplace, and complementary to national strategic 
priorities. In turn, the technological advantages presented by 
unmanned aircraft systems have the potential to yield vast 
increases in the amount of data available to engineer more 
sound 
decisions, 
including 
decisions 
regarding 
the 
prevention and mitigation of UAS malicious use.  
This increase in available data and enhanced decision 
engineering is at the core of a Big Data Paradigm for 
pervasive remote sensing, and can improve our approach to a 
variety of missions, including critical infrastructure 
protection, homeland defense, law enforcement, resource 
management, environmental stewardship, and disaster 
response. Pervasive remote sensing will drive the advance of 
analytics in a host of commercial and research fields, as it 
makes more data available. However, this potential can only 
be realized if the proliferation of UAS is managed 
proactively and wisely. In light of a Big Data paradigm’s 
value for these issues, we look forward to future work 
exploring what other areas of strategic interest might 
similarly benefit from such a paradigm. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank the Cyber Futures 
Center, an initiative of the Sensemaking-U.S. Pacific 
Command Fellowship, and the Dr. Steve Chan Center for 
Sensemaking — one of the centers of the Asia-Pacific 
Institute for Resilience and Sustainability (AIRS), which is 
jointly anchored at Swansea University’s Network Science 
Research Center and Hawaii Pacific University — for the 
opportunity to study the challenges facing Hawaii and other 
archipelagos, and to contribute towards the various Public 
Private Partnership Initiatives aimed at developing solutions 
to overcome those challenges.  
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Zaslavsky, C. Perera, and D. Georgakopoulos, "Sensing as a service 
and big data," arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.0159, 2013. 
[2] F. Viani, P. Rocca, G. Oliveri, and A. Massa, "Pervasive remote sensing 
through WSNs," in Antennas and Propagation (EUCAP), 2012 6th 
European Conference on, 2012, pp. 49-50. 
[3] L. Dorrington. (2011, January 24, 2011) 125th Anniversary of the 
Automobile: Karl Benz and Gottlieb Daimler put the world on wheels 
Autoweek. 
Available: 
http://autoweek.com/article/car-news/125th-
anniversary-automobile-karl-benz-and-gottlieb-daimler-put-world-wheels-
0 accessed February 15, 2015 
[4] F. Alizon, S. B. Shooter, and T. W. Simpson, "Henry Ford and the 
Model T: lessons for product platforming and mass customization," Design 
Studies, vol. 30, pp. 588-605, 2009. 
[5] R. B. D. Boff, "The Introduction of Electric Power in American 
Manufacturing," The Economic History Review, vol. 20, pp. 509-518, 
1967. 
[6] P. Wells and P. Nieuwenhuis, "Transition failure: Understanding 
continuity in the automotive industry," Technological Forecasting and 
Social Change, vol. 79, pp. 1681-1692, 2012. 
[7] M. A. Cusumano, "Manufacturing innovation: lessons from the 
Japanese auto industry," Sloan Management Review, vol. 29, 2013. 
[8] J. H. Dyer, "Specialized Supplier Networks as a Source of Competitive 
Advantage: Evidence from the Auto Industry," Strategic Management 
Journal, vol. 17, pp. 271-291, 1996. 
[9] T. Nishiguchi, A. Beaudet, and B. M. Strategy, "The Toyota group and 
the Aisin fire," Image, 2012. 
[10] Treasury, "The Department of the Treasury Office of Financial 
Stability – Troubled Asset Relief Program Citizens' Report Fiscal year 
2014," D. o. t. Treasury, Ed., ed. Washington, D.C., 2014. 
[11] C. Berggren and T. Magnusson, "Reducing automotive emissions—
The potentials of combustion engine technologies and the power of policy," 
Energy Policy, vol. 41, pp. 636-643, 2012. 
[12] J. N. K. K. Schmidt. (2009, April 15, 2009) History of U.S. 
Government 
Bailouts. 
ProPublica. 
Available: 
http://www.propublica.org/special/government-bailouts#tarp 
accessed 
February 10, 2015 
[13] E. Pawlikowski, D. Loverro, and T. Cristler, "Space: Disruptive 
Challenges, New Opportunities, and New Strategies," Strategic Studies 
Quarterly, 2012. 
[14] B. Warf, "International Competition Between Satellite and Fiber Optic 
Carriers: A Geographic Perspective," The Professional Geographer, vol. 
58, pp. 1-11, 2006/02/01 2006. 
[15] R. J. Zelnio, "Whose jurisdiction over the US commercial satellite 
industry? Factors affecting international security and competition," Space 
Policy, vol. 23, pp. 221-233, 2007. 
[16] H. R. Hertzfeld, "Globalization, commercial space and spacepower in 
the USA," Space Policy, vol. 23, pp. 210-220, 2007. 
[17] B. R. Early, "Exploring the Final Frontier: An Empirical Analysis of 
Global Civil Space Proliferation," International Studies Quarterly, vol. 58, 
pp. 55-67, 2014. 
[18] SIA, "State of the Satellite Industry Report," Satellite Industry 
Association, Washington, D.C.2014. 
[19] HPA, "The Impact of U.S. Space Transportation Policy on the 
Commercially Hosted Payload Enterprise," Hosted Payloads Alliance, 
Deerfield, Illinois2012. 
[20] M. Gruss, "Pentagon Lease of Chinese Bandwidth Arouses Concern " 
in Space News, ed, 2013. 
[21] P. Enge and P. Misra, "Special Issue on Global Positioning System," 
Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 87, pp. 3-15, 1999. 
[22] GAO, "GPS Disruptions: Efforts to Assess Risks to Critical 
Infrastructure and Coordinate Agency Actions Should Be Enhanced," U. S. 
G. A. Office, Ed., ed. Washington, D.C., 2013. 
[23] S. Cojocaru, E. Birsan, G. Batrinca, and P. Arsenie, "GPS-GLONASS-
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

GALILEO: a dynamical comparison," Journal of Navigation, vol. 62, pp. 
135-150, 2009. 
[24] J. C. Moltz, "Technology: Asia's space race," Nature, vol. 480, pp. 
171-173, 2011. 
[25] D. Rumsfeld, D. Andrews, R. Davis, H. Estes, R. Fogleman, J. Garner, 
et al., "Report of the Commission to Assess United States National Security 
Space Management and Organization," Government Printing Office, 
Washington, DC, 2001. 
[26] L. J. DeLucas, "International space station," Acta Astronautica, vol. 
38, pp. 613-619, 1996. 
[27] W. C. Martel and T. Yoshihara, "Averting a Sino‐U.S. space race," 
The Washington Quarterly, vol. 26, pp. 19-35, 2003/09/01 2003. 
[28] J. M. Logsdon, "Change and continuity in US space policy," Space 
Policy, vol. 27, pp. 1-2, 2011. 
[29] E. Strickland, "The next space super-power," Spectrum, IEEE, vol. 51, 
pp. 48-51, 2014. 
[30] S. Burleigh, V. G. Cerf, J. Crowcroft, and V. Tsaoussidis, "Space for 
Internet and Internet for space," Ad Hoc Networks, vol. 23, pp. 80-86, 
2014. 
[31] ICAO, "Circular 328, Unmanned Aerial Systems," I. C. A. 
Organization, Ed., ed. Montreal, Quebec, Canada, 2011. 
[32] K. L. B. Cook, "The Silent Force Multiplier: The History and Role of 
UAVs in Warfare," in Aerospace Conference, 2007 IEEE, 2007, pp. 1-7. 
[33] L. R. Newcome, Unmanned aviation: a brief history of unmanned 
aerial vehicles: Pen and Sword, 2005. 
[34] J. M. Sullivan, "Revolution or evolution? The rise of the UAVs," in 
Technology and Society, 2005. Weapons and Wires: Prevention and Safety 
in a Time of Fear. ISTAS 2005. Proceedings. 2005 International 
Symposium on, 2005, pp. 94-101. 
[35] T. P. Ehrhard, "Air Force UAV's: The Secret History," Mitchell 
Institute for Airpower Studies, Arlington, VA2010. 
[36] SASC/HASC, "National Defense Authorization Act and Military 
Construction Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1995 - Conference Report," 
U. Congress, Ed., ed. Washington, D.C.: Congressional Record, 1994. 
[37] NGA, "The Advent of the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency," 
O. o. t. H. Historian, Ed., ed. St. Louis, MO, 2011. 
[38] OSD, "Unmanned Aircraft Systems Roadmap 2005-2030," D. o. 
Defense, Ed., ed. Washington, D.C., 2005. 
[39] OSD AT&L, "Department of Defense Report to Congress on Future 
Unmanned Aircraft Systems Training, Operations, and Sustainability ", D. 
o. Defense, Ed., ed. Washington, D.C., 2012. 
[40] A. Bleicher, "Eyes in the Sky That See Too Much [Update]," 
Spectrum, IEEE, vol. 47, pp. 16-16, 2010. 
[41] G. Jaffe. (April 10, 2002) Military Feels Bandwidth Squeeze As the 
Satellite 
Industry 
Sputters. 
Wall 
Street 
Journal. 
Available: 
http://www.wsj.com/articles/SB1018389902229614520 accessed February 
12, 2015 
[42] Stanford/NYU, "Living Under Drones: Death, Injury, and Trauma to 
Civilians from U.S. Drone Practices in Pakistan," International Human 
Rights and Conflict Resolution Clinic at Stanford Law School and Global 
Justice Clinic at NYU School of Law2012. 
[43] U.K. MoD, "Joint Doctrine Note 2/11 The U.K. Approach to 
Unmanned Aircraft Systems," M. o. Defence, Ed., ed. Shrivenham, United 
Kingdom: Development, Concepts and Doctrine Centre, 2011. 
[44] M. Mazzetti and M. Apuzzo, "Deep Support in Washington for 
C.I.A.’s Drone Missions," in New York Times, ed. New York, NY, 2015. 
[45] D. W. Casbeer, R. W. Beard, T. W. McLain, L. Sai-Ming, and R. K. 
Mehra, "Forest fire monitoring with multiple small UAVs," in American 
Control Conference, 2005. Proceedings of the 2005, 2005, pp. 3530-3535 
vol. 5. 
[46] J. Horgan. (2013, March 2013) The Drones Come Home. National 
Geographic. 
Available: 
http://ngm.nationalgeographic.com/2013/03/unmanned-flight/horgan-text 
accessed February 18, 2015 
[47] C. H. J. Gertler, "Homeland Security: Unmanned Aerial Vehicles and 
Border Surveillance ", C. R. Service, Ed., ed. Washington D.C., 2010. 
[48] M. Dunbabin and L. Marques, "Robots for Environmental Monitoring: 
Significant Advancements and Applications," Robotics & Automation 
Magazine, IEEE, vol. 19, pp. 24-39, 2012. 
[49] A. Rango, A. Laliberte, J. E. Herrick, C. Winters, K. Havstad, C. 
Steele, et al., "Unmanned aerial vehicle-based remote sensing for rangeland 
assessment, monitoring, and management," Journal of Applied Remote 
Sensing, vol. 3, pp. 033542-033542-15, 2009. 
[50] A. Puri, "A survey of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) for traffic 
surveillance," Department of computer science and engineering, University 
of South Florida, 2005. 
[51] NRC, Autonomy Research for Civil Aviation: Toward a New Era of 
Flight. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press, 2014. 
[52] W. Hongwei and H. Wenbo, "A Reservation-based Smart Parking 
System," 
in 
Computer 
Communications 
Workshops 
(INFOCOM 
WKSHPS), 2011 IEEE Conference on, 2011, pp. 690-695. 
[53] J. Bidgood, "Massachusetts Man Gets 17 Years in Terrorist Plot," in 
New York Times, ed, 2012. 
[54] M. S. M. Shear, "A Drone, Too Small for Radar to Detect, Rattles the 
White House," in New York Times, ed. New York City, NY, 2014. 
[55] H. G. Wolf, "Unmanned aircraft systems integration into the national 
airspace," in Aerospace Conference, 2013 IEEE, 2013, pp. 1-16. 
[56] "White House U.S. Commercial Remote Sensing Policy," ed. 
Washington, D.C., 2003. 
[57] Operation and Certification of Small Unmanned Aircraft Systems, U. 
S. D. o. Transportation RIN 2120–AJ60, 2015. 
[58] FAA, "Department of Transportation Federal Aviation Administration 
Advisory Circular 91-57 Model Aircraft Operating Standards," U. S. D. o. 
Transportation, Ed., ed. Washington, D.C., 1981. 
[59] FAA, "Integration of Civil Unmanned Aircraft Systems in the National 
Airspace System Roadmap," U. S. D. o. Transportation, Ed., First Edition 
ed. Washington D.C. : FAA Communications, 2013. 
[60] A. Madrigal. (2012, October 25, 2012) If I Fly a UAV Over My 
Neighbor's 
House, 
Is 
It 
Trespassing? 
The 
Atlantic. 
Available: 
http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2012/10/if-i-fly-a-uav-
over-my-neighbors-house-is-it-trespassing/263431/ accessed February 20, 
2015 
[61] S. S. S. Olivier. (2012, June 13, 2012) China Has No Good Answer to 
the U.S. Embassy Pollution-Monitoring. The Atlantic. Available: 
http://www.theatlantic.com/international/archive/2012/06/china-has-no-
good-answer-to-the-us-embassy-pollution-monitoring/258447/ 
accessed 
February 20, 2015 
[62] R. N. Van Dyk, D. H. Pariseau, R. E. Dodson, B. T. Martin, A. T. 
Radcliffe, E. A. Austin, et al., "Systems integration of Unmanned Aircraft 
into the National Airspace: Part of the Federal Aviation Administration 
Next Generation Air Transportation System," in Systems and Information 
Design Symposium (SIEDS), 2012 IEEE, 2012, pp. 156-161. 
[63] S. Sala, M. Zennaro, L. Sokol, A. Miao, R. Spousta, and S. Chan, 
"Mitigation of Rain-Induced Ka-Band Attenuation and Enhancement of 
Communications Resiliency in Sub-Saharan Africa," 2013. 
[64] ICAO, "Manual on the Regulation of International Air Transport - 
Second Edition," I. C. A. Organization, Ed., ed. Montreal, CA, 2004. 
[65] United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, U. Nations, 1982. 
[66] R. S. Jakhu and J. N. Pelton, "The Global Legal Guidelines Governing 
Satellite Deployment," in Small Satellites and Their Regulation, ed: 
Springer, 2014, pp. 43-48. 
[67] C. Heyns, "Report of the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, 
summary or arbitrary executions "  vol. A/68/382, U. N. G. Assembly, Ed., 
ed. New York, NY: U.N. General Assembly, 2013. 
[68] D. R. Rothwell, "The Polar Regions and the Development of 
International Law: Contemporary Reflections and Twenty-First Century 
Challenges," The Yearbook of Polar Law Online, vol. 5, pp. 233-251, 
2013. 
[69] D. J. B. Vasigh, "The Economic Impact of Unmanned Aircraft 
Systems Integration in the United States," Association for Unmanned 
Vehicle Systems International, Arlington, VA2013. 
[70] J. N. C. Murphy. (2014, November 10, 2014) Who Builds the World's 
Most 
Popular 
Drones? 
The 
Wall 
Street 
Journal. 
Available: 
http://www.wsj.com/articles/who-builds-the-worlds-most-popular-drones-
1415645659 accessed February 20, 2015 
 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

