Discovering and Linking Financial Data on the Web 
 
José Luis Sánchez-Cervantes 
Universidad Carlos III de Madrid 
  Av. Universidad 30, Leganés, 28911, 
Madrid, Spain. 
+34 91 624 5936 
joseluis.s.cervantes@alumnos.uc3m.es 
 
Juan Miguel Gómez-Berbís 
Universidad Carlos III de Madrid 
  Av. Universidad 30, Leganés, 28911, 
Madrid, Spain. 
+34 91 624 5936 
juanmiguel.gomez@uc3m.es
Gandhi S. Hernández-Chan 
Universidad Carlos III de Madrid 
  Av. Universidad 30, Leganés, 28911,   
Madrid, Spain. 
+34 91 624 5936 
gandhi.hernandez@alumnos.uc3m.es 
 
Ángel García-Crespo 
Universidad Carlos III de Madrid 
  Av. Universidad 30, Leganés, 28911, 
Madrid, Spain. 
+34 91 624 5936 
acrespo@ia.uc3m.es 
 
 
Mateusz Radzimski 
Universidad Carlos III de Madrid 
  Av. Universidad 30, Leganés, 28911, 
Madrid, Spain. 
+34 91 624 5936 
mradzims@pa.uc3m.es
Abstract—The constant publishing of large volumes of 
financial information by various business sector organizations 
through its financial statements is a fact that must be 
exploited by using semantic technologies. This paper describes 
the use of Linked Data to generate a financial dataset that is 
part of the ongoing work of the FLORA (Financial Linked 
Open Data Reasoning and Management for Web Science) 
project. Furthermore, we describe a process to discover other 
relevant links within the LOD cloud which can be related to 
FLORA 
dataset 
in 
order 
to 
provide 
a 
financial 
knowledgebase, which might be useful for: data analysis to 
support 
decision 
making, 
generating 
predictions 
or 
performing own financial discoveries to mention a few.  
However, the results of experiments performed, show that the 
coverage of the financial domain of public companies is rather 
small and ambiguous to link them to the FLORA dataset. 
Thus, is necessary involve more data as CIK (Central Index 
Key) or ticker symbol of the companies to objective of 
improve the results quality and implement techniques for 
disambiguation and manual verification. 
 
Keywords-Financial data; Semantics; Linked Open Data; 
FLORA; SILK framework. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The current trend for companies to publish their 
financial 
statements 
under 
the 
Generally 
Accepted 
Accounting Principles (US-GAAP Financial model) and 
following the eXtensible Business Reporting Language 
(XBRL standard), increases the capacity for recovery and 
analysis of relevant data containing financial data semi-
structured which is derived to facilitate the extending of 
financial datasets. Unlike datasets integrated by unstructured 
data and published on the Web, which represent a limitation 
by the high cost of transformation in order to be fit into 
existing analytic models and tools [1]. In our work, we have 
exploited the advantages of using semantic technologies [2], 
Linked Data (and Linked Open Data) [3] itself, which 
involves make the most of the best practices of sharing the 
data across the Web with great integration capabilities [4], 
basically we present a high level overview of an ongoing 
work in the FLORA project. FLORA fosters the transparent 
access to financial data through its dataset developed from 
extraction and triplification of the data contained in the 
financial statements of companies registered on U.S. 
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) [5] through 
fillings and forms stored on EDGAR System [6] 
furthermore, it allowing the easy combination of many 
information sources thus favoring the optimizing for data 
analysis. However, we consider important increasing the 
FLORA functionality through use of frameworks for 
discovering relationships between companies contained on 
FLORA dataset and data items within different Linked 
Data sources. This paper is structured in five sections, 
which are described briefly below. The introduction 
provides an overview of FLORA project, the second 
section corresponds to related work and it is divided into 
two subsections, the first subsection includes tools for 
discovery of links on the Web of data and second 
subsection describes some Linked Data projects. In section 
three, we describe the process for generation of financial 
dataset and discovery of related data items with companies 
stored on FLORA dataset. The fourth section, we describe 
the experiments for discovery of data elements in the LOD 
cloud and we present quantitative results obtained. Finally, 
we mention a conclusion and the future of our work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In recent years, the systems for "triplification" and 
publication of datasets from multiple domains based on the 
Linked 
Data 
principles 
are 
becoming 
increasingly 
important. In this sense, there are several initiatives for the 
discovery of data items contained within the Linked Open 
Data cloud (LOD). We have classified these initiatives in 
two types, which are described briefly below: 
A. Tools for discovery of links on the Web of data 
Silk - Linking Framework [7], a toolkit for discovering 
and maintaining data links between Web data sources was 
presented in [8]. Silk is a tool that allows discovering 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-295-0
DATA ANALYTICS 2013 : The Second International Conference on Data Analytics

relationships between data items within different Linked 
Data sources. Data publishers can use Silk to set RDF 
(Resource Description Framework) [9] links from their data 
sources to other data sources on the Web. The presentation 
and evaluation of LIMES (Link Discovery Framework For 
Metric Spaces) [10] a novel time efficient approach for link 
discovery in metric spaces was described in [11]. The 
authors approach utilizes the mathematical characteristics 
of metric spaces to compute estimates of the similarity 
between instances. Thus, LIMES can reduce the number of 
comparisons needed during the mapping process by several 
orders of magnitude. In [12], LinQL framework was 
presented. It is a generic and extensible framework that 
works like an extension of SQL (Structured Query 
Language). This tool allows users to interleave declarative 
queries with interesting combinations of link discovery 
request. Its goal is to facilitate experimentation and help 
users find and combine the link discovery methods that will 
work best for their application domain. In [13], Silk Server 
was presented. It is an identity resolution component, 
which can be used within Linked Data application 
architectures to augment Web data with additional RDF 
links.  
B. Linked Data applications 
 
In [14], current efforts interlinking music-related 
datasets on the Web were addressed. The authors detail the 
application of an algorithm in two contexts: a) to link the 
Creative Commons music dataset to an editorial, and b) to 
link a personal music collection to corresponding Web 
identifiers. One of the most important features of this 
algorithm is that it was developed, implemented and 
practically it deployed to interlink different music-related 
datasets facing the overlapping problem. Faviki is an 
example of linked data application. It is a social 
bookmarking tool that lets users tag Web pages with 
semantic tags stemming from Wikipedia [15]. In [16], K-
Search was presented. K-Search is an implementation of 
Hybrid Search (HS) another manifestation of linked data. It 
combines the flexibility of keyword-based retrieval with 
the ability to query and reason on metadata typical of 
semantic search systems. HS is defined as: i) the 
application of semantic search for the parts of the user 
queries where metadata is available and ii) the application 
of keyword-based search (KS) for the parts not covered by 
metadata however, KS is often affected by two main issues, 
ambiguity 
and 
synonymy. 
The 
LDIF-Linked 
Data 
Integration Framework [17] can be used with Linked Data 
applications to translate heterogeneous data from the Web 
of Linked data into a clean local target representation 
mapping language for translating data from various 
vocabularies that are used on the Web into a consistent, 
local target vocabulary. It includes an identity resolution 
component, which discovers URI (Uniform Resource 
Identifier) based on user-provides matching heuristic. The 
goal of Linking Open Drug Data (LODD) project presented 
in [18] is to facilitate the integration of large amounts of 
biomedical data from many different sources by bringing 
these data sources onto the Web of Linked Data. The 
biomedical datasets selected allow strong connections to 
existing Linked Data resources, while providing novel data 
of interest to pharmaceutical industry and patients. FLORA 
allows search of financial information contained in its data 
set including the calculation of several additional financial 
ratios that help users in finding information relevant to 
them [19]. However, the development of this project is 
iterative to obtain a continuous improvement at every stage 
of research and development whereby which we intend to 
exploit the FLORA possibilities. In the following section, 
stages of FLORA process are described briefly.  
III. 
FLORA FINANCIAL DATASET 
 
The transformation and generation process of FLORA 
dataset consists in investigate appropriate data sources and 
rich in financial information among which include: balance 
sheet, cash flow and income statements from companies. 
So far, we have generated a dataset that stores RDF triples 
generated from the extraction of 409.374 financial 
statements, which have been published in XBRL [20] 
format by different U.S. companies through the EDGAR 
system fillings [21].  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In Figure 1, each stage of the FLORA process has a 
defined function, which is briefly described below: 
1. Data Acquisition: It is to research and get only the data 
sources of interest. The current focus of FLORA system 
is based on US-GAAP XBRL reports containing the 
Forms 10-Q, as published by the SEC EDGAR System. 
The published reports are crawled, downloaded and 
stored for further processing (Stage Data extraction and 
triplification). This stage needs to be repeated (at least 
quarterly) in order to retrieve newest reports and keep 
the system up-to-date. 
2. Conceptual model: It is a meta-model that is the core 
of 
FLORA 
functionality 
because 
semantically 
represents 
the 
interaction 
between 
classes 
and 
subclasses that integrate it. This representation is 
Figure 1. Stages of the FLORA process for generation of financial 
dataset and discovery of related data items 
 
. 
 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-295-0
DATA ANALYTICS 2013 : The Second International Conference on Data Analytics

described in a high level of abstraction (see Figure 2) 
and includes an example of simplified taxonomy 
generated from published balance sheets under US-
GAAP model including its general financial ratios, 
besides allowing the calculation of some additional 
ratios among which are: Total Asset Turnover, Non-
Current Asset Turnover, Current Asset Turnover, 
Rotation of Rotation of Warehouse or Stocks, Working 
Capital, Cash Ratio, Debt Ratio and Ratio of Debt 
Quality. 
3. Data Extraction and Triplification: this stage 
involves two simultaneous processes: the analysis 
(parsing) and extraction of data from financial 
statements made at the first stage and conversion to 
RDF triples extracted data in order to build the required 
dataset.  
4. Dataset generation: this stage is closely related with 
the previous stage and consists in serialize the RDF 
triples to the semantic form. The dataset is following 
Linked Data principles and can be queried through 
SPARQL (Simple Protocol and RDF Query Language)-
based queries.  
5. Discovery of data items within external datasets: this 
is a stage that is currently underway and that we can 
consider the point to be discussed in this paper. As 
shown in Figure 2, the flow "Discovery of related data 
items" defines the search to find and create the links of 
all data stored in the LOD cloud that are related to 
companies registered in the FLORA dataset. Analyzing 
the state of the art (see Section 2) using frameworks like 
LIMES or Silk can be useful to achieve this goal. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Discovering and linking additional data with data existing 
in FLORA dataset, will improve the search criteria and its 
reasoning capabilities. On other hand, through conceptual 
model we can identify the FLORA's behavior as well as 
detected and improve any data inconsistency with the 
possibility to correct or eliminate them. 
 
IV. 
DISCOVERING DATA ITEMS IN THE LOD 
CLOUD 
The volume of data stored in the FLORA system is 
increasing frequently to keep it updated.  However, we find 
it interesting to investigate to what extent the LOD cloud 
covers the financial domain and what other data items may 
be linked with our dataset. To find this information, we 
have performed a set of experiments that allow linking 
external dataset with FLORA dataset through the SILK 
framework which provides the necessary mechanisms for 
discovering relationships between data items corresponding 
to FLORA dataset and different Linked Data sources within 
the LOD cloud.  
As external datasets we have chosen DBpedia, Semantic 
XBRL and SEC triplified dataset. The latter two datasets 
are linking company concepts to DBpedia, but due to the 
outdated version (SEC triplified dataset discontinued as of 
2010) and scarce mappings (Semantic XBRL) the only 
dataset is DBpedia. 
The FLORA dataset that we have created is composed of 
8915 public US companies obtained from SEC EDGAR 
fillings. In order to create mappings between concepts we 
considered comparing the following properties: (i) label, 
(ii) CIK (Central Index Key), (iii) ticker symbol. While the 
CIK and ticker symbol would clearly lead to the best 
results, most of the companies in DBpedia are lacking those 
data, leaving us with only label as a viable property for 
mappings. 
To facilitate mappings, we performed 2 necessary steps: 
we created a list of stopwords for company names, 
including such terms as “inc”, “co”, “ltd” etc. and created a 
list of synonyms with stopwords filtered. In that example, a 
company “Apple Inc.” would have a synonym “Apple”. 
For comparing strings, we used Levenshtein distance 
and a metric that measures the difference between two 
sequences. The Levenshtein distance between two strings is 
defined as the minimum number of edits needed to 
transform one string into the other, with the allowable edit 
operations being insertion, deletion, or substitution of a 
single character.  
After that, we launched experiments with FLORA 
dataset against DBpedia SPARQL endpoint, with following 
parameters: 
• 
Experiment 1 presents a Levenshtein distance with 
value 0 and the use of Stopwords. 
• 
Experiment 2 includes a Levenshtein distance with 
value 0 and no Stopwords (no synonyms, only the 
official company name). 
Figure 2. FLORA conceptual model 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-295-0
DATA ANALYTICS 2013 : The Second International Conference on Data Analytics

• 
Experiment 3 contains a Levenshtein distance with 
value 1 and use of Stopwords. 
• 
Experiment 4 involves a Levenshtein distance 
with value 1 and no use of Stopwords (as in 
Experiment 2). 
The summary of the experiments performed and the 
results obtained are shown in Table 1. 
TABLE 1. SUMMARY OF THE EXPERIMENTS PERFORMED AND THE RESULTS 
OBTAINED 
Linking external dataset experiment 
Number of companies in FLORA dataset: 8915 
Experiment  
Levenshtein 
distance value 
Stopwords 
Discovered Links 
1 
0 
No 
96 
2 
0 
Yes 
1031 
3 
1 
No 
437 
4 
1 
Yes 
3652 
 
The results presented in this section are experiments for 
development of our work and can be considered as partial 
results for the stage of "Discovery of data items within 
external datasets" (see Section 3). While for a simple string 
comparison (experiment 1) we obtain quite a few 
mappings, this is what previously was observed by García 
and Gil [22]. However the striking difference is the 
increase of number of links created when a list of 
synonyms is generated. The distance between strings might 
include many false links, especially for short company 
names, but provides user with more possible alternatives in 
case of longer company names (with typically non-letter or 
a white space character difference). 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 
 
This article presented a complex, unified process of 
transforming unstructured financial data into an interlinked, 
navigable knowledge base for financial information 
management and information discovery within the Web of 
data through the use of frameworks developed for this 
purpose. In the future work we aim at implementing 
LIMES framework, applying of inference using SPIN rules 
and identify and use other financial data sources to perform 
more complex experiments. 
 
The experiment, however, shows that the coverage of 
the financial domain (in case of this paper: public 
companies) is rather small. The lack of data that could be 
used for univocally identify company concepts (such as 
CIK or ticker symbol) makes dataset interlinking still a 
difficult 
task 
requiring 
various 
techniques 
for 
disambiguation and manual verification. 
In the future work, we are focusing on generation of 
rich gazetteer for each company in order to increase the 
number of possible matches based on the company name. 
Also, other string comparing metrics are considered; that 
could use other advanced features for comparing company 
names. After that, we will perform a manual evaluation of 
created links in order to assess the gazetteer and synonym 
list for company mappings. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work was supported by the Spanish Ministry of 
Industry, Tourism, and Commerce under the projects: 
FLORA (TIN2011-27405) and (SEMOSA TSI-020400-
2011-51). It was also supported by The Spanish Ministry of 
Science and Innovation under the project GECALLIA 
(TSI-020100-2011-244). Additionally, this work was 
sponsored by The National Council of Science and 
Technology (CONACYT). 
REFERENCES 
[1] Ciccotello, C. S. and Wood, R. E. An investigation of the 
consistency of financial advice offered by web-based 
sources. Financial Services Review, 10, 1-4 (2001), 5-18. 
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1057-0810(01)00078-6 
[2] Allemang, D. and Hendler, J. Semantic Web for the working 
ontologist: effective modeling in RDFS and OWL. Morgan 
Kaufmann, 2011. ISBN-10: 0123859654. 
[3] Bizer, C., Heath, T. and Berners-Lee, T. Linked data-the 
story so far. International Journal on Semantic Web and 
Information Systems (IJSWIS), 5, 3 (2009), 1-22. DOI= 
10.4018/jswis.2009081901  
[4] O’Riain, S., Harth, A. and Curry, E. Linked data driven 
information systems as an enabler for integrating financial 
data. Information Systems for Global Financial Markets, 
Emerging Developments and Effects, (2011), 239-270.  
DOI=10.4018/978-1-61350-162-7.ch 010 
[5] U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, SEC. Retrieved 
June 16, 2013, from http://www.sec.gov/index.htm 
[6] EDGAR 
System. 
Retrieved 
June 
17, 
2013, 
from 
http://www.sec.gov/edgar.shtml 
[7] Silk - A Link Discovery Framework for the Web of Data. 
Retrieved 
June 
17, 
2013, 
from 
http://wifo5-
03.informatik.uni-mannheim.de/bizer/silk/ 
[8] Volz, J., Bizer, h., Gaedke, M. and Kobilarov, G. 2009. Silk–
a 
link 
discovery 
framework 
for 
the 
web 
of 
data. In Proceedings of the 2nd Linked Data on the Web 
Workshop LDOW2009, (Madrid, Spain, April 20, 2009), 
559-572. 
[9] RDF, Resource Description Framework. Retrieved June 17, 
2013, from http://www.w3.org/RDF/ 
[10] LIMES, Link Discovery Framework for Metric Spaces. 
Retrieved 
June 
17, 
2013, 
from 
http://aksw.org/Projects/LIMES.html 
[11] Ngomo, A. N. and Auer, S. LIMES: a time-efficient 
approach for large-scale link discovery on the web of data. 
In Proceedings of the Twenty-Second international joint 
conference on Artificial Intelligence Volume Three. AAAI 
Press, 2011, 2312-2317. 
[12] Hassanzadeh, O., Lim, L., Kementsietsidis, A., and Wang, 
M. A declarative framework for semantic link discovery over 
relational data. In Proceedings of the 18th international 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-295-0
DATA ANALYTICS 2013 : The Second International Conference on Data Analytics

conference on World Wide Web. (ACM New York, NY, 
USA, 2009), 1101–1102 DOI=10.1145/1526709.1526876 
[13] Isele, R., Jentzsch, A., and Bizer, C. Silk Server-adding 
missing links while consuming linked data. In 1st 
International Workshop on Consuming Linked Data (COLD 
2010). (Shanghai, China, November 8, 2010) 
[14] Raimond, Y., Sutton, C., and Sandler, M. Automatic 
Interlinking of Music Datasets on the Semantic Web. In 
Proceedings of the 1st WorkShop about Linked Data on the 
Web LDOW2008. (Beijing, China, April 22, 2008)   
[15] Hausenblas, M. Exploiting Linked Data to Build Web 
Applications. IEEE Internet Computing, 13(4), 68-73. DOI= 
http://doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/MIC.2009.79 
[16] Bhagdev, R., Chapman, S., Ciravegna, F., Lanfranchi, V. and 
Petrelli, D. Hybrid search: Effectively combining keywords 
and semantic searches. The Semantic Web: Research and 
Applications, 5021 (2008), 554-568. DOI=10.1007/978-3-
540-68234-9_41 
[17] Achultz, A., Matteini, A., Isele, R., Bizer, C., and Becker, C. 
LDIF-Linked 
Data 
Integration 
Framework. 
In 
2nd 
International Workshop in Consuming Linked Data. (Bonn, 
Germany, October 2011)  
[18] Jentzsch, A., Cheung, K., Zhao, J., Samwald, M., 
Hassanzadeh, O., and Andersson, B. Linking Open Drug 
Data. Presented at the Triplification Challenge of the 
International Conference on Semantic Systems. (2009), 3-6. 
[19] Radzimski, M., Sánchez-Cervantes, J. L., Rodríguez-
González, A., Gómez-Berbís, J. M., and García-Crespo, Á. 
FLORA–Publishing Unstructured Financial Information in 
the Linked Open Data Cloud. In International Workshop on 
Finance and Economics on the Semantic Web (FEOSW 
2012), (Heraklion, Greece. May 27-28, 2012), 31. 
[20] XBRL - Extensible Reporting Business Report Language. 
Retrieved June 19, 2013, from http://www.xbrl.org/  
[21] EDGAR System Fillings. Retrieved June 20, 2013 from 
http://www.sec.gov/cgi-bin/browse-edgar?action=getcurrent 
[22] García, R., and Gil, R. Linking XBRL financial data. In D. 
Wood (Ed.), Linking enterprise data. Springer US. (2010), 
103-125. DOI=10.1007/978-1-4419-7665-9_6 
 
 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-295-0
DATA ANALYTICS 2013 : The Second International Conference on Data Analytics

