Learning Analytics: Supporting Teaching and Learning through Learner’s Data 
Analytics and Visualization 
Ali Shiri 
School of Library and Information Studies,  
University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada  
e-mail: ashiri@ualberta.ca 
 
Abstract— This paper reports on the design and development 
of a new learning analytics application for the Moodle learning 
management system. The uniqueness of this application lies in 
its ability to provide transparent access to learner’s data 
interaction for both instructors and students. This application 
allows instructors to monitor their students’ online learning 
activities, interaction and performance and facilitates the 
provision of personalized and enhanced advice to students. It 
also provides students with new visual and analytical tools and 
opportunities to regularly manage their learning activities and 
interactions in order to be able to compare their performance 
with their peers in an ongoing and real time manner. This 
paper addresses the target analytics conference theme.  
Keywords-Learning analytics; learner’s big data; visualization; 
data analytics; learning management systems. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The widespread development of online teaching and 
learning and the introduction of numerous online courses 
and programs have presented new challenges and 
opportunities for the institutes of higher learning to develop 
and apply new ways and tools for monitoring and evaluating 
online teaching and learning. Terms such as educational 
data mining, academic analytics and more commonly 
adopted term ‘learning analytics’ have been used in the 
literature to refer to the methods, tools and techniques for 
gathering very large online data about learners and their 
activities and contexts. The first International Conference on 
Learning Analytics and Knowledge (LAK 2011) [1] defines 
learning analytics as “the measurement, collection, analysis 
and reporting of data about learners and their contexts, for 
purposes of understanding and optimizing learning and the 
environments in which it occurs”. Clow [2] provides a 
learning analytics life cycle to conceptualize successful 
learning analytics work, including four key components, 
namely learners, data, metrics, interventions.  Learner 
means a student who may take an online course or courses 
that make use of a learning management system. The second 
step in the cycle is the generation and capture of data about 
or by the learners, including login and clickstream data. The 
metrics stage refers to the processing of data using various 
metrics, examples of which may include visualization, 
dashboards, list of at-risk students, comparison with 
previous cohorts, etc. The final stage of the cycle refers to, 
for instance, dashboards for learners in order for them to be 
able to compare their activities with their peers or previous 
cohorts, etc.  
The advantages of learning analytics have been 
enumerated by Siemens et al. [3] and Siemens and Long [4], 
some of the important ones include: 
 
Early detection of at-risk students and generating 
alerts for learners and educators 
 
Personalize and adapt learning process and content 
 
Extend and enhance learner achievement, 
motivation, and confidence by providing learners 
with timely information about their performance 
and that of their peers 
 
Higher quality learning design and improved 
curriculum development  
 
Interactive visualizations of complex information 
will give learners and educators the ability to 
“zoom in” or “zoom out” on data sets,  
 
More rapid achievement of learning goals by 
giving learners access to tools that help them to 
evaluate their progress  
A recent report on the state of learning analytics 
concludes that there is widespread interest, both within the 
academic community and beyond, in learning analytics and 
the possibilities they offer for tailoring educational 
opportunities to each learner’s level of need and ability [5].  
II. 
CONETXT AND PRIOR RESEARCH 
There have been a number of learning analytics tools 
developed for various learning management systems, such 
as Moodle, Desire2Learn, Canvas and Blackboard. There 
are two general categories of learning analytics tools. The 
first category is exclusively designed to be used by 
instructors and course designers with features and 
functionalities for analyzing and visualizing data related to 
student activities. The second category provides additional 
features and functionalities for students, as well as 
instructors with access to learners’ interaction and activity 
data. A significant number of these learning analytics tools 
are open source applications, some of which are still being 
developed and others have not been kept up to date.  In the 
following, a review of ongoing and useful projects is 
presented.   
SNAPP 
(Social 
Networks 
Adapting 
Pedagogical 
Practice) is a browser plugin that has limited functionality 
and creates social network diagrams that can be used to 
identify isolated students, network patterns and interaction 
occurring between student participants. This tool allows 
126
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

instructors to evaluate student behavioral patterns against 
learning activity, design objectives and intervene as required 
a timely manner [6]. It can be used within Moodle, 
Blackboard, and Desire2Learn.  
The Moodle Analytics and Recommendations block is a 
small scale project that uses colour coded charts and tables 
to allow students to quickly view their participation. 
Teachers are able to view single, comparative analytics and 
global analytics. This block is not currently maintained up 
to date or supported [7]. 
LOCO-Analyst is an open source educational tool that 
provides teachers with feedback regarding student activities 
and usage. The application does not provide any features 
and functionalities for students to compare their learning 
data with their peers. This application is still being 
developed [8].  
GISMO (Graphical Interactive Student Monitoring Tool 
for Moodle) is a graphical interactive monitoring tool that 
provides useful visualization of students' activities in online 
courses to instructors. Using GISMO instructors can 
examine students’ attendance, reading of materials, and 
submission of assignments. While GISMO is designed to 
work with Moodle, the version available is not compatible 
with University of Alberta eClass platform.  Another major 
limitation of the application is that GISMO focuses mainly 
on instructors and there is very limited functionality for 
students to be able to use the system and interact with their 
own data [9]. 
The Academic Analytic Tool (AAT) is an open source 
ongoing project at the Athabasca University, which allows 
instructors to access and analyze student behaviour data in 
learning systems. It enables them to extract detailed 
information about how students interact with and learn from 
online courses, to analyze the extracted data, and to store the 
results in a database and/or CSV/HTML files. While AAT is 
compatible with Moodle, it has primarily been developed 
for learning designers [10].   
In addition to the above applications, there are other 
learning 
analytic 
tools 
developed 
for 
Blackboard, 
Desire2Learn and Canvas. The main point is that learning 
analytics are becoming an integral and expected component 
of learning management systems. In this paper we report on 
the design and development of a learning analytics 
application for eClass, a learning management system that is 
based on Moodle and is currently used by the University of 
Alberta in Canada and many universities around the world. 
This 
new 
application 
provides 
learning 
analytics 
functionalities for both students and instructors and given 
that it is created for an open source learning management 
system, it can be adopted by other universities and colleges 
that use Moodle as their learning management system.   
Course and learning management systems such as Moodle 
hold very large data sets related to student interactions and 
activities. However, student tracking capabilities in these 
systems are usually limited and as a result the depth of 
extraction and aggregation, reporting and visualization 
functionality of these built-in analytics has often been basic 
or non-existent [11]. While Moodle has reporting functions 
for students and instructors, these functionalities are not 
easy to use. For instance, Moodle data can be downloaded 
as an Excel file, but it still requires analysis in order to be 
useful for students and instructors. The University of 
Alberta eClass environment does not currently have learning 
analytics tools to provide support for analyzing, visualizing 
and making sense of very large student and instructor 
activities datasets. The eClass reporting features and logs 
provide only limited and basic level data, such as time, IP 
address, course view, forum view, resource view, and 
actions such as ‘add’, ‘delete’, ‘view’ for forum or blog 
posts. These data points are presented separately from one 
another, with no analytical, comparative or visual 
functionality to allow for a real time understanding of the 
individual and class performance. Therefore, instructors are 
not able to use these data points in a multidimensional way 
to make detailed and comparative inferences about student 
activities and interactions within one particular course 
activity or across the entire course content. For instance, it is 
not possible for an instructor to a) comparatively and 
visually identify the most frequently used resources within a 
course, b) detect the kinds of resources used by high 
performing students in class, or c) identify the nature of 
course materials not used by low and average performing 
students. The overarching goal of the analytical tool 
reported here is to facilitate access to and making sense of 
learning data for students and instructors.  
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
This project will draw upon [2] learning analytics life 
cycle to design an application that will support the four 
stages of the learning analytics life cycle, namely learner, 
data, metrics and interventions. The learning analytics tool 
that will be designed in this project will support both 
instructors and students and will be compatible with the 
eClass environment.  Moodle databases collect large 
multidimensional data 
files from 
student activities, 
clickthrough data, access to various digital objects, history 
of pages viewed, number of hits for each day of the course. 
However, this data is available in a tabular format and it is 
very difficult to understand the structure and organization of 
data or to be able to make sense of various types of data 
collected. The learning analytics tool that is developed in 
this project will provide the following key components: 
 
Data repository: Data collection and amalgamation  
 
Data transformation mechanism to organize and 
cluster raw data 
 
Data processing to support large data analysis  
127
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

 
Data and information visualization functionalities 
to visualize and demonstrate individual and 
comparative views of the following data points:  
o 
Logins 
o 
Submissions 
o 
Interaction with learning objects 
(resources accessed and frequency) 
 
Frequently used content and 
media 
o 
Interaction with discussion forums, 
lessons, quizzes etc. 
o 
Student interaction and social networks 
o 
Blog and discussion forum analysis and 
visualization 
o 
Time spent (on individual pages, on 
average, across the course, etc.) 
o 
Detection of low, average and high 
performing students  
The application makes use of a broad range of 
technologies, including PHP (Hypertext Preprocessor) and 
MySQL 
(Structured 
Query 
Language), 
information 
visualization technologies, and text and data analysis tools.  
 
IV. 
LEARNING ANALYTICS TOOL FUNCTIONALITIES 
The following graphs will depict a number of screenshots 
of our newly developed learning analytics application. The 
screenshots provide visual representation of learner’s data 
analyzed using our application.  
A. Visual dashboard for engagement data 
Our application provides a number of features to analyze 
and visualize content engagement, forum engagement, forum 
usage over time and events by user over time. Fig. 1 shows 
an example of a graph that depicts students’ engagement data 
across a number of activities, such as visiting various course 
webpages, interacting with forums, files or blocks.  
 
 Figure 1. Visual dashboard for engagement data 
     Through this graph students are able to visually identify 
how students within a class have viewed and interacted with 
different parts and components of a course. It also allows 
individual students to choose a particular time range to view 
their own enganement and activities for the time period. 
      Fig. 2 provides a longitudinal view of engagment data 
for students. This functionality allows for a holistic view of 
all activities over a certain period of time. They can also 
choose a particular activity, such as contributing to a forum 
or blog and view how they have been using or interacting 
with the forum over time. This feature allows them to keep 
track of their own use of various learning objects over the 
period of a semester.  
 Figure 2. Time-based engagment data 
 
The granularity function shown in Fig. 3 allows students 
to narrow down the timeline to days and hours. This 
function will be useful for identifying how active students 
are before or after a particular quiz. 
 
 
Figure 3. Time-based granularity for learning objects 
128
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

B. Visual dashboard for weekly discussion and selected 
students 
 
In order to allow students to gain a collective perspective 
of performance within a class, engagement data for all 
students are shown in Fig. 4. This graph is useful for 
instructors and students to quickly and visually see how 
students contribute to a discussion forum across several 
weeks.  
 
 
Figure 4. Weekly discussion engagement data for all students 
 
Fig. 5 allows a student to gain a comparative perspective 
of how other students on average interacted with course 
content and where she stands.  
 
Figure 5. Engagment data for selected students across weeks 
 
This will allow a student to see the level of engagement 
on the part of her fellow students.  
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The learning analytics tool that was reported in this 
paper provides a useful tool for universities and colleges 
that make use of the Moodle learning management system. 
This application supports instructors and students in 
monitoring learning and teaching activities and provides 
ways in which instructors can offer personalized and 
enhanced advice to students. The tool has the potential to be 
expanded to include department-level and campus-wide 
evaluation of learning and teaching to facilitate prediction, 
adaptation, personalization and intervention in the learning 
process.  
For instance, at the department level, first year 
undergraduate courses with large enrollment can benefit 
from student engagement data analysis and visualization to 
allow the department to assess the usefulness of various 
learning objects and resources for a particular course. 
Further development of this application will focus on text 
analysis and visualization tools that will support instructors 
to create quick visual representations of large discussion 
forum data. We are currently conducting usability 
evaluation with students and instructors from a wide variety 
of disciplines to assess the ease of use, learnability and 
usability of our learning analytics tool. An initial analysis of 
the usability study data indicates a number of areas for 
further refinement of the tool, including the terminology 
used on the interface (e.g. views vs. interactions), analytical 
tools for the textual data on discussion forums, and ways to 
triangulate data with grades. Once the tool is finalized it will 
be shared openly with those using the Moodle system. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
I would like to acknowledge the Teaching and Learning 
Enhancement Fund (TLEF) that was provided by the 
University of Alberta Centre for Teaching and Learning. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 1st International Conference on Learning Analytics and 
Knowledge 
(LAK 
11). 
https://tekri.athabascau.ca/analytics/about 
(retrieved 
June 
2016) 
[2] D. Clow, “The learning analytics cycle: closing the loop 
effectively.” In Proceedings of the 2nd International 
Conference on Learning Analytics and Knowledge (pp. 134-
138). ACM, April 2012. 
[3] G. Siemens, D. Gasevic, C. Haythornthwaite, S. Dawson, S. 
B. Shum, R. Ferguson,  K. E. Duval, and R. S. J. D. Baker, 
(2011). “Open Learning Analytics: an integrated & 
modularized platform.” Proposal to design, implement and 
evaluate an open platform to integrate heterogeneous 
learning 
analytics 
techniques. 
http://www.elearnspace.org/blog/wp-
content/uploads/2016/02/ProposalLearningAnalyticsModel_S
oLAR.pdf (retrieved June 2016) 
[4] G. Siemens and P. Long, “Penetrating the fog: Analytics in 
learning and education.” Educause Review, 46(5), pp. 30-32, 
2011. 
129
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

[5] R. Ferguson,  “Learning analytics: drivers, developments and 
challenges.” International Journal of Technology Enhanced 
Learning, 4(5/6) pp. 304–317,  2012. 
[6] S. Dawson, A. Bakharia, and E. Heathcote, “SNAPP: 
Realising the affordances of real-time SNA within networked 
learning 
environments.” 
In 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
7th 
International Conference on Networked Learning, pp. 125-
133, 2010. 
[7] Moodle 
Blocks: 
Analytics 
and 
Recommendations: 
https://moodle.org/plugins/view.php?plugin=block_analytics_
recommendations (retrieved June 2016) 
[8] J. Jovanovic, D. Gaševic, C. Brooks, V. Devedžic, M. Hatala,  
T. Eap, and G. Richards, “LOCO-Analyst:  semantic web 
technologies 
in 
learning 
content 
usage 
analysis”.  
International Journal of Continuing Engineering Education 
and Life Long Learning 18, 1, pp. 54-76, 2008. 
[9] GISMO: http://gismo.sourceforge.net/index.html (retrieved 
June 2016) 
[10] S. Graf, C. Ives, N. Rahman, and A.  Ferri, “AAT: a tool for 
accessing and analysing students' behaviour data in learning 
systems.” In Proceedings of the 1st International Conference 
on Learning Analytics and Knowledge (pp. 174-179). ACM, 
February 2011. 
[11] S. Dawson,   “ ‘Seeing’ the learning community: An 
exploration of the development of a resource for monitoring 
online student networking.” British Journal of Educational 
Technology, 
41(5), 
736-752, 
2011.
130
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

