 
Data Merging Technique in Cataract Patients in Telangana for Enhancing Public 
Awareness of Visual Impairment    
 
Amna Alalawi  
Strategic Leadership Program 
Thomas Jefferson University 
Philadelphia, PA, USA 
Email: alalawiaj@gmail.com 
Les Sztandera 
Kanbar College of Design, Engineering, and Commerce 
Thomas Jefferson University 
Philadelphia, PA, USA 
Email: les.sztandera@jefferson.edu 
 
 
 
Abstract—Data merging is a creative technique used in big 
data analysis and is considered a model in strategic leadership 
thinking, one which is used in integrating and applying 
strategy to resolve complex problems. In addition, data 
merging can draw a blueprint for effective decisions, especially 
when harnessing data in healthcare to clarify ambiguity on 
complex issues. The objective of this study was to examine the 
data merging technique using the Electronic Medical Record 
(EMR) in LV Prasad Eye Institute (LVPEI) in India, for the 
aim of contributing to the management of patient care, and 
ultimately spreading public awareness of cataracts. Our 
findings revealed that there is a high presence of cataract in 
the state of Telangana, mostly in rural areas and throughout 
the different weather seasons in India. Men tend to be the most 
affected, while home makers make the most visits to the 
hospital, in addition to employees, students, and laborers. 
While cataract is most dominant in the older age population, 
diseases such as astigmatism and conjunctivitis are more 
present in the younger age population. The study appeared 
useful for taking preventive measures in the future to manage 
the treatment of patients who present themselves with eye 
disorders in Telangana.  
 
Keywords –data merging; visual impairment; data analysis; 
public awareness. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
India is home to over 8.3 million people with Vision 
Impairment (VI), the highest in the world [1]. Even though, 
in 1976, India became the first country in the world to start a 
national program for control of blindness with the goal to 
reduce blindness prevalence to 0.3 percent by 2020, the 
prevalence of blindness still stands at 1.99 percent, 
according to the National Blindness and Visual Impairment 
Survey, released in October 2019 [2] by the Union Ministry 
of Health and Family. The prevalence of blindness and 
visual impairment is one of the highest in Telangana, a state 
in Southern India, as inferred from survey [2]. The 
significant reasons indicated in the survey were due to 
cataract and refractive error [3].  
All surveys in the country have shown that cataract, 
which is a clouding of the lens – turning the lens from clear 
to yellow, brown, or even milky white, is the most common 
cause of blindness and all prevention of blindness programs 
have been “cataract-oriented.” However, it has recently been 
recognized that the visual outcome of the cataract surgeries 
as well as the training of ophthalmologists has been less 
than ideal.  
This study uses Artificial Intelligence (AI) and machine 
learning techniques to explore a dataset containing 
information on 873,448 patients who visited LV Prasad Eye 
Institute (LVPEI), a multi-tier ophthalmology hospital 
network, based in Hyderabad. LVPEI operates out of 106 
locations, 86 of them being primary eye care centers located 
in remote rural villages [10]. For the past 24 years, it has 
served over 14 million people, over 50 percent of them 
entirely free of cost, irrespective of the complexity of care 
needed. To date, LVPEI has trained over 13,000 eye care 
professionals; its faculty has been awarded 22 PhDs with 
over 
1,000 
research 
paper 
publications, 
its 
sight 
enhancement and visual rehabilitation services served over 
100,000 people, and its eye bank services have harvested 
about 34,000 donor corneas, and it has transplanted more 
than 17,000 of them to needy patients [10].  
 The data used in this study was extracted from 
EyeSmart, the hospital’s EMR and health management 
system, and then merged with climatic factors to test the 
correlation between climatic variables and ocular diseases 
presented by the patients [1]. Studying risk factors, 
primarily associated with climate and the environment can 
lead to a better understanding of the causes, diagnosis, and 
treatment of several eye diseases [4].    
The goal of an EMR in general is to enable electronic 
documentation of patients for faster retrieval and research 
purposes, as well as to transform the entire network into a 
paperless eco-friendly environment. LVPEI states that Eye 
Smart is an effective EMR that is enabled for viewing on 
various digital platforms, such as iPads, iPhones and other 
tablets. It has also evolved into an effective educational tool 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-891-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Data Analytics

 
 
for students and fellows who train at the institute. The 
standard 
procedures, 
classifications, 
evidence-based 
medicine protocols integrated into the system help to deliver 
more effective care, and to also aid in teaching. 
 
 
Figure 1. LVPEI Area Map 
     Figure 1 shows the different centers of LVPEI in the 
state of Telangana and the total area that it covers in 
offering eye care to all patients. The map is important to 
view as the different districts of where patients come from 
have been examined alongside cataract development.  
      In Section II of the paper, we explain the data merging 
technique that was used to merge weather variables with 
datasets from Eye Smart, to enhance the findings that relate 
to the development of cataracts in patients, and to 
potentially offer preventative measures of the development 
of the disease. The aim is to use knowledge management to 
gain insight into socio-demographic and environmental 
factors to shed light on the causes, diagnosis, and treatment 
of cataracts to enhance ophthalmology practice. In this case, 
the knowledge management technique consists of applying 
computational intelligence software to patient data and 
environmental factors such as race, culture, and climate.  
The need for an interconnected health network has 
reached 
its 
peak. 
Using 
electronic 
health 
records 
dramatically increases the quality of care for patients and 
the efficiency of the health care systems. Looking at 
electronic health systems independently can show limited 
information about patients. The methodology, which was 
based on a design thinking approach, offers ways in which 
EMRs can be studied collectively and holistically to bridge 
the gap that currently exists between knowledge and 
practice, and to enhance and improve public awareness of 
visual impairment. 
The rest of the paper is organized into discussing 
methodology of the research in Section 2, analysis and 
findings of the data trends in relation to the development of 
cataracts in Sections 3 and 4, and conclusion including 
recommendations for preventative measures in Section 5. 
II. 
METHODOLOGY 
To gain insight into the climatic and socio-demographic 
factors that correlate to the risk of ocular diseases in the 
State of Telangana, we used multiple approaches utilizing 
AI and statistical software and programming languages, 
including Microsoft Power BI and Python to explore the 
dataset, which contained information on 873,448 patients 
complaining of eye disorder symptoms across multiple 
categories of ocular diseases. Publicly available climatic 
variables were obtained and aligned to the dataset through a 
process called column mutation, and then examined by 
Microsoft Power BI, which heavily relies on visual 
illustrations and statistical storytelling to present findings 
and new insights. It should be noted that Microsoft Power 
BI is considered an assortment of software or apps which all 
together works in amalgamation to transform the unrelated 
sources of data into a visually pattern oriented, continuous 
and dynamic insights.  
Analysis Engine 
 
Figure 2. Data Analytics Engine 
 
     The purpose of Figure 2 is to explain the process of the 
data analytics engine that was applied in the research, and 
that achieved enhanced visibility of patterns and findings. 
The environment for any data analytics application creation 
should provide for the following: storing data, processing 
data, and data analysis alongside visualization. To this end, 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-891-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Data Analytics

 
 
the process contributed to knowledge expansion of the 
causes that develop cataract in patients and showed the 
relationships between all the co-factors studied. Researchers 
and practitioners in the big analytics sector can use this 
diagram to understand how data merging can be processed 
and can lead to potential strategies for greater impact of 
result findings. The main advantage to data merging is that, 
in addition to storing big data, it provides a process through 
which large pools of data can lead to intelligent insight and 
perform informed decisions based on variables that are 
merged alongside each other. The outcome led to decisions 
that can drive recommendations, growth, planning and 
prevention, which can be defined as the “wisdom” that is 
created.  
     Trends in the IT industry have been transformational in 
the way data is collected and analyzed through AI 
techniques. There was an era when people were moving 
from manual computation to automated, computerized 
applications, then moved into an era of enterprise level 
applications, which ultimately gave birth to architectural 
models such as Software as a Service (SaaS) and Platform 
as a Service (PaaS). Now, we are in the big data era, which 
can be processed and analyzed in cost-effective ways [5], 
such as through Microsoft Power BI. The world is moving 
towards open source to get the benefits of reduced license 
fees, data storage, and computation costs. It has really made 
it lucrative and affordable for all sectors and segments to 
harness the power of data. This is making Big Data 
synonymous with low cost, scalable, highly available, and 
reliable solutions that can churn huge amounts of data at 
incredible 
speed 
and 
generate 
intelligent 
insights. 
 
III. 
ANALYSIS 
The scheme of Cynefin Framework acts as a guidance to 
healthcare practitioners and researchers because of its 
foundation in the management of information [6]. This 
particular tool was developed with an aim to offer support 
and right direction in the process of decision making for 
situations where the existing intricacy within the outcomes 
affect the nature of knowledge, forecast, and choice [6]. It 
has varied domains which necessitate different actions, for 
instance, the straightforward and complex context is 
considered equivalent to an “ordered state” of universe 
which can be interpreted based on the causal and effect 
association of the facts or findings, and therefore the right 
orientation or pattern can be decoded [7]. However, in the 
case of “complicated or chaotic” data, where researchers or 
healthcare practitioners are unable to formulate a definitive 
cause and effect association, there is no such immediate 
conceivable relationship, thus, the Cynefin Framework 
guides professionals to choose the right orientation based on 
the “emerging patterns” [7]. This means that the chaotic or 
unordered state of the world requires pattern dependent 
management for proper orientation and right decision 
making [7].  
This framework proved very useful in this study as it 
served as a guide to simplify the complex data in a format 
that could be studied and explored for suggesting reasons 
that are associated with the development of cataracts, with 
the hope of taking preventative measures in the future in 
patient treatment. 
Cynefin Framework 
 
 
Figure 3. Cause Effect Association Interpretation Using Cynefin 
Framework 
 
     Figure 3 refers to the cause and effect association 
between the parameters decoded with the aid of the Cynefin 
Framework [8]. In the figure, the square block indicates the 
“causal agent”, and the dots indicate the “effect agent” [8]. 
The proper lines refer to the direct association in between 
the two agents whereas the dotted lines refer to the weak or 
probable association in between the two agents. When the 
relation or the conduct of the components of the complex 
adaptable systems cannot be perceived in direct terms, it is 
said to be emergent and active in nature. Moreover, these 
factors again show alterations with time and pressure of the 
surrounding environment due to which it develops into a 
new form [8]. 
The master dataset or the big data, which was explored 
and analyzed, covered clinical visits between the year 2011-
2019, and included demographic information of the patient, 
including age, gender, profession, data of visit, district of 
resident, and symptoms and diagnosis of the patient in 
relation to eye disease. To look further into this issue, we 
merged climate variables to the dataset to explore the 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-891-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Data Analytics

 
 
relationship with eye disorders. The AI approach can be of 
varied 
types, 
namely 
conventional symbolic 
AI, 
Computational intelligence, and statistical tools, or the 
combination of all of the above. Here, in the present 
assignment, the Computational intelligence approach has 
been adopted for the analytical purpose [9].  
The climate variables we examined were average 
temperature, minimum temperature, maximum temperature, 
humidity, rainfall, and solar radiation. This data was 
retrieved from the Telangana State Development Planning 
Society in the state of Telangana. The findings that relate to 
temperature and its effect on cataract in older age was 
consistent in high and low temperatures.  
 We followed the model of the Cynefin Framework as a 
blueprint for analysis to take complicated data into a 
simplistic form for exploration. By transforming the data 
into information, we gained certain knowledge about the 
topic which then was transformed into wisdom that helped 
us in not only conducting the investigation effectively, but 
also to gain effective understanding about the research topic. 
The readers can also rely on this wisdom to gain conceptual 
clarity and understanding of the subject matter.  
IV. 
SUMMARY OF FINDINGS  
This section highlights key findings of the study, as well 
as trends in relation to the subject matter as per the 
demographic and climatic variables tested, which as 
discussed in the previous section were were average 
temperature, minimum temperature, maximum temperature, 
humidity, rainfall, and solar radiation. This data was 
retrieved from the Telangana State Development Planning 
Society in the state of Telangana, and then merged with the 
EMR of patient records using data merging as the main 
technique for analysis.  
The analysis shows that astigmatism (irregularity in the 
shape of the cornea) and conjunctivitis (inflammation or 
infection of the conjunctiva) are the most prevalent eye 
diseases among the youth population (ages 21-40) in 
Telangana. For older adults, (ages 41-70), the analysis 
shows that cataract and pseudophakos are the most 
prevalent 
eye 
diseases. 
Paloncha, 
Kothagudam, 
Kothagudam Bazar, Bhadrachalam, Mauguru, Madhapur, 
Kondapur, Adilabad, Yellandu, Kondapur and Tekulapalli 
are the top ten locations with the highest number of hospital 
visits, with Paloncha being identified as a high-risk location 
because of the presence of the state-run thermal power 
plant. In addition, the analysis shows a consistent pattern for 
high prevalence of cataract within the minimum ranges of 
temperature (20ºC - ~30ºC). The analysis also shows that 
cataract is the most prevalent eye disease in the rainfall 
season. 
 
Influence Diagram - Taking Knowledge to 
Wisdom 
 
Figure 4. Influence Diagram of Cataract Patients and Co-Factors Affecting 
Cataract  
 
     Figure 4 depicts the summary of findings in a form of an 
influence diagram. Influence diagrams are closely related to 
decision trees and often used in conjunction with them. An 
influence diagram displays a summary of the information 
contained in a decision tree. It involves four variable types 
for notation: a decision (a rectangle), chance (an oval), 
objective (a hexagon), and function (a rounded rectangle). 
Looking at the data analysis holistically through Figure 4 
creates the ease to depict the main causes of the 
development of cataracts.  
V. 
CONCLUSION  
     As concluded from the research, the healthcare EMR 
system is large and complex, one that does not naturally 
lend itself to easy analysis, design or even understanding. In 
the case of studying the patients’ data in Eye Smart, and 
summarizing the co-factors that play a role in the 
development of cataracts in Telangana, an influence 
diagram was created to show the different co-factors that 
lead to cataract according to the findings generated.  This 
was further analyzed with a systems thinking approach, a 
method that allows consideration of the whole rather than 
individual elements of representation of the related co-
factors. 
     The mission of data merging is to try to improve societal 
outcomes by developing, integrating, and using appropriate 
analytical tools in these new approaches, to offer healthcare 
practitioners the opportunity to design better patient-care 
policies and well-targeted regulations to lower the burdens 
of the economic and social problems associated with 
diseases, such as cataracts. An important starting point is to 
understand how data analysis and its results can be 
incorporated into the actual decision-making process. 
decision-making process.  
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-891-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Data Analytics

 
 
     Visual impairment imposes substantial costs on society, 
particularly to individuals with visual impairment and their 
families. Eliminating or reducing disabilities from visual 
impairment through public awareness of preventive care, 
early diagnosis, more intensive disease treatment, and new 
medical technologies could significantly improve the quality 
of life for people with visual impairment and their families, 
while also potentially reducing national health care 
expenditure 
and 
increasing 
productivity 
in 
the 
underdeveloped world. We recommend that the authorities 
spend more time and funds on creating awareness to educate 
individuals and families about the visual impairment crisis 
in Telangana. Creation of awareness is one of the most 
comprehensive 
approaches 
to 
sensitize 
communities 
concerning the consequences of eye disorders, but also one 
of the avenues to equip individuals with knowledge, skills 
and correct attitudes towards a healthier lifestyle.  
      Besides creation of awareness, this study also 
recommends ophthalmologists’ understanding of all factors 
that influence a disease other than medical history, and to 
look at each patient uniquely in terms of social income, 
cultural upbringing and offer a more individualistic 
approach in educating a patient from the criticality of self-
care, to help patients deviate away from high risk situations 
that can cause eye disorders, and to find ways from an 
earlier age for more effective preventative results that can 
reduce the number of individuals with vision impairment.
 
 
       REFERENCES
 
[1] S. Marmamula, R. Khanna, and G. Rao, “Unilateral visual 
impairment in rural south India–Andhra Pradesh Eye Disease 
Study (APEDS)”, International Journal of Ophthalmology, 9 
no.5, pp.763, 2016. 
[2] G. Rao, N. Khanna, and A. Payal, “The global burden of 
cataract,” Current Opinion in Ophthalmology, 22 no. 1, pp. 4-
9, 2011. 
[3] A. Das, P. Kammari, and S. Ranganath Vadapalli, “Big data 
and the eyeSmart electronic medical record system-An 8-year 
experience from a three-tier eye care network in India,” 
Indian Journal of Ophthalmology, 68 no. 3, pp. 427, 2020. 
[4] A. Clark, J. Ng, N. Morlet, and J. Semmens, “Big data and 
ophthalmic research,” Survey of Ophthalmology, 61 no.4, pp. 
443-465, 2016. 
[5] S. Gupta, Real-Time Big Data Analytics. Packt Publishing 
Ltd. 2016. 
 
[6] D.J Snowden and M.E Boone, A leader's framework for 
decision making. Harvard Business Review, 85(11), p.68. 
2007. 
[7] G. Kempermann, Cynefin as reference framework to facilitate 
insight and decision-making in complex contexts of 
biomedical research. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 11, p.634. 
2017. 
[8] J.P. Sturmberg and C.M. Martin, Complexity and health–
yesterday’s traditions, tomorrow’s future. J Eval Clin 
Pract, 15(3), pp.543-548. 2009. 
[9] R. Ackoff,. "From Data to Wisdom." Journal of Applied  
Systems Analysis, 16.1 pp. 3-9. 1989.   
[10] A Das, P Kammari, R Vadapalli, and S. Basu. Big Data and   
       the Eyesmart electronic medical record system. Indian Journal 
       of Ophthalmology. pp. 427-432. 2020. 
 
 
 
 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-891-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Data Analytics

