A Visual Data Profiling Tool for Data Preparation 
Bjørn Marius Von Zernichow and Dumitru Roman 
SINTEF Digital 
Oslo, Norway 
BjornMarius.vonZernichow@sintef.no 
Dumitru.Roman@sintef.no 
 
 
Abstract—In this paper, we propose a tool that implements 
visual data profiling capabilities for data preparation – an 
essential step in the process of linked data generation. Our tool 
features visual data profiling – a technique that identifies and 
visualizes potential data quality issues, relevant data cleaning 
functions, and an interactive spreadsheet table view. The 
proposed demonstration of the tool will focus on the use of 
visual data profiling in a scenario of cleaning and transforming 
tabular weather data – as a pre-processing step for linked data 
generation. 
Keywords-data preparation; visual data profiling; linked data; 
usability testing; interactive data cleaning and transformation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Tabular data has been an important type of source for 
generating linked data, but very often tabular data has 
quality issues that create challenges in generating linked 
data [1]. Examples of data quality issues include 
occurrences of missing values, outliers, inconsistencies, and 
noisy data [2]. Despite considerable recent research in the 
area of data quality, there are still opportunities for 
innovative solutions that can improve data quality and make 
cleaning and transformation processes more efficient [3][4]. 
Moreover, there is a need for better solutions and tools to 
assist users in the data preparation phase that usually comes 
before the linked data generation process. In this context, 
visual data profiling is a technique that can support the data 
preparation process. Visual data profiling systems are used 
to assess the data quality of datasets, and identify sources of 
quality issues such as missing and extreme values [2]. 
We propose a tool that implements visual data profiling 
capabilities in data preparation by taking as a baseline the 
Grafterizer framework [1][4][5], a framework for data 
cleaning and linked data generation – part of the DataGraft 
platform [4][6][7]. The profiling system checks a selection 
of a dataset (e.g., a column of values) against a rules matrix 
to display only possible and relevant charts and data 
cleaning functions. As an example, number based columns 
will enable functions (e.g., 'Replace empty cells with 
median value') and charts (e.g., boxplot) that are not allowed 
for string columns.  
Furthermore, we performed a usability study with 24 
users to evaluate usefulness and ease of use of the prototype, 
while areas of improvement were identified by four expert 
reviewers. A data preparation scenario was used to compare 
usefulness and ease of use of the existing version of 
Grafterizer with the proposed tool that implements visual 
data profiling capabilities. Drawbacks of the existing 
Grafterizer framework include usability issues such as a 
steep learning curve and a complex, less intuitive user 
interface. To address Grafterizer’s usability challenges, we 
implemented a proof of concept tool that features visual data 
profiling capabilities to ease the process of data preparation, 
and improve data quality. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. 
Related work is discussed in Section II, while the 
implementation of the software prototype is presented in 
Section III. The demonstration of the tool is outlined in 
Section IV. Finally, Section V summarizes this paper and 
outlines avenues for future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Currently, there exists no framework for tabular data 
cleaning, transformation and linked data generation that 
targets both data developers and non-developers [1]. Profiler 
[8], Data Wrangler [11], Trifacta [12] and Talend [13] are 
examples of systems for data quality analysis that include 
data mining and anomaly detection techniques in addition to 
visualizations of relevant data summaries that can be used to 
evaluate data quality issues. Our data preparation tool is 
inspired 
by 
Profiler, 
Trifacta, 
Talend, 
and 
the 
implementation 
of 
a 
spreadsheet 
table 
for 
direct 
manipulation of data [14][15]. Still, none of these tools for 
visual data profiling in data preparation target linked data 
generation. The above-mentioned tools lack specific 
capabilities that are needed in a linked data transformation 
process, e.g., the annotation of data with URIs (Uniform 
Resource Identifiers), and mapping of data into a linked data 
format that conforms to a specific ontology and data model. 
Our proposed tool features visual data profiling capabilities 
that are aimed to be easily integrated in a linked data 
generation pipeline by replacing the existing version of 
Grafterizer. 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-603-3
DATA ANALYTICS 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Data Analytics

III. 
SOFTWARE PROTOTYPE 
Based on the drawbacks that were identified in the 
existing version of Grafterizer, the improved tool should 
provide 
a) 
Visual 
data 
profiling 
capabilities, 
b) 
Recommendations 
for 
relevant 
data 
cleaning 
and 
transformation functionality, c) A pipeline that reflects the 
applied data preparation steps, and d) A solution that is 
useful in data scientists' work activities, and easy to use. 
The visual data profiling approach was implemented in a 
software prototype featuring 14 data cleaning and 
transformation functions. The implemented data cleaning 
and transformation process involves the following activities 
[8]–[10]: 
1. Discovery: Based on the visual data profiling charts and 
statistical feedback, the user explores the content and 
structure of the dataset to understand the quality of the 
data.  
2. Data preparation: The user applies relevant data 
preparation functions to the dataset to clean and 
transform the data. 
3. Validation: The visual data profiling charts are used to 
validate that the data is cleaned and transformed 
according to the intended quality and structure. 
 
The tool consists of five interacting components:  
1. The file import (Fig. 1-1): Parsing of the tabular dataset 
(i.e., in CSV (Comma Separated Values) format).  
2. The tabular view (Fig. 1-2): The data can be manipulated 
directly in the tabular view which features spreadsheet 
functionality such as 'copy/paste' or 'insert column'.  
3. The visual data profiling view (Fig. 1-3): When the user 
clicks a column in the table, the visual data profiling 
view returns relevant information about missing values 
and data distribution of the values in that column. 
4. The suggested data cleaning functions (Fig. 1-4): Based 
on the assessment of data quality, the user selects one of 
the suggested, relevant data cleaning and transformation 
functions to improve data quality.  
5. The steps pipeline (Fig. 1-5): Finally, the applied data 
preparation steps are added to a steps pipeline that 
reflects the data cleaning history. 
IV. 
DEMONSTRATION OUTLINE 
The visual data profiling prototype will be demonstrated 
in a scenario that cleans and transforms tabular weather data 
[16] (precipitation, minimum and maximum temperatures, 
wind speed, and weather condition). The iterative cleaning 
and transformation process assisted by the visual data 
profiling system will include identifying and correcting 
missing values, and applying transformation functions to the 
dataset to prepare it for linked data mapping. The 
demonstration will include all three activities of the visual 
data profiling process described in Section III, and a typical 
scenario will include the following steps: 
 
 
 
Figure 1. User interface of the visual data profiling tool 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-603-3
DATA ANALYTICS 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Data Analytics

1. The weather dataset is imported [16]. 
2. The user selects one of the columns, e.g., 'wind', directly 
in the table view. 
3. The data quality, i.e., missing values and data distribution 
in this case, is assessed by the visual data profiling 
system. The user reads from the leftmost chart that there 
are 56 missing values in the 'wind' column.  
4. Based on the information about missing values, the user 
selects a relevant data cleaning function (i.e., 'Replace 
missing values with a defined value'). In this context, the 
missing values will be replaced by the median value of 
all values in the 'wind' column. Alternatively, the 
function can be selected by right clicking the table view. 
5. The rightmost boxplot chart is used to find the median 
value (i.e., 15.6), and the user applies the data cleaning 
function to replace all missing values of the column. 
6. The user will once more use the profiling charts to assess 
the current number of missing values. The function has 
been successfully applied, and the leftmost chart updates 
to reflect zero missing values. 
7. Steps 2 – 6 are repeated to continue improving the quality 
of the dataset.  
8. The resulting dataset is imported to DataGraft and 
transformed to linked data. 
The open source code of the visual data profiling tool is 
currently available at GitHub [17]. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
This paper proposed a visual data profiling tool that 
implements visual data profiling capabilities and statistical 
feedback, recommendations for data cleaning operations, 
and an interactive spreadsheet table view. The proposed 
capabilities can improve data quality, and reduce time spent 
on cleaning and transforming data. Furthermore, the visual 
data profiling tool has been evaluated in terms of usability, 
and found to be perceived useful and easy to use [5].  
Future work will focus on developing a framework that 
simplifies the technical user specification in a domain 
specific language. This will be achieved by implementing a 
visual recommender system for data profiling, and a semi-
automated data preparation approach to guide the user 
through 
an 
incremental 
process 
of 
cleaning 
and 
transforming data. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The work in this paper is partly supported by the EC 
funded projects proDataMarket (Grant number: 644497), 
euBusinessGraph (Grant number: 732003), and EW-Shopp 
(Grant number: 732590). 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
D. Sukhobok et al., “Tabular Data Cleaning and Linked 
Data Generation with Grafterizer,” ESWC (Satellite 
Events), pp. 134–139, 2016. 
[2] 
J. Han, J. Pei, and M. Kamber, Data mining: concepts and 
techniques. Elsevier, 2011. 
[3] 
J. M. Hellerstein, “Quantitative Data Cleaning for Large 
Databases,” United Nations Economic Commission for 
Europe (UNECE), Feb. 2008. 
[4] 
D. Roman et al., “DataGraft: One-Stop-Shop for Open Data 
Management,” To appear in the Semantic Web Journal 
(SWJ) – Interoperability, Usability, Applicability (published 
and printed by IOS Press, ISSN: 1570-0844, DOI: 
10.3233/SW-170263), 2017. 
[5] 
B. M. V. Zernichow and D. Roman, “Usability of Visual 
Data Profiling in Data Cleaning and Transformation,” To 
appear in the proceedings of ODBASE 2017 - The 16th 
International Conference on Ontologies, DataBases, and 
Applications of Semantics, Springer, 24-25 October 2017, 
Rhodes, Greece, in press. 
[6] 
D. Roman et al., “Datagraft: Simplifying open data 
publishing,” in ESWC (Satellite Events), pp. 101–106, 
2016. 
[7] 
D. Roman et al., “DataGraft: A Platform for Open Data 
Publishing,” In the Joint Proceedings of the 4th 
International Workshop on Linked Media and the 3rd 
Developers Hackshop. (LIME/SemDev@ESWC), 2016. 
[8] 
S. Kandel, R. Parikh, A. Paepcke, J. M. Hellerstein, and J. 
Heer, “Profiler: 
Integrated 
Statistical 
Analysis 
and 
Visualization for Data Quality Assessment,” in Proceedings 
of the International Working Conference on Advanced 
Visual Interfaces, New York, NY, USA, pp. 547–554, 2012. 
[9] 
J. Heer, J. M. Hellerstein, and S. Kandel, “Predictive 
Interaction for Data Transformation.,” in CIDR, 2015. 
[10] 
S. Chen, “Six Core Data Wrangling Activities eBook,” 
Trifacta, 2015. 
[11] 
S. Kandel, A. Paepcke, J. Hellerstein, and J. Heer, 
“Wrangler: 
Interactive 
visual 
specification 
of 
data 
transformation scripts,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 
3363–3372, 2011. 
[12] 
M. Heinsman, “Data Wrangling | Prepare Raw & Diverse 
Data 
Faster,” 
Trifacta. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.trifacta.com/. [Accessed: 2017.09.28]. 
[13] 
“Talend Data Preparation: Self-Service Data Prep for 
Analytics,” 
Talend 
Real-Time 
Open 
Source 
Data 
Integration Software. 
[14] 
E. Bakke and D. R. Karger, “Expressive query construction 
through direct manipulation of nested relational results,” in 
Proceedings of the 2016 International Conference on 
Management of Data, pp. 1377–1392, 2016. 
[15] 
“Microsoft Excel 2016 Spreadsheet Software.” [Online]. 
Available: https://products.office.com/en/excel. [Accessed: 
2017.09.28]. 
[16] 
GitHub - vega-datasets: Common repository for datasets 
used by Vega-related projects. Vega, 2017. 
[17] 
GitHub - data-fixer: Tool for tabular data cleaning, 
preparation and transformation. DataGraft, 2017. 
 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-603-3
DATA ANALYTICS 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Data Analytics

