Towards the Automated Identiﬁcation of Orphan Diseases From Case Descriptions
Christian Rohrdantz∗, Andreas Stoffel∗, Franz Wanner∗, Martin Drees†
∗Department of Computer & Information Science, University of Konstanz, Germany
Email: ﬁrstname.lastname@uni-konstanz.de
†coliquio GmbH, Konstanz, Germany
Abstract—Orphan diseases are very rare diseases that are not
well-known to many medical doctors. Patients suffering from
them often remain without the correct diagnosis. Yet, there is
a potential that advice-seeking doctors, posting medical case
descriptions in web forums, may be automatically given a hint
to matching orphan diseases. In this work-in-progress paper, we
investigate opportunities and issues for an automated identiﬁca-
tion of orphan diseases in medical case descriptions through text
mining and data analytics.
Keywords–Data Analytics; Text Mining; Medical Data Analytics.
I.
INTRODUCTION
It is the daily work of most medical doctors to examine
patients and then combine observations on clinical signs and
symptoms with their knowledge and experience in order to
arrive at diagnoses. Accurate and timely diagnoses are crucial
for initiating successful treatments. Yet, there are cases where
medical doctors are confronted with patients showing symp-
toms that do not ﬁt well into the known patterns. In these cases,
physicians consult literature and seek the advice of experienced
colleagues.
But what if the disease of the patient is just so extremely
rare that only a handful of experts worldwide would be able
to identify it based on the given clinical signs? There is a
quite high chance that these cases end up with unspeciﬁc or
wrong diagnoses and do not get the optimal treatment. Yet, it
is known that there are quite a number of such rare, so-called
orphan diseases.
In recent years, doctors have increasingly made use of
medical web forums in order to seek advice from colleagues
and discuss cases. In Germany, the largest and most active
online community of medical doctors is coliquio [1]. It is
experiencing a fast growth and has currently already more than
125,000 members. Without a doubt, it would be of great value
if the case descriptions of advice-seeking physicians could
be automatically matched with the known orphan diseases.
These physicians could then be hinted by the system to the
corresponding orphan disease in cases where a match seems
likely.
Consequently, in this paper we describe work-in-progress
towards such an automated identiﬁcation of orphan diseases.
The contribution of this initial study is twofold. First, we
investigate how freely available, stuctured resources of medical
knowledge, like orphanet [2], [3], and large repositories of
medical texts, like the Wikipedia Portal Medicine [4] , can
be exploited for our purpose. Second, we present a statistical
method for the extraction of contextual knowledge and termi-
nology, and show that it yields a lot of relevant information that
could not be gathered from common dictionaries and medical
ontologies.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. First,
in Section II, we provide the necessary background information
on rare or orphan diseases and the related work in this area,
before we describe the data sources used in Section III. Next,
in Section IV, we introduce our novel approach of leveraging
the described data for the potential detection of orphan diseases
from medical case descriptions. In Section V, we present
ﬁrst results, evaluate the performance, and identify issues and
opportunities. Finally, we draw conclusions and identify key
challenges setting the agenda for future work in Section VI.
II.
RELATED WORK
Orphan or rare diseases ﬁt into the broader context of
research regarding rare events [5] and events in text data [6],
but to date have not been treated in these areas.
The deﬁnitions of orphan disease vary slightly in the
literature. The European Organisation for Rare Diseases (EU-
RORDIS) states on their Websites:
“A rare disease, also referred to as an orphan disease, is
any disease that affects a small percentage of the population.
Most rare diseases are genetic, and are present throughout
a person’s entire life, even if symptoms do not immediately
appear. In Europe, a disease or disorder is deﬁned as rare
when it affects less than 1 in 2000 citizens.” [7].
Despite of the rareness of individual diseases, the overall
quantity of affected people is still quite high:
“There are more than 6000 rare diseases. On the whole,
rare diseases may affect 30 million European Union citi-
zens.” [8]
The coverage of orphan diseases in standard terminologies
is very limited [9]. Rath et al. [10] state that only 446
orphan diseases have a speciﬁc code in the ICD10 disease
classiﬁcation, which most European countries use in their
health information systems.
In general, text mining for clinical medical records is an
important ﬁeld of research [11], but there is few work on
symptom or disease identiﬁcation. Koeling et al. [12] manually
annotate symptoms in patient records and provide statistical
information on the frequency distribution of symptoms. They
come to the conclusion that “there is great variation in the
expressions used to describe the same symptom”. Data from
orphanet has been used exploiting the given mapping between
diseases and disease-causing genes [13], but not for text mining
purposes. Our approach ﬁlls a clear gap in the current research.
III.
DATA
A. Orphadata
Orphanet provides structured textual data on orphan dis-
eases and indicative clinical signs as part of their orphadata
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

service [14]. We made use of the XML version of the data in
German. The data contains information about 2689 different
orphan diseases and their clinical signs. Overall, the data
contains 1362 different clinical signs and information on their
frequency for different diseases. Moreover, the clinical signs
are organized hierarchically in a thesaurus structure from rather
general to more speciﬁc signs. Each clinical sign is typically
described by one or more synonyms or alternative expres-
sions. For example, one of the clinical signs is named “Nau-
sea/vomiting/regurgitation/merycism/hyperemesis”.
We
will
refer to each of these alternative expressions as symptoms.
For each orphan disease, different clinical signs may have
three different frequency values: very frequent, frequent, and
occasional. While the data is available for different languages,
in this initial study we use the German version only.
B. Wikipedia Portal Medicine
The Wikipedia Portal Medicine constitutes a rich body of
diverse textual medical information. We leverage the German
version of this resource in order to automatically extract
context knowledge and feed it into our text mining models.
IV.
MINING AND MODELING MEDICAL KNOWLEDGE
FROM TEXT
One of the services orphanet provides is that a user can
select different clinical signs from the controlled thesaurus
through a web interface and retrieve potentially matching
orphan diseases. The big challenge we face, however, is to
automatically identify mentions of clinical signs in medical
case descriptions. In only very few cases, physicians use
explicitly and exactly the terminology given in controlled
vocabularies like the orphanet thesaurus. Mostly, they will
use either inﬂected word forms, alternative wordings, varying
multi-word expressions, paraphrasing or abbreviations. Our
approach consists in learning the alternative terminology ap-
plying advanced statistical methods to large text repositories,
such as the Wikipedia Portal Medicine. The advantage is that
such a source contains expressions as they are actually used
by phycisians rather than controlled idealized language use.
For the mining of medical knowledge from texts, we proceed
different consecutive steps.
A. Step 1: Identifying Descriptive Contexts
As mentioned before, each clinical sign in the orphadata
is described by a set of symptoms. In order to get hold of
textual contexts describing symptoms, we query Wikipedia.
For each symptom, our ﬁrst attempt is ﬁnding an article
where the title exactly matches the given symptom. Such an
article has basically been written to describe the symptom and
consequently we consider all of the text in the article to be
related to the symptom. For us, it constitutes what we deﬁne as
a descriptive context. If, however, there is no matching article,
we make use of the common search capability of Wikipedia.
We use the symptom as a query and then sift through the
retrieved articles. For each of these articles, we ﬁrst check
whether it belongs to the category “medicine” or one of its
more than 400 subcategories. From each article meeting this
criterion, we extract those paragraphs, where the symptom
appears and save them as descriptive contexts.
B. Step 2: Extracting Knowledge from Descriptive Contexts
Next, from the available descriptive contexts we build two
kinds of data co-occurrence tables. First, for each noun we
count how often it occurs within the descriptive contexts of
each symptom. This gives us a noun-symptom co-occurrence
table. Next, for each pair of nouns, we count how frequently
they co-occur within descriptive contexts. This gives us a noun-
noun co-occurrence table for symptom contexts. From now on,
we will refer to nouns within the tables as descriptors.
C. Statistics-based Identiﬁcation of Relevant Descriptors
Next, we perform a statistical analysis of the co-occurrence
tables. First, we aggregate the descriptor counts for all symp-
toms belonging to the same clinical sign. Next, we extract
those descriptors that are highly correlated with individual
clinical signs. The assumption is that if these descriptors can
be identiﬁed in a medical case description, they will be likely
to point to the correlated clinical sign.
V.
PRELIMINARY RESULTS & EVALUATION
In order to gain a better feeling for the feasibility of
an automatic detection, we systematically analyze both the
information contained in the orphadata and that extracted from
Wikipedia. We perform different statistical analyses in order
to learn more about potential issues and opportunities.
A. Knowledge Extraction from Orphadata
The listing of orphan diseases and their clinical signs builds
the backbone of our approach. The nature of this data may
therefore impose limitations on the overall proceeding. In a
ﬁrst step, we have to examine and evaluate this resource.
An orphan disease contained in orphadata has between as
few as one and as many as 180 different clinical signs. On
average an orphan disease contains 19.5 clinical signs, with a
standard deviation of 15.7. Yet, the distribution is somewhat
skewed and the peak is with 9 clinical signs per disease, see
Figure 1. At the lower end the data sparsity may be an issue
for the identiﬁcation of orphan diseases: 32 orphan diseases
have only one clinical sign each, and 58 have only two signs
each. It is questionable whether the automated detection is
feasible for these cases as it will be based on a lightweight
evidence. Orphan diseases at the other side of the range, the
ones having a plethora of clinical signs, are challenging for
the analysis, too. Yet, there is a chance to narrow the list of
clinical signs down to the most indicative ones. The disease
with most clinical signs has 180 of them, out of which 48 are
classiﬁed as very frequent, 50 as frequent, and 82 as occasional
only. It can be observed as a general tendency that diseases
with more signs tend to have a disproportionately high amount
of occasional signs.
A clinical sign contained in orphadata points to as few as
one and as many as 987 different orphan diseases. On average
a clinical signs points to 41.2 different orphan diseases, with
a standard deviation of 71.5. Again, we are confronted with a
quite skewed distribution with a peak at two different diseases
per sign, see Figure 2. At the lower end of the scale, we ﬁnd
clinical signs that are quite speciﬁc and indicative for certain
orphan diseases. For example, 66 signs point to exactly one
disease each, and 73 signs point two different diseases each.
The discriminatory power of these clinical signs within the
set of orphan diseases can be considered to be quite high.
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

Figure 1. Skewed distribution: some orphan diseases have far more different
clinical signs than others.
Figure 2. Skewed distribution: some clinical signs point to far more different
orphan diseases than others.
At the other end of the range, we ﬁnd widely spread signs
like the one named “Intellectual deﬁcit/mental/psychomotor
retardation/learning disability”, which points to 987 different
diseases. When omitting orphan diseases for which clinical
signs are occasional only, the tendency remains the same.
The most widely spread sign occurs for 876 different diseases
frequently or very frequently. Still, those clinical signs pointing
to a wide range of different diseases may be quite useful for
the higher-level classiﬁcation whether a patient might suffer
from an orphan disease or not. For a distinction within the
set of orphan diseases, more speciﬁc, hardly spread signs are
useful.
With n = 2689 different orphan diseases we can make
(n ∗ (n − 1))/2 = 3, 614, 016 pairwise comparisons. In partic-
ular, we can determine for each pair of diseases in how many
clinical signs they coincide and in how many they are distinct.
Figure 3 provides a visual summary of performing all pairwise
comparisons. The strong left shift of the resulting distribution
clearly shows that for almost all of these pairwise comparisons,
the corresponding orphan diseases are quite distinct: they
share only very few clinical signs (x-axis) while there are
many clinical signs in which they can be distinguished (y-
Figure 3. The lion’s share of the data is located to the upper left of the
diagonal, i.e., almost all pairs of diseases differ in more clinical signs than
they have in common.
axis). This shows that most orphan diseases have quite unique
combinations of signs, which makes an automated distinction
become very realistic.
B. Knowledge Extraction from Wikipedia
The 1362 clinical signs from orphadata contain more
than 2500 symptoms. Currently, for 37.2% of the symptoms
Wikipedia articles exist, for 15,8% of the symptoms related
articles can be retrieved, and for the remaining 47% no articles
are found. Overall, information from 2479 Wikipedia pages
was gathered. Yet, as described, for a considerable number of
symptoms no information was available. This implies that for
423 clinical signs, roughly one third of all signs, we do not
dispose of descriptive contexts.
From the available contexts, descriptors were extracted
as described in Section IV. When investigating the extracted
descriptors, it becomes evident that they are typically very
useful and can be divided into 8 categories. For a better
illustration, Table I provides the top 50 correlations to clinical
signs together with the categories they fall in. The categories
and their relative frequencies within the top 50 descriptors:
a) SYNM (28%): Synonyms, e.g., Lichtscheu for Pho-
tophobie. As in this case, often one synonym has a German
origin, while the other is of Latin or Greek provenance.
b) ORTH (6%): Orthographical variations, e.g., Hydro-
cephalus for Hydrozephalus.
c) ABBR (4%): Abbreviations, e.g., AVSD for atrioven-
trikul¨arer Kanal.
d) DISE (8%): Diseases that relate to the given symp-
tom, e.g., KBG-Syndrom for EEG-Anomalien.
e) THRP (2%): Terms indicating a common therapy for
the given clinical sign.
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

f) GNRL (10%): Hypernyms or otherwise more general
terms with and without morphological relation, e.g., Volvulus
for Magenvolvulus, or Gliederg¨urteldystrophien for Klauen-
zehe/Beugekontrakturen der Zehen.
g) RELA (34%): Clearly related terms that do not fall
into any of the other previous categories, e.g., Fusionsgene for
interstitielle Deletion/subtelomere Mikrodeletion.
h) ERRD (8%): Errors typically due to wrong data. In
all of the investigated cases, we could trace them back to the
erroneous retrieval of an unrelated article in Wikipedia.
It can be concluded that a number of descriptors could
potentially have been discovered by other means as well. For
example, spell-checkers could have uncovered orthographical
variations. Synonyms and abbreviations could potentially have
been retrieved from digital dictionaries. Specialized ontologies
could have helped in extracting related diseases and therapies.
That makes a total of about 48% of descriptors, for which
there is hope to obtain them by alternative means.
For the 10% of more general terms (GNRL), however,
it is doubtful whether these could have been gathered from
controlled vocabularies. For the 34% of remaining related
terms (RELA), ﬁnally, there is basically no other way than
learning them from data. Our approach does a very good job
with respect to this and on top it extracts descriptors from all of
the other categories with the same proceeding. The automated
method yields whole semantic ﬁelds with a precision of more
than 90% and provides more than a third more descriptors than
available by the most optimistic usage scenario of traditional
resources. It is hard to estimate a reasonable recall value,
though. Finally, apart from a word lemmatization processing
step, our method is language-agnostic and can readily be
transferred to other natural languages.
VI.
CONCLUSION & FUTURE WORK
This work-in-progress paper lays the foundation for the
automated extraction of orphan diseases from medical case de-
scriptions and uncovers a number of challenges and limitations
mainly regarding the available data.
For some orphan diseases, orphanet lists only one or two
symptoms. In these cases, we have a limited and uncertain
foundation for identiﬁcation. In addition, for one third of
all clinical signs we could not retrieve descriptive contexts
from Wikipedia. This limits the identiﬁcation of these signs in
medical case descriptions to mere exact matches.
While in some cases, due to nature of the data or the lack of
available data, the automated identiﬁcation of orphan diseases
is currently quite challenging, for the majority of orphan
diseases we indeed do see a very good chance. Moreover,
the used data sources are permanently growing and being
improved, which will ease the identiﬁcation and put it in
on more solid ground in the future. Regarding the extraction
of descriptors, the ﬁrst results can be considered as very
promising. The precision is above 90%. In the future, we plan
to extract more than just nouns as descriptors, namely words
with other parts-of-speech, word ngrams and phrases. This
will increase the recall further. Finally, we will start experi-
menting with different ways of incorporating the descriptors
for an automated identiﬁcation of orphan diseases within case
descriptions posted to the medical community coliquio.
TABLE I. THE 50 STRONGEST CORRELATIONS BETWEEN
CLINICAL SIGNS AND DESCRIPTOR WORDS TOGETHER WITH THE
CATEGORY THEY FALL IN.
Clinical Sign (with orphanet id)
Descriptor
Cat.
47800 Kryoglobulin¨amie
Kryoglobuline
RELA
20360 Trommelschlegelﬁnger
Trommelschl¨agelﬁnger
ORTH
5720 Photophobie
Lichtscheu
SYNM
46560 Kniescheibenverrenkung
Patellaluxation
SYNM
23020 Hypohidrose/...
Anhidrose
SYNM
7150 Blepharophimose/...
Blepharophimose-Syndrom
RELA
21320 Anom. d. unt. Extremit¨aten/...
Epiphyseodese
THRP
15640 Pectus carinatum
Kielbrust
SYNM
33350 Ausweitung der Bronchien/...
Bronchiektasen
RELA
52480 interstitielle Deletion/...
Fusionsgene
RELA
52540 Chromosomenbr¨uchigkeit
Nijmegen-Breakage-Syndrom
DISE
41870 Galaktorrh¨o
Milchﬂuss
SYNM
43140 EEG-Anomalien
KBG-Syndrom
DISE
3700 Kinngr¨ubchen/Kinnspalte
Gr¨ubchen
GNRL
22320 Klauenzehe/...
Gliederg¨urteldystrophien
GNRL
41750 vorzeitige Pubert¨at
Pubertas
SYNM
15400 ¨uberz¨ahlige Mamillen/...
Milchleiste
SYNM
4260 Melanose der Iris/...
Melanosis
ORTH
49680 Vitamin B3/PP-Mangel
Nicotins¨aure
SYNM
35270 .../Raynaud-Ph¨anomen/...
Raynaud-Syndrom
SYNM
23330 negatives Nikolski-Zeichen
Pemphigus
DISE
17880 persistierender Urachus/...
Allantois
RELA
23060 Hautdehnungsstreifen/Striae
Dehnungsstreifen
GNRL
27630 Darmverschluss/...
Ileus
SYNM
43200 Gangst¨orung/auff¨alliger Gang
Gangbild
RELA
10490 Ankyloglossie/...
Zungenb¨andchen
RELA
42450 Hydrozephalus
Hydrocephalus
ORTH
35480 ¨Odem der Beine/...
Frakturen
ERRD
49260 Hyperkalziurie
Nephrokalzinose
RELA
5060 Glask¨orpertr¨ubungen/...
Vitrektomie
RELA
23190 chron. Infektion der Haut/...
Ulcus
RELA
54210 Durst
Durstgef¨uhl
RELA
34500 atrioventrikul¨arer Kanal
AVSD
ABBR
18880 kutanes/amniotisches Band/...
Amniotisches-Band-Syndrom
DISE
12250 ¨uberz¨ahlige Z¨ahne/Polydontie
Hyperdontie
SYNM
49140 Hypokali¨amie
Kalium
RELA
26420 Magenvolvulus
Volvulus
GNRL
2600 Kopfhaut/Sch¨adeldefekt
Skalp
SYNM
2600 Kopfhaut/Sch¨adeldefekt
Kopfschwarte
SYNM
2600 Kopfhaut/Sch¨adeldefekt
Skalpieren
ERRD
41150 Kropf
Kropfmilch
ERRD
44450 Anomale Muskel-
Biopsie/Muskelenzyme/CPK/LDH/...
Enzym
GNRL
same as above
Blutentnahme
RELA
same as above
R¨ohrchen
ERRD
21680 Knickfuß
Kn¨ochel
RELA
21280 tarsale Anomalie/Fusion/...
Verschmelzung
SYNM
23500 Pigmentanomalien der Haut
FA-Patienten
RELA
50900 vaskul¨arer Tumor
EHE
ABBR
44500 Fasziitis
Faszien
RELA
24200 Lanugo/Wollhaar
Lanugobehaarung
RELA
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has partly been funded by the research project
“Visual Analytics of Text Data in Business Applications” at the
University of Konstanz. We would like to thank the Vidatics
GmbH for providing the software implementations.
REFERENCES
[1]
“coliquio,” Available on: https://www.coliquio.de/ [Date accessed:
2015-05-26].
[2]
“Orphanet: The Portal for Rare Diseases and Orphan Drugs.” Avail-
able on: http://www.orpha.net/consor/cgi-bin/index.php [Date accessed:
2015-02-27].
[3]
A. Rath, A. Olry, F. Dhombres, M. M. Brandt, B. Urbero, and S. Ayme,
“Representation of rare diseases in health information systems: the
orphanet approach to serve a wide range of end users,” Human mutation,
vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 803–808, 2012.
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

[4]
“Wikipedia
Portal
Medicine
(German
Version).”
Available
on:
https://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Portal%3AMedizin [Date accessed: 2015-
02-04].
[5]
S. Uryasev and P. M. Pardalos, Stochastic optimization.
Springer
Science & Business Media, 2001, vol. 54.
[6]
F. Wanner, A. Stoffel, D. J¨ackle, B. C. Kwon, A. Weiler, and D. A.
Keim, “State-of-the-Art Report of Visual Analysis for Event Detection
in Text Data Streams,” in EuroVis - STARs, R. Borgo, R. Maciejewski,
and I. Viola, Eds.
Swansea, UK: Eurographics Association, 2014, pp.
125–139.
[7]
“EURORDIS, Rare Diseases Europe: What is a rare disease?” Available
on: http://www.eurordis.org/content/what-rare-diseas [Date accessed:
2015-03-03].
[8]
“EURORDIS, Rare Diseases Europe: About Rare Diseases,” Available
on: http://www.eurordis.org/about-rare-diseases [Date accessed: 2015-
03-03].
[9]
K. W. Fung, R. Richesson, and O. Bodenreider, “Coverage of rare
disease names in standard terminologies and implications for patients,
providers, and research,” in AMIA Annu Symp Proc, vol. 564, 2014, p.
570.
[10]
A. Rath, B. Bellet, A. Olry, C. Gonthier, and S. Aym´e, “How to code
rare diseases with international terminologies?” Orphanet Journal of
Rare Diseases, vol. 9, no. Suppl 1, p. O11, 2014.
[11]
X. Zhou, H. Han, I. Chankai, A. Prestrud, and A. Brooks, “Approaches
to text mining for clinical medical records,” in Proceedings of the 2006
ACM symposium on Applied computing.
ACM, 2006, pp. 235–239.
[12]
R. Koeling, J. Carroll, A. R. Tate, and A. Nicholson, “Annotating
a corpus of clinical text records for learning to recognize symptoms
automatically,” in Proceedings of the 3rd Louhi Workshop on Text and
Data Mining of Health Documents, 2011, pp. 43–50.
[13]
S. K¨ohler et al., “Construction and accessibility of a cross-species
phenotype ontology along with gene annotations for biomedical
research.” F1000Research, vol. 2, Feb. 2013. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.12688/f1000research.2-30.v1
[14]
“Orphadata: Free access data from Orphanet.
c⃝ INSERM 1997.”
Available on: http://www.orphadata.org/ [Date accessed: 2015-02-04].
125
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

