Multilingual Sentiment Analysis on Data of the Refugee Crisis in Europe
Gayane Shalunts
SAIL LABS Technology GmbH
Vienna, Austria
Email: gayane.shalunts@sail-labs.com
Gerhard Backfried
SAIL LABS Technology GmbH
Vienna, Austria
Email: gerhard.backfried@sail-labs.com
Abstract—The refugee crisis in Europe was one of the biggest
challenges in summer-autumn 2015. The problem drew the
highest attention in media and was the discussion topic of politi-
cians and responsible organizations. The current article presents
multilingual sentiment analysis of the traditional media content
covering the topic. Sentiment analysis forms an integral part
of multifaceted media analysis. The dataset comprises relevant
articles from eighty of the most circulated traditional media
sources in English, German, Russian and Spanish, compiled in
the course of three months. The temporal sentiment classiﬁcation
per language demonstrates how the attitude towards the crisis
differs across the languages and geographical areas. The further
sentiment analysis and visualizations of various aspects illustrate
in details the distribution of positivity/negativity among media
sources and their target languages.
Keywords–Multilingual sentiment analysis; refugee crisis.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Sentiment analysis refers to a classiﬁcation task in Natural
Language Processing (NLP) community, the goal of which is
commonly to determine the objectivity (objective/subjective)
or polarity (positive/negative) of the input data. The main
parameters deﬁning the scope of a sentiment analysis approach
are the target language, domain and media type (traditional or
social media). The most common application is the monitoring
of public opinions in marketing (product reviews) and politics
(election campaigns). Whereas the research ﬁeld is active,
most publications are limited to the domains of movie and
product reviews in English only. Sentiment analysis methods
can be divided into two broad categories: machine-learning-
and lexicon-based methods [1]. Machine learning methods are
implemented as supervised binary (positive/negative) classiﬁ-
cation approaches, in which classiﬁers are trained on labeled
data [1] [2]. However, the dependence on a labeled dataset
is considered a major drawback, since labeling is usually
costly, time-intensive and even impossible in some cases. In
contrast, lexicon-based methods use a predeﬁned set of patterns
(referred to as a sentiment dictionary or lexicon) associating
each entry with a speciﬁc sentiment score and do not require
any labeled training data. Here, the challenge lies in designing
an appropriate sentiment lexicon. Lexicon-based methods are
tuned towards speciﬁc target domains, media types and the
respective language style, e.g., formal language on traditional
media and colloquial language on social media. A compar-
ison of eight state-of-the-art sentiment analysis methods is
performed in [1]. All experiments are carried out using two
English datasets of Online Social Networks messages. The
methods compared are SentiWordNet [3], SASA [4], PANAS-
t [5], Emoticons, SentiStrength [6], LIWC [7], SenticNet [8]
and Happiness Index [9]. They report that the examined sen-
timent analysis methods have different levels of applicability
on real-world events and vary widely in their agreement on
the predicted polarity. Sentiment analysis of the textual data
relevant to disasters/crises aims to provide additional structured
information to the responsible organizations for situation anal-
ysis in various phases of disaster/crisis management [10].
The current article makes the following contributions: 1)
Compiles automatically a corpus of news articles covering
the refugee crisis in Europe in a period of a quarter in
summer-autumn 2015 (36702 articles in total). The articles
originate from 80 of the most circulated traditional media
sources in English, German, Russian and Spanish, 2) in-
vestigates the temporal development of the data volume per
language, 3) performs sentiment analysis per language, 4)
detects the sentiment polarity across media sources and their
languages and generates visualizations of different aspects. The
authors choose to employ the SentiSAIL software tool [11]
among numerous existing state-of-the-art sentiment analysis
methods to carry out the above remarked experimental setup.
SentiSAIL performs multidimensional sentiment analysis in
terms of languages, domains and media types. It is inte-
grated into the SAIL LABS Media Mining System (MMS)
for Open Source Intelligence [12]. MMS is a state-of-the-
art Open-Source-Intelligence system, incorporating speech and
text-processing technologies [11]. SentiSAIL performs an im-
portant part of MMS automatic multifaceted processing of
unstructured textual data. It addresses the content of both
traditional and social media in English, German, Russian and
Spanish, supports the domains of general news and particularly
the coverage of disasters/crises. The performance evaluation
of SentiSAIL on a trilingual traditional media corpus, as
well as on an English social media dataset for comparison
with other state-of-the-art methods, is reported in [11]. The
experiments in [11] showed that the performance of SentiSAIL
and human annotators are equivalent. SentiSAIL was also
used to analyze the social media data in German, concerning
the European ﬂoods 2013
[13]. The choice of SentiSAIL
is motivated by the following advantages of applicability in
the current scenario: 1) SentiSAIL supports all the languages
mentioned, unlike other sentiment analysis approaches, which
handle only a single language content. E.g., SentimentWS [14]
and [15] target only German, [16] [17] - Russian, Sentitext [18]
and [19] - Spanish. The authors in [20] adapted the English
semantic orientation system [21] to Spanish, comparing several
alternative approaches. 2) SentiSAIL is adapted to the domain
of news articles and especially the coverage of disasters/crises
in the traditional media. The authors in [22] also target the
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

domain of news, limited only to English though.
The paper is organized as follows: Section II clariﬁes the
methodology of the SentiSAIL tool. Section III gives de-
tailed information about the experimental corpora. Section IV
presents the experimental setup, performance evaluation and
results. And ﬁnally, Section V draws conclusions from the
work presented.
II.
SENTISAIL METHODOLOGY
SentiSAIL is a multilingual sentiment analysis tool ad-
dressing the domain of general news and particularly the
coverage of disasters/crises in general news [11]. It employs
the algorithm of one of the state-of-the-art sentiment analysis
methods
SentiStrength [6]. SentiStrength, like [21], is a
lexicon-based approach, using lexicons of words associated
with scores of positive or negative orientation. SentiSAIL also
supports stemming of the lexicon patterns, which is particularly
important for the processing of inﬂective languages, such as
Russian or German. The intensiﬁcation/boosting and negation
of the lexicon words, as well as the polarity scoring of phrases
and idioms, intend to model the structure and semantics of
the language observed. The innovative contribution of Sen-
tiSAIL [11] lied in expanding the SentiStrength algorithm
into new domains (general and disasters/crises related news),
multiple languages (English, German, Russian and Spanish)
and to the granularity level of full articles. In the scope of the
crises domain were considered both natural and humanitarian
crises, like the refugee crises in Europe. The adaptation of
SentiSAIL to the crises domain was achieved by means of
manual compilation of sentiment terms from relevant texts.
Examples of such terms are ”donation”, ”volunteer” (positive
terms), ”underfeeding”,”xenophobic” (negative terms).
Whereas SentiStrength is optimized for and evaluated on
social media content, SentiSAIL targets both social and tradi-
tional media data. The social media features are parameterized
and may be disabled during traditional media processing. The
SentiStrength and SentiSAIL features are compared in [11]
on a self-compiled traditional media corpus, reporting the
SentiSAIL performance improvement in English to be slight
and considerable in German and Russian. SentiSAIL, like [23],
solves a dual classiﬁcation task by classifying a text into one of
the following 4classes: positive, negative, mixed (both positive
and negative) or neutral (neither positive, nor negative). The
dual classiﬁcation scheme is motivated, as humans exhibit the
ability to experience positive and negative emotions simulta-
neously [24]. The class of the input text is obtained by taking
the following steps: 1) the sentiment on the granularity level
of line is determined by obtaining a pair of positive/negative
scores by averaging the respective positive/negative scores of
the sentiment patterns present in the line. Algorithms other
than averaging were also employed in this step without a
signiﬁcant impact on the ﬁnal classiﬁcation rate [11]. 2) The
sentiment on the granularity level of document is calculated
likewise as a pair of positive/negative scores by averaging the
pairs of the positive/negative scores of all lines respectively.
3) The ﬁnal sentiment class of a text is produced by double
thresholding of the pair of the positive/negative scores on the
granularity level document: classiﬁcation of the positive and
negative classes is straightforward. Documents passing both
thresholds are classiﬁed into the mixed class, those failing both
thresholds are classiﬁed as neutral.
III.
DATA COLLECTION
The multilingual corpus covering the humanitarian crisis of
refugees in Europe was collected automatically using the SAIL
LABS Feeder for web content
a web-crawler aimed at the
collection of textual content from feeds and web-pages [12].
The tool can be scheduled to collect traditional media sources
on a regular basis. A multilingual corpus (English, German,
Russian and Spanish) was compiled to reﬂect a variety of
views in particular geographical regions and formed by cultural
differences and political inﬂuences. Twenty out of the most
circulated traditional media sources per language were chosen
in order to obtain equal distribution among languages. The
period observed is a quarter from July to September 2015
Figure 1. Temporal chart of the data volume per language (horizontal axis - date, vertical axis - article count).
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

Figure 2. Temporal sentiment analysis of the English data (horizontal axis - date, vertical axis - article count).
Figure 3. Temporal sentiment analysis of the German data (horizontal axis - date, vertical axis - article count).
on a daily basis. The number of the collected articles in the
mentioned period in English is equal to 6580, in German
16669, in Russian
6459 and in Spanish
6994. A total of
36702 articles relevant to the refugee crisis were analyzed.
IV.
THE EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND RESULTS
In order to have a picture about the development of
the refugee crisis and how actively the selected multilingual
traditional media sources covered those, ﬁrstly the temporal
distribution of the data volume among languages is examined.
Fig. 1 depicts the daily volume of the compiled data per
language in the period from July the 1st to September 30th.
The data volume growth is noticeable for all languages starting
from August 25th, coinciding with the dates of the deepening
of the refugee crisis. It is also visible from the chart that the
traditional media sources in German paid more attention to the
problem, generating the highest volume of content among the
four languages monitored. This tendency may be explained
by the fact that the German speaking countries Austria and
Germany were confronted with the crisis immediately by a
vast stream of refugees.
The temporal sentiment analysis of the selected traditional
media sources in English, among those CNN and BBC, is
displayed in Fig. 2. The vertical axis represents the number of
articles per sentiment class, the horizontal axis the issue dates
of the articles. The articles, classiﬁed in the mixed class, are
assigned both to the positive and negative classes. As observed
in Fig. 2, the negative sentiment is generally dominating
during the whole period. The term refugee(s), associated with a
slightly negative score, is excluded from the sentiment patterns
in all languages, in order not to bias the classiﬁcation of the
whole corpus towards negative sentiment. Fig. 3, Fig. 4 and
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

Figure 4. Temporal sentiment analysis of the Russian data (horizontal axis - date, vertical axis - article count).
Figure 5. Temporal sentiment analysis of the Spanish data (horizontal axis - date, vertical axis - article count).
Fig. 5 portray the equivalent temporal charts of the distribution
of the sentiment classes on German, Russian and Spanish share
of the corpus respectively. Comparing the four multilingual
charts, one may conclude that whereas the negative sentiment
is highly prevailing on English and Spanish media sources,
the German media stands out by dominating neutrality. The
Russian corpus analysis reveals high rates of both negative
and neutral sentiment (Fig. 4). One can also ﬁnd correlations
with the crisis events examining the sentiment distribution
diagrams. For example, the global maximum of the negative
sentiment on the English data is observed on September 3rd
(Fig. 2), coinciding with the date, when a three-year-old boy
drowned in his Syrian familys attempt to reach Greece from
Turkey. On the other hand, the global negative maximum
on the German media is located on August 28th (Fig. 3),
when 71 refugees were found dead in the back of a freezer
truck in Austria. A closer look at German articles, carrying
positive sentiment, revealed phrases, such as Ich bin stolz
Deutscher zu sein (I am proud to be German); Eine der gr¨oßten
Spendenaktionen der vergangenen Jahre ist gelungen (One of
the biggest donation activities of the past years succeeded);
Hilfsbereitschaft (willingness to help), etc.
Table I demonstrates how positivity, negativity and neu-
trality are distributed among the four languages, covering the
sensitive topic of the refugee crisis. The most positive media
language is Spanish with 27.61% positive content, the least
positive is the Russian one with only 2.35% positive articles.
Note for comparison that the average positivity rate of the
whole multilingual corpus is 13.13% (Table I). The highest
negativity rate is observed on the English media coverage
with 72.3% negative rate, whereas the German media spreads
the lowest negativity with 23.6% negative rate. The average
negativity rate on the whole multilingual corpus yields 52.9%.
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

TABLE I. THE POSITIVITY, NEGATIVITY AND NEUTRALITY RATES IN PERCENT PER LANGUAGE.
English
German
Russian
Spanish
Average
Positivity rate %
19.61%
2.96%
2.35%
27.61%
13.13%
Negativity rate %
72.3%
23.6%
45.6%
70.2%
52.9%
Neutrality rate %
19.7%
74.3%
53.2%
21.7%
42.2%
Figure 6. The rate of all positive articles in % per media source.
Figure 7. The rate of all negative articles in % per media source.
Figure 8. The rate of negativity (vertical axis) vs positivity (horizontal axis) in % per media source and language.
The German corpus also stands out with the highest neutrality
rate (74.3%), which is considerably higher than the average
neutrality rate of the complete dataset (42.2%) (Table I).
The next facet of our multilingual sentiment analysis por-
trays the distribution of the positive and negative sentiment
per media source to reveal the most positive/negative sources.
Fig. 6 depicts the positive rate in percent for the 80 media
sources, labeled by their language. Fig. 7 is the corresponding
chart for the negative sentiment. The most positive media
source is the Spanish La Razon Spain with 48.55% positive
content, the least positive ones are the Russian Ria Novosti,
Gazeta, 112 Ukraine, Oxu, RBC Ukraine, Interfax and Korre-
spondent Ukraine, lacking positive content completely (Fig. 6).
The most negative media source is the Russian Ria Novosti
with 96.3% negative articles, the least negative one - the
German Handelsblatt with 13.6% negativity rate (Fig. 7). Fig. 8
shows a visualization of the positivity vs negativity rates in
percent per media source and language. Here, an interesting
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

tendency of clustering per language is noticeable: 1) The
German media sources shape a well-deﬁned cluster of low
negativity and low positivity. 2) The Russian media sources
form a cluster of low positivity and moderate negativity.
Here, the clear outlier is Ria Novosti with 96.3% negative
and 0% positive content. The clustering is not so clearly
notable in cases of the English and Spanish corpora. Here,
one may conclude, that whereas both media languages spread
highly negative content (exceeding 59%), the range of the
distribution of the positivity is very broad. The outliers from
the tendency are the English Washington Post (3% positivity vs
50% negativity) and the Spanish El Comercio Ecuador (0.74%
positivity vs 33.1% negativity).
V.
CONCLUSION
The paper presented sentiment analysis of traditional media
data on the 2015 refugee crisis in Europe, originating from
a vast number of multilingual, highly circulated sources of
traditional media. The languages, covering the humanitarian
tragedy, were English, German, Russian and Spanish. The
observed time span was a quarter year in summer-autumn
2015. The initial experiment compared the data volume per
language of the automatically compiled corpora. The German
data volume was considerably higher than those of the other
languages, explained by the fact that German speaking coun-
tries faced the crisis immediately. The second experiment em-
ployed SentiSAIL software tool to perform sentiment analysis
per language. The outcome of the experiment was that the
dominating sentiment on the English and Spanish corpora was
the negative one, whereas on the German and Russian data
the neutral one. The ﬁnal experiment visualized and illustrated
the distribution of the positivity and negativity rates among all
multilingual sources, revealing a tendency towards clustering
per language. In a larger context, these results form part of
our contrastive analysis of media coverage of disasters across
multiple languages and media.
REFERENCES
[1]
P. Gonc¸alves, M. Ara´ujo, F. Benevenuto, and M. Cha, “Comparing
and combining sentiment analysis methods,” in Proc. of the 1st ACM
Conference on Online Social Networks (COSN). Boston, USA: ACM,
2013, pp. 27–38.
[2]
B. Pang, L. Lee, and S. Vaithyanathan, “Thumbs up?: sentiment
classiﬁcation using machine learning techniques.” in Proc. of the
ACL conference on Empirical methods in natural language processing
(EMNLP), Philadelphia, PA, USA, 2002, pp. 79–86.
[3]
A. Esuli and F. Sebastiani, “Sentiwordnet: A publicly available lexical
resource for opinion mining,” in Proc. of the 5th Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC06, 2006, pp. 417–422.
[4]
H. Wang, D. Can, A. Kazemzadeh, F. Bar, and S. Narayanan, “A system
for real-time twitter sentiment analysis of 2012 u.s. presidential election
cycle,” in ACL (System Demonstrations), 2012, pp. 115–120.
[5]
P. Gonc¸alves, F. Benevenuto, and M. Cha, “Panas-t: A pychometric
scale for measuring sentiments on twitter,” CoRR, vol. abs/1308.1857,
2013.
[6]
M. Thelwall, K. Buckley, G. Paltoglou, D. Cai, and A. Kappas,
“Sentiment Strength Detection in Short Informal Text,” J. American
Society for Information Science and Technology, vol. 61, no. 12, Dec.
2010, pp. 2544–2558.
[7]
Y. R. Tausczik and J. W. Pennebaker, “The psychological meaning
of words: Liwc and computerized text analysis methods,” Journal of
Language and Social Psychology, vol. 29, no. 1, 2010, pp. 25–54.
[8]
E. Cambria, R. Speer, C. Havasi, and A. Hussain, “SenticNet: A
Publicly Available Semantic Resource for Opinion Mining,” in AAAI
Fall Symposium: Commonsense Knowledge, 2010, pp. 14–18.
[9]
P. S. Dodds and C. M. Danforth, “Measuring the happiness of large-
scale written expression: songs, blogs, and presidents,” Journal of
Happiness Studies, vol. 11, no. 4, 2009, pp. 441–456.
[10]
G. Backfried et al., “Integration of Media Sources for Situation Analysis
in the Different Phases of Disaster Management: The QuOIMA Project,”
in Proc. of European Intelligence and Security Informatics Conference
(EISIC), Uppsala, Sweden, 2013, pp. 143–146.
[11]
G. Shalunts and G. Backfried, “SentiSAIL: Sentiment Analysis in
English, German and Russian,” in Proc. of the 11th International
Conference on Machine Learning and Data Mining, ser. MLDM ’15,
Hamburg, Germany, 2015, pp. 87–97.
[12]
G. Backfried et al., “Open Source Intelligence in Disaster Management,”
in Proc. of the European Intelligence and Security Informatics Confer-
ence (EISIC).
Odense, Denmark: IEEE Computer Society, 2012, pp.
254–258.
[13]
G. Shalunts, G. Backfried, and K. Prinz, “Sentiment analysis of German
social media data for natural disasters,” in Proc. of the 11th International
Conference on Information Systems for Crisis Response and Manage-
ment (ISCRAM), University Park, Pennsylvania, USA, 2014, pp. 752–
756.
[14]
R. Remus, U. Quasthoff, and G. Heyer, “Sentiws - a german-language
resource for sentiment analysis,” in Proc. of the 7th conference on
International Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC), Valletta,
Malta, 2010, pp. 1168–1171.
[15]
S. Momtazi, “Fine-grained german sentiment analysis on social media,”
in Proc. of the 8th International Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC).
Istanbul, Turkey: European Language Resources
Association (ELRA), 2012, pp. 1215–1220.
[16]
I. Chetviorkin and N. Loukachevitch, “Extraction of Russian Sentiment
Lexicon for Product Meta-Domain,” in Proc. of the 24th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING), Bombay, India,
2012, pp. 593–610.
[17]
I. Chetviorkin and N. Loukachevitch, “Evaluating Sentiment Analysis
Systems in Russian,” in Proc. of the 4th Biennial International Work-
shop on Balto-Slavic Natural Language Processing, Soﬁa, Bulgaria,
2013, pp. 12–17.
[18]
A. Moreno-Ortiz, C. Perez-Hernandez, and M. A. Del-Olmo, “Manag-
ing multiword expressions in a lexicon-based sentiment analysis system
for spanish,” in Proc. of the 9th Workshop on Multi-word Expressions,
Atlanta, Georgia, USA, 2013, pp. 1–10.
[19]
V. P. Rosas, C. Banea, and R. Mihalcea, “Learning Sentiment Lexicons
in Spanish,” in Proc. of the 8th International Conference on Language
Resources and Evaluation (LREC).
Istanbul, Turkey: European Lan-
guage Resources Association (ELRA), 2012, pp. 3077–3081.
[20]
J. Brooke, M. Toﬁloski, and M. Taboada, “Cross-Linguistic Sentiment
Analysis: From English to Spanish,” in Proc. of Recent Advances in
Natural Language Processing (RANLP).
Borovets, Bulgaria: RANLP
2009 Organising Committee / ACL, 2009, pp. 50–54.
[21]
M. Taboada, J. Brooke, M. Toﬁloski, K. Voll, and M. Stede, “Lexicon-
based methods for sentiment analysis,” Computational Linguistics,
vol. 37, no. 2, 2011, pp. 267–307.
[22]
A. Balahur et al., “Sentiment analysis in the news,” in Proc. of the
7th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC).
Valletta, Malta: European Language Resources Association
(ELRA), 2010.
[23]
T. Wilson, J. Wiebe, and P. Hoffmann, “Recognizing Contextual Polar-
ity: An Exploration of Features for Phrase-Level Sentiment Analysis,”
Computational Linguistics, 2009, pp. 399–433.
[24]
G. J. Norman et al., “Current Emotion Research in Psychophysiology:
The Neurobiology of Evaluative Bivalence,” Emotion Review, vol. 3,
no. 3, 2011, pp. 349–359.
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

