 
Aircraft Path Planning for UAM Applications 
 
Silvio Semanjski 
SEAL Aeronautica S.L. 
Barcelona, Spain 
Email: silvio.semanjski@sealaero.com 
 
Ronald Ponguillo-Intriago 
Dept. of Industrial Systems Engineering and Product 
Design, Ghent University 
Industrial Systems Engineering (ISyE), Flanders Make 
Ghent, Belgium 
Facultad de Ingenieria en Electricidad y Computacion 
Escuela Superior Politecnica del Litoral, ESPOL 
Guayaquil, Ecuador 
Email: RonaldAlberto.PonguilloIntriago@UGent.be 
 
Ignacio Querol Puchal 
SEAL Aeronautica S.L. 
Barcelona, Spain 
Email: IgnacioQuerolPuchal@sealaero.com 
 
Ivana Semanjski 
Dept. of Industrial Systems Engineering and Product 
Design, Ghent University 
Industrial Systems Engineering (ISyE), Flanders Make 
Ghent, Belgium 
Email: Ivana.Semanjski@ugent.be 
 
 
 
Abstract— Aircraft path planning in urban air mobility context 
relates to finding of a continuous path/trajectory that will drive 
the aircraft from a start to an end location knowing the 
environment map. This map can be a 3D model, including 
semantic information (no fly zones, aerial corridors) that are 
constraints for the path planning algorithm. This paper 
investigates the aircraft path plan dealing with the flight pre-
known obstacles in the 3D space, regardless of their static or 
dynamic characteristics, that syncs with the local path in cases 
when pre-flight unknown obstacles are detected along the global 
path by one of the aircraft’s sensors to ensure safe flight between 
flight origin and destination locations. To achieve this, we rely 
on a combination of A* and Visibility graphs approach. 
 
Keywords- Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS), Drones, Urban Air 
Mobility (UAM), Aircraft path planning, Path optimisation, A*, 
Visibility graphs 
I. INTRODUCTION  
Aircraft path planning, within Urban Air Mobility (UAM) 
context, relates to finding of a continuous path/trajectory that 
will drive the aircraft from a start to an end location knowing 
the environment map, which is stored in the navigator’s 
memory. This map can be a 3D model, including semantic 
information (no fly zones, aerial corridors) that are constraints 
for the aircraft planning algorithm. To ensure a failsafe 
operation, the aircraft also has to build a local semantic map 
at the same time as it moves to avoid potential hazards or 
obstacles. The perception abilities are obviously the starting 
point to develop the path planning algorithms and allowing 
the aircraft to accomplish its mission. In this paper, we will 
describe in more details the development of an aircraft path 
planning algorithm for the purpose of the urban air mobility 
applications. 
 The structure of the paper is as follows. Section II 
introduces the flight path planning building blocks. Section III 
elaborates on flight path planning methodology while Section 
IV briefly discusses obstacle clearance construction. Section 
V elaborates on the 3D path construction. Section VI 
discusses non-holonomic constraint, which is followed by a 
brief conclusion in Section VI. 
II. AIRCRAFT PATH PLANNING BUILDING BLOCKS 
The search space for our path planning problem is an 
undirected graph in R3 that is built from the visible vertices of 
the physical and non-physical objects on the map of the 
location where the flight task will be deployed. Physical 
objects refer to buildings, trees, etc. Non-physical objects 
refer to geometric objects in R3 defined by the aeronautical 
authorities within which it is not possible to navigate, and they 
are flight constraints for our solver (Figure 1). In practice, 
these objects are defined in Aeronautical Information 
Exchange Model (AIXM) [1] format and are called Airspace 
Volume objects. 
 
 
Figure 1. Global path search space example.  
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-994-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Data Analytics

 
 
 
In each node of the graph, the geolocation information of 
the given point in World Geodetic System 84 (WGS84) 
coordinates and the altitude are placed. The information about 
the distances for each pair of nodes connected is placed in the 
corresponding edges. 
III. AIRCRAFT PATH PLANNING METHOD SELECTION  
     Due to the nature of the aircraft path planning problem, the 
number of possible solutions to it is large. A solution can be 
modelled as an ordered set of points in space conforming a 
path whose length is minimum with respect to others. To cut 
back the solution space, some flight path planning methods 
search some points that are good candidates for belonging to 
the optimal solution (or optimal path). One of these methods 
is the Visibility Graph [2], which only considers the origin, 
destination and the points belonging to the outline of the 
obstacle. Indeed, this graph consists of a set of inter-visible 
locations, i.e., pairs of points in the 2D Euclidean plane that 
can see each other [3]. Each node in the graph represents a 
point location, and each edge represents a visible connection 
between them. That is, if the line segment connecting two 
locations does not intersect any third obstacle, an edge is 
drawn between them in the graph. One example of a Visibility 
Graph among a set of polygons is shown in Figure 2. In the 
case of polygons, just their vertices are considered as nodes of 
the constructed graph since any intermediate point of any 
polygon edge would be part of a suboptimal sub-path. 
 
Figure 2. Visibility graph. 
     The perfect complement for the Visibility Graph is a tree 
search algorithm, since once the data set is decomposed into a 
relatively small set of nodes and edges, this type of algorithm 
can provide a solution in a reasonable amount of time [4]. 
Among the algorithms that have historically been used for this 
problem, we find Dijkstra, which is able to compute the 
optimal solution in O(|E| + |V | log |V |) time complexity 
(being V the number of vertices and E the number of edges of 
the graph). However, a generalization of Dijkstra’s algorithm 
has been preferred in this approach. It is called A*, and its 
main advantage is that it cuts down on the size of the sub-
graph that must be explored [5]. It does so by considering a 
lower bound on the distance to the target, which works well in 
this case since Euclidean distances are considered. This bound 
or weight permits us to distinguish promising nodes to explore 
from nodes that may not be part of the solution. So, with this 
combination of methods it is possible to exactly solve the 
problem in 2D and without considering the dynamics of the 
vehicle. 
IV. OBSTACLES CLEARANCE CONSTRUCTION 
     One of the most critical parts of the aircraft path planning 
is the integration of the so-called ‘horizontal and vertical 
clearances’ constraints [6]. These have been the first studied 
constraints after the selection of the path planning method, and 
due to the nature of this problem, their incorporation was 
laborious.  
     In the aircraft plan planning problem, just static objects 
were considered, that is to say, animals or other vehicles that 
could intersect the studied vehicle’s path during the flight 
would be avoided locally in an online manner. But, in a first 
approach, the most efficient but safe route should be 
computed considering objects which would be (with certain 
guarantee) in the vehicle’s path during the flight. The set of 
obstacles that we have considered in the aircraft plan planning 
can be defined in 2D as convex or non-convex regions in 
space, being the most used representations the circle and the 
polygon in the UAM framework. In fact, the area enclosing 
these obstacles should be as close as possible to the original 
shape of the objects, but it is also pretended to define this area 
with as few numbers of points as possible. Therefore, being 
the polygon and the circle the two basic shapes whose 
combination is able to tightly cover almost all possible figures 
in 2D space, both have been selected as the main obstacle’s 
representations in this research. 
     Regarding its provenance, there are two types of obstacles. 
The first are provided by some aviation institutions like 
EUROCAE in maps defining the Airspace Class of each 
region of the atmosphere, named Visual Flight Rules (VFR) 
[7]. In these maps, the restricted areas or No-Fly Zones of a 
given region are pointed out. Moreover, in our problem, there 
is a second type of obstacle which fundamentally consists of 
the rest of objects against which we do not want the vehicle to 
collide: buildings, trees, bridges, transmission towers, power 
lines, etc. Considering both type of obstacles, it is possible to 
gather a set of forbidden zones in space that the aircraft will 
have to surround.  
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-994-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Data Analytics

 
Figure 3. Global path planning test area [8]. 
     By clearance with respect to an obstacle, it is meant to 
express the distance that the vehicle must respect at all times 
from each kind of obstacle. There is a distinction between 
horizontal and vertical clearances in this research, due to the 
nature of the problem (for example, the aircraft’s dynamics). 
Thus, to guarantee at all times that this constraint is respected, 
the approach that has been followed is to enlarge the objects, 
so that the forbidden region is formed by the prism/cylinder 
volume and the volume which is closer than a given value hc 
with respect to the obstacles. In Figure 3 it is possible to see a 
horizontal projection of these enlarged objects. In blue, a set 
of buildings that can be encountered in a certain test area for 
this research are represented. In orange it is possible to see a 
boundary which is placed at a distance hc = 60 m from the 
obstacles, and that contours the forbidden region that must 
never be trespassed. It is also possible to see that these objects, 
composed of a set of linear and circular segments, have some 
holes in their interior. 
     As commented previously, some difficulties have arisen 
during the conceiving of this specific part of the algorithm. As 
the objects represented in 2D can be concave polygons, some 
exceptions appeared when searching some criterion in order 
to extract the single contour of this kind of figures. Also, as 
some objects are adjacent (interior and exterior) with respect 
to others, some errors were being obtained since these figures 
were intersecting at several points. By merging these 
overlapping figures in the first place, it was possible to solve 
the mentioned problem. Another set of exceptions appeared 
when integrating the vertical constraint, as it was needed to 
update the heights of the merged figure and the single ones, so 
that there was no overlapping among prisms. In this way, it 
was possible to compute the obstacle clearances at different 
heights in an efficient manner. 
 
V.  3D PATH CONSTRUCTION 
     In the previous section, the main challenge when 
integrating the vertical constraint has been stated. As said, this 
was related to the clearance construction of the objects in the 
vertical domain. If it was possible to specify the range of 
heights among which the polygons were extended, then it was 
possible to compute 2D forbidden area contours (as 
represented in Figure 4) for several discrete height values. In 
this manner, it was possible to compute a 3D version of the 
forbidden areas.  
     The next step in the pursuance of integrating the third 
dimension was to update the optimization method. The 
Visibility Graph together with the A* worked well in 2D but 
when used within a 3D environment, edges were converted 
into planes and path must be optimized among these planes. 
For this reason, the complexity of an integral 3D Visibility 
Graph algorithm increased a lot. By integral, it is intended to 
mean a method which computes all the Visibility Graph edges 
between all the 2D obtained figures even if they belong to 
different height cuts. In this approach, while a higher degree 
of freedom is given to the vehicle, certain properties of the 
problem are not taken into account. These can be found by 
studying Urban Air Mobility framework, like the height 
distribution that a vehicle under these conditions would 
delineate or even the speed distribution [9]. So, by simplifying 
our model or making some assumptions, it has not only been 
possible to cut time complexity of the algorithm, but to help it 
in the resolution of the problem. In Figure 4, it is possible to 
see some 3D obstacles in blue, the computed obstacle 
clearances in orange and a path in red which goes under a 
floating obstacle. The top surfaces of the obstacles and the 
orange contours are not colored for visualization purposes. 
 
Figure 4. Clearance construction. 
 
VI. NON-HOLONOMIC CONSTRAINT 
     Once the third dimension is added, there is another 
challenge to face: how to integrate the vehicle’s dynamics into 
the problem. In fact, this constraint prevents some paths or 
some maneuvers from being valid. Thus, by applying this 
constraint, it is possible to say that the vehicle follows a non-
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-994-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Data Analytics

 
 
 
holonomic system, which in physics and mathematics is a 
physical system whose state depends on the path taken in 
order to achieve it. In other words, the vehicle’s orientation at 
a given point depends on the path taken. So, in this way, steep 
climbs and turns must be eliminated from the solution space. 
     The approach taken for the purpose of adding this new 
restriction has been to discretize the flight or the path into 
some phases. The considered flight phases are the following 
ones:  
• 
take-off,  
• 
climb,  
• 
cruise,  
• 
approach, and  
• 
landing.  
     During the cruise phase, the 2D Visibility Graph and A* 
method is used in order to calculate the optimal path at a 
constant height. This height is determined a priori based on 
several criteria: length of the path, safety, time complexity, 
etc. Like this, it is possible to calculate routes in large datasets 
including a high number of obstacles. The other flight phases 
are computed using a heuristic algorithm, tailored to the 
application. In short, several take-off trajectories are 
computed considering different azimuths and the ones that are 
non-valid are removed. Afterwards the transition between the 
take-off phase and the cruise one is computed. For the landing 
heuristic, the procedure is almost the same. Like this, steep 
climbs are removed from the model, while turn radius can be 
regulated by adjusting the parameter hc, which was the 
horizontal clearance of the obstacles. In Figure 5, it is possible 
to see a 3D path which complies with the non-holonomic 
constraint.  
 
Figure 5. 3D path which complies with the non-holonomic constraint. 
 
 
VII.  CONCLUSION 
Challenge of introducing urban air mobility relates to the 
aircraft path planning and optimization in low airspace area 
characterized with the presence of multiple obstacles. This 
requires introduction of adjusted aircraft path planning in 3D 
environment as well as integration of relevant constrains, 
including non-holonomic ones, in order to introduce safe 
operations and reliable flight path plans. This paper briefly 
introduces one of such approaches based on the visibility 
graphs method. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme 
(H2020-MG-3-6-2020 Research and Innovation Action 
“Towards sustainable urban air mobility”) under Grant 
Agreement No. 101007134. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Aeronautical Information Exchange Model," Eurocontrol, 
[Online]. Available: https://www.aixm.aero/. [Accessed 28 
January 2022]. 
[2] H. Niu, Y. Lu, A. Savvaris and A. Tsourdos, "An energy-
efficient path planning algorithm for unmanned surface 
vehicles," Ocean Engineering, vol. 116, pp. 308-321, 2018. 
[3] M. de Berg et al., "Visibility graphs," in Computational 
geometry. , Berlin, Heidelberg, Springer, 2000, pp. 307-317. 
[4] D. O'Sullivan and A. Turner, "Visibility graphs and landscape 
visibility analysis," International journal of geographical 
information science, vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 221-237, 2001. 
[5] C. Ge, T. Wu and Z. Zhou, "Research on ship meteorological 
route based on A-star algorithm.," Mathematical Problems in 
Engineering, vol. 2021, 2021. 
[6] Y. Gu, "Design and flight testing evaluation of formation 
control laws," IEEE Transactions on Control Systems 
Technology, vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 1105-1112, 2006. 
[7] H. Alturbeh and J. Whidborne, "Visual flight rules-based 
collision avoidance systems for uav flying in civil aerospace," 
Robotics, vol. 1, no. 8, p. 9, 2020. 
[8] S. Semanjski, I. Querol Puchal, I. Semanjski, R. A. Ponguillo 
Intriago and O. Broca, "Global path planning algorithm," 
Aurora project, 2022. 
[9] AURORA consortium, "AURORA," [Online]. Available: 
https://aurora-uam.eu/. [Accessed 20th October 2022]. 
 
 
 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-994-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Data Analytics

