Practices for Data Sharing: An Empirical Survey
Andrei-Raoul Morariu, Bogdan Iancu, Jerker Bj¨orkqvist
˚Abo Akademi University
Faculty of Science and Engineering
Vesilinnantie 3, Turku, Finland
Email: {firstname.lastname@abo.fi}
Abstract—The data economy is changing the way companies
operate. The largest companies in the world are strong actors in
the data economy. Still, the share of data economy of GDP (Gross
Domestic Product) is rather small. For industrial operators, data
utilization is predicted to increase performance, predictability,
and cost-effectiveness. However, to achieve the goals, data often
need to be shared between operators, to produce system level
gains. This paper analyses the possibilities and barriers for
reaching effective data sharing through qualitative interviews
with company representatives with technical insights into data
sharing. The paper includes aspects such as value proposition,
barriers, confidentiality, and technical aspects of data sharing.
Index Terms—data economy, data sharing, industrial opera-
tors.
I. INTRODUCTION
The volume of data/information created, captured, copied,
and consumed worldwide was in the year 2010 approximately
two zettabytes. This volume is forecasted to rise to 181
zettabytes by 2025 [1]. Most of the data is from people’s
activities where they are happy to share some of their data
to improve their experiences. However, companies are more
reluctant to share some of their data with other partners [2].
It is usually reduced towards data ownership using policies to
prevent harming the participant entities [3].
This motivator made us proceed with a series of interviews
with Finnish industry professionals to create an overview
of the practicalities of data sharing. The data we refer to
is not describing internet traffic data but measurement data
from sensors. In most cases, such sensors are usually placed
on moving mechanisms or adjacent to them collecting, e.g.,
vibration measurements.
Companies use data for various purposes, most prominent
of which are: supplying it either as a standalone asset or
a fundamental component of a product, improving their op-
erational processes, or acquiring new technological or busi-
ness insights. Data-driven innovation came to the forefront
of modern industrial development in the past decade, since
various technological advances stimulated data usage through
significantly elevated storage capacity, computing power and
data transmission speed [4] [5].
Data represents a crucial resource that is yet to be ad-
equately exploited. Modern industrial development already
employs prevalent data-intensive technologies such as machine
learning, pervasive computing, edge computing, etc. [6]. One
critical reason for the adoption of technologies that demand
substantial data intake is the development of digital twins
when simulating certain processes on physical models is of
uttermost complexity. Data generation from diverse machines
and devices contributes to datasets which can reach even
petabytes per dataset. Companies, especially SMEs (Small
and Medium Enterprises), that are reluctant to digitalization
or even impede it, compromise their future progress relative
to their competitors [4].
While many SMEs have the capacity to design highly inno-
vative solutions to drive their business, in practice often they
require data sources they do not have access to. Data sources
are developed and analyzed by many companies primarily to
advance their own business without an explicit intention to
share it. Many data sources remain unexploited to the full
of their potential even by the companies that produced them.
Moreover, great reluctance towards sharing data with external
partners seems to have permeated deep within business de-
velopment layers as less than 50% of companies in a recent
survey show that data sharing is a common practice in their
company [7] [6].
In many companies, reluctance towards data sharing is
rooted unsurprisingly in the economical aspect. A 2019 OECD
(Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development)
report on data sharing identified the main impediments for
accessing, sharing and exploiting data through continuous
development as data privacy and ownership. Some states do
not have currently any clear law that defines data ownership
and the benefit of sharing [8]. The complexity is grounded
in determining the requirements that need to be met prior
to sharing data. Industrial players also find it challenging to
estimate the value of data and to assess the risk of sharing
it, with many of them being open to share data only if other
players reciprocate [6]. Another critical aspect that hinders
data sharing among companies is inadequate transparency and
a stark imbalance in power between different players in a
market sector [5]. One of the most prevalent challenges for
data sharing is privacy, which affects several aspects of de-
velopment within an ecosystem: maintenance of data through
its entire life-cycle [9], safeguarding it from corruption, and
sustainable development to retain usability [4].
B2B (Busines-to-Business) data sharing is especially scarce,
impeding data utilization to its full potential at industrial
level [5]. There is a great discrepancy between data sharing
and the extensive efforts that are put into collecting it [10].
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-994-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Data Analytics

Notable benefits were attained in some industrial sectors
through data sharing. One example is the automotive industry
and transport sector, where data sharing promoted smart map-
ping solutions. For instance, the mapping service HERE [11]
provides enhanced spatial data, including geocoding, posi-
tioning, map rendering etc., and is endorsed by some of the
most prominent automobile manufacturers. While increasing
their revenue, HERE also is committed to contribute to safer
and more sustainable transportation. Furthermore, automobile
manufacturers can capitalize on their data through the HERE
marketplace [10]. Another sector where data sharing has
brought about tremendous benefits is the healthcare sector,
where data sharing is used to promote more rapid diagnostics
and more effective treatments by employing machine learning
algorithms [12] [13]. Not only does medical data sharing bene-
fit society at large by providing enhanced medical services, but
medical providers also capitalize on these solutions, offering
more efficient and precise diagnostics [14] [15].
There are two distinct data sharing strategies when it comes
to private data, vertical, which develops across the supply
chain, and horizontal, which transpires between competing
companies [10] [16]. Vertical data sharing is characterized
predominantly by trust between companies along the supply
chain and the degree of certainty attributed to certain business
needs. Horizontal data sharing, however, is employed to a
lower degree due to its sensitivity. Personal data, which
concerns largely horizontal data sharing is highly regulated
in the European Union by GDPR (General Data Protection
Regulation), which requires extensive considerations on vari-
ous aspects of its content. This, in turn, makes personal data
sharing a very intricate matter [10].
To promote data sharing by various companies, it be-
comes imperious to incentivise the process since it involves
an extremely valuable asset. One way to do so could be
to purchase it. However, data acquisition raises yet new
challenges since selling it at an equitable price can be a
difficult endeavour [17] [18]. To address such demands, data
marketplaces emerged, such as: Azure Marketplace [19], Japan
Data Exchange Inc. [20], Qlik DataMarket [21], etc. However,
a considerable variety of data precludes trading it in a fairly
regulated manner [22]. To address these challenges, different
pricing and trading models showcasing auspicious prospects
were introduced in [23] [24].
The paper is organized as follows. Section II depicts the
study design and interview questions. Section III illustrates the
results of the qualitative analysis of interviews with companies.
In Section IV, a few solutions for data exchange are discussed.
Conclusions of the study are presented in Section V.
II. RESEARCH QUESTIONS AND STUDY DESIGN
Sharing data is an integral part of the scientific community
as it allows for verification of results and enables researchers
to build upon previously discovered information [25]. Interest
in this subject came from multiple face-to-face conversations
with industry experts. They assert that cooperation between
companies on similar topics can lead to further developments
in different areas connected to the industries. Cooperation
under non-disclosure agreements would secure the data trans-
actions and enforce the credibility between partners.
The study addresses the following research questions:
RQ1: Is your organisation exercising any data sharing with
other company?
a) If yes, to what extent do you do this and how
dependent is your business on data sharing? How
long do you store the data you share with others?
Do you use a third part service for sharing your
data, such as Amazon/cloud services?
b) If no, what are the reasons for not doing this?
RQ2: What value do you see between sharing your data with
other organisations?
RQ3: What are the barriers for performing data sharing?
Were there some previous episodes of data sharing with
others?
RQ4: Is confidentiality of data an issue?
RQ5: Do you have a data management strategy/policy?
Research questions were used to extract data from a series of
interviews with experienced employees from different business
areas. We organized Semi-Structured Interviews (SSI) for our
research. A semi-structured interview is a meeting where
the interviewer asks questions that are meant to evoke open
conversations offering participants the chance of bringing up
important matters [26]. As part of their experience, SSIs
are intended to find out what participants think about their
experiences related to the given topic [27]. It provides the
advantage of collecting the data needed from topics that can
be further developed towards new insights.
A. Threats to validity
The most significant threat to the validity of RQ1 is that
data sharing between companies is still limited. Furthermore,
companies’ guidelines and restrictions drive many respondents
to give short and sparse answers to questions. The purpose
of RQ1 is to develop a more in-depth understanding of data
sharing between companies and other partners. Using this
question, we learn how vital data provided by other partners
is to a business’s success, such as data availability and the
platform used for data sharing.
Data value is a subjective opinion that allows for RQ2
to bear a respective degree of uncertainty upon receiving an
answer from participants. Although, considering the expertise
of the interviewees, the article may provide inspiration for
other businesses.
The purpose of the RQ3 is to challenge the specialist to
observe the main topic from a different point of view. This
question may also bring challenges allowing the respondent
to claim that the company is conducting safe data sharing
procedures with other external partners. Moreover, RQ3 fur-
ther investigates whether there have been previous agreements
on sharing data with other partners and the resulted outcome.
In this case, common factors such as lack of time or limited
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-994-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Data Analytics

funding prevent companies from sharing their data with other
external partners [25].
RQ4 is counted as a controversial question where many
respondents had to take some extra time to respond. Many
thought that confidentiality could lead to security concerns
since raw data does not display any signs of being private.
On the other hand, even number sequences can include, for
example, personal identification codes from a specific country.
The validity of our study of RQ5 is compromised by com-
panies keeping the response to the question private. Therefore,
companies could decide on some data management strategies
internally.
B. Conducting the interview
The selection of respondents was decided internally within
the author group on companies that were previous project
members in consortiums with the university. Considering their
experience and previous connection to us, we interviewed the
selected specialists.
When we conducted the interview, the concept of sharing
data with other partners was still not a regular practice.
Many specialists responded negatively to whether they share
company data with external parties. A quarter of the total
number of specialists invited for interviews chose not to attend
online interviews due to their personal disinterest in discussing
any information about company practicalities.
A total of 12 specialists were interviewed during three
weeks between 2022-04-02 to 2022-04-28. In selecting the
number, we focused on gathering experts from diverse or-
ganizations and fields. Interview meetings were agreed upon
according to the availability of the specialists. In an email
before the interviews, participants were informed that the study
would lead to a publication that would enhance university re-
search and provide new business opportunities for companies.
Each interview was scheduled for 30 minutes, with an average
of 24 minutes per participant. There was an interview guide
containing the research questions used listed in Section II.
Many questions were meant for an open discussion where
the specialists discussed the practicalities of data sharing
within the companies where they work. The interviews were
transcribed during the conversation in real-time.
III. RESULTS
In this section, we present the main findings of the research.
The interview results where categorised in a systematic way
based on each question and follow-up discussions.
We aim to create a comprehensive guideline for data sharing
that would encourage companies to increase their expertise and
revenue from collaborations.
The research starts with domain identification where the
respondents were working at the interview date. Figure 1
illustrates these domains. We chose the working domains of
the companies with generic names to keep them transparent.
We focused on having different areas of expertise of the
respondents, but only with applicability to the industry. We
chose an even distribution of chart slices for company domains
to increase the privacy of the respondents. Several employees
working at the same place were interviewed for some of
the companies. We decided this way because the experience
of the interviewed persons was valuable to our research.
Furthermore, to minimize the repeatability of answers, we
only chose respondents from different departments of the same
company.
Fig. 1. Application domains of the company representatives who participated
in the qualitative interviews.
A. Data sharing between companies (RQ1)
Most of the time, sharing data is hindered by company
culture and practices. In addition, individual judgment plays
a significant role in influencing later decisions. Today, new
mandates relate to data management strategies, which means
that new partnerships will be more open.
Considering the first research question, the respondent
should share with the researchers whether the company where
they work shares any data with outside partners. There are
some follow-up questions on the given answers. The purpose
of this question is to collect information on reasons for
not sharing data or on how dependent the business is on
distributing data.
Starting with this, some of the experts responded that
sharing data may lead to: further improvements in manu-
facturing and execution, improve analytics or maintain safe
operations. Here, we also asked on how was this performed.
The most common answer noted was via project partnership,
while others mentioned about verbal agreement, or one time
transactions.
It was discussed that confidentiality, general data protection
regulation, data ownership, and low business opportunities
were some of the risks preventing data sharing. As one
individual indicated, their business was not dependent on
data sharing. Therefore, it was not taking place. Yet another
claimed that data sharing had been attempted with another
partner. This practice did not result in a long-term partnership
due to the differences between the two partners’ technologies.
In addition to the opening question, we asked how long
data shared with others is stored. The most common answer
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-994-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Data Analytics

is that the data is erased according to customer agreements
and when the project ends. A few respondents noted that
they typically archive the data for up to 10 years. They
added that some reasons involve legal requirements and testing
information (e.g., electrical components). Furthermore, some
mentioned that they prefer storing data for a longer duration
for availability on further improvements to their products and
services.
Many respondents noted that they use an in-house private
cloud for data sharing. According to Figure 2, Google, Ama-
zon, Microsoft Azure, and OneDrive are services used for data
sharing. Others mentioned file transfer protocol (TCP/IP) and
email attachments as means for data sharing. This question
also brought up an emerging topic from one of the respondents.
A respondent stated that they are involved with creating a data
lake where companies would be able to access data according
to agreements. This illustrates the need for industry companies
to develop data sharing frameworks.
Fig. 2. Means of performing data sharing with external partners.
B. Value of shared data (RQ2)
As mentioned in Section II-A, the answer to this question
differs even for people from the same company. It aims at
experts’ opinions on data visualization, which sometimes may
only mean a series of numbers aligned in a specific order.
Experts’ viewpoint is that the value of shared data comes
from reasons such as:
• Money saving from better understanding of the processes
• Forecasting the need for components
• Quick troubleshooting
• Enhancing services to customers
• Development of products
• Increasing value of use cases
• Ensuring customers that sold products will not break
A few interviewees noted that perhaps the value in sharing
data with other partners is yet to be discovered or even
speculated that there might not be value in doing it at all.
They added that the data recipients could have additional
benefits from analyzing it and that pre-processing it for sharing
purposes typically requires additional resources. Furthermore,
sometimes the data the company is working with may belong
to clients and is, therefore, more complicated to share exter-
nally. In some cases, data refers to the information given via
a telephone call from one person to another. Such a situation
leads to miscommunication with the other groups interested
in the details.
C. Barriers from performing data sharing (RQ3)
Obstacles preventing data sharing can sometimes be tied
to cultural reasons preventing people from making such de-
cisions. Data sharing is hampered by intellectual property
rights due to ownership of data. Some companies are service
providers using data from partners according to contracts. In
this case, sharing customer data would mean creating new
agreements, contacting the customer, and other connected
processes.
In Figure 3, we extracted some of the reasons preventing
companies from exercising data sharing. In many cases, ex-
perts contend that the heavy process, confidentiality, and Non-
Disclosure Agreement (NDA) are some of the main reasons
for not executing data sharing. Usually, it takes a long time
to agree on the revised terms of the contract with customers,
and the process becomes extremely tedious. It is crucial to
consider privacy and access when it comes to data sharing to
prevent breaches, identity theft, or other security threats.
Therefore, some respondents mentioned that before sharing
the data with others, they perform data masking in various
ways such as cleaning, averaging, anonymizing, and removing
the means. There is no harm intended to occur to the company
sharing the data through those filtering methods.
Fig. 3. Barriers preventing data sharing between companies.
D. Is data confidentiality an issue? (RQ4)
Having information about a company’s process work may
be of significant importance to the company. However, that
same piece of information may not be of any importance to
another company. This leads to a comprehensive definition of
confidentiality. This interview question raised many affirmative
answers on validating that data confidentiality is an issue.
Experts mentioned that data sharing is always executed under
NDA contracts and trust. The NDA contracts usually contain
agreements that include:
• Common collaboration on improvements
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-994-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Data Analytics

• Complete list of information about shared data
• Data leaking prevention measures
• Access limitations
E. Data management strategies/policies (RQ5)
Three-quarters of the respondents mentioned that the com-
pany where they work has data management strategies. Dis-
tributed control systems and in-house data management are
the most common strategies related to cyber security. Data
systems in many companies are only used within a closed
network without an external data sharing interface.
Equipment manufacturers typically create an Application
Programming Interface (API) to facilitate customers’ instal-
lation of their protocols. One respondent mentioned that the
data management policy implies retrieving data up to ten years
old.
IV. STRATEGIES FOR PERFORMING DATA EXCHANGE
Machine learning models that use the output to change
the operation of a real-world device may be patentable since
they are integrated into changing the actual state of the
device. Artificial intelligence systems are now able to solve
problems more effectively due to new developments. But a
novel solution may still be patentable if it improves upon
a conventional manual process as well. Last but not least,
it is crucial for companies to prepare detailed disclosures
describing the low-level details of the system [28].
Two core challenges affect the deployment of AI solutions
in companies. Firstly, industrial partners store data in silos
and do not implement regulated exchange frameworks, and
secondly they prefer a more traditional approach to data
privacy and security, which limits considerably data sharing
or exchange, sometimes to an astounding degree. Given the
highly competitive nature of various industrial sectors, en-
hanced privacy requirements and demanding data manage-
ment specifications, companies find it often challenging to
implement data integration even within their own organisation.
One approach to address the aforementioned hindrances is
federated learning, which promotes the idea of developing
Machine Learning (ML) models by exploiting data originating
from multiple sources, while obstructing data breaches [29].
An important challenge that federated learning faces is the
traceability of ML models throughout their life-cycle. Given
a prediction value from an ML process, if one cannot trace
which input values (originating in which datasets) determined
it, we encounter a situation when the ML model is essentially
a black-box, hence its traceability cannot be ensured [30]. To
address this topic, several frameworks employing blockchain
technology emerged, which tackle the development of more
transparent deep learning models with enhanced traceabil-
ity [31] [32].
Gaia-X [33] is a standard for data exchange across compa-
nies. Its role is to be a mediator in agreements between compa-
nies and to ensure cooperation. One of these data ecosystems is
Catena-X [34], which is responsible for creating a standalone
data exchange standard across the entire automotive supply
chain. The core values of their standards are to ensure data
protection, security, and fairness for participating companies.
Toolchains have been standardized by numerous non-profit
organisations, such as ASAM (Association for Standardization
of Automation and Measuring Systems), to ensure better qual-
ity for their underlying processes, testing and development in
the automotive sector [35]. The members of ASAM standards
are companies involved in the car manufacturing process as
manufacturers, suppliers, etc. ASAM is the owner of the
standards that enable data exchange or the necessary tools
required. In order to share data within the ASAM group,
partners need to comply with the definition of the test data
provided by the application model and to have the data
in XML (Extensible Markup Language) file format. Since
every company has its application model, the ASAM standard
extends toward company-specific metadata [36].
V. CONCLUSION
Data economy is an emerging topic where many companies
are currently working to improve their operability and increase
revenue through the development of various systems.
Many companies and allied businesses begin to exchange
data in order to increase the number of services they offer and
solve unknown customer problems.
This article aims to provide an overview of various compa-
nies’ capabilities to collaborate with external partners across
multiple sectors. We interviewed 12 employees of various
companies in industrial sectors that gave us insights on prac-
tices they employ regarding data sharing with external parties.
It is common nowadays to see an increase in external
collaboration, but unfortunately, companies are backed-up on
collaborating only under projects. Collaboration between two
companies is usually time-consuming when NDA contracts
are involved. For the purpose of avoiding damaging company
information, companies prefer to send single batches of data
that are averaged and partially removed.
In order to increase the number of services offered, young
emerging businesses must make their customers aware of the
potential data sharing.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was partially supported by projects funded by
Business Finland.
REFERENCES
[1] Statista. https://www.statista.com/, Accessed on June 2022.
[2] N. Pearce and A. H. Smith. Data sharing: not as simple as it seems.
Environmental Health, pp. 1–7, vol. 10(1), 2011.
[3] F. Aggestam. Setting the stage for a shared environmental information
system. Environmental Science & Policy, pp. 124–132, vol. 92, 2019.
[4] S. Yin et al. Data-based techniques focused on modern industry: An
overview. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, pp. 657–667,
vol. 62(1), 2014.
[5] H. Richter and P. R. Slowinski.
The data sharing economy: on
the emergence of new intermediaries.
IIC-International Review of
Intellectual Property and Competition Law, pp. 4–29, vol. 50(1), 2019.
[6] A. Krotova, A. Mertens, and M. Scheufen. Open data and data sharing:
An economic analysis, IW-policy paper. Technical Report 21, Institut
der deutschen Wirtschaft (IW) K¨oln, 2020.
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-994-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Data Analytics

[7] H. Huttunen et al. What are the benefits of data sharing? uniting supply
chain and platform economy perspectives. Uniting Supply Chain and
Platform Economy Perspectives (September 19, 2019), 2019.
[8] X. Li and Y. Cong. A systematic literature review of ethical challenges
related to medical and public health data sharing in china. Journal of
Empirical Research on Human Research Ethics, pp. 537–554, vol. 16(5),
2021.
[9] H. F. Atlam and G. B. Wills. Iot security, privacy, safety and ethics. In
Digital twin technologies and smart cities, pp. 123–149. Springer, 2020.
[10] N. St¨udlein. Developing a framework for strategic data sharing barriers
among competitors. Data as a Common Good, pp. 16, 2022.
[11] HERE. https://www.here.com, Accessed on August 2022.
[12] G. Cammarota et al. Gut microbiome, big data and machine learning to
promote precision medicine for cancer. Nature reviews gastroenterology
& hepatology, pp. 635–648, vol. 17(10), 2020.
[13] K. Y. Ngiam and W. Khor. Big data and machine learning algorithms
for health-care delivery. The Lancet Oncology, pp. 262–273, vol. 20(5),
2019.
[14] S. Rutella et al.
Society for immunotherapy of cancer clinical and
biomarkers data sharing resource document: volume i—conceptual chal-
lenges. Journal for immunotherapy of cancer, vol. 8(2), 2020.
[15] D. Kerr et al.
The oncology data network (odn): A collaborative
european data-sharing platform to inform cancer care. The Oncologist,
pp. 1–4, vol. 25(1), 2020.
[16] F. Cruijssen, W. Dullaert, and H. Fleuren. Horizontal cooperation in
transport and logistics: a literature review. Transportation journal, pp.
22–39, vol. 46(3), 2007.
[17] D. Iwasa, T. Hayashi, and Y. Ohsawa.
Development and evaluation
of a new platform for accelerating cross-domain data exchange and
cooperation. New Generation Computing, pp. 65–96, vol. 38(1), 2020.
[18] M. Zhang et al. Pricing fresh data. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
Communications, pp. 1211–1225, vol. 39(5), 2021.
[19] Azure Marketplace.
https://azuremarketplace.microsoft.com/en-u, Ac-
cessed on July 2022.
[20] J-DEX. https://j-dex.co.jp/en/index.html, Accessed on July 2022.
[21] Qlik. https://www.qlik.com/us/, Accessed on July 2022.
[22] F. Liang et al.
A survey on big data market: Pricing, trading and
protection. IEEE Access, pp. 15132–15154, vol. 6, 2018.
[23] J. Yang, C. Zhao, and C. Xing. Big data market optimization pricing
model based on data quality. Complexity, 2019.
[24] Z. Zheng et al. Arete: On designing joint online pricing and reward
sharing mechanisms for mobile data markets. IEEE Transactions on
Mobile Computing, pp. 769–787, vol. 19(4), 2019.
[25] C. Tenopir et al. Data sharing by scientists: practices and perceptions.
PloS one, pp. e21101, vol. 6(6), 2011.
[26] C. Schmidt. The analysis of semi-structured interviews. A companion
to qualitative research, pp. 7619–7374, vol. 253(258), 2004.
[27] M. J. McIntosh and J. M. Morse. Situating and constructing diversity
in semi-structured interviews. Global qualitative nursing research, pp.
2333393615597674, vol. 2, 2015.
[28] E. L. Sophir and R. E Glass.
Key strategies for patenting big
data solutions. https://www.foley.com/en/insights/publications/2022/key-
strategies-for-patenting-big-data-solutions, Accessed on July 7 2022.
[29] Q. Yang et al. Federated machine learning: Concept and applications.
ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol., pp. 1–19, vol. 10(2), Jan 2019.
[30] V. Mothukuri et al.
A survey on security and privacy of federated
learning. Future Generation Computer Systems, pp. 619–640, vol. 115,
2021.
[31] H. Kim et al.
Blockchained on-device federated learning.
IEEE
Communications Letters, pp. 1279–1283, vol. 24(6), 2019.
[32] K. Salah et al. Blockchain for ai: Review and open research challenges.
IEEE Access, pp. 10127–10149, vol. 7, 2019.
[33] Gaia-X. https://gaia-x.eu/, Accessed on July 2022.
[34] Catena-X. https://catena-x.net/en/, Accessed on July 2022.
[35] ASAM. https://www.asam.net/, Accessed on July 2022.
[36] ASAM.
Asam solutions guide.
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/
download?doi=10.1.1.738.2707rep=rep1type=pdf, Accessed on July 10
2022.
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-994-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Data Analytics

