Real-Time Knowledge Map Services on National R&D Data 
 Kang-Ryul Shon  
Korea Institute of Science and Technology 
Daejeon, Korea 
krshon@kisti.re.kr 
 
Cheol-Joo Chae  
Korea Institute of Science and Technology 
Daejeon, Korea 
cjchae@kisti.re.kr 
 
Han-Jo Jeong  
Korea Institute of Science and Technology 
Daejeon, Korea 
hanjo.jeong@kisti.re.kr 
 
                                  Chul-Su Lim  
Korea Institute of Science and Technology 
Daejeon, Korea 
cslim@kisti.re.kr
Abstract—The National Science & Technology Information 
Service (NTIS) provides knowledge map services with an 
integrated information of national R&D information and 
science & technology information. In order to solve the request 
of the users in real time, this paper presents a real-time 
knowledge map service that retrieves and aggregates the 
needed data and creates the map services on the fly. To select 
and aggregate the needed information on the fly, we used the 
slice and dice method, which is one of the most widely used 
methods in data warehousing and on-line analytical processing 
(OLAP) approach. In addition, we show some examples of 
knowledge map services, which analyze and visualize the status 
and the topic-trend of the national R&D information based on 
the real-time data selection and aggregation. 
Knowledge Map; Map Service; NDSL-NTIS; Real-Time 
Analysis ; Slice and Dice 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Knowledge maps can be divided into two types: one is a 
knowledge map used in the area of knowledge management 
to store, manage and process the organizations’ data as 
knowledge, the other is a knowledge map for analyzing and 
representing knowledge extracted from the science & 
technology documents. The knowledge map in the 
knowledge management area is focused on designing and 
structuring the organizations’ internal knowledge and 
processes to enhance the knowledge management and 
business processes [1]. On the other hand, the main purpose 
of the knowledge map in the science & technology area is to 
represent the science & technology knowledge by allowing 
users to navigate the knowledge [2] the same way a general 
map allows users to browse and navigate a region and an 
area in the map. In this research, we focus on the knowledge 
map of representing the science & technology knowledge as 
our goal is to integrate the R&D data and to assist users to 
browse and navigate the R&D data in terms of such 
knowledge-based approach. 
National Science & Technology Information Service 
(NTIS) [3] provides such knowledge map services with an 
integrated information of national R&D information and 
science & technology information obtained from NTIS and 
National Digital Science Library (NDSL) [4]. In this 
research, a real-time knowledge map service, which selects 
and aggregates a part of knowledge map data and creates the 
knowledge map services on the fly, is introduced. 
 
II. 
KNOWLEDGE BASED KNOWLEDGE MAP SERVICE 
In this section, the knowledge-map service system in 
NTIS is introduced. As shown in Figure 1, the NDSL-NTIS 
Knowledge base is created based on a national R&D 
ontology for integrating the national R&D data, such as 
research projects, research papers, patent, and project reports. 
The system has as goals 1) to integrate the national R&D 
data obtained from NDSL and NTIS, which are two major 
repositories and service of national R&D data servicing in 
Korea, 2) to provide a topic-based information search on the 
integrated data, and 3) to provide knowledge map services 
based on the analysis and knowledge processing. 
 
Figure 1.  Overall System Architecture 
III. 
REAL-TIME KNOWLEDGE MAP SERVICES 
As described in Figure 2, users can select (Slice) a part of 
knowledge map data using a filtering-based search. Then, the 
part of the data are selected (Dice) and aggregated into a 
knowledge map on the fly applying the slice and dice 
method, which is one of the widely used methods in on-line 
analytical processing (OLAP) approach [5]. Lastly, the 
knowledge map services, such as R&D output analysis and 
trend analysis map services could be created based on the 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

aggregated data in real time using ‘d3’ Java script Library for 
visualized graph. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Real-Time Knowledge Map Creation 
A. Real-Time R&D Output Analysis Map Service 
Figure 3 shows a real-time R&D output analysis map 
service. Basically, the national R&D project data is filtered 
and retrieved from the filtering-based search. Then, the 
project data is firstly clustered based on the topics, and the 
clustered data is aggregated with the number of the related 
R&D projects and the total amount invested for the R&D 
projects. Lastly, top N topics are selected based on the 
number and the amount of the related R&D projects. Based 
on the selection and aggregation, the R&D output analysis 
map service is created with the selected topics and their 
related R&D output data. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Real-Time R&D Output Analysis Map Service 
B. Real-Time R&D Trend Analysis Map Service 
Figure 4 shows a real-time R&D trend analysis map 
service. As similar with the R&D output analysis map 
service, the R&D project data is selected and filtered by 
users and the data is aggregated based on the topics. The 
aggregation can be done in two ways: the first is aggregating 
by the number of R&D output data, and the second is 
aggregating by the total amount of R&D investment. In 
addition, the aggregation can be performed by the number of 
each R&D output data at the user’s request. After the 
aggregation is done, the R&D trend graph is created with the 
aggregation by year. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Real-Time R&D Trend Analysis Map Service 
Ⅳ. CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper, we introduced the real-time knowledge map 
services, which select and aggregate the knowledge map 
data and create the knowledge map service upon the user 
request. To select and aggregate the knowledge map data, 
the slice and dice method is used. We also introduced the 
examples of the knowledge map services, which represent 
and visualize the knowledge map data in the form of 
network and graph. In future research, we will elaborate on 
the keyword focused processing methods to minimize user 
interaction for the knowledge map construction. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by Maximize the Value of 
National 
Science 
and 
Technology 
by 
Strengthen 
Sharing/Collaboration of National R&D Information funded 
by the Korea Institute of Science and Technology 
Information (KISTI). 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. Businska, I. Supulniece, and M. Kirikova, “On data, 
information, and knowledge representation in business 
process models,” In Information Systems Development, 
Springer New York, pp 613-627, 2013. 
[2] R. Klavans and K. W. Boyack, “Toward a consensus map of 
science,” Journal of the American Society for information 
science and technology, vol. 60, no. 3, pp 455-476, 2009. 
[3] “National Science & Technology Information Service 
(NTIS),” URL http://www.ntis.go.kr/ 
[4] “National 
Digital 
Science 
Library 
(NDSL),” 
URL 
http://www.ndsl.kr/ 
[5] R. Kimball and R. Margy, “The data warehouse toolkit: the 
complete guide to dimensional modeling,” John Wiley & 
Sons, 2011. 
 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

