WACIC Method – A Web Analytics Process to
Perform Continuous Improvement in Digital Environments
Adriana T. Figueiredo
Faculdade de Tecnologia
UNICAMP
Campinas, Brazil
adrinit@gmail.com
Marcos Augusto F. Borges
Faculdade de Tecnologia
UNICAMP
Campinas, Brazil
marcosborges@ft.unicamp.br
Regina Lucia de O. Moraes
Faculdade de Tecnologia
UNICAMP
Campinas, Brazil
regina@ft.unicamp.br
Abstract - The Web universe expands every day,
providing access to multiple sources of information
using different platforms and devices. Due to the
increasing number of online users in the world, there
are several reasons why corporations became interested
in analyzing the traffic on their websites. From small to
medium sized businesses, this analysis means dealing
with large volumes of data, which can become a real
struggle to perform without the support of Web Data
Tools. In order to deal with this challenge, this paper
proposes the WACIC- a Web Analytics Process to
perform
continuous
improvement
in
digital
environments. Beside the process definition, the paper
proposes a set of artifacts to help the discussion and to
register decisions.
Keywords - Web Analytics; Metrics; Method; Google Analytics.
I. INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, understanding the habits of consumers who
use the Web for daily activities is a point that draws
attention and concern for companies. Transformations and
innovations take place constantly on the Web, which leads
companies to try to understand and meet the needs of online
users. Websites focused on providing services need to
operate
dynamically,
be
agile
and
show
continuous
improvement [1].
Considering the constantly increasing number of online
users in the world, there are various reasons for a company
to be interested in analyzing the traffic on their Website,
such as knowing if the Website is attracting visitors; what
are the pages gaining more interest; to measure the budget
invested; the conversion rate; among others [2][3].
Digital marketing, a relatively recent field of study from
1990, has recorded an expressive growth throughout the last
decades. Companies started to meet the need for digital
marketing strategies, aiming at a better position in the
online environment. Besides, the concepts of visitation and
navigation on the Web have gone through transformation
throughout the last decade [4].
Today, users create their own content, communicate
through social networks, give opinions and are constantly
interacting
in
the
virtual
environment
[4][5].
Consequently, the data analysis coming from the Web
has gained increasingly greater space in organizations due
to some key aspects, such as helping in evaluating the
performance of a business and allowing the entrepreneurs to
better know the market they are working in.
This analysis aims to make strategic decision making
more effective and less risky [5]. This way, the importance
of tools that aim to collect and analyse Web data has
emerged. This concept earned the name Web Analytics, and
it has redefined the way in which companies are monitoring
online user’s behavior, and even their decision making
process [1][4][5][6].
Today, enterprises are exploring Web Analytics to
discover facts they did not know before. This is an
important task because the recent economic recession
forced deep changes into most businesses, especially those
that depend on mass consumers [2][3].
The goal of this article is to describe an approach of the
use of Web Analytics tools in order to help organizations to
reach a competitive differential founded on the analysis of
data
coming
from
their
Websites.
The lack of a structured process, the difficulties and the
divergences faced by companies during the adoption of
Web Analytics motivated the proposed approach. It covers
the common steps that are presented by different authors,
along with new steps that are suggested and are relevant in
the context of Web Analytics.
The contributions of this paper are:
•
A reviewed and optimized method based on
continuous improvement for digital environments,
combined
with
steps
commonly
used
by
companies during the adoption of Web Analytics
process;
•
Monitoring
artifacts
that
helps
to
store
the
information tracking between all the involved roles
during the process
•
A method that can be used by different companies
that work on the Web in different contexts.
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

The remaining of the paper is divided as follows:
Section II describes the related work; the fundamental steps
of Web Analytics are found in Section III; Section IV
presents the WACIC method; finally, the conclusion is
found in Section V.
II. RELATED WORK
During the development of this work, traditional and/or
standardized processes to guide the use of Web Analytics
were not identified. Onwubiko [7] performed a research
focused on the applicability of Web Analytics tools in data
gathering and
analysis to
enhanced
cyber situational
awareness for monitoring critical online Web services.
Many different intelligence sources such as Web logs,
browser fingerprints and mobile fingerprints were analysed,
in terms of information protection. The author brings useful
information
regarding
technical
aspects,
technical
challenges in the applicability of specific tools and devices
that support Web Analytics, but does not present a method
to structure a Web Analytics process, like the one presented
in this work.
Bengel et al. [8] describe the technical aspects of a
research
on
adopting
Web
Analytics
by
directly
implementing a tracking code (tag) on the website. This tag
aids in automating the tracking and identification of
marketing tags for websites overall, which would be a
significant effort if done manually. It is an innovative
implementation, and it surely provides a competitive
advantage. But the paper does not go deeply in a procedural
perspective, by emphasizing a process or a method to use
Web Analytics tools for different contexts. Instead of that,
authors
focus
on
the
technical
aspects
of
the
tag
implementation,
and
provide
a
how-to
for
this
implementation.
Although the authors provide an extensive technical
explanation of the experiment, it could be difficult for
beginners in Web Analytics context to embrace the
technique
described
in
the
paper
without
a
process
methodology that supports the adoption. A Web Analytics
approach is presented by Li and Baciu [9]. According to the
authors, visual analytics of large data sets has become a
challenge for traditional in-memory and off-line algorithms
as well as in the cognitive process of understanding features
at various scales of resolution. In the paper, they attempt a
new Web-based framework for the dynamic visualization of
large data.
Along
with
the
technical
aspects
and
challenges
described during the data modeling, it is interesting that the
authors demonstrate the effectiveness of their Web-based
framework on different types of large datasets. This type of
Web Analytics research is absolutely useful and provides a
step forward in Web Analytics techniques, but this research
does not provide the necessary support for those who are
still in need of understanding the basics of the Web
Analytics adoption.
In terms of standardized Web Analytics methods, Cassidy
[10] and Phillips [11] provide an explanation that goes
through the common steps and helps most organizations
start the adoption of Web Analytics tools. The authors
provide
important
information
regarding
how
organizations can
integrate
their
own
processes
with
adoption of Web Analytics, and how to mitigate the risks of
this integration.
This
information
helping
to
integrate
processes,
technology, and people into all facets of analysis to
generate business value is useful, but it is important to
highlight that the Web Analytics steps are described
without considering a specific method or framework.
Some missing steps were identified, such as the tool
definition (and criteria to choose the tool that best suits the
needs) and a specific step for action plans after the analysis.
These complementary steps are provided by the proposed
process in this work.
In the next section,
we describe in more detail the
Web Analytics concept and what are the fundamental steps
commonly used by companies that adopt Web Analytics.
III. FUNDAMENTAL STEPS - WEB ANALYTICS
As underlined by the authors Dehkordi et al. [4],
Kaushik [5], Siegel and Davenport [6], Kotler, Kartajaya
and Setiawan [13], there are three methods that are most
used to evaluate the performance of strategies in digital
environments.
Kaushik [5], Siegel and Davenport [6] mentioned the
approach based on Web metrics (or Web Analytics);
another approach is supported by financial indicators,
according to Dehkordi et al. [4]; and the third approach is a
hybrid of Web Analytics and financial indicators, according
to Kotler, Kartajaya and Setiawan [13]. For this work, the
Web Analytics is the chosen one to be studied.
There
are
some
divergences
regarding
the
exact
definition of the concept of Web Analytics. Kaushik [5]
synthesized it in an objective manner: “The objective of
Web Analytics is to first and foremost improve the
experience of online customers. It is not a technology to
produce reports; it is a
virtuous cycle
for Website
optimization.”
The mentioned cycle is commonly supported by Web
Analytics tools that extract data from Websites. Regardless
of whether it is applied, the cycle is understood as a process
of measurement, collection, analysis and production of
navigation and interaction data reports, whose purpose is to
understand the behavior and needs of the users for better
optimization of Internet sites and pages.
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

The work of Kaushik [5] is more closely related to this
work, since its steps, presented in Figure 1, were used and
extended. However, these steps were described and have
been carried out in an ad hoc manner by the organizations.
Figure 1. Fundamental steps of the Web Analytics Cycle.
The first fundamental step in the Web Analytics process
is to define the MEASUREMENT to be used. Called by
some
authors
KPI
(Key
Performance
Indicators)
DEFINITION, it consists of defining what should be
measured and what one wants to analyze in order to guide
the KPIs choice [1][5][14]. It is necessary to establish a
frequency to observe each KPI, identifying successes and
failures in the outlined goals and allowing for comparing
the results.
Therefore, from time to time, some KPIs adjustments
and modifications are necessary, and they should be quickly
done so that opportunities to collect information are not lost
[14]. In addition, some authors recommend an amount of 3
up to 5 KPIs in order to observe each Web Analytics cycle
[1][5][6].
The second step consists of data COLLECTION which
is usually done by a Web Analytics tool. According to
Kaushik [5] and Jerath, Ma and Park [14], it can be said that
all of the Web Analytics tools available have a common
point: once enabled, the data collection is done in real time,
continuously.
The third step consists of the ANALYSIS of the
collected
data.
The
administrators
and/or
analysts
responsible for manipulating the tools and metrics can use
specific tools and metrics or to segment the captured data
(the forms and options vary according to the tool) for
carrying out the analysis[1][5][6]. For Rosenzweig [15] this
step is considered crucial, emphasizing the importance of
the
understanding
of
user
behavior
on
the
Web
environment.
At last, the fourth step consists of the REPORTS
GENERATION. In this step, it is common to organize the
information provided based on the data analysis. There are
countless forms and standards of documents for generating
reports of the results and they vary according to the Web
Analytics tool being used [1][5][16].
This section proposes an empowered and optimized
adaptation of the fundamental steps.
In
order
to
empower
the
Web
Analytics
adoption,
a
Web
Analytics
Process
to
perform
continuous
improvement
in
digital
environments
is
proposed.
IV. THE PROPOSED METHOD
The method proposed for using Web Analytics is based
on the fundamental steps described in the previous section.
However, some steps were added in order to bring an
adherent proposal to all types of organizations interested in
practices based on Web Analytics tools. Also, the proposed
method aims to solve the lack of standardized methods of
Web Analytics application.
A.
The Method Definition - WACIC
The method proposed is named WACIC – Web
Analytics Continuous Improvement Cycle. It includes the
fundamental steps and added two new steps. The first one is
a specific step that helps to define the Web Analytics tool
that best suits and supports the chosen KPIs. Normally, this
step is not performed by most of companies; they usually
choose the tool before the KPIs definition [1][6]. Plus, the
choice itself is commonly based only on price and
popularity, instead of considering the importance of the
KPIs adherence to the tool.
The second new step consists of executing action plans
based on the analysis. The actions should be executed in
order to reach the goals outlined in the KPIs step. Besides
the
inclusion
of
these
two
new
steps,
the
DATA
ANALYSIS
and
REPORTS
GENERATION
were
combined into one single step. This change is due to the
fact that the analysis needs to be documented or organized
to be provided to all involved roles, and the reports
generated by the Web Analytics tools can be used as
artifacts for this step.
Two cycles compose the WACIC: the FULL CYCLE
and the CONTINUOUS CYCLE. The Full Cycle presents
the Method flow as a whole, since the Action Plans
implemented and executed will reflect in reaching the goals
defined in the KPI step. The Continuous Cycle presents a
cyclical flow where the action plans executed should be
analyzed and re-executed until the expected result is
reached. Once the goal is reached, the full cycle should start
again, in order to define new KPIs so as to reach further
improvements due to the continuous process.
The adaptation of the method is based on the concept of
continuous improvement, through the PDCA (Plan, Do,
Check and Act) framework. In the PDCA, the main
activities are planning, executing, checking and verifying
[17]. As such, an uninterrupted optimization method for
product and service improvement is obtained, since as the
PDCA cycle repeats itself, it is possible to come closer to
outlined goals and reach the expected result.
In addition, the WACIC method integrates specific
artifacts
that
help
to
consolidate
and
track
all
the
information obtained during each of the steps and document
the decisions during the process.
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

Moreover, the artifacts are a suggestion, and not
mandatory. In case of an organization that does not have its
own artifact to support the information tracking, the
WACIC can help by suggesting the artifacts that is
integrated by the proposed method.
Figure 2 presents the WACIC method and Figure 3
presents the artifacts integrated to the process.
Figure 2. The WACIC method.
B.
KPIS Definition
Besides the definition of measurements to be used
provided by the fundamental step, three activities should be
concluded during this step, aiming at addressing all the
mandatory steps for KPIs definition. The activities can be
carried out during one (or more, if necessary) alignment
meetings. The participation of interested roles through
means of communication with the data analysis team is
essential and can be done either in person or through video
conferences.
Figure 3. WACIC Artifacts.
During the first step, the activities should be carried out
jointly, involving all of the relevant roles and awareness of
the business goals.
Professionals tasked to conduct the Web Analytics
process participate in this step, that is, Business Analysts,
Project
Managers,
Directors
and
additionally,
other
professionals who carry out roles relevant to defining the
performance indicators for the organization.
The activities in this step were defined as follows:
•
Organization Goals Definition and Understanding
- understanding of the organization's objectives
provides greater assertiveness in the definition of
the KPIs.
•
Motivation/Purpose for choosing the KPIs - after
understanding
the
organization's
business
objectives, it is necessary to justify the choice of
the KPIs that will be defined. Which are the
factors, on a technical or business level, that
motivate the choice of the KPIs.
•
Definition of the KPIs - this definition guides all of
the following steps of the proposed method.
Through the KPIs, it should be possible to
understand if the Web environment under analysis
is
progressing
or
regressing.
TABLE I. KPIS DEFINITION
Art. 01 - KPIs definition
[Company’s name]
[Website]
[Focal Points of the Company (Name, e-mail and telephone) ]
[Duration of this step]
Date / Meeting Place
[Focal Points involved in this step (Name, e-mail and telephone) ]
Company’s goals
[to be defined]
What motivates to choose
each of the KPIs
[to be defined]
KPI 01
Description/
How
it
will
be
measured/ data collect period
KPI 02
Description/
How
it
will
be
measured/ data collect period
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

The following questions are examples of KPIs:
"how many visitors or buyers access the organization's site
daily"; "where the Website accesses come from and what is
the peak number of accesses"; "what is being commented in
the social networks regarding the organization"; "what are
the consumer experiences of the Internet users (positive or
negative
reactions
about
the
brand
or
product)".
A proposal of an artifact resulting from this step is
presented in TABLE I, which aims to document the
information relevant to the KPIs definition.
Each organization that is the focus of the analysis
generates an artifact containing the information. The
artifact’s fields indicate the participants for each activity,
date and time of the meeting(s), what the business
objectives
discussed
were,
what
the
purpose
and
justifications for the defined KPIs were, and finally, the
definition of the KPIs.
C.
Choosing the Web Analytics Tool
The second step in the method consists of choosing the
Web Analytics tool to capture the collection of data to be
analyzed. The choice of the tool needs to be based on
information
defined
in
the
first
step.
Bearing in mind the various tools for capturing Web data
available, the method proposed here presents four criteria
that help in more assertively choice of the most adequate
tool to be used.
The
criteria
are
described
in
TABLE
II.
The application of the first criterion considers the most
current commonly used tools, which was considered
bearing in mind the tools cited in the bibliographic sources.
TABLE II. CRITERIAS TO CHOOSE THE WEB ANALYTICS TOOL
Art. 02 - Criterias to choose the Web Analytics tool
First
Most
commonly
used Web
Analytics
tools,
nowadays.
Second
Logs based tools versus tags based tools
Third
Web Analytics tools that offers the features
necessary to measure the KPIs defined in the
first KPIs phase
Fourth
Costs and benefits of the tools
The second criterion is supported by the discussion of
particularities that the Web Analytics tools present. That is,
based on logs or measurement by tags. These two methods
are, today, often used for analyzing Internet traffic. This
criterion allows for the analysis of the KPIs considered to
be adherent to the operation of the chosen Web Analytics
tool. It identifies, basically, if the focus of the analysis is of
a technical nature and/or focused on performance (the log
method favors the collection and analysis of data through
the server-side), or if the focus is the behavior/actions of the
visitor (the method that uses tags favors the collection and
analysis of data through the client-side).
The third criterion to be considered in the choice of the
Web Analytics tool consists of choosing a tool that has the
functions that allow for the proposed measurement. The
types of metrics and KPIs stipulated vary according to the
search objective. Then, the choice of the tool should
consider if the functions necessary to meet and support the
requested measurement are provided by it.
The fourth criterion consists of the evaluation of the
cost/benefit of the tools researched. There are tools
available for free and tools that require a specific cost.
Depending on the result of the criteria previously applied,
the options for tools mapped out are countless. However, it
is necessary to evaluate if the cost of a paid tool will in fact
be necessary for an organization.
TABLE III. CRITERIA APPLIED TO CHOOSE THE WEB
ANALYTICS TOOL
Art. 03 - Criterias applied to choose the Web Analytics tool
[Company’s name]
[Website]
[Focal Points of the Company (Name, e-mail and telephone) ]
[Duration of this step]
Date / Meeting Place
[Focal Points involved in this step (Name, e-mail and telephone) ]
First Criteria
[results after the first criteria]
Second Criteria
[results after the second criteria]
Third Criteria
[results after the third criteria]
Fourth Criteria
[results after the fourth criteria]
Chosen Web Analytics tool
[to be defined]
The
application
of
the
criterion
consists
of
the
fundamental activity in the step proposed here. This activity
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

should be carried out with the involvement of roles relevant
to the choice.
At the end of this step, an artifact will be generated,
referent to the choice of the Web Analytics tool. The
artifact consists of a table for filling in information referent
to the choice of the tool, as presented in TABLE III.
It is important to highlight that the Web Analytics tool
do not need to be changed or replaced every time the
WACIC flow restarts. Companies usually deal with costs,
implementation and training of the Web Analytics tools,
and those aspects should not be disregarded.
D.
Data Collect
The third step of the continuous cycle consists of
collecting the data. This step has some activities that need
to be completed so that enabling the data capture is carried
out.
The activities were divided as follows:
•
Installation of the tool - for this activity, the
manual and/or instruction steps provided by the
chosen Web Analytics tools should be followed;
•
Configuration of the Website data capture - to
enable the tool, capture the data from the Website
and store them for analysis;
•
Validation of the monitoring of the Website pages -
aiming to guarantee full coverage of the pages to
be analyzed.
TABLE IV. DATA COLLECT
Art. 04 - Data Collect
[Company’s name]
[Website]
[Focal Points of the Company (Name, e-mail and telephone) ]
[Duration of this step]
[Focal Points involved in this step (Name, e-mail and telephone) ]
Chosen tool
[to be defined]
Tool installation
(OK / NOK)
[to be defined]
Tool configuration to capture data correctly
(OK / NOK)
[to be defined]
Validation of pages – to make sure all of
them are being tracked correctly
(OK / NOK)
[to be defined]
People involved in the data capturing activities are
basically people from the technical team and/or Web
Analytics professionals who carry out the activities directly
through the tool, and who monitor the Website.
It is necessary a focal point, a technical role, to verify if
the tool is in fact collecting the data correctly, and if all of
the pages are being analyzed so that the information
relevant to the future analysis of the data is not lost. For this
step, an artifact that describes the activities referent to the
data collection was defined. The artifact can be seen in
TABLE IV.
E.
Data Analysis Reports
After the data collection, the analysis step on the
collected data and the interpretation of these data by the
tool begins. Using the defined KPIs as a base for analysis,
the interpretation of the data is performed, with the aim of
evaluating and understanding the involvement of the
Website visitors.
This step can be described as a study of the collected
data. The formalization of the study takes place through the
generation of reports containing conclusions from the
analysis. The data analysis and generation of the reports
should be carried out by the roles relevant to his step, that
is, professionals tasked with conducting the Web Analytics
process, or Business Analysts, Project Managers, Directors
and, additionally, other who can help to understand user
behavior and refine the objective of the research.
TABLE V. DATA AND ANALYSIS REPORTS
Art. 05 - Data and analysis reports
[Company’s name]
[Website]
[Focal Points of the Company (Name, e-mail and telephone) ]
[Duration of this step]
[Focal Points involved in this step (Name, e-mail and telephone) ]
Date and Meeting place
KPIs/ Period of data collect
Report Information
[to be defined]
[to be defined]
The activities in this step can be carried out, preferably,
during one (or more, if necessary) meeting in person, since
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

the analyzed KPIs should be discussed. At the end of the
data analysis phase, the reports generated by the tool will be
used as artifacts from this step.
In addition to the generated reports, the TABLE V will
present a summary of the content from the reports,
facilitating its identification and interpretation.
F.
Action Plans (definition and execution)
The fifth step consists of applying action plans that help
to reach the objectives described in the first step of this
cycle. Within an organization, an action plan may involve
various departments and areas.
For each plan, three items should be defined, i.e.,
defining who will be responsible for carrying it out, the
duration, and how the plan will be executed.
The action plan is derived from the analysis performed
in the Analysis and Report Generation step, and consists of
a practical way to reach the strategic objectives previously
established in the first step of the method.
Professionals conducting the Web Analytics process and
those designated
to
carry out the action plan
must
participate in this step, preferably in an in-person meeting.
The activities in this step consist of the execution of the
action plans and vary according to the defined KPI and
should be described and monitored through the artifact
presented in TABLE VI. Each action plan details must be
registered.
TABLE VI. ACTION PLANS
Art. 06 – Action Plans
[Company’s name]
[Website]
[Focal Points of the Company (Name, e-mail and telephone) ]
[Duration of this step]
[Focal Points involved in this step (Name, e-mail and telephone) ]
Date and Meeting place
[KPI
DESCRIPTION]
[REPORT
OF THE
KPI]
[ACTION
PLAN
DEFINED]
DURATION
OF
ACTION
PLAN - and
its deadline
RESPONSIBLE
TO EXECUTE
ACTION PLAN
(Name,
telephone and e-
mail)
It is important to highlight that in this step the cyclic
flow of the method started. If one of the action plans
executed does not present the expected result during a new
data analysis, the continuous cycle is repeated with the aim
of continuous improvement, until the KPI is achieved.
After the KPIs have been observed and reached, the
complete cycle repeats itself. For this, it has a method
where it will be possible to constantly collect, measure,
analyze and implement improvements that are reflected in a
better quality of the information made available to Website
users.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper presented WACIC Method that has as a goal
to standardize the use of Web Analytics and to integrated
artifacts that guide and document decisions.
The validation of WACIC is being applied (still in
progress) using two case studies from distinct Web
environments, i.e., a corporate and an academic ones. The
validation takes a long time because it needs to collect data
for a significant period, analyze and understand the
problems to define the action plan. Then, it is necessary to
implement the plan and collect data again and compare the
improvement towards the KPIs that were defined.
Based on previous works, there are companies that still
have difficulties to create or follow a process that helps
them to deal with Web data. Many of companies are still
starting to use Web Analytics tools, and during this
transition it is common to emerge doubts regarding how to
use Web Analytics tool, what exactly should be measured
or how should the process be executed in order to extract
the maximum strength from Web Analytics tools.
One of the alleged reasons for the failure and/or lack of
continuity of the investment in Web Analytics is related to
the difficulty in structuring an adequate process or method.
What is often seen are organizations that end up mixing
concepts and guidance from various sources when applying
Web Analytics, facing even more doubts and difficulties
when they try to extract useful information.
This paper can help these companies to adopt the
WACIC process and its artifacts, documenting decisions
and achieving their goals more assertively through the Web
Analytics.
Future work will present the challenges faced and the
complete
results
of
the
method
applicability
and
conclusions about its efficacy. Also will the action plans
implemented and its impact to the products/services offered
by the Websites analyzed will be described. It is expected
to provide a map between the identified problems and
solutions that efficiently improved the focused Web sites.
REFERENCES
[1]
G. Blokdijk “Web Analytics - simple steps to win, insights and
opportunities for maxing out success.”, Complete Publishing, pp.186,
2015.
[2]
Internet
World
Stats.
Available
at:
http://www.internetworldstats.com/top20.htm . Last access in August,
2016.
[3] P. Russom "Big Data Analytics”. TDWI best practices Report. TWI
Research, 2011.
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

[4] G.J. Dehkordi, S. Rezvani, M. Salehi, S. Eghtebasi and A. Hasanabadi,
“A conceptual analysis of the key success of business in terms of internet
marketing”.
Interdisciplinary Journal of Contemporary Research in
Business, 4 (1), pp. 811-816, 2012.
[5] A. Kaushik, “Web Analytics 2.0: the art of online accountability and
science of customer centricity.“, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 2009.
[6]
E. Siegel and T. H. Davenport, “Predictive analytics: the power to
predict who will click, buy, lie, or die.” Willey, 2013.
[7] C. Onwubiko, "Exploring Web analytics to enhance cyber situational
awareness for the protection of online Web services," 2016 International
Conference On Cyber Security And Protection Of Digital Services (Cyber
Security), London, 2016, pp. 1-8.
[8] A. Bengel, A. Shawki and D. Aggarwal, "Simplifying Web analytics
for digital marketing," Big Data (Big Data), 2015 IEEE International
Conference, Santa Clara CA, 2015.
[9] C. Li and G. Baciu, "VALID: A Web Framework for Visual Analytics
of Large Streaming Data," 2014 IEEE 13th International Conference on
Trust, Security and Privacy in Computing and Communications, Beijing,
2014.
[10] J. M. Cassidy, "What Is Web Analytics And How To Get Started: An
Introduction To The Web Analytics Process." Paperback. CreateSpace
Independent Publishing Platform, 2012.
[11] J. Philips, "Building a Digital Analytics Organization: Create Value
by Integrating Analytical Processes, Technology, and People into Business
Operations". FT Press Analytics Series, 1st edition, August 2013.
[12] C. Ryan and C. Jones “Understanding digital marketing: marketing
strategies for engaging the digital generation”, Kogan Page Limited, 2nd
Edition, 2012.
[13]
P. Kotler, H. Kartajaya and I. Setiawan “Marketing 3.0: from
products to customers to the human spirit.”, Wiley, 1st Edition, 2010.
[14] K. Jerath, L. Ma and Y. Park “Consumer click behavior at a search
engine: the role of keyword popularity.” Journal of Marketing Research,,
51 (4), pp. 480-486, 2012.
[15]
E.
Rosenzweig
"Successful
user
experience:
strategies
and
roadmaps", Chapter 11, Morgan Kaufmann, pp. 221-244, 2015.
[16] J. Järvinen and H. Karjaluoto “The use of Web Analytics for digital
marketing performance measurement", Industrial Marketing Management,
Vol. 50, pp. 117-127, 2015.
[17]
J. Ning, Z. Chen and G. Liu, "PDCA process application in the
continuous
improvement
of
software
quality,"
Proc.
International
Conference
on
Computer,
Mechatronics,
Control
and
Electronic
Engineering,
Changchun,
2010,
pp.
61-65,
doi:
10.1109/CMCE.2010.5609635.
[18]
K. Shibata, H. Nakayama, T. Hayashi and S. Ata, "Establishing
PDCA cycles for agile network management in SDN/NFV infrastructure,
Ottawa, ON, 2015, pp. 619-625, doi: 10.1109/INM.2015.7140346.
125
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

