Analysis of Antithetical Elements in English Literary Passages Using Stochastic 
Models  
 
Chenjie Zeng 
School of Humanities and Social Science 
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 
Shenzhen, China 
E-mail: chenjiezeng@link.cuhk.edu.cn 
Clement H. C.  Leung 
School of Science and Engineering &  
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Future Networks 
of Intelligence 
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen 
Shenzhen, China 
E-mail: clementleung@cuhk.edu.cn
 
 
Abstract—Thesis and antithesis are rhetorical figures often 
employed by well-known authors in English literary passages. 
Antithesis refers to the juxtaposition of contrasting words or 
ideas, which often, although not always, appears in the form of 
parallel structures. Such rhetorical figure is used to contrast 
opposing ideas, creating a sense of tension and urgency, as well 
as heightening the emotional impact of the speech. Contrasting 
the antithesis is the thesis, which refers to a statement, assertion, 
or tenet. A thesis also is a proposition laid down or stated, 
especially as a theme to be discussed and proved, or to be 
maintained against attack. It is observed that the points of 
occurrence of thesis and antithesis are random, yet they occur 
with remarkable regularity alternating each other. In this study, 
we represent the lengths of thesis and antithesis by using an 
alternating renewal stochastic process. We find that the 
underlying parameters of the alternating renewal process are 
able to usefully characterize the writing style of individual 
authors and help us to quantify and understand their linguistic 
technique and intention. Using the present method in 
conjunction with other techniques, such as sentiment analysis, 
and word embedding models, it is possible to gain a deeper 
understanding of the literature and its underlying themes and 
structures. 
Keywords-stochastic alternating renewal process; antithesis; 
literary passages; thesis; renewal function. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Mathematical 
models 
provide 
a 
useful 
analytic 
mechanism for the quantitative study of the characteristics of 
literary work. For example, Markov models have been used 
extensively in studying English literature and language. One 
notable application is in the area of computational stylometry, 
which is a field that uses statistical methods to identify the 
authorship of anonymous or disputed literary texts. The use of 
Markov models in literature and language analysis has been a 
fruitful area of research, providing new insights into the 
structure and patterns of language use in literature, as well as 
enabling new methods for identifying core features of 
individual writers and texts. 
For example, in Shakespeare’s play Henry V, Henry’s 
speech to his men before the Battle of Agincourt (Act 4, Scene 
3) is a masterful example of rhetorical and dramatic 
effectiveness. The speech has its historical and literary value 
and importance. On the one hand, the Battle of Agincourt is a 
triumph for the English in the Hundred Years’ War. The battle 
occurred on Saint Crispin’s Day, October 25th, 1415. Despite 
being outnumbered by the French, the English emerged 
victorious, and this unexpected win had a significant impact 
on English morale and reputation. It also dealt a severe blow 
to France and began a new phase of English superiority that 
would last for 14 years. On the other hand, Henry’s speech is 
filled with rhetorical figures, such as antithesis, rhetorical 
questioning, allusion, parallelism, and so on. These stylistic 
devices create a stirring call to arms that inspires the English 
soldiers to fight with courage and conviction. 
Therefore, the stylistic and rhetorical figures serve the 
theme of Henry’s speech to his men before the Battle of 
Agincourt in Shakespeare’s play Henry V. The theme is 
related to the power of leadership and inspiration in the face 
of adversity, and the responsibility of leaders to motivate and 
uplift their followers. The speech also shows personal 
responsibility, and the ability to rise to significant challenges. 
In this speech, Henry seeks to inspire his soldiers to fight and 
win against overwhelming odds, despite their fears and 
doubts. He does this by appealing to their patriotism, sense of 
honor and duty, and faith in God. He also shows them he is 
with them, leading the charge into battle and sharing their 
risks and struggles.  
Through this speech, Shakespeare portrays the idea that 
leadership is not just about commanding others but inspiring 
and motivating them to be their best selves. It is about 
connecting with people on a deeper emotional level and giving 
them a sense of purpose and direction, even in the face of great 
danger and uncertainty. Henry’s speech also highlights the 
importance of personal responsibility and accountability for 
leaders and those they command. By taking personal 
responsibility for his soldiers’ well-being and showing that he 
is willing to share in their burdens and take on the risks of 
battle, Henry earns their respect and loyalty, and inspires them 
to fight with all their might. 
In Section II, previous and relevant studies in the vast field 
of English literature and computer science will be introduced, 
so to portray a landscape of the related work. In Section III, 
we define the notation and function of “thesis” and 
“antithesis” as rhetorical devices in literary passages, 
including Shakespeare’s Sonnet and Henry V, where King 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-111-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Data Analytics

Henry delivered a speech to his men before the Battle of 
Agincourt. More importantly, in this section, we explain how 
literary rhetoric is associated with mathematic and stochastic 
models, which bridges the gap between the disciplines of 
English Literature and Computer Science. Later in Section IV, 
as the nature of this interdisciplinary paper, we model the 
rhetoric thesis and antithesis by applying alternating renewal 
processes. Finally, in Section V, we test the model by 
conducting experiments. We analyze two literary passages in 
vastly different genres, including Leo Tolstoy’s novel “War 
and Peace” and Barack Obama’s 2008 presidential speech 
“Yes We Can”. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS  
Antithesis, known as confrontation or contradiction, refers 
to the juxtaposition of opposing thoughts, concepts, meanings, 
and images that are logically comparable [14]. It is a literary 
device characterized by the presentation of contrasting words 
or meanings. Many literary scholars have studied the function 
of antithesis. For example, in their work, Raximovna and 
Mirusmanovna [14] elucidate the practical characteristics of 
antithesis within literary texts, employing examples from both 
English and Uzbek fiction for analysis. It is commonly 
employed in literary texts, particularly in works of fiction, and 
holds significant value for in-depth examination [14].  
Moreover, mathematical models have been used 
extensively in studying English literature and language. To be 
more specific, researchers have used Markov models to 
analyze the writings of Shakespeare, examining the patterns 
of word choice and syntax in his plays and sonnets to identify 
his distinctive writing style. By using Markov models to 
identify the probability of certain words or phrases occurring 
in a particular order, researchers have been able to detect 
subtle features of Shakespeare’s writings [1]–[3]. Markov 
models have also been applied to study narrative structure in 
English literature. Researchers have examined the patterns of 
plot elements and character development in novels and other 
works, using Markov models to identify the most common 
transitions between different states in the narrative. This has 
allowed them to identify the key events and turning points in 
a story, as well as to analyze how different characters 
influence the course of the plot. For instance, Markov models 
are commonly used for statistical learning applications to 
capture the sequential patterns of data over time. While 
Hidden Markov models are widely researched, Devesh [7] 
explores an approach inspired by symbolic dynamics. This 
approach involves two main steps for successfully 
representing time-series data in a discrete space: first, 
continuous attributes are discretized, and second, the size of 
the temporal memory of this discretized sequence is 
estimated. Both steps are crucial for an accurate and concise 
representation 
of 
time-series 
data. 
The 
first 
step, 
discretization, determines the information content of the 
resulting sequence. The second step, memory estimation, is 
essential for extracting predictive patterns in the discretized 
data. The effectiveness of using a discrete Markov process for 
signal representation is determined by these two steps. 
Another area of research has focused on using Markov 
models in natural language processing, which is the field of 
computer science that involves using computers to process 
and analyze human language. Markov models have been used 
to analyze the structure and syntax of sentences, as well as to 
identify patterns of co-occurrence between different words or 
phrases in a text. For example, Eder et al. [6] discuss R in the 
context of Stylometry with R, used for analyzing writing 
styles in stylometry. Stylometry is a field that studies writing 
styles quantitatively, such as authorship verification, which 
can be useful in forensic contexts and historical research. The 
paper presents the potential applications of stylometry for 
computational text analysis, using several example case 
studies from English and French literature. The package is 
particularly effective in exploratory statistical analysis of 
texts, especially with regard to authorial writing style. The 
package has an appealing graphical user interface for novices 
without programming skills, such as those in the Digital 
Humanities. Experienced users can benefit from the package’s 
standard pipelines for text processing and different similarity 
metrics. 
III. 
THESIS AND ANTITHESIS IN LITERARY PASSAGES 
One of the key rhetorical figures used in the speech is the 
antithesis. Antithesis refers to the juxtaposition of contrasting 
words or ideas, which often, although not always, in parallel 
structure. For example, Shakespeare’s Sonnet says, ‘Before, a 
joy proposed; behind, a dream’ [16]. This figure is used to 
contrast opposing ideas and create a sense of tension in 
“Henry V”. The contrast of antithesis is thesis. According to 
Oxford English Dictionary [11], a “thesis” refers to a 
statement, assertion, or tenet. Thesis also is a proposition laid 
down or stated, especially as a theme to be discussed and 
proved, or to be maintained against attack. Thesis, in Logic, is 
sometimes as distinct from hypothesis, while, in Rhetoric, it is 
contrasted with antithesis. The formal connection between 
these figures demonstrates that despite their discrete, distinct, 
or potentially conflicting natures, they have the capacity and 
necessity to contribute to the larger entity of creation or 
society, existing alongside each other in a meaningful manner 
[15]. For example, when Henry says (in stanza 1, Act 4 Scene 
3, Henry V),  
 
 
                         X    2    3    4 
If we are marked to die, we are enough 
 
 5    6   7      8          9    10  11 12  -X 
To do our country loss; and if to live,  
           X     2        3      -X         
The fewer men, the greater share of honor 
 
Henry highlights the high stakes of the battle and contrasts 
the potential for death with the potential for glory. The 
highlights and contrasts create a sense of urgency and 
heighten the emotional impact of the speech. Shakespeare 
explores the concept of patriotism as a thematic element 
juxtaposed with profoundly unsettling notions, striving for a 
delicate equilibrium [12]. We use “X” to represent the first 
occurrence of rhetoric “die/fewer,” and use “-X” to represent 
the follow-up antithesis “live/greater”. Given the condition 
that an “X” appears in a poetic line, it is expected to have an 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-111-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Data Analytics

“-X” sooner or later. In the above lines that contain antithesis 
in Henry’s speech, when we come across “X,” such as “die” 
in the third line, we expect to have an antithesis “-X” like 
“live” later. Likewise, when we have the word “fewer”, which 
is an “X”. We will have its antonym “greater”, which can be 
symbolized as “-X”.  
In order to analyze this phenomenon, let us count “X” and 
“-X” as 1, and then we can determine the exact length between 
them. The numbering starts from “X” and ends just before “-
X” occurs. For instance, the beginning of the first “X” is “die”, 
which is number 1. The length in terms of the number of 
words between “X” (die) and its antithesis “-X” (live) is thus 
12 words. The same length-counting goes on when we find 
the next “X” (fewer) and “-X” (greater). And the length 
between “fewer” and “greater” is 3 words. Given a simple 
calculation, we will have the average length (12+3)/2=7.5 
words in the first stanza of Henry’s speech to his men before 
the Battle of Agincourt.  
Another example would be in Stanza 7 of Henry’s speech 
to his men before the Battle of Agincourt in Henry V: 
 
 
 
                              X 
Old men forget: yet all shall be forgot, 
2      3         4           5           6 
But he’ll remember with advantages  
7           8    9    10    11     12 
What feats he did that day. 
13         14    15   16 
Then shall our names, 
17           18   19    20      21   22             23 
Familiar in their mouths as household words, 
24       25  26 
Harry the king, 
27            28    29 
Bedford and Exeter, 
30             31    32 
Warwick and Talbot, 
33              34      35 
Salisbury and Gloucester, 
36  37  38     39         40    41     -X  
Be in their flowing cups freshly remember’d. 
 
In stanza 7, the length between the first occurrence of the 
thesis X “forgot” in the first line and “-X” (remember’d) in the 
tenth line is 41 words. Provided that there is no other 
prominent antithesis in Henry’s speech to his men before the 
Battle of Agincourt, we can have an average length of the two 
stanzas: (7.5+41)/2=24.25 words. 
Furthermore, the same pattern of “X” and a follow-up “-
X” can also be seen in rhetorical questions. The rhetorical 
question is usually defined as any question asked for a purpose 
other than to obtain the information the question asks. For 
example (at the beginning of stanza 1), 
 
 
X 
What’s he that wishes so?  
-X                X                      -X 
My cousin, Westmoreland? No, my fair cousin; 
 
Literarily speaking, “What’s he that wishes so?” and 
“Westmoreland?” are likely to be statements regarding one’s 
opinion of the person addressed rather than a genuine request 
to know. Similarly, when someone responds to the question 
by saying, “My cousin” is more likely to be an expression of 
feeling than a realistic request for information. The technical 
term for rhetorical questions, in general, such as “No, my fair 
cousin”, is erotema, which is a rhetorical question to affirm or 
deny a point strongly by asking it as a question. 
If we call the whole sentence “What’s he that wishes so?” 
as “X,” then we are expecting an answer like “My cousin”, 
which is an “-X”. The same pattern goes in the second pair of 
“questioning” and “answering” followed up. The second 
“questioning” is “Westmoreland?”, which is a “X”, and the 
second “answering” is “No, my fair cousin”, which is another 
“-X”.  
Furthermore, allusion is also an effective rhetorical device 
used in Henry’s speech. An allusion is a literary technique that 
makes a short reference to a well-known thing that the 
audience will likely know. This technique enables writers and 
speakers to convey a lot of meaning and importance in a 
concise manner. When Henry references the feast of Crispian, 
he draws on historical and religious symbolism to motivate his 
troops. The allusion serves to create a sense of continuity 
between the present moment and the past, and to elevate the 
importance of the battle in the minds of the soldiers. 
Nevertheless, the effectiveness of allusions depends on 
readers’ comprehension and recognition of them, and their 
correct interpretation of the associated significance. If an 
allusion is perplexing or misconstrued, it can reduce its 
effectiveness by perplexing the reader. 
While comprehending the comedic aspect may not be 
entirely achievable, it is evident that a significant source of 
amusement for the audience lies in encountering familiar and 
unpretentious traditions presented in a manner typically 
associated with religious or moral contexts, thereby 
alleviating the need for restraint [13]. For example, Crispin 
and Crispinian, are twin brothers born to a noble Roman 
family, having been beheaded during Diocletian’s reign. They 
were executed for their religious beliefs on October 25th, 
probably in the year of 285 or 286. While fleeing religious 
persecution, the brothers worked diligently at their cobbler 
business in secret during night-time hours. By utilizing their 
trade, the brothers were able to support themselves and aid 
those in need. Their success led to Rictus Varus, governor of 
Belgic Gaul, becoming hostile towards them, resulting in the 
brothers being tortured and heaved into the river with 
millstones tied to their necks. Despite surviving this ordeal, 
they were killed by the emperor in 286. Later, October 25th 
becomes the feast day of Saints Crispin and Crispinian. Given 
the above historical background, it is expected that the twin 
brother “Crispin and Crispinian” should always appear in 
pairs. If we make “Crispin” as “X” and “Crispinian” as “-X”, 
we can see a similar and repetitive pattern of “X” and “-X” in 
the speech. For instance,  
 
This story shall the good man teach his son; 
            -X          X 
And Crispin Crispian shall ne’er go by, 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-111-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Data Analytics

 
Similarly, the repetitive pattern is shown as follows as well. 
             
  X                    -X 
Bedford and Exeter, 
  X                    -X 
Warwick and Talbot, 
  X                    -X 
Salisbury and Gloucester, 
 
Bedford and Exeter, Warwick and Talbot, and Salisbury 
and Gloucester are all pairs of names of places in England or 
surnames of people. Specifically, in Shakespeare’s “Henry 
V”, these names refer to specific people. Namely, the Duke of 
Gloucester and Duke of Bedford are brothers to the King; the 
Duke of Exeter is uncle to the King. And the following 
characters should be officers in King Henry’s army, including 
Earl of Salisbury, Earl of Westmoreland, and Earl of 
Warwick. They are important figures and contrasts in the 
events leading up to and during the Battle of Agincourt. The 
next section develops a general stochastic model for these 
situations. 
IV. 
MODELLING THESIS AND ANTITHESIS USING 
ALTERNATING RENEWAL PROCESSES 
The alternating recurrence of Thesis and Antithesis can be 
modelled as an alternating renewal stochastic process [8]. 
Upon the occurrence of the thesis, a certain length of words 
(Xi) elapsed before the occurrence of the antithesis; for such 
words, we shall refer to them as being under the dominance of 
the thesis. Likewise, upon the occurrence of the antithesis, a 
certain length of words (Yi) also elapsed before the occurrence 
of the thesis; for such words, we shall similarly refer to them 
as being under the dominance of the antithesis. By focusing 
on such rhetorical devices, we have the following model of a 
passage. 
 
 
     
 
, 
 
where {Xi} are independent, identically distributed positive 
random variables representing the length of words under the 
dominance of the thesis pending resolution by the antithesis, 
and {Yi} are also independent, identically distributed positive 
random variables representing the length of words under the 
dominance of the antithesis awaiting the next occurrence of a 
new thesis or until the end of the passage is reached. In 
general, {Xi} and {Yi} have different distributional properties. 
We shall refer to Xi as the thesis length and refer to Yi as the 
antithesis length. The lengths of thesis and antithesis will form 
an important basic characterization of a piece of literary work. 
Certain authors prefer to deploy a relatively lengthy Xi so 
that greater tension can be built up until its eventual 
resolution; other authors may choose to adopt a medium or 
short length for Xi to bring about a sharper impact. Thus, the 
{Xi} and {Yi} often provide a useful mechanism to 
characterize the stylistics of different writers. For an arbitrary 
word under the dominance of a thesis, it can therefore be 
classified as either positive, which corresponds to a 
continuation of the thesis dominance pending resolution or 
negative, which corresponds to a resolution that switches from 
a thesis dominance to an antithesis. Under the dominance of a 
thesis, the propensity of a word being positive is represented 
by the probability p, while the probability that it is negative is 
represented by the probability q, where p + q = 1. On the other 
hand, for an arbitrary word under the dominance of an 
antithesis, it can be classified as either negative, which 
corresponds to a continuation of the antithesis dominance 
pending the arrival of a fresh thesis or positive, which 
corresponds to the arrival of a new thesis. For a given word 
under the dominance of an antithesis, the probability of it 
being negative is given by the probability q, while the 
probability that it is being positive is given by the probability 
p.  
Thus, given a thesis occurs, then the thesis length has a 
probability distribution 
 
 
 
This can be seen as follows. Given the occurrence of a thesis, 
then it must consist of at least one positive word (the first word 
of the thesis), for otherwise, it would not be a thesis. For long 
passages, the number of words is large and may be 
mathematically approximated by infinity. Following the same 
reasoning, we also have  
 
 
 
The probability generating function F (z) of Xi is therefore 
given by 
 
 
 
The probability generating function G (z) of Yi is given by 
 
 
 
The mean thesis length is obtained by differentiation 
 
 
 
and similarly, the mean antithesis length is  
 
 
 
The variance of the thesis length is   
 
 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-111-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Data Analytics

 
and the variance of the antithesis length is   
 
 
 
Another common way of characterizing a passage is 
determining the total length L of words in relation to a given 
length r of the thesis. Now, L=k (≥r), iff the kth word 
encountered coincides with the rth positive word, and this 
happens with probability 
 
 
 
for k = r, r+1, r+2, …. This can be seen by noting that in order 
for L= k to be true, we must have (r—1) positive words among 
the first (k—1) words encountered, and this has the binomial 
distribution 
 
 
 
On multiplying this by the probability that the kth word is 
positive, we obtain Pr[L = k]. The mean value of L is given by 
 
 
On identifying 1/q as the mean thesis length and that, 
similarly, 1/p as the mean antithesis length, we obtain the 
following relation 
 
 
 
Or in normalizing by r, we have 
 
 
 
which can be utilized to characterize the style of a passage. 
Another useful characterization is represented by the 
renewal function [8], which in the present context is the 
number of distinct thesis episodes N within r positive words. 
The r positive words have at most (r—1) gaps among them, 
since between any two successive positive words, there may 
or may not be intervening negative words. The probability of 
having no such intervening words is of course p and that of 
having one or more such words is q. Hence, the number of 
distinct episodes of the thesis equals k iff there are (k—1) 
interventions among the (r—1) gaps, i.e., 
 
 
 
where 1 ≤k ≤r. This has mean 
 
 
 
If r is large and q small, then we can use the Poisson 
approximation 
 
 
V. 
EXPERIMENTS AND ILLUSTRATIONS 
Leo Tolstoy’s novel “War and Peace” and Barack 
Obama’s speech “Yes We Can” are two works that belong to 
vastly different genres. “War and Peace” is a classic novel that 
was first published in 1869 and is considered one of the 
greatest literary works in history. It is a work of historical 
fiction set against the backdrop of the Napoleonic Wars and 
explores themes of power, war, love, and society in 19th-
century Russia. On the other hand, Barack Obama’s speech 
“Yes We Can” is a political speech delivered by the former 
US President during his 2008 presidential campaign. It is a 
work of oratory and aims to persuade and motivate the 
American people to vote for Obama and support his vision for 
the country’s future. These two works may be vastly different 
in their genres, but both demonstrate the power of language 
and storytelling to explore important themes and ideas that 
resonate with readers and audiences. 
A. Russian Novel 
The first chapter of Leo Tolstoy’s “War and Peace” sets 
the stage for the novel’s exploration of power, war, and social 
norms in 19th-century Russia. Chapter One begins with a 
discussion of the state of Russian society in the early 1800s, 
with a focus on the importance of social hierarchy and wealth. 
The reader is introduced to several aristocratic families and 
their relationships with each other, including the Bolkonskys, 
the Rostovs, and the Bezukhovs. When Anna Pavlovna talked 
about family members, Prince Vasili said, 
 
“What would you have me do?” he said at last. “You know 
I did all a father could for their education, and they have 
both turned out fools. Hippolyte is at least a quiet fool, but 
Anatole is an active one. That is the only difference 
between them.” He said this smiling in a way more natural 
and animated than usual so that the wrinkles round his 
mouth very clearly revealed something unexpectedly 
coarse and unpleasant. 
 
Therefore, we have  
  
 
      X     2      
Hippolyte is at least a quiet fool,  
 3      4         5  6     -X 
but Anatole is an active one.  
  
 
 
 
 
 
He said this smiling in a way  
  X        2      3 
more natural and animated than usual,  
 4    5    6        7          8       9    10         
so that the wrinkles round his mouth  
11     12        13           14 
very clearly revealed something  
15                      16    17       -X 
unexpectedly coarse and unpleasant. 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-111-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Data Analytics

 
The first “X” is “quiet” and its follow-up “-X” is 
“active”. The length between “quiet” and “active” is 6 
words. Then we have the second pair of “X” (animated) 
and “-X” (unpleasant), and the length is 17 words. The 
average length of these two sentences is (6+17)/2=11.5 
words. Compared with Shakespeare’s “Henry V,” Leo 
Tolstoy’s “War and Peace” has a shorter length of 
antithesis. To summarize, we have: 
 
E(Xi) = 11.5 
E(Yi) = 12 
For r = 10, E(L) = 21   
B. Presidential Speech 
Barack Obama delivered his New Hampshire Primary 
Concession Speech entitled “Yes We Can” on January 8th, 
2008, in Nashua, New Hampshire. The speech was delivered 
in the aftermath of his defeat in the New Hampshire 
Democratic primary by Hillary Clinton. Obama had 
previously won the Iowa caucus, but his defeat in New 
Hampshire was seen as a major setback for his presidential 
campaign. The primary was a crucial moment in the race for 
the Democratic nomination, and Obama’s defeat was 
unexpected, given the momentum he had gained after Iowa. 
Obama’s concession speech was a pivotal moment in his 
campaign, one that would ultimately lead him to win the 
presidency. In the speech, Obama addressed his supporters, 
acknowledging the difficult road ahead while rallying them to 
continue the fight of his campaign. The speech was widely 
praised for its emotional appeal and demonstration of 
Obama’s resilience and determination. It is often seen as a 
turning point in his campaign, ultimately leading to his victory 
in the Democratic primaries and his ultimate election as the 
44th President of the United States. In the speech, Obama 
goes, 
 
“And whether we are rich or poor, black or white, 
Latino or Asian, whether we hail from Iowa or New 
Hampshire, Nevada or South Carolina, we are ready to 
take this country in a fundamentally new direction. 
 
…… 
We can bring doctors and patients, workers and 
businesses, Democrats and Republicans together, and 
we can tell the drug and insurance industry that, while 
they get a seat at the table, they don’t get to buy every 
chair, not this time, not now.” 
 
Therefore, we have the following antithesis: 
 
 
 
 
X   2   -X      X       2   -X         
And whether we are rich or poor, black or white 
 
 
 X      2     -X        
We can bring doctors and patients, 
    X      2     -X        
workers and businesses,  
            X      2     -X        
Democrats and Republicans together 
 
E(Xi) = 2 
E(Yi) = 1+4+1+1=1.75 
For r = 10, E(L) = 17   
C. Shakespearean Classic 
 
X 
What’s he that wishes so?  
-X                X                      -X 
My cousin, Westmoreland? No, my fair cousin; 
 
E(Xi) = (5+1)/2 = 3 
E(Yi) = 2 
For r = 6, E(L) = 8   
 
We see that E(Xi),  E(Yi) = 2, and E(L) for these three 
categories of literary styles are distinctly different. 
The antithesis is a literary device in which opposites are 
put close to one another in a sentence or phrase for 
contrasting effects. In the opening of Shakespeare’s “Henry 
V” (before Act 1 Scene I), there are several examples of 
antithesis when Chorus enters and delivers the following 
speech. 
 
Stanza 1: 
 
O for a Muse of fire, that would ascend        
 
 
    X      2     3 
The brightest heaven of invention,    
4      - X  
 
 
    X       
A kingdom for a stage, princes to act     
2         3            4      - X            
And monarchs to behold the swelling scene!          
Then should the warlike Harry, like himself,          
Assume the port of Mars; and at his heels,          
Leash’d in like hounds, should famine, sword and fire          
Crouch for employment.  
But pardon, and gentles all,     
 
 
 
 
     X      
The flat unraised spirits that have dared    
2     3       4             5           6     7     8       
On this unworthy scaffold to bring forth    
9    10     11  12       13  14      15       16       
So great an object: can this cockpit hold   
17     18     19     20  21       22   23   24   25 
The vasty fields of France? or may we cram   
26         27     28      29 30  31     32        
Within this wooden O the very casques 
      33     34     -X         
That did affright the air at Agincourt? 
 
There are at least four pairs of thesis and antithesis in the 
above literary passages, such as heaven and kingdom, act and 
behold, scaffold and cockpit, dared and affright. These 
examples of antithesis in stanza 1 serve to emphasize the 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-111-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Data Analytics

tension in Shakespeare’s play, particularly in regard to the 
relationship between the grand ambitions of artistic creation 
and the limitations of the physical world. 
First, the length between “heaven” and “kingdom” is 4. 
Regarding heaven and kingdom, the thesis in this contrast is 
the idea that the kingdom is like a stage, a place of grandeur 
and excitement worthy of the presence of princes and 
monarchs. The stage is an unworthy scaffold, a place that is 
limited in scope and unable to contain the vastness of the 
world outside like heaven. However, the antithesis of the 
kingdom is heaven, which is limitless because it usually 
refers to the expanse in which the celestial bodies, such as the 
sun, moon, and stars are observed, which was historically 
considered to resemble a large vault stretching over the earth, 
also known as the sky or the firmament.  
Second, in terms of “act” and “behold”, the length 
between them is 4 as well. The thesis is that the stage is a 
place for actors to take on roles, an opportunity to “act” and 
perform for audiences. The antithesis is that the monarchs 
and audience members who watch the play are passive 
spectators who “behold” the action, emphasizing their 
potential power and leashed engagement. 
Third, the length between “dared” and “affright” is 34 
words, which is largely distinct from the previous two pairs 
of thesis and antithesis. According to [11], “affright” means 
“to frighten, terrify” and “to be or become afraid”, while 
“dare” refers to “having boldness or courage”. The thesis here 
is that the actors have dared to bring forth an object of great 
significance, symbolized by the “great object” they are 
attempting to create through their performance. The 
antithesis is that the objects, such as the “casques” (or 
helmets) used in the battle scene which “affright” the air at 
Agincourt, are so terrifying that they cannot be contained 
within the “wooden O” symbolizing the limited confines. 
 
Stanza 2: 
 
O, pardon! since a crooked figure may          
 
        X       2     3    4 
Attest in little place a million; 
5       6   7      8        9   10   - X        
And let us, ciphers to this great accompt,          
On your imaginary forces work.          
Suppose within the girdle of these walls          
Are now confined two mighty monarchies,          
Whose high upreared and abutting fronts 
 
 
 
X       2     3      
The perilous narrow ocean parts asunder:       
4          5    6      7                    8       9      10    
Piece out our imperfections with your thoughts;          
11    12   13         14     15     16    17 
Into a thousand parts divide on man,          
18     19       20            21 
And make imaginary puissance;          
22        23     24   25  26   27       28   29  30    31 
Think when we talk of horses, that you see them     
32           33     34        35  36 37     38         -X   
Printing their proud hoofs i’ the receiving earth;         
For ’tis your thoughts that now must deck our kings,          
 
 
X    2     -X  
Carry them here and there; jumping o’er times,         
Turning the accomplishment of many years          
Into an hour-glass: for the which supply,          
Admit me Chorus to this history;          
Who prologue-like your humble patience pray,          
Gently to hear, kindly to judge, our play. 
 
The thesis and antithesis in the passage are ocean and 
earth, little and great, here and there. These antithesis and 
thesis emphasize the grand ambition of the playwright, who 
attempts to transport the audience’s imagination from the 
small confines of the stage to vast distances and times. The 
use of antithesis serves as a reminder of the limitations that 
can constrain even the most ambitious attempts to capture the 
epic grandeur of history on the stage. 
Between “little” and “great”, the length is 10 words. Here, 
the thesis is that a small place can be of great importance, 
while the antithesis is that something great can also be 
imperfect and have flaws. The line “a crooked figure may / 
Attest in little place a million” highlights the significance of 
small things in the grand scheme of things. 
Regarding “ocean” and “earth”, the length is 38 words. 
The thesis is the idea that two mighty monarchies are 
separated by the narrow and perilous “ocean” that lies 
between them. It suggests a vastness and distance that capture 
the imagination, allowing the audience to visualize and join 
the drama. The antithesis of “earth” is that these monarchies 
are confined within the walls of the stage, reducing the scale 
of the conflict and the drama. 
“Here” and “there” share a relatively shortest length of 2 
words. The thesis aims to transport the audience’s 
imagination across vast distances and times, from “here” to 
“there”, referring to the distant monarchies and their battles. 
The line “Carry them here and there; jumping o’er times” 
emphasizes the idea of travelling through time and space. The 
antithesis is more subtle but can be seen in the line “Piece out 
our imperfections with your thoughts,” which suggests that 
imagination is needed to fill in the gaps and make the 
performance more complete. 
These antitheses in the above two stanzas highlight the 
grandeur and magnitude of the events depicted in the play and 
contrast the lofty aspirations of the characters with the 
limitations of the stage and the mortal world. The use of 
antithesis also adds rhetorical complexity and depth to the 
language, highlighting Shakespeare’s skill as a writer and his 
ability to convey powerful emotions through his use of 
language. 
VI. 
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 
Antithetical elements are often used by authors in English 
literary writings and speeches. Antithesis refers to the 
juxtaposition of contrasting words or ideas, which often, 
although not always, in parallel structure. Such rhetorical 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-111-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Data Analytics

figure is used to contrast opposing ideas, creating a sense of 
tension and urgency, as well as heightening the emotional 
impact of the speech. Contrasting the antithesis is the thesis, 
which refers to a statement, assertion, or tenet. Thesis also is 
a proposition laid down or stated, especially as a theme to be 
discussed and proved, or to be maintained against attack. It is 
observed that the points of occurrence of thesis and antithesis 
are random, yet they occur with remarkable regularity 
alternating each other. In this study, we represent the lengths 
of the thesis and antithesis by using an alternating renewal 
stochastic process. We find that the underlying attributes, 
such as the length of the thesis, the length of the antithesis, 
and the renewal function, of the alternating renewal process 
are able to usefully characterize the writing style of individual 
authors and help us to quantify and understand their linguistic 
technique and intention. Experiments are carried out to 
illustrate the present approach. Using the present method in 
conjunction with other techniques, such as sentiment 
analysis, and word embedding models, it is possible to gain a 
deeper understanding of the literature and its underlying 
themes and structures. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. H. C. Leung and C. Zeng, “The Use of Multi-Step Markov 
Chains in the Characterization of English Literary Works,” in 
Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on Data 
Analytics, pp. 43-48, 2022.  
[2] C. Zeng and C. Leung. “The Use of Stochastic Models in the 
Analysis of Vast English Literary Data Corpora,” in 2020 6th 
International Conference on Big Data and Information 
Analytics (BigDIA),  pp. 282-288, 2020. 
[3] C. H. C. Leung and C. Zeng. “Pattern Discovery and 
Stylometric Analysis in English Literature and Literary 
Translation 
Through 
State 
Integration 
in 
Markovian 
Representations,” in Journal on Advances in Software, vol. 16, 
no. 1&2, June 2023, in press. 
[4] E. Smith. The Cambridge Introduction to Shakespeare. 
Cambridge University Press, 2007. 
[5] W. Shakespeare. Henry V. Oxford University Press, 2008.  
[6] M. Eder, M. Kestemont, and J. Rybicki, “Stylometry with R: A 
package for computational text analysis,” in R Journal, 8(1), 
pp. 107-121, 2016. 
[7] D. K. Jha, “Markov Modeling of Time-Series Data using 
Symbolic Analysis,” in arXivLabs, 2021. Available from: 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2103.11238 
[8] R. Bass. Stochastic Processes. Cambridge University Press, 
2012. 
[9] L. Tolstoy. War and Peace. Duke Classics, 2013. 
[10] B. Obama. Yes We Can, 2008 Presidential Campaign Speech. 
[11] Oxford English Dictionary. 
[12] P. Honan. Shakespeare: A Life. Oxford University Press, 1999. 
[13] C. L. Barber. Shakespeare’s Festive Comedy. Princeton 
University Press, 2011. 
[14] R. N. Raximovna and M. M. Mirusmanovna, “Comparison of 
Pragmatic Value of Antithesis in Fiction Texts.” Turkish 
Journal of Computer and Mathematics Education 12.6, pp. 
1195-198, 2021. 
[15] V. S. Bailey, ‘Pope and Antithesis: “Law and War with 
Words,”’ in Studies in English Literature 1500-1900, 27(3), pp. 
437–454, 1987.  
[16] M. Dobson, W. Wells, W. Sharpe, and E. Sullivan. The Oxford 
Companion to Shakespeare. Oxford University Press, 2016.  
 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-111-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Data Analytics

