Effects of New Media on Eviction Rates 
 
Regina Ruane, Ph.D.  
Yulia Vorotyntseva, Ph.D.  
Subodha Kumar, Ph.D. 
Edoardo M. Airoldi, Ph.D 
Data Science Institute 
Temple University 
Philadelphia, PA USA 
e-mail: regina.ruane@temple.edu
 
 
Abstract— Social media has impacted society in many unexpected 
ways, including the real estate and housing markets. Particularly, 
in these markets, social media can affect the structure of the 
communities, landlord-tenant relationships and, subsequently, 
the eviction problem. With the growing availability of search 
data from online sources, there is increasing interest in how 
individuals’ choices reveal submarkets in domains, especially 
those that have a social component, i.e. online reviews and 
connection to social media among others.  To demonstrate the 
structural components of the subnetworks that develop via the 
rental market that cause eviction and the market outcomes that 
result, we will use network analysis. This research aims to 
combine online review and social media data with eviction data to 
explore the range of effects of new media on the eviction rates. 
 
Keywords-big data; social network analysis; data analytics; data 
visualization; eviction. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
   The eviction crisis in the united states has recently drawn a 
plethora of public attention – much of which is due to the 
efforts of dr. Matthew desmond who authored the pulitzer-
prize winning book evicted: poverty and profit in the 
american city, which was published in 2016. Drawing on 
social science research, including his own, desmond (2016) 
has made a compelling argument that evictions are not only 
the result of poverty, but are a major source of poverty 
perpetuation and exacerbation.  
Philadelphia, like other cities, is currently facing an 
eviction crisis with over 240,000 evictions filings in 2017 
alone. To address this problem, the Mayor’s Task Force on 
Eviction Prevention and Response has been established.  
Temple University’s Data Science Institute aims to contribute 
to the City of Philadelphia’s and the nationwide effort to 
combat the eviction crisis. The research outlined in this 
proposal aims to yield findings that will aid existing programs 
and inform the development of new programs and policies. 
The proposed project is concerned with the effects of new 
media, such as social media and shared economy platforms, 
on eviction rates and housing scene in general. In the next 
section, we outline the questions that we will address within 
the scope of the proposed project. 
II. 
RESEARCH QUESTIONS 
In this section, we provide and elaborate on the research 
questions that we will address within the scope of the 
proposed project.  
A. How does advertising targeting affect the eviction 
problem, and more generally, the housing situation? 
Targeted online advertising can help municipal and 
national programs reach out to vulnerable populations 
and inform them about their rights and government 
assistance programs. For example, New York City runs 
a Propel app that helps people manage SNAP benefits 
and relies heavily on Facebook advertising. On the 
other hand, it has been argued that advertising targeting 
can be used for discrimination purposes: for instance, 
housing advertising may exclude protected categories 
of potential tenants. As a response to those concerns, 
Facebook recently agreed to restrict targeting options 
for housing, employment and credit ads. However, it is 
not clear how widespread is the abuse of advertising 
targeting 
and 
what 
is 
the 
magnitude 
of 
its 
consequences. It is also unclear if restricting targeting 
options for housing ads is sufficient to protect 
vulnerable populations, especially when there are no 
such restrictions for related categories, such as 
educational institutions and legal advice. In this project 
we aim to investigate the effects of targeted advertising 
policies on the evictions problem in Philadelphia. 
B. Does Airbnb play a role in the eviction crisis? Many 
hosts claim that they sign up for Airbnb to offset high 
rent costs. Hosting an Airbnb on a rental property is 
often explicitly prohibited by a lease contract, but the 
need for additional income can encourage a tenant to 
take the risk. Such violations can lead to eviction of the 
Airbnb host, and there is anecdotal evidence that such 
situations indeed happen. We propose to conduct a 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-741-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Data Analytics

systematic analysis of the effect of Airbnb emergence 
and its policies on the eviction crisis. 
C. What is the network structure of the eviction 
community? What overlapping communities and sub-
communities exist? Evictions are the result of a 
breakage in the relationship between a landlord and 
tenant and cause serious hardships on tenants and the 
housing landscape.  Government agencies, non-profits, 
lawyers and judges support both landlords and tenants 
with services, information, or enforcement. To 
determine the network structure, we will complete a 
thorough network analysis to visualize its large-scale 
eco-system.  We will also include data regarding 
eviction filings to determine frequency levels and 
prominence in the network structure.  We will perform 
additional analyses to determine betweenness levels 
among the nodes to uncover intermediary or conduit 
roles and outcomes.  This analysis will aid in 
determining network-related effects regarding eviction 
cycles and their impact. 
 
III. 
RESEARCH METHODS 
The Research Methods section describes the methods this 
study will utilize to address our research questions. 
 
A. Data Visualization 
The first step in the proposed project is to generate 
descriptive statistics that include data visualization. Data 
visualization of landlords, tenants and eviction victims can 
provide 
important 
insights 
into 
eviction 
trends, 
demographics and related behaviors. 
B. Social Network Analysis 
Social network analysis takes as its starting point the 
premise that social life is created primarily and most 
importantly by relations and the patterns formed by these 
relations (Scott and Carrington, 2011).  Numerous 
applications have extended social network analysis into the 
study of political and policy networks (Bond and Harrigan, 
2011; Knoke, 2011).  Analyzing eviction victims from a 
network perspective will determine aggregate choices with 
regard to frequency and geographic locations, rental 
payments, visualization of the evictions at site and city 
levels, and subnetwork patterns. Using a causal inference 
approach, we will create a network model assigning 
individuals a position in a latent space based on City of 
Philadelphia data and determine the network structure of 
eviction victims using aggregate data and predict outcomes 
using housing cost and income rate changes. 
C. Quasi-Experiment 
To elicit causal effects of technological disruptions (e.g., 
emergence of social media, development of advertising 
targeting and policy interventions) we will use the 
longitudinal data of eviction patterns and, controlling for 
other relevant factors, estimate what changes can be 
attributed to the factors in questions. 
 
IV. 
TIMELINE 
A. September-October 2019 Data collection, tidying and 
visualization. We will use obtained insights to refine 
research questions within the identified directions. 
B. November 2019 - February 2020 Data analysis, 
visualization, network analysis and development of 
policy recommendations. We will first focus on the 
impact of advertising targeting. We will use historical 
data on Philadelphia eviction filings and the data on 
evolution of targeted advertising and policies restricting 
it. Controlling for other factors, we will evaluate how 
advertising targeting affects the evictions situation. 
C. March - May 2020 Analyzing the data related to the 
Airbnb effect on eviction crisis. Addressing other 
research questions that may emerge on the previous 
stage. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Desmond, M.. Evicted: Poverty and profit in the American 
city. Broadway Books, 2016. 
[2] Bond, M., & Harrigan, N. Political dimensions of corporate 
connections. The SAGE handbook of social network analysis, 
196-209, 2011. 
[3] Knoke, D. Policy networks. The SAGE handbook of social 
network analysis, 210-222, 2011. 
[4] Scott, J., & Carrington, P. J. The SAGE handbook of social 
network analysis. SAGE publications, 2011. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-741-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Data Analytics

