Blind Spots and Counterfeits in the Supply Chain 
Lessons from Haiti that can be well applied to the Philippines and Hawaii 
Alison Kuzmickas, Steve Chan, Robert Spousta III, Simone Sala 
Dr. Steve Chan Center for Sensemaking, AIRS 
Swansea University NSRC and Hawaii Pacific University 
Swansea, Wales, U.K.; Honolulu, HI, USA 
Email: akuzmic@mit.edu, stevechan@post.harvard.edu, spousta@mit.edu, salas@mit.edu 
 
Abstract—Collaborative Big Data Analytics involve a variety of 
techniques 
for 
information 
gathering 
and 
source 
authentication, including crowdsourcing data. In turn, the 
development of crowdsourced and participatory mechanisms 
for a more transparent supply chain is pivotal to identify blind 
spots and mitigate their impact on global citizens’ health and 
safety. Such effort is also instrumental in reducing cyber risks 
from the digital world that currently represent a major threat 
to the stability of national and international economic systems. 
The paper reviews the lessons learned from the earthquake 
that devastated Haiti in 2010, whereby the successful combined 
application of crowdsourced crisis mapping with standard 
disaster relief operations was equalized by the challenges of 
data verification for the authenticity of humanitarian 
products.  By overviewing the threats to supply chains coming 
from the digital world, the paper proposes the adoption of 
next-generation network science tools to enhance transparency 
of global supply chains and reduction of cyber risks on the 
global society. 
Keywords-Big Data, Cyber-Physical Supply Chain, Decision 
Engineering,  Social Complexity Science, Technological 
Innovation 
I. 
  INTRODUCTION 
At first glance, the Haiti Earthquake and Tsunami of 
2010 demonstrates the extraordinary value of modern day 
geolocative technological responses. Ushahidi, a geospatial 
platform that became the go-to for a number of 2010 
extreme-scale disasters (including the January 12th and 
February 27th earthquakes in Haiti and Chile, respectively) 
propelled two ideas onto a global stage. First, it 
demonstrated the merit of Gartner Research Vice President 
Anthony Bradley’s 2008 blog post that proclaimed “Every 
Twitterer as a Sensor” for the reporting of timely 
information, via Twitter posts and Short Message Service 
(SMS) text messages from disaster areas, so as to assist 
boots-on-the-ground officials in locating and prioritizing 
those victims with the most time-sensitive needs as well as 
to effectuate the point-of-need delivering of humanitarian 
and medical relief more rapidly. Second, it formulated the 
intersection graph for Kevin Ashton and the Massachusetts 
Institute 
of 
Technology 
Auto-ID 
Lab’s 
ubiquitous 
computing mantra of the “Internet of Things” with Graham 
Cluley’s descriptor of the current state of the Web — the 
World Where Web — in which everything is increasingly 
being tagged, tracked, mapped, and construed as part of a 
global supply chain.  
With this study space clearly illuminated, we began to 
get a handle on the incredibly complex Wurlitzer of supply 
chain logistics that runs the gamut from inbound helicopters 
precisely choreographed with the whistling of extending 
flaps by landing aircraft, at the U.S. Air Force-operated 
Toussain Ouverture International Airport in Port-au-Prince 
(P-au-P), to the orchestral grinding of gears amidst the 
convoy of United Nations (U.N.) vehicles and the sharp 
metallic sounds of the local Haitian trucks, which serve as 
supply transports from P-au-P to the abutting rural areas of 
need in Carrefour, Leogane, Delmas, and Jacmel. However, 
just as the U.N. was about to plant the pennant of victory so 
as to memorialize its successful distribution of essential 
drugs and medical treatments to throngs of grateful Haitians, 
a locally well-known, but little advertised phenomenon (and 
blind spot) arose from an obscured subterranean position to 
a prominent surface location, and the ensuing tectonic shift 
sent a high magnitude shock wave through the entire 
humanitarian world; many of the crates chock-full of 
emergency supplies and medicines were filled with 
counterfeit pharmaceuticals [1]. 
In this paper, we explore vulnerabilities in the global 
cyber-physical supply chain, and offer mitigation strategies. 
In Section II, we begin by establishing the danger of 
counterfeit goods in the global supply chain through various 
recent examples. In Section III, we discuss the economic 
impact of counterfeiting on corporate brand images, and the 
need for increased private sector focus on cyber risk 
mitigation. In Section IV, we offer the “See Something, Say 
Something” mantra of citizen vigilance and homeland 
security as a means for enhancing resilience in the cyber-
physical supply chain. In Section V, we discuss how 
increased transparency, when coupled with citizen vigilance 
and technological innovation can yield more resilient global 
supply chains, and we conclude in Section VI.  
II. COUNTERFEITS IN THE SUPPLY CHAIN 
Whereas having a fake Louis Vuitton bag does not pose 
any personal risk per se, counterfeit drugs pose a clear and 
present danger to both the patient and the provider of 
medical materiel [2]. In one stroke, the integrity of the 
savior white knight’s supply chain was called into question, 
and as we obtained an increasingly deeper understanding of 
the P-au-P supply chain and engaged in a hermeneutic 
examination of the actual machinations for the supplying of 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

the much needed humanitarian aid from the concerned-
community-at-large to Haiti’s devastated regions, our sense 
of organizational triumph was swiftly punctured. We 
quickly discovered that even with our dedicated and 
sustained efforts towards this worldwide-attention-receiving 
mission, our incredible preponderance of logistical force 
conjoined with the aggregate of multinational “no-expenses-
spared” herculean technological muscle, with plenty of 
technological safeguards, simply was not sufficient to 
prevent the fact that large supplies of medicinal drugs in 
Haiti, in many instances delivered under the haloed 
imprimatur of a respected non-governmental organization 
(NGO) or sanctioned sovereign force, still turned out to be 
false and potentially harmful to those disaster victims, who 
desperately needed these supplies.  
Even though P-au-P is no stranger to counterfeits (such as 
when it happily received from New York City, in April 
2010, approximately $10 million worth of NYPD-seized 
knockoff footwear and clothing [3], which sported spurious 
labels ranging from Nike to Ralph Lauren), P-au-P also 
retains painful lingering memories of the death of eighty 
nine of its children who died from bogus cough syrup 
containing antifreeze [4]. The ever-increasing prevalence of 
these 
reported 
horrific 
incidents 
involving 
harmful 
counterfeit medicines is frightening: anti-inflammatories 
that contain leaded road paint [5], antibiotics that are made 
of talcum powder [6] or flour [7], and other purported life-
saving pharmaceuticals that contain atrocious ingredients 
such as floor polish [8], sawdust [9], and rat poison [10]. 
The cry, “The evil of [fraudulent] fake drugs is worse 
than the combined scourge of malaria, HIV/AIDS, armed 
robbery, and illicit drugs” [11] echoes throughout the 
developing world, and some experts have estimated that 
there are about a million deaths a year from the 
consumption of counterfeit drugs [12]. Even in the cases for 
which there actually are some active ingredients in the sham 
drugs, the trace amounts are not sufficient to function 
effectively and, ironically, actually induce the virus 
(because there is insufficient potency to kill it) to mutate 
into an entirely new strain, thereby causing the unwitting 
patient to develop an irreversible resistance against 
subsequent treatments by legitimate medicines. It turns out 
that these pestilent counterfeits not only irreparably harm 
these innocent patients, but the fraudulent mislabeling and 
ensuing breach of trust for the alleged brand also tarnishes 
the reputation of the victim company.  
Despite valid mitigating factors in each of these 
counterfeiting cases, the stigma and intensely negative 
perception attached to the incidents cannot be displaced or 
dispelled by the victim companies. The counterfeiting state 
of affairs has become a force onto itself, and the World 
Health Organization (WHO) has estimated that up to 10% of 
the world’s pharmaceutical market is now comprised of 
these spurious drugs [13], and for some cases in Africa, 
Latin America, and Asia (including the Philippines), these 
counterfeits congest up to 30% of those markets [14]. 
The counterfeit pharmaceutical market equates to 
approximately U.S. $75 billion [15], and pharmaceutical 
firms must now diligently maintain global intelligence 
efforts and actively collaborate with law enforcement to 
search out, seize, and destroy counterfeit products in order 
to protect the integrity and reputation of their brands. From 
the myriad of various jurisdictions from around the world, 
the dedicated and indefatigable anti-counterfeiting hounds 
of law are more than eager to assist in these mutually 
reinforcing Public-Private Partnership Initiatives (P3I) 
because the involved host nation’s economic success and 
progress is predicated upon the notion of uninterrupted 
trade; any lack of confidence in iconic brand names most 
definitely constitutes a barrier to the flow of goods.  
Many iconic brand names have suffered, and the 
traditional top-down supply chain approaches are fraught 
with issues of opacity, particularly when corporate annual 
reports only necessitate peering at the primary layer of 
suppliers. In essence, operations ranging from the U.N. 
operations in P-au-P to large distributors and manufacturers, 
such as Wal-Mart and Boeing, amidst the increasingly 
convoluted supply chain web in these hard economic times, 
can no longer readily identify who the suppliers of their 
suppliers are. Traditionally, transparency is divided along 
two dimensions. Given a more constrained product line, and 
particularly if there is an extremely popular product, firms 
might provide complete transparency about just that specific 
product. In contrast, given an enormous product line or a 
wide swathe of involved components, transparency might 
only go one or two levels deep. When transparency does not 
run deep, there are blind spots and things can go bump in 
the night, for the nation as a whole, such as when a large 
company like Boeing is impacted. 
In the case of the U.S.-based Boeing Company, it not 
only has an iconic brand, but it is also one of several large 
companies whose success or failure can have an enormous 
impact on the U.S. economy; an interruption of just a few 
weeks in the company’s production contributed to a 6.2% 
decline in the U.S. Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in the 
fourth quarter of 2008 [16]. This recital of national factual 
significance underscores a core tenet and forms the 
touchstone for not only the treatment of counterfeits and the 
explorations for a crowdsourced participatory mechanism 
for a more transparent supply chain, but also for the 
revealing of an unexpected opportunity to simultaneously 
tackle another ominous national priority  cyber risks in 
the digital world. 
III. COUNTERFEITS, CORPORATE REPUTATION, AND THE 
NEED TO BETTER MANAGE CYBER RISK 
Given today’s litigious climate, organizations across the 
board now take cyber risks very seriously, and nothing is 
more valuable to a business than its reputation [17]. Hence, 
cyber brand attacks, which leverage a company’s valuable 
brand for nefarious purposes, are particularly dangerous. 
Firms, such as Novartis, assert that their brand depends 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

upon their ability to assure patients that products bearing the 
Novartis label are, in fact, Novartis products, which are 
inherently underpinned by elevated unwavering standards of 
“quality, safety, and efficacy” [18]. 
The most vicious of cyber brand attacks is malware 
(malicious software) [19], and 38% of all cyber attacks use 
malware [20]; in fact, there are 60,000 new pieces of 
malware identified per day [21]. At a broad level, malware 
is best identified by us as simply the Google warning, “this 
web site may be harmful to your computer.” Behind the 
scenes, malware is designed to target the contact list of the 
victim of attack. The contacts might start receiving Viagra 
spam (unsolicited e-mail containing, in many cases, a 
payload such as malware) and other unsolicited email 
messages pertaining to a variety of pharmaceutical drugs. 
According to the Verizon Data Breach Investigations, the 
majority of all corporate data breaches are effectuated by 
organized criminal groups [22]. This Poneman Institute 
study puts the average cost for a data breach at $202 for 
each customer record compromised [23], and the pinnacle of 
severe data breaches has ended up costing approximately 
$109 million in the case of Heartland Payment Systems [24] 
(the sixth largest credit card processor in the U.S.) and $4.5 
billion in the case of TXJ Companies [25] (the parent 
company of T.J. Maxx, Marshalls, and Home Goods). To 
compound this situation, with regards to the contacts 
receiving the spam, in the cases for which medicines are 
purchased over the Internet, approximately 50% of the 
pharmaceuticals have been found to be counterfeit [26]. 
These phenomena have prompted the realization that 
apart from contending with the baseline preexisting 
legalities for cyber risks as specified under the Family 
Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) of 1974, 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
(HIPAA) of 1996, Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX) of 2002, 
Federal Information Security Management Act (FISMA) of 
2002, et al, the disciplinary scope of the cyber practitioner is 
broadening to encompass not just data breaches, but also 
risk management, supplier management, brand protection, 
perception management, and reputation management. This 
growing scope will very likely be accompanied by 
increasing liability associated with these expansion zones, 
such as product liability suits, even in those cases for which 
the company is simply a data breach victim. This is 
underscored by both the U.S. Foreign Corrupt Practices Act 
and the U.K. Bribery Act, which assert that companies are 
now responsible for bringing their supply chain partners into 
an overall compliance program [27]. Additionally, the 
degree of personal liability will directly correspond to the 
cyber practitioner’s day-to-day operational involvement and 
tangible actions of due care. After all, we now live in an era 
of elevated standards, whereby it is not just the letter of the 
law that is critical, but the compliance with the spirit of the 
law. Suffice it to say, this presents serious problems for the 
cyber risk professional. 
In the realm of physical security, if something is really a 
big threat, you can typically see it coming — the rabid dogs 
coming over the other hillside or the army crossing the 
isthmus. You can readily see these threats, and they do not 
constitute a surprise. In the cyber security world, that is 
simply not the case. By way of example, if your car is 
stolen, you will notice. If your data is stolen, you still have 
it. If the police do an exceptionally good job, and your car 
reappears in your driveway, you know that no one else has 
it. But if your data has been stolen, you will never again be 
able to say whether or not someone else has a copy [28]. 
This poses an ongoing liability for companies experiencing 
data breaches. Given this operating environment of cyber 
risk, 
cyber 
security, 
information 
assurance, 
risk 
management, or whatever term of art one wishes to use, the 
arena is deemed to be an incredibly challenging intellectual 
field to engage in, because the problem space changes so 
rapidly. Even the recognized subject matter experts worry 
that, every day, something that was true yesterday might no 
longer be true today. Each and every day, the corpus of 
network-attached peripherals (e.g., uninterruptible power 
supplies, printers, copiers, postage meters, digital signs, 
point-of-sale systems, et al) is distending in size and its 
constituents are becoming increasingly computerized and 
subject to cyber attack (thereby constituting increased cyber 
risk). This interrelation of factors is depicted below in 
Figure 1.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The nexus between enhancing our cyber risk posture 
and increasing the transparency of the global supply chain is 
clear, as depicted above in Figure 1, and there are numerous 
researchers active in this space, including members of our 
team. First, cyber crime is the venue of choice for organized 
crime [29], particularly since the rule of law for Internet 
crime is — because of its transnational borderless nature — 
far more nebulous (e.g., there exists a non-unified motley 
Figure 1. Main knowledge domains in supply chain cyber-risk 
management, Khan & Estay, Technology & Innovation Management 
Review, April 2015 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

crew of international treaties for extradition [30]) than 
conventional crime (traditional, illegal behaviors that most 
people think of as crime). Generally, Internet-facilitated 
spam and the sale of bogus goods carries with it penalties of 
up to five years of incarceration under the Criminal Spam 
Act of 2003 [31] and a similar tenure exists under the Anti-
Counterfeiting Consumer Protection Act of 1996 [32], 
respectively, which by comparison, represent a much lower 
threshold of penalties than selling fifty grams of crack 
cocaine or ten grams of lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), 
which carries a minimum of ten years imprisonment without 
parole under the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986 [33]. 
Malware and spam are the tools of opportunity for 
organized crime, particularly since the draconian mandatory 
minimum 
sentences 
under 
the 
Federal 
Sentencing 
Guidelines Act of 1984 did not anticipate and take into 
consideration the combination of cyber crime/fraudulent 
drugs, particularly as the World Wide Web was not yet 
launched, until six years later, in 1990. Similar to how the 
odds in gambling are on the side of the casino, the 
advantage in the cyber landscape is currently skewed in 
favor of the criminal element. As an example, the average 
sentence for running an international multi-million pound 
counterfeit drug operation between 2002 and 2005 was 2.5 
years imprisonment. Thus, since the penalty, even in the 
event of being successfully prosecuted, is comparatively 
speaking, much lower than other forms of crime, organized 
criminal 
groups 
have 
gravitated 
toward 
this 
very 
comfortable and prolific venue of fraudulent drugs — the 
flagship product promoted by the malware delivered by 
massive spam campaigns. 
The profitability and growth of the counterfeit drug 
market is currently running rampant [35] and will continue 
to grow as a juggernaut force until this avenue of corruption 
has run its course and deemed to be no longer profitable for 
the currently engaged sophisticated criminal actors. For 
society to successfully transform the fraudulent drug 
business from a highly lucrative proposition to an 
unprofitable venue, the number of law enforcement seizures 
must increase to dramatically raise the cost of counterfeiting 
[36]; for these “Title 18” [37] busts to percolate quickly, 
there need to be more eyes from disparate communities of 
interest and many more voices from active public 
participation (such as in the manner consistent with the New 
York City Metropolitan Transportation Authority’s security 
slogan, and the now U.S. Department of Homeland 
Security’s mantra, “see something, say something” [38]).  
IV. SEE SOMETHING, SAY SOMETHING FOR A MORE 
TRANSPARENT SUPPLY CHAIN 
Since the time when Google acquired the geospatial data 
visualization firm, Keyhole, Inc., in 2004 and rebranded the 
Keyhole software offering, EarthViewer 3D, as Google 
Earth, the public interest in geographic information systems 
(GIS) and encompassing geospatial technologies has 
increased tenfold [39] [40]. Paralleling this phenomenon, 
the interest in utilizing network science tools and 
methodologies for better understanding the global supply 
chain has increased as well. Now, more than ever before, 
network science practitioners are eagerly observing and 
reporting various aspects of pedigree/provenance (i.e., the 
origin or source). This is critical for three reasons. First, in 
2006, two hundred and sixty thousand bottles of 
Panamanian cold medicine contained antifreeze and killed at 
least one hundred seventy four people [41]. Second, in 
2007, bottles of toothpaste bearing the Colgate and Crest 
brand, which contained substitute ingredients (e.g., 
diethylene glycol instead of glycerin) provided by a Chinese 
subcontractor killed at least a hundred people [42]; and 
third, in 2009, there was a massive peanut butter recall 
linked to salmonella poisoning, and the list of recalled 
products included a spectrum of items, such as peanut 
butter-flavored cookies, crackers, cereals, and ice cream 
[43]. 
Ultimately, this recall highlighted the complication of 
keeping food safe as it makes its way through a complex 
supply chain from farms to grocery stores shelves to kitchen 
pantries. Many have long advocated for transparency within 
the supply chain to provide the all-important origin or 
provenance information for the consumer [44]. After all, as 
customers, we want to know the pedigree of what we are 
buying and using, and of tantamount importance is 
authenticity. However, we are also concerned with ethics 
and environmental impact, as in 2006, when Gap, Inc 
recalled one of its clothing lines after an outcry that one of 
its Indian subcontractors was using children as young as ten 
years old to work sixteen hours a day for no pay [45]; and in 
2010, when Nestlé fired one of its Indonesian suppliers after 
Greenpeace revealed that the supplier was destroying vast 
tracts of rainforests to make way for palm plantations, 
which produce the palm oil used in Power Bar, Coffee 
Mate, Nestle Crunch, and other Nestlé products [46]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 2. Example of New York City citizen vigilance campaign
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

So, what happens when the crowdsourced cylinders are 
all firing as in the example pictured above in Figure 2 
amidst this era of a “Network Science Evolution” which is 
replete with a rich trove of geolocation and social media 
information, to help increase the overall transparency of the 
supply chain and combat counterfeit pharmaceuticals, et al?  
V. SUPPLY CHAIN TRANSPARENCY FOR A BREAKTHROUGH 
IN CYBER SECURITY 
Imagine this. Given an increased number of tips from the 
“see something, say something” mantra and the resultant 
seizures, the counterfeit drug business is no longer as 
profitable [47], relative to other criminal venues. Hence, 
organized crime groups abandon this increasingly stringent 
sector, as their predominant revenue source, and the mass 
quantities of malware and spam begin to dip and suddenly 
fall away. With fewer professional cyber risk resources 
necessary for allocation towards the malware and spam 
amalgam, the new question becomes, “Does this constitute a 
breakthrough in governmental cyber risk efforts?” The 
answer is yes, absolutely [48]. After all, our current “state of 
the practice” cyber defense systems are not completely 
automated like science fiction writer Sir Arthur C. Clarke’s 
sentient computer, HAL 9000. There still exists the 
necessity and significant reality of the all-important human 
component within human-computer interactions, and a finite 
amount of manpower necessitates careful prioritization in 
dealing with the Pandora’s Box of cyber risk concerns. 
Given the newfound excess capacity of human cycles, other 
cyber risk domains are now able to receive an infusion of 
much-needed dedicated cycles of attention, thereby 
segueing into our penultimate question: “Exactly how 
significant are these newly allocated human cycles?”  
Consider the following. When a historically proud 
seafaring nation, such as Great Britain, retires its flagship 
earlier than planned and begins to actively shrink the size of 
its surface warfare fleet so as to increase expenditures on 
cyber risk, you begin to sense that this new battle space is of 
serious concern. When you start digging into the 
classification of national threats within the U.K. and 
discover that the highest ranking national threat, a “Tier 
One,” is assigned to a devastating attack on computer 
networks while a “Tier Two” threat is assigned to a nuclear, 
chemical, or biological attack, the sinking feeling in your 
stomach provides an indicator that something is afoot.  
This begs the riveting question of whether the 
aforementioned freshly available human cycles can be of 
value-add to this endeavor? Absolutely, it can. The pathway 
of transparency within the global supply chain for the partial 
resolution of the cyber risk problem will be one that 
effectively 
makes 
counterfeit 
pharmaceuticals 
an 
unattractive venue for organized crime, and a lion’s share of 
the world’s spam and malware amalgams can indeed be 
remanded to the past.  
To actually realize this vision and to effectuate a 
transparent supply chain so as to explore and contextualize 
the pedigrees of the innumerous ingredients and materials 
(which are sourced from around the world, aggregated, and 
processed to become the medicines we take, foods we eat, 
the clothes we wear, the things we buy, and the 
infrastructure we rely upon), we need to take a deep dive 
into the world of Big Data where there are branches and 
sub-branches of information pertaining to the trillion things 
that we have made in the world. 
For this envisioned world, we cannot simply rely upon a 
centralized top-down identification and tracking system, 
which may be vulnerable to failure or being compromised 
by a cyber attack. We must engage the bottom-up 
distributed democracy, such as the nearly a billion 
smartphone users in the world, and situated before us now, 
we have the real possibility of leveraging the “Network 
Science Evolution” to contextualize the swarm of 
information from all over the world. This way, we can build 
a common operating picture of where our morning coffee 
comes from, whether anybody under the age of fourteen has 
labored to weave the clothes we are wearing, that the 
components of the aircraft we are flying today are of the 
highest standards of engineering excellence, and that the 
medicine we provide during humanitarian relief efforts are 
authentic. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
The earthquake-induced crisis in Haiti in 2010 was 
exemplary in showing the potential contribution of a 
complementary application of crowdsourced crisis mapping 
with standard disaster relief operations. Validation as well as 
bottom-up 
editing 
and 
management of 
geographic 
information were made easier and more rapid than in the 
past, but in parallel, limitations and challenges of data and 
information verification did indeed also emerge. Issues of 
veracity not only contaminated the information supply chain, 
but also expanded into the whole supply chain logistics that 
were part of the humanitarian relief efforts. As a result, a 
relatively large share of the pharmaceuticals supplied in Haiti 
consisted in fraudulent counterfeit medicinal drugs. 
This case highlighted how crucial it is to expand our 
understanding of supply chain dynamics so as to reduce 
cyber risk as well as to improve disaster preparedness. 
Within this framework, the notion of transparency is, 
axiomatically, critical. Within large-scale product supply 
chains, transparency might only have a two-step depth, and 
in such cases, the likelihood of blind spots occurring 
increases exponentially. These blind spots can profoundly 
impact a country’s economy, as is exemplified by the case of 
Japan and Toyota in the aftermath of the 1997 Aisin Fire 
[49].  
It is evident that the there exists a nexus between the 
physical supply chain and the cyber supply chain, and it is 
clear that a stable economy and society does pass through 
the combined the enhancement of transparency of global 
supply chains and reduction of cyber risks. The case of 
fraudulent drugs promoted by criminal groups, via cyber 
attacks (e.g., through massive spam and malware 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

campaigns) is paradigmatic of such nexus. Indeed, cyber 
attacks can not only include data breaches, impacts upon 
supply chain integrity, and other related attack vectors, but 
also represent a direct and profound danger to corporate 
reputation, particularly when the criminal group leverages a 
company’s 
brand 
for 
nefarious 
purposes. 
Various 
governments have issued ad hoc laws stating that companies 
are now responsible for their entire supply chain, including 
partners; nevertheless, law enforcement is particularly 
arduous in the area of cyber crime, because the likelihood 
for criminal groups to be prosecuted is comparatively lower 
(given the Internets’ transnational and borderless structure) 
and the possible penalty is much lower than other forms of 
crime.  
The development of crowdsourced and participatory 
mechanisms for a more transparent supply chain is pivotal 
for identifying blind spots and mitigating their impact upon 
the integrity of supply chains. Concurrently, such efforts 
could reduce cyber risks in the digital world that currently 
represent a major threat to the stability of national and 
international economic systems. Thanks to the growing 
availability of crowdsourced and volunteered geographic 
information, more robust mapping and analytical tools have 
been developed and/or applied for bottom-up monitoring 
and mapping of socially or politically sensitive processes. 
Such results could represent the starting point to develop 
next-generation of network science tools, which lend to 
supply chain analytics, via pattern of life analyses, thanks to 
the integration of official and unofficial information 
produced (even involuntarily) across social networks and 
other collective intelligence feedback loops. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank the Cyber Futures 
Center, an initiative of the Sensemaking-U.S. Pacific 
Command Fellowship, and the Dr. Steve Chan Center for 
Sensemaking — one of the centers of the Asia-Pacific 
Institute for Resilience and Sustainability (AIRS), which is 
jointly anchored at Swansea University’s Network Science 
Research Center and Hawaii Pacific University — for the 
opportunity to study the challenges facing Hawaii and other 
archipelagos, and to contribute towards the various Public 
Private Partnership Initiatives aimed at developing solutions 
to overcome those challenges.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
“Haiti Earthquake Victims to Receive $10 Million Worth of NYC’s 
Counterfeit Goods,” The Huffington Post 21 April 2010: 1. 
[2] 
“Fatalities Associated with Ingestion of Diethylene Glycol-
Contaminated Glycerin Used to Manufacture Acetaminophen Syrup,” 
Center for Disease Control 2 August 1996: 1. 
[3] 
“Counterfeit Internet Drugs Pose Significant Risks and Discourage 
Vital Health Checks,” Science Daily 21 January 2010: 1. 
[4] 
A. Gardner, “Fake Drugs Bought on the Web Pose Big Health Risks,” 
U.S. News & World Report 29 January 2010: 1. 
[5] 
A. Marshall, “The Fatal Consequences of Counterfeit Drugs,” 
Smithsonian.com October 2009: 1. 
[6] 
E. Clark, “Counterfeit Medicines: The Pills That Kill,” The Telegraph 
5 April 2008: 1. 
[7] 
A. Coghlan, “Sawdust, Coffee and Dirt – Just About Anything Can 
End Up in Medicines Commonly Sold To The World’s Poorest 
People. How Many More Will Die Before Proper Controls Are Put in 
Place?” New Scientist 29 March 1997: 1. 
[8] 
S. Boggan, “Headache Pills Made of Rat Poison and Viagra Made of 
Chalk: We Reveal the Chilling Truth about Internet Drugs,” Daily 
Mail 29 April 2009: 1. 
[9] 
“Opening remarks by R. K. Noble, INTERPOL Secretary General,” 
2009 International Law Enforcement Intellectual Property Crime 
Conference 15 December 2010: 1. 
[10] “Indian Start-up Strikes Deal to Combat Counterfeiting of Medicine,” 
The Christian Science Monitor 14 December 2010: 1. 
[11] “Counterfeit Drugs Pose Dangers in 90 Countries Worldwide,” 
America.gov 14 October 2010: 1. 
[12] Activities of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to 
address emerging forms of crime,” Conference of the Parties to the 
United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime 
18-22 October 2010: 15. 
[13] J. Rothfeder, “Bumpy Ride,” Portfolio.com 22 April 2009: 1. 
[14] S. Narisi, “Feds Put IT in the Hot Seat for Security Breaches,” 
Docucrunch.com 5 December 2010: 1. 
[15] “Counterfeit Medicines,” Novartis November 2005: 1. 
[16] “The New World of eCrime: Targeted Brand Attacks and How to 
Combat Them,” Mark Monitor March 2009: 1. 
[17] “Organized Crime Wants Your Data,” Docucrunch.com 5 December 
2010: 1.  
[18] L. Dignan, “Cyber Security by the Numbers: Malware Surges, Spam 
Declines in Third Quarter,” ZDNet.com 17 November 2010: 1. 
[19] “Expanded Study Finds More Insider Threats, Greater Use of Social 
Engineering, Continued Strong Organized Criminal Involvement,” 
Verizon 28 July 2010: 1; Verizon’s 2012 Data Breach Investigations 
Report. 
[20] “Data Breach Costs Increase,” Help Net Security 25 January 2010: 1. 
[21] B. Krebs, “Payment Processor Breach May Be Largest Ever,” The 
Washington Post 20 January 2009: 1. 
[22] “Estimates Put T.J. Maxx Security Fiasco At $4.5 Billion,” 
InformationWeek 2 May 2007: 1. 
[23] “Growing threat from counterfeit medicines,” Bulletin of the World 
Health Organization April 2010: 241-320: 1. 
[24] S. Weber, “The U.K. Bribery Act 2010, Cheers!” Adfero Group 13 
October 2010: 1. 
[25] Interview with Dan Geer, Chief Security Officer for In-Q-Tel, the 
venture capital arm of the Central Intelligence Agency. 
[26] B. Krebs, “Organized Crime Behind a Majority of Data Breaches,” 
Washington Post 15 April 2009: 1. 
[27] “UN 
Rejects 
International 
Cybercrime 
Treaty,” 
ComputerWeekly.com 20 April 2010: 1. 
[28] “Congressional Record-Senate,” Congress 19 June 2003: 15564. 
[29] “Trademark Counterfeiting – Introduction,” Criminal Resource 
Manual 1997: 1701. 
[30] E. E. Sterling,” Drug Laws and Snitching: A Primer,” Frontline, 
January 1999: 1. 
[31] “U.K.’s 
Largest 
Counterfeit 
Drug 
Operation 
Concluded,” 
Pharmaceutical Manufacturing 15 July 2009: 1. 
[32] J. Schenker, “MPedigree’s Rx for Counterfeit Drugs,” Bloomberg 
Businessweek 3 December 2008: 1. 
[33] “Report on Counterfeiting and Piracy in Canada: A Road Map for 
Change,” The Canadian Anti-Counterfeiting Network March 2007: 
39. 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

[34] E. Dou, “‘See Something, Say Something’ Goes National,” 
Huffington Post, 1 July 2010: 1. 
[35] GIS in Humanitarian Activities,” Aid & International Development 
Forum 8-9 June 2011: 1. 
[36] R. Hart, “Google Earth Popularity Booms,” GeoCarta 25 January 
2006: 1. 
[37] “Panama Releases Report on ’06 Poisoning,” 14 February 2008: 1. 
[38] J. Enoch “FDA Bans Toothpaste from China,” ConsumerAffairs.com 
24 May 2007. 
[39] “How Does Salmonella Get in Peanut Butter? And Can You Kill It 
Once It’s There?” Scientific American 13 January 2009: 1. 
[40] Interview with Dr. Steve New, Program Director at the Centre for 
Corporate Reputation within the University of Oxford. 
[41] “Gap: Report of Kids’ Sweatshop ‘Deeply Disturbing,” CNN World 
29 October 2007. 
[42] D. Gutierrez, “Nestle Drops Indonesia Palm Oil Supplier After 
Greenpeace Report on Rainforest Destruction,” Natural News 18 
August 2010. 
[43] “Fake Pharmaceuticals: How They and Relevant Legislation or Lack 
Thereof Contribute to Consistently High and Increasing Drug Prices,” 
American Journal of Law & Medicine 22 December 2003: 1. 
[44] Interview with Executive Director Maxim Weinstein, who leads 
StopBadware.org, a former Harvard Berkman Center for Internet and 
Society and Oxford Internet Institute project that develops new 
approaches to address malware. 
[45] G. Wilson, “Fight Cyber War Before Planes Fall Out of the Sky,” The 
Sun 19 October 2010: 1. 
[46] M. Conner, “Sensors Empower the ‘Internet of Things’,” Electronics 
Design, Strategy, News 27 May 2010: 1. 
[47] “One Billion Subscribers to Own Smartphone Devices in 2013,” 
Informa 20 September 2010: 1. 
[48] T. Nishiguchi and A. Beaudet, "The Toyota group and the Aisin fire," 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology Sloan Management Review, 
vol. 40, Fall 1998. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

