  Design and Operation of the Electronic Record Systems of the US Courts are 
Linked to Failing Banking Regulation 
Joseph Zernik 
Human Rights Alert (NGO) 
Jerusalem 
e-mail: 123456xyz@gmail.com  
 
  
Abstract— The current report is based on data mining of the 
information systems of the US courts – PACER (Public Access 
to 
Court 
Electronic 
Records) 
and 
CM/ECF 
(Case 
Management/Electronic Court Filing) in general, and review of 
the electronic records in a landmark litigation under the 
current financial crisis: Securities and Exchange Commission v 
Bank of America Corporation (2009-10). The case originated in 
the unlawful taking of $5.8 billion by banking executives, and 
concluded with the executives never returning the funds to the 
stockholders and with no individual being held accountable. 
The case was covered numerous times by major US and world 
media.  Data mining of records of the US courts from coast to 
coast reveals built-in deficiencies in validity and integrity of the 
PACER and CM/ECF.  The case study documents missing and 
invalid litigation records, leading to the conclusion that the 
case as a whole amounts to simulated litigation.  A number of 
corrective measures are outlined, including publicly and 
legally accountable functional logic verification of 
PACER and CM/ECF, and correction of the defective 
signature 
and 
authentication 
procedures 
now 
implemented in the systems.  This study highlights the 
significance of application of data mining to the target 
area of court records in particular, and records of the 
justice system in general.  It is also a call for action by 
computing experts and data mining experts in for the 
safeguard 
of 
Human 
Rights 
and 
integrity 
of 
governments in the Digital Era.  
Keywords- e-Courts; e-Government; United States; Banking 
Regulation; PACER; CM/ECF. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The US government has completed a decade-long 
project of transition to electronic administration of the US 
courts at a cost that is estimated at several billion US 
dollars. Courts of nations around the world are going 
through similar processes, and United Nations reports on 
judicial integrity promote such transition. Obviously, valid 
electronic record systems could have enhanced the integrity 
and transparency of the courts.  
Record keeping under paper administration of the courts 
has evolved over centuries and formed the core of due 
process and fair hearing. The transition to electronic 
administration of the courts affected a sea change in such 
court procedures.  
Two systems were implemented in the US district courts 
and US courts of appeals:  
 PACER – for Public Access to Court Electronic 
Records, and  
 CM/ECF – for Case Management and Electronic 
Court Filing.  
Previous reports inspected the validity and integrity of 
the systems, and identified core defects inherent in their 
design and operation. [1,2]  
Fraud in the state and US courts has been increasingly 
recognized as a key part of the current financial crisis. [3-6] 
A legal expert opined, “… it's difficult to find a fraud of this 
size on the U.S. court system in U.S. history… I can't think 
of one where you have literally tens of thousands of 
fraudulent documents filed in tens of thousands of cases." 
[7] Concern has also been repeatedly voiced with the 
ineffectiveness of US banking regulation. [7] 
Other papers have documented fraud in the litigation of 
cases in the US district courts, in the US court of appeals, 
and the US Supreme Court. [8-10]  
Under such circumstances, this study inspects the 
information systems, implemented by the US courts, and 
their implications in the litigation of a landmark case under 
the current financial crisis: Securities and Exchange 
Commission v Bank of America Corporation (1:09-cv-
06829). In this case, the US Securities and Exchange 
Commission (SEC) purportedly prosecuted Bank of 
America Corporation (BAC) in the US District Court, 
Southern District of New York, for violations of securities 
laws, related to the unlawful taking by executives of $5.8 
billion. Financial analysts described the underlying matter 
as a ‘criminal conspiracy’ and ‘bigger than Watergate?’  
Based on data mining in this unique target area, this 
study claims that instead of enhancing integrity and 
transparency of the courts, the electronic record systems 
have enabled unprecedented, widespread corruption in the 
US courts.  
This study highlights the significance of application of 
data mining techniques to the target area of court records.  It 
is also a call for action by computing experts in general and 
data mining experts in particular for the safeguard of Human 
Rights and integrity of governments in the Digital Era. 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-242-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2012 : The First International Conference on Data Analytics

A. Authorities of Judges and Clerks 
Generally, the courts are described as consisting of two 
arms: the judicial arm and the ministerial (clerical) arm.  
Both the judges and the clerks must be duly appointed and 
hold their positions under Oath of Office.  A judge is 
authorized to decide on a matter, duly presented to him by 
parties in a given matter.  The clerk is the legal custodian of 
the data base of court records.  
Therefore, a judge may decide and issue a signed 
decision in a given matter. However, such record is not a 
valid court record, until it is duly inspected for validity (case 
number, case caption, signatures, assignment of the judge to 
the specific case, etc) and formally entered into the data 
base under the signature of a named, authorized clerk.   
The entry of a judicial record into the data base is 
inseparable from authentication of the record through its 
service on all parties in the case.  Accordingly, for example, 
the authentication record, accompanying each and every 
judicial record and signed by the Clerk in the Superior Court 
of California, is titled “Certificate of Mailing and Notice of 
Entry by the Clerk.”  
B. PACER and CM/ECF 
Critical deficiencies were previously identified in design 
and operation of PACER and CM/ECF: [10]  
 
Both the courts and the US Congress failed to establish 
by law the new electronic court procedures, inherent in 
the systems. Particularly, no law today defines the 
form of valid and publicly recognizable digital 
signatures of judges and clerks.  (Figures 1,2, and 3; 
see Online Appendix 1)  
 
Public access to the electronic authentication records, 
which are maintained in CM/ECF, but not in PACER, 
is routinely denied. The corresponding records were 
essential part of the public records under paper 
administration of the courts.   
 
The systems enable attorneys to appear, file, and 
purportedly enter records with no prior review by the 
clerks of the courts, and with no power of attorney by 
their purported clients. [11,12]  The systems also 
enable unauthorized court personnel to issue and 
publish online court records – dockets, minutes, orders, 
and judgments, which were never authenticated by the 
duly authorized clerks. [10]  
 
There is no evidence that the systems were subjected 
to functional logic verification in a publicly and legally 
accountable manner.  
The outcome of such conditions, as demonstrated in this 
study is that the public is unable to distinguish between 
valid and void court records. With it, the systems enable 
the courts to conduct of simulated litigation, otherwise 
known as “Fraud on the Court”. [13] 
II. 
METHODS 
A. General Approach to data mining of the records of the 
US courts 
The research presented in this paper was narrowly 
focused on analysis of integrity of the electronic record 
systems in the national courts (US district courts).  The study 
was not based on legal analysis of the records, or challenges 
to the rationale of the adjudication in specific decisions, 
except for the laws pertaining to the maintenance of court 
records.   
Rules, pertaining to the operation of the systems were 
investigated through review of the Users’ Manuals of the 
various courts, where available.  Such manual provided 
limited rules at best.   
Therefore, rules of the systems had to be inferred through 
data mining. 
 
UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT  
FOR THE  
DISTRICT OF <name of district>  
Case Number: <number>  
<name1>, Plaintiff,  
v.  
<name2>, Defendant.  
CERTIFICATE OF SERVICE  
I, the undersigned, hereby certify that I am an employee in the 
Office of the Clerk, U.S. District Court, Northern District of 
California.  
That on <date>, I SERVED a true and correct copy(ies) of the attached, 
by placing said copy(ies) in a postage paid envelope addressed to the 
person(s) hereinafter listed, by depositing said envelope in the U.S. 
Mail, or by placing said copy(ies) into an inter-office delivery receptacle 
located in the Clerk's office.  
<service list>  
Dated: <date>  
<name of individual>, Clerk  
[wet graphic signature]  
________________________  
By: <name of individual>, Deputy Clerk  
Figure 1.  Paper-based Certificate of Service, as Used by the 
Clerks of the US District Courts Prior to Implementation of 
PACER and CM/ECF, the Electronic Record Systems of the US 
Courts.  
The Certificate of Service was titled “Certificate”, it included a 
certification statement, “I certify…”, the name and authority of the 
individual executing the certification, on behalf of the clerk of the 
court, and his/her hand signature. The certification records were 
essential part of the public records in the paper court files. None of 
these elements were preserved in PACER and CM/ECF (Figure 2; 
see Online Appendix 1). 
Subsequently, irregularities, or contradictory data in date, 
signature, certification, and registration procedures were 
examined through data mining methods, executed on the 
online public records of the courts, through various search 
options, provided in the systems themselves. 
Initially, integrity of the basic components of the systems 
were examined: indices of all cases, calendars, dockets (lists 
of records in a given file), indices of decisions, and 
compliance of these components with the Federal Rules of 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-242-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2012 : The First International Conference on Data Analytics

Civil Procedure, pertaining to the maintenance of court 
records and the duties of the clerks in this regard.  
The analysis was also based on consultations with Israeli law 
computing/cryptology experts. No US law or computing 
expert, who was approached, agreed to discuss the matter. 
B. Information regarding PACER and CM/ECF in the US 
District Court, Southern District of New York  
The platforms of PACER and CM/ECF in the US 
District Court, Southern District of New York, are the same 
as previously described in other US district courts. [2, 10] 
The electronic authentication records (NEFs – Notices of 
Electronic Filings) are excluded from public access in 
PACER. The NEFs are today accessible only through 
CM/ECF, only by court personnel and by attorneys, who are 
authorized by the courts in particular cases.  
The Local Rules of the US District Court, Southern 
District of New York, as downloaded from the Court’s 
website, were reviewed, particularly relative to the 
following matters: [14]  
 
Operations of PACER and CM/ECF and court 
procedures inherent in them;  
 
Certification of court records under electronic filing;  
 
Issuance, docketing, and execution of the service of 
summons and complaint;  
 
Certification of attorneys as Attorneys of Record upon 
appearance, and  
 
Definition of valid digital signatures under electronic 
filing.  
As was the case in other US courts, which were 
examined, the Local Rules of the US District Court, 
Southern District of New York, failed to provide clear and 
unambiguous details of electronic filing and electronic court 
records procedures in general, and in particular relative to 
the matters listed above.  
Further information regarding the design and operations 
of PACER and CM/ECF was found in the Electronic Case 
Filing Rules & Instructions and the CM / ECF Attorney 
Civil Dictionary of the US District Court, Southern District 
of New York. [14] However, such sources are not valid 
legal sources for establishing the validity of court records.  
Users’ manuals, albeit not valid court records, provided 
additional information regarding the design and operation of 
PACER and CM/ECF in the various US district courts, 
which were inspected. [15] No public access was found 
online to the Users’ Manual of the US District Court, 
Southern District of New York.  
C. Court Records in Litigation of SEC v BAC  
The primary source of records was through online public 
access to PACER records.  
Additionally, efforts were made to obtain missing 
records, where access in PACER was not available, through 
requests, which were forwarded to the office of the Clerk of 
the Court, to attorneys for SEC and BAC, to the office of 
the Chair of SEC, and to the office of BAC President. 
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests were filed on 
the office of SEC and the office of Fair Fund Administrator 
(detailed below).  
D. Media Reports  
Major media outlets: New York Times, Washington Post, 
Wall Street Journal, and Times of London were searched 
online for media coverage of the litigation.  
III. 
RESULTS 
A. Public Access to Court Records through PACER 
Public access to US court records is effetively permitted 
only through PACER.  However, the identity of the server, 
from which the records are displayed and downloaded is 
unverified.  A typical browser “page info” statement for 
PACER is: 
Website Identity 
Website:  
http://www.pacer.gov/  
Ownership:  This website does not supply ownership 
information. 
Verified by:  Not specified 
Technical Details 
  
 
Connection Not Encrypted. 
B. Public Access to the litigation records in SEC v BAC  
1) NEFs 
As is the case in all other US district courts, which were 
inspected, public access to the authentication records 
(NEFs) of the US District Court, Southern District of New 
York in PACER is denied.   
Although never stated in the Rules of Court of the US 
District Court, Southern District of New York, the evidence 
shows that, as is the case in other US courts, the NEFs are in 
fact deemed the authentication records of the Court. No 
other form of authentication record, pertaining to judicial 
records (minutes, orders, judgments) was found in the 
PACER docket.  
The form of the NEFs of the US District Court, Southern 
District of New York, is identical to the NEFs, as 
discovered in other US courts. The NEF, in and of itself, 
should be considered invalid Certificate of Service. It 
includes no mention of certification in its title, it includes no 
certification statement - “I certify…”, it never invokes the 
authority of the Clerk of the Court, it never names the 
person, who issued the NEF, and it includes neither a 
graphic hand-signature, nor a valid digital signature of an 
authorized individual, affixed as a symbol of intent to take 
responsibility. Instead, it only includes a machine generated, 
encrypted checksum string. (Figures 1, 2; see Online 
Appendix 1)  
2) Calendar and Docket Activity Report 
Furthermore, the US District Court, Southern District of 
New York, unreasonably limits public access to the 
Calendars of the Courts, in contrast with other US district 
courts. Access is permitted only to the current seven days 
window.  Therefore, conduct of the “off the record” 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-242-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2012 : The First International Conference on Data Analytics

proceedings and other proceedings with no valid minutes 
cannot be confirmed. Likewise, the US District Court, 
Southern District of New York, denies access to the Docket 
Activity Report – critical data for confirmation of docket 
notations.  
3) Summons, Minutes 
Although the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure prescribe 
the docketing of the summons as issued by the Clerk of the 
Court and the minutes of the proceedings, these records 
were missing from PACER docket of the case at hand. 
C. Access to Litigation Records from Other Sources  
Requests for copies of the missing litigation records, 
which were forwarded to the office of the Clerk of the 
Court, to attorneys for parties in the case, to the office of 
SEC Chair, and to the office of President of BAC,  were all 
refused. 
Eventually, only one NEF was obtained from the office 
of the Fair Fund Administrator (2; see Online Appendix 1). 
Access to the other NEFs was denied by the same office 
with no explanation at all.  
The summons, as issued by the Clerk of the Court, was 
eventually obtained in response to a Freedom of Information 
Act (FOIA) request on SEC (Figure 4; see Online 
Appendix 1). [16] However, the same office failed to 
produce the other missing records of the NEFs in this case 
under the claim that “these documents are not agency 
records under the FOIA." Such claim contradicted the 
response of the same office on the summons in this case.  
Conduct of SEC in this matter amounts to selective 
compliance with the Freedom of Information Act. 
The September 9, 2010 FOIA response letter from SEC 
states:   
This letter is a final response to your request, dated 
January 26, 2010, and received in this office on 
February 2, 2010, for certain information concerning 
SEC v. Bank of America Corporation (BAC)(1:09-
cv-06829), United States District Court for the 
Southern District of New York. Specifically, you 
request copies of the following:  
a)  Summons, as issued by clerk under such caption; 
NEF (Notice of Electronic Filing) pertaining to 
the Summons, as issued by clerk under such 
caption;  
b)  Summons, as executed under such caption.  
c) NEF (Notice of Electronic Filing) pertaining to the 
Summons, as executed under such caption.  
d) NEF (Notice of Electronic Filing) pertaining to the 
complaint under such caption.  
e) NEF (Notice of Electronic Filings) for each and 
every court order under such caption.  
In response to a) and c) above please find attached a 
copy of the summons issued in SEC v. Bank of 
America Corporation (BAC)(1:09-cv-06829).  
With respect to the remainder of your request related 
to Notices of Electronic Filing generated by the 
United States District Court for the Southern District 
of New York, please be advised that these documents 
are 
not 
agency 
records 
under 
the 
FOIA. 
Consequently, we are considering your request 
closed.  
D. PACER Chronology of SEC v BAC (1:09-cv-06829) 
1) The PACER Docket as a Whole  
A total of 19 purported proceedings are listed in the 
PACER docket (see the full PACER docket and linked 
records under the Online Appendix). For two of the 
proceedings, no docket entries are found at all. These two 
proceedings should be deemed ‘off the record’ proceedings. 
For the remaining 17 proceedings, invalid docket entries are 
found - no minutes records at all are linked to the docket 
listings, no docket numbers are designated, and no 
information regarding content of the proceedings is 
provided in the docketing text.  
Moreover, based on the design of the NEFs (see below), 
it is impossible that such docket entries were authenticated. 
Therefore, these are invalid docket entries, with no 
corresponding valid court records. (Figure 3; see Online 
Appendix 1) These remaining 17 proceedings should be 
deemed simulated court proceedings. 
Of such 17 minutes with no records, 16 are listed as 
‘entered’ by an individual only identified as ‘mro’. The full 
name and authority of the person remain unknown. In 
contrast, out of a total of 24 docket listings of orders and the 
judgment, where docket number is designated, where a 
record is linked, and where informative docketing text is 
provided, not a single item is entered by ‘mro’. The 
Docketing Department of the Court confirmed that 
docketing in the case was not performed by authorized 
Deputy Clerks, but refused to disclose the names of the 
individuals involved.  
Entry of transactions in the PACER dockets by 
unauthorized court personnel, unbound by Oath of Office, 
was documented in other US district courts as well. Beyond 
undermining the integrity of the dockets, such practices 
demonstrate the lack of security and validity of PACER and 
CM/ECF as a whole.  
Overall, nowhere in the PACER docket is the authority 
of the office of the Clerk of the US Court invoked, neither is 
the name, nor the authority of any individual as Deputy 
Clerk to be found.  
2) Individual PACER Docket Records  
A detailed review of the entries in the PACER docket, 
and their validity, or lack thereof, is provided in the Online 
Appendix. Here, only highlights are provided.  
a. August 3, 2009 – Summons issued  
The PACER docket in this case states that on August 3, 
2009, summons was issued as to BAC. However, absent a 
Docket Number, the text cannot possibly be deemed a valid 
docket entry. Additionally, no link is provided in the 
PACER docket to the summons record itself. Therefore, no 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-242-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2012 : The First International Conference on Data Analytics

electronic authentication could have been issued through an 
NEF under such circumstances on the summons.  
Access to the summons as issued and as served was 
repeatedly requested from the office of the Clerk of the 
Court. Access was denied.  
Eventually, a copy of the summons, as issued by the 
Clerk of the Court, was obtained through a Freedom of 
Information Act (FOIA) response from SEC. (Figure 4; see 
Online Appendix 1) The summons as issued by the Clerk of 
the Court in this case is unsigned, and bears no seal of the 
Court. Therefore, the summons is in fact a simulated 
summons record. [13] The failure to issue and docket valid 
summons is consistent with the intent to conduct simulated 
litigation from the start. 
b. Service of Process  
Nowhere in the docket is there any indication that 
service of the summons was in fact executed, alternatively, 
that service of the summons was waived.  
In the FOIA response, the unsigned summons record was 
provided as both the record of the summons as issued and 
the summons as executed. (Figure 4; see Online Appendix 
1) Needless to say, execution of service of an unsigned, 
fraudulent summons is invalid execution.  
Therefore, the service of process in this case was 
simulated, service of process. 
c. 
August 3, 2009 - Motion for entry of Settlement 
Agreement  
Media reported from the onset of the litigation that a 
proposed Settlement Agreement for $33 million, to be paid 
by BAC to the US government, was filed on August 3, 
2009. Later, several docket notations refer to the pending 
initial Settlement Agreement.  
On September 24, 2009, Order was entered in the 
docket, purportedly rejecting the then pending proposed 
Settlement Agreement. However, no Motion for entry of the 
proposed Settlement Agreement and no proposed Settlement 
Agreement records are found in the docket. 
The failure to file a Motion for Entry of the Settlement 
Agreement, and consequent issuance of an order, purported 
to deny the motion with no motion record are consistent 
with the conduct of simulated litigation.  
d. August 10, 2009 – ‘off the record’ proceeding  
There is no docket listing at all for the August 10, 2009 
proceeding. However, evidence of its conduct is provided in 
the PACER docket entries #15,16, and 17.  
The conduct of ‘off the record’ court proceeding is also 
consistent with the conduct of simulated litigation in this 
case.  
e. 
August 25, 2009 - Order denying 
 the 
initial 
proposed Settlement Agreement  
The August 25, 2009 Order (Dkt #13) states:  
This Court has the obligation, within carefully 
prescribed limits, to determine whether the proposed 
Consent Judgment settling this case is fair, 
reasonable, adequate, and in the public interest.  
The ruling on a matter that was never pending before 
the Court is also consistent with the conduct of simulated 
litigation in this case. 
f. 
February 22, 2010, Final Consent Judgment  
On February 22, 2010, the Final Consent Judgment (Dkt 
#97) was filed by Judge Jed Rakoff.  
The docketing text of the Final Consent Judgment states:  
FINAL 
CONSENT 
JUDGMENT 
AS 
TO 
DEFENDANT 
BANK 
OF 
AMERICA 
CORPORATION # 10,0297 in favor of Securities 
and Exchange Commission against Bank of America 
Corporation in the amount of $ 150,000,001.00. 
(Signed by Judge Jed S. Rakoff on 2/24/2010) 
(Attachments: # 1 Notice of Right to Appeal) (dt) 
(Entered: 02/24/2010)  
Access was repeatedly requested to the NEF of the Final 
Consent Judgment, absent which, the record cannot be 
deemed a valid court record. Access was denied in violation 
of the law (First Amendment).  
3) Other PACER Records  
Detailed review of the other PACER records is provided 
in the Online Appendix. Here only highlights are provided:  
a. 
August 3, 2009 - Civil Cover Sheet  
Records of the US District Court, Southern District of 
New York, prescribe that a Civil Cover Sheet be filed with 
the complaint. Likewise, the Civil Litigation Management 
Manual of the Judicial Council of the United States, [18] 
prescribes the filing of a Civil Cover Sheet as prerequisite 
for opening a new docket by the Clerk of the Court, no Civil 
Cover Sheet is found in the docket of the case at hand. In 
contrast, Civil Cover Sheets are routinely found in the 
PACER dockets with the complaints in other cases. As 
further noted in the Rules of Court, the Civil Cover Sheet 
must be part of Service of Process, together with the 
summons and complaint.  
The failure to file and docket a Civil Cover Sheet is of 
particular significance, since it is one of the only records, 
where a publicly visible, hand signature of the Clerk of the 
Court, identified by name and authority, is still required.  
The failure to file and serve a Civil Cover is consistent 
with the intent to conduct simulated litigation from the start.  
4) Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) and Fair Fund 
Administrator Responses  
While the Clerk of the Court refused to provide access to 
the missing court records in this case, which were and are 
public records by law, access was gained to certain missing 
records from other sources.  
The FOIA response by SEC yielded a copy of a record 
that was described as “summons, as issued by clerk” and 
“summons, as executed”. (Figure 4; see Online Appendix 1) 
However, the record produced in the FOIA response is an 
unsigned summons with no seal of the Court. Therefore, the 
record is a simulated summons.  
The Fair Fund Administrator provided a copy of one 
NEF only (Figure 2; see Online Appendix 1). The same 
office refused to provide the NEFs of other records, most 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-242-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2012 : The First International Conference on Data Analytics

notably the NEF of the Final Consent Judgment (Dkt #97). 
No explanation at all was provided by the Fair Fund 
Administrator for the refusal to provide copies of the 
additional NEFs.  
5) Circumstances Surrounding the Litigation of SEC v 
BAC  
The New York Times reported the news regarding the 
Final Consent Judgment in this case as follows: [17]  
In a ruling that freed Bank of America from some 
legal problems, a federal judge wrote on Monday that 
he had reluctantly approved a $150 million settlement 
with the Securities and Exchange Commission… 
“This court, while shaking its head, grants the 
S.E.C.’s motion and approves the proposed consent 
judgment,” the judge wrote.  
Independent investigation of events surrounding the 
BAC-Merrill Lynch merger by State of New York Attorney 
General Andrew Cuomo was summed up in his April 23, 
2009 letter to the US Congress. [19] Financial analysts’ 
responded the release of the letter and its attachments under 
headlines such as “Let the Criminal Indictments Begin: 
Paulson, Bernanke, Lewis”, “Bigger Than Watergate?”, and 
“Cuomo Unveils Paulson, Bernanke, Lewis Conspiracy”.  
However, in contrast with such analysts’ opinions, none of 
the perpetrators suffered any material consequences so far.  
Judge Jed Rakoff, who presided in the case, is considered 
one of the most experienced and notable among US judges 
in matters pertaining to securities, white-collar crime, and 
racketeering.  
Regarding Judge Jed Rakoff’s conduct in this case, the 
Wall Street Journal Law Blog said: [20]  
Rakoff is currently proving himself to be, if nothing 
else, unafraid to single-handedly take on some 
heavyweight institutions and their lawyers.  
Numerous attorneys appeared in the case, both for 
Plaintiff SEC - a government entity, and for Defendant BAC 
– a major financial institution. Over twenty Notices of 
Appearance appear in the PACER docket of the case. 
In a September 22, 2009 report, the Washington Post 
quotes official statement by SEC:  
"[W]e will vigorously pursue our charges against 
Bank of America and take steps to prove our case 
in court," the SEC said in a statement. "We will 
use the additional discovery available in the 
litigation to further pursue the facts and determine 
whether to seek the court's permission to bring 
additional charges in this case."  
It is practically impossible that the prominent attorneys, 
who appeared in the case for both SEC and BAC, were 
unaware of the simulated  nature of the litigation.  
The litigation of this case was extensively covered by 
major US and international media outlets, as a key litigation 
under the current global financial crisis. A total of ten (10) 
reports of the litigation were found in the New York Times, 
eight (8) reports in the Washington Post, and dozens of 
reports in the Wall Street Journal. Likewise, fourteen (14) 
reports related to the case were found in the Times of 
London. However, there is no reason to assume that any 
media, which reported on the litigation, ever tried, or gained 
access to records in the case beyond those accessible 
through the PACER docket, as described above. There also 
is no evidence that media ever reported that critical 
litigation records are missing. It is difficult to believe that 
experienced legal reporters of major media outlets never 
noticed the fatal flaws in the records and conduct of the 
litigation. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION  
A. Overall Conduct of the Litigation  
The conduct of the US District Court in this matter 
should be reviewed in the context of the conduct of civil 
litigation as stipulated in the Federal Rules of Civil 
Procedure, and as outlined in the Civil Litigation 
Management Manual, Second Edition (2010) by the Judicial 
Conference of the United States. [18] Upon such review, a 
reasonable person would conclude that the litigation as a 
whole was never deemed by the US Court itself as valid 
litigation.  
1) Issuance and Service of Simulated Summons 
The summons is a critical record – it establishes the 
onset of litigation and also establishes the jurisdiction of a 
particular court in a particular matter on particular parties. 
Accordingly, the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure prescribe 
that the summons be docketed by the clerk of the court and 
therefore become a public record. Moreover, the US Code 
prescribes that the summons be issued under the signature of 
the Clerk of the Court and under the Seal of the Court. 
The invalidity of the summons in this case undermines 
the validity of the litigation as a whole. However, the 
invalidity of the summons in this case could not be 
discerned in PACER, the public access system.  
Since the issuance of the summons is the very first 
action in any case, the issuance of a simulated summons in 
this case also shows that the case was designed to be 
simulated litigation from the very start, through collusion of 
the Judge, the Clerk of the Court, and the attorneys for SEC 
and BAC. In fact, the case was intended from the start to be 
an inverse show trial. [21] 
2) The Fairness Perspective 
The outcome of the litigation should also be viewed 
from the fundamental fairness perspective: Individuals, who 
were banking executives, unlawfully took $5.8 billion from 
the shareholders of BAC.  
In response, SEC and BAC proposed, concomitantly 
with the filing of the complaint, the initial Settlement 
Agreement, which would have imposed a fine of $33 milion 
on the stockholders - the victims of the unlawful conduct. 
Eventually, the outcome of the litigation was that 
pursuant to the final Settlement Agreement, compensation 
in the sum of $150 million was paid by the shareholders to 
themselves. No funds were returned by any of the 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-242-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2012 : The First International Conference on Data Analytics

perpetrators, and none of the perpetrators was held 
accountable for their unlawful conduct. 
B. Human Errors,  or Simulated litigation? 
The conduct, documented in this study and in numerous 
other cases in the US district courts, the US courts of 
appeals, and the US Supreme Court cannot reasonably be 
deemed the outcome of human errors for the following 
reasons: 
 Any valid and honest electronic record system of a 
courts must be secure enough, so that it would not 
enable unauthorized, unnamed persons, unbound by 
Oath of Office, to execute any transactions in the 
system. 
 The authentication records, implemented in CM/ECF 
(the NEFs), bear neither the name, nor the authority and 
signature of the person, who issues the authentication 
record. Moreover, the NEFs are excluded from the data 
base of public records of the courts, and the courts deny 
access to these records in violation of First Amendment 
rights. There is no plausible explanation for such design 
of the systems and the universal denial of access to these 
records, which is consistent with integrity of the US 
courts.   
 In all cases in the state and US courts, where simulated 
service of judicial records and their incorporation in the 
dockets was brought to the attention of the respective 
court, the courts refused to correct the dockets.  Instead, 
the courts proceeded with the litigation of such cases, 
treating such simulated records as valid and effectual 
court records. [22,23]  In doing so, the courts 
deliberately ignored the fact that the service of invalid 
judicial records and the publication of the same by the 
courts are the essence of the criminality, here referred to 
as “Simulating Legal Process”, [13] and historically known as 
“Fraud on the Court”. [24] 
C. Transparency of the judicial process – public access to 
court records. 
Court records are public records pursuant to the US law 
– the First Amendment.   The landmark decision in this 
matter by the US Supreme Court in Nixon v Warner 
Communications, 1978, pertaining to the Nixon tapes, 
explicitly states that it only re-affirms existing law in this 
regard, and that public access to court records is essential, in 
order to enable to People “to keep a watchful eye on 
government” (including, but not limited to the judiciary). 
As documented in this case and numerous others, today 
public access to court records in the United States is 
selective.  
A major claim of this study is that the selective denial of 
public access to court records has been enabled in recent 
decades through the implementation of invalid electronic 
record systems in the courts.  It effectively amounts to 
establishment of “double books” systems in the courts – in 
the US courts – PACER and CM/ECF.  [25] 
D. Missing Court Records – Cardinal Sign of Judicial 
Corruption.  
United Nations reports on “Strengthening Judicial 
Integrity” advocate the implementation of electronic record 
systems in the courts, as a tool for enhancing the 
transparency and integrity of the courts. [29,30] However, 
the same United Nations reports list missing court records 
as a cardinal sign of judicial corruption.  
In the case of PACER and CM/ECF, the implementation 
of invalid electronic record systems in the courts enables the 
conduct of litigation, where critical records are permanently 
missing, as demonstrated in the current study. 
E. Banking Regulation  
Conduct of the SEC, BAC, and the US District Court, 
Southern District of New York, as documented in the 
current study, stands contrary to ongoing efforts by the US 
Congress and repeated statements by the US Government, 
regarding efforts to restore the integrity of Banking 
Regulation in the United States and enhance the 
accountability of directors, executives, accountants, and 
attorneys, acting on behalf of corporations. In the wake of 
the Enron scandal, the US Congress passed the Sarbanes-
Oxley Act (2002), in order to enhance the accountability of 
corporate officers, attorneys, and accountants. In the wake 
of the current financial crisis, the US Congress passed the 
Fraud Enforcement and Recovery Act (2009). SEC and 
other Banking Regulators routinely appear before the US 
Congress and provide testimonies, which claim that 
integrity of Banking Regulation in the United State has been 
“shored up”.  
The US Government was also pressured by the 
international community, which was seriously harmed by 
the ongoing financial crisis, to take corrective measures, 
consistent with the US Government’s duties and obligations 
in international treaties and accords.  
In contrast, the litigation of SEC v BAC in the US Court, 
Southern District of New York, reviewed in the current 
report, was as merely simulated litigation, and fraud on the 
People of the United States and the international community 
by the US District Court and the US government. This study 
also documents the tight link between integrity of the US 
courts, or lack thereof, and the failure of US banking 
regulation.  
F. PACER and CM/ECF, Information Systems of the US 
Courts  
The case, reviewed in the current study, documents the 
critical effect of PACER and CM/ECF, the electronic 
records systems of the US courts, on to integrity, or lack 
thereof, of US court records and the US justice system in 
general.  
Conditions that today prevail in the US courts stand in 
stark contrast with the laws enacted by US Congress, 
Presidential Directives, Regulations, and applications, 
which 
have 
been 
presumably 
implemented 
for 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-242-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2012 : The First International Conference on Data Analytics

authentication and validation of electronic government 
records in the United States. [26, 27]  
Deficiencies in the design and operation of PACER and 
CM/ECF were previously noted in reports, which were 
published by others and by this author in legal, criminology, 
and computer science journals. [1, 8-10] The report in 
ProPublica, copied in the National Law Journal documented 
the falsification of records in a landmark case of 
international significance – the Habeas Corpus petition of a 
Guantanamo detainee in the US District Court, Washington 
DC. Such conduct should have been prevented, or made 
obvious by a valid electronic record system of the courts.  
Reports regarding the deficiencies in PACER and 
CM/ECF have also been repeatedly forwarded to the 
appropriate US government agencies. [10] Regardless, there 
is no evidence of intent to initiate corrective actions. 
G. The NEFs as Certificates of Authentication – a Case of 
“Robo-signers”  
Of particular concern is the design and operation of the 
NEFs, the certificates of service in CM/ECF.  
Beyond the design of the electronic form itself, as 
described above, the universal exclusion of the NEFs from 
public access has no plausible explanation that is consistent 
with integrity of the courts.  
The opening statement on the NEF says:  
“This is an automatic e-mail message generated by the 
CM/ECF system.”  
Therefore, the overall design of the NEF, as a Certificate 
of Service, is comparable to systems, which have been 
reported in recent years in the banking system, as one of the 
causes of the financial crisis, and have been dubbed “Robo-
signers”.  
The NEF is an electronic record that purports to provide 
certification of critical court records.  In fact, it provides no 
no certification at all and implies accountability by no 
individual.  
H. The Electronic Documents Stamps – invalid either as  a 
digital signatures or as a checksum strings  
As described above (Figures 1,2; see Online Appendix 
1), the Electronic Document Stamp in the NEFs replaced the 
hand-signature of the Clerk of the Court in the Certificates 
of Service. However, the Stamp is a checksum string, and as 
such, cannot be deemed an electronic signature of any 
authorized, named individual. Moreover, the public is 
denied access to the NEFs. 
The CM/ECF User Guide of the US District Court, 
Northern District of Illinois is unique among such user 
guides, which have been surveyed. It provides detailed 
description of a Document Verification Utility, which 
permits the CM/ECF user to verify a given PACER record 
against the Stamp in the respective NEF. (Figure 5; see 
Online Appendix 1) [28] However, the public is also denied 
access to the Document Verification  Utility.  Had the public 
been permitted access to the NEFs and the Document 
Verification Utility in the US District Court, Washington, 
DC, it would have provided definitive evidence for the 
adulteration of the Order in the Guantanamo Bay Habeas 
Corpus case, even absent to the two materially different 
order records, recently reported by the National Law 
Journal. [1] 
There is no plausible explanation for such design of 
PACER and CM/ECF and conduct of the US courts in this 
regard that is consistent with integrity of the US courts.  
I. 
Data Mining of Judicial Records 
This study highlights the significance of data mining of 
judicial records and other records of the justice system (e.g., 
prisoners´ registration systems [8]).  The integrity of these 
systems is critical for the safeguard of Human Rights and 
Civil Society, and their corruption bears a profound impact, 
which should be considered an unannounced regime change. 
This study also demonstrates that although the courts today 
deny access to key records, in violation of the law, through 
data mining, the fraud in such systems can still be 
elucidated. 
Obviously, key data to be mined are elements related to 
graphic signatures, electronic signatures, authentication 
records, names and authorities of individuals involved in 
issuing the various records. 
Beyond the documentation of the invalidity of specific 
records, data mining provides evidence of the invalidity and 
fraud in the design and operation of such systems as a 
whole. 
J. 
The  fraud inherent in the electronic recod systems of 
the US courts is not unique. 
Sustain, the electronic record system of the Superior 
Court of California, County of Los Angeles, is believed to 
be one of the earliest electronic record system of any court 
(implemented around 1985). According to the web page of 
its maker, the Sustain Corporation, the system is by now 
implemented in the courts of eleven states and three nations. 
Sustain shows remarkably similar fraudulent features to 
those described here in PACER and CM/ECF. 
An accompanying paper describes the electronic record 
systems of the courts of the State of Israel, which were 
implemented a decade later than PACER and CM/ECF.  
The Israeli systems also show remarkable similarity to the 
fraud inherent in PACER and CM/ECF. 
Preliminary inspection suggests that similar faults also 
exist in the electronic record systems, which have been 
recently implemented in other “Western Democracies”. 
K. Desired Corrective Actions  
Deficiencies in PACER and CM/ECF, which were 
outlined in this study, are not inherent to electronic records 
systems. On the contrary, such systems could have 
enhanced integrity and transparency of the courts and the 
judicial process.  
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-242-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2012 : The First International Conference on Data Analytics

1) Computing Experts in General, and Data Mining 
Experts in Particular, Should Assume a Unique Civic 
Duty in the Ongoing Monitoring of the Integrity of 
the Electronic Record Systems of the Courts.  
The common law right to inspect and to copy judicial 
records was reaffirmed by the US Supreme Court in Nixon v 
Warner Communications, Inc (1978) as inherent to the First 
Amendment. In doing so, the US Supreme Court said that 
the right was necessary for the public "to keep a watchful 
eye on government". Today, the public must keep a 
watchful eye particularly on the courts’ electronic record 
systems. Computing experts in general and data mining 
experts in particular are uniquely equipped to exert such 
“watchful eye” on the courts. No other measures could 
substitute for public scrutiny of the courts in safeguarding 
Human Rights and Civil Society in the Digital Era.  
2) Procedures Inherent to the Design and Operation of 
PACER and CM/ECF Should be Established by Law 
and Validated by Computing Experts under Public 
and Legal Accountability.  
Implementation of PACER and CM/ECF should be 
recognized as an act of establishing novel court procedures. 
Therefore, 
their 
implementation 
should 
have 
been 
established by law. Validation (functional logic verification) 
of such systems should have been undertaken prior to their 
installation, in a manner that is both legally and publicly 
accountable, e.g., through agencies under control of the 
legislative branch. As part of validation, adequate security 
should be ascertained, to ensure that only named, authorized 
court personnel is permitted to conduct docket transactions. 
The identity and authority, as well as digital signatures of 
such persons should be publicly and unambiguously 
discernable. Thereby, accountability of the clerks of the 
courts for integrity of electronic court records should be 
restored.  
3) Valid Authentication Procedures and Authentication 
Records Should be Implemented  
As detailed above, the NEFs cannot possibly be deemed 
valid electronic Certificate of Service, and the Electronic 
Document Stamp was implemented in CM/ECF in a manner 
that prevents the public from ascertaining the integrity, or 
lack thereof, of US court records. A publicly recognized and 
publicly accessible form of valid digital signatures should 
be implemented instead.  
4) Public Access to Judicial Records, to Inspect and to 
Copy, Should be Restored.  
Given that today PACER is effectively the exclusive 
way, provided by the US courts, for public access to court 
records, all court records, including the electronic 
Certificates of Service, should be publicly accessible online, 
pursuant to the First Amendment, Due Process, and Public 
Trial rights. Such access should be denied only when 
explicitly stipulated by law or through fully documented 
sealing orders.  
5) US judges and clerks should be required to post 
financial disclosures on an annual basis.  
Given the serious concern of bribing of judges and 
clerks by corporate and other financial interests, judges and 
clerks should be required to post their financial disclosures 
on an annual basis. Similar measures were instituted in 
California for various elected public officials, and also for 
police officers of the undercover narcotics unit of the Los 
Angeles Police Department, given substantial evidence of 
widespread public corruption. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS  
Litigation of SEC v BAC (1:09-cv-06829) in the US 
District Court, Southern District of New York, was hailed 
by media as the hallmark of banking regulation in the wake 
of the global financial crisis. The current study finds critical 
records of the litigation missing, others - outright invalid, 
simulated records, and others - vague and ambiguous to the 
degree that the litigation as a whole cannot be reasonably 
deemed valid litigation.  Instead, the evidence shows that 
the case was conducted as simulated litigation in the US 
District Court, Southern District of New York, from it onset. 
To a large degree, such conduct was enabled through the 
design and operation of PACER and CM/ECF, the 
electronic record systems of the US courts. Key defects in 
PACER and CM/ECF, which were demonstrated in the 
current report, pertain to digital signatures, authentication 
records, authorities, security, public access, and functional 
logic verification of the systems as a whole.  
PACER and CM/ECF are invalid electronic records 
systems of the US courts.  
This study is also a call for action by computing experts in 
general and data mining experts in particular for the safeguard of 
Human Rights and integrity of government in the Digital Era.  
VI. 
ONLINE APPENDICES  
[1] This complete paper, including Figures 2-5, is accessible at: 
http://www.scribd.com/doc/104880125/  
[2] The complete PACER docket, additional relevant records in 
litigation of SEC v BAC (1:09-cv-06829), and detailed analysis 
of specific records are accessible at:  
http://www.scribd.com/doc/44663232/   
VII. ACKNOWLEDGMENT  
The author thanks Israeli computing/cryptology and legal 
experts for their assistance. 
VIII. REFERENCES  
[1] D. Linzer, “In GITMO Opinion, Two Versions of Reality”, 
The National Law Journal, October 11, 2010.  
[2] J. Zernik, ‘Data Mining of Online Judicial Records of the 
Networked US Federal Courts’, 1 International Journal on 
Social Media: Monitoring, Measurement, Mining 1:69-83, 
2010.  
[3] A. Field, “Foreclosure fraud: The homeowner nightmares 
continue”, CNN, April 7, 2011.  
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-242-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2012 : The First International Conference on Data Analytics

[4] Daily Koss, "60 Minutes Exposes Massive Foreclosure Fraud" 
April 11, 2011.  
[5] G. Morgenson, “From East and West, Foreclosure Horror 
Stories”, New York Times, January 7, 2012.  
[6] G. Morgenson and L. Story, “In Financial Crisis, No 
Prosecutions of Top Figures”, New York Times, April 14, 
2011.  
[7] S. Paltrow, “Special Report: The watchdogs that didn't bark,” 
Reuters, December 11, 2011.  
[8] The following paper details retaliation against the 70-year old, 
former US prosecutor Richard Fine, who exposed, publicized, 
and rebuked the large-scale bribing of the judges of the 
Superior Court of California, County of Los Angeles - the 
largest county court in the United States. His actions led to the 
signing of “retroactive immunities” (simulated pardons) to all 
judges of the California courts by the California Governor – in 
fact an admission of widespread criminality. Two weeks later, 
Richard Fine was arrested. He was falsely imprisoned for 18 
months in solitary confinement (considered by the United 
Nations torture). His electronic prisoner’s booking record 
listed him as arrested and booked on location and by authority 
of the “Municipal Court of San Pedro”. Such court did not and 
does not exist.  Richard Fine’s Habeas Corpus petitions were 
subjected to simulated review in the US District Court, Central 
Disrict of California, the US Court of Appeals, 9th Circuit, and 
the US Supreme Court. 
J. Zernik, “Habeas Corpus in the United States - the case of 
Richard Isaac Fine – a Review” (2010); retrieved: September 
4, 2012; accessible at:  
http://www.scribd.com/doc/24729084/  
[9] The following papers detail simulated litigation in Citizens 
United v Federal Election Commission - a landmark case in the 
US District Court, Washington DC, and in the Supreme Court 
of the United States. The case is considered by some legal 
experts as an open invitation by the US Supreme Court for the 
corruption of the US governemnt. The Supreme Court docket 
in this case lists “judgment issued”, but no judgment record is 
to be found in the online electronic records of the Supreme 
Court and no judgment record was found by the Federal 
Election Commission in response to Freedom of Information 
Act request. 
J. Zernik, “Citizens United v Federal Election Commission (1-
07-cv-2240) in the US District Court, DC – invalid court 
records in a case of Simulated Litigation” (2011); retrieved: 
September 4, 2012; accessible at:  
http://www.scribd.com/doc/56080106/ 
J. Zernik, “Citizens United v Federal Election Commission in 
the US Supreme Court - so far only a simulated Judgment 
record has been discovered…” (2011); retrieved: September 4, 
2012; accessible at:  
http://www.scribd.com/doc/55613401/ 
[10]  The following papers includes a list of US judges and 
respective cases of simulated litigation in the US district 
courts, the US courts of appeals, and the US Supreme Court, 
with links to detailed review of each: 
W. Windsor and J. Zernik, “Request filed by Windsor and 
Zernik with US Attorney General Eric Holder for Review of 
Integrity of Public Access and Case Management Systems of 
the US Courts” (2011); retrieved: September 4, 2012;  
accessible at:  
http://www.scribd.com/doc/59480718/   
J. Zernik, “Evidence of widespread corruption of the US courts 
and proposed corrective measures submitted to the US House 
of Representatives”; retrieved: September 4, 2012; accessible 
at:  
http://www.scribd.com/doc/85481555/  
[11]  J. Bohm, “Memorandum Opinion”, in Case of Borrower 
Parsley (05-90374), US Bankruptcy Court, Southern District 
of Texas, Dkt #248, March 5, 2008; retrieved: September 4, 
2012; accessible at: 
http://www.scribd.com/doc/25001966/  
[12]  P. Carrizosa, “RE: Engagement of Attorney McCormick in 
Fine v Sheriff (2:09-cv-01914) in the US District Court, 
Central District of California”, March 19, 2010 Letter on 
behalf of the California Judicial Council”; retrieved: 
September 
4, 
2012; 
accessible 
at: 
http://www.scribd.com/doc/28645522/   
[13] The terms "Simulated litigation", "simulated decisions", 
"simulated service", etc are used in this paper as defined in 
the Texas Penal Code:  
Texas Penal Code §32.48. SIMULATING LEGAL 
PROCESS.   
(a) A person commits an offense if the person recklessly 
causes to be delivered to another any document that 
simulates a summons, complaint, judgment, or other 
court process with the intent to: 
(1)  induce payment of a claim from another person; 
or                        
        (2)  cause another to:                                                         
(A)  submit to the putative authority of the 
document;  or                  
            (B)  take any action or refrain from taking any 
action in response to the document, in compliance with 
the document, or on the basis of the document. 
(b)  Proof that the document was mailed to any person 
with the intent that it be forwarded to the intended 
recipient is a sufficient showing that the document was 
delivered. 
The same conduct is defined in the penal codes of some other 
states as “sham litigation”.  In the US Code the same conduct 
is prohibited under the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt 
Organization Act (RICO). 
[14]  US District Court, Southern District of New York, “Local 
Rules and ECF Rules and Instructions” (2010).  
[15]  W. Anderson, “Anderson on Civil E-Filing in the Central 
District of California: The Unofficial Civil E-filing User 
Manual”, 2008.  
[16]  Securities and Exchange Commission, “September 9, 2010 
FOIA Response No 10-03964-FOIA, RE: SEC v Bank of 
America Corporation (1:09-cv-06829)”; retrieved September 
4, 2012; accessible at:  
http://www.scribd.com/doc/46608559/   
[17]  L. Story, “Judge Accepts S.E.C.’s Deal With Bank of 
America”, New York Times, February 22, 2010.  
[18]  Judicial Conference of the United States, Committee on Court 
Administration and Case Management, “Civil Litigation 
Management Manual”, 2nd Edition (2010).  
[19]  A. Cuomo, “Re: Bank of America - Merrill Lynch Merger 
Investigation,” April 23, 2009, linked to: D. Cho and T. Tse 
“U.S. Forced Bank Board To Carry Out Merrill Deal,” 
Washington Post, April 24, 2009  
[20]  A. Jones, “Rakoff Hands It to BofA, the SEC,”, Law Blog, 
The Wall Street Journal, August 11, 2009  
[21]  The term “show trials” originally referred to certain trials in 
the Soviet Union. Show trials are described in Wikipedia as 
follows: 
The term show trial is a pejorative description of a type 
of highly public trial in which there is a strong 
connotation that the judicial authorities have already 
determined the guilt of the defendant. The actual trial has 
as its only goal to present the accusation and the verdict 
to the public as an impressive example and as a warning. 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-242-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2012 : The First International Conference on Data Analytics

Show trials tend to be retributive rather than correctional 
justice. The term was first recorded in the 1930s. 
The term “inverse show trial” here refers to the practice in the 
US today - conducting simulated litigation in cases, where the 
goal is to publicly exonerate certain individuals after their 
criminality has been publicly exposed, e.g., government 
officers and bankers.  
[22]  J. Zernik, “Motion to Intervene and Concomitantly Filed 
Papers,” in Log Cabin Republicans v USA et al (10-56634) in 
the US Court of Appeals, 9th Circuit Dkt #39-47, January 7, 
2011; retrieved September 4, 2012; accessible at:  
http://www.scribd.com/doc/46516034/ 
[23]  J. Zernik, “Amended Request for Correction of US Supreme 
Court Records” in Fine v Sheriff (09-A827); retrieved 
September 4, 2012; accessible at:  
http://www.scribd.com/doc/30162109/ 
[24]  In Bulloch v. United States, 763 F.2d 1115, 1121 (10th Cir. 
1985), the court states "Fraud upon the court is fraud which is 
directed to the judicial machinery itself and is not fraud 
between the parties or fraudulent documents, false statements 
or perjury. ... It is where the court or a member is corrupted or 
influenced or influence is attempted or where the judge has not 
performed his judicial function --- thus where the impartial 
functions of the court have been directly corrupted." 
[25]  J. Zernik, “Through Implementation of Case Management 
Systems, the California and the US Courts Rendered the 
Judicial Process Vague and Ambiguous”; retrieved September 
4, 2012; accessible at:  
http://www.scribd.com/doc/46519282/ 
[26]  E-Sign Act (2000), USA  
[27]  E-Government Act (2002), USA 
[28]  US District Court, Northern District of Illinois, “CM/ECF 
Ver4.0 User Guide”, undated.  
[29]  United Nations Drug Control and Crime Prevention Center, 
“Report of the First Vienna Convention - Strengthening 
Judicial Integrity, CICP-6” (2000).  
[30]  United Nations Drug Control and Crime Prevention Center, 
“Strengthening Judicial Integrity Against Corruption CICP-10” 
(2001)
 
 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-242-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2012 : The First International Conference on Data Analytics

