Machine Learning for Cyber Defense and Attack
Manjeet Rege
Graduate Programs in Software
University of St. Thomas
St. Paul, MN, USA
Email: rege@stthomas.edu
Raymond Blanch K. Mbah
Graduate Programs in Software
University of St. Thomas
St. Paul, MN, USA
Email: kong1343@stthomas.edu
Abstract—The
exponential
advancements
in
processing,
storage and network technologies have led to the recent
explosive growth in big data, connectivity and machine
learning. The world is becoming increasingly digitalized -
raising security concerns and the desperate need for robust
and advanced security technologies and techniques to combat
the increasing complex nature of cyber-attacks. This paper
discusses how machine learning is being used in cyber security
in both defense and offense activities, including discussions on
cyber-attacks
targeted
at
machine
learning
models.
Specifically, we discuss the applications of machine learning in
carrying out cyber-attacks, such as in smart botnets, advanced
spear fishing and evasive malwares. We also explain the
application of machine learning in cyber security, such as in
threat
detection
and prevention,
malware detection and
classification, and network risk scoring.
Keywords- Cyber Security; Machine Learning; Malware;
Thread Detection and Classification; Network Risk Scoring.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Digital security remains a top concern as the world is
becoming increasingly digitalized. With advances in network
technologies, such as the Internet, access to cutting edge
technology and research findings has never been this easy
with research papers being made public daily and the digital
world becoming increasingly open sourced. Unfortunately,
cutting edge research and breakthroughs in technology are
both available to the security analyst and cybercriminals who
have various interests in making use of these technologies
and information.
Research and advances in the field of
machine learning has resulted in algorithms and technologies
for improving security solutions that help in identifying and
decisively dealing with security threats. However, this also
makes it possible for cybercriminals to use this knowledge in
crafting and launching bigger and more sophisticated attacks.
Cybercriminals have a huge advantage in the cyber war
since, out of many attempts, they need to be right just once.
For security, on the other hand, the desired success rate
needs to be 100%. Research shows that in 2017, multiple
organizations, business, individuals and applications were
victimized
by
cybercriminals
[1].
Stolen
information
included sensitive classified intelligence data, financial
records, and personally identifiable information. The use of
these kinds of information can be catastrophic, especially
when it is made publicly available or sold on the black
market. Some research statistics with regards to the impact of
cyber security to businesses, organizations, and individuals
include:

In recent years, cybercrime has been responsible
for more that $400 billion in funds stolen and
costs to mitigate damages caused by crimes [2].

It has been predicted that a shortage of over 1.8
million
cybersecurity
workers
will
be
experienced by 2022 [3].

It’s been predicted that organizations globally
will spend at least $100 billion annually on
cybersecurity protection [4].

Attackers currently make over $1 billion in
annually revenue from Ransomware attacks,
such as Wannacry and CryptoWall attacks [5].
Keeping up and countering the increasing sophistication
of cyber-attacks is becoming increasingly challenging, as
defense tools quickly become obsolete. In fact, on average, it
can take up to 240 days to detect an intrusion [6].
The
sophistication of cyber-attacks is growing both in scale and
complexity making it increasingly challenging to keep up
and respond to the constant emergence of new threats and
vulnerabilities.
One major area that is currently having a
high impact on cyber security is machine learning, which
will be the focus of this paper.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section
II, we present an overview of machine learning, including its
various categories (supervised and unsupervised learning).
Section III describes the applications of machine learning in
cybersecurity, such as in network risk scoring and in
malware detection and prevention. In section IV, we discuss
the applications of machine learning in cyber-attacks, such as
in smart botnets, advanced spear fishing and evasive
malwares. Section V discusses cyber-attacks targeted at
machine learning models.
II.
OVERVIEW OF MACHINE LEARNING
Machine learning is a sub-field of artificial intelligence
that aims to empower systems with the ability to use data to
learn and improve without being explicitly programmed [7].
It relies on mathematical models derived from analyzing
patterns in datasets, which are then used to make predictions
on new input data. Applications of machine learning span
across a vast set of domains including e-commerce, where
machine
learning
applications
are
used
to
make
recommendations
based
on
customer
behavior
and
preferences, and health care, where machine learning is used
to predict epidemics or the likelihood of a patient having
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-681-1
DATA ANALYTICS 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Data Analytics

certain diseases, such as cancer, based on their medical
records.
Machine learning algorithms can be categorized as
Predictive (Supervised
Learning)
or Pattern
Discovery
(Unsupervised Learning) [39]. In supervised learning, there
is always a target variable, the value of which the machine
learning model learns to predict using different learning
algorithms e.g., based on an IP address location, frequencies
of Web requests and times of request, a machine learning
model can predict if a given IP address was part of a
Distributed Denial of Service (DDOS) attack. A variety of
Machine learning algorithms fall under the umbrella of
supervised
learning,
including
Linear
and
Logistic
Regression, Decision Tree and Support Vector Machine
(SVM) [40]. On the other hand, in unsupervised learning,
there
is
no
prediction
of
a
target
variable,
rather,
unsupervised algorithms learn to find interesting associations
or patterns in datasets e.g., identifying computer programs,
such as malwares with similar operating/behavioral patterns
using clustering and association algorithms.
One particular domain where machine learning is seeing
wide adoption is that of cybercrime and security which has
multiple use cases for machine learning, such as in malware
and log analysis. The power of machine learning is leveraged
by cybercriminals as well as security experts. We will now
discuss how machine learning is being used for cybercrime
as well as cyber security.
III.
APPLICATIONS OF MACHINE LEARNING IN CYBER
SECURITY
With the growing threat of cybersecurity, studies are
focusing on machine learning and its vast set of tools and
techniques to identify, stop and respond to sophisticated
cyber-attacks [21]. Machine learning can be leveraged in
various domains of cyber security to provide analytical-
based approaches for attack detection and response. It can
also enhance security processes by automating routine tasks
and making it easy for security analysts to quickly work with
semi-automated tasks. Some popular applications of machine
learning in cyber security are presented below.
A.
Threat detection and classification
Machine learning algorithms can be implemented in
applications to identify and respond to cyber-attacks before
they take effect [8]. This is usually achieved using a model
developed by analyzing big data sets of security events and
identifying the pattern of malicious activities. As a result,
when similar activities are detected, they are automatically
dealt with. The models’ training dataset is typically made up
of
previous
identified
and
recorded
Indicators
of
Compromise (IOC), which are then used to build models and
systems that can monitor, identify and responds to threats in
real time. Also, with the availability of IOC datasets, we can
use machine learning classification algorithms to identify the
various behaviors of malwares in datasets and classify them
accordingly. Studies have been made on behavioral-based
analysis frameworks that make use of machine learning
clustering and classification techniques to analyze the
behaviors of thousands of malwares [14]. This makes it
possible to use the learned patterns to automate the process
of detecting and classifying new malware. This can help
security analysts or other automated systems to quickly
identify and classify a new type of threat and respond to it
accordingly using a data driven decisions. For example, by
using a historic dataset containing detailed events of
WannaCry ransomware attacks, a machine learning model
can learn to identify similar attacks, thereby making it
possible to automate the identification and response process
of similar attacks. Machine learning techniques have also
been used in IP traffic classification [15][16] which can help
automate the process of intrusion detection systems that can
be used to identify behavioral patterns as in the case of
DDOS attacks. With the increasing number of machine
learning techniques, other studies have been focused on
analyzing multiple machine learning solutions for intrusion
detection systems including single, hybrid and ensemble
classifies [17].
B. Network risk scoring
This refers to the use of quantitative measures to assign
risk scores to various sections of a network, thereby helping
organizations to prioritize their cyber security resources
accordingly with regards to various risk scores. Machine
learning can be used to automate this process by analyzing
historic cyber-attack datasets and determining which areas of
networks were mostly involved in certain types of attacks.
Using machine learning is advantageous in the sense that the
resulting scores will not only be based on domain knowledge
of the networks but most importantly, the scores will be data
driven. This score can help quantify the likelihood and
impact of an attack with respect to a given network area and
can thus help organizations to reduce to risk of being
victimized by attacks.
Studies have been carried out on the use of machine
learning algorithms such K-Nearest Neighbor, Support
Vector Machines, and Random Forest algorithms to analyze
and cluster network assets based on their connectivity [18].
Other studies have focused on how IOT devices connected to
small and Medium Sized Enterprises (SMEs) can be used to
lunch attacks on SMEs [19]. Machine learning powered
systems have been developed that make use of the mutual
reinforcement principle to analyze massive volumes of alerts
in organization networks to determine risk scores by taking
into account the associations of various network entities [20].
C. Automate routine security tasks and optimize human
analysis
Machine learning can be used to automate repetitive
tasks carried out by security analysts during security
activities.
This
can
be
done
through
analyzing
records/reports of past actions taken by security analysts to
successfully identify and respond to certain attacks and using
this knowledge to build a model that can identify similar
attacks and respond accordingly without human intervention.
Though it is difficult to automate the full security process
and replace the human security analyst, there are some
aspects of the analysis that machine learning can automate
including malware detection, network log analysis, and
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-681-1
DATA ANALYTICS 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Data Analytics

vulnerability assessments, such as network risk analysis. By
incorporating machine learning in the security work flow,
‘man and machine’ can join forces and accomplish things at
a degree of speed and quality that will have been otherwise
impossible.
With the exponential growth of artificial intelligence, we
see an increasing number of tasks being automated. It is
tempting to think that artificial intelligence will increase
automation, and certain tasks that are currently performed by
humans will be taken over by machines. This might be true
in some cases, however there are numerous cases where the
combination of artificial intelligence and human intelligence
produce far better results than each will produce by itself. It
is for this reason that we are currently seeing the rise of
artificial intelligence companies with a focus on not only
creating AI product for automating tasks, but creating
products that enhancing and complement the productivity of
human analysts. A well-known example of such a company
is Palantir [9], which creates products that make it easy for
analysts to aggregate and make use of massive volumes of
data.
In other to enhance security analysts activities, studies
have been carried out on the use of machine learning
algorithms, such as genetic algorithms and decision tries to
create applications that generate rules for classifying network
connections [22]. Other approaches go far as to implement a
cognitive architecture to create an automated cyber defense
decision-making system with expert-level ability inspired by
how humans reason and learn [23]. Cybersecurity analysts
typically have to spend time responding to multiple events,
which sometimes include false positives, which mostly turn
out to be a waste of their time. Studies have been done to
show that machine learning classifiers can be trained on alert
data to identify and distinguish between false positives and
true positives, thereby making it possible to create an
automated system that will alert the analyst only on scenarios
that include true positives [24].
IV.
APPLICATIONS OF MACHINE LEARNING IN CYBER
CRIME
Just as machine learning is a promising tool to deal with
the growing cyber threats, as shown in the previous section,
it also acts as a tool that can be leveraged by malicious
attackers. For instance, there have been studies that show the
possibility of cybercriminals leveraging machine learning to
create
intelligent
malware
that
can
outsmart
current
intelligent defense systems [25]. Hence, as the field of
machine learning progresses at a rapid rate while offering
promising solutions for cyber defense, it also makes it
possible for cybercriminals to use it in carrying out more
sophisticated attacks at scale as well as lunch attacks targeted
at machine learning models. Everyone including security
analysts
and
cybercriminals are
actively seeking
new
innovative AI techniques/technologies to add to their arsenal
of cyber weapons. For instance, just like cyber defense
specialist are actively analyzing data to better understand an
attackers’ patterns, the attackers themselves can also steal
data about users and analyze it to better craft their attacks.
An example includes illegally accessing and analyzing a
targeted users’ emails with the aim of having a better
understanding of their email patterns and leveraging that to
craft better phishing emails.
Some popular categories of machine learning based
attack techniques include:
A. Unauthorized Access
Machine learning can be used to gain unauthorized
access to systems, such as those involving captchas. One
field that has been hugely impacted by machine learning is
that of machine vision, whereby a machine is trained to
identify objects. This is the same technology being used in
self driving cars where cars rely on machine learning to
identify and avoid obstacles. With machines being capable of
identifying objects in images, they can be trained to bypass
captcha-based system that relies on a user to identify the
objects in an image before being authorized [10]. Also,
machine learning algorithms, such as neural networks that
attempt to mimic the human brain can be trained to speed up
and
automate
social
engineering
techniques,
such
as
guessing user passwords by training the model with big
datasets
containing
data
of
previously
hacked
user
information including their usernames and passwords and
any kind of information that can be used to enhance the
guessing process.
Multiple studies have been carried out on how machine
learning can be leverage to gain unauthorized access to
systems. Examples include PassGANs that can generate high
quality password guesses by using Generative Adversarial
Networks (GAN) and real password leaks to learn the
distribution of real passwords [26]. Some studies focus on
using machine learning to generate passwords for real time
broot force attacks that rely on testing different variants of
passwords with the aim of successfully gaining unauthorized
access to a system [27]. Other studies focus on using Deep
learning to bypass CAPTCHAs without human intervention
[28][29], while others focus on leveraging machine learning
to clone human voices. Applications exists that leverage
machine learning techniques to clone voices [30], making it
possible to impersonate people.
B. Evasive Malware
Typically, the creation of malware involves writing a
malicious program which in most basic cases can be
identified by security programs which have records of the
malwares’ signature. However, there have been cases where
machine learning has been used to generate malware code
that other security programs could not detect including
machine learning based systems [11]. Another example
includes DeepLocker, an AI powered malware developed by
IBM
researchers
that
is
capable of
leveraging
facial
recognition, voice recognition and geolocation to identify its
target before launching its attack [12]. There’s a lot of
research on using machine learning to generate computer
code with the goal of replacing computer programmers with
AI systems in scenarios where an AI can write the code
without human intervention. Examples include a recent
research carried out at Microsoft to create AI systems that
can generate code without human intervention [13].
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-681-1
DATA ANALYTICS 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Data Analytics

C. Spear Phishing
Machine learning can be leveraged to carryout advanced
spear phishing attacks for example, by illegally collecting
genuine email data of targeted individuals and feeding the
data to a machine learning model which can then learn from
the data, derive context from the data and generate emails
that look similar and genuine to those it learned from. This
can then be incorporated into an automated process thereby
speeding
up
the
efficiency
and
speed
in
which
cybercriminals can launch targeted phishing attacks. Some
phishing attacks leverage social engineering to illegally
acquire information about their targeted users.
Social engineering is a popular kind of attack technique
that uses deception to manipulate individuals to get their
personal information. There have been studies on using
machine
learning
to
carry
out
sophisticated
social
engineering attacks. Examples include studies that used long
short-term memory (LSTM) neural network and recurrent
neural network that are trained on social media post
extracted
from a
targets time
line
with
the
aim of
manipulating
users
into
clicking
on
deceptive
URLs
[31][32]. Similar approaches can also be used to carry out
email based phishing attacks.
V.
SECURITY THREADS TO MACHINE LEARNING
PRODUCTS
From
the
beginning
of
the
computer
revolution,
cybercriminals have always been on the lookout for ways to
exploit software vulnerabilities and carry out malicious
activities. With the explosive growth of artificial intelligence
technology, cybercriminals are beginning to look for ways to
exploit vulnerabilities in this domain. Attacks on machine
learning systems are typically discussed in the context of
adversarial machine learning which is concerned with the
security of applying machine learning techniques to security-
related tasks, such as biometric recognition, spam filtering,
network
intrusion
and
malware
detection.
Attacks
on
machine learning algorithms can be categorized into three
domains: attacks targeted at altering training datasets and
introducing vulnerabilities in the final model [33]; attacks
targeted at increasing the error rate of the final model [34];
attacks aimed at making it possible for a specific set of
records to be classified or interpreted by the model as desired
by the attacker [35].
Like we earlier said, a machine learning model is built by
feeding data into a computer algorithm which then learns
patterns from the data and can then use the learned patterns
to predict or classify unseen data. The final product of a
machine learning model can be a simple equation which is
then translated as a computer code that receives input and
produces output in the form of a classification or prediction.
With this simple intuition of machine learning models, it can
be seen that cybercriminals can interfere with a machine
learning product by tempering with the training and test data
or altering the final parameters of the model:

Poisoning the training data: It is well known by
machine learning practitioners that the success of
machine learning projects relies heavily on quality of
the data. This is usually called ‘garbage in garbage out’
meaning if you train your model on garbage data, it
will
produce
garbage results,
regardless
of how
advanced your model is. A possibility is that a
cybercriminal gains access to the training set of a
machine learning model and alters the data before the
training begins without the knowledge of the machine
learning engineers. Clearly, we can see that the data
will already be tampered with and has lost its original
quality which will result in modeling on wrong data.
Hence, our final model will no longer be a reliable one
since it was trained on bad data and it doesn’t matter
how good the modeling process goes, our predictions
or model classifications will surely not be appropriate.
Also, another scenario can be in a situation where a
model is made to re-train itself every time it receives
new records. In this case, a cybercriminal can feed the
model with bad data and the model can learn from this
bad data and as a result, negatively impact its
performance. Multiple studies have been carried out on
understanding and defending against poisoning attacks
[36][37].

Altering a machine learning model: In this case, a
cybercriminal can illegally access a machine learning
model and alter its parameters and thereby influence
how it produces results. For example if after training,
the
final
machine
learning
model
deployed
to
production can be represented mathematically as y = 1
+ 2x , where x is the input parameter and y is the output
from the model, then if a cybercriminal can access the
system and alter the equation to y = 1 – 2x, then it can
clearly be seen that this can lead to wrong prediction
and might result in catastrophic decisions if the results
of the predictions were being used to make key
business decisions.

Evading detection by machine learning models: This
refers to attacks that aimed at avoiding detection. This
can happen in situations where an attacker alters data
used during the testing phase with the aim of avoiding
being classified as a threat during regular system
operations. Biometric systems have been used as
examples in studies to show how such attacks can be
done [38].
From the points mentioned above, it can be seen that it is
of vital importance that machine learning projects take
security seriously. Appropriate measures should be taken to
monitor machine learning models and their datasets.
VI.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have seen how machine learning can be
applied in a security context from both a defense and attack
perspective as well as the potential threats targeted at
machine learning models. Clearly it can be seen that machine
learning is a powerful tool that can be used for automating
complex defense and offense cyber activities. Hence, with
cybercriminals also leveraging machine learning in their
arsenal of cyber weapons, we are expected to experience
more sophisticated and big attacks powered by AI. It is
therefore of vital importance that security specialists as well
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-681-1
DATA ANALYTICS 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Data Analytics

as machine learning practitioners stay abreast with the recent
advancements in machine learning including adversarial
machine learning so as to constantly be on the lookout to
make use of potential AI related security applications.
This paper can act as basis for future research that can
focus on analyzing existing security solutions and the various
challenges of leveraging machine learning to develop and
deploy
scalable
cybersecurity
systems
in
production
environments.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Larson. 10 biggest hacks of 2017. 2017, December 20. Retrieved:
November
3,
2018,
from
https://money.cnn.com/2017/12/18/technology/biggest-cyberattacks-
of-the-year/index.html
[2]
T. Rimo and M. Walth, “McAfee and CSIS: Stopping Cybercrime
Can Positively Impact World Economies”, McAfee, June 9, 2014.
[3]
“2017 Global Information Security Workforce Study”, Frost and
Sullivan, May 2017.
[4]
Worldwide Revenue for Security Technology Forecast to Surpass
$100 Billion in 2020, According to the New IDC Worldwide
Semiannual Security Spending Guide. 2016, October 12. Retrieved:
September
21,
2018,
from
https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20161012005102/en/Worl
dwide-Revenue-Security-Technology-Forecast-Surpass-100.
[5]
A. Cuthbertson. Ransomware attacks have risen 250 percent in 2017,
hitting the U.S. hardest. 2017, May 28.
Retrieved: September 21,
2018, from http://www.newsweek.com/ransomware-attacks-rise-250-
2017-us-wannacry-614034.
[6]
B. M. Cooper. Resiliency and Recovery Offset Cybersecurity
Detection Limits. 2015, January 16. Retrieved: September 21, 2018,
from
https://www.afcea.org/content/resiliency-and-recovery-offset-
cybersecurity-detection-limits.
[7]
S. Dolev and S. Lodha, “Cyber Security Cryptography and Machine
Learning“, In Proceedings of the First International Conference,
CSCML 2017, Beer-Sheva, Israel, June 29-30, 2017.
[8]
S. Dolev and S. Lodha, “Cyber Security Cryptography and Machine
Learning“, In Proceedings of the First International Conference,
CSCML 2017, Beer-Sheva, Israel, June 29-30, 2017.
[9]
About.
(n.d.).
Retrieved:
November
03,
2018,
from
http://www.palantir.com/.
[10] G. A. Wang, M. Chau, and H. Chen. Intelligence and Security
Informatics: 12th Pacific Asia Workshop, PAISI 2017, Jeju Island,
South Korea, May 23, 2017, Proceedings. Cham, Switzerland:
Springer.
[11] H. Weiwei., and Y. Tan. Generating Adversarial Malware Examples
for Black-Box Attacks Based on GAN. 2017, February 20, Retrieved:
November 03, 2018, from https://arxiv.org/abs/1702.05983v1.
[12] M. P. Stoecklin. DeepLocker: How AI Can Power a Stealthy New
Breed of Malware. 2018, August 13. Retrieved: September 20, 2018,
from
https://securityintelligence.com/deeplocker-how-ai-can-power-
a-stealthy-new-breed-of-malware/
[13]
D. Gershgorn. Microsoft's AI is learning to write code by itself, not
steal it., 2017, March 1. Retrieved: November 03, 2018, from
https://qz.com/920468/artificial-intelligence-created-by-microsoft-
and-university-of-cambridge-is-learning-to-write-code-by-itself-not-
steal-it/
[14] K. Rieck, P. Trinius, C. Willems, and T. Holz. Automatic analysis of
malware behavior using machine learning. Journal of Computer
Security, 19(4), 639-668, 2011.
[15] T. Nguyen, and G. Armitage. A survey of techniques for Internet
traffic classification using machine learning. IEEE Communications
Surveys and Tutorials, 10(4), 56-76. 2008.
[16] S.
Zander,
T.
Nguyen,
and
G.
Armitage.
Automated
traffic
classification and application identification using machine learning.
In Local Computer Networks, 2005. 30th Anniversary. The IEEE
Conference on (pp. 250-257). IEEE, 2005, November.
[17] C. F. Tsai, Y. F. Hsu, C. Y. Lin, and W. Y Lin. Intrusion detection by
machine
learning:
A
review. Expert
Systems
with
Applications, 36(10), 11994-12000, 2009.
[18] D. Arora, K. F. Li, and A. Loffler. Big data analytics for classification
of network enabled devices. In Advanced Information Networking
and Applications Workshops (WAINA), 2016 30th International
Conference on(pp. 708-713). IEEE, 2016, March.
[19] J. Saleem, B. Adebisi, R. Ande, and M. Hammoudehs A state of the
art survey-Impact of cyber attacks on SME's. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Future Networks and Distributed
Systems (p. 52). ACM, 2017, July.
[20] X. Hu, T. Wang, M. P. Stoecklin, D. L. Schales, J. Jang, and R.
Sailer. Asset risk scoring in enterprise network with mutually
reinforced reputation propagation. In 2014 IEEE Security and Privacy
Workshops (SPW) (pp. 61-64). IEEE, 2014, May.
[21] J. B. Fraley, and J. Cannady. The promise of machine learning in
cybersecurity. In SoutheastCon, 2017 (pp. 1-6). IEEE. 2017, March.
[22] C. Sinclair, L. Pierce, and S. Matzner. An application of machine
learning
to
network
intrusion
detection.
In Computer
Security
Applications
Conference,
1999.(ACSAC'99)
Proceedings.
15th
Annual (pp. 371-377). IEEE, 1999.
[23] D. P. Benjamin, P. Pal, F. Webber, P. Rubel, and M. Atigetchi. Using
a cognitive architecture to automate cyberdefense reasoning. In Bio-
inspired Learning and Intelligent Systems for Security, 2008.
BLISS'08. ECSIS Symposium on (pp. 58-63). IEEE, 2008, August.
[24] L. Zomlot, S. Chandran, D. Caragea, and X. Ou. Aiding intrusion
analysis
using
machine
learning.
In Machine
Learning
and
Applications (ICMLA), 2013 12th International Conference on (Vol.
2, pp. 40-47). IEEE, 2013, December.
[25] R. Price. Artificial intelligence-powered malware is coming, and it's
going to be terrifying. 2016, October 08. Retrieved: September 19,
2018, from https://www.businessinsider.com/darktrace-dave-palmer-
artificial-intelligence-powered-malware-hacks-interview-2016-
10?r=UK&IR=T.
[26] B. Hitaj, P. Gasti, G. Ateniese, and Perez-Cruz, F. Passgan: A deep
learning
approach
for
password
guessing. arXiv
preprint
arXiv:1709.00440, 2017.
[27] K. Trieu, and Y. Yang. Artificial Intelligence-Based Password Brute
Force Attacks, 2018.
[28] F. Stark, C. Hazırbas, R. Triebel, and D. Cremers. Captcha 
recognition with active deep learning. In GCPR Workshop on New
Challenges in Neural Computation, 2015.
[29] H. Gao, W. Wang, Y. Fan, J. Qi, and X. Liu. The Robustness of“
Connecting
Characters
Together”
CAPTCHAs. J.
Inf.
Sci.
Eng., 30(2), 347-369, 2014.
[30] Lyrebird Ultra-Realistic Voice Cloning and Text-to-Speech. (n.d.).
Retrieved: September 20, 2018, from https://lyrebird.ai/
[31] J. Seymour, and P. Tully. Generative Models for Spear Phishing Posts
on Social Media. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.05196. 2018.
[32] J. Seymour, and P. Tully. "Weaponizing data science for social
engineering: Automated E2E spear phishing on Twitter." Black Hat
USA , 2016: 37.
[33] L. Huang, A. D. Joseph, B. Nelson, B. Rubinstein, and J. D. Tygar.
"Adversarial machine learning". In 4th ACM Workshop on Artificial
Intelligence and Security, AISec, 2011, pages 43–57, Chicago, IL,
USA, October 2011.
[34] M. Barreno, B. Nelson, R. Sears, A. D. Joseph, and J. D. Tygar. Can
machine learning be secure? In ASIACCS '06: Proceedings of the
2006
ACM
Symposium
on
Information,
computer
and
communications security, pages 16–25, New York, NY, USA, 2006.
ACM.
[35] M. Barreno, B. Nelson, A. Joseph, and J. Tygar. "The security of
machine learning". Machine Learning, 81:121–148, 2010.
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-681-1
DATA ANALYTICS 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Data Analytics

[36] B. I. P. Rubinstein, B. Nelson, L. Huang, A. D. Joseph, S. h. Lau, S.
Rao, N. Taft, and J. D. Tygar. "Antidote: understanding and
defending against poisoning of anomaly detectors". In Proceedings of
the 9th ACM SIGCOMM conference on Internet measurement
conference, IMC '09, pages 1–14, New York, NY, USA, 2009. ACM.
[37]
B. Biggio, B. Nelson, and P. Laskov. "Poisoning attacks against
support vector machines". In J. Langford and J. Pineau, editors, 29th
Int'l Conf. on Machine Learning. Omnipress, 2012.
[38] R. N. Rodrigues, L. L. Ling, and V. Govindaraju. "Robustness of
multimodal biometric fusion methods against spoof attacks". J. Vis.
Lang. Comput., 20(3):169–179, 2009.
[39] A. Dey. Machine Learning Algorithms: A Review. vol, 7, 1174-1179,
2016.
[40] S. B. Kotsiantis, I. Zaharakis, and P. Pintelas. Supervised machine
learning: A review of classification techniques. Emerging artificial
intelligence applications in computer engineering, 160, 3-24, 2007.
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-681-1
DATA ANALYTICS 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Data Analytics

