Tracking Cyclists and Walkers: Will it Change Planning and Policy Processes? 
 
João Bernardino, Mafalda Lopes 
TIS - Consultants in Transport, Innovation and  
Systems S.A. 
Lisbon, Portugal 
e-mail: joao.bernardino@tis.pt, mafalda.lopes@tis.pt 
Predrag Živanović, Slaven Tica, Branko Milovanović, 
Stanko Bajčetić 
University of Belgrade – 
Faculty of Transport and Traffic Engineering 
Belgrade, Serbia 
e-mail: p.zivanovic@sf.bg.ac.rs, slaven.tica@sf.bg.ac.rs, 
b.milovanovic@sf.bg.ac.rs, s.bajcetic@sf.bg.ac.rs 
Giacomo Lozzi 
POLIS - Promotion of operational links with integrated services, Association internationale 
Bruxelles 1050, Belgium 
e-mail: glozzi@polisnetwork.eu
 
Abstract—Tracking cyclists and walkers may open a new 
window of opportunities for urban planning and policy. Data 
analytics about where, when, how, why, how far, how fast and 
from and to where people walk or cycle, will be available 
cheaply and quickly. It is our hypothesis that this will cause a 
change in transport planning and decision making processes. 
How, and to what extent, will this happen? Through what 
actors? With what kind of information? For what types of 
action? Who will want it and why? Will it generate a positive 
outcome? We approach some of these questions by elaborating 
on the technical potential of tracking data towards cycling and 
walking planning and policy analysis, interpreting the results 
of a stakeholder consultation and observing the approaches 
and outcomes of some cases of application. We conclude that 
tracking data analysis is likely to become a relevant part of 
cycling and walking planning and policy processes in the near 
future, not only for the efficiency gains in technical analysis, 
but also crucially in the communication between actors.  
Keywords-tracking; 
walking; 
cycling; 
GPS; 
mobility 
tracking; transport planning, transport policy. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The ubiquitous presence of smart mobile phones 
accompanying 
individuals, 
and 
its 
technological 
development, is facilitating the tracking of those individuals, 
with multiple applications. An opportunity is created by the 
fact that tracking data allows to characterize the movements 
of individuals in ways that may be used in mobility planning 
and policy processes. In the scope of motorized traffic, 
tracking data is already being applied in citizen information 
[34] and traffic model calibration [35][36]. When it comes to 
cycling and walking, applications in the scope of 
infrastructure and communication planning and policy are 
yet less mature, although there are already a few cases to 
record, either analysing data through common geographic 
information system (GIS) tools or even already with 
dedicated user interfaces (BikePrint tool [37]). These 
experiences are mostly part of research projects, and even 
though several cities have already applied tracking data, 
there has been no time to mature them into systematized 
local planning processes. It is thus not yet clear what the 
actual influence of tracking data might become in the future. 
To contribute to such assessment, we provide a review 
about the positioning of tracking information in relation to 
current cycling and walking planning and policy practices, 
identifying what it adds to existing information, interpreting 
the results of a stakeholder consultation and reviewing some 
already existing applications. We finally elaborate on how 
tracking data could influence and change cycling and 
walking planning and policy processes in the future, 
considering also the issue of the quality of data obtained. 
The stakeholder consultation included two surveys and a 
workshop. The first survey targeted mobility planners and 
approached 92 respondents from 25 European countries. The 
second survey was targeted at user representatives and 
collected 63 responses from 15 countries. The workshop 
targeted planners, researchers and user representatives and 
involved 27 participants from 12 European countries (details 
are provided in [27]). The samples were based partly on calls 
within the network of European cities POLIS [38] and partly 
based on calls by the entities taking part in the TRACE 
project [39], under which these activities were executed. The 
samples in question may be characterized by a higher than 
average interest of the participants in innovative urban 
mobility initiatives and a specific focus on cycling and/or 
walking issues. The samples were fairly representative in 
terms of countries, except for the user representatives survey, 
which has an overbalance of two countries (Portugal – 33% 
of respondents; Italy – 15%). 
Section II of this document starts by reviewing what is 
the role data and planning support systems play in urban 
mobility processes. Section III describes the traditional 
methods on data collection for monitoring travel behaviour. 
Section IV digs into what tracking data could add to these 
processes, both from the perspective of the comparison with 
the data provided by traditional methods and from the 
perspective of stakeholders. Section V introduces some cases 
of application. Finally, based on the observations of the 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

previous sections, section VI elaborates about the ways how 
tracking data might influence cycling and walking planning 
and policy processes, including the identification of its 
limitations and challenges. 
II. 
DATA AND PLANNING SUPPORT SYSTEMS IN URBAN 
MOBILITY PLANNING PROCESSES 
Reference [1] notes the influence of data in planning and 
policy processes in the following way: “data can help 
establish baselines, identify trends, predict problems, assess 
options, set performance targets, and evaluate a particular 
jurisdiction or organization. Which indicators are selected 
can significantly influence analysis results. A particular 
policy may rank high when evaluated using one set of 
indicators, but low when ranked by another.” 
In this scope, it is firstly interesting to obtain a measure 
of the extent to which data is being applied in the field of 
active mobility. The planners’ survey asked which types of 
information were being used for cycling and walking 
planning in the respondents’ sites. About 26% of the said 
that no type of network related quantitative data is 
considered locally for cycling. The number increases to 76% 
in the case of walking, showing that the use of data is much 
higher for cycling than walking. Qualitative information has 
a significantly wider use across cities than quantitative 
information (Fig. 1). On the other hand, asked about which 
types of barriers they found to be the most relevant to 
achieve existing priorities, respectively 51% and 62% 
identified the lack of data as one of the issues.  
 
For our aim, the relevant question is why data is being 
(or not) used. And building on it, how could the new tracking 
data add to planning and policy processes. In this section we 
provide a review on the application of data in urban mobility 
and specifically cycling and walking policy. 
Data is used in distinct ways depending on the context 
and inherent needs of the relevant actors. The work [2] 
points that “transport data needs may be assessed on the 
project basis, the business basis or the system basis. The 
purpose, content and extent of data needs are different for 
these three bases”. 
In Europe, best practices have been synthesized and are 
widely disseminated by the European Commission’s 
Sustainable Urban Mobility Planning guidelines [32]. This 
guide advocates four main stages of the planning process. 
Data plays an important role in all of them:  
A.  Preparation: data is used to analyse the current 
mobility situation and develop alternative scenarios that 
might result from different policies and measures. 
B.  Setting of the objectives: to set targets, the level of 
accuracy of the previously collected data should be assessed 
C.  Elaboration of the plan: monitoring and evaluation 
process should be defined, and the impact of a particular 
measure will be assessed on the basis of data.  
D.  Implementation: data is collected to measure target 
user behaviour and target achievement, allowing for a better 
understanding of the system and correction actions. 
Structured guidance in the specific scope of cycling has 
been given by European projects like PRESTO [40], 
BYPAD [41] and CHAMP [42], which include a role of data 
in the scope of their normative planning frameworks. They 
put a particular emphasis on planning related linear aspects 
like the diagnosis of the current situation and on the 
monitoring and evaluation of actions carried out. A 
structured approach towards the collection of data for cycling 
policy is given by [33], which attempts to provide guidance 
to cities. Depending on the aims of data collection, several 
questions are presented as to how to communicate the data, 
such as: 
 
Who is the primary target group? 
 
Who are secondary target groups? 
 
How should data be presented? 
 
Should other media also be involved? 
 
Who is to draw up the final cycling account? 
 
Is the cycling account to be politically approved or 
are they simply informative? 
 
How can it be ensured that politicians, municipal 
staff and citizens are aware of the cycling account? 
As assumed by several of these guidance initiatives, the 
advocated planning stages and their intermediate steps are 
actually a dynamic, non-linear process. In the real world, not 
strictly shaped by the desirable approaches of guidelines, the 
processes are often chaotic and strongly framed by political 
and organizational short-term issues. In that scope, it is an 
interesting and rather under-studied issue what is the actual 
role of data in real world urban mobility planning and policy. 
 
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Measurements of delays in
bottlenecks
Tracking of routes of individuals
Origin and destination matrices
(quantitative data)
Surveys to users
Counts of volumes in links and/or
nodes
Complaints/advice by citizens
Consultation with users
I don't know
Not considered
Considered for cycling
Considered for walking
Considered for both modes
 
Figure 1.  Type of information considered for cycling and walking (planners survey) 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

While we did not find such analyses in the strict scope of 
data collection, they are embedded in a wider field within the 
scope of mobility, which is the use of planning support 
systems (PSS). PSS refer to information and analysis tools 
which provide support by identifying problems and testing 
solutions, by translating data into relevant information 
applicable for planning purposes. In other words, PSS may 
be defined as “an information framework that integrates the 
full range of current (and future) information technologies 
useful for planning'' [3], with the purpose of either projection 
to some point in the future or estimation of impacts from 
some form of development [4].  
The accumulated experience, including the evaluation of 
its (lack of) success, is interesting to interpret the ability of 
data in ultimately influencing planning and policy processes.  
Reference [5] describes the advantages of PSS as 
providing analytical and communicative support. From an 
analytical perspective, the PSS can provide valuable 
feedback on the necessary iterations that are part of a 
negotiation task. From a communication perspective, the 
PSS may spark an active and content-based dialogue among 
the involved participants and improve the collaboration and 
communication among different disciplines. However, the 
authors warn that the support capabilities of a PSS can also 
have a negative effect on conducting a task, an idea also 
supported by [6], who argue they can become performative, 
thereby steering rather than supporting the process. 
Reference [8] assesses the history of PSS use, claiming 
that there has been a significant evolution, powered by new 
technologies for disseminating information. This, coupled 
with the development of intrinsically visual tools such as 
GoogleMaps [43], has led to the common media of 
communication becoming predominantly visual. As such, 
PSS have evolved to graphic and related media in contrast to 
its origins in numerical data processing. The interactivity of 
these systems has also developed considerably. An 
assessment of spatial planning practice at the end of the 20th 
century however suggested that the adoption and use of geo-
information tools are far from widespread and far from being 
effectively integrated into the planning process. 
Reference [4] claims that the largely successful history of 
urban transportation modelling systems in the United States 
suggests that three factors are required for computer-based 
tools to be widely used in practice: a shared commitment to a 
well-defined methodology, extensive government support, 
and the ability of available tools to provide needed outputs 
for a substantial user community.  
Some authors [9] attempted to identify the main factors 
blocking the widespread usage of PSS by launching a web 
survey directed to people involved in planning practices from 
all around the world. The participants were asked to classify 
the importance of potential bottlenecks. The main obstacles 
were identified as: 
 
Little awareness among planners of the existence of 
PSS and for the purposes for which PSS can be used; 
 
Lack of experience with PSS; 
 
Low intention to start using a PSS among users. 
The 
authors 
suggest 
that 
marketing 
actions 
accompanying the launch of the PSS are essential in order to 
give PSS a good chance to prove itself as a means for 
improving spatial planning practice. Other researchers [10] 
consider that the PSS are stuck in a vicious cycle: although 
there are many PSS in existence, generally speaking PSS 
have not yet become widely applied in planning practice. As 
a result, few lessons are actually being learned about the 
effective integration of PSS in planning practice, and this 
lack of experience hampers the further improvement of PSS 
technology and its application. 
Reference [11] considers that there are several barriers 
that explain this lack of integration, which can be divided in 
institutional/procedural discrepancies (i.e., separate planning 
institutions, formal processes, financial arrangements, etc.) 
and substantive differences (i.e., different planning objects, 
information etc.). In a web survey, the author identified 
additional barriers to the widespread usage of PSS, noting 
that these relate mostly to “softer issues”: 
 
PSS are implemented too late rather than too early in 
the planning process; 
 
PSS are implemented too far removed from the 
political process;  
 
They do not fit the land use and transport planning 
process, 
 
PSS do not sufficiently support the generation of 
new strategies, although they do support the 
evaluation of strategies; 
 
Lack of transparency; 
 
Low communication value (i.e., PSS which are not 
understandable for planners, stakeholders and 
politicians); 
 
Conflicting interests between land use and transport 
actors are the main barrier to successful integration, 
with ‘lack of a common language’ in second place 
and ‘lack of political commitment’ as third. 
Other 
authors 
[12] 
consider 
that 
there 
is 
an 
implementation gap between the PSS and the actual planning 
decisions. In order to overcome this gap, it is advisable for 
the development of the PSS to be intertwined with the 
planning process itself. The authors consider that the 
transparency of the output and the assumptions of the models 
that are part of the PSS are improved through discussions 
and continuous explanations by the modellers.  
A relevant conclusion for our analysis is that the 
application and influence of data in planning and policy 
processes is more complex than the picture provided by 
linear urban mobility guidance, being framed by diverse and 
contextual political, organizational and individual elements.  
Another dimension to this review of PSS use processes is 
that the influence of data in this context also depends on how 
it is presented. As pointed by [1], an “activity or option may 
seem desirable and successful when measured one way, but 
undesirable and ineffective when measured in another. It is 
therefore important to understand the assumptions and 
implications of different types of measurements”. For 
example, bicycle counting and surveys may provide different 
conclusions regarding the bicycle use trends [13]. This calls 
for data collection methods and an appropriate choice of 
accurate indicators. 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

In further sections of this paper, we try to understand 
how tracking data can influence planning and policy, not in 
view of desirable normative planning frameworks, but rather 
actual planning and policy processes. 
III. 
DATA COLLECTION METHODS FOR MONITORING 
TRAVEL BEHAVIOUR 
Travel behaviour may be monitored either by observing 
what users do or by asking them about what they do. In the 
scope of cycling and walking, the traditional methods used 
are counting and surveys.  
Counting allow to quantify the number of users passing 
in a given place. They are a physical measure associated with 
a point, a section or an area. The most relevant indicator 
collected from counting is the volume of users or vehicles in 
the given element of infrastructure. The most common 
motivation of local authorities to apply counting is related to 
the measurement of the achievement of some type of target 
with regard to bicycle traffic, while prioritising certain 
measures among others, or to monitor specific measures on 
individual routes are also found to be related to counting 
[13]. With the later scope, it is also possible for example to 
measure speeds or delay times through more sophisticated 
technology. 
Counting does not allow knowing who the user is, from 
where to where he goes or why. To obtain more detailed data 
about the users and their trips, surveys are used. Different 
survey methods can be used and survey data can be 
quantitative or qualitative. Three broad types of surveys may 
be identified: general/population-based surveys, intercept 
surveys and travel diaries [14].  
General surveys are of static nature, in the sense that they 
do not relate to specific trips or sites, but they tend to capture 
routine travel behaviour of the users, focusing on general 
behaviour, like for example usual mode of transport to work, 
usual distance, or usual number of trips. General surveys also 
provide a good opportunity to know the personal 
characteristics of the user. Their application is frequently 
made in the scope of the elaboration or monitoring of general 
mobility plans [13]. They may also be used to predict what 
users would do in the face of some transport supply change, 
in the form of a stated preference survey. 
The intercept survey refers to directly interviewing 
cyclists or pedestrians, i.e., capturing them while they are 
cycling or walking. This allows both to approach directly the 
user target in question but also to target by the place where 
users are passing. 
Travel diaries provide the transport planner specific 
information about each trip realized during a period. This 
data collection method has a number of drawbacks, however: 
large burden placed on respondents, high costs, decrease in 
the quality of the recorded data and missing trips, especially 
if the diary is made over several consecutive days. Reference 
[15] highlights ‘non-response’ as the most pressing problem 
in all surveys (response rates around 20-30 percent from a 
mail-back survey, 40-60 percent from a telephone survey, 
and 60-75 percent from a face-to-face interview).  
A problem faced in many travel surveys, and in particular 
in the scope of cycling and walking, is that they assume trips 
are taken by only one mode, while many trips involve more 
than one mode. “Last-mile” connections to and from public 
transport trips are the best-known example of missing 
multimodal information, such as walking to a bus stop, or 
carpooling to a park-and-ride station [16]. 
TABLE I.  
IDENTIFICATION OF GAPS IN DATA RELEVANT FOR TRANSPORT PLANNING AND POTENTIAL OF TRACKING DATA TO FULFIL THOSE GAPS 
Input data for 
transport planning 
Traditional methods 
Tracking based methods 
Surveying 
Counting 
GPS  
GPS + GIS 
GPS + 
SMS/app 
GPS + GIS + 
SMS/app 
User data - socioeconomic 
Gender, age, occupation, address, etc. 
yes 
no 
 no 
no 
 yes 
 yes 
Travel data - individual 
Origin 
yes 
no 
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
Destination 
yes 
no 
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
Journey start time 
yes 
no 
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
Journey end time 
yes 
no 
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
Exact routes 
no 
no 
yes 
yes 
yes 
yes 
Transport mode(s) 
yes 
yes 
no 
yes 
yes 
yes 
Travel purpose 
yes 
no 
no 
yes 
yes 
yes 
Transfer nodes 
yes 
no 
no 
yes 
yes 
yes 
Transfer time 
yes 
no 
no 
yes 
yes 
yes 
Network data 
Road data (type and condition) 
yes 
no 
no 
yes 
no 
yes 
Nodes data (bottlenecks, delays, etc.) 
no 
yes 
no 
no 
no 
yes 
Links data (link speeds, bottlenecks, delays) 
no 
yes 
no 
yes 
no 
yes 
Absolute volumes 
no 
yes 
no 
no 
no 
no 
Public transport data (stops, lines, routes, etc.) 
yes 
yes 
no 
yes 
no 
yes 
Parking data (location, quantity) 
yes 
yes 
no 
no 
no 
yes 
Zones data 
yes 
no 
no 
no 
no 
yes 
Note: The classification given in the table to each item is subjective. In some cases with classification “no”, the data in question may potentially be extracted by the concerned method but it would imply high 
costs and is not common (e.g,. surveys could incorporate GIS tools allowing the user to provide exact routes). In other cases with classification “yes”, the capability may not yet be fully developed (or fully accurate) 
with current tools, but such may be expected in the near future (e.g., transport mode identification from tracking tools). 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

IV. 
WHAT DOES TRACKING DATA ADD? 
A. Tracking and traditional data collection methods 
The growing importance of promoting and improving 
conditions for cycling and walking is evident in today’s 
urban planning practice. One of the major issues for not 
putting cycling and walking on an equal footing with 
motorised transport modes is arguably the lack of data. Good 
quality and reliable input data are crucial for efficient 
transport planning processes.  
Table I indicatively reviews gaps in data relevant for 
transport planning from traditional data collection methods. 
Surveying lacks or implies high costs in obtaining network 
and travel data. Additionally, for some relevant types of data, 
it does not provide necessarily accurate data, but only the 
perceptions of users (concerning, for example, travel time), 
which may be both an advantage and a disadvantage. On the 
other hand, counting only gives partial network data, while 
socioeconomic and travel information is absent.  
Tracking allows to characterize network data with a level 
of detail and capability to obtain indicators that is not 
possible by other methods. This is achieved if combined with 
GIS tools, through which a map matching operation allows 
to allocate GPS trajectories to the existing network. When 
movement trajectory is obtained via an application from 
mobile phones, the same application is an opportunity to 
establish a channel of communication with the user, allowing 
to obtain the type of socio-economic information normally 
extracted by common surveys. Tracking data combined with 
GIS tools and an application interface with users thus seems 
to at least potentially cover all data needs, with one 
exception and one significant difficulty: 
 
Tracking data does not allow to infer absolute 
volumes, only relative volumes, since it does not 
capture all users. To obtain absolute flow volumes, 
counting are still essential; 
 
Tracking combined with an application allows 
asking specific question to users; however, it is 
questionable that this is possible to do within 
reasonable representativeness of the sample. 
Overall, the comparison of these methods suggests that 
tracking provides network data that was previously not 
possible or difficult to obtain. At the same time, traditional 
methods will still fill some gaps, as also suggested by [31]. 
B. New indicators and visualizations 
The location and time data provided by tracking allows 
for a variety of analysis fields and approaches. Table II 
outlines the most relevant and potentially feasible indicators 
identified in the stakeholder consultation [27]. These 
indicators can be grouped into origins/destinations, flows and 
volumes, level of service and surface quality. Additionally, 
relevant derived visualizations like isochrones or parking 
spot attraction (based on local arrivals) were particularly 
highlighted as useful. Another element referred was the 
ability to visualize and compare the tracking based indicators 
with other indicators like slopes, pollution or accident data. 
TABLE II.  
TRACKING DATA INDICATORS 
Indicators 
Space dimension 
Unit 
Volume of users 
Link, node, area 
users/time 
Number trips originated 
and ended per zone 
(origin/destination) 
Area 
users/time 
Volume per origin-
destination 
Area-Area 
users/time 
Speed average 
Link, area 
kilometre per hour 
Speed standard deviation 
Link, area 
kilometre per hour 
Level of service and/or 
congestion 
Link, path, node, 
area 
percentage 
Distance average 
Area-Area 
meters 
Trip time average 
Area-Area 
minutes 
Waiting time 
Link, path, node, 
area, area-area 
time 
Waiting time per user 
Link, path, node, 
area, area-area 
time /user 
Quality of surface 
Link 
rugosity index 
 
An additional interesting outcome of the planners’ 
consultation is that the importance given to different types 
of indicators varies with local context (Fig. 2). If divided 
into two groups according to the local modal cycling share – 
into champions and starters – it becomes clear that in 
champion cities, respondents give more importance to 
indicators related to the performance of the existing network 
(like speeds and delays), while in starter cities they tend to 
be more interested in indicators that help to define a 
network (like number of trips per origin and destination). 
 
 
Figure 2.  Indicators planners would like to obtain from tracking data, according to the city profile in terms of level of cycling adoption 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

C. Contributions to a mobility vision (Workshop) 
The “Tracking data for planning and policy” workshop 
explored how tracking data could influence planning and 
policy, from mobility vision to operations [27]. 
A starting point of the workshop conclusions was that 
changing the mobility paradigm away from car use is a 
difficult task, which requires a strong dialogue between 
actors that promotes the sharing of information and ideas. In 
this process, tracking will help redefining the policy vision 
by providing evidence and helping quantifying goals: vision 
is not a technical matter, but it needs technical support. 
More particularly, it was a wide belief that tracking data 
could give visibility to ideas and groups of users commonly 
disregarded by traditional planning and data collection 
methods, helping to increase the community engagement and 
participation. Tracking will help reinforce the idea that users 
are persons, not numbers, thus enabling setting goals and 
approaches more suited to the target groups: if you want to 
build a city for people, you have to have data on people. The 
underlying vision is to drive change based on the evidence of 
user demand, i.e., on what people actually want. 
Another dimension of reflection referred to the trends in 
collection of tracking data. According to the recent trends, 
tracking data will be pervasive and standard within few 
years. Coupled with the widespread use of other big data, it 
might have significant impacts on the planning process. 
Tracking data provides continuous and current information, 
richer detail, user segmentation, and can complement other 
types of data. This contributes to making better diagnoses, 
test ideas, monitor and evaluate actions, develop multimodal 
policies and improve the network design. 
Another relevant aspect raised is that by accessing data 
continuously, tracking will shorten the temporal horizon of 
activities and programs: with tracking there is no need to 
wait for the “elephant paths” (i.e., the destruction of grass by 
people walking along he shortest path across a field). 
However, stakeholders also stressed that, when using 
tracking for planning, it is important to keep in mind that it 
should not be seen as a goal in itself or as the only basis for 
establishing goals and visions. Like motor traffic models, 
tracking may reinforce the idea that mobility is solely an 
engineering question, while personal choices, equity, 
lifestyle and citizens’ well-being should not be forgotten. 
V. 
CASES OF APPLICATION 
The stakeholder consultation allowed to identify some 
cases of influence of tracking based information in planning 
and policy processes. Five representative cases are presented, 
which refer to different aspects of those processes. None of 
those cases is part of a systematic use of tracking data in 
local planning procedures; they rather refer to applications of 
research projects or ad-hoc uses of the available data. All the 
collected cases refer to cycling, which is coherent with the 
fact revealed by the stakeholder survey that planners show a 
higher interest to apply tracking in the scope of cycling. 
A. Case 1: Identifying user preferences through Strava to 
select the ideal path for a cyclepath (Lisbon) 
In Lisbon, there was an internal discussion in the 
municipality about the ideal path for a new cycle path, 
considering a balance between distance and slopes. The 
question was put which path would the users prefer. The 
observation of the Strava Heat Map (Fig. 3) available in the 
web allowed to conclude that most users preferred to follow 
the path with the shortest distance, even if it had a higher 
slope and more intense traffic. This led to the decision to 
build the cycle path in this link instead of the alternatives. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Path development choices in Lisbon (Source: author’s 
elaboration based on Lisbon municipality staff’s description and Strava 
Heat Map) 
B. Case 2: “Cycling is faster” area definition and 
communication to citizens (Leuven) 
In Leuven, the cycling and car tracking data allowed to 
map the areas of the city from which each of the modes of 
transport is faster in trips towards the train station (Fig. 4). 
This information was then used to communicate to citizens 
with the objective to promote more cycling in relation to car 
use. The campaign was based on outdoor posters spread in 
the frontier within which cycling was faster than car [28]. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Areas where each mode (cycling vs car) is faster towards train 
station in Leuven (Source: [28]) 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

C. Case 3: Defining position for bike parking (Bologna) 
In 2015, the Municipality of Bologna decided to install 
1.000 new bike racks in the city centre of Bologna. The issue 
was to determine the places and the number of racks per 
place in order to maximize their efficacy. The Local Mobility 
Agency and the Municipality decided to study the 
origins/destinations coming from GPS data collected during 
the European Cycling Challenge 2015 [44] (Fig. 5). The 
result was a set of locations and a number of racks per 
location based on real needs of cyclists, an "evidence-based" 
approach that gave strength and concreteness to the decision. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Bicycle parking location selection (right) based on tracked trip 
destinations (left) in Bologna (Source: SRM – Reti e Mobilità Srl,) 
D. Case 4: How would a new cycle highway improve 
travel times? (Eindhoven) 
In Eindhoven (Fig. 6), an analysis of the cycle tracking 
data through the BikePrint tool allowed to closely calibrate 
the speeds practised in each link, as well as the travel times 
from each zone to the city centre. Based on that information, 
a test was made to check what would be the time benefits per 
zone of building a cycle highway [18]. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Analysis of travel time reduction by implementation of a high 
speed cycling lane in Eindhoven (Source: [18]) 
E. Case 5: Identification of user sub-optimal choices and 
improve information to users (Leuven) 
A new high speed cycling route was developed at the 
north side of the rail line in Leuven (Fig. 7).  
 
 
Figure 7.  Bicycle user route choices between a high speed route and an 
old route in Leuven (Source: [28]) 
However, the tracking data revealed about half of the 
users coming from the south side of the line were still using 
an old route when they would be able to ride faster if they 
followed a certain link towards the north route. From this 
information, the municipality put better information at the 
relevant intersection to inform the users that they could 
proceed to the high speed cycle route [28]. 
VI. 
HOW COULD TRACKING DATA INFLUENCE PLANNING 
AND POLICY PROCESSES? SOME SPECULATIVE HYPOTHESES 
When asked whether they believed that tracking data 
would be useful to their municipality or region, most 
respondents of the planners’ survey replied that it would – 
85% and 68% respectively in the scope of cycling and 
walking. When asked if tracking based information could be 
useful for a set of elements, the respondents replied 
positively to all of them. But it is noteworthy that despite 
they valued technical aspects like effectiveness of the actions 
and defining priorities, the one which was rated the highest is 
“communication to policy makers” (Fig. 8). 
A different perspective is the perspective of the users 
(cyclists and walkers). In the user representatives’ survey, 
74% agreed that the use of tracking data would have the 
potential to “radically” improve planning practises. About 
the uses of tracking data, user representatives saw the highest 
potential in using it for their own purposes as a 
communication tool for lobbying policy interventions, 
followed by understanding priorities for intervention and 
providing information to users (Fig. 9). 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

Figure 8.  Planners survey responses: “Do you believe tracking based information could be useful for…?” 
      
Figure 9.  User representatives survey responses: “In your opinion, would tracking based information be useful to your organization for …? 
Considering the collection of stakeholder views and the 
observations described in the previous sections, we elaborate 
on plausible hypotheses about the future role of tracking in 
cycling and walking planning and policy. 
A. Functions of tracking data 
Tracking data may have multiple functions interfering in 
policy and planning process: 
A simple tool for Communication. A potential of tracking 
data is its apparently powerful communication ability. 
Because it makes cyclists or walkers visible to the decision 
maker, to the general public or to planners themselves, 
tracking visualizations seem to have the ability to influence 
opinions and decisions, at least in the short term. 
Demand and infrastructure performance analysis. The 
location and time data provided by tracking allows for a 
variety of analysis fields and approaches, whether they be 
about the level of service of the infrastructure or knowledge 
about the demand and its preferences, at a micro or macro 
level, per type of user, schedule, weather or location.  
Monitoring of measures. Tracking data allows to see in 
much detail how demand changed whenever a measure is 
introduced in the local mobility system.  
Like other policy and planning tools, it may be that 
tracking data and related tools will become intrinsically 
connected within the process of planning and decision 
making. We could say that it will have become a building 
block of the process. At that point, its influence would be 
structural and part of the paradigm of urban mobility. It is 
desirable that such influence of a tool is a positive one and 
not biased towards certain objectives opposed to others, or 
that it is not only illusionary contributing to some objective. 
This was the case in the past of transport models, which 
ignored other modes of transport and failed to show planners 
and decision makers that addressing congestion through 
more space for cars was feeding a never ending feedback 
loop. In its own ways, cycling and walking tracking 
information use has a risk of creating biases. 
B. Stakeholders under influence of tracking 
Stakeholders may use or be influenced by tracking 
information in several ways. We will describe a scenario 
where tracking influences a system of interrelations between 
different actors in the planning and decision making process. 
The system is constituted by planners in the field of cycling 
and walking, planners from other fields, decision makers and 
the citizens, which may include the general public but also 
user activists (Fig. 10). 
Decision 
makers
Planners 
(walk/cycling)
Public 
opinion
Planners 
(other)
Vision & goals
Operational 
activities
communication
pressure
influence
communication
analysis   & priorities
Potential roles of tracking data in the planning & policy process
monitoring
 
Figure 10.  Roles of tracking data in the planning process (Source: author) 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

First of all, cycling and walking planners may use 
tracking information to develop better analyses and properly 
define priorities for action. But they can also use tracking 
information to communicate and sometimes influence other 
actors. That could be the case with other technicians within 
the organization who might have different views or distinct 
languages –the visual and quantitative power of tracking data 
helps to show that cyclists and walkers have needs and face 
movement constraints. 55% of the planners’ survey 
respondents said that conflicting views were one of the main 
barriers in relation to achieving the existing priorities in the 
scope of cycling (30% for walking). 
The same goes for the planners’ relation with decision 
makers. Here, the influence might happen not only on 
operational decisions but also at a higher level of vision 
definition. Showing the evidence on the entropy of walking, 
or the choices of cyclists towards safer or quicker paths, may 
trigger the decision maker’s appetite for giving priority to 
improving the conditions for walkers or cyclists. 
Tracking information will also give decision makers the 
additional assurance that will be able to communicate with 
the public in an effective way. Through the network 
information provided by tracking data, they will be able to 
use numbers to describe the problem and show the positive 
effects of solutions. This ability to argue based on empirical 
evidence will provide decision makers more confidence to 
take politically risky decisions. 
The communication between decision makers and public 
will also occur in the opposite direction. Activism towards 
cycling or walking can in the same way find in tracking data 
a powerful tool to argue for the improvement of their 
conditions, showing that there are users and describing their 
problems through data, makes it more inevitable for the 
interlocutor politician to act. 
VII. 
QUALITY OF DATA 
The quality of input data in transport planning analyses 
may have significant influence on the accuracy of the 
conclusions. [19] claim no study has systematically 
examined the implications of using low-quality big data for 
traditional analyses. Nevertheless, there are two main 
elements related to quality of data for the purpose of 
realizing analysis meaningful for mobility planning.  
The first one is the accuracy of the location data, which 
depends on the instruments and methods of measurement 
used by the application. Several issues affect the accuracy of 
GPS data: trees and buildings obscuring GPS signals, the 
geometric arrangement of the GPS constellation of satellites, 
and the quality of the GPS unit [20]. Because of this, GPS 
routes can appear to bounce around to either side of an actual 
route when accuracy is decreased. But for tracking routes 
longer than only the shortest walking trips, modern GPS 
devices represent a relatively accurate and inexpensive way 
to record natural travel data [21]. A recent study that tested 
algorithms for calibrating GPS-observed walking trips to 
actual trips had the best results when trips were more than 3 
minutes long and more than 30 meters in distance [22]. This 
deficiency of GPS can be mitigated by implementing a 
primary data processing phase prior data usage for planning 
and/or other purposes. Some authors [23] have described a 
series of procedures that have been developed to manipulate 
data collected from GPS devices carried by people or placed 
in personal vehicles, and used to produce records of the trips 
made over a period of days or weeks. In their paper they give 
insight on different steps within data processing, from 
converting continuous GPS logs into trip-based records and 
trip identification, to overcoming of various deficiencies. 
These include cold start problems, particularly the case for 
movements of a vehicle over a distance of one or two 
kilometres and for short walks with a wearable GPS, where a 
‘‘cold start’’ receiver may not record position, or when the 
trip is long enough for position to be acquired, but the 
resulting trip will be shown to be shorter in length and 
duration than the real trip). Another issue addressed is the 
correction for signal loss in ‘‘urban canyons’’, tunnels, and 
under other circumstances. The authors claim to have 
reached a 95% correct rating in identifying real trips, while 
at the same time reducing the time and effort required to 
process data up to 75-80% of the amounts of time required 
for a manually assisted procedure. 
The other issue is the representativeness of the sample. 
Since different user groups have distinct preferences and 
behaviour profiles [30], it tends to be important that the 
sample has a realistic representation of those user groups. To 
guarantee that this happens, it is not enough to obtain a 
sufficiently large sample, but also that specific groups are not 
being excluded from the sample for some reason [25].  
[24] gave a comprehensive review on a state-of-the-art of 
the travel behaviour studies categorized by trajectory data 
types. All selected empirical studies have drawn conclusions 
about the population based on the sampling dataset. 
According to [19], there have been three large-scale travel 
surveys that have relied entirely on GPS technology, two of 
these in the USA. The first exclusively GPS household travel 
survey conducted was by the Ohio Department of 
Transportation, in the Cincinnati metropolitan area with a 
sample of 2608 households [15]. Sampling for the pilot and 
the main surveys used an address-based sampling procedure 
[15]. GPS data was complete in 80% cases and the data was 
used to derive travel parameters, i.e., average daily No of 
trips (mobility rate), trip distance, travel time, travel purpose, 
etc. Data was presented for all days and weekdays, and on 
the personal and household level. Reference [15] has 
reported that a high level of representativeness for the 
sample was achieved. Their primary conclusion was that it is 
feasible to undertake a GPS-only household travel survey. 
They also recommend a longer period of measurement to be 
used in future surveys.  
According to the results of the stakeholder consultation, 
there 
are 
three 
typical 
problems 
of 
sample 
representativeness: 
 
Leisure vs. utilitarian cyclists: the most developed 
segment of tracking applications is related to the 
promotion of sports or physical activity in general. 
For example, the STRAVA [45] heat map is 
available for any user and site. In starter countries 
with a low level of cycling, even applications 
primarily targeted at utilitarian trips, like the 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

European Cycling Challenge, do attract individuals 
who cycle for leisure. Leisure minded cyclists have 
different preferences in terms of destinations and 
path choice to utilitarian cyclists and are generally 
not suitable as a sample for the purpose mobility 
planning. 
In 
European 
Cycling 
Challenge 
application in Bologna, currently the tool attempts to 
distinguish utilitarian from sports users by filtering 
the trips by some areas of the city or schedule. 
 
Experienced cyclists vs. starters: this distinction is 
particularly relevant in the context of starter or 
climber cities, where the cycling network is not fully 
developed and there are very significant differences 
between users in terms of their ability and 
willingness to use the car network for cycling. 
Initiatives that collect data about existing cyclists 
tend to attract experienced cyclists, who are the more 
willing to participate in these kind of initiatives. 
However, the stronger is their identity as a cyclist, 
the more likely are they to be far away from the 
average in terms of choice preferences. When the 
target of the planner is to take into account the 
preferences of users who are not very experienced or 
have a strong cyclist identity, this effect should be 
considered. A possible way to isolate the differences 
among different groups is to ask the application 
users how they identify themselves in terms of their 
experience and cycling identity. 
 
Info excluded users: walkers with specific needs like 
elder people and children are also the ones who tend 
to be excluded from the use of smart mobile phones, 
which are the devices that make it viable to track the 
movements of users. This biasing factor is difficult 
to overcome and the planner may have to assume 
that the data is not representative for these types of 
users. If data from these users is particularly 
important, the planner may require different data 
collection methods and a specific campaign targeted 
at these users. 
Overall, it seems to be important that the analyst is 
critical about the type of sample represented by the data and 
the implications that may have for the validity of the analysis 
that is realized. The application of samples from different 
sources may minimize the problem or, at least, provide an 
opportunity to compare data. Obtaining specific information 
about user characteristics also provides the chance to 
compare results for different user groups. 
VIII. CONCLUSIONS 
With the aim of assessing the potential of tracking data to 
change cycling and walking planning and policy processes, 
this paper reviewed (i) the analytical capabilities resulting 
from tracking data, considered (ii) the views of relevant 
actors in a stakeholder consultation and collected some (iii) 
initial experiences on the application of tracking data.  
Tracking data obtained though users’ mobile devices 
opens up an opportunity to obtain new cycling and walking 
activity information. Such data can be treated through GIS 
tools to produce quantified information about the state and 
performance of the cycling or walking network. Indicators 
like speeds, delays, relative volumes, trip origins and 
destinations and their paths, collected for every part of the 
network, become possible. This information allows to better 
assess bottlenecks, user information, monitoring the effects 
of measures or studying user preferences in ways  
Mobile applications doing tracking (and possibly 
interacting with the user) could thus complement and 
significantly replace traditional data collection methods. Two 
main limitations to this were identified: firstly, tracking data 
does not provide absolute volumes in the network, for which 
countings data will still be needed; secondly, the sample of 
tracked users may have biases. 
Considering the new technical analyses that are made 
possible, such new tool theoretically promises to enable 
better diagnoses and decision making towards cycling and 
walking provision. This is also the belief of the planners and 
user representatives consulted under this work. 
However, such capability does not guarantee by itself 
that the use of tracking data will be embraced within 
planning and policy processes. The review of past 
applications of planning support systems shows that not 
always they are successful in penetrating the planning and 
policy practices. Or, in cases where they are, there is a risk 
that these planning support systems end up steering decisions 
based on partial information rather than supporting a 
conscious decision making – as motor traffic models which 
ignored costs on cycling and walking. 
A different, perhaps even more crucial dimension of the 
influence of cycling and walking tracking data, is its 
communication ability. “Communication to policy makers” 
was evaluated as the most relevant application of tracking 
information by planners. According to these actors, tracking 
data makes cyclists and pedestrians more “visible”, and thus 
more prone to be considered as a priority in decision making 
processes. Communication between staff of the local 
authorities and communication to citizens have also been 
cited in the survey as important functions of tracking data. 
Some of the practical cases presented in this paper show 
actual examples of how the tracking data has been applied 
both in internal dialogue between planners and decision 
makers and in citizen information. Tracking data does 
therefore not only provide potential analytical ability, but 
could also be a powerful instrument for communication. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This paper is based on results of the project ‘Opening the 
cycling and walking tracking potential – TRACE’, under 
grant agreement No 635266 – European Union's Horizon 
2020 research and innovation programme. 
We thank all the participants in the surveys and 
workshop. 
REFERENCES 
[1] T. Litman, “Developing indicators for comprehensive and sustainable 
transport planning”, Transportation Research Record: Journal of the 
Transportation Research Board, (2017), pp. 10-15, 2007. 
[2] Z. Huang, “Data integration for urban transport planning”, PhD 
thesis, Febodruk BV, Enschede, The Netherlands, 2003. 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

[3] R.E. Klosterman, and E. Richard, “Planning Support Systems: A New 
Perspective on Computer-Aided Planning, Journal of Planning 
Education and Research”, vol. 17, pp. 45-54, 1997. 
[4] R. K. Brail, “Planning Support Systems Evolving: When the Rubber 
Hits the Road,” in Complex Artificial Environments: Simulation, 
Cognition and VR in the Study and Planning of Cities, J. Portugali, 
Ed. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 307–317, 
2006. 
[5] P. Pelzer, G. Arciniegas, S. Geertman, and S. Lenferink, “Planning 
Support Systems and Task-Technology Fit: a Comparative Case 
Study”, Applied Spatial Analysis and Policy, pp. 1-21, 2015 
[6] H. Smith, G. Wall, and K. Blackstock, “The role of map-based 
environmental information in supporting integration between river 
basin planning and spatial planning”, Environmental Science & 
Policy, 30, pp. 81–89, 2013. 
[7] Brail, R. K., “Planning support systems for cities and regions”, 
Lincoln Institute of Land Policy, Cambridge, Massachusets, 2008. 
[8] J.S. Stillwell, S. Geertman, and S. Openshaw, eds., Geographical 
information and planning: Advances in spatial science, Berlin: 
Springer Verlag, 1999. 
[9] G. Vonk, S. Geertman, and P. Schot, “Bottlenecks blocking 
widespread usage of Planning Support Systems”, Environment and 
Planning A, vol. 37. Pp. 909-924, 2005. 
[10] G. Vonk and S. Geertman, “Improving the Adoption and Use of 
Planning Support Systems in Practice”, Applied Spatial Analysis, vol.  
1, pp. 153-173, 2008. 
[11] M. te Brömmelstroet, “Making planning support systems matter: 
improving the use of planning support systems for integrated land use 
and 
transport 
strategy-making”, 
PhD 
thesis, 
University 
of 
Amsterdam, 2010. 
[12] M. te Brömmelstroet and P. Schrijnen, “From planning support 
systems to mediated planning support: a structured dialogue to 
overcome the implementation gap”, Environment and Planning 
B:Planning and Design, vol. 37, pp. 3-20, 2010. 
[13] A. Niska, A. Nilsson, M. Wiklund, P. Ahlström, U. Björketun, L. 
Söderström, and K. Robertson, “Methods for Estimating Pedestrian 
and Cycle Traffic”, Survey and Quality Assessment, VTI Report 686, 
2010. 
[14] A. J. Richardson, E. S. Ampt, and A. H. Meyburg, “Survey methods 
for transport planning”, Melbourne: Eucalyptus Press., 314 p., 1995. 
[15] P. Stopher, L. Wargelin, J. Minser, K. Tierney, M. Rhindress and S. 
O’Connor, “GPS-Based Household Interview Survey for the 
Cincinnati, Ohio Region”, Abt SRBI, Incorporated, Cincinnati, OH, 
2012. 
[16]  “Transportation Research Circular E-C183: Monitoring Bicyclist and 
Pedestrian Travel and Behavior”, 2014. 
[17] R. Greene-Roesel, M. C. Diogenes, D. Ragland, and L.A. Lindau, 
“Effectiveness of a Commercially Available Automated Pedestrian 
Counting Device in Urban Environments”, TRB Annual meeting CD-
ROM,  2008. 
[18] D. Bussche and P. V. de Coevering, "BikePRINT–In Depth Analysis 
of Cyclist Behaviour and Cycle Network Performance Using GPS-
Tracking Technology." European Transport Conference 2015. 2015. 
[19] A. Vij and K. Shankari, “When is big data big enough? Implications 
of using GPS-based surveys for travel demand analysis”, 
Transportation Research Part C, vol. 56, 446–462, 2015. 
[20] J. Wolf, S. Hallmark, M. Oliveira, R. Guensler and W. Sarasua, 
“Accuracy Issues with Route Choice Data Collection by Using 
Global Positioning System”, In Transportation Research Record: 
Journal of the Transportation Research Board, No. 1660, pp. 66–74, 
1999. 
[21] S. Bricka, J. P. Zmud, J. L. Wolf, and J. Freedman, “Household 
Travel Surveys with GPS: An Experiment”, In Transportation 
Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, No. 
2105, pp. 51–56, 2009. 
[22] G.-H. Cho, D. A. Rodríguez, and K. R. Evenson, “Identifying 
Walking Trips Using GPS Data”, Medicine and Science in Sports and 
Exercise, Vol. 43, No. 2, pp. 365–72, 2011. 
[23] P. Stopher, C. FitzGerald, and J. Zhang, “Search for a global 
positioning system device to measure person travel”, Transport. Res. 
Part C: Emerg. Technol., vol. 16 (3), pp. 350–369, 2008. 
[24] Y. Yue, T. Lan, A.G.O. Yeh, and Q. Li, “Zooming into individuals to 
understand the collective: A review of trajectory-based travel 
behaviour studies”, Travel Behaviour and Society, vol. 1, pp. 69–78, 
2014. 
[25] N. Facchiano, A. Kingman, A. Olore, and D. Zuniga, “Sampling 
Strategies for Error Rate Estimation and Quality Control (Project 
Number: JPA0703)”. Worcester Polytechnic Institute. Available 
from: 
https://www.wpi.edu/Pubs/E-project/Available/E-project-
042308-150804/unrestricted/JPA-0703_JHMQP_FINAL.pdf. 
April, 
2008. 
[26] E. Bossuyt, J. Christiaens, N. Deham, E. Franchois, and I. Vleugels, 
“Assessment of the potential and conditions for use in behaviour 
change initiatives”, Report, Project TRACE – Walking and Cycling 
Tracking Services, 2016. 
[27] J. Bernardino et al., “Walking and Cycling Tracking for Planning 
Information and guidelines on using tracking data for mobility 
planning”, Report from project TRACE, 2016. 
[28] I. Semanjski, “Move platform, i-Know consortium presentation”, 1st 
TRACE Take-Up Group meeting. Brussels, January 21, 2016. 
[29] www.fietstelweek.nl, Retrieved 16 February 2016. 
[30] I. Semanjski, A.J. Lopez Aguirre, J. De Mol, and S. Gautama "Policy 
2.0 Platform for Mobile Sensing and Incentivized Targeted Shifts in 
Mobility Behavior." Sensors 16.7 (2016): 1035. 2016. 
[31] G. Romanillos, M. Zaltz Austwick, D. Ettema, and J De Kruijf, "Big 
data and cycling." Transport Reviews 36.1 (2016): pp. 114-133. 
[32] European Union, "Guidelines. Developing and Implementing a 
Sustainable Urban Mobility Plan", Brussels, 2013. 
[33] Nordyske cykelbyer, Process plan for preparation of a cycling 
account, 
Published 
online 
at 
http://www.nordiskecykelbyer.dk/upload/NonPublic/Proces_plan_cyc
ling_account.pdf , 2013. 
[34] Wikipedia contributors, "Google Traffic," Wikipedia, The Free 
Encyclopedia, 
https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Google_Traffic&oldid=71
8736727 [retrieved: August, 2016]. 
[35] A. Kesting and M. Treiber, "Calibrating car-following models by 
using trajectory data: Methodological study." Transportation 
Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board 2088 
(2008): pp. 148-156, 2008. 
[36] E. Brockfeld, R. Kühne, and P. Wagner, "Calibration and validation 
of microscopic traffic flow models." Transportation Research Record: 
Journal of the Transportation Research Board 1876 (2004): pp. 62-70, 
2004. 
[37] www.bikeprint.nl/ [retrieved: August, 2016]. 
[38] http://polisnetwork.eu/ [retrieved: August, 2016]. 
[39] TRACE – Walking and cycling tracking services, Horizon 2020 
under grant agreement No 635266. http://h2020-trace.eu/  
[40] http://www.rupprecht-consult.eu/nc/projects/projects-
details/project/presto.html [retrieved: August, 2016]. 
[41] www.bypad.org/ [retrieved: August, 2016]. 
[42] http://www.champ-cycling.eu/ [retrieved: August, 2016]. 
[43] https://www.google.rs/maps/ [retrieved: August, 2016]. 
[44] http://www.cyclingchallenge.eu/ [retrieved: August, 2016]. 
[45] https://www.strava.com/ [retrieved: August, 2016]. 
 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

