Determing the Business Value of Business Intelligence with Data Mining Methods 
 
Karin Hartl, Olaf Jacob 
Department of Information Management 
University of Applied Sciences Neu-Ulm (HNU) 
Neu-Ulm, Germany 
karin.hartl@hs-neu-ulm.de, olaf.jacob@hs-neu-ulm.de 
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents a research project which aims to 
determine the value of Business Intelligence (BI) and 
Corporate Performance Management (CPM) with the help of 
Data Mining methods. The starting point of the research is the 
hypothesis that the value proposition of BI can be measured on 
the success of CPM. Previous empirical studies try to define 
the impact of BI on CPM with research methods like 
explanatory factor analysis or structural equation modeling. 
This paper discusses the use and benefit of Data Mining 
methods for exploring the value of BI. It clarifies why specific 
Data Mining methods are seen as a beneficial tool to determine 
the relation between BI and CPM.  
Keywords-Business Intelligence; Corporate Performance 
Management; Data Mining; Business Value. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
The challenge companies have to face nowadays for 
success and existence proves to be increasingly difficult. 
Globalization intensifies the competition and digitalization 
leaves enterprises with an immense amount of mainly 
unstructured data. These data and the contained information, 
however, are assumed to be the key to ensure the survival of 
an enterprise in the rapidly changing business environment. 
BI as a method of analyzing data and the business 
environment promises companies to support their decision 
making process [2]. The support is achieved by acquiring, 
analyzing and disseminating information from data 
significant to the business activities [1]. Accordingly, BI is 
seen as a source for quality data and actionable information. 
This implies that the appropriate use of BI systems supports 
the success of organizations [3].  
As BI projects are not exempt from the increasing 
pressure in companies to justify the return on IT Investment, 
the business value of BI needs to be measured [5]. Due to 
the abstract nature of BI capturing its value, it is a strategic 
challenge [6][4]. Generally, BI systems don’t pay for 
themselves strictly by cost reduction. Most BI benefits are 
intangible and hard to measure [5]. Williams and Williams 
[6] point out that the business value of BI lies in its use 
within the management processes. Therefore, the concept of 
CPM evolved, which is understood as the appropriate 
context to prove the value proposition of BI [4]. It is defined 
by Gartner as “an umbrella term that describes all 
processes, methodologies, metrics and systems needed to 
measure and manage the performance of an organization” 
[9]. CPM presents the strategic deployment of BI solutions 
and is born out of a company need to proactively manage 
business performance [8][10]. Inferentially, CPM needs BI 
to work effectively on accurate, timely and high quality data 
and BI needs CPM for a purposeful commitment [9]. 
Consequently, it is expected that the effectiveness of CPM 
increases with the effectiveness of the BI solution and 
therefore company success improves as well [11]. A 
hypothesis can be put in place, which states that the value 
proposition of BI can be measured on the success of CPM. 
This research aims to define the link between CPM and BI 
with the use of Data Mining methods and is based on the 
findings of Jacob and Lien Mbep [3]. In the research field of 
BI, exploratory factor analysis and structural equation 
modeling are the dominant research methods. As addressed 
in this paper, it is assumed that Data Mining techniques are 
able to answer different kinds of research questions than the 
above mentioned approaches on the subjects of BI and 
CPM. Data Mining could be suitable to gain more detailed 
information and could be a more appropriate approach to 
examine the business value of BI on the effectiveness of the 
CPM processes. 
In Section 2 of this paper an overview of subject related 
research and its importance for this research is given. 
Section 3 highlights the motivators for using Data Mining 
techniques to discover the relationship between BI and 
CPM. In Section 4, the aspired research approach is 
explained including the Data Mining methods which will be 
applied. Section 5 closes with a short conclusion on why 
Data Mining is seen as a beneficial approach to determine 
the business value of BI.  
II. 
SUBJECT RELATED RESEARCH 
In the last couple of years, various studies regarding the 
business value of BI emerged. An early approach has been 
made by the Viva Business Intelligence Company [4] in 
discussing general principles on how the business value of 
BI could be measured. The article underlines that the direct 
monetary benefits are hard to calculate and that the 
significance of BI programs lies in the production and 
analyzation 
of 
information 
[4]. 
Even 
though 
the 
standardization of the BI-output for measurement purposes 
is suggested and possible measures are stated, no detailed 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

examination has been accomplished. Williams and Williams 
[6] expose the necessity to determine how BI is used in a 
company for the quest of defining the value proposition of 
BI. It is shown that the business value of BI lies especially 
in its use within the management processes of a company 
that impact the operational processes. The return on BI 
investment is assumed to be measurable on the increased 
revenues and reduced costs. But BI is more than monetary 
benefits. It is a complex process that makes an in depth 
evaluation of the impact it has on the management processes 
necessary. In 2004, Miranda [12] brought BI into context 
with CPM by summarizing CPM as a business management 
approach that supports companies in the way they operate 
by using business analysis. CPM is a management process 
based on BI systems. Therefore, CPM is identified as a 
suitable framework for determining the business value of 
BI. This conclusion provides the foundation for more 
detailed research in the field, including the following.  
Empirical studies on the investigation of the business 
value of BI have mainly been realized just recently. Yogev 
et al. [13] addresses the question of the business value 
gained by implementing a BI system in an enterprise 
through using a process oriented approach. The research 
model formulated is built on the resource based view of a 
firm. It identifies key BI resources and capabilities as 
possible explanatory factors of the value creation that can be 
accomplished with the implementation and application of a 
BI system. Hypothesis are formulated that can be 
summarized to state that BI has a positive effect on the 
operational and strategic business processes. Data have been 
collected using a survey consisting of seven-point Likert 
scale items, anchored at the ends by “strongly agree” and 
“strongly disagree”. The research method applied is 
structural equation modelling and the confirmatory factor 
analysis is identified as showing a satisfactory model fit. 
The results illustrate that BI has a positive effect on both the 
operational and the strategic level of the company. 
Nevertheless, no further details are given on the intensity of 
the positive effect BI has on performance management, on 
how this positive effect can be measured nor on the BI 
related resources which create these positive effects. 
Richard et al. [11] are the first to investigate the impact of 
BI on CPM. The aim of the study is the examination of the 
impact of commonly used BI technologies on the CPM 
related management practices which include planning, 
measurement and analysis. The role BI plays in supporting 
CPM related managements practices is to be identified to 
enable IT practitioners to better understand the influence of 
BI technologies across the CPM cycle. The main research 
hypothesis states that “the more effective the BI 
implementation, the more effective the CPM-related 
management practices” [11]. The research model as shown 
in Figure 1 supposes that BI directly influences and supports 
measurement, planning and analytics. The effectiveness of 
planning, measurement and analytics, again, influences the 
effectiveness of the company processes. To answer the 
research hypothesis, sample data have been collected by 
using a questionnaire which is based on items in the Likert 
scale format [11]. 
 
 
Figure 1.   Research Framework [11] 
After collecting the data, Richard et al. [11] used an 
exploratory factor analysis to reduce the number of 
variables complied in the questionnaire followed by the 
partial least square (PLS) analysis. The findings suggest that 
BI positively influences planning effectiveness, analytics 
effectiveness and through these, indirectly influences 
process effectiveness as well. Even though the research 
identifies a direction of how BI influences CPM, the 
specific BI mechanisms who do so are not defined. 
Therefore, Richard et al. [11] suggests further studies on this 
subject, which will be done by this research. 
The subject related work is complemented by this study 
as the previous findings have been used as the initial point. 
Miranda [12] identifies the importance CPM has in 
determining the business value of BI and Richard et al. [11] 
applies this knowledge. But besides discovering and proving 
a positive connection between BI and CPM, both researches 
lack detail. It is still not clarified which BI related tools and 
processes influence the CPM of a company and which CPM 
processes are effected. Therefore, the CPM process has to 
be identified in more detail. Based on a process model 
defined by Lien Mbep et al. [10] and an empirical analysis 
Jacob and Lien Mbep [3] identified a set of both CPM and 
BI related items. These items are understood as suitable to 
measure the appropriate use of BI on one site and CPM on 
the other. By bringing them together it is aimed to identify 
the BI related resources and factors which influence the 
CPM cycle positively. Furthermore, the strength on how the 
resources and factors positively influence the effectiveness 
of a company CPM is to be identified. 
III. 
MOTIVES FOR THE DATA MINING APPROACH 
The common approach in the research field of determining 
the value of BI is using exploratory factor analysis first and 
then confirmatory factor analysis second. With the 
exploratory factor analysis correlating items are organized 
together in groups and summed up as a factor. Data can be 
structured and reduced this way. This structured and 
reduced data are then analyzed with the PLS method by 
seeking the optimal predictive linear relationship to assess 
the previous defined causal relationship. The creation of 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

factors for compacting information might be the right 
approach for many research subjects, but is it the only 
correct approach for defining the business value of BI? It is 
assumed that Data Mining can highly contribute to the 
subject. It presents the opportunity to answer different as 
well as more specific research questions then the commonly 
used approaches. Instead only testing assumed hypothesis 
with Data Mining otherwise undiscovered data attributes, 
trends and patterns can be explored [14]. This can be done 
with predictive and explanatory Data Mining methods. With 
explanatory Data Mining data can be interpreted and a better 
understanding of connections in the dataset is to be achieved 
[18]. Predictive Data Mining procedures aim to define 
prediction models from existing data, which allows 
forecasting unknown values in new data [18]. Although 
Data Mining is only seen as most suitable for large datasets, 
Natek and Zwilling [17] disclose that the use of small 
datasets in specific Data Mining analysis are not limiting the 
use of the tool. Data Mining can be understood as an 
extension of statistical data analysis and statistical 
approaches [16]. Both approaches aim to discover structure 
in data, but Data Mining methods are generally robust to 
non-linear data, complex relationships and non-normal 
distributions [15]. These differences between Data Mining 
and the commonly used statistical approaches are assumed 
to supply more detailed and surprising results for the 
research field of BI and CPM. 
IV. 
RESEARCH APPROACH 
This research bases on the findings of Jacob and Lien 
Mbep [3], where a set of criteria that is seen as most suitable 
to represent CPM on one and BI on the other side has been 
identified. In total a set of 20 CPM related items and 28 BI 
related items have been selected. Now a supplementary 
study is needed to bring the criteria of both fields together 
and to explain the relationship between BI and CPM [3]. 
Therefore, the identified criteria have been transformed into 
questionnaire items which are to be answered on a five-
point Likert scale. The anchor points at the ends of the scale 
are “does not apply” and “does apply” and an additional 
definition “applies half and half” for the mid stage has been 
defined. The data collection is taking place at the moment 
by using an online questionnaire. Subjects are German 
companies who use BI for supporting their performance 
management. Hence decision makers from management, 
controlling and IT are addressed. With the survey results 
inter alia the following research questions are to be 
answered which can be done by using various Data Mining 
techniques.  
 
R1: Which relations persist between the CPM criteria and 
the BI criteria?  
R2: Which patterns exist between the interviewed 
companies? 
R3: Is the CPM development of a company predictable 
through the occurrence of the BI characteristics of a 
company? 
 
To answer the above questions a procedure model has to 
be first defined. In the Data Mining literature, a broad 
variety of those can be found, like the Cross Industry 
Standard Process for Data Mining (CRISP-DM) process 
model or the overall procedure model Knowledge Discovery 
in Data Bases (KDD) [18]. They all have the main steps in 
common. The ones shown in Figure 2 will be followed in 
the examination of the defined research questions [18]. As 
the data are especially generated for the research purpose, 
no selection of the appropriate dataset is necessary. 
Therefore, the starting point for the data analysis will be 
preprocessing of the data. Data will be cleansed and 
missing, as well as conflicting values corrected. The main 
issue this research assumedly has to deal with are missing 
values. Cleve and Lämmel [18] suggest alternatives for 
dealing with missing values depending on the data structure. 
The important items of the questionnaire are formatted as 
Likert scale items and can be interpreted as metric data. 
Metric data can be preprocessed by replacing the missing 
values in the sample by the mean value of all item-based 
compiled answers. The mean values also can be stated by 
contemplating the datasets closest to the dataset with the 
missing value. This idea follows the k-nearest neighbours 
(kNN) approach and will most likely be applied to the 
collected dataset. After preprocessing, the data will be 
transformed in the required format for the applicable Data 
Mining technique. Data Mining algorithms demand specific 
data types. For example, the kNN prefers metric data and 
the Apriory Algorithm needs binary data [18]. Before 
operating, the below discussed Data Mining techniques it 
has to be ensured, that the correct data types for each 
method are provided. In the third step the data will be mined 
by applying the algorithm identified as most suitable to 
answer the above mentioned research questions. Afterwards, 
in step 4, the outcomes will be interpreted and evaluated.  
 
 
Figure 2.  Research Procedure Model 
As the study aims to determine the business value of BI on 
the processes of the CPM of a company, firstly, the relations 
between CPM and BI are to be explored. The common 
approach would be to correlate the collected data. This way, 
the linear connections between BI and CPM can be 
explored. To get a detailed result on criteria basis that would 
mean to correlate the 20 CPM items of the questionnaire 
with the 28 BI items, if no hypothesis are put in place 
beforehand. Accordingly, researchers would apply an 
exploratory factor analysis to reduce the data. This may 
mean more structure and a better overview, but also is 
associated with data loss and loss of accuracy plus detail. 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

Data Mining as a technique to discover new and unexpected 
patterns and relationships in data is assumed to be a second 
approach for determining connections and associations. In 
comparison with correlation or regression analysis many 
Data Mining techniques do not imply connections in 
advance but discover them automatically. It is assumed that 
the above mentioned research questions can be answered by 
the following Data Mining techniques, as shown in Table 1. 
To answer research question one R1, Association Rule 
Discovery will be applied. With association rules, co-
occurrence relationships between data items can be 
discovered, taking into account as many research items as 
needed and available [18]. This, indeed, can lead on the 
upside to more detailed results and on the downside to an 
enormous 
amount 
of 
discovered 
association 
rules. 
Unmanageable amounts of association rules easily can be 
organized 
by 
instating 
metrics 
that 
measure 
the 
interestingness 
of 
the 
discovered 
connections. 
An 
appropriate metric could be Lift [18]. To generate 
association rules many algorithms are available. The 
Apriory Algorithm is the classic procedure and works in 
two steps [19]. First, frequent itemsets are identified before 
the confident association rules are generated. In this 
research, association rule discovery will be applied to find 
relation rules between BI and CPM. Before applying the 
Apriory Algorithm to the compiled dataset the data will be 
transformed into binary variables. This transformation gives 
each of the items the two characteristics “distinct” or “not 
distinct”. After executing the Apriory Algorithm to the 
cleansed data it is assumed that many anticipated 
connections between BI and CPM are shown. But also 
interesting new results are expected. As the analysis will 
include all criteria from both CPM and BI, detailed 
outcomes are targeted. The results will be association rules, 
showing which BI items and which CPM items appear 
together in one of the above mentioned characteristics. For 
example, a discovered rule could state, that if BI item 1 and 
BI item 2 are distinct, then there will be a high chance that 
CPM item 3 as well is distinct. Furthermore, it can be 
reasoned that the investment of a company in the 
development of BI item 1 and 2 results most likely in a 
higher CPM stage of maturity. 
The second research question R2 asks for similarities 
between the companies interviewed. The regarding results 
could provide information that states if the company size 
influences the successful use of BI and CPM. Also it could 
be shown whether companies with well-established CPM 
strategies also have a well-functioning BI system. 
Corresponding results may create room for conclusions of a 
positive connection between the successful use and 
implementation of the BI system in a company and an 
effective CPM. Patterns and groups in the research criteria 
can be found by using clustering. Clustering organizes data 
without previous knowledge of potential groups [18]. It 
organizes the examination objects by means of their 
similarity. 
TABLE I.  
OVERVIEW OF THE APPLICAPLE DATA MINING 
TECHNIQUES 
Research Issues and applicable Data Mining Techniques 
Research Issue 
Data Mining 
Method 
Algorithm 
Examining 
the 
relationship 
between the CPM criteria and 
the BI criteria 
Association 
Rule 
Discovery 
Apriory 
Algorithm 
Pattern discovery  
Clustering 
k-means 
algorithm 
Predictability 
of 
the 
CPM 
development 
Classification 
decision tree 
modelling 
 
The objects belonging to one group are as much as possible 
homogenous based on their characteristics [18]. The groups, 
however, are as heterogeneous as possible among 
themselves [18]. In clustering all attributes available can be 
used in parallel. This offers a detailed view of the cluster 
features and enables a thorough view on the relations 
between BI and CPM. Clustering is done by defining a 
similarity and distance measure, which is also known as 
proximity measure. For ordinal scaled variables the City-
Block-Metric is an appropriate measure [20]. A first 
interesting result on the research data is believed to be 
accomplished by using the k-means algorithm as it is the 
best known partitioning algorithm [21]. The data are 
iteratively partitioned into k clusters by using a distance 
function. The quantity of clusters k has to be defined 
beforehand [21]. A hierarchical cluster analysis, like the 
Ward’s method, can help to define the number of clusters 
needed [21]. Results could be two or more clusters in which 
the companies surveyed can be divided. An example 
outcome could show that companies belonging to the same 
industrial sector group together in one cluster. The 
development of the BI items and CPM items in this cluster, 
furthermore, help to explore the usage and connection of BI 
and CPM in Germanys companies today. This facilitates the 
understanding of the connection BI and CPM have in 
Germany. 
To evaluate the predictability of the CPM development 
in a company on the occurrence of the BI characteristics, as 
asked in question R3, decision tree modelling [18] can be 
applied. The decision tree learning is known as very 
effective and therefore a widely used technique for 
classification [21]. It is a hierarchical classification model 
which means that the research items are tested separately 
according to their importance. In that way, the possible 
classes are limited gradually and visually presented as a 
decision tree [19]. This is usually done by identifying 
successively homogeneous groups in a training dataset in 
concerning the classification variables [19]. The data 
collected will be used as training dataset. The decision tree 
results support the prediction of a company’s CPM maturity 
through evaluating the BI development. It also shows if a 
high development of the BI items leads to a high 
development of the CPM items. In detail, the BI items most 
important to a successful CPM can be identified. 
Conversely, it should be possible to derive the BI tools and 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

processes most important to the effective use of a certain 
CPM process. This supports, in turn, the definition of the 
business value of BI.  
V. 
CONSLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The Data Mining methods association rule discovery, 
clustering and decision tree modelling are seen as powerful 
research tools for determining the business value of BI on 
the effectiveness of CPM. Unlike the commonly used 
research methods like explanatory factor analysis and PLS, 
the Data Mining techniques include all research criteria, 
which is seen to give a more detailed insight and highly 
interesting new findings on the subject. After collecting the 
data sample, the above mentioned Data Mining methods 
will be applied. As indicated in Figure 1, the evaluation and 
discussion of the results will follow as a next step of this 
research. It is assumed that the findings will promote the 
clarification of the relationship between BI and CPM in 
more detail. In a future research, a time-lagged investigation 
is sought to evaluate the study results. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] M. Hannula and V. Pirttimäki, “Business Intelligence 
Empirical Study on the top 50 Finnish Companies”, Journal of 
American Academy of Business, vol. 2, no. 2, 2003, pp. 593-
599. 
[2] M. Aho, "The Distinction between Business Intelligence and 
Corporate Performance Management-A Literature Study 
Combined with Empirical Findings", in Proceedings of the 
MCSP 2010 conference, 2010.  
[3] O. Jacob and F. H. Lien Mbep, “Factors to determine the 
value of Business Intelligence to Corporate Performance 
Management”, Hochschule Neu-Ulm, unpublished. 
[4] Pro-How Paper 2/00, “Measuring the benefits of Business 
Intelligence”, 
Available 
from 
http://legacy.wlu.ca/documents/22449/07_Measuring_the_Be
nefits_of_BI_Viva.pdf, retrieved 2015.02.12. 
[5] S. Negash, "Business Intelligence", The Communications of 
the Association for Information Systems, vol. 13, no. 1, 2004, 
pp.177-195.  
[6] S. Williams and N. Williams, "The Business Value of 
Business Intelligence", Business Intelligence Journal, vol. 8, 
2003, pp. 30–39. 
[7] I. B. Pugna, F. Albescu, and D. Babeanu, "The Role of 
Business Intelligence in Business Performance Management", 
Annals of Faculty of Economics, University of Oradea, vol. 4, 
2009, pp. 1025–1029. 
[8] ResearchandMarkets, 
“Business 
Intelligence: 
Corporate 
Performance 
Management”, 
Available 
from 
http://www.researchandmarkets.com/reports/1055897, 
retrieved 2015.02.19. 
[9] J. Becker, D. Maßing, and C. Janiesch, „An Evolutionary 
Process Modell for the Introduction of Corporate Performance 
Management Systems“, Data Warehousing, 2006, pp. 247–62. 
[10] F. H. Lien Mbep, O. Jacob and L. Fourie, “Critical Success 
Factors of Corporate Performance Management (CPM)”, 
BUSTECH, 2015, pp. 6-14.. 
[11] G. Richard, W. Yeoh, A. Y. Loong Chong, and A. Popovič, 
“An empirical study of Business Intelligence impact on 
Corporate Performance Management”, Proceedings of the 
PACIS 2014 conference, 2014, Paper 341. 
[12] S. Miranda, “Beyond BI: Benefiting from Corporate 
Performance Management Solutions”, Financial Executive, 
vol. 2, 2004, pp. 58-61.  
[13] N. Yogev, L. Fink, and A. Even, “How Business Intelligence 
Creates Value”, ECIS 2012 Proceedings, 2012, Paper 84. 
[14] M. L. Gargano and B. G. Raggad, “Data Mining – a powerful 
information creating tool”, OCLC Systems and Services, vol. 
15, no. 2, 1999, pp. 81-90. 
[15] A. Stolzer and C. Halford, “Data Mining Methods Applied to 
Flight Operations Quality Assurance Data: A Comparison to 
Standard Statistical Methods”, Journal of Air Transportation, 
vol. 12, no. 1, 2007, pp. 6-24. 
[16] J. Jackson, “Data Mining; A Conceptual Overview”, 
Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 
vol. 8, 2002, article 19. 
[17] S. Natek and M. Zwilling, “Data Mining for small student 
dataset”, Management, Knowledge and Leanring Conference, 
2013, pp.1379-1389. 
[18] J. Cleve and U. Lämmel, Data Mining, Oldenbourg 
Wissenschaftsverlag GmbH, 2014. 
[19] H. Peterson, Data Mining: Methods, Processes, Application 
Architectures, Odlenbourg Wissenschaftsverlag GmbH, 2005. 
[20] K. Backhaus, B. Erichson, W. Plinke, and R. Weiber, 
Multivariate Analysis – an application-oriented introduction, 
Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, Aufl. 13, 2011. 
[21] B. Liu, Web data mining exploring hyperlinks, contents, and 
usage data, Springer-Verlag Berling Heidelberg, 2011. 
 
 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

