Improve Operations of Real-Time Image Classiﬁcation Utilizing Machine Learning
and Knowledge Evolution
David Prairie
Electrical and Computer Engineering Dept.
University of Massachusetts Dartmouth
Dartmouth, Massachusetts United States
Email: dprairie@umassd.edu
Paul Fortier
Electrical and Computer Engineering Dept.
University of Massachusetts Dartmouth
Dartmouth, Massachusetts United States
Email: pfortier@umassd.edu
Abstract—This paper delves into the generation and use of
image classiﬁcation models in a real-time environment utilizing
machine learning. The ImageAI framework is used to generate a
list of models from a set of training images and also for classifying
new images using the generated models. Through this paper,
previous research projects and industry programs are analyzed
for design and operation. The basic implementation results in
models that classify new images correctly the majority of the
time with a high level of conﬁdence. However, almost a quarter
of the time the models classify images incorrectly. This paper
attempts to improve the classiﬁcation accuracy and improve the
operational efﬁciency of the overall system as well.
Index Terms—Machine Learning, Tensor Flow, Image Classi-
ﬁcation
I. INTRODUCTION
Presented in this research paper is a new and novel ap-
proach to machine learning design that maximizes the balance
between accuracy, efﬁciency, solution justiﬁcation, and rule
evolution. This research attempts to improve four factors of
machine learning within a single design. Different components
of the system design shall aim to improve one of the four
factors compared to traditional designs. During this research,
traditional open source machine learning methodologies are
altered to improve different aspects of machine learning,
tested against one application. These traditional methodologies
will be integrated using ensemble methods for enhancing
the performance along with providing justiﬁcations for the
classiﬁcation results. This paper will discuss the preliminary
results, data used, the analysis, and validation methodologies
used.
During this research the Identiﬁable Professionals (Iden-
Prof) Dataset was used for training and validating models. The
dataset contains ten image sets of distinguishable professions,
each set containing 900 images for training and 200 images
for validation per profession. The expected outcome of this
research is a two part system capable of analyzing a real-time
feed and perform profession classiﬁcation based on a remotely
generated model.
This paper is broken up into a Background section, where
high-level aspects of machine learning and knowledge-bases
will be discussed. The Methodology will be discussed fol-
lowing the Background section. Following the Methodology
section the preliminary results will be discussed in the Data
Analytics and Results sections. Finally the conclusion will
discuss planned future work and recommended further work.
II. BACKGROUND
Knowledge base systems enable problems to be quickly
and accurately solved based on previous cases. Knowledge
base systems also allow for problem solving of very complex
situations at speeds humans alone would not be able to
achieve at such accuracies. Throughout the last 20 years,
knowledge bases have grown in applications to assist in
everyday tasks. More recently, IBM’s Watson, an Artiﬁcial
intelligence supercomputer, is in the limelight through its uses
in the medical arena and in personal taxes with H&R Block.
Other applications of machine learning have been completed
or are being developed include detecting insider threats, big
data analytics, market analysis for proposals, condition-based
maintenance, and diagnostics in the medical ﬁeld.
In the medical industry, Watson has proven capable of
making the same recommended treatment plans as doctors
99% of the time. Unlike traditional human doctors, Watson can
use all available medical resources when making a patient’s
diagnosis. By having such vast amounts of knowledge, Watson
can provide treatment options doctors may miss. Watson uti-
lizes powerful algorithms and immense computing resources to
analyze all medical relevant data to ﬁnd “...treatment options
human doctors missed in 30 percent of the cases.” [2] Since
Watson has so much computing power it is able to determine
treatment plans for patients faster than human doctors could,
allowing doctors to put patients on treatments faster with
the intervention of Watson. Watson is one example of how
knowledge base systems positively beneﬁt society by efﬁcient
and accurate problem solving of complex problems. Additional
research into knowledge bases will allow them to problem
solve faster, with more accuracy, and with less compute power
requirements.
Condition-Based Maintenance is the method of monitoring
a system’s components to determine what level of maintenance
is required for the system to remain functioning. Using a
Condition-Based Maintenance system for managing mainte-
nance events allows professionals to be proactive with per-
forming maintenance activities versus being reactive. Reactive
maintenance involves replacing components after they already
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-741-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Data Analytics

failed, causing system downtime. When a system goes down
for unscheduled maintenance or repairs, many different reper-
cussions can occur depending on the affected system’s role.
Using air trafﬁc control centers as an example, any unplanned
downtime has the potential to disrupt hundreds of ﬂights
and cost a signiﬁcant amount of money due to ﬂight delays
[11]. Machine learning can be used to assist professionals to
determine optimal maintenance schedules while minimizing
system down time.
Although some of the described applications may not be as
drastic as life or death medical decisions, all still can greatly
affect society. Utilizing machine learning allows organizations
to detect threats, conduct predictive maintenance, and perform
many repeatable decision-making tasks consistently and efﬁ-
ciently. By allowing a machine to learn over time through
historical cases and building a knowledge base, the machine
allows operators to make informed decisions by providing
every available piece of information. Systems are able to make
decisions in a fraction of the time compared to a human
expert attempting to come to the same decision, however
additional advancement is needed to make machine learning
more accurate and efﬁcient. Areas needing additional inquiries
include indexing algorithms, storage solutions, and ﬁnally
the decision-making algorithms themselves. Machine learning
is important because of the wide range of applications and
beneﬁts provided through the decision making and predictions
capable. As the ﬁeld advances, machines will create predic-
tions and perform decision making faster and more completely.
A. Deep Learning Frameworks - Tensor Flow
Tensor Flow is a deep learning framework built on the
ﬁrst generation framework called DistBelief. Both frameworks
were developed by Google to advance technology for the pub-
lic and for use in Google’s wide range of data products [13].
One of TensorFlow’s major improvements over DistBelief is
its ability to scale up onto large distributed hardware platforms
utilizing multiple CPUs and GPUs. Tensor Flow utilizes a
master orchestrator to distribute work across the number of
hardware platforms available, each individual platform then
breaks the work down to be solved across each system’s
available CPUs and GPUs.
Benchmarks conducted by Google researchers showed the
Tensor Flow framework performs, as well as other popular
training libraries. However, Tensor Flow did not have the best
performance statistics as other libraries in the study when
tested on a single machine platform
B. Rule Evolution IB1 & IB2 Algorithms
The IB1 and IB2 algorithms are used to evolve a system’s
rules used for classiﬁcation by incorporating new cases. The
addition of more instances over time causes the machine to
alter its rules to improve the probability of giving a correct
prediction on future instances. Instances can either enforce
existing rules or go against existing rules. Over the course
of a training period, the IB1 algorithm will converge to the
actual results based on altering its rules. IB1 requires data
to have speciﬁc attributes, making cases distinct enough for
the algorithm to learn over time. If the data does not have
distinct attributes then the machine will not learn, since no
strong points of comparison are available between cases [1].
A downside of the IB1 algorithm is the need to store all
correct and incorrect classiﬁcations over the lifetime of the
machine. The IB2 algorithm is a branch of the IB1 algorithm
that does not require the storage of all classiﬁcations, only the
incorrect classiﬁcations. The trade off of saving storage space
is the increase in time required for the IB2 algorithm to learn
to predict with strong accuracy [1].
During the evaluation of both the IB1 and IB2 algorithms,
researchers determined both algorithms are able to achieve
acceptable prediction accuracies in some situations. However,
IB1 attains greater accuracies on each scenario when compared
to the IB2 algorithm. The increase in accuracy for IB1 could
be attributed to the storing of all classiﬁcation events versus
only the incorrect classiﬁcations.
III. METHODOLOGY/THEORY
This section discusses the methodology used in the com-
pletion of this research. The research processed followed the
system engineering v-diagram during development. This sec-
tion is further broken into a system architecture and software
architecture sections.
A. System Architecture
The implementation, which is shown in Figure 1, is broken
into four sections; a workstation computer, web server, rasp-
berry pi, and a shared storage box. The workstation computer
contains a NVidia GTX 980ti and is used for generating
models based on the training images. Once the models are
generated they are stored on a centralized shared storage array.
The raspberry pi is used as the real-time image capture device
and performs classiﬁcations utilizing the models.
The web server is the middle point between the workstation
and the raspberry pi, by serving the models generated for the
Pi to download. To enable future learning from real imaging,
the Pi will upload classiﬁed images to the web server for the
Desktop to use in future model generation.
B. Software Architecture
The following software packages and frameworks are used
to generate the models for real-time image classiﬁcations and
for classifying new images:
• Python 3.6
• Tensorﬂow-GPU
• Numpy
• SciPy
• OpenCV
• Pillow
• Matplotlib
• H5py
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-741-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Data Analytics

Fig. 1. System Flow Diagram.
• Keras
• ImageAI [10]
ImageAI is an API that can generate models based on an
image set and perform image classiﬁcations based on the
generated models. The API can generate models using the
Desenet, Inveption v3, Resnet, and Squeezenet algorithms.
The workstation utilizes the above listed software when
generating the initial models used for classiﬁcation. ImageAI is
a wrapper framework for the rest of the libraries, simplifying
the development process. The same ImageAI framework is
used on the raspberry pi for real-time image classiﬁcation
utilizing an add-on camera board. The raspberry pi is capable
of handling the classiﬁcation algorithms because the model
generation and model evolution is ofﬂoaded to the workstation
[9]. This heavily reduces the compute requirements, enabling
the mobile real-time classiﬁcation.
The web server is a repository for the raspberry pi to retrieve
the latest generated models and to upload classiﬁed images
for further analysis. Real-time images are uploaded to the
webserver for manual veriﬁcation of the image’s classiﬁcation
and are then loaded into the desktop as additional training
images to evolve the models. The combination of the Desktop
and Raspberry Pi enables an overall system supporting model
evolution while increasing the efﬁciency of the real-time
classiﬁer [9].
A future implementation adds a system capability of justify-
ing the classiﬁcations provided. The current design behind the
justiﬁcation uses the built in conﬁdence levels provided when
classifying images. An alternative approach includes providing
sample images that were classiﬁed using the same models and
produced the same results.
IV. DATA ANALYTICS
During this research, the Identiﬁable Professionals (Iden-
Prof) dataset [14] is used for evaluating the proposed changes
to the ImageAI algorithm. IdenProf contains 10 distinguishable
professions, listed in Table I. The dataset consists of over 900
images per profession used for training the system’s models
and an additional 200 images per profession for validating the
models. All images are sized to a common pixel dimensions
of 224 by 224 for uniformity. The image set has a make up of
mostly white males from the top 15 most populated countries
[14], compared to other genders or nationalities. During the
duration of this research project additional images can be
gathered by pulling images from Google’s search engine.
TABLE I. Training Images Classiﬁcations
Training Images Classiﬁcations
Profession
Accuracy
Chef
74.5%
Doctor
76.5%
Engineer
86.0%
Farmer
89.5%
Fireﬁghter
90.5%
Judge
92.0%
Mechanic
84.5%
Pilot
87.5%
Police
87.5%
Waiter
72.0%
Current experiments include testing the base algorithms
against the training and validation images. These 200 images
will allow analysis and validation of the models generated at
all three stages of development. Additional experiments will
be planned utilizing the raspberry pi and camera for real-time
image classiﬁcation. The models used in classiﬁcations are
selected based on the assigned accuracy deﬁned during model
generation. For these experiments the models select have over
eighty percent accuracy.
Figure 2 depicts one of the test images for a pilot, one of
the professions used in this research project. When running a
classiﬁcation against image, the system provides three results.
Each result comes with a probability that the answer is correct.
Typically the models generate one answer with a probability of
over 95% and then the remaining two answers will make up the
remaining percentage. In this case, the following probabilities
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-741-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Data Analytics

are produced when classifying Figure
2: Pilot: 99.9527%,
Chef: 0.0457%, and Mechanic: 0.0015%.
Fig. 2. Sample Profession Image - Pilot
V. RESULTS
Initial runs for the system produced expected results, as
shown in “Table I”. Two professions to take note of are the
Chef and Waiter. From reviewing the Chef and Waiter images,
there are many images where its difﬁcult to distinguish which
profession the image is of. Incorporating additional models for
classiﬁcation and using a voting scheme (described in the next
section) could produce more accurate classiﬁcations.
When reviewing the model’s perceived accuracy on clas-
siﬁcation, the top profession is consistently listed as 95% or
higher. This shows although the models are not able to reach
the correct classiﬁcation every time, the model produces a high
level of certainty on the correct answer. When reviewing the
raw data, a pattern arose showing when the models classiﬁed
an image incorrectly, the probability produced tends to be
signiﬁcantly lower.
VI. CONCLUSION
At this stage in development the system has only been
implemented using base algorithms and libraries with no other
design improvements. The next step in development is to
implement a voting scheme where the system will utilize
multiple generated models to classify new images. Then the
system will use the prediction from multiple models and
use a voting method incorporating the model probability to
determine a classiﬁcation. The voting result is not necessary
equal votes per model, the votes can be based on the model’s
conﬁdence in the answer the individual model is providing.
For instance, if one model has a 98% conﬁdence in the answer
provided and the second model only has a 80% conﬁdence,
then chances are the ﬁrst model would be the better of the
two results to go with.
Upon completing the accuracy improvements, the system
implementation will be broken up into the same format
discussed in Figure
1. Currently the implementation has
all model generation and model validation being conducted
locally on Desktop. This is done to simplify the process, while
ensuring the base algorithms are operating correctly. Once the
remaining design are implemented a deeper system analysis
will be completed. The analysis will include determining the
reliability of the overall system and determining the theoretical
versus actual efﬁciency of the algorithm.
Beyond the implementations and the analysis, additional
work should be done collecting real-time images. The majority
of the images used in this research project are collected
from international researchers. A collection of images from
additional countries, like the United States or United Kingdom,
should be done to see if models are capable of classifying
images correctly from other nations. This can also incorporate
utilizing the raspberry pi at an event or walking around in
pubic to do real-time classiﬁcations.
This research project attempts to incorporate common open
source algorithms to enable real-time image classiﬁcation
using minimal processing power. By enabling the system to
operate on minimal processing power at the user level, the
system can be applied to new applications without relying
on massive compute infrastructures at the endpoint. The base
algorithms used will be modiﬁed to increase the operational
efﬁciency and accuracy of the overall system.
The end result of this project can be applied to applications,
such as security checkpoints or even used for ﬁeld classifying
insects and animals. As each component is implemented
into the overall design, systems analysis for efﬁciency and
reliability will be conducted to ensure the system is improving.
REFERENCES
[1] D. Aha, D. Kibler and M. Albert, ”Instance-Based Learning Algo-
rithms,” Machine Learning, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 37-66, 1991
[2] D. Galeon, ”Paging Dr. Watson,” 28 October 2016. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://futurism.com/ibms-watson-ai-recommends-same-treatment-
as-doctors-in-99-of-cancer-cases/. [Accessed 22 February 2019].
[3] Dtex Systems, ”The Hidden Security Threat,” Dtex Systems, 2016. [On-
line].
Available:
https://dtexsystems.com/portfolio-items/infographic-
ﬁndings-from-the-2016-costs-of-insider-threats-report/.
[Accessed
21
March 2019].
[4] Q. Althebyan and B. Panda, ”A Knwoledge-Base Model for Insider
Threat Prediction,” Proceedings of the 2007 IEEE Workshop on Infor-
mation Assurance, vol. June, pp. 20-22, 2007.
[5] P. Bakkum and K. Skadron, ”Accelerating SQL Database Operations on
a CPU with CUDA,” University of Virginia, Charlottesville, 2010.
[6] J. Jean, G. Dong, H. Zhang, X. Guo and B. Zhang, ”Query Processing
with An FPGA Coprocessor Board,” in Proceedings of the International
Conference on Engineering and Reconﬁgurable Systems and Algo-
rithms, 2001.
[7] Mart´ın Abadi et al, ”TensorFlow: A System for Large-Scale Machine
Learning,” in 12th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design,
Savannah, 2016.
[8] D. Patil and P. Jayantrao. ”Malicious URLs Detection Using Decision
Tree Classiﬁers and Majority Voting Technique.” Cybernetics and Infor-
mation Technologies. 18. 11-29. 10.2478/cait-2018-0002.
[9] S. Jain, ”How to easily Detect Objects with Deep Learning on
Raspberry Pi”, medium.com, Mar. 20, 2018. [Online]. Available:
https://medium.com/nanonets/how-to-easily-detect-objects-with-deep-
learning-on-raspberrypi-225f29635c74. [Accessed May. 11, 2019].
[10] DeepQuest AI, ”Ofﬁcial English Documentation for ImageAI!” Deep-
Quest AI. [Online]. Available: https://imageai.readthedocs.io/en/latest/.
[Accessed: Feb. 11, 2019].
[11] C. Nichols, ”How many ﬂights come in and out of LAX every
day?,” Los Angeles Magazine, 1 May 2011. [Online]. Available:
http://www.lamag.com/askchris/how-many-ﬂights-come-in-and-out-of-
lax-every1/. [Accessed Mar. 20, 2018].
[12] Homeland Security, ”Combating the Insider Threat,” Homeland Security,
2014.
[13] Google,
”Tensor
Flow”
Google,
[Online].
Available:
https://www.tensorﬂow.org/. [Accessed Apr. 20, 2019]
[14] M. Olafenwa, ”IdenProf Datasheet” Olafenwa, [Online]. Available:
https://github.com/OlafenwaMoses. [Accessed Mar. 16, 2019]
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-741-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Data Analytics

