Big Data Analytics for the Small Social Enterprise
How to Create a Data-Driven Approach to Address Social Challenges?
Soraya Sedkaoui
Dept of Economy University of Khemis Miliana
Algeria
SRY Consulting, Montpellier, France
e-mail: soraya.sedkaoui@gmail.com
Salim Moualdi
Dept of Economy University of Khemis Miliana
Algeria
e-mail: moualdis@yahoo.com
Abstract— Big data and the use of data analytics are being
adopted more frequently, especially in companies that are
looking for new methods to develop smarter capabilities and
tackle challenges in the dynamic processes. This study pays a
particular attention to the role of big data analytics as an
immense potential for addressing societal challenges. It focuses
on how to conduct a data-driven approach to better address
social
concerns
and
challenges
that
social
enterprises,
especially the small ones, are dealing with. The purpose of this
paper is to explore and show how social enterprises can
harness the potential of big data and how the analytics power
can help them find creative solutions to the various societal
concerns.
Keywords: big data; social innovation; SSEs; Analytics;
data-driven.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In the context of social advancement, the availability of
big data enables every individual in a developing community
to
engage
in
economic
activities,
such
as
social
entrepreneurship [1]. Exploiting big data can also be used to
help make decisions to reduce large-scale social problems
and address societal challenges. Many experiences, over the
world, show how big data analytics can generate value for
social good.
Glow, for example, developed an app using big data to
empower
women
to
gain
better
insights
into
their
reproductive systems. Or, IBM’s Canadian Smarter Health
study aggregates millions of data elements from monitors in
ICUs to identify early warning signs of potential newborn
infections, pinpointing issues that even the most experienced
doctor would not have caught using traditional practices [2].
Also, social listening data helped AT&T to identify the
growing sensitivity to texting while driving as a relevant
cause and communications platform.
At this stage, one must wonder ‘how do they do it?’
Somehow, the answer lies in the fact that these enterprises
have seen the potential in using analytics not only to
differentiate their business models but also to innovate. The
power of big data has evolved to become a primary tool in
creating patterns, modeling, and recognizing predictive
patterns, which, in effect, offers valuable insights for social
entrepreneurship to create life-changing opportunities [2].
Despite its importance for Social Innovation (SI), we
have noticed that few studies have analyzed the power of big
data in enhancing Small Social Enterprise (SSEs). SSEs are
concerned as well with the big data phenomenon, which is
also changing the social impact and needs
A SSE is a form of enterprise that places the general
interest above profit, which aims to meet social and
environmental challenges while remaining economically
viable. The fields of application of big data analytics in
social
context
are
numerous,
such
as:
occupational
integration, disability, diet, environment, etc. From health to
agriculture and transport, from energy to climate change and
security, many business models recognize the opportunities
offered by the enormous amounts of data created in real-
time. These models can be provided as a roadmap for this
category of enterprise that seeks to become more successful
social actors by leveraging big data analytics to guide their
social engagements.
But,
they
must
understand
the
evidence
of
new
opportunities for finding appropriate solutions to societal
problems through big data analytics, which has opened new
doors and unleashed data’s potential. Furthermore, the paper
creates a roadmap to help them to deal with social issues
when working with big data.
Therefore, in this study the following research question
will be answered: How can social enterprises drive an
analytical approach to get more value out of the data and
optimize their business model in order to better conduct their
project? Through this question, we recall the context of big
data, its importance in conducting decision-making, its
challenges and the role it plays as a complement to create
new opportunities for SSE in order to address the societal
issues.
This study will cover and discuss the basic concepts that
lie behind the big data analytics in order to highlight its
importance in the SI ecosystem. It does not focus on the
technical aspect of big data, such as how to store and process
large amounts of data, rather, it explores why and how SSEs
might engage operationally with data analytics to better
operate in their ecosystem and derive solutions that allow
them to improve SI.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
describes a short overview of big data analytics. Section III
describes the challenges and the relevant questions when
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-681-1
DATA ANALYTICS 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Data Analytics

working with data. Section IV gives key elements to
undertake in big data analytics for SI. Section V discusses
the development of a data-driven approach for the SSE. The
conclusions close the study.
II.
BACKGROUND: UNDERSTAND BEFORE UNDERTAKE
Before talking about how the social sector can use big
data for SI, this section will discuss the basic concepts of big
data analytics in order to understand the potential of working
with data.
A. Data Analytics Power
Many companies have realized that knowledge is power,
and to get this power they have to gather its source, which is
data, and make sense of it [3]. This was illustrated by the
famous “knowledge pyramid” (see [4]), described as a
“knowledge discovery”.
According to the Oxford dictionary, data are defined as:
“the quantities, characters, or symbols on which operations
are performed by a computer, which may be stored and
transmitted in the form of electrical signals and recorded on
magnetic, optical, or mechanical recording media”.
The potential of data analytics algorithms is deeply
related to the potential of data because data are the material
that Information Technology (IT) tools will harness. Data
are, therefore, a form of wealth, and exploiting it results in an
essential competitive advantage for an ever-tougher context.
In big data age, enterprises will come across many different
types of data (structured, semi-structured and unstructured),
and each of them requires different tools and techniques.
The power of data analytics and their applications, in the
big data age, is no longer to prove. All sectors are warming
up to the benefits of big data analytics. Big data has radically
changed the way data are collected and analyzed since it
introduces new issues concerning volume (how much?),
velocity (at what speed?) and the variety (how diverse?) of
the data available today.
Understanding big data means dealing with data volumes
that are significantly higher than those previously analyzed,
at an incomparable speed (velocity), all while integrating a
widely richer data variety. It is no more about the word ‘big’
now, but it is more about how to handle this ‘big’ amount of
structured, semi-structured and unstructured data, that cannot
be managed with traditional tools, and deal with its high
diversity and velocity to generate value [5].
The added value of big data is the ability to identify
useful data and turn it into usable information by identifying
patterns, exploiting new algorithms, tools and new project
solutions. The idea behind the term ‘big data’ is the one that
justifies that we talk about revolution and not a simple
development of data analysis. What big data brings is the
ability to process and analyze all types of data, in their
original form, by integrating new methods and new ways of
working.
The case of many companies’ experiences illustrates that
data can deliver value in almost any area of business.
Turning
data
into
information
and
then
turning
that
information into knowledge remains a key factor for
business success. So, data in itself is not a power; it is its use
that gives power, and more one gives an exchange of data
and information, more one receives [6].
Big data then is about collecting, analyzing and using
data efficiently and quickly with new tools to gain a
competitive advantage by turning data into knowledge and
generate value.
B. How to Generate Value and Extract Useful Knowledge
Overall, the approach seems to be simple: (i) we need
data; (ii) we need to know what we want to do with it and
(iii) how to do it. This idea can be formalized using the
following definition [7]:
“Analytics is the process of developing actionable
insight through discovery, modeling and analysis, and
interpretation of data”.
While:

The idea of actionable insight is applied to convey
that the objective of analytics is to generate results
that directly increase the understanding of those
involved in the decision-making process [8].

Discovery refers to the problem definition and
exploratory element of analytics; the identification,
collection, and management of relevant data for
subsequent
and/or
concurrent
analysis.
This
discovery stage integrates in [8] emphasis on a
problem definition, with what [9] conceptualizes as
data management, which includes:
-
Problem definition: identify what data to collect,
and begin acquiring it. But, the volume of data
manipulated by some companies has increased
considerably and
is
now in
the order of
Petabytes, Exabytes, and even Zettabytes. Chen
et al. [10] highlight the multitude of techniques
that allow organizations to tap into text, Web,
social networks, and sensors, all of which enable
the acquisition and monitoring of real-time
metrics, feedback, and progress.
-
Data collection: The collection and combination
of semi-structured and unstructured data require
specific
technologies,
which
also
have
to
account for data volume and complexity.
-
Data management: Data management involves
the storage, cleaning, and processing of the data.

Modeling and analysis are concerned with applying
statistical models or other forms of analysis against
real-world or simulated data. The middle stage of
this categorization involves making sense of the
acquired data, to uncover patterns, and to evaluate
the resulting conclusions [11].

Interpretation involves making sense of the analysis
results
of,
and
subsequently
conveying
that
information in the most comprehensible form
onward to the relevant parties. In another words,
making sense of different types of data and generate
value from it, results in some form of finding.
The most important asset of big data has to do with the
fact that they make it possible to apply knowledge and create
considerable value. But, before one attempts to extract useful
knowledge, it is important to understand the overall approach
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-681-1
DATA ANALYTICS 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Data Analytics

that leads to finding new knowledge. The process defines a
sequence of steps (with eventual feedback) that should be
followed to discover knowledge in data. To complete each
step successfully, effective data collection, description,
analysis, and interpretation must be applied [5][12].
Each step is usually realized with the help of available
software tools. Data mining is a particular step in this
process – application of specific algorithms for extracting
models. The additional steps in the process, such as data
preparation, data selection, data cleaning, incorporation of
appropriate prior knowledge, and proper interpretation of the
results of mining ensure that useful knowledge is derived.
III.
ENHANCE INNOVATION WITH BIG DATA
This section is interested in investigating the challenges
that SSEs are dealing with in order to map out an efficient
plan to improve solutions for social issues.
A. Challenges that Social Enterprises are Dealing with
Recently, many studies have employed big data and
analytics for SI [13][14]. The potential for innovation
through data uses and analyzes exists, but, it should be
noticed that there are some obstacles to overcome. The
challenges that social enterprises are dealing with are in
many ways very complex compared to those of enterprises in
business or science sector, which can make the use of big
data that much more difficult. In this context, greater
attention must be paid to the data security and privacy.
So, being a social enterprise is a challenge itself and
small enterprises must recognize the importance of investing
in big data analytics, given its important role as a value
generator.
In order to harvest value from big data, social
enterprises have to address some challenges, such as:

Big data dimension: Each dimension presents both
challenges for data management and opportunities
to advance decision-making. The 3 V’s provide a
challenge associated with working with big data.
The volume emphasizes the storage, memory and
computing capacity of a computing system and
requires access to a computing cloud. The velocity
stresses the rate at which data can be absorbed and
meaningful answers produced. The variety makes it
difficult to develop algorithms and tools that can
address that large variety of input data [15].

Technological context: One of the main issues is the
incompatible
IT
infrastructures
and
data
architectures. IT systems and software should be
able to store, analyze, and derive useful information
from available data [16]. The most successful
companies
understand
the
limitations
of
the
technology behind their big data operation and
recognize the importance of combining analysis
with a sound understanding of the context, a good
intuition for the industry, and a critical attitude
towards insights derived from data.

Managerial context: The keystone of big data
exploitation is to leverage the existing datasets to
create new information, enriching the business
value chain [15]. The major challenge to overcome
is the management’s lack of understanding of the
potential value big data can bring to companies
[16]. The goal was to manage the increasing
amount of data, information and to ensure its usage
and flow across the organization. Data are required
to be managed in different steps and most of all
analyzed [17], for organizations to gain knowledge
and value.
A large part of this challenge, for SSEs, lays in the
complexity of data collection, data analysis, data security,
and how to turn that data into usable information by
identifying patterns, exploiting new algorithms, tools, and
new solutions to address social concerns. They are required
to deal with these several issues to be able to seize the full
potential of big data.
B. Making Plans: Beginning by Understanding
The biggest confusion of the importance of big data
(why?), as with every major innovation, lies in the exact
scope (what?), and its implementation (how?). In this
context, SSEs must pay attention to the data’s boundless
opportunities, if they want to generate solutions to address
social challenges. They must adopt a ‘data-driven approach’.
To better conduct this approach, one needs to have a clear
objective. In other words, the clearer the objectives, the more
focused and rewarding the analytical approach will be.
Of course, there are multiple ways a social enterprise can
become more data-driven. For example, by using big data
technologies,
exploring
new
methods
able
to
detect
correlations
between
the
quantities
of
available
data,
developing algorithms and tools that can address that large
variety of input data, by optimizing the Business Intelligence
process, and more.
SSEs must, therefore, seek the information where it is
not, and the most popular way is probably to ask a lot of
questions and see what sticks. SSEs must seek for the
innovative idea by asking relevant questions [5]. Two
essential components are needed to question whether data
analytics can or cannot add value to a SSE:

Data: What should be done here is exploring all
possible paths to recover the data in order to
identify all the variables that affect, directly or
indirectly, the phenomenon that interests the social
project. An important procedure is to understand the
data that will be collected and then analyzed. The
idea is that the more we have a good understanding
of our data, the better we will be able to use them
wisely. This aims to precisely determine where we
should look for the data, which data to be analyzed
and identify the quality of the data available but
also link the data and their meaning from a business
perspective.

Definition of problem statement: Everything in big
data
analytics
begins
with
a
clear
problem
statement. Determining what type of problem a
social enterprise is facing with, will allow the
enterprise to correctly choose the technique that can
be used. The success of an analytics approach
cannot be possible without the clarification of what
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-681-1
DATA ANALYTICS 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Data Analytics

we want to achieve and what is need to be changed
to embrace the advancement that big data entails.
This is not just valid in big data context but in all
areas.
Big data is opening up a number of new areas for social
enterprise. Just as Facebook has made it easier to share
photos, new analytics products will make it far easier not just
to run analysis but also to share the results with others and
learn from such collaborations [18].
Public institutions, such as the US government, the
World Bank, etc., have understood the power of data
analytics. They made their data available (open data) to be
exploited and analyzed. This perspective allows many
enterprises and businesses to create innovative applications
able to address societal concerns.
Asking interesting questions develop their inherent
curiosity about data that they are working on. The key is
thinking broadly about how to transform data into a form
which
would
help
to
find
valuable
tendencies
and
interrelationships. The following types of questions seem
particularly interesting to better guide a social project:

What things can SSEs learn from the data?

How can they ever understand something they
cannot see (making sense)?

What techniques, methods, and technology do they
need to improve their project strategy?

How to avoid mistakes and get the best models?

How can they learn lessons by analyzing available
data, and what they can do with it?

How to use the results (models) efficiently?

What impacts do they expect on the choices to be
made? Etc.
This kind of questions allow them to better conduct their
project based on data and analytics, that means think about
the ‘meaningful’ of data, so its ‘practice’ [5].
IV.
BIG DATA ANALYTICS AND SOCIAL ENTERPRISE
This section discusses the key elements that can help the
enterprise to conduct a data-driven-approach for SI.
A. Big Data for Social Sector: Challenges and
Opportunities
The generalization of the cloud, intelligent devices, big
data and Artificial Intelligence (AI) coupled with new
human-machine interfaces have revolutionized the business
world and upset the entire economic landscape. With the
emergence of smart devices, the Internet of things (IoT) and
big data age, more and more social enterprises rely on the
use of technology.
According to [2], the concept of smart data is considered
as an exponential part of creating a prosocial brand. In her
research, she discussed the opposite characteristics of doing
social good and big data because both recognize the
important aspects of contemporary markets. The SSE seeks
to create a sustainable business strategy that will encourage
the formation of social values while big data encompasses
growth expectations attributed to private markets [1].
Social enterprises can also promote the achievement of
SI through the utilization of big data analytics. It is the case
of many examples that highlight the potential of big data for
SI. The idea is to combine the passion for social change with
the data analytics field.
In Bhopal India, for example, the Panna Tiger Reserve is
using drones (unmanned aerial vehicles) to safeguard against
tiger poachers. The data collected has allowed them to
improve the efficacy of their efforts and to prove the impact
of their activities, thus encouraging greater support and
funding for their initiatives [2].
Also, the ‘Ushahidi’ application, designed to map
violence after the Kenyan elections in 2008, collects and
disseminates data about urban violence, allowing users to
avoid it and public authorities to prevent it. As for the ‘I
Wheel Share’ application, it facilitates the collection and
dissemination of urban data likely to be useful for people
with disabilities [5].
Or even ‘Deuxio’ the portable sensor developed by
‘Plume Labs’, which measures local air pollution in real-time
and communicates results and data with users. The ‘Victor &
Charles’ provides service that allows hotel managers to
access the digital social profile of their customers in order to
adjust at best their services.
The Social Innovation Program of Qatar Computing
Research Institute (QCRI), in partnership with several
humanitarian organizations, applies big data analytics to
improve humanitarian response.
Also, the Daniel Project, another successful example of
using
big
data
analytics
for
social
impact,
Intel’s
collaboration
with
Not
Impossible
Labs
to
3D-print
prosthetic arms for a 14-year old war victim. Intel’s data
competencies contributed significantly to the technological
solution [2]. The video of this initiative, shared on social
media, captured the hearts and imaginations of consumers
across the world and earned Intel more than a half-billion
online impressions, an impressive quantification of the
intrinsic value of social branding [2].
These examples and many others show the potential of
data-driven approach and its actual impact in helping solve
social problems. Big data is considered a new form of capital
in today’s marketplace [19][20], many firms fail to exploit its
benefits [21]. For SSEs, it is known that they are unlikely to
analyze data on the same scale as large companies (Google,
Facebook, Amazon, IBM, etc), due to their limited sources,
skills and IT tools.
It is possible that they are engaging with the free big data
tools provided by companies like Google, without forgetting
the increase in the prominence of social networks and the
fact that engaging with social media, which can help
generates exposure and traffic for SSEs at a much lower cost
than traditional marketing approaches [22].
But, it is to highlight that they are unlikely to have
capacities and sophisticated tools to capture, prepare, analyze
and manage generated data. In another word, they are not
prepared to fully use the unprecedented amounts of data that
they are able to collect for their unique target populations or
the social issues they address.
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-681-1
DATA ANALYTICS 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Data Analytics

Also, there are several social challenges that social
enterprises are aiming to address, be it environmental,
education, and/or health problems, the innovations that can
be drawn from data are limitless [23]. As for the concept of
smart data, for example, integrating the approach towards
social entrepreneurship brings out an initiative in reinforcing
social values while using information as its core component
[1].
The literature suggests that entrepreneurial orientation is
a useful lens through which to consider the use of big data
analytics in small enterprises. The two dimensions of
entrepreneurial orientation, which point to the link between
small enterprise and big data capabilities, are [16]:

Innovativeness: Achieving social mission through
innovativeness refers to the ability to solve social
problems or in effect to create social value. This
supports a contention that it will be a key indicator
of whether social entrepreneurs will adopt big data
analytics.

Proactiveness: Proactive enterprises can make use
of big data analytics to improve their understanding
of their
customer
and
their
sector,
with
the
condition that they have access to the right sources
of information. It is, therefore, an important element
to consider when looking at big data adoption in
SSEs.
For
example,
through
retaining
the
environment,
this
reflects
the
tangible
and
intangible results of breaking patterns, changes in
the system, and new discoveries towards process
improvement.
So, SSEs have to examine how to exploit successfully the
diverse and voluminous data and how to use the analytical
techniques in order to accomplish their mission and support
sustainable change.
B. Develop a Data-Driven Approach for SSEs
In order to succeed in an analytical approach and boost a
big data project, it is necessary for social enterprises to
prepare it in advance. To do this, three essential questions
must be asked:

Why: The first question to ask is “why? “. In most
cases, this question will inevitably occur during the
initial briefing with a consultant or client. Many big
data projects are launched only because the term big
data is in vogue. Many executives board the wagon
and begin to approve massive investments of time
and money to develop a data platform. Most of the
time, this strategy is based entirely on the motive
that “everyone is doing it”. An in-depth analysis of
the goal that a social enterprise wants to achieve, by
analyzing the data, as well as an assessment of the
investments and expertise that the project needs, are
required but too often overlooked in the context of
the deployment of a big data strategy.

What: In all sectors, companies are now considering
turning the corner on big data and analytics. They
recognize in the data a largely untapped source of
value
creation
and
an
exclusive
factor
of
differentiation.
But,
many
don’t
know
which
approach to tackling. What social enterprise is
trying to do? Does the project objective creating an
innovative market, or find a new channel that
requires information on client interest and future
profitability?

How: While companies do see the great potential
that big data analytics can bring to improve their
business performance, the reality is that many are
struggling to generate value from available data.
Gartner [24] study shows that many big data
projects remain blocked and that only 15% have
been deployed in production. Examining such
failures, it appears that the main factor is in fact not
related to the technical dimension, but rather to the
processes and human aspects that prove to be as
important. Conduct a data-driven project means
also to be able, in particular, to answer questions,
such as: How can we be sure that big data could
help us to create social impact? Who should be
involved and when? What are the key steps that
need to be attentive? Is the project on the right track
to succeed? Etc. It is therefore essential, for data-
driven orientation, to ensure:

For the data: quality, security, structure …;

For the process: well-defined organization, a
data-driven culture, its direction …;

For tools: IT infrastructure, storage, data
visualization
capability,
performance
monitoring.
In order to extract value from big data, it must be
processed and analyzed in a timely manner, and the results
need to be available in such a way as to be able to effect
positive change or influence business decisions. It is also
important to ensure that the social project is progressing
towards the intended result (as depicted in Fig. 1).
Small enterprise in the age of big data, must rely on
varied analytical approaches to thought and action to create
and implement solutions that are socially, environmentally,
and
economically sustainable. Being
a
data-driven
in
business, social or science sector means being at the heart of
data valuing and intervene at all stages of the data value
chain: problem definition, data collection, preparation,
modeling and solution creation.
New analytics approach in big data age combines
predictive and prescriptive analytics to predict what will
happen and how to make it happen. Analytics uses and
applications improve the efficiency of the decision-making
process and generate value.
SSEs have to expand their efforts to move their small
business from using only traditional business intelligence
(BI) that addresses descriptive analysis (what happened) to
advanced analytics, which complements by answering the
“why”, “what” and “how” questions.
Ultimately, ‘data science’ and the algorithm of machine
learning are inevitable as they can help extract various kinds
of knowledge from data, which can be referred to the social
solutions.
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-681-1
DATA ANALYTICS 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Data Analytics

Figure 1.
Data-driven approach for SSEs (create value from data)
SI is based on the power of data and analytics, which
leads to the need for the exploitation of the data potential.
The principle is that by analyzing, in real-time, the data
collected by GPS, satellites, smartphones, social media …
around the world, it is possible to identify trends, make
connections
and
predictions.
SSEs
are
leveraging
the
opportunities of big data universe and must create their own
approach based on data analytics to better derive social
impact [25][26].
V.
DISCUSSION
Analytics widens SSEs scope as an entity, giving them
the ability to do things they never thought were possible. For
example, it offers timely insights, to allow them making
better decisions, about SI opportunities; it also helps them to
ask the right questions and supports them to extract the right
answers as well.
Clearly, the use of big data analytics will provide
numerous opportunities to build social approach based on
data that will effectively and efficiently cater to the needs of
the various entities. In this context, the United Nations
Global Pulse has been created to harness digital data using
analytics tools in order to understand changes in people well-
being.
To improve decision-making processes in the choice of
infrastructure, geolocation data are useful. In Senegal for
example, a GSMA project has identified the most relevant
trajectories for the construction of a road, in line with the
data of journeys operated by mobile phone users. The data
are also used to define maps of illiteracy rates. The same
goes for Ebola, where the mobility of citizens is analyzed to
anticipate population movements.
Also,
in
partnership
with
WHO
(World
Health
Organization), the GSMA has addressed tuberculosis risks
by using anonymous mapping data to measure disease peaks
and predict people at higher risk [27]. The association is also
tracking the resistant forms of malaria using anonymous data
to identify the source and routes of transmission of this
disease.
The ‘Give Directly NGO’ that provides direct donations
to poor people in Africa, is now equipped with a poor village
recognition algorithm based on an automatic analysis of
Google Earth satellite imagery [5][28].
Also, ‘Simpa Networks’, an Indian social enterprise that
rents out-of-use solar panels to households without access to
electricity and donates them after a rental amount, has
obtained a predictive model to identify, among its new
customers, most likely to go through the rental process [29].
Many examples have shown that data-driven solutions
have transformative impacts on SI. These examples have
taken the importance of data from the power of its use and
purpose rather than its volume. These enterprises have
understood that it is the analytics process that can bring
innovative and social benefits.
So, it is the data analysis that will extract all the value
and
especially
allows
developing
a
more
detailed
understanding of the uses. Powerful analytics tools can then
be used to process the information gathered in large sets of
structured, semistructured, and unstructured data.
Data analytics algorithms can provide teams with a
deeper level of evidence so that they can better differentiate
which activities have the greatest social impact and redesign
their services accordingly.
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-681-1
DATA ANALYTICS 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Data Analytics

Be able to act effectively on diverse aspects of data
analysis techniques and IT tools give SSEs the power to
better adapt big data analytics to social needs.
Join the arena of data-driven to SI provides alight on
several points, in this context, some initiatives should be
stepped:

Map out the demand in the social sector to
identify the nature of issues and the solutions
needs.

Explore the social impact of big data, and
identify
mechanisms
through
which
SI
is
achieved [30].

Identify the existing social project in this field in
order
to
have
a
clear
vision
about
the
opportunities and challenges and identify gaps
to better draw their program.

Preparing a solid IT infrastructure to meet the
challenge and be more competitive in the SI
context.

Founding a strategy-based approach, which
must be tailored to analytics practices and
techniques in order to address issues and face
social challenges, including practices in which
they implement their own concepts for their
entrepreneurial orientations.
The placement of these initiatives should be coordinated
with the launch of the social entrepreneurial creative spaces
and the pilot projects (where they could be employed). In
this term, the SI ecosystem must be redesigned and updated
through the integration of the factors and the needs to better
draw the roadmap for SSEs to enable them to use big data
and
advanced
analytics
for
social
good
towards
the
achievement of social change.
Therefore, the efforts should concentrate on creating a
roadmap for success that covers several stages:

Set up the entrepreneur’s social issues direction
(identifying its mission, vision and strategic and
operational objectives).

Establish policies, principles, resources and
expertise guidelines to control ICT and big data
usage.

Evaluate and analyze the current situations and
the necessary changes and additions to reach the
desired result.

Identify priorities and use them to determine the
most important components and techniques that
would offer the greatest social effects with the
smallest investment.

Realize
new
SI
opportunities
for
further
development by monitoring current analytics
developments and their effects and the arising
issues and new requirements.
SI often has a positive connotation associated with
notions of openness, collaboration or inclusion, unlike other
commercial innovations. Whether it takes the form of new
practices, new measures, new programs or new policies, big
data analytics will facilitate the appropriation and adaptation
of social innovations, alleviating those apprehensions and
will benefit the greatest number of people.
This innovation is placed at the intersection of three
areas: innovation, social problems and digital technologies
that increase the quantities of data. To launch a big data
project, SSEs have to master the way it works (see Fig. 1). In
this context, we propose two approaches [31]:

Bottom-Up Approach: This approach goes from the
bottom (the technique) to the top (the organization).
With this approach, social enterprises will first
validate the technical choices through a PoC and a
case of use that they consider relevant. Once the
project has been validated, they can continue with
other
experiments
on
ancillary
domains
(data
analysis, visualization, etc.) or quickly realize a use
case and bring value immediately. This organization
is highly iterative both technically and functionally.
This is obviously the method that brings the fastest
results and can support enterprises’ strategies; in
contrast, its visibility is limited.

Top-Down Approach: This approach will first impact
the organization of the social enterprises to enable
them to launch big data projects. They must define a
big data strategy for their entire social objective, a
schedule of implementation of the concrete objectives
that often result in new offers for the company or the
improvement of existing offers. With this approach,
the concrete results are longer to obtain. In contrast,
objectives, responsibilities, and sponsors are clearly
identified.
From the several examples mentioned in this paper we
can notice that big data analytics can meaningfully support
social
innovation
across
health,
housing,
education,
employment, etc. But, it should be noticed that the
exploration of the data alone will not solve major social
problems. Financial and technological resources are also
needed. Therefore, it is necessary to include enough
resources and finance to support the analytics’ uses by
entrepreneurs for social good. This investment is essential to
reap the full benefits of big data and realize all the
envisioned features and capabilities.
The ability of social enterprises to adopt big data
analytics may be understood by looking at their role in the
determination of the data-driven culture and how they are
deploying their resources to engage with and make use of
analytics tools and methods in their field.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
To promote the SI process based on data analytics,
specific attention will be paid to the SSEs that want engaging
in this field. This is important because, it helps to understand
their roles, their needs, the challenges they are dealing with,
the social value they can generate, and their position in the SI
ecosystem. Thus, it is needed to address the existing need for
theoretical and methodological frameworks, which build on
the different elements that iterate in the social construction of
SI and account for its complexity and contextual dimensions
[32].
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-681-1
DATA ANALYTICS 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Data Analytics

This paper addresses the importance of big data for small
SSEs, without covering all the areas where data analytics
may benefit the social innovation. It allows an understanding
of the importance of big data for social sector and how these
tools can revolutionize and help the SSEs to evaluate the
efficiency of the social project in order to enhance their
future directions.
This paper contributes to SI literature by creating a data-
driven approach that can help the social enterprise to grow in
unpreceded ways by harnessing the available data and
understand the social needs and issues. This work paves the
ground for developing a more mature data-driven approach,
where real case studies are involved to test the efficiency of
this approach in meeting various social impacts through a
flexible data analytics process.
Future research should focus on data-driven SI, as this
relates to the results and outcomes of data use, from
generating innovative social solutions (products or service)
to improving business and social efficiency. To better
analyze the social impact of big data, more empirical studies
are needed to understand more reasons for which social
enterprises must integrate big data analytics in the SI
ecosystem.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. T. Matriano and F. R. Khan, “Technological platforms for social
entrepreneurship and community engagement”, International Journal
of Management, Innovation & Entrepreneurial Research, vol. 3 n°1,
pp. 40-47, 2017.
[2]
L. Pascaud, Smart data at the heart of Prosocial Brands, Kantar
Added
Value,
[retrieved:
February,
2018]
http://added-
value.com/2015/01/23/smart-data-at-the-heart-of-pro-social-brands/
[3]
S. Sedkaoui, “Statistical and Computational Needs for Big Data
Challenges”, In A. Al Mazari (Ed.), “Big Data Analytics in
HIV/AIDS Research”, (pp. 21-53). Hershey, PA: IGI Global, 2018,
doi:10.4018/978-1-5225-3203-3.ch002
[4]
R. L. Ackoff, “From data to wisdom”, Journal of Applied Systems
Analysis, vol. 15, pp. 3-9, 1989
[5]
S. Sedkaoui, Data analytics and big data, London: ISTE-Wiley, 2018.
[6]
B. Martinet and Y. M. Marti, Economic Intelligence: How to Give
Competitive Value to Information , Paris, Editions d’Organisation,
2001.
[7]
A. Van Barneveld, K. E. Arnold, and J. P. Campbell, “Analytics in
higher education: Establishing a common language”, EDUCAUSE
learning initiative, vol. 1 n°1, pp. l-ll, 2012
[8]
A.
Cooper,
“What
is
analytics?
Definition
and
essential
characteristics”, CETIS Analytics Series, vol. 1 n°5, pp. 1-10, 2012.
[9]
A. Labrinidis and H. V. Jagadish, “Challenges and opportunities with
big data”, Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, vol. 5 n° 12, pp.
2032-2033, 2012.
[10] H. Chen, R. H. L. Chiang, and V. C. Storey, “Business intelligence
and analytics: From big data to big impact”, MIS Quarterly, vol. 36
n°4, pp. 1165-1188, 2012.
[11] G. S. Tomar, N. S. Chaudhari, R. S. Bhadoria, and G. C. Deka, The
Human Element of Big Data: Issues, Analytics, and Performance,
CRC Press, 2016.
[12] W. W. Piegorsch, Statistical Data Analytics, New York: Wiley, 2015.
[13] R. Dubey, et al, Can big data and predictive analytics improve social
and environmental sustainability?, Technological Forecasting and
Social Change, in press, 2017.
[14] C. Njuguna and P. McSharry, “Constructing spatiotemporal poverty
indices from big data”, Journal of Business Research, vol. 70, pp.
318-327, 2017.
[15] S. Sedkaoui, “The Internet, Data Analytics and Big Data”, Chapter 8.
In Gottinger, H.W (Eds), “Internet Economics: Models, Mechanisms
and Management” (pp. 144-166), eBook Bentham Science Publishers,
Sharjah, UAE, 2017.
[16] S. Sedkaoui, “How data analytics is changing entrepreneurial
opportunities?”, International Journal of Innovation Science, Vol. 10
n° 2, pp.274-294, 2018. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJIS-09-2017-0092
[17] S. Kudyba, “Information Creation through Analytics”, In S. Kudyba
(Ed.), “Big Data, Mining, and Analytics. Components of Strategic
Decision Making”, (pp. 17-48). Boca Raton: CRC Press Taylor and
Francis Group, 2014.
[18] D. Feinleib, Big Data Bootcamp: What Managers Need to Know to
Profit from the Big Data revolution, Apress, 2014.
[19] V. Mayer-Schonberger and K. Cukier, Big Data: A Revolution That
Will Transform How We Live, Work and Think, Boston, Ma:
Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2013.
[20] G. Satell, Five things managers should know about the big data
economy. Forbes, 2014.
[21] S. Mithas, M. R. Lee, S. Earley, and S. Murugesan, “Leveraging big
data and business analytics”, IT Professional, vol. 15 n° 6, pp. 18–20,
2013.
[22] L. C. Schaupp and F. Bélanger, “The value of social Media for small
businesses”, Journal of Information Systems, vol. 28 n° 1, pp. 187-
207, 2014.
[23] A. Peredo and M. McLean, “Social entrepreneurship: A critical
review of the concept”, Journal of World Business, vol. 41 n°1, pp.
56-65, 2006.
[24] Gartner, (2016), “Investment in big data is up but fewer organizations
plan
to
invest”,
[retrieved:
November,
2017]
https://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/3466117
[25] D. Archibugi, “The social imagination needed for an innovation-led
recovery”, Research Policy, vol. 46 no.3, pp.554-556, 2017.
[26] W.
Bijker,
“Constructing
Worlds:
Reflections
on
Science,
Technology and Democracy (and
a
Plea
for
Bold
Modesty)”,
Engaging Science, Technology, and Society, vol. 3, pp.315-331.
[27] GSMA Press Office, (2018), “GSMA expands big data for social
good initiative, announces successful first wave of trials”, [retrieved:
September,
2018]
https://www.gsma.com/newsroom/press-
release/gsma-expands-big-data-social-good-initiative-announces-
successful-first-wave-trials/
[28] Z. Guo, et al,” Identification of Village Building via Google Earth
Images and Supervised Machine Learning Methods”, Remote Sens,
MDPI, vol. 8n° 271, pp. 1-15, 2016.
[29] GSMA, (2017), “Mobile for Development Utilities Lessons from the
use of
mobile in
utility pay-as-you-go
models”,
[retrieved:
September, 2018] https://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/wp-
content/uploads/2017/01/Lessons-from-the-use-of-mobile-in-utility-
pay-as-you-go-models.pdf
[30] I. Pappas, M. L. Jaccheri, P. Mikalef, and M. Giannakos, “Social
innovation and social entrepreneurship through big data: developing a
research agenda”, proceeding of the 11th Mediterranean Conference
on Information Systems (MCIS), Genoa, Italy, 2017. 12, pp. 1-14.
[31] S. Sedkaoui, Big Data Analytics for Entrepreneurial Success, New
York: IGI Global, 2018.
[32] G. Cajaiba-Santana, “Social innovation: Moving the field forward. A
conceptual
framework”,
Technological
Forecasting
and
Social
Change, vol. 82, pp. 42-51, 2014.
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-681-1
DATA ANALYTICS 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Data Analytics

