Tourism Websites Network: Crawling the Italian Webspace 
Alessandro Longheu, Giuseppe Mangioni, Marialaura Previti 
Dipartimento di Ingegneria Elettrica, Elettronica ed Informatica (DIEEI) 
University of Catania  
Catania, Italy 
e-mail: alessandro.longheu@dieei.unict.it, giuseppe.mangioni@dieei.unict.it, ml.previti@gmail.com 
 
 
 
Abstract— The relevance of tourism is increasing more and 
more in the globalized economy. To improve management of 
tourism activities, the analysis of tourism related data deserves 
a major attention. In this work, we investigate on the Italian 
tourism website network, exploiting crawling and classifying 
techniques in order to extract and analyze such network, with 
the final goal of providing useful information for tourism 
management stakeholders. 
Keywords— web pages categorization; text classification; 
Support Vector Machine (SVM); complex networks; tourism 
management. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Tourism is one of the main entries in globalized 
economy, and is becoming more and more a challenging 
issue in many research areas even apparently unrelated, as 
sustainable (tourism) development [1], health-care and well-
being [2], as well as many others [3]. 
Even if the pervasive adoption of mobile devices and 
related apps for tourism resource discovery and management 
represent a cutting-edge topic [4], the huge amount of web 
sites currently available still represents the main data source 
for tourism information [5]. 
In this paper, we aim at focusing on the Italian website 
tourism network in order to analyze such network and its 
properties.  Our final goal is to exploit this information to 
improve the comprehension about tourism phenomenon, for 
which a number of models have been proposed in the past 
with limited success in providing satisfactory insights [6].  
Actually, each term of “Italian website tourism network” 
should be further specified according to topics we want to 
highlight: 
- by “Italian” we mean any website containing 
information written in Italian language, since we believe that 
information in other languages may either represent a simple 
duplicate of the former, or they are not intended for the 
Italian webspace;  
- by “website” we mean the site seen as the atomic unit 
of information, i.e., we gather (text) information from all 
pages belonging to the same site, of course, we limit the data 
amount stopping the of collecting web pages from the same 
site according a given depth; 
- by “tourism” we mean that each site contains tourism 
related information, we perform the classification using a 
SVM based text classifier that has been develop using the 
KNIME software. 
- finally, by “network” we mean that we aim at gathering 
hyperlinked Italian tourism websites. In particular, the 
crawling process used to build such a network starts from an 
initial seed made by official, institutional regional tourism 
websites, further considering all hyperlink contained within 
each visited page. The process is properly managed to avoid 
downloading huge amount of data, as explained below. 
After the (large) crawling operation cited so far, we 
started to analyze such data. In this work, we consider in 
particular one of the first crawled Italian region (“Abruzzo”) 
and we illustrate the related network and its analysis. These 
preliminary results are promising in terms of their relevance 
in providing significant information about how many Italian 
tourism websites are present, how they are connected and 
finally how such information can be exploited to improve 
tourism management. 
The rest of paper is organized as follows: in Section II, an 
overview of related work about website classification is 
introduced, then in Section III we describe our work in more 
detail. In Section IV first results are presented, finally 
providing in Section V our conclusions and further works. 
 
II. 
WEB CONTENT CLASSIFICATION 
Web page classification is the process of assigning a web 
page to one or more categories. In recent years, several 
methodologies for the automatic classification of web pages 
have been introduced. The most common approach is based 
on web pages information content categorization: images 
analysis, text classification, metadata extraction, document 
structure analysis, etc.   
To achieve this goal, F. Sebastiani [7] mainly focused on 
traditional textual classification based on supervised 
machine learning techniques, C. Lindermann [8] identified 
and analyzed structural properties, which reflect the 
functionality of a Web site to divide them into five most 
relevant functional classes, Z. Xu [9] proposed a statistical 
web page classification approach, which incorporates 
heterogeneous data sources extracted from web pages like 
title, metadata, anchor texts, URLs, links and formulates 
them into a common format of kernel matrix, P. Calado [10] 
used link information in combination with content 
information to improve classification results for web 
collections, A. Sun [11] proposed the use of Support Vector 
131
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

Machine classifiers to classify web pages using both their 
text and context feature sets.  
Although no new techniques are presented in this paper, 
we used a combination of the aforementioned to analyze the 
Italian tourist webspace.  
Although there are various classifiers that allow to 
review the English-language texts, until today, no one has 
modified a classifier for the purpose of classifying large-
scale texts in Italian language, so we have had to face this 
challenge to perform this work. 
 
III. 
CRAFTING ITALIAN TOURISM WEBSITE NETWORK 
A. Overview 
As introduced in Section I, the work here proposed 
begins from considering a set of Italian official tourism 
websites (actually not shown here) that were manually 
classified. 
We used these sites as a seed to start crawling, in 
particular we considered for each site its home page together 
with related first level pages (i.e., those directly linked by 
the home page), extracting all hyperlinks to proceed with 
crawling process, and retaining the whole text of such pages 
to further classify the site. 
      Each website will be a node in the network, and the 
crawling continues until a specified number of hops is 
reached, hence the overall network is built. This network 
may include site with non-italian language text, and/or 
unrelated to the tourism topic, therefore this is simply the 
network of (hyper)linked sites reachable from the seed.  
       In order to extract the subnetwork of Italian tourism 
websites, we first discard all sites whose language is not 
Italian, then we perform a classification to establish whether 
a site is about tourism or not, using the seed as a training set. 
All nodes that “survive” these filtering phases will compose 
the Italian tourism (sub)network.  
       Finally, to cope with crawling time and with the huge 
amount of data to analyze, we split the whole process over 
the 20 italian geographical regions. In the following, each 
step of our proposal is described in more detail. 
 
B. Filtering Crawled data 
After having crawled data, the next step was the filtering 
of web pages to get only the Italian ones, in fact an initial 
data analysis showed that most of tourist web pages are part 
of  multilingual sites and are linked to foreign countries 
pages.  
Foreign words can adversely affect the text classification 
because they can't be prefiltered with preprocessing 
instruments that use the Italian vocabulary (e.g., stemmers, 
word filter stop), therefore they are placed in the bag-of-
word as they are.   
Therefore we developed a whitelist filter used to discard 
web pages with a top-level domain different from .it, .com, 
.org, .net, .tv, .info, .eu, .ch, .at and .fr, then we filtered the 
selected pages using the java library language-detection [12] 
to further discard the pages with Italian domain, but written 
in a foreign language. Note that in the whitelist we included 
top level domain of countries bordering Italy since this 
geographic proximity sometimes implies that sites are bi-
lingual, e.g. a .fr website is likely to include Italian text. 
Today many websites are created using scripts, therefore 
extracting text useful for the classification is difficult and, in 
some cases, is also insufficient, then we need to preliminarily 
extract additional textual useful information to be added to 
the text from the body of the page. In order to do this, our 
filter not only performs the removal of tags and scripts, but 
preliminarily examines tags containing the metadata (HTML 
and OG [13]) of title, description and keyword and, after text 
cleaning, adds this information on top of the extracted text. 
C. Classification tool 
After a practical comparison of six most used free 
software tools for general data mining today available and 
thanks the Jovic [14] description of algorithms and 
procedures supported by these tools, we decide to use 
KNIME [15], an open-source general-purpose data mining 
tool based on dataflow architecture. This tool offers several 
configurable building blocks in the core installations and 
various extensions, including "text processing" and 
"mining" plugins that we have used to achieve our purpose.   
D. Training set  
Among the classification techniques analyzed [16][17], 
we decided to use Support Vector Machine (SVM) with 
Sequential Minimal Optimization (SMO) [18], a simple 
algorithm 
that 
quickly 
solves 
the 
SVM 
quadratic 
programming problem without any extra matrix storage and 
without invoking an iterative numerical routine for each 
sub-problem, significantly reducing training time. 
The first step to use SVM is the creation of a data set, so, 
starting from a list of tourist web page URLs manually 
created searching on internet for hotels, travel agencies, 
tourist destinations, etc., with our filter we automatically 
extract text and save it in textual.  
After this we have assessed the results and have 
discarded texts with insufficient size or content. The 
remaining texts became part of the tourist texts folder. 
Similar work has been done to create non-tourist texts 
folder.  
To evaluate the quality of the work performed, we 
created a KNIME program to do cross-validation (Fig. 1), 
i.e., to partition data into two segments: one used to train the 
model and the other used to validate it. In typical cross-
validation, the training and validation sets must cross-over 
in successive rounds such that each data point has a chance 
of being validated against. We therefore repeated ten times 
the classification and produced an error rate table shown in 
Fig. 2, where during each cycle 9 folds are used as training 
set and the remaining one is the test set. 
The results show that the average of classification 
accuracy is 89,75%. 
132
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

 
 
 
Figure 1.  KNIME program used to validate training set. 
 
Figure 2.  Error rate table. 
 
E. Preprocessing 
Any text written in any language contains a large 
number of elements common to all documents written in the 
same language, so these elements do not add any 
information content 
neither 
facilitate the document 
classification, rather they only increase computation time.  
In the preprocessing phase, terms are manipulated in 
order to cut out elements that don't contain content, such  as 
stop words, numbers, punctuation marks or to remove 
endings based on declination or conjugation by applying 
stemming.  
While Puntuaction Erasure and Number Filter are the 
same for all languages, the other preprocessing block 
depend on the language to analyze, so we provided to Stop 
Word Filter a list of common terms in Italian language and 
used Snowball Stemmer, which allows the stemming of text 
in various languages (Fig. 3). 
All terms survived to preprocessing are collected in a 
bag-of-word, which keeps the reference to the document 
belongs to, through this, the frequency with which a term 
appears in a document can be calculated and the terms less 
frequent can be removed. We set frequency filter threshold 
to 0,3%. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Content of preprocessing metanode.  
F. Classification 
The classification consists of two phases: learning and 
prediction (Fig. 4). 
The first phase is carried out by the SVM learner, i.e., a 
block that trains the SVM on the input data using a 
polynomial kernel: 
 
K(x, y) = (gamma*xTy + bias)power 
where: 
 x and y are vectors in the input space; 
 power is the degree of the polynomial; 
 bias and gamma are hyperplane coefficients. 
Power was the only parameter we set to 1 in order to 
have a linear SVM.  
We have provided to SVM learner the dataset previously 
validated to get the best hyperplane for the separation of the 
two sets of classification: tourist text and non-tourist text.  
In the second phase, the SVM predictor takes as input 
the model proposed by SVM learner and an unclassified 
dataset equal to 1/3 of the total number of text.  
To prevent unclassified data were more than classified 
ones, each folder containing text supplied from sites of a 
given region has been divided into sub-folders in order to 
keep the aforementioned proportion and the classification 
procedure has been iterated several times till all the data has 
been classified.  
133
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

 
Figure 4.  KNIME program used to classificate tourist and not tourist text.  
IV. 
PRELIMINARY RESULTS 
Abruzzo has been the first analyzed region. The crawler, 
starting to seeds of certainly tourist sites, crawled 14.482 
sites on a total of 2.377.378 pages. Using aforementioned 
classificator, we discover that only 4.200 sites were in 
Italian language and among these, only 2169 were classified 
as touristic.  
Each of these sites was considered as a network node. In 
Fig. 5, we show the Abruzzo network after deleting non-
Italian nodes. In Fig. 6, we show the Abruzzo (sub)network 
with tourism websites only. 
To better characterize the subnetwork, we assess its in-
degree (Fig. 7) and out-degree (Fig. 8) distributions in two 
graphs with logarithmic scale. Both graphs exhibit a trend 
that can be approximated to a power laws distribution, 
although further studies are needed to determine the exact 
degree and parameters. 
Analyzing the network with standard bow-tie model 
(Fig. 9), the strongly connected core consists of 7 nodes 
only, whereas input nodes are only 3 and 85 are output 
nodes. Tendrils, i.e., pages that link to and from the In and 
Out group but are not part of either, are 1194. The 
disconnected component includes 880 nodes. Bow-tie graph 
shows that the network core, i.e., the strongly connected 
part, is really small and there are many disconnected nodes. 
Furthermore, the large number of tendrils highlights that 
most of the nodes prefer to be pointed, but rarely link other 
tourist sites. 
The reason is probably that a low level of cooperation 
among tourism operators is present, and this negatively 
affects the development of Italian tourism.  
 
 
TABLE I.  
ABRUZZO CRAWLING RESULTS 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Italian nodes of Abruzzo network 
 
Figure 6.  Tourism Italian nodes of Abruzzo network
134
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

  
Figure 7.  In-degree distribution of tourism nodes. 
  
Figure 8.  Out-degree distribution of tourism nodes. 
 
 
Figure 9.  Bow-tie model of Abruzzo network.  
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS 
In this paper, the Italian tourism websites network has 
been extracted from a large set of crawled sites. Using a 
proper seed of tourism websites and an SVM-based 
classifier, we crafted the tourism network, then we focused 
on one of the 20 italian regional networks, analyzing and 
briefly discussing its feature. In particular, a really low level 
of cooperation seems to characterize the network, and this is 
probably due to an extreme competition among tourist 
operators that negatively affects the management of tourism 
itself. 
Although at a first stage, this work seems promising in 
terms of its dimension (a large website data set has been 
considered), becoming a significant base for further 
analysis. In particular we are going to craft all other regional 
Italian networks, in order to get a global view of the overall 
Italian tourism website network (actually, part of this work 
has been already carried out [19]). Finally, we are also 
planning to compare our approach with other classification 
models. 
We believe that the further analysis of such global 
network will provide tourism stakeholders with significant 
and detailed data to improve tourism management, also by 
leveraging results coming from other research areas, for 
instance trust  and ranking [20][21], to score and exploit 
“relevant” tourism sites, or recommendation systems [22], 
to discover and endorse “useful” tourism sites. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] J. Zhang, "Weighing and realizing the environmental, 
economic and social goals of tourism development using an 
analytic 
network 
process-goal 
programming 
approach." Journal of Cleaner Production 127: pp. 262-273, 
2016. 
135
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

[2] S. Pyke, H. Hartwell, A. Blake, A.Hemingway, "Exploring 
well-being 
as 
a 
tourism 
product 
resource."Tourism 
Management 55: pp. 94-105, 2016. 
[3] L. Y. Y. Lu and J S. Liu, "A novel approach to identify 
research fronts of tourism literature." Management of 
Engineering 
and 
Technology 
(PICMET), 
Portland 
International Conference on. IEEE, pp. 2211-2217, 2015. 
[4] A. Groth and D. Haslwanter, "Efficiency, effectiveness, and 
satisfaction of responsive mobile tourism websites: a mobile 
usability study."Information Technology & Tourism: pp. 1-28, 
2016. 
[5] I. Christensen, S. Schiaffino, and M. Armentano, "Social 
group recommendation in the tourism domain." Journal of 
Intelligent Information Systems: pp. 1-23, 2016. 
[6] B. H. Farrell and L. Twining-Ward, "Reconceptualizing 
tourism."Annals of tourism research 31.2: pp. 274-295, 2004. 
[7] F. Sebastiani, "Machine learning in automated text 
categorization." ACM computing surveys (CSUR) 34.1: pp. 1-
47, 2002 
[8] C. Lindemann and L. Lars, "Coarse-grained classification of 
web sites by their structural properties." Proceedings of the 
8th annual ACM international workshop on Web information 
and data management. ACM, pp. 35-42, 2006.  
[9] Z. Xu, I. King, and M. R. Lyu, "Web page classification with 
heterogeneous 
data 
fusion." Proceedings 
of 
the 
16th 
international conference on World Wide Web. ACM, pp. 
1171-1172, 2007. 
[10] P. Calado, M. Cristo, E. Moura, N. Ziviani, B. Riberto-Neto, 
and M. A. Gonçalves, "Combining link-based and content-
based methods for web document classification." Proceedings 
of the twelfth international conference on Information and 
knowledge management. ACM, pp. 394-401, 2003.  
[11] A. Sun, E. Lim, and W. Ng, "Web classification using support 
vector machine." Proceedings of the 4th international 
workshop on Web information and data management. ACM, 
pp. 96-99, 2002. 
[12] http://developer.cybozu.co.jp/archives/oss/2010/10/language-
detect.html [retrieved: July, 2016] 
[13] A. Haugen, "The open graph protocol design decisions." The 
Semantic Web–ISWC 2010. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. pp. 
338-338, 2010. 
[14] A. Jovic, K. Brkic, and N. Bogunovic, "An overview of free 
software tools for general data mining." Information and 
Communication 
Technology, 
Electronics 
and 
Microelectronics (MIPRO), 37th International Convention 
on. IEEE, pp. 1112-1117, 2014. 
[15] M. R. Berthold et al., "KNIME: The Konstanz information 
miner:version 2-0 and beyond" . AcM SIGKDD explorations 
Newsletter 11.1: pp. 26-31, 2009.  
[16] T. N. Phyu, "Survey of classification techniques in data 
mining."Proceedings of the International MultiConference of 
Engineers and Computer Scientists. Vol. 1., pp. 18-20, 2009. 
[17] S. B. Kotsiantis, "Supervised machine learning: A review of 
classification techniques.": pp. 3-24, 2007. 
[18] J. C. Platt, "12 fast training of support vector machines using 
sequential 
minimal 
optimization." Advances 
in 
kernel 
methods : pp. 185-208, 1999. 
[19] G. Mangioni, A. Longheu, and R. Baggio, “The Italian 
Tourism Webspace: a Complex Network Analysis”. Poster 
presented at the 5th Workshop on Complex Networks, 
Bologna, pp. 727-734, 2014.  
[20] V. Carchiolo, A. Longheu, M. Malgeri, and G. Mangioni, 
“Trust assessment: a personalized, distributed, and secure 
approach” Journal Concurrency and Computation: Practice 
and Experience (CCPE) Special Issue: Special Issue on 
intelligent distributed computing, Volume 24, Issue 6, pp. 
605–617, 2012 
[21] V. Carchiolo, A. Longheu, M. Malgeri, and G. Mangioni, 
“Network size and topology impact on trust-based ranking”, 
in press on Intl Journal of Bio-inspired Computation (IJBIC), 
http://www.inderscience.com/info/ingeneral/forthcoming.php
?jcode=ijbic [retrieved: July, 2016] 
[22] V. Carchiolo, A. Longheu, M. Malgeri, and G. Mangioni, 
“Context-based global expertise in recommendation systems” 
International Journal of Computing and informatics – 
Informatica - ISSN: 1854-3871 - Volume 34, no. 4, pp. 409-
418, Slovenia, 2010. 
136
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

