 
 
Leveraging Statistical Methods for an Analysis of Demographic Factors of Opioid 
Overdose Deaths             
Amna Alalawi1, Daniel Fooks2, Les Sztandera3, and Sean Zakrzewski4 
 
1DMgmt in Strategic Leadership Program, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA 
Email: Amna.Alalawi@Jefferson.edu 
 
2School of Business, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA 
Email: Daniel.Fooks@Jefferson.edu 
 
3Kanbar College of Design, Engineering, and Commerce, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA 
Email: Les.Sztandera@Jefferson.edu 
 
4School of Business, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, USA 
Email: Sean.Zakrzewski@Jefferson.edu 
 
 
Abstract - Deaths from drug overdose including 
opioid overdose have been increasing at an alarming 
rate, and authorities still find tackling this problem an 
acute challenge. This paper applies Artificial Intelligence 
and statistical techniques to big data to identify the 
demographic and socio-economic factors that have led to 
the increasing number of drug overdose deaths in 
Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, United States. Using 
Artificial Intelligence software, we analyzed a dataset of 
over 3,500 patients alongside demographic and socio-
economic variables to gain detailed insights into the 
issue, insights that we can generalize to craft solutions to 
this problem in both domestic and global communities. 
Our findings revealed patterns ranging from possible 
psychological and behavioral factors and drug use on 
weekends, as well as a direct market supply effect on the 
number of deaths. These findings imply the need for 
authorities to offer educational workshops to individuals 
and their families about the dangers of the current drug 
epidemic and to design an effective policy for the 
oversight of drug market supply that includes taking 
firm action against violators.  
Keywords – data analytics; big data; opioids; drug overdose  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Deaths caused by the opioid crisis have reached 
epidemic levels in the US, with more people dying from 
opioid overdose than by either motor vehicle incidents, gun 
violence, or HIV [2]. In 2016, more than 42,000 Americans 
lost their lives as the result of a drug overdose, including 
613 Allegheny County residents, a rise in deaths of over 44 
percent. This has largely been attributed to the presence of 
newer, stronger drugs such as fentanyl in US communities 
[7]. Local health officials have found it difficult to keep 
pace with the new drugs being introduced into common 
usage, especially the presence of fentanyl in most of the 
heroin sold on the streets. Fentanyl is extremely potent and 
can cause a fatal overdose on the first try for some users [7]. 
Today, drug abuse is indeed a major problem in the US. A 
study by the Center for Disease Control (CDC) clearly 
evidences the existence of this crisis, stating that in 2017, 
more than 47,000 people died of a drug overdose in the 
country [6]. It was found that more than 2,000,000 
Americans live with drug addiction, such as opioid 
addiction [9]. 
This study uses Artificial Intelligence (AI) and machine 
learning techniques to explore a dataset containing 
information on 3,551 fatal incidents of opioid overdose in 
Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, with the aim of finding 
ways to minimize the consequences of the opioid crisis in 
communities in the US and globally.  
Opioid overdose has become an epidemic in the US as 
well as Allegheny County [13]. In 2015, the country 
experienced more than 400 deaths, and from then, the trend 
continued to increase. Data showed that individuals affected 
were within the age range of 25 to 54 years old. It was 
found that there are plenty of opportunities that have not 
been taken full advantage of in terms of intervention for 
opioid users [13]. The authors recommended that screening 
for opioid and other drugs among adults involved in child 
welfare should be improved. Further, enhancing the ability 
of the direct care staff to identify opioid use and risk of 
overdose, as well as access to expert consultants should be 
increased to improve the effectiveness of the care 
mechanism.   
In Section 2 of this paper, we discuss and highlight 
different statistical tools and methods used to carry out the 
investigation to study several demographic factors of those 
affected in Allegheny County. While Section 3 focuses on 
providing a thorough analysis of the data collected through 
various sources, Section 4 highlights key findings of the 
study as well as trends in relation to the subject matter. 
Section 5 provides conclusion and recommendations 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-741-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Data Analytics

 
 
pertaining to drug overdose in the community that can be 
used for prevention intervention.  
II. 
METHODOLOGY 
To gain greater insight into the social and economic 
factors that have increased the risk of fatal opioid overdose 
in Allegheny County, PA, we used multiple approaches 
utilizing AI and statistical software and programming 
languages, including IBM SPSS Analytics, IBM Watson 
Analytics, Microsoft Power BI, and Python, to explore the 
dataset, which contained information on 3,551 fatal 
incidents of opioid overdose in Allegheny County. 
The dataset, which covers opioid overdose deaths from 
the year 2008 to 2017, includes fatal accidental overdoses in 
the country and contains information on the date of death, 
the time of death, the manner of death, the age, gender, and 
race of the decedent, the seven most prevalent drugs found 
in overdose victims, the zip code of the overdose incident, 
and the zip code of the decedent’s residence [1]. To look 
further into this issue, we searched for other variables that 
may have a relationship with opioid overdose rates. These 
other variables can be divided into two general categories: 
climate and economic.  
The climate variables we examined were: monthly 
average temperature and temperature departure from mean 
levels for the 2008-2017 base period. This data was 
retrieved using the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration “Climate at a Glance” tool.  
The economic indicators we examined were: county 
unemployment rate and income inequality in the county 
(measured as a ratio of the mean income of the highest 
quintile of earners divided by the mean income of the lowest 
quintile of earners in the county). These two datasets were 
collected from the FRED Economic Data service of the St. 
Louis Federal Reserve Bank. The final variable examined in 
this category was the uninsured rate, data on which was 
sourced using the U.S. Census Bureau’s Small Area Health 
Insurance Estimates program [12]. 
III. 
ANALYSIS 
It has proven valuable to first observe the overdose 
dataset by itself to get a full understanding of the situation 
and to provide a baseline against which to compare the 
climate and economic variables examined.  
The timespan of this dataset is from 01/03/08 to 
12/31/17, a total of 9 years, 11 months and 28 days. The 
most surprising and saddening takeaway from the data is the 
age range of those affected by fatal drug overdose, which is 
an astonishing 1 to 91. The n for this dataset is 3,460. 
 
Figure 1. Overdose deaths in Allegheny Country, PA (2008-2017) 
 
Figure 1 indicates overdose deaths over the past several 
years have been increasing at an exponential rate. This 
cannot be explained simply by an increase in population as 
the population of Allegheny County has fluctuated over the 
past decade and has, in fact, not grown at all. The graph uses 
data from 2010 (the earliest year in which reliable data was 
collected) to 2017, to illustrate the rising trend in overdose 
deaths. 
Across all ten years covered by the dataset, it becomes 
clear that the crisis appears to have two distinct peaks in 
terms of age: one among those in their 20s and 30s and 
another among those in their 50s. The most common age for 
someone in the county to die of an overdose is 51, 
indicating that there is a slight skew toward the older of the 
two age peaks. Moreover, the standard deviation is 12.5, 
showing that most deaths occur within an approximately 24-
year timeframe in mid-life. 
It is interesting to observe how age distribution across 
drug overdose deaths changes over time. The double peaks 
are not initially pronounced, but develop over time until 
2017, when they seem to disappear. It is also interesting to 
see how age range widens over the years as well, and how 
age distribution starts to skew toward younger people.  
Nonetheless, the opioid epidemic is more prevalent among 
men than women given that women accounted for a 
comparably low 31 percent of fatal drug overdoses in this 
timeframe.  
It is also clear that the overdose deaths in this county 
occur overwhelmingly among Caucasians. However, it is 
worth looking at the demographics of the county overall to 
identify any major disparities. In Table 1, we compare 
overdose deaths with county population data that closely 
aligns with U.S. Census data. While there may be some 
disparities in the total percentages due to non-matching 
categories, for the purposes of a “sanity check” on the 
proportions of overdose deaths in the dataset, the table 
serves its purpose.  
 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-741-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Data Analytics

 
 
TABLE I. PERCENTAGE OVERDOSE DEATHS BY RACE WITH 
COUNTY POPULATION DATA  
Race 
Percent of 
County 
Population 
Percent of 
Overdose 
Deaths 
Difference 
Asian 
4.0 
.2 
3.8% 
Black or 
African 
American 
13.4 
14 
-.06% 
Hispanic 
2.1 
.2 
1.9% 
White 
78.6 
85.5 
-6.9% 
It appears that Asian and Hispanic ethnic groups are 
comparatively less affected by overdose deaths to a small 
degree and African Americans are more affected, again by a 
small 
amount. 
Meanwhile, 
Caucasian 
people 
are 
overrepresented as victims of overdose deaths by a larger 
difference than any other, although still not by a significant 
degree.  
It is interesting to note that April and August are the 
most common months for overdose deaths to occur. The 
reasons for this are not obvious and warrant further 
investigation. However, other than August, there is a decline 
in deaths during the summer months, which may suggest a 
possible seasonal element in overdose deaths.  
Figure 2 shows the number of deaths by day of the 
week, the results collected here are perhaps unsurprising. 
Friday, Saturday, and Sunday see the highest number of 
overdose deaths. People are less likely to be working on 
these days and will thus have more leisure time. These days 
are also when people are most social, which, depending on 
the person, can involve alcohol or recreational drug use.  
The spike in overdose deaths that occurs at around 5 pm 
is also of interest. This is when many people get out of work 
and there may be a connection here. The fact that most 
overdose deaths occur in the middle of the day is interesting 
as well, particularly the spike observed at 1 pm.  
 
Number of Deaths by Days of Week 
 
Figure 2. Number of deaths due to drug overdose by day of week 
 
 
Figure 3. Top five zip codes for the locations of overdose deaths in the 
county during the period examined 
 
Figure 3 shows the top five zip codes for the locations of 
overdose deaths in the county during the period examined. 
They account for a substantial proportion of all overdose 
deaths, but overall distribution remains quite wide and 
dispersed.   
 
 
Figure 4. Top five zip codes for the residences of people who suffered a 
fatal drug overdose in Allegheny County during the period examined 
Figure 4 shows the top five zip codes for the residences 
of people who suffered a fatal drug overdose in Allegheny 
County during the period examined. They are the same as 
the zip codes identified as the top five locations of fatal 
overdoses. This overlap indicates that people tend to 
overdose in the zip code in which they live, which seems 
reasonable. Nonetheless, there are some differences in 
frequency and a far larger range of zip codes cover the 
residences of the decedents. So, some people do travel and 
then overdose, including from as far away as West Virginia 
and even Minnesota.  
IV. 
FINDINGS AND TRENDS 
This section highlights key findings of the study, as well 
as trends in relation to the subject matter as per the 
demographic variables tested. 
A. 
Temperature and Overdose Deaths 
The graph in Figure 5 charts temperatures and uninsured 
rates and reveals a higher death rate for uninsured people in 
the warmer months.  In contrast, in the graph above, a 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-741-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Data Analytics

 
 
higher death rate is observed to occur in the colder months. 
This is both fascinating and difficult to explain. It is 
possible that uninsured people are less motived to go to the 
hospital in the warmer months, believing that whatever 
ailment they may have will pass on its own since they don’t 
have the cold weather working against them. Moreover, 
illnesses, such as flu and pneumonia, tend to arise in the 
colder months, and this again suggests people are less 
concerned about illness in the warmer months. Therefore, 
there is no significant dependence on temperature in relation 
to drug overdose deaths. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. A chart showing how the monthly average temperature and 
annual uninsured rate influenced the death rate 
Figure 6 analyzes the distribution between male and 
female in overdose deaths in Allegheny County. The study 
revalidates that overdose deaths are more amongst men, 
which make up around 69 percent of the total deaths. 
Women account for 31 percent of the total deaths.  
 
Figure 6. A chart showing the number of deaths by sex in Allegheny 
County, PA 
Figure 7 identifies the number of deaths by race. It is 
seen that Whites represent the highest segment of the 
population that is affected among drug users and number of 
fatalities due to the opioid crisis. 
 
Figure 7. A pie chart showing number of deaths by race in Allegheny 
County, PA 
 
 
Figure 8. Shows how the rate of overdose deaths is determined by age and 
the monthly average temperatures 
The graph in Figure 8 plots average monthly 
temperatures against the age of the decedents. The graph 
shows that there are strong clusters and then gaps around 
certain temperatures as compared with age, which shows a 
distinct range. It is interesting to observe certain gaps 
around temperatures at which no overdose deaths appear to 
have occurred versus clusters where many overdose deaths 
occurred. Again, this graph further supports our finding that 
there is no significant dependence on temperature in relation 
to drug overdose deaths. 
 
B. Month to Month Fluctuations 
Looking at every year separately on IBM Watson, a cloud 
system for data analytics, another pattern emerges whereby 
months with abnormally high death counts are followed by 
months with abnormally low death counts, and vice versa. 
This may be related to the availability of drugs in the 
market, reflecting the high level of addiction to drugs 
containing fentanyl and heroin specifically. The authorities 
have successfully taken down various platforms that were 
previously used to sell and buy drugs, but not a lot of 
information has been gathered in terms of the effects of such 
an action [4].  
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-741-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Data Analytics

 
 
Number of Deaths in Year 2017 
 
Figure 9. A visualization of the death rates of each month of the year 
2017 
 
In 2017, the aforementioned pattern was most visible in 
the months of August and September. August saw a high 
number of deaths and was followed by September, a month 
with lower deaths, which is the pattern we recognized 
through IBM Watson which we concluded that this could be 
related to market supply. When one particular month has a 
high death number, the following month is much lower, 
suggesting that the supply is lower in the market. The year 
ended with relatively low death rates in comparison with 
previous months.  
Number of Deaths in Year 2013 
 
Figure 10. A visualization of the death rates of each month of the year 
2013 
As per the visualization in Figure 10, the year 2013 is a 
very good example of the potential oscillating trend, in 
which months with very high fatal drug overdose rates are 
followed by months with significantly lower overdose death 
rates.  
Number of Deaths by Month (2008-2017) 
 
Figure 11. A visualization of the number of deaths for each month of all 
the years of observation 
Looking at all the years examined together in Figure 11, 
we can confirm the pattern that shows that it may be due to 
the supply of drugs in the market which causes fluctuation 
in deaths by months. Looking at August for example, we see 
a peak in deaths, of which then September shows much 
lower deaths. As previously mentioned, and can be seen 
from Figures 9 and 10, this was also apparent when we 
studied each year separately on IBM Watson. There was a 
high indication that after a month of high deaths, the 
following month sees much lower deaths. The visualization 
in Figure 11 was generated using Microsoft Power BI.  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
This data analytics study provides an expanded 
exploration of the problem of opioid drug overdoses in 
Allegheny County. Applying several statistical techniques, 
including pattern recognition, and generating other data 
visualizations, we were able to validate previously identified 
findings about overdose deaths, such as the age range and 
general demographics of affected populations [7]. We found 
the tools we used to be very useful in helping us to gain a 
better understanding of our sample set and to generate 
informative and understandable visuals.  
Data Analytics also allowed us to find new 
information about our sample, particularly when combined 
with the additional variables added to the base dataset. We 
were able to generate highly practical visuals and illustrate 
clear trends from a large dataset with many variables, 
indicating that there is a possible relationship between drug 
addiction 
and 
lower 
temperatures 
and 
between 
psychological and behavioral factors and weekend drug use 
as well as a direct market supply effect on the number of 
deaths. These findings imply the need for authorities to offer 
educational workshops to individuals and their families, as 
well as health practitioners, about the dangers of the current 
drug epidemic and to design an effective policy for the 
oversight of drug market supply that includes taking firm 
action against violators.  
We recommend that the authorities spend more time 
and funds on advertisements to educate individuals and 
families about the problem as well as investing in 
approaches to oversee market supply to drug users.  
The issue of drug overdose deaths is so pressing that 
more research by data and population scientists is needed to 
gain further insight into this epidemic, so that impactful 
solutions can be found to reduce its harmful effects on 
communities both in the United States and around the globe. 
Results of the current study supported results of the 
past studies. Thus, the limitation of this research was that 
there were no new findings obtained. The tools used in this 
study helped in enabling us to recognize patterns through 
data visualizations, and we encourage future researchers to 
leverage the use of multi-dimensional data to find factors 
that could possibly correlate to the drug addiction epidemic 
to explore new findings within regional and global 
communities. It is the hope that this information will be 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-741-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Data Analytics

 
 
used in enhancing understanding of readers regarding the 
subject matter.  
REFERENCES 
[1] Allegheny County Fatal Accidental Overdoses. (2018, April 
11). 
Retrieved 
April, 
2019, 
from 
https://catalog.data.gov/dataset/allegheny-county-fatal-
accidental-overdoses 
[2] D. Ciccarone, “Fentanyl in the US heroin supply: a rapidly 
changing risk environment”, The International journal on drug 
policy, vol. 46, pp. 107-111, 2017.  
[3] Climate at a Glance. (n.d.). Retrieved April, 2019, from 
http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/cag/county/time-series/PA-
003/tavg/all/1/2008-
2017?base_prd=true&firstbaseyear=2008&lastbaseyear=2017
&trend=true&trend_base=10&firsttrendyear=1895&lasttrend
year=2019 
[4] B. R. Edlin, “Access to treatment for hepatitis C virus 
infection: Time to put patients first”, The Lancet Infectious 
Diseases, vol. 16(9). doi:10.1016/s1473-3099(16)30005-6, 
2016. 
[5] Income Inequality in Allegheny County, PA. (2018, 
December 
7). 
Retrieved 
April, 
2019, 
from 
https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/2020RATIO042003 
[6] Lopez, G. (2019, February 26). A new study shows America's 
drug overdose crisis is by far the worst among wealthy 
countries. 
Retrieved 
May 
20, 
2019, 
from 
https://www.vox.com/science-and-
health/2019/2/26/18234863/drug-overdose-death-america-
international-study 
[7] Lord, R. (2017, April 06). Allegheny County drug overdose 
deaths surge to 613 in 2016, breaking record. Retrieved May, 
2019, 
from 
http://www.post-
gazette.com/news/overdosed/2017/04/06/Allegheny-County-
drug-overdoses-610-deaths-break-
record/stories/201704060199. 
[8] Percent Without Health Insurance Data for Allegheny County, 
PA. 
(n.d.). 
Retrieved 
May, 
2019, 
from 
http://www.opendatanetwork.com/entity/0500000US42003/A
llegheny_County_PA/health.health_insurance.pctui?year=201
4&age=18 to 64&race=All races & sex=Both sexes & 
income=All income levels 
[9] B. Saloner, “A public health strategy for the opioid crisis”, 
Public Health Reports, vol. 133, pp. 24S-34S, 2018.  
[10] Sederer, L. (2016, February 1). Take Action Against 
Addiction. 
Retrieved 
May 
20, 
2019, 
from 
https://www.usnews.com/opinion/blogs/policy-
dose/articles/2016-02-01/10-ways-to-combat-americas-drug-
abuse-problem 
[11] Unemployment Rate in Allegheny County, PA. (2019, May 
31). Retrieved May, 2019, from https://fred.stlouisfed.org/seri 
[12] U.S. Census Bureau’s Small Area Health Insurance Estimates 
Program. 
(N.d.). 
Retrieved 
April 
2019, 
from 
https://www.opendatanetwork.com/entity/0500000US42003/
Allegheny_County_PA/health.health_insurance.nui?ref=entit
yquestion&year=2014&age=18%20to%2064&race=All%20r
aces&sex=Both%20sexes&income=All%20income%20levels 
[13] E. Hulsey, and et. al., Opiate-Related Overdose Deaths in 
Allegheny County – Risks and Opportunities. (2016, July). 
Retrieved 
August, 
2019, 
from 
https://alleghenycounty.us/uploadedFiles/Allegheny_Home/H
ealth_Department/Programs/Special_Initiatives/Overdose_Pre
vention/Opiate-
Related_Overdose_Deaths_in_Allegheny_County.pdf
 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-741-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Data Analytics

