Social Media and Google Trends in Support of Audience Analytics: Methodology 
and Architecture 
 
Nikos Kalatzis, Ioanna Roussaki, Christos Matsoukas, 
Marios Paraskevopoulos, Symeon Papavassiliou 
Institute of Communications and Computer Systems  
Athens, Greece 
e-mails:{nikosk@cn, ioanna.roussaki@cn, cmatsoukas@cn, 
mariosp@cn, papavass@mail}.ntua.gr 
Simona Tonoli 
European & Funded Projects Department 
Mediaset 
Milan, Italy 
e-mail: Simona.Tonoli@mediaset.it
 
Abstract — In recent years, there have been various research 
efforts aiming to investigate how social media are used to 
express or influence TV audiences and if possible to estimate 
TV ratings through the analysis of user interactions via social 
media. Given that these efforts are still in their infancy, there is 
a lack of an established methodology for designing such 
frameworks or services. This paper reviews the most dominant 
existing approaches and identifies the fundamental design 
principles aiming to generate best practices and guidelines for 
such systems. It then proposes a methodology and a reference 
architecture that can be employed by those that aim to exploit 
social media data to support audience analytics and extract TV 
ratings. Finally, this paper introduces and evaluates the 
utilisation of Google Trends service as an additional 
information source in support of audience analytics. 
Keywords-social 
media 
data; 
audience 
analytics; 
methodology; reference architecture; Twitter; Facebook; Google 
Trends. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
TV ratings have been crucial for the society due to the 
fact that they influence the popular culture, but also for the 
media industry as they are the basis for billions of dollars’ 
worth of advertising transactions every year between 
marketers and media companies [1]. For more than 50 years, 
TV ratings are estimated by sampling the audience with 
specific installed hardware on TV devices. In the meantime, 
there is an increasing trend of people watching TV programs 
that on the same time are also interacting via social media 
services posting messages or other content mediating their 
opinions. In addition, new services are drastically changing 
the media consumption patterns as for example it is now 
possible to watch TV programs on YouTube regardless of 
location or time.  
This proliferation of social media utilisation by large 
population portions along with recent advances in data 
collection, storage and management, makes available 
massive amounts of data to research organisations and data 
scientists. Exploiting the wealth of information originating 
from huge repositories generated for example by Twitter and 
Facebook has become of strategic importance for various 
industries. However, the availability of massive volumes of 
data doesn’t automatically guarantee the extraction of useful 
results, while it becomes evident that robust research 
methodologies are more important than ever.  
There are already various research efforts aiming to 
exploit data originating from social media sources in support 
of audience analytics. Until today, these efforts are mainly 
offered to complement the traditional TV ratings and do not 
aim to substitute them. However, as stated in [2], traditional 
approaches are demonstrating various limitations due to the 
fact that they are necessarily sample based with a relatively 
small number of installed metering devices due to the high 
cost of them. In addition, traditional approaches can hardly 
take into account new viewing behaviours such as the 
mobility of audience members and nonlinear viewing.  
This paper aims to review the most dominant research 
efforts for social media analytics focusing on the extraction 
of additional insights about TV audiences. Based on this 
review and on authors’ own evaluations, this paper proposes 
a five stage methodology and introduces a reference 
architecture that can be used as a starting point for any 
research work studying the usefulness of social media data 
for audience analytics purposes. 
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section II 
reviews the main research initiatives that aim to extract 
audience analytics metrics by monitoring any related 
keyword-specific traffic across selected social media. 
Section III proposes a methodology for building a social-
media based audience analytics framework and maps the 
most dominant related research initiatives to specific 
decisions made across the five steps of this methodology. 
Section IV introduces a reference architecture suitable for the 
implementation of such a framework. Section V presents 
experimental findings that support the extension of social 
media data sources with Google Trends data aiming to 
optimise the performance of the proposed audience analytics 
framework. Finally, conclusions are drawn and future plans 
are exposed. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In recent years, there is an increasing trend on analysing 
social media and Internet search engines utilisation for 
studying and examining behaviour of people with regards to 
various societal activities. The proper analysis of these 
services goes beyond the standard surveys or focus groups 
and has the potential to be a valuable information source 
leveraging internet users as the largest panel of users in the 
world. Researchers and analysts from a wide area of fields 
are able to reveal current and historic interests for 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-681-1
DATA ANALYTICS 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Data Analytics

communities of people and to extract valuable information 
about future trends, behaviours and preferences. Some of the 
fields where social media analytics have been employed for 
such purposes include: economy (stock market analysis [3] 
and private consumption prediction [4]), politics (opinion 
polls [5] and predictions of political elections [6]), public 
health (estimate spread of influenza [7] and malaria [8]), 
sports (predict football game results [9]), tourism (places to 
be visited by observing the most frequently attended places 
in a given location [10]), demographics (identifying gender 
and age of selected user groups [11]) and infotainment 
elaborated upon hereafter. 
There are numerous research initiatives that apply social 
media analytics to estimate potential popularity of 
multimedia content. For example, authors in [12] propose a 
mechanism for predicting online content’s popularity by 
analysing the activity of self-organized groups of users in 
social networks. Authors in [13] attempt to predict IMDB 
movie ratings using Google search frequencies for movie 
related information. Similarly, authors in [14] are applying 
social media analytics for predicting potential box office 
revenues for Bollywood movies based on related content 
shared over social networks. In the work presented in [15], 
social media and search engines utilisation are analysed 
during the pre-production phase of documentaries in order to 
identify appealing topics and potential audiences. 
Based on the findings of the aforementioned initiatives, 
social media data demonstrate a relevant and flexible 
predictive power. The underlying relations among social 
media data and predictive variables not known a priori. The 
extraction of these variables and the utilisation of the 
appropriate algorithms can lead to quantitative statistical 
predictive models of several social targets of interest. A 
research field that gains significant attention with huge 
economical potential is the application of social media 
analytics in support of audience estimation for TV shows. 
Some of the existing efforts are presented here after. 
One of the first approaches towards this scope is 
presented in [16]. Authors introduced concepts such as 
“Textual relevance”, “Spatial Relevance”, and “Temporal 
Relevance” along with the respective formulas for measuring 
the relevance of a Tweet with a targeted TV show. These 
metrics were utilized along with the total volumes of tweets 
and users for calculating the popularity of TV shows. 
However, cross-validation of this approach with ground truth 
data is missing.  
The research presented in [17] mainly focuses on TV 
drama series that airs once a week. Authors attempt to 
estimate future audience volumes of TV shows through a 
predictor which is based on three layer back-propagation 
neural network. The predictor is fed with input from 
Facebook (e.g., number of related posts comments, likes, and 
shares) along with the ratings of the first show of the season 
and the rating of the previous show. According to the 
authors, the prediction accuracy of this approach based on 
Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE) was from 6% to 
24%. 
The work presented in [18] is one of the first attempts for 
creating a statistical model with the goal of predicting the 
audience of a TV show from Twitter activity. Authors 
collected a large number of Tweets containing at least one of 
the official hash-tags of the targeted political talk shows. 
After analysing the data, a significant correlation was 
discovered between Twitter contributors per minute during 
airtime and the audience of the show’s episode. Based on 
these results, a multiple regression model was trained with 
part of the dataset and utilized as a predictor for the 
remaining observations to evaluate its performance. 
In [19], interactions between television audiences and 
social networks have been studied, focusing mainly on 
Twitter data. Authors collected about 2.5 million tweets in 
relation with 14 TV series in a nine-week period aired in 
USA. Initially, tweets were categorised according to their 
sentiment (positive, negative, neutral) based on the use of a 
decision trees classifier. Further analysis included the 
clustering of tweets based on the average audience 
characteristics for each individual series, while a linear 
regression model indicated the existence of a strong link 
between actual audience size and volume of tweets.  
Authors in [20] defined a set of metrics based on Twitter 
data analysis in order to predict the audience of scheduled 
television programmes. Authors mainly focus on Italian TV 
reality shows, such as X Factor and Pechino Express where 
audiences are actively engaged. According to the authors, the 
most appropriate metrics are related to the volume of tweets, 
the distribution of linguistic elements, the volume of distinct 
users involved in tweeting, and the sentiment analysis of 
tweets. Based on these metrics, audience population 
prediction algorithms were developed that have been 
validated based on real audience ratings. 
Similarly, research efforts presented in [2] and [21] are 
utilising Twitter data in an attempt to improve TV ratings, 
but these approaches lack extensive validation. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY FOR BUILDING A SOCIAL-MEDIA 
BASED AUDIENCE ANALYTICS FRAMEWORK 
In the last years, the vast use of social media gave us the 
ability to accurately predict or discover various events 
exploiting data freely available online. The most suitable 
methodology that enables researchers to build an efficient 
audience analytics mechanism based on social-media data 
has been studied by several initiatives [22]-[24]. Building on 
these and based on the main big-data mining principles [25]-
[27], as well as on the online social network data collection 
and analytics trends and approaches [28]-[30], we propose a 
five-stage methodology that is depicted in Figure 1 and is 
briefly described in this section. 
The five main steps that compose the proposed 
methodology for social media data exploitation in support of 
audience analytics are the following: 
 
1. SM Data Identification 
• 
Identify the most appropriate social media sources to be 
used such as popular SM networks (e.g., Twitter, 
Facebook, Google+, YouTube, LinkedIn, Pinterest, 
Instagram, Tumblr, Reddit, Tumblr, Snapchat, etc.) or 
more focused sources (e.g., web fora, blogs, message 
boards, news sites, podcasts, Wikis, etc.).  
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-681-1
DATA ANALYTICS 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Data Analytics

• 
Identify the type of data (e.g., comments, tweets, posts, 
likes, shares, links, connections, user account details, 
etc.) to be collected. 
• 
Specify the criteria to be used for data collection (e.g., 
keywords, 
hashtags, 
timeframe, 
geographic 
area, 
language, user account properties, etc.) 
 
 
Figure 1.  Social media data mining methodology in support of audience 
analytics. 
2. SM Data Collection 
• 
Most often, the SM sites provide an Application 
Programming Interface (API) that can be used by the 
developers to collect data based on the type and criteria 
specified in previous Phase. In this case, initially the 
necessary libraries need to be installed, the authorization 
needs to be obtained and finally a decision needs to be 
made regarding the platform/language to be used for 
writing the data collection software.  
• 
In case no such API is made available by the SM site, 
crawling can alternatively be used with an automated 
script that explores the social media website and collects 
data using HTTP requests and responses.  
• 
Another method that enables collection of SM data is 
the implementation and deployment of a custom 
application based on an SM site that monitors its usage. 
• 
If the methods above cannot be employed, self-reported 
data can be used instead, which requires for directly 
asking the users about their interests, opinion, 
experience, etc., mainly via online questionnaires or in-
situ surveys. 
Various shortcomings and limitations need to be 
carefully addressed during the “Data Collection” phase. 
For example, the standard version of Twitter API 
enforces “Rate Limits” allowing a certain number of 
calls on 15 minute intervals. In addition, the standard 
Twitter API allows the retrieval of Tweets for a period 
of the last 7 days. In a similar manner, Facebook 
enforces strict privacy protection policies which are 
limiting the amount of information that can be retrieved. 
These policies are subject to frequent updates which 
services consuming the APIs should follow. 
 
3. SM Data Preparation 
• 
Data cleaning (or cleansing) aims to fill in missing 
values, smooth out noisy data, identify and remove 
outliers, minimise duplication and computed biases, and 
correct inconsistencies within the data collected in the 
previous phase. Given that data are collected based on 
criteria such as the inclusion of a keyword or a hashtag 
it is highly possible that the actual Tweet or Facebook 
post to be irrelevant with the targeted show. In a similar 
manner, during this phase data generated by automated 
software scripts – known as bots – should also be 
identified and filtered out. 
• 
Data integration combines data from multiple social 
media sources into a coherent store, while it aims to 
detect and resolve any data value conflicts or data 
redundancies that may arise in this process. 
• 
Data transformation converts the raw social media data 
into the specified format, model or structure. Methods 
used for this purpose include: normalization (where 
numerical data is converted into the specified range, i.e., 
between 0 and one so that scaling of data can be 
performed), aggregation/ summarisation (to combine 
features into one), generalization or attribute/feature 
construction (where lower level attributes are converted 
to a higher standard or new attributes are constructed 
from the given ones in general) and discretization 
(where raw values of a numeric attribute are replaced by 
interval labels). 
• 
Data reduction aims to obtain a reduced representation 
of the social media data set collected that is much 
smaller in volume but yet produces the same (or almost 
the same) analytical results. Methods employed for this 
purpose include: data compression, data sampling, and 
dimensionality reduction (e.g., removing unimportant 
attributes) and multiplicity reduction (to reduce data 
volume by choosing alternative, smaller/more compact 
forms of data representation). 
 
4. SM Data Analysis 
• 
At this stage the pre-processed SM data collected need 
to be analysed in order to extract results linked with the 
popularity of the broadcasted TV program. Specific 
metrics are defined indicating audience statistics 
aspects, such as: number of messages referring to the 
targeted show (e.g., tweets, posts), number of 
interactions associated with a post (e.g., liked, favorited, 
retweeted, shared, etc.), number of unique users 
participated in the overall interactions. In some cases, 
researches are setting their own objective functions and 
define their own scores for evaluating the generated 
Social Media buzz.  
• 
Aiming to identify correlations between the Social 
media data and the actual audience’s interest, the 
following statistical approaches are often utilised by the 
research community: Logistic Regression (LR), Density 
Based Algorithm (DBA), Hierarchical Clustering (HC), 
AdaBoost, 
Linear-Regression(Lin-R), 
Markov, 
Maximum Entropy (ME), Genetic Algorithms (GA), 
Fuzzy, Apriori, Wrapper, etc. 
• 
Inference of higher level information based on the 
analysis of raw collected data aiming to extract 
additional characteristics of the audience. Processing 
raw data through sophisticated algorithms allows the 
extraction of information that are not provided by 
directly by SM APIs, such as the classification of a 
post/tweet with regards the sentiment (positive, 
1. SM Data 
Identification
Identify SM data 
sources to be 
targeted; select 
types of data to be 
collected; specify 
criteria to be used . 
for data collection  ..
2. SM Data 
Collection
Performed via: 
dedicated API 
available by the 
SM site; crawling; 
custom application 
deployment; self - . 
Reported data.      .
3. SM Data 
Preparation
Data Cleaning;   
Data Integration; 
Data 
Transformation; 
Data Reduction.
4. SM Data   
Analysis
Identification of 
metrics to be esti-
mated; selection           
of data analysis 
method to be 
employed; metrics 
calculation; 
extraction of high e 
level knowledge 
5. Framework 
Validation
Experiment scope 
specification; se-
lection of ground  
truth data to 
compare with; 
mechanism 
calibration; experi-
mental evaluation; 
visualisation
of results.
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-681-1
DATA ANALYTICS 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Data Analytics

negative, neutral) and the profile of the SM user (e.g., 
gender, age, political views, hobbies, other preferences). 
Towards this scope, there are numerous data analytics 
techniques that have been applied by researchers [31], 
each suitable for specific problems and domains. These 
tasks 
are 
usually 
handled 
as 
a 
classification/ 
categorization problem. 
 
5. Framework Validation 
• 
Validation of the outcomes generated by the Data 
Analysis step allows drawing the respective conclusions 
whether and in which extent the overall approach 
achieved the desired outcomes. Within the scope of 
estimating audience volumes interested or watched a TV 
show through the analysis of SM data, often the Data 
Analysis results are cross-validated with published 
audience rates metrics.  
• 
These metrics also contain audience profile information 
(e.g., age, gender, location, occupation) hence advanced 
analysis methods can also be cross validated. However, 
these metrics are not always publicly available or the 
published measurements are generic and not include 
details about the profile of audiences. 
• 
So far, realisation of such techniques has revealed 
various shortcomings mainly related to the over or/and 
under representation of certain societal groups within 
SM services. Statistical approaches for validation 
include but are not limited to: Root Mean Square Error, 
Mean Absolute Error, Pearson correlation coefficient, 
Akaike Information Criterion, etc. 
 
The proposed methodology described herewith has been 
used by the authors in several situations in the domain of 
social media data exploitation for audience analytics or 
prediction purposes. In all occasions, it has proven to be very 
effective, when proper elements and configuration are 
employed at each stage.  
As already stated, the five-step methodology is the 
outcome of a thorough review of the most dominant state of 
the art approaches in the area of social-media data processing 
in support of TV show audience analytics. To this end, Table 
1 presents a summary of this analysis, where the various 
steps employed by the most popular approaches presented in 
the state of the art review in Section II are mapped to the 
main elements of the methodology proposed herewith, while 
the specific mechanisms employed are identified.  
TABLE I.  
MAPPING THE MOST DOMINANT STATE OF THE ART WORK 
TO THE PROPOSED METHODOLOGY STEPS  
Refe- 
rence Step# 
Step Elements 
[2] 
Step 1 
Japan geo-tagged tweets containing hashtags related with the 
show and the TV channel. Targeted genres of shows are: 
News, documentary, talk show, life style 
Step 2 Native Twitter API 
Step 3 Algorithm for calculating score reflecting the relevance of 
tweets with targeted show 
Step 4 Identification of overall popularity of the show based on the 
volume of “relevant” tweets and the absolute number of users 
Step 5 No cross-validation with ground truth data 
[20] Step 1 Tweets containing hashtag related to Reality shows in Italy 
Step 2 Collection of Tweets based on “Twitter Vigilance” multiuser 
tool developed for research purposes 
Step 3 Sentiment Analysis based on a score for positive, negative, 
and neutral mood 
Step 4 
Predict audience of scheduled TV programmes based on 
volumes of (re)tweets, of unique users "tweeting", sentiment 
analysis scores for each textual element in the tweets.  
Statistical approaches utilised are: Principal Component 
Analysis, Multi-linear Regression & Ridge Models 
Step 5 RMSE-Root Mean Square Error, MAE - Mean Absolute 
Error 
[19] 
Step 1 
Tweets containing the official hashtag of selected popular 
USA TV series, possible hashtag derivatives, official account 
of the television program. 
Step 2 
Python script, interacting with Twitter Streaming API that 
allows for real-time downloading of tweets containing certain 
keywords. 
Step 3 
Sentiment categorization based on Knime Decision Trees 
algorithm. Manual classification for an initial set of 14,000 
tweets. 
Step 4 
Audience prediction estimation based on the calculation of 
volumes of positive, neutral and negative tweets considering 
different time frame windows: (i) within 3 hours after episode 
start, (ii) within 24 hours after episode start 
Statistical approaches utilised are: Linear Regression Models 
Step 5 p-value and t-test significant test 
[17] 
Step 1 
Data from Facebook "fan pages" regarding the TV shows: 
#page posts, #fans posts, #page posts comments, #fans posts 
likes, #fans posts shares, #fans posts comments, #page posts 
likes. Taiwan: TV drama series aired once a week. 
Step 2 Facebook API for collecting data from the official page of the 
show 
Step 3 
Repeated respondents in the same article were filtered out to 
avoid large amount of increased responses due to special 
events (such as quizzes or Facebook Meeting Rooms, etc.) 
Step 4 
Accumulation of the broadcasted TV programs’ word-of 
mouth on Facebook and apply the Backpropagation Neural 
Network to predict the latest program audience rating. 
Step 5 Mean Absolute Error, Mean Absolute Percentage Errors 
[21] 
Step 1 
Tweets containing only the most commonly used TV shows 
hashtags Netherlands: Country’s top-25 TV shows with high 
number of tweets. #tweets #hashtags (tweets posted half an 
hour before broadcast, during broadcast and half an hour after 
the end on the shows) 
Step 2 Native Twitter API 
Step 3 None 
Step 4 Correlation of tweets volumes with audience measurements 
with the utilisation of Linear Regression Models. 
Step 5 Pearson correlation coefficient 
[32] 
Step 1 
Official Facebook page of TV show. USA: Reality, Drama 
and Sports series. Average engagement per post, Fans on 
Facebook, Posts in Total, Links in Total, Photos in Total, 
Videos in Total, Included question post in Total, Unique 
engaged audiences on Facebook 
Step 2 Facebook API 
Step 3 Not specified 
Step 4 Data Visualization of Correlations, PCA for Dimension 
Reduction, Multiple Regression Analysis 
Step 5 Akaike Information Criterion, Bayesian Information 
Criterion, ANOVA, Word Cloud Analysis 
IV. 
PROPOSED ARCHITECTURE FOR SOCIAL MEDIA-
BASED AUDIENCE ANALYTICS 
Based on the proposed methodology and building on the 
architectures proposed by the most popular state of the art 
related initiatives, this section proposes a reference 
architecture suitable for social media based audience 
analytics. Among the design principles of this architecture is 
the ability of the service to query various Social Media 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-681-1
DATA ANALYTICS 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Data Analytics

Services (e.g., Twitter and Facebook) through pluggable 
connectors for each service. The respective high level 
functional view is presented in Figure 2 and its core modules 
are described hereafter. 
RestAPI: It exposes the backend’s functionality v a REST 
endpoint. The API specifies a set of SM data mining 
functions where the service consumer provides as input 
various criteria such as data sources, data types, keywords, 
topics, geographical regions, time periods, etc. 
SM 
Data 
Query 
Management: 
This 
component 
orchestrates the overall execution of the queries and the 
processing of the replies. Given the input from the user (e.g., 
targeted keywords, targeted location, time frame) several 
properly formulated queries are generated that are forwarded 
to the respective connectors/wrappers to dispatch the 
requests to several existing Social Media services available 
online. The SM Data Query Management enforces querying 
policies tailored to each service in order to optimize the 
utilization of the services and to avoid potential bans.  
Social Media Connectors: A set of software modules that 
support the connection and the execution of queries to 
external services through the provided available APIs or via 
tailored crawlers. Connectors are embedding all the 
necessary security related credentials to the calls and 
automate the initiation of a session with the external services. 
Thus, the connectors automate and ease the actual 
formulation and execution of the queries issued by the SM 
Data Query Management component. Some example APIs 
that are utilized by the connectors are: Twitter API, 
YouTube Data API v3, Facebook API. 
SM Data Collection Engine: Given that each external 
service will reply in different time frames (e.g., a call to 
Google Trends discovery replies within a few seconds while 
Twitter stream analysis might take longer time periods) the 
overall process is performed in an asynchronous manner, 
coordinated by the Data Collection Engine,  
SM Data Pre-processor: This module performs the 
necessary data cleaning aiming to improve the quality of the 
collected data and to prepare them for the actual data 
analysis through data transformation mechanisms that 
models raw data into a uniform model. 
SM Data Analytics Engine: This module maintains a 
repository of statistical and data mining methods that can be 
applied on data sets previously prepared by the SM Data Pre-
processor module. 
Analysis Results Database Management: The outcome 
from various data analysis tasks are maintained to a local 
database. The Database Management module supports the 
creation, retrieval, update and deletion of data objects. 
Hence, it is feasible for the user to compare analysis tasks 
reports performed in the past with more recent ones and have 
an intuitive view of the evolution of trend reports in time.  
Front End: The Front-End visualizes the results 
providing the following output: (i) various graphs presenting 
the absolute volume of retrieved messages (e.g., number of 
tweets, number of Facebook posts), (ii) calculated scores 
indicating audience interest for different shows, per location 
(country), time period, (iii) higher level information e.g., 
audience’s sentiment or gender. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Reference Architecture for using social media data to support 
audience analytics. 
A proof of concept of the described architecture has been 
implemented in Python 3 programming language. For the 
SM Data Analytics Engine the scikit-learn [33] python 
package has been integrated, while results are stored in a 
MySQL relational database. Currently connectors for 
Twitter, Facebook and Google Trends have been integrated. 
V. 
WHAT ABOUT GOOGLE TRENDS? 
Based on the state of the art review, the research work 
conducted so far by various initiatives on the domain of 
Social Media data usage to extract information related to 
audience analytics focuses on Twitter and Facebook. In 
certain occasions, the obtained results are not of adequate 
quality and reliability. In an attempt to treat this, the authors 
are 
currently 
experimenting 
with 
using 
additional 
information obtained via Google Trends [34]. Google Trends 
is a public web facility of Google Inc. that presents how 
often a specific search-term is entered on Google Search 
relative to the total search-volume across various regions of 
the world, and in various languages. The idea is to couple 
this information with data extracted by Twitter for example 
in the framework of a TV show or program in order to 
enhance the quality of the respective audience statistics 
extracted. 
In an initial attempt to evaluate this approach, we focused 
on the Italian talent show “Amici di Maria de Filippi” that 
broadcasts for the last 17 years and lies among the most 
popular shows in Italy. The show airs annually from October 
until June, thus being appropriate for yearly examination of 
the data. In this study, data of the year 2017 have been used, 
split in two semesters as elaborated upon subsequently. 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-681-1
DATA ANALYTICS 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Data Analytics

 
 
Figure 3.  Correlation of Google Trends and Twitter data for the term 
‘#amici16’ targeting the first semester of 2017 
Google Trends (GTrends) provides a variety of 
chronological and geographical metrics that show the search 
activity for the term in question. The one used in this study is 
a time series of the relative search figures -search volume for 
the term divided by the total volume of the day- normalized 
between 0 and 100. One limitation of the platform is that one 
can only get daily figures for a maximum range of 270 days, 
which of course is less than a year. To overcome this 
obstacle, the year has been split in two semesters, which also 
allows us not to mix results, since the TV season starts 
during the second semester of the year. Data from GTrends 
require no further processing, since they are provided in the 
format required for this experiment. 
On the other hand, the data obtained via Twitter have 
been extracted on a monthly basis and have been grouped 
based on date in order to acquire the daily volume. Tweets 
retrieval was based on the hashtags ‘#amiciXX’ where XX 
corresponds to the number of the consequent season that the 
show is aired. During the period January -June 2017 and 
based on the hashtag ‘#amici16’ there where 882024 tweets 
collected while during the period July to December 2017 and 
based on the hashtag ‘#amici17’ there where 135288 tweets 
collected. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Correlation of Google Trends and Twitter data for the term 
‘#amici17’ targeting the second semester of 2017. 
In order to verify the correlation between data originating 
from Google Trends and those originating from Twitter, the 
Pearson correlation coefficient was utilised. The obtained 
results for the first semester of 2017 are illustrated in Figure 
3 and lead to coefficient of 0.893 and to significance of 
approximately 10-32. This indicates that the two datasets are 
strongly correlated, since we secured that the figures of each 
set are matched 1-1 and the low significance ensures that this 
result cannot be produced randomly. The respective 
outcomes for the second semester of 2017 are presented in 
Figure 4 and lead to correlation coefficient of 0.816 and to 
significance of about 10-30. The slightly lower correlation 
demonstrated can be fully justified by the fact that the show 
does not broadcast during the summer and thus there is lower 
activity both on Twitter, as well as on Google, resulting in 
lower correlation results. Nevertheless, the findings indicate 
a strong relation between Twitter and Google Trends data. 
The aforementioned results confirm what the authors 
originally expected: Data obtained from Google Trends and 
Twitter at the same period and subject are strongly (linearly) 
correlated and this of course can be further exploited in a 
variety of research purposes.  
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS & FUTURE PLANS  
This paper presents a review of existing research 
initiatives that exploit online user activity data across social 
media to extract information linked to audience statistics and 
TV ratings. Among the core findings of this analysis is that 
existing mechanisms can mainly act as a complement 
approach to the traditional TV ratings, but are not able yet to 
fully substitute them. However, there is an imperative need 
to further investigate such mechanisms, as traditional 
audience metering approaches are demonstrating various 
limitations, especially due to the change of viewing 
behaviours such as audience’s mobility and nonlinear 
viewing.  
Most of the investigated approaches employ common 
data analysis steps that have been studied herewith, along 
with the prevailing statistical and data mining methods 
utilised. Building on these and considering the online social 
network data collection and analytics trends and approaches, 
this paper proposed a five-stage methodology that enables 
any interested party to build an efficient audience analytics 
mechanism based on social-media data. Based on the defined 
methodology and building on the architectures proposed by 
the most effective state of the art related initiatives, a 
reference architecture in support of social-media based 
audience analytics extraction is introduced and elaborated 
upon. Finally, this paper identifies Google Trends as a 
valuable source of information that, to the best of the 
authors’ knowledge, has so far not been investigated by any 
of the existing approaches on this topic. Future plans include 
further evaluation of the proposed methodology and 
architecture by extracting qualitative and quantitative 
audiences’ characteristics and metrics in various settings, and 
cross validating these with ground truth data collected with 
the traditional audience rating measurement approaches. 
Moreover, the authors have already kicked off an extended 
evaluation of the usability of Google Trends in the 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-681-1
DATA ANALYTICS 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Data Analytics

application domain of TV show audience analytics based on 
several shows and couple the respective data with other SM 
data to improve the quality and accuracy of the estimated 
and predicted TV ratings. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been supported by the European 
Commission, Horizon 2020 Framework Program for 
research and innovation under grant agreement no. 
65020601. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
S. Sereday and J. Cui, “Using machine learning to predict future tv 
ratings”, Data Science, Nielsen, Vol. 1, No. 3, pp. 3-12, Feb. 2017. 
[2] 
S. Wakamiya, R. Lee, and K. Sumiya, “Towards better TV viewing 
rates: exploiting crowd’s media life logs over twitter for TV rating”, 
5th ACM Int. Conf. on ubiquitous information management and 
communication, pp. 412-421, Feb. 2011. 
[3] 
F. Ahmed, R. Asif, S. Hina, and M. Muzammil, “Financial Market 
Prediction using Google Trends”, Int. Journal of Advanced Computer 
Science and Applications, Vol. 8, No.7, pp. 388-391, July 2017. 
[4] 
N. Askitas and K.F. Zimmermann, “Google econometrics and 
unemployment forecasting”, Applied Economics Quarterly, Vol. 55, 
No. 2, pp. 107-120, Apr. 2009. 
[5] 
B. O’Connor, R. Balasubramanyan, B.R. Routledge, and N.A. Smith, 
“From tweets to polls: linking text sentiment to public opinion time 
series”, 4th AAAI Int. Conf. on Weblogs and Social Media (ICWSM 
2010), pp. 122–129, May 2010. 
[6] 
A. Tumasjan, T. Sprenger, P.G. Sandner, and I.M. Welpe, “Predicting 
elections with twitter: what 140 characters reveal about political 
sentiment”, 4th AAAI Int. Conf. on Weblogs and Social Media 
(ICWSM 2010), pp. 178–185, May 2010. 
[7] 
A. J. Ocampo, R. Chunara, and J. S. Brownstein, “Using search 
queries for malaria surveillance, Thailand”, Malaria Journal, Vol. 12, 
pp. 390-396, Nov. 2013. 
[8] 
S. Yang, et al., “Using electronic health records and Internet search 
information for accurate influenza forecasting”, BMC Infectious 
Diseases (BMC series), Vol. 17, pp. 332-341, May 2017. 
[9] 
S. Sinha, C. Dyer, K. Gimpel, and N.A. Smith, “Predicting the NFL 
Using Twitter”, Machine Learning and Data Mining for Sports 
Analytics Workshop (ECML/PKDD 2013), pp. 137-147, Sep. 2013. 
[10] A. Chauhan, K. Kummamuru, and D. Toshniwal, “Prediction of 
places of visit using tweets”, Knowledge and Information Systems 
Journal, Vol. 50, No. 1, pp. 145-166 , Jan. 2017. 
[11] O. Giannakopoulos, N. Kalatzis, I. Roussaki, and S. Papavassiliou, 
“Gender Recognition Based on Social Networks for Multimedia 
Production”, 13th IEEE Image, Video, and Multidimensional Signal 
Processing Workshop (IVMSP 2018), IEEE Press, Jun. 2018, pp. 1-5, 
doi: 10.1109/IVMSPW.2018.8448788 
[12] M.X. Hoang , X. Dang , X. Wu , Z. Yan, and A.K. Singh, “GPOP: 
Scalable Group-level Popularity Prediction for Online Content in 
Social Networks”, 26th Int. Conf. on World Wide Web, pp. 725-733, 
Apr. 2017. 
[13] A. Oghina, M. Breuss, M. Tsagkias, and M. de Rijke, “Predicting 
IMDB movie ratings using social media”, 34th European Conf. on 
Advances in Information Retrieval (ECIR 2012), pp. 503-507, Apr. 
2012. 
[14] B. Bhattacharjee, A. Sridhar, and A. Dutta, “Identifying the causal 
relationship between social media content of a Bollywood movie and 
its box-office success-a text mining approach”, Int. Journal of 
Business Information Systems, Vol. 24, No. 3, pp. 344-368, 2017. 
[15] G. Mitsis, N. Kalatzis, I. Roussaki, E. Tsiropoulou, S. Papavassiliou, 
and S. Tonoli, “Social Media Analytics in Support of Documentary 
Production”, 10th International Conference on Creative Content 
Technologies (CONTENT 2018) IARIA, Feb. 2018, pp. 7-13, ISSN: 
2308-4162, ISBN: 978-1-61208-611-8 
[16] S. Wakamiya, R. Lee, and K. Sumiya, “Crowd-Powered TV Viewing 
Rates: Measuring Relevancy between Tweets and TV Programs”, Int. 
Conf. on Database Systems for Advanced Applications (DASFAA 
2011), pp. 390-401, Apr. 2011. 
[17] W. Hsieh, Y. Cheng, S.T. Chou, and C. Wu, “Predicting tv audience 
rating with social media”, Workshop on Natural Language Processing 
for Social Media (SocialNLP) under 6th Int. Joint Conf. on Natural 
Language Processing (IJCNLP 2013), pp. 1–5, Oct. 2013. 
[18] F. Giglietto, “Exploring correlations between TV viewership and 
twitter conversations in Italian political talk shows”, Aug. 2013, doi: 
10.2139/ssrn.2306512. 
[19] L. Molteni and J. Ponce De Leon, “Forecasting with twitter data: an 
application to Usa Tv series audience”, Int. Journal of Design & 
Nature and Ecodynamics, Vol. 11, No. 3, pp. 220–229, Jul. 2016. 
[20] A. Crisci, et. al, “Predicting TV programme audience by using twitter 
based metrics”, Multimedia Tools and Applications Journal, Vol. 77, 
No. 10, pp. 12203–12232, May 2018.  
[21] B. Sommerdijk, E. Sanders, and A. van den Bosch, “Can Tweets 
Predict TV Ratings?”, 10th Int. Conf. on Language Resources and 
Evaluation (LREC 2016), pp. 2965-1970, May 2016.  
[22] C. Oh, S. Sasser, and S. Almahmoud, “Social Media Analytics 
Framework: The Case of Twitter and Super Bowl Ads”, Journal of 
Information Technology Management, Journal of Information 
Technology Management, Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 1-18, Jan. 2015. 
[23] M.H. Cheng, Y.C. Wu, and M.C. Chen, “Television Meets Facebook: 
The Correlation between TV Ratings and Social Media”, American 
Journal of Industrial and Business Management, Vol. 6, No. 3, pp. 
282-290, Mar. 2016. 
[24] W. Fan and M. Gordon, “The Power of Social Media Analytics”, 
Communications of the ACM, Vol. 57, No.6, pp.74-81, June 2014. 
[25] A. Gandomi and M. Haider, “Beyond the hype: Big data concepts, 
methods, and analytics”, Int. Journal of Information Management, 
Vol. 35, No. 2, pp. 137-144, Apr. 2015. 
[26] X. Wu, X. Zhu, G.Q. Wu, and W. Ding, “Data Mining with Big 
Data”, IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, Vol. 
26, No. 1, pp. 97-107, Jan. 2014. 
[27] K. Kambatla, G. Kollias, V. Kumar, and A. Grama, “Trends in big 
data analytics”, Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing, Vol. 
74, No. 7, pp. 2561-2573, July 2014. 
[28] A. Gandomi and M. Haider, “Beyond the hype: Big data concepts, 
methods, and analytics”, Int. Journal of Information Management, 
Vol. 35, No. 2, pp. 137-144, Apr. 2015. 
[29] X. Wu, X. Zhu, G.Q. Wu, and W. Ding, “Data Mining with Big 
Data”, IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, Vol. 
26, No. 1, pp. 97-107, Jan. 2014. 
[30] K. Kambatla, G. Kollias, V. Kumar, and A. Grama, “Trends in big 
data analytics”, Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing, Vol. 
74, No. 7, pp. 2561-2573, July 2014. 
[31] M.N. Injadat, F. Salo, and A.B. Nassif, “Data mining techniques in 
social media: A survey”, Neurocomputing, Vol. 214, pp. 654–670, 
Nov. 2016. 
[32] J. Min, Q. Zang, and Y. Liu, “The influence of social media 
engagement on TV program ratings”, 2015 Systems & Information 
Engineering Design Symposium, pp. 283-288, Apr. 2015. 
[33] http://scikit-learn.org/ [accessed July 2018] 
[34] https://trends.google.com/ [accessed July 2018] 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-681-1
DATA ANALYTICS 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Data Analytics

