Fuzzy Clustering Based Approach to Network  
Traffic Classification and Anomaly Detection  
Julija Asmuss, Gunars Lauks 
Institute of Telecommunication  
Riga Technical University  
Riga, Latvia 
e-mail: julija.asmuss@rtu.lv, gunars.lauks@rtu.lv 
 
 
Abstract— In this work, we develop network traffic 
classification and anomaly detection methods based on traffic 
time series analysis using fuzzy clustering. We compare four 
fuzzy clustering techniques using different dimensionality 
reduction methods and validity indices to work out an effective 
anomaly detection algorithm. The effectiveness of the proposed 
classification system is evaluated on traffic data with and 
without traffic attack components.  
Keywords- 
fuzzy 
clustering; 
fuzzy 
transform; 
traffic 
classification; anomaly detection. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The ability to classify and identify network traffic is the 
main area of interest for many network operation and 
research topics such as traffic engineering, monitoring, 
pricing, security, anomaly detecting. Anomalous traffic or 
unwanted traffic definition is still very fuzzy and immensely 
varies among networks. But it is clear that anomalies (such 
as Distributed Denial-of-Service (DDoS) attacks [1], for 
example) may cause significant variances in a network traffic 
level, and as a result, legitimate user requests can not get 
through the network. Our work mainly focuses on flood 
attacks. The most common DDoS flood attacks target the 
computer networks bandwidth or connectivity. In this 
context, traffic volume analysis is considered to be a 
sensitive tool for anomaly detection. 
Many monitoring schemes against DDoS attacks have 
been reported in the literature (see, e.g., [2][3][7][9][12] 
[13][16]), but only a few of them have been applied in a real 
network environment. In the context of balance between 
computation speed and classification success, the task of 
network traffic anomaly detection is still very important [1].  
Our research is devoted to anomaly detection methods 
based on traffic time series analysis using clustering 
technique. We follow the idea, which is based on anomalous 
traffic profile deviation from normal traffic profile, defined 
empirically on the basis of previously collected information 
on the properties of normal traffic conditions. The traditional 
approach to clustering can not be effectively used in this case 
due to the dynamic behaviour of network traffic in its 
development over time. This dynamic behaviour should be 
taken into account when solving traffic classification 
problems. Traffic time series may belong to one cluster 
during a certain period; afterwards, its profile may be closer 
to another cluster. This switch from one state to another can 
be naturally modelled using a fuzzy approach. We show that 
fuzzy logic based techniques allow us to deal effectively 
with the vague and imprecise boundaries between normal 
traffic and different levels of attacks. 
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. 
Section II introduces objectives and tasks of this research. 
Section III contains traffic data representation tools. Sections 
IV and V are devoted to the clustering and classification 
stages, respectively. Section VI contains the description of 
experiments and results. 
II. 
OUTLINE OF RESEARCH OBJECTIVES 
Our aim in this research is to use the advantages of the 
fuzzy logic based approach for analysis of network traffic 
dynamics and to suggest traffic classification and anomaly 
detection mechanisms based on fuzzy transforms, fuzzy 
clustering and classification with good computation speed 
and classification success characteristics. The tasks of the 
research follow directly from its objectives:  
 
To develop a fuzzy transform technique for 
representation of network traffic and to investigate 
its advantages in traffic data compression; 
 
To evaluate the performance of different fuzzy 
clustering 
methods 
for 
solving 
the 
traffic 
classification problem and to identify the best one; 
 
To develop the mechanism of traffic classification 
and anomaly detection using traffic fuzzy clusters 
and self-similarity characteristics;  
 
To evaluate the performance of the suggested 
method and to compare it with the existing solutions. 
III. 
TRAFFIC DATA PRE-PROCESSING  
We work with time series that represent aggregated 
traffic and we compare two dimensionality reduction 
methods. 
Usually, 
the 
dimension 
of 
time 
series 
representation is reduced using Piecewise Aggregate 
Approximation (PAA) [17]. In this research, we also apply 
time series representation based on Fuzzy Transform (for 
short, F-transform) introduced in [8].  
Generally, F-transform depends on a chosen fuzzy 
partition, which consists of fuzzy sets given by membership 
functions. We apply uniform fuzzy partition with the 
triangular form of membership functions and use discrete 
formulas for F-transform components. 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

The idea of using fuzzy transforms in analysis of time 
series is not new (see, e.g., [4][5]). Our research develops the 
F-transform technique as a special tool for traffic data 
aggregation and investigates its role in reduction of traffic 
classification computational resources. 
IV. 
FUZZY CLUSTERING TECHNIQUE  
We consider four fuzzy clustering algorithms and 
evaluate their performance for our purposes: Fuzzy C-Means 
(FCM); 
Possibilistic 
C-Means 
(PCM); 
Possibilistic 
Clustering Algorithm (PCA); Unsupervised Possibilistic 
Fuzzy Clustering (UPFC) [6][11][14][15]. For each of them 
we consider also Gustafson-Kessel modification GK (see, 
e.g., [6]).   
We apply four validity indices for determining the 
number of clusters: modified partition coefficient, Fukuyama 
and Sugeno index, Xie and Beni index, separation and 
compactness index (see, e.g., [10]). Taking into account that 
the result obtained by using each index can be interpreted as 
evaluation done by an expert, we apply the technique of 
aggregation of expert opinions. 
Thus, at the clustering stage we obtain fuzzy clusters and 
cluster centroids given by their F-transform components or 
PAA components, correspondingly.  
V. 
FUZZY CLASSIFICATION AND ANOMALY DETECTION  
For the traffic classification merit we use the prototypes 
obtained at the previous stage. Decision making on 
classification of a new traffic time series is done in the 
following way. We suppose that we have new infinite time 
series, therefore the algorithm runs infinite time too. At each 
moment in time, the classification is done considering a 
finite number of time series components and their F-
transform (or PAA) components, correspondingly.  
In each next step, we start with the computation of F-
transform (or PAA) components (as compared with the 
previous step, the first component is removed and one new 
component is added to the end). Then, we compute the 
membership degrees with respect to all clusters of normal (in 
some cases, of anomalous also) traffic. Next, we evaluate 
self-similarity parameter changing rate. Finally, decision 
making on the risk of anomalies is done on the basis of the 
above mentioned membership degrees and Hurst parameter 
changing rate by using the fuzzy rule based technique.  
VI. 
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS  
When studying a traffic classification technique with real 
traces, it is important to have a baseline for traffic 
classification that will be used as a reference. Because it is 
very difficult to obtain a dataset that is representative of real 
network activities and contains both normal and anomalous 
traffic, attack traffic for numerical experiments was 
generated and added as additional component of traffic data.  
To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed technique, 
we consider all major steps:  
 
Traffic data pre-processing, the main merit of which 
is to reduce the amount of traffic data and to allow a 
more effective use of data analysis techniques, both 
in time and space;  
 
Extracting the relationship between traffic data by 
using fuzzy clustering methods to characterize 
patterns, which identify normal network traffic;  
 
Detecting traffic anomalies by using fuzzy rule 
based prototypical classification methods. 
The algorithm consists of two stages: fuzzy clustering, which 
can be executed only once, and real-time classification. 
When evaluating the computation time per classification, the 
clustering stage is not taken into account.  
The results obtained by comparing different techniques 
show that the best compromise between computation speed 
and classification success is achieved using F-transforms for 
traffic time series representation and applying UPFC-GK 
clustering algorithm. The detection rate (DR) in our 
experiments with this technique was greater than 99%; the 
false alarm rate (FAR) was about 1% in the worst cases. A 
comparison with methods based on statistical analysis (D-
WARD, DCD, T-test model) is done using DR and FAR 
evaluation results shown in [16]. For the exact comparison 
and performance evaluation, it is necessary to obtain results 
for real traffic classification in the same testing conditions.        
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been supported by the European Social 
Fund within the project 2013/0024/1DP/1.1.1.2.0/13/APIA/ 
VIAA/045 „Applications of mathematical structures based 
on fuzzy 
logic principles in the development of 
telecommunication network design and resource control 
technologies”.  
REFERENCES 
[1] Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-EU), “DDoS 
overview and incident response guide,” 2014. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://cert.europa.eu/static/WhitePapers/  
[retrieved: May, 2015] 
[2] K. Lee, J. Kim, K. H. Kwon, J. Han, and S. Kim, “DDoS 
attack detection method using cluster analysis,” Expert 
Systems with Applications, vol. 34, 2008, pp. 1659–1665.  
[3] M. Li, “Change trend of averaged Hurst parameter of traffic 
under DDOS flood attacks,” Computers & Security, vol. 25, 
2006, pp. 213–220.        
[4] V. Novák, I. Perfilieva, M. Holčapek, and V. Kreinovich, 
“Filtering out high frequencies in time series using F-
transform,” Information Sciences, vol. 274, 2014, pp. 192–
209.       
[5] V. Novák, M. Štepnička, V. Dvorák, I. Perfilieva, V. 
Pavliska, and I. Vavrıčková, “Analysis of seasonal time series 
using fuzzy approach.,” International Journal of General 
Systems, vol. 39, 2010, pp. 305–328. 
[6] J. V. de Oliveira and W. Pedrycz,  “Advances in fuzzy 
clustering and its applications,” John Wiley and Sons, 2007. 
[7] T. T. Oo and T. Phyu, “A statistical approach to classify and 
identify DDoS attacks using UCLA Dataset,”  Int. J. of 
Advanced Research in Computer Engineering & Technology, 
vol. 2, No. 5, 2013, pp. 1766–1770. 
[8] I. Perfilieva, “Fuzzy transforms: Theory and applications,” 
Fuzzy Sets and Systems, vol. 157, 2006, pp. 993–1004.    
[9] S. N. Shiaeles, V. Katos, A. S. Karakos, and B. K. 
Papadopoulos, “Real time DDoS detection using fuzzy 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

estimators”, Computers & Security, vol. 31, 2012, pp. 782–
790. 
[10] W. Wang and Y. Zhang, “On fuzzy cluster validity indices,” 
Fuzzy Sets and Systems, vol. 158, 2007, pp. 2095 –2117. 
[11] X. Wu, B. Wu, J. Sun, and H. Fu, “Unsupervised possibilistic 
fuzzy clustering,” Journal of Information & Computational 
Science,  vol. 7(5), 2010, pp. 1075–1080. 
[12] Z. Xia, S. Lu, J. Li, and J. Tang, “Enhancing DDoS flood 
attack detection via intelligent fuzzy logic,” Informatica, vol. 
34, 2010, pp. 497–507.   
[13] Z. Xiong, Y. Wang, and X. F. Wang, “Distributed 
collaborative DDoS detection method based on traffic 
classification features”, Proc. of International Conference on 
Computer Science and Electronics Engineering ICCSEE 
2013, Atlantic Press, Paris, 2013, pp. 93–96. 
[14] M.-S. Yang and K.-L. Wub, “Unsupervised possibilistic 
clustering,” Pattern Recpgnition, vol. 39, 2006, pp. 5–21. 
[15] R. J. Almeida and J. M. C. Sousa, “Comparison of fuzzy 
clustering 
algorithms 
for 
classification,” 
Proc. 
of  
International Symposium on Evolving Fuzzy Systems  
EFS’06, Lake District, United Kingdom, 2006, pp. 112–117.  
[16] M. H. Bhuyan, H. J. Kashyap, D. K. Bhattacharyya, and J. K. 
Kalita, “Detecting distributed denial of service attacks: 
methods, tools and future directions,” Computer Journal, vol. 
57, 2014, 537-556. 
[17] E. Keogh, K. Chakrabarti, M. Pazzani, and S. Mehrotra, 
“Dimensionality reduction for fast similarity search in large 
time series databases,” Knowledge and Information Systems,” 
vol. 3, 2001, pp. 263–286. 
 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

