 
 
Modelling the Consistency between Customer Opinion and Online Rating with 
VADER Sentiment and Bayesian Networks 
  
Alexandros Bousdekis  
Department of Business 
Administration 
School of Business, Athens 
University of Economics and 
Business 
Athens, Greece 
e-mail: albous@mail.ntua.gr 
Dimitris Kardaras 
Department of Business 
Administration 
School of Business, Athens 
University of Economics and 
Business 
Athens, Greece 
e-mail: dkkardaras@yahoo.co.uk 
Stavroula Barbounaki 
Merchant Marine Academy of 
Aspropyrgos  
Aspropyrgos, Greece 
e-mail:  
sbarbounaki@yahoo.gr
Abstract— Customers have access to different sources of 
information, and generate their own content and share their 
views and experiences which are expressed through online 
review comments and ratings about products and services. 
However, the increasing amount of data has reached a level 
that makes manual processing impossible, requiring data-
driven approaches. Sentiment analysis is rapidly emerging as 
an automated process of examining semantic relationships and 
meaning in reviews. Despite the large amount of research 
works dealing with sentiment analysis, the consistency between 
the customer opinions expressed in review comments and the 
rating that they provide has not been explored. In this paper, 
we propose an approach incorporating the Valence Aware 
Dictionary for Sentiment Reasoning (VADER) algorithm for 
extracting the polarity of the review comments and Bayesian 
Networks for revealing the relationships between the 
aforementioned sentiment scores and the online rating. The 
proposed approach was validated in the tourism domain using 
a dataset with hotel reviews, extracted from the TripAdvisor. 
Keywords—sentiment analysis; probabilistic model; machine 
learning; data analytics; hotel review; tourism management; 
opinion mining. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Customers 
have access to different 
sources 
of 
information, and generate their own content and share their 
views and experiences which are expressed through online 
review comments and ratings about products and services. 
However, the increasing amount of data has reached a level 
that makes manual processing impossible, requiring data-
driven approaches. Sentiment analysis is rapidly emerging as 
an automated process of examining semantic relationships 
and meaning in reviews. Analyzing the sentiment tendency 
of consumer evaluation can not only provide a reference for 
other consumers but also help businesses on e-commerce 
platforms to improve service quality and consumer 
satisfaction [1]. 
E-commerce platforms use ratings in order to quantify 
customer’s preferences and satisfaction on products and 
services. Several techniques like clustering, nearest-
neighbour methods, matrix manipulations, point-of interest 
modelling have been used to model user interest patterns so 
as to maximize purchase satisfaction [2]. However, these 
ratings are biased by certain hidden factors like brand 
adherence and product-prejudice [2]. On the other hand, 
review comments is a valuable source of data related to 
customers’ opinions. However, different people use different 
ways of expressing themselves, leading to variations in the 
sentiment scores. In addition, the customers select some 
main points to be mentioned in the review comments. 
However, there are various aspects that affect their level of 
satisfaction and their preferences that are not mentioned at all 
and remain at their own mind. In this sense, there may be 
review comments with similar content and sentiment but 
different ratings. These facts lead to inconsistencies between 
the customer opinions expressed in review comments and the 
rating that they provide. 
Despite the large amount of research works dealing with 
sentiment analysis, the consistency between the customer 
opinions expressed in review comments and the rating that 
they provide has not been explored. In this paper, we propose 
an approach incorporating the Valence Aware Dictionary for 
Sentiment Reasoning (VADER) algorithm for extracting the 
polarity of the review comments and Bayesian Networks for 
revealing the relationships between the aforementioned 
sentiment scores and the online rating. The proposed 
approach was validated in the tourism domain using a dataset 
with hotel reviews, extracted from the TripAdvisor.  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II 
describes the related work with a focus on sentiment 
classification of review comments and analysis of review 
rating. Section III presents the proposed approach for 
modelling the consistency between customer opinion and 
online rating. Section III presents and discusses the results of 
the application of the proposed approach to the e-tourism 
domain. Section IV concludes the paper and outlines our 
plans for future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Sentiment analysis uses algorithms to extract and analyse 
opinions from text (e.g., customers online reviews), as well 
as to identify positive, neutral and negative opinions to 
measure a customer’s attitude toward an issue [3]. In other 
words, sentiment analysis aims at identifying the polarity of 
text by extracting sentiments, opinions and emotions [4][5]. 
There is a wide range of applications, from customer 
satisfaction to political opinions [5], or even diagnosis of 
health care related problems identified by the patients 
themselves [6]. Sentiment analysis does not correspond to 
one single problem but it may incorporate several different 
objectives, such as: sentiment classification (e.g., polarity 
determination, 
vagueness 
resolution), 
subjectivity 
classification, and opinion spam detection [2][3][7].  
A. Sentiment Classification of Review Comments 
Sentiment classification is a widely explored research 
area with a variety of methods and techniques that have been 
proposed in the literature. There are three main categories of 
approaches [7][8]: (i) lexicon dictionary-based methods; (ii) 
machine learning-based methods; and, (iii) hybrid methods. 
Lexicon dictionary-based methods deal with creating a 
sentiment lexicon, i.e., words carrying a sentiment 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-891-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Data Analytics

orientation [9][10]. These methods can create the dictionary 
from initial seed words, corpus words (related to a specific 
domain) or combining the two. Frequently, the dictionary is 
fed with synonyms and antonyms [8]. One of the most well-
known dictionary-based algorithms is VADER [11]. The 
increasing amounts of data generated by commercial 
platforms in which the customers are able to rate and 
comment on products and services has fostered the 
emergence of various data-driven approaches for sentiment 
analysis [12]. However, the machine learning approach 
requires an already labelled dataset to learn from, and it is 
not certain that knowledge learned in one domain is 
transferable to another domain [5]. Such approaches usually 
require human intervention to obtain the sentiment category 
of the input text. Traditional machine learning methods 
commonly used include Naive Bayes [13][14], Support 
Vector Machine [13][15], K-Nearest Neighbor [16], 
maximum entropy [17], logistic regression [18], Random 
Forest [19] and conditional random fields model [1]. 
B. Analysis of Review Ratings 
Several research works propose approaches, methods and 
algorithms that also incorporate the review ratings provided 
directly by the customer. Chua and Banerjee [20] examined 
review helpfulness as a function of reviewer reputation, 
review rating, and review depth. Chen et al. [21] introduced 
an attention mechanism to explore the usefulness of reviews, 
and proposed a Neural Attentional Regression model with 
Review-level Explanations (NARRE) for recommendation. 
Hassan and Shoaib [22] presented a Gated-Recurrent-Unit 
(GRU) based Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) architecture 
for multi-class review rating classification problem. Their 
model incorporates domain-specific word embeddings and 
does not depend on the reviewer’s information. Ahmed and 
Ghabayen [23] proposed a review rating prediction 
framework using deep learning. Seo et al. [24] proposed to 
model 
user 
preferences 
and item properties 
using 
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) with dual local and 
global attention, motivated by the superiority of CNNs to 
extract complex features. By using aggregated review texts 
from a user and aggregated review text for an item, their 
model can learn the unique features (embedding) of each 
user and each item. Songpan [25] proposed the analysis and 
prediction rating from customer reviews who commented as 
open opinion using probability's classifier model. Overall, 
the embodiment of review ratings along with the review 
comments shows a potential to further enhance the 
algorithms in providing predictions but also extracting useful 
insights on the performance of products and services. 
However, they pose additional challenges to their modelling 
capabilities due to the inconsistencies existing between the 
review text and the review rating. 
III. 
THE PROPOSED APPROACH FOR MODELLING THE 
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN CUSTOMER SENTIMENT AND 
ONLINE RATING 
In this section, we present our proposed approach for 
modelling the consistency between customer opinion and 
online rating. Customer opinions may be explicitly 
mentioned with the use of ratings and binary feedback, 
implicitly mentioned through online review comments, and 
not mentioned at all by not expressing their preferences, 
satisfaction or dissatisfaction for specific aspects. This 
classification is depicted in Figure 1. Most of the time, there 
are combinations of opinion’s expression.  
 
Figure 1. The steps of the proposed approach. 
The proposed approach consists of five steps that are 
described in the following sections: (A) Data Acquisition; 
(B) Extraction of Sentiment Scores with the VADER 
Algorithm; (C) Assignment of Sentiment Scores to a 
Discrete Scale; (D) Modelling the Relationships between 
Sentiment and Review Rating with Bayesian Networks; and, 
(E) Evaluating the Consistency between Customer Opinion 
and Online Rating. 
A. Data Acquistion 
In this step, the data are acquired from the database 
storing the review comments and the online rating about the 
product or service, provided by the customer. Then, they are 
pre-processed by being subject to cleaning in order to 
remove records that do not include either the review 
comment or the review rating. Finally, the acquired data are 
structured so that they feed into the next steps for further 
processing. 
B. Extraction of Sentiment Scores with the VADER 
Algorithm 
In this step, the online review comments are processed in 
order to extract their sentiment scores with the use of the 
VADER algorithm for sentiment analysis, an algorithm that 
has been proved to outperform several other sentiment 
analysis lexicons [11]. VADER sentiment is a lexical 
sentiment classifier and it is used to do initial sentiment 
labelling of each review comment [11]. A sentiment lexicon 
is a lexicon where the words have been annotated with 
semantic scores, often between -1 and 1. VADER sentiment 
can also aggregate sentiment scores from individual words 
into sentence scores. The support for sentence sentiment also 
takes into account booster words (e.g., “very” in “very 
happy”) and negation words (e.g., “not” in “not happy”) [5]. 
VADER uses a combination of qualitative and 
quantitative methods in order to produce a sentiment lexicon 
that is especially attuned to microblog-like contexts. These 
lexical features take into account generalizable rules that 
embody grammatical and syntactical conventions that 
humans use when expressing or emphasizing sentiment 
intensity [11]. VADER is applicable to various domains, 
such as social media text as well as product and service 
reviews.  
C. Assignment of  Sentiment Scores to a Discrete Scale 
In this step, the sentiment scores extracted from the 
previous step are assigned to a discrete scale consisting of 
ranges of sentiment score values. The number of the scale 
items should be the same with the respective scale of the 
review rating so that they are directly comparable. For 
example, if the review rating takes values between 1 and 5 
(which is the most common case), the sentiment scores are 
classified to a respective discrete scale: 
• 
[-1, -0.6] is assigned to “DISASTER” 
• 
(-0.6, -0.2] is assigned to “MANY THINGS 
NEED TO BE IMPROVED” 
• 
(-0.2, +0.2] is assigned to “FAIR ENOUGH” 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-891-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Data Analytics

• 
(+0.2, +0.6] is assigned to “PERFECT” 
• 
(+0.6, +1] is assigned to “ABSOLUTELY 
PERFECT” 
D. Modelling the Relationships between Sentiment and 
Review Rating with Bayesian Networks 
In this step, the relationships between the sentiment 
discrete scale created in the previous step and the review 
rating of the customer are modelled in a probabilistic model 
with the use of Bayesian Networks. A Bayesian Network 
(BN) is a powerful tool for knowledge representation and 
reasoning under conditions of uncertainty and visually 
presents the probabilistic relationships among a set of 
variables [26]. A BN has many advantages such as 
combination of different sources of knowledge, explicit 
treatment of uncertainty and support for decision analysis, 
and fast responses.  
More formally, BNs are directed acyclic graphs whose 
nodes represent random variables from the domain of 
interest, in the Bayesian sense. Therefore, a BN is defined as 
a pair B = (G, Θ). G = (V, E) is a Directed Acyclic Graph 
(DAG) where V = {v1, …, vn} is a collection of n nodes, E ⸦ 
V × V a collection of edges and a set of parameters Θ 
containing all the Conditional Probabilities (CP) of the 
network.  
Each node v ϵ V of the graph represents a random 
variable XV with a state space XV which can be either discrete 
or continuous. An edge (vi, vj) ϵ E represents the conditional 
dependence between two nodes vi, vj ϵ V where vi is the 
parent of child vj. If two nodes are not connected by an edge, 
they are conditional independent. Because a node can have 
more than one parent, let πv the set of parents for a node v ϵ 
V.  
      Therefore, each random variable is independent of all 
nodes V \ πv. For each node, a Conditional Probability Table 
(CPT) contains the CP distribution with parameters θxi|πi 
:=P(xi|πi) ϵ Θ for each realization xi of Xi conditioned on πi. 
The joint probability distribution over V is visualized by the 
BN and can be defined as  
 
 
(1) 
E. Evaluating the Consistency between Customer Opinion 
and Online Rating 
In the last step of the proposed approach, the consistency 
between the customer opinion and the provided rating is 
evaluated in order to identify the customer behaviour. 
Moreover, these results may reveal the level of satisfaction 
of the customer when this is not explicitly evident from the 
review comments. For example, a customer may not mention 
some aspects, although they affect their opinion and thus, the 
online rating. 
IV. 
APPLICATION IN HOTEL ONLINE REVIEWS FROM THE 
TRIPADVISOR 
In this section, we present the application of the proposed 
approach in the tourism and hospitality industry. More 
specifically, we used a dataset of hotel online reviews and 
ratings from the TripAdvisor in order to evaluate the 
proposed approach for modelling the inconsistency between 
the review comments and the review rating. Finally, the 
implemented model is validated as a predictor and a learning 
mechanism for the adoption of future records. 
A. The Tourism and Hospitality Industry 
Recently, data available online related to tourism is 
increasing exponentially [27]. Sentiment analysis can 
effectively aid decision making in tourism, by improving the 
understanding of tourist experience [8]. Sentiment analysis 
of hotel guests’ online reviews has undergone major 
developments in recent years [28]. These online reviews in 
the e-tourism era, in the format of both textual reviews 
(comments) and ratings, generate an electronic Word Of 
Mouth (eWOM) effect, which influences future customer 
demand and hotels’ financial performance [29].  
Online customer ratings play a key role in the hospitality 
industry [29]. Online hotel reviews also provide comparative 
and benchmarking insights about customer satisfaction 
[29][30]. Although, overall customer ratings are provided in 
these websites, there is a need to understand how far these 
ratings are consistent with the actual customer sentiments 
expressed through the reviews [31]. To this end, modelling 
the complex dynamics of online hotel review data in order to 
derive meaningful insights is of outmost importance [32]. 
B. The TripAdvisor Dataset 
TripAdvisor is an American travel website company 
providing reviews from travellers about their experiences in 
hotels, restaurants, and monuments [8].  
TABLE I.  
DATA SAMPLE FROM THE TRIPADVISOR 
ID 
Review 
Title 
Full Review 
Rating 
 
 
 
 
1 
Great 
location, 
comfortab
le. 
Neo-
classical 
boutique 
hotel 
Nice. Brilliant location opposite the 
cathedral. Bed and linen ideal for a 
good night’s sleep. Good combination 
of design in neo-classical building. 
Quiet. The roof terrace is currently very 
trendy for an early evening drink. Great 
view. The "8 hours before sunrise" 
cocktail 
is, 
incidentally, 
fun 
and 
delicious. Breakfast has a good choice 
and is good quality. Staff professional 
and friendly. We will definitely want to 
revisit. 
5 of 5 
bubbles 
 
 
 
 
2 
Fairly 
nice hotel, 
not much 
amenities 
If you want a hotel walking distance 
from town but don't want to be in the 
center of town, then this place is good. 
Not much on amenities and while they 
tell you not to drink/brush your teeth 
with the water, they will provide bottled 
water-at a fee! That just didn't feel 
right. The staff was friendly and the 
breakfast was fine-nothing out of the 
ordinary. 
3 of 5 
bubbles 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
Not worth 
it!! 
We stayed 4 nights. We had arranged 
with the hotel shuttle to pick up us. It 
was confirmed twice. After 45 min of 
no show we finally took a taxi and paid 
20 Euros!!  The room was a little dirty. 
The worse part was the bathroom, 
towels, and the pillows they have as 
headboards!!  We thought we will be 
able to walk to the town. It was 
impossible, there are no side walk, and 
the road is just dirt and not safe to walk 
on the street.   The hotel free shuttle 
into the Town (which leaves every 2 
hours) was good. This was the only way 
into town because of the hotel's location 
and a small number of taxis on the 
island.   The breakfast buffet was very 
good and the staff here was very 
friendly. 
2 of 5 
bubbles 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-891-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Data Analytics

Tourists can read the accumulated opinions of millions 
of everyday tourists. Linked to this is the bubble rating (user 
rating), a 1–5 scale. Together with this rating, users include 
their opinions, which can cover the performance of a 
restaurant, hotel, or tourist spot. The dataset under 
consideration consists of 10,276 online reviews from the 
TripAdvisor. A sample of 3 records is shown in Table I. 
After pre-processing, each record includes the review title, 
the full review, and the rating. 
C. Implementation  
The implementation of the proposed approach was 
performed using the Python programming language. The 
VADER algorithm that extracts the sentiment scores out of 
the review comments was implemented with the use of the 
Natural Language ToolKit (NLTK) library (version 3.6.2) 
[33]. NLTK provides easy-to-use interfaces to over 50 
corpora and lexical resources such as WordNet, along with a 
suite of text processing libraries for classification, 
tokenization, stemming, tagging, parsing, and semantic 
reasoning. 
The Bayesian Network that models the relationships 
between the extracted sentiments and the review rating was 
implemented with the use of the PyBBN library and PyMC3 
library. The former incorporates the junction tree algorithm 
or Probability Propagation in Trees of Clusters. PPTC is 
applied to BNs with all discrete variables. When dealing with 
a BBN with all Gaussian variables, exact inference is 
conducted through an incremental algorithm manipulating 
the means and covariance matrix. The latter performs 
Bayesian estimation, particularly using Markov Chain Monte 
Carlo (MCMC). 
D. Results 
The VADER algorithm extracts the sentiment score for 
each record. The sentiment scores are assigned to 5 discrete 
classes as it was described in Section III.C. The output of the 
algorithm provides a dataset with all the record IDs along 
with the Rating (R) (“bubbles”), each one assigned to a 
sentiment score (ranging from -1 to +1), and an associated 
class of the Discrete Scale (DS) (“DISASTER”, “MANY 
THINGS NEED TO BE IMPROVED”, “FAIR ENOUGH”, 
“PERFECT”, “ABSOLUTELY PERFECT”). Table II 
presents a sample output based on the records presented in 
the data sample of Table I.  
It can be noticed that the rating does not always match to 
the discrete scale as derived from the sentiment scores. For 
instance, the comments with IDs 2,3, and 5 are assigned to 
“ABSOLUTELY PERFECT”, since their sentiment scores 
are far above +0.6; however, all of these three comments are 
accompanied with a different rating provided by the 
customer. Such inconsistencies between the rating provided 
by the customer and the discrete scale as derived from the 
sentiment score exist in the whole dataset. In order to model 
those relationships and reveal the inconsistencies, the 
aforementioned output of all the records feeds into the 
Bayesian Network. 
More specifically, the Bayesian Network consists of two 
layers. The upper layer includes the parent nodes with the 
values of the discrete scale that has been derived from the 
sentiment scores.  The lower level includes the child nodes 
with the values of the online rating. Therefore, it is possible 
to estimate the probability of receiving a specific rating given 
the discrete scale. The structure of the Bayesian Network is 
depicted in Figure 2. Every parent node is linked to every 
child node. Based upon this structure, the Conditional 
Probabilities Table (CPT) is calculated for each node.  
TABLE II.  
SAMPLE OUTPUT FROM THE VADER ALGORITHM 
ID 
Rating 
Sentiment 
Score 
Discrete Scale 
1 
5 of 5 bubbles 
0.987 
ABSOLUTELY 
PERFECT 
2 
3 of 5 bubbles 
0.8504 
ABSOLUTELY 
PERFECT 
3 
2 of 5 bubbles 
-0.5471 
MANY THINGS NEED 
TO BE IMPROVED 
 
Based upon this structure, the parameters of the Bayesian 
Network are learned. Table III presents the resulting 
conditional probabilities of receiving a specific rating (R) 
given a specific discrete scale (DS) that has been derived 
from the sentiment score. In this way, the consistency 
between the customer opinion and the provided rating is 
evaluated in order to identify the customer behaviour. 
Moreover, these results may reveal the level of satisfaction 
of the customer when this is not explicitly evident from the 
review comments. 
TABLE III.  
CONDITIONAL PROBABILITIES OF RATING GIVEN THE 
DISCRETE SCALE 
 
 
Discrete Scale (DS) 
 
P(R|DS) 
 
DISASTER 
MANY THINGS 
NEED TO BE 
IMPROVED 
 
FAIR ENOUGH 
 
PERFECT 
ABSOLUTELY 
PERFECT 
Review Rating (R) 
1 of 5 
bubbles 
45.27% 
22.69% 
 
17.99% 
 
9.56% 
 
1.14% 
2 of 5 
bubbles 
27.90% 
21.85% 
 
19.05% 
 
14.67% 
 
2.17% 
3 of 5 
bubbles 
19.97% 
34.87% 
 
33.33% 
 
32.89% 
 
9.04% 
4 of 5 
bubbles 
5.34% 
11.76% 
 
19.05% 
 
25.56% 
 
28.07% 
5 of 5 
bubbles 
1.52% 
8.82% 
 
10.58% 
 
17.33% 
 
59.57% 
 
E. Discussion 
The diagonal cells of Table III indicate the percentages of 
the exact consistency between the discrete scale as derived 
from the sentiment scores and the review rating as indicated 
by the customer. Based on the results, the highest 
consistencies exist in the extreme values, i.e. P(R = 1 of 5 
bubbles | DS = “DISASTER”) = 45.27% and P(R = 5 of 5 
bubbles | DS = “ABSOLUTELY PERFECT”) = 59.57%.  
Interestingly, for the rest of the review ratings, the 
highest percentages do not belong to the diagonal cells 
indicating a higher level of inconsistency between the 
customer opinion and the review rating. The greatest 
difference exists in the review rating of 2 bubbles, since P(R 
= 2 of 5 bubbles | DS = “DISASTER”) = 27.90%. The cases 
of 3 and 4 bubbles have a lower difference with the 
respective diagonal cells, i.e. P(R = 3 of 5 bubbles | DS = 
“MANY THINGS NEED TO BE IMPROVED”) = 34.87%, 
and P(R = 4 of 5 bubbles | DS = “ABSOLUTELY 
PERFECT”) = 28.07%. 
 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-891-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Data Analytics

Figure 2. The structure of the Bayesian Network. 
The results also show the trend that the ratings of 2 and 3 
bubbles tend to be higher than the discrete values derived 
from the sentiment score. On the other hand, the trend of the 
rating with 4 bubbles tends to be lower than the discrete 
values derived from the sentiment score. It should be noted 
that the nature of the discrete scale does not allow 
distinguishing the values that are close to the value that 
indicates a scale change. For example, the value -0.61 is 
assigned to the “DISASTER” scale, but there is a high 
uncertainty about whether it belongs to that scale or to the 
next 
one, i.e. 
“MANY THINGS 
NEED TO BE 
IMPROVED”. This limitation will be addressed in our future 
work. However, even in this case, it can be noticed that a 
significant percentage of online review comments are not 
consistent with the provided rating. This is evident by the 
fact that the percentages belonging to cells that are not near 
the diagonal are relatively high. 
These results validate the statement that there are usually 
inconsistencies between the review comments and the review 
ratings. As already mentioned, this fact occurs for two main 
reasons. First, different people use different ways of 
expressing themselves. For example, the phrase “very good” 
may reflect a different level of satisfaction among different 
customers. Therefore, there are variations in the sentiment 
scores extracted from the review comments. Second, the 
customers select some main points to be mentioned in the 
review comments. However, there are various aspects that 
affect their level of satisfaction and their preferences that are 
not mentioned at all and remain at their own mind. In this 
sense, there may be review comments with similar content 
and sentiment but different ratings.  
The application of the proposed approach in the e-
tourism domain reveals such kind of inconsistencies. From 
the business perspective, the proposed approach can support 
product and service managers to look beyond the ratings into 
the sentiments of the customers. Human language can 
express emotions which quantitative ratings cannot capture. 
On the other hand, customers can choose from services that 
brings them desired satisfaction. The proposed approach 
enables customers to look beyond online customer ratings 
while selecting products and services. It brings forth 
experiences of previous customers in a qualitative and 
interpretable manner, so that new customers can make 
informed decisions.  
Going through several thousands of comments present 
online could be a tedious task. The proposed approach 
summarizes the underlying sentiments of the comments for 
customers to easily comprehend and decide. Sometimes, fake 
ratings can distort the actual image of the hotels for the 
customers. Our study presents a framework for relating 
ratings with reviews, which can be used for validation. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Customers 
have access to different 
sources 
of 
information, and generate their own content and share their 
views and experiences, which are expressed through online 
review comments and ratings about products and services. 
However, the increasing amount of data has reached a level 
that makes manual processing impossible, requiring data-
driven approaches.  
Despite the large amount of research works dealing with 
sentiment analysis, the consistency between the customer 
opinions expressed in review comments and the rating that 
they provide has not been explored. In this paper, we propose 
an approach incorporating the VADER algorithm for 
extracting the polarity of the review comments and Bayesian 
Networks for revealing the relationships between the 
aforementioned sentiment scores and the online rating.  
The proposed approach was validated in the tourism 
domain using a dataset with hotel reviews, extracted from the 
TripAdvisor. The proposed approach is able to model 
effectively the aforementioned relationships in order to 
derive the consistency between the review comments and the 
online rating. The results showed there are usually 
inconsistencies between the review comments and the review 
ratings, because different people use different ways of 
expressing themselves, while the customers select some main 
points to be mentioned in the review comments.  
However, there are various aspects that affect their level 
of satisfaction and their preferences that are not mentioned at 
all. From the business perspective, the proposed approach 
can support product and service managers to look beyond the 
ratings into the sentiments of the customers. On the other 
hand, customers can choose from services that brings them 
desired satisfaction. 
Our future work will move towards the following 
directions:  First, we will implement fuzzy logic approaches 
in order to address the issues related to the fact that different 
people use different ways of expressing themselves leading 
to variations in sentiment scores. Second, we will apply 
probabilistic and fuzzy approaches in order to relax the 
discrete scale derived from the sentiment scores in order to 
tackle with sentiments that are close to the borders between 
two discrete values. Third, we will examine how different 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-891-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Data Analytics

aspects of the review comments (e.g., different services of 
the hotels) affect the overall sentiment and rating. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
L. Yang, Y. Li, J. Wang, and R. S. Sherratt, “Sentiment analysis for 
E-commerce product reviews in Chinese based on sentiment lexicon 
and deep learning,” IEEE Acc., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 23522-23530, 2020. 
[2] 
S. Hu, A. Kumar, F. Al-Turjman, S. Gupta, and S. Seth, “Reviewer 
credibility and sentiment analysis based user profile modelling for 
online product recommendation,” IEEE Acc., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 26172-
26189, 2020. 
[3] 
E. Ma, M. Cheng, and A. Hsiao, “Sentiment analysis–a review and 
agenda for future research in hospitality contexts,” Int. J. of Contemp. 
Hosp. Man., 2018. 
[4] 
R. S. Jagdale, V. S. Shirsat, and S. N. Deshmukh, “Sentiment analysis 
on product reviews using machine learning techniques,” in Cognitive 
Informatics and Soft Computing. pp. 639-647, Springer, Singapore, 
2019. 
[5] 
A. Borg and M. Boldt, “Using VADER sentiment and SVM for 
predicting customer response sentiment,” Exp. Sys. with App., vol. 
162, no. 1, pp. 113746, 2020. 
[6] 
M. T. Khan and S. Khalid, “Sentiment analysis for health care”, in 
Big Data: Concepts, Methodologies, Tools, and Applications, pp. 
676-689, IGI Global, 2016. 
[7] 
K. Ravi, and V. Ravi, “A survey on opinion mining and sentiment 
analysis: tasks, approaches and applications,” Knowl. Sys., vol. 89, 
no. 1, pp. 14-46, 2015. 
[8] 
A. Valdivia, M. V. Luzón, and F. Herrera, “Sentiment analysis in 
tripadvisor,” IEEE Intel. Sys., vol. 32, no. 4,  pp. 72-77, 2017. 
[9] 
M. Taboada, J. Brooke, M. Tofiloski, K. Voll, and M. Stede, 
“Lexicon-based methods for sentiment analysis,” Comp. Ling., vol. 
37, no. 2, pp. 267-307, 2011. 
[10] C. S. Khoo and S. B. Johnkhan, “ Lexicon-based sentiment analysis: 
Comparative evaluation of six sentiment lexicons,” J. Inform. Sc., 
vol. 44, no. 4, pp. 491-511, 2018. 
[11] C. Hutto and E. Gilbert, “Vader: A parsimonious rule-based model 
for sentiment analysis of social media text,” in Proceedings of the 
International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media, vol. 8, no. 
1, 2014. 
[12] S. Anis, S. Saad, and M. Aref, “Sentiment Analysis of Hotel Reviews 
Using Machine Learning Techniques,” in International Conference on 
Advanced Intelligent Systems and Informatics, pp. 227-234, Springer, 
Cham, 2020. 
[13] V. Kharde and P. Sonawane, “Sentiment analysis of twitter data: a 
survey of techniques,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1601.06971, 2016. 
[14] V. S. Shirsat, R. S. Jagdale, and S. N. Deshmukh, “Sentence level 
sentiment identification and calculation from news articles using 
machine learning techniques,” in Computing, Communication and 
Signal Processing, pp. 371-376, Springer, Singapore, 2019. 
[15] N. Nandal, R. Tanwar, and J. Pruthi, “Machine learning based aspect 
level sentiment analysis for Amazon products,” Spatial Information 
Research, vol. 28, no. 5, pp. 601-607, 2020. 
[16] R. M. Duwairi and I. Qarqaz, “Arabic sentiment analysis using 
supervised classification,” in 2014 International Conference on Future 
Internet of Things and Cloud, pp. 579-583, IEEE, 2014. 
[17] R. Xia, C. Zong, and S. Li, “Ensemble of feature sets and 
classification algorithms for sentiment classification,” Inf. Sc., vol. 
181, no. 6, pp. 1138-1152, 2011. 
[18] A. Prabhat and V. Khullar, “Sentiment classification on big data using 
Naïve Bayes and logistic regression,” in 2017 International 
Conference on Computer Communication and Informatics (ICCCI), 
pp. 1-5, IEEE, 2017. 
[19] B. K. Bhavitha, A. P. Rodrigues, and N. N. Chiplunkar, “Comparative 
study of machine learning techniques in sentimental analysis.,” in 
2017 International conference on inventive communication and 
computational technologies (ICICCT), pp. 216-221, IEEE, 2017. 
[20] A. Y. Chua and S. Banerjee, “Understanding review helpfulness as a 
function of reviewer reputation, review rating, and review depth,” J. 
of the Assoc. for Inf. Sc. and Tech., vol. 66, no. 2, pp. 354-362, 2015. 
[21] C. Chen, M. Zhang, Y. Liu, and S. Ma, “Neural attentional rating 
regression with review-level explanations,” in Proceedings of the 
2018 World Wide Web Conference, pp. 1583-1592, 2018. 
[22] J. Hassan and U. Shoaib, “Multi-class review rating classification 
using deep recurrent neural network,” Neur. Proc. Let., vol. 51, no. 1, 
pp. 1031-1048, 2020. 
[23] B. H., Ahmed and A. S.  Ghabayen, “Review rating prediction 
framework using deep learning,” J. of Amb. Intel. and Hum. Comp., 
vol.1, no. 1, pp. 1-10, 2020. 
[24] S. Seo, J. Huang, H. Yang, and Y. Liu, “Interpretable convolutional 
neural networks with dual local and global attention for review rating 
prediction,” in Proceedings of the eleventh ACM conference on 
recommender systems, pp. 297-305, 2017. 
[25] W. Songpan, “ The analysis and prediction of customer review rating 
using opinion mining,” in 2017 IEEE 15th International Conference 
on Software Engineering Research, Management and Applications 
(SERA), pp. 71-77, IEEE, 2017. 
[26] J. Cheng, R. Greiner, J. Kelly, D. Bell and W. Liu, “Learning 
Bayesian networks from data: an information-theory based approach,” 
Artif. Intell. Vol. 137, no. 1–2, pp. 43–90, 2002. 
[27] A. R. Alaei, S. Becken, and  B. Stantic, “Sentiment analysis in 
tourism: capitalizing on big data,” J. of Trav. Res., vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 
175-191, 2019. 
[28] J. Luo, S. Huang, and R. Wang, “A fine-grained sentiment analysis of 
online guest reviews of economy hotels in China,” J. of Hosp. Mark. 
& Manag., vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 71-95, 2021. 
[29] K. L. Xie, Z. Zhang, and Z. Zhang, “The business value of online 
consumer reviews and management response to hotel performance,” 
Int. J. of Hosp. Manag., vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 1-12, 2014. 
[30] A. G. Mauri and R. Minazzi, “Web reviews influence on expectations 
and purchasing intentions of hotel potential customers,” Int. J. of 
Hosp. Manag., vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 99-107, 2013. 
[31] M. Geetha, P. Singha, and S. Sinha, “Relationship between customer 
sentiment and online customer ratings for hotels-An empirical 
analysis,” Tour. Manag., vol. 61, pp. 43-54, 2017. 
[32] A. Bousdekis, and D. Kardaras, “Hotel Quality Evaluation from 
Online Reviews Using Fuzzy Pattern Matching and Fuzzy Cognitive 
Maps,” in The Ninth International Conference on Data Analytics 
(DATA ANALYTICS), 2020. 
[33] S. Bird, E. Klein, and E.  Loper, “Natural language processing with 
Python: analyzing text with the natural language toolkit,” O'Reilly 
Media, Inc., 2009. 
[34] J. Salvatier, T. V. Wiecki, and C. Fonnesbeck, “Probabilistic 
programming in Python using PyMC3,” PeerJ Computer Science, 2, 
2016. 
 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-891-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Data Analytics

