Analyzing the United State’s Nationwide Opioid Crisis and Socio-
economic Factors using K-Means Clustering 
Ryan McGinnis 
Thomas Jefferson College of Biomedical Sciences 
Thomas Jefferson University 
Philadelphia, PA, USA 
Email: ryan.mcginnis@students.jefferson.edu 
 
 
Les Sztandera 
Kanbar College of Design, Engineering, and Commerce 
Thomas Jefferson University 
Philadelphia, PA, USA 
Email: les.sztandera@jefferson.edu
 
Abstract— In this paper, we lay out the severity of the opioid 
crisis by focusing on the current literature of socio-economic 
addiction factors. We also discuss how opioids have become so 
prominent in the US. The analysis was done by taking data 
from one major city per state, totaling 50 cities, and putting 
them through a K means clustering analysis. Our findings 
revealed that commute times and average annual income had 
proportional increase and decrease to their cities opioid death 
rates. This builds to the current literature of the different 
quality of life factors that contribute to one’s likelihood to 
develop an addiction. 
Keywords – opioid; k-means; clustering; socio-
economic;  factors;  statistical analysis.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Over the past several decades, the number of deaths due 
to opioid use has been rising at an alarming rate. It has 
reached a critical level where deaths related to opioid use 
surpass the number deaths due to motor vehicle accidents, 
gun violence and HIV [3]. This means that opioids can be 
considered the third leading killer in the United States, 
beaten only by heart disease and cancer. The opioid 
epidemic has grown from multiple issues. There are several 
different reasons someone would use opioids. Opioids are 
used either by prescription for pain management, or as a 
result of addiction.  
Opioids have become a widely used pain management 
medication for patients with acute or chronic pain. Opiates 
are prescribed to those who may be recovering from an 
injury or surgery and will use opioid to better manage their 
pain. They are also prescribed for those with chronic pain 
and patients that need pain management medication for long 
durations of their lives. It is not uncommon for some of 
these patients to take the wrong dosage of medication, or 
forget they already took their medication, and accidentally 
overdose [2] [4]. In addition to this, they are highly 
addictive medication and considered a controlled substance 
by the Food and Drug Adminstration (FDA). It is very 
common for patients who are prescribed opioids for pain 
management to become dependent on them [7]. As a result, 
patients will recover from their injuries addicted to opioids.  
Outside of prescription medication, there are many 
forms of opioid abuse from illicit drugs. Prescription 
opioids, heron, fentanyl, and other synthetic opioids are 
often illegally sold on the streets to those suffering from 
addiction. Opioid addiction being a large contributor to the 
opioid death tool, it is much more dangerous using the street 
version of these drugs because they are often diluted with 
fillers or other drugs. Part of this is because of how 
accessible opioids and their synthetic counterparts have 
become. There has been network analysis done to track the 
distribution of opioids coming from South American 
countries into the United States [5]. It is no question that the 
East Coast has been hit the hardest in opioid epidemic 
simply because that is where the supply is being distributed.  
The opioid epidemic also stays out of the public’s eye 
because of how it is factored by the Center for Disease 
Control (CDC). The CDC considers any opioid related 
death an “accidental poisoning” and, therefore, falls in with 
many other categories of death that are considered 
accidents. This category of accidental deaths is the third 
leading killer in the United States. Breaking down the 
different accidents in this category, opioid related deaths 
would have the highest death toll. Because of this, opioid 
deaths have surpassed motor vehicle accidents, gun 
violence, and HIV [3]. However, all opioid accidents are 
avoidable, and addiction can be treated. With better 
management for pain treatment, opioid prescription 
frequency, and how we manage addiction in our cities, it is 
possible to minimize the opioid death toll. 
There are many retrospective studies that have been 
done that analyze and discuss what demographic factors 
influence addiction. One study looked at 5,483 overdose 
patients and laid out all demographic factors for analysis 
[9]. The most significant finding was that more than half of 
the patients had an opioid prescription within 90 days of 
their death. This tells us that opioid prescription history is a 
massive contributor to one’s likelihood to overdose. Having 
the initial exposure to opioids opens the gate to addiction 
that the patient otherwise would never have if they were 
prescribed a different medication. In addition to opioid 
prescription history, the results showed that the majority of 
the patients were white/non-Hispanic. Although it is 
difficult 
to 
confirm, 
many 
papers 
analyze 
ethnic 
backgrounds of their patients for trends. The challenge that 
this brings is the diversity of factors that could be 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-891-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Data Analytics

influencing the data, outside of the scope of the experiment. 
For example, ethnic ratios are not likely to be proportionate 
in each city/state/country where the study is done and this 
will influence the discussion around the results. It is best to 
take ethnic background data on the opioid epidemic lightly 
until there is a larger collection of studies analyzing the data 
with different factors. Some interesting factors that were 
studied in the paper reference were education background 
and marital status. The highest overdose rates came from 
those with only a high school diploma. The rate of 
overdoses declined with each higher level of education, 
bachelor’s degree, master’s etc. Marital status opioid rates 
were relatively the same across married, divorced, or single, 
however there was a steep drop off in the widowed 
category. Those who were widowed were far less likely to 
overdose on opioids. Factors like these raise questions as to 
what exactly can lead one to an opioid dependency, and thus 
are important to analyze with as many studies as we can.  
In “Analyzing the relationships between city opioid 
deaths and socioeconomic factors” [6], we looked at one 
major city from each state’s opioid death toll, average 
commute time, budget for roads, and budget for arts and 
culture in 2018 for a total of 50 cities their respective 
variables. We also collected data from 2017 however not the 
full 50 cities due to the fact that budgets and their timelines 
are allocated differently for each city. The reason we 
collected these variables was so that we could analyze what 
different socio-economic factors were related to the opioid 
death toll, speculate as to how they factored into addiction, 
and reference other studies that were done to support our 
findings. The data was analyzed via ANOVA tests and 
Logistical Regression Tests. Logistical Regression was 
chosen for this experiment because it showed the trendline 
for the data. Our findings revealed that commute time 
yielded significant results in nearly all of the tests it was 
included in. This was complimented by budget for roads 
yielding significant results in some of the tests, while budget 
for arts and culture showed occasional significant results but 
with no pattern. This shows that commute times had a 
strong relationship with one’s likelihood to overdose on 
opioids. Since the city’s commute times are most likely 
determined by their respective budget for roads, it makes 
sense that that variable also share some significant results 
with commute time. We concluded that commute time and 
its opioid addiction relationship is connected by a quality-
of-life factor.  
The significance of these papers that analyze external 
factors form opioid deaths is that they are a novel approach 
to uncovering what drives addiction. There is already a 
massive quantity of papers that look at addiction related 
deaths retrospectively and compare what each patient had in 
common [8]. They often look at factors like ethnicity, 
financial status, education, or career, but they leave out all 
of the external factors. External factors may prove to be 
critical in identifying one’s likelihood of addiction. External 
factors are what people are exposed to on a regular basis 
that can influence addiction, regardless of their demographic 
factors. By analyzing as many different factors as we can, 
we can create a foundation of external factors that are 
known to influence addiction. This will take many more 
studies of replication and novel approaches to build this 
foundation, but it will play a critical role in prediction and 
prevention in the world of addiction medicine. 
In this paper, we aim to look at how external factors in 
one’s surroundings may be a contributing factor to their 
likelihood of using opioids [1]. We will look at average 
commute times, budgets for roads, and budgets for arts and 
culture within each city and compare them their opioid 
death count of 2018. The significance of this, is that it gives 
cities predictor and preventative models to both prepare and 
avoid increasing opioid deaths. With K means cluster 
analysis we can group cities into different categories base on 
their average commute times and how they allocate their 
budget. 
We will also compare the results with Cluster Mapping 
data from Harvard Business School and US Economic 
Development Administration, 2018 [8]. This allows us to 
look at the country by metropolitan county and see if there 
are any patterns that are comparable with our results. In 
Figure 1, we can see the average annual wage, clustered into 
their respective metropolitan regions. The different annual 
wage averages can give us some insight as to whether or not 
it has any effect on one’s likelihood of opioid abuse. 
Looking to see if there are any financial thresholds where 
cities above or below any certain amount of funding could 
show some consistency with our clustering data. By 
comparing these patterns without clustering data, we could 
reason that financial status does play a role in a city’s opioid 
crisis. If wealthier cities reflect to have higher opioid death 
rates, this can be used as predictor model.  
 
II. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
For this experiment, we looked at each state in the US 
and took one major city from them. For each of those cities, 
we took the following data from 2018: total opioid death 
toll, average commute time, budget for roads, and budget 
for arts and culture. We used IBM Statistical Package for 
the Social Sciences (SPSS) statistical software version 25 to 
analyze the data. 
The first thing we did was standardize all the variables 
so that they could be compared to each other. This was done 
by converting them all to their Z scores. In SPSS, a 
descriptive test was run with all of the variables, and metrics 
set to their default settings.  
With the Z scores collected, the K means cluster analysis 
was ready to be run. The Z scores were added to the variable 
list with their labels classed by cities. The maximum 
number of iterations was set to 99. This is because with  
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-891-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Data Analytics

TABLE 1. EACH CITY WITH THEIR RESPECTIVE CLUSTER LABEL 
FROM THE K-MEANS CLUSTER ANALYSIS. 
 
enough iterations that clusters will develop a pattern and 
average out. The cluster membership was set to save so in 
retrospect we could analyze which city fits in which cluster. 
The number of clusters was set to 5. The reason 5 clusters 
were chosen was because during the initial testing, too few 
didn’t offer enough variation across clusters. Anymore than 
5 clusters and we saw that groups started to replicate with 
no significant difference. 5 clusters gave us a good variation 
of the different groups that could emerge from the different 
ways commute time and budget allocation factors into 
opioid deaths. The ANOVA table was also saved to analyze 
variance and significance scores of the variables. All other 
metrics were set to their default settings.    
 
III. 
RESULTS 
In Table 1, we can see how the software categorized the 
different clusters. The software plotted all of the data points 
of the variables and grouped them into 1 of 5 clusters based 
on these generated values. With each iteration, there comes 
5 new locations for where the clusters are centered. Each 
iteration offers a different way to group these cities into 
clusters. The more iterations that are done helped the 
software find an average cluster for each city until the city’s 
cluster assignments become redundant. Once the software 
finds the average cluster that all the cities are assigned, the 
iterations end, and results are shown. From here we can 
analyze where each city falls in relation to the clusters.  
In Table 1, we can see each city and in which cluster 
they were categorized. It is worth noting that the opioid 
crisis is so severe in New York City, that it is the only one 
in Cluster 2.  
 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
There are a few key takeaways that this data reveals to 
us. Initially, it is clear that cities with higher populations 
tend to lean towards clusters 1, 3 or 4, while smaller cities 
tend to fall into cluster 5. A simple predictor of the opioid 
death toll can be population. The more people, the more 
likely there will be a higher opioid death toll.  
In Figure 2, the commute time always sits next to the 
opioid death toll. This can infer that in many circumstances, 
the opioid death toll of a city could be predicted by looking 
at the average commute time for that city. Knowing this, 
cities can use this as a predictor model for gauging and 
preparing opioid casualties in their respective cities. The 
measures that could be taken can be to increase the amount 
of naloxone supply that emergency responders carry or 
increasing patrols in high-risk opioid overdose areas. 
Knowing that commute times are not something that can 
create addiction, we must ask ourselves how this factor is 
consistent with opioid deaths across cities. Like many other 
contributors of addiction, it is a reflection of the quality of 
life. For the portion that initially seek opioids in their illegal  
City 
Cluster 
Philadelphia 
1 
Chicago 
1 
Phoenix 
1 
Baltimore 
1 
New York City 
2 
Detroit 
3 
Portland 
3 
Houston 
3 
Los Angeles 
4 
Boston 
4 
Providence 
4 
Newark 
4 
Charlotte 
4 
Indianapolis 
4 
Las Vegas 
4 
Atlanta 
4 
Seattle 
4 
Orlando 
5 
Charleston 
5 
Manchester 
5 
Louisville 
5 
Columbus 
5 
Albuquerque 
5 
Salt Lake City 
5 
Nashville 
5 
Portland 
5 
Wilmington 
5 
Hartford 
5 
Burlington 
5 
Milwaukee 
5 
St Louis 
5 
Columbia 
5 
Richmond 
5 
Anchorage 
5 
Oklahoma City 
5 
Denver 
5 
New Orleans 
5 
Birmingham 
5 
Cheyenne 
5 
Minneapolis 
5 
Des Moines 
5 
Little Rock 
5 
Jackson 
5 
Boise 
5 
Wichita 
5 
Fargo 
5 
Sioux Falls 
5 
Billings 
5 
Honolulu 
5 
Omaha 
5 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-891-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Data Analytics

 
Figure 1. US Cluster Map by average salary per county. 
 
forms or those that have addiction issues prior to their 
opioid prescription, quality of life is something that has 
major effects on one’s likelihood of developing addiction.  
Alternatively, we can see that the city’s budget for arts 
and culture do not show any consistent patterns together. In 
all clusters, we can see that opioid deaths and budget for arts 
and culture are inconsistent with each other. As opioid 
deaths rise and fall, budget for arts does not rise or fall or 
vice versa with it. This means that budget for arts and 
culture acted as our control group. By showing us that some 
groups have no relationship, we can focus on the groups that 
show relationships like opioid deaths and commute times. 
Looking at Figure 1, we can see the annual wage averages 
by metropolitan area of 2018. By comparing the cluster 
groups to their city’s annual wage, we can see that almost 
all of the high annual wage cities have a proportional 
relationship with high opioid death tolls. New York City, 
being in cluster 2 has one of the highest annual wages of 
$73,000. Close to New York there is Philadelphia in cluster 
1 with an annual wage of $59,000 and Baltimore in cluster 1 
with an annual wage of $57,000. The surrounding 
metropolitan areas have a lower annual wage and by more 
than $10,000 and lower opioid death counts. However, if we 
look at Los Angeles in cluster 4, it has an annual wage of 
$60,000. The opioid crisis, being as complex as it is, leads 
us to believe that this cannot be predicted by commute time, 
roads, or wage alone, but by a combination of actors. 
Knowing that the opioid crisis is worse on the East coast, 
we can see that reflected here by how death rates are higher 
in wealthier cities along the East Coast with harsher 
commute times, but not along the West coast.  
Illicit opioids and their synthetic counterparts are some 
of the most lethal illegal drugs in the US right now. With 
massive amounts of opioids being brought into the US 
internationally and devastating the east coast, it has become 
a two pronged attacked on those susceptible to addiction. 
Not only do those who work their tolerance up eventually 
become addicted to opioids, but it is very common who 
have finished their prescription with a dependence on the 
drug, continue to seek, use and thus turning to the more 
accessible and cheaper illegal sources. For these illegal 
opioids, it is not simply a matter of population density, 
otherwise we would see different results in our study. For 
example, Los Angeles being in cluster 4 but having one of 
the highest populations in the country. Illegal opioids are 
much more widely distributed along the East Coast. 
Synthetic opioids can be cheap or diluted to be sold at a 
margin of their price, however purchasing prescription 
opioids on the street are far more expensive. Knowing this, 
we must also consider the economic state that some of these 
critically hit areas are in. 
Looking at Figure 2, we can see that the majority of our 
critically impacted cities, being in clusters 1 or 2, are all 
metropolitan areas that average over $55,000 annual wage. 
Knowing this, it stands to reason that these areas have the 
financial means to afford these opioids either via 
prescription or illegally. Looking at other cities on the chart, 
it is interesting to see how as soon the average wage falls 
roughly below the $55,000 annually, these cities end up in 
clusters 3, 4, and 5. This tells us that economic status can 
play a significant role in one’s likelihood of addiction to 
opioids. This is most likely due to the fact that opioids are 
one of the most expensive drugs to abuse both legally and 
illegally. Naturally those that cannot afford prescription 
opioids, or their illegal street counterparts, will not have the 
same level of exposure as those that can. Those that can 
afford opioids both in their prescription form or their illegal 
street form have a much higher risk of becoming addicted. If 
one is in a pain management situation and can afford an 
opioid prescription, they are at a much higher risk than it 
may seem. If they can afford the opioid prescription, they 
have the risk of developing a dependency. Not only are they 
at the initial risk from their prescription but following their 
prescription their odds of developing an addiction only 
increase if they live in one of these wealthier cities, on the 
East coast, and make an average income greater than 
$55,000. 
Knowing that those making above $55,000 annually 
may be a factor contributing to addiction, we can compare 
that to the findings of the study discussed earlier in this 
paper. There is a steady decline in overdose likelihood with 
degree of higher education. Typically, higher salaries are 
earned by those with a strong educational background. 
Naturally there are exceptions, but there must be some 
middle ground of those with only a high school diploma, 
although still in a high-income job. It is possible that the 
patients that made up the high school diploma category are 
from an older generation when going to college was not a 
standard. This generation would fit the age group where it is 
very common to take the wrong dose of opioid medication 
and passing away in their sleep. This means they would also 
fit the category of having an opioid prescription within 90 
days of their death. Evidently, knowing what factors 
contribute to addiction helps us build the circumstances as 
to one’s likelihood of overdosing.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
When considering strategies to minimize the death toll 
of opioids, one must first consider the complexity what  
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-891-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Data Analytics

 Figure 2. Results from k-means cluster analysis. 
 
influences it. We know that they are a pillar of pain 
management in modern day society, highly addictive, and 
have little to no substitutes for chronic pain. They are so 
addictive that prescribed patients are likely to develop some 
level of dependence of these drugs, either causing addiction 
to the prescription opioids themselves or starting a lifestyle 
of addiction to similar drugs. In addition to having a 
prescription to an opioid, there are demographic factors that 
contribute to one’s likelihood of addiction. This gives 
insight as to who is likely to become dependent on their 
opioid prescriptions and developing addiction, however 
using this information to prescribe opioids and their strength 
is at the discretion of the provider and is not uniform. 
Because of all this, it is to be expected that opioid deaths are 
to be higher in more densely populated areas. The more 
people, the more doctors, the more circumstances there will 
be to prescribe opioids. However, this is not the only 
pathway that opioids contribute to their death toll.  
Opioids have proven to become one of the most 
dangerous drugs in our society. Being one of the only 
medications on the market suitable for pain management 
and its high likelihood of developing a dependency, it 
creates a high volume of addiction in our society. In 
addition, opioids are being illegally distributed across our 
country granting even easier access to them. Legally or 
illegally, opioids are one of the strongest and easiest drugs 
to get a hold of in this country. With opioid deaths only 
continuing to rise, the best thing we can do is uncover what 
are the factors that drive this epidemic. From this paper, we 
discovered that a city’s commute plays a major role in their 
opioid death toll. As commute times increased or decreased, 
the death followed. We also found that annual income is 
also a factor. Having the financial means to afford these 
drugs, either legally or illegally, only builds to the 
accessibility of these drugs. The opioid epidemic is driven 
by many compounding factors. Knowing that commute 
times and annual income rates are some of these factors can 
give cities more insight to prepare and manage their 
populations.  
Further studies can be done that analyze other quality of 
life factors to see if any of them have a proportionate role in 
opioid death rates. The model of the study could also be 
changed. Instead of looking at cities, additional studies 
could analyze the data by zip code or county. One of the 
difficulties that this study faced is that, although we 
analyzed city’s budget for roads and arts and culture, there 
was no way knowing exactly where these funds were 
allocated to. In 2018, it is possible that a large portion of the 
budget went to one project as opposed to spread evenly 
across the city. Because of this, it would be interesting to 
look at these cities on a smaller scale. If the data is 
available, analyze where the budgets were allocated (filling 
potholes, new bridges, multi neighborhood) and compare to 
how the opioid death toll was affected. One could also use 
the Harvard Business School Clustering Map, to analyze 
other factors that may be proportional to a location’s opioid 
death rate. There is more work to be done in order to have a 
better understanding as to all the different factors that 
influence addiction and opioid death rates. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Alalawi and L. Sztandera, “Leveraging Statistical Methods 
and AI Tools for Analysis of Demographic Factors of Opioid 
Overdose Deaths.” International Journal on Advances in Life 
Sciences:  12(1&2): 24 – 33. 
[2] J. Baird et al., “A retrospective review of unintentional opioid 
overdose risk and mitigating factors among acutely injured trauma 
patients.” Drug Alcohol Depend. 2017; 178: 130 - 135. DOI: 
10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2017.04.030. 
[3] D. Ciccarone, “Fentanyl in the US heroin supply: A rapidly 
changing risk environment.” The International Journal on Drug 
Policy. 
2017 
Aug; 
46:107-111. 
DOI: 
10.1016/j.drugpo.2017.06.010. 
[4] P. Dilokthornsakul et al., “Risk factors of prescription opioid 
overdose among Colorado Medicaid beneficiaries.” J Pain. 2016; 
17 (4): 436 - 443. DOI: 10.1016/j.jpain.2015.12.006. 
[5] L. Giommoni, A. Aziani and G. Berlusconi, “How do illicit 
drugs move across countries? A network analysis of the heroin 
supply to Europe.” J Drug Issues 2017; 47 (2): 217 - 240. 
DOI:10.1177/0022042616682426. 
[6] R. McGinnis, L. 
Sztandera, R. Vadigepalli, and J. 
Ruane, “Analyzing the relationships between city opioid deaths 
and socioeconomic factors” J Opioid Mgmt. 2021; 17(5): 363-382. 
unpublished. 
[7] S. Nechuta, B. Tyndall, S. Mukhopadhyay and M. Mcpheeters, 
“Sociodemographic factors, prescription history and opioid 
overdose deaths: A statewide analysis using linked PDMP and 
mortality data.” Drug Alcohol Depend. 2018; 190: 62 - 71. DOI: 
10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2018.05.004. 
[8] US Cluster Mapping. Harvard Business School. Retrieved June 
12, 2021 from https://clustermapping.us/region 
[9] B. Zedler et al., “Risk factors for serious prescription opioid-
related toxicity or overdose among veterans’ health administration 
patients.” 
Pain 
Med. 
2014; 
15 
(11): 
1911 
- 
1929. 
DOI:10.1111/pme.12480. 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-891-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Data Analytics

