Forecasting Travel Behaviour from Crowdsourced Data with Machine Learning 
Based Model 
 
Angel J. Lopez1.2; Ivana Semanjski1; Sidharta Gautama1 
1 Ghent University, Department of Telecomunications and Information Processing,  
Ghent, Belgium 
Emails: {angel.lopez, ivana.semanjski, dominique.gilles, sidharta.gautama} @ugent.be 
2Facultad de Ingenierıa en Electricidad y Computacion 
 
 Escuela Superior Polit´ecnica del Litoral, ESPOL 
Guayaquil, Ecuador 
Emails: alopez @espol.edu.ec 
 
 
Abstract—Information and communication technologies have 
become integral part of our everyday lives. It seems as logical 
consequence that smart city concept is trying to explore the 
role of integrated information and communication approach in 
managing city’s assets and in providing better quality of life to 
its citizens.  Provision of better quality of life relies on 
improved management of city’s systems (e.g., transport 
system) but also on provision of timely and relevant 
information to its citizens in order to support them in making 
more informed decisions.  To ensure this, use of forecasting 
models is needed. In this paper, we develop support vector 
machine based model with aim to predict future mobility 
behavior from crowdsourced data. The crowdsourced data are 
collected based on dedicated smartphone app that tracks 
mobility behavior. Use of such forecasting model can facilitate 
management of smart city’s mobility system but also ensures 
timely provision of relevant pre-travel information to its 
citizens.  
Keywords-travel behavior; smart city; crowdsourceing; 
transport planning. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Influence 
of 
information 
and 
communication 
technologies (ICT) on transport planning is not new. On one 
hand, transport planning involves multiple complex models 
that try to generalize dynamic features of human and cargo 
movements, needs for mobility and forecasts future states of 
the system. On the other end, ICT constantly develops, 
which includes higher processing powers and calculation 
capabilities, innovative protocols and growing number of 
available sensors. Thus, integration of ICT tools into 
transport planning process is twofold challenging and 
requires 
constant 
synchronization 
between 
available 
technology and transport planning needs. A lot has been 
done in this field over last decades, particularly in recent 
years when role of ICT is getting integrated at the higher 
level enabling development of smart cities [1]-[8]. In this 
context, location acquisition technologies play an important 
basis for smart city applications [9][10]. Smart cities as 
urban development concept aim to integrate ICT solutions in 
a secure fashion to manage a city’s assets (e.g., local 
departments’ 
information systems, 
transport 
systems, 
hospitals, power plants, water supply networks, waste 
management, etc.). The goal of building a smart city is to 
improve quality of life for its residents by using technology 
to improve the efficiency of services and to enable more 
informed decision making process on both policy makers’ 
and citizens’ ends. When it comes to the transport aspect of 
smart cities, location information acquisition is often 
supported by Global Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSS) 
data. GNSS comprehends a constellation of satellites 
providing signals from space that transmit positioning and 
timing data to GNSS receivers. The receivers then use this 
data to determine location. Probably the best know GNSS 
system is Global Positioning System (GPS) developed by 
USA’s NAVSTAR, but other systems like Russia’s 
Global'naya 
Navigatsionnaya 
Sputnikovaya 
Sistema 
(GLONASS) and China’s BeiDou Navigation Satellite 
System are operational while some others are on its way to 
ensure global coverage like European Union’s Galileo 
system. In the literature, there are some interesting examples 
of GNSS use for extraction of origin-destination (OD) 
matrices [11]-[14], validation of travel behaviour models 
[15][16] or rush hour analysis [17][18]. Furthermore, when 
analysing the use of GNSS data for mobility studies we can 
distinguish between implementation of (a) dedicated GNSS 
sensor and (b) integrated GNSS sensors. The first one 
usually includes dedicated sensor placed into a vehicle or 
portable GNSS device that individual carries in order to log 
his mobility behaviour. In these studies samples are usually 
limited in size (e.g., due to discipline that is required from 
responded in order to carry the device with him) or bias in 
transport modes coverage (e.g., device tracks only motorised 
transport modes). The second one involves integration of 
GNSS chipsets into devices that are not primary dedicated to 
location purposes. Probably the most common device of such 
kind today is a mobile phone [19]. As mobile phones have 
more sensors integrated (e.g., cameras, accelerometers, etc.) 
and individuals usually carry them without considering it to 
be a burden, they exhibit potential to overcome above 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

mentioned limitations and deliver a rich datasets for mobility 
studies. Most often these datasets are referred as 
crowdsourced data. Nevertheless, little is known about the 
potential of crowdsourced data for smart city mobility 
management. And even less about the context of 
personalized mobility services and the interactions between a 
city and its transport system users. While only scarce 
literature tackles this idea [20][21], in this article we 
contribute to this line of research by using crowdsourced 
data from smartphones and a support vector machine 
algorithm to forecast transport mode one will use for the 
upcoming travel. Forecasting is based on a set of given 
conditions (location, trip’s purpose, time of day, etc.). We 
see this as a potential application that can be used to enable 
timely relevant indication of intended mobility behaviour. 
This way relevant transport information and incentives can 
be provided in order to support making of more informed 
mobility related decisions. Furthermore smart city mobility 
management can be supported with this information to 
ensure timely management of transport related activities and 
services.   
This paper is structured as follows: after the Introduction, 
Section 2 provides detailed description of the data collection 
procedure and adopted support vector machines approach. 
Section 3 summarizes the result of the transport mode 
forecasting procedure and is followed with discussion 
section. Finally, Section 5 highlights major conclusions 
drawn from the observed insights.  
 
II. 
METHOD AND DATA 
A. Data collection 
Data on mobility behavior is collected via an Android 
smartphone application Routecoach [22], which is developed 
at Ghent University in Belgium. The Routecoach application 
was a part of sustainable mobility campaign in province of 
Flemish-Brabant. The main aim of the campaign was to 
develop an evaluation and planning toolkit for mobility 
projects, which is transferable and can be adopted by 
planners [23]. The data collection process lasted from 
January to April 2015. Over this period, in total, 8303 users 
actively participated by downloading the freely available 
application and collecting the data on more than 30,000 trips.  
For our analysis, we used a part of overall dataset that 
included only ‘interactively’ (also called ‘actively’) [19] 
logged trips that were collected in area of city of Leuven. 
The city of Leuven (Fig.1) is the capital of the province of 
Flemish-Brabant and located about 25 kilometers east of 
Brussels (capital of Belgium). The two cities are well 
connected with road, rail and bike highway. Leuven itself is 
a very dynamic city that is a home to one of the largest 
universities in the region. The city’s daily dynamics results 
in a lot of traffic and also related traffic congestion. This is 
particularly noticeable across the ring road that surrounds the 
city center and main road axes that bring regional traffic to 
the city. Potentially for this reason, the use of public 
transportation (only bus is available) in the city has seen a 
fivefold increase in last 20 years. Also, the use of active 
transport modes is quite common as just cycling contributes 
to the city’s modal share with 17-20% [24].  
 
 
Figure 1.  Location of city of Leuven in Flanders region. 
As already mentioned, for our research we used only 
‘actively’ logged trips. ‘Active’ logging comprehends that 
the logged data are validated by users. This way, through the 
application itself, users can confirm transport mode that they 
are using or indicate a reason for the trip (trip purpose) while 
data are being logged. In addition, for the completed trips 
users can perform data quality control. Data quality control is 
made possible over dedicated web portal (Fig. 2). Through 
the web portal, participants can access to their personal trip 
logs and use friendly, geographic information system (GIS), 
interface. This interface visualizes exiting trips but can also 
be used to report on additional trip data, correct wrongly 
introduced information or report on personal points of 
interest (like home or work locations).  
 
 
Figure 2.  Geo interface for data validation and quality control. 
Our sub dataset consist of 17,040 validated trips created by 
292 individuals, meaning that each individual in average 
made around 60 trips. Most of the trips were made by car 
and least by public transport (Fig.3). The distribution of 
validated trips over 24 hours clearly indicates morning and 
afternoon peaks (Fig. 4).  
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

 
Figure 3.  Modal split (validated trips). 
 
Figure 4.  The distribution of validated trips over 24 hours. 
A detail description of attributes collected for each trip is 
given in Table 1. 
B. Support vector machines classification 
Support vector machines (SVM) are supervised machine 
learning algorithm that is based on the concept of decision 
hyperplanes. These decision hyperplanes separate between 
observations that have different class membership in 
multidimensional feature space. Quite often, it is not so easy 
to separate between observations, and different mathematical 
functions (kernels) are used to map them in order to separate 
among different classes. For this reason, firstly, a training 
dataset is introduced. The training dataset is a dataset where 
class membership is know in advance for each observation. 
This dataset serves to train the model so that, as good as 
possible, decision hyperplanes are selected. Later, to test the 
success rate of the first step, and the selected decision 
hyperplanes, a new dataset is introduced. This second 
dataset, called test dataset, also has known class membership 
for each observation. This knowledge of the class 
membership is used to objectively test the outcome of the 
trained model. The objectivity is based on the fact that newly 
introduced dataset contains observations on which the initial 
model was not trained, thus it allows more fair evaluation of 
the model results. After the selection of decision hyperplanes 
is confirmed on the test dataset it is considered that the 
model will give fair results when data with unknown class 
membership are introduced to it. More detailed overview of 
SVM algorithm can be found in literature [25]-[27]. 
TABLE I.  
DESCRIPTION OF VARIABLES 
Variable 
Acronym 
Description 
User’s ID 
userid 
Unique identifier of the user/device 
Trip’s ID 
tripid 
Unique identifier of the trip 
Trip’s start 
time 
starttime 
Year, month, day, hour, minute and 
second when trip started 
Trip’s stop 
time 
stoptime 
Year, month, day, hour, minute and 
second when trip ended 
Trip’s start 
location 
startpoint 
Geographic location of the trip’s origin 
point 
Trip’s end 
location 
endpoint 
Geographic location of the trip’s 
destination point 
Distance 
distance 
Distance between trip’s origin and 
destination 
points 
measured 
in 
kilometres 
Transportation 
mode 
transportmode 
Transportation mode used for the trip 
Trip’s purpose 
purpose 
The purpose of the trip made (go to 
work, shopping, recreation, school…) 
Working day 
identification 
week day 
Boolean value that indicates if the day 
when trip started is a working day 
Holiday 
identification 
weekend 
Boolean value that indicates if the day 
when trip started is a holiday or 
weekend 
 
In our study, we divided complete data set in two parts; 75% 
has been used as training and 25% as test dataset. Sampling 
was random and insight into distribution of trip lengths 
between training and test dataset reveals quite balanced 
representation of different trip lengths in both samples 
(Fig.5). The input dataset consists of trip observations for 
every individual, where each trip is considered to be a path 
between two locations made by one transport mode. Each 
trip is described with variables listed in Table 1. 
59.73% 
13.60% 
26.33% 
0.18% 
0.16% 
CAR
BIKE
FOOT
BUS
TRAIN
0
500
1000
1500
2000
0
5
10
15
20
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

 
Figure 5.  Success rate in relation to the trip lengths.
 
For the SVM classification, we applied C-SVM type. The 
forecasting minimization error function for the applied C-
SVM is defined as:  
1
2 𝑤𝑇𝑤 + 𝐶 ∑ 𝜉𝑖
𝑁
𝑖=1
 
(1) 
subject to constraints: 
𝑦𝑖(𝑤𝑇 𝜙(𝑥𝑖) + 𝑏) ≥ 1 − 𝜉𝑖  
(2) 
𝜉𝑖 ≥ 0 
(3) 
Where i=1, …, N , C is the capacity constant, w represents 
the vector of coefficients, b is a constant, and ξi are 
parameters for handling non-separable inputs and ɸ stands 
for kernel function. Kernel function used in our example is 
radial basis function that transforms input to the feature 
space as defined by (4): 
 
𝐾(𝑋𝑖, 𝑋𝑗) = 𝜙(𝑋𝑖) ∙ 𝜙(𝑋𝑗) = 𝑋𝑖, 𝑋𝑗.  
(4) 
The value of parameters C and γ is defined in training phase 
based on the result of 10- fold cross validation. The obtained 
values were 3 for C and 0.2 for γ. The output variable of the 
model was a transport mode one will use for a next trip and 
forecasting time frame was one hour.  
 
 
III. 
RESULTS 
Overall success rate of the forecasting model was 82% 
(Table 2). The most challenging part was to create decision 
hyperplanes that separate between trips made with private 
car, bike and public transportation (bus) as this resulted in 
more than 1000 support vectors for bike and car transport 
modes. 
TABLE II.  
MODEL RESULTS 
Kernel type 
Radial Basis Function 
Classification accuracy 
81.87% 
Number of SVs 
2921 ( 1 bounded) 
Number of SVs ( BIKE ) 
1187 
Number of SVs ( BUS ) 
687 
Number of SVs ( CAR ) 
1033 
Number of SVs ( FOOT ) 
5 
Number of SVs ( TRAIN ) 
9 
 
Considering each transport mode individually (Fig. 6), it 
was easiest to predict when one will use personal vehicle for 
the next trip. A detailed look into confusion matrix reveals 
occurrence of miss-classifications between transport modes 
bike, car and foot (Fig. 7). In most of the cases trips that 
were predicted to be made by car were forecasted to be made 
by bike or foot. Potentially, insight into weather conditions 
could give more details on context of miss-classifications 
and in future phase model can be extended to integrate these 
insights. Furthermore, Fig. 8 and 9 show more details on trip 
purposes for the forecasted trips. Quite different distributions 
indicate how important the availability of information on the 
purpose of travel is when predicting transport mode to be 
used for travel.  
 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

 
Figure 6.  Model’s success rate at transport mode levels 
 
Figure 7.  Purpose of trips for which transport mode was incorrectly 
forecasted. 
 
 
Figure 8.  Confusion matrix. 
 
 
Figure 9.  Purpose of trips for which transport mode was correctlly 
forecasted. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
Although the implemented SVM model has a quite high 
success rate (82%), still there is a place to improve 
forecasting 
results 
by 
additional 
extensions 
and 
considerations based on the gained insights. Firstly, since the 
model would give a good forecast in a bit more than eight 
out of ten trips, when implemented to provide pre-travel 
information, it could be useful to provide information on two 
transport modes that are most likely to be used. This way the 
model outcomes could be of higher relevance to the user and 
have outweighing role when user is considering more than 
one option. Furthermore, this way provision of such 
information could be also integrated into the city’s transport 
management system and provided information can be 
coordinated with city’s preferences. For example, if city 
wishes to promote new public transport line, or bike route, it 
can add additional weight to these options in the model so 
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
BIKE
BUS
CAR
FOOT
TRAIN
Correct(%)
Incorrect(%)
WORK 
1.01% 
null 
97.26% 
HOME 
1.01% 
DROPOFF 
0.29% 
OTHER 
0.29% 
SHOP 
0.14% 
WORK
null
HOME
DROPOFF
OTHER
SHOP
RECREATION 
5% 
WORK 
13% 
HOME 
21% 
SHOP 
3% 
DROPOFF 
7% 
OTHER 
3% 
null 
47% 
VISIT 
1% 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

that this information is provided to the user whenever 
feasible route using promoted options exists. In addition, 
there is a highest confusion between use of private car and 
active transport modes like bike and foot, which are the two 
ends of the sustainable mobility spectrum. It is worth to 
examining in future research in more details a context of 
trips for which confusion happened. Potential reasons 
include bad weather conditions when users are more prone to 
use private cars but also different trip purposes (e.g., one is 
more likely to use private car to drop-off multiple family 
members than for recreation). First reason can successfully 
be examined by fusing weather data and crowdsourced 
dataset. This insight car provide more descriptive context of 
the confusion occurrence. Second challenge is the familiarity 
of trip purpose. As forecasting time frame was an hour, this 
means that trip purpose should be known in advance. 
However, unless user indicates this information, a need to 
make a trip for certain reason should also be forecasted. This 
adds additional complexity to the model and can impact the 
success rate of the forecast. Therefore, it could be beneficial 
to investigate in more details complementarity of trip 
purpose forecasting models with transport mode forecasting 
and evaluate added value they give to each other.  
Compared with results from literature [20], where 
gradient boosting trees were used to forecast transport mode 
one will use for the next trip, our results achieved with the 
support vector machines based model have around 10% 
higher success rate. This shows potential of support vector 
machines based model to be extended to incorporate other 
data sources and to be successfully implemented in order to 
support smart city mobility planning and managing process.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Support vector machines based model achieved success 
rate of 82% in forecasting transport mode one will use for 
the next trip. This shows high potential to implement such a 
model into smart city mobility system management and 
planning processes as it can result in development of more 
advanced pre-travel information service. Furthermore, 
gained insights already indicate potential future extensions of 
the model in order to ensure higher usability of the output 
results and improved relevance to the end users.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is funded by INTERREG North-West 
Europe project New Integrated Smart Transport Options 
(NISTO), the Flemish government agency for Innovation by 
Science and Technology and the Flemish Institute for 
Mobility. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] E. Tranos and D. Gertner, “Smart networked cities?” 
Innovation: The European Journal of Social Science Research.  
25, pp. 175–190, 2012. 
[2] P. Neirotti, A. de Marco, A. C. Cag, G. Mangano, and F. 
Scorrano. Current trends in Smart City initiatives: Some 
stylised facts. Cities, 38, pp. 25–36, 2014. 
[3] I. Marsa-Maestre, M. A. Lopez-Carmona, J. R. Velasco,  and 
I. A. Navarro, “Mobile Agents for Service Personalization in 
Smart Environments”. Journal of Network and Computer 
Applications, 3, pp. 30–41, 2008. 
[4] S. Beswick, Smart Cities in Europe: Enabling Innovation; 
Osborne Clarke: London, UK, 2014. 
[5] G. J. A. Alonso and A. Rossi, New Trends for Smart Cities; 
ATOS: Bezons, France, 2011. 
[6] L. Atzori, A. Iera, and G. Morabito, “The Internet of Things: 
A survey”. Computer Networks, 54,  pp. 2787–2805, 2010. 
[7] T. Nam and A. Pardo, “Conceptualizing Smart City with 
Dimensions of Technology, People, and Institutions”. In 
Proceedings of the 12th Annual International Conference on 
Digital Government Research, College Park, MD, USA, 12–
15 June 2011. 
[8] The Climate Group, ARUP, Accenture & The University of 
Nottingham. Information Marketplaces, The New Economics 
of Cities; The Climate Group, London, UK, 2011. 
[9] G. C. Lazaroiu and M. Roscia, “Definition methodology for 
the smart cities model”. Energy, 47, pp. 326–332, 2012. 
 
[10] Y. Lu and Y. Liu, “Pervasive location acquisition 
technologies: Opportunities and challenges for geospatial 
studies”. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 36, pp. 
105–108, 2012. 
[11] R. M. Pulselli, C. Ratti, and E. Tiezzi, “City out of Chaos: 
Social Patterns and Organization in Urban Systems”. 
International Journal of Design & Nature and Ecodynamics, 1, 
pp. 125–134, 2006. 
[12] J, Novak, R. Ahas, A. Aasa, and S. Silm, “Application of 
mobile phone location data in mapping of commuting patterns 
and functional regionalization: A pilot study of Estonia”. 
Journal of Maps, 9, pp. 10–15, 2013. 
[13] O. Järv, R. Ahas, and F. Witlox, “Understanding monthly 
variability in human activity spaces: A twelve-month study 
using mobile phone call detail records”. Transportation 
Research Part C: Emerging Technologies. 38, pp. 122–135, 
2014. 
[14] S. Iqbal, C. F. Choudhury, P. Wang, and M. C. González,  
“Development of origin-destination matrices using mobile 
phone call data”. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging 
Technologies, 40, pp. 63–74, 2014. 
[15] F. Liu, D. Janssens, J. Cui, Y. Wang, G. Wets, and M. Cools,  
“Building 
a 
validation 
measure  
for activity-based transportation models based on mobile 
phone data”. Expert Systems with Applications, 41, pp. 6174–
6189, 2014. 
[16] Y. Yuan, M. Raubal, and Y. Liu, “Correlating mobile phone 
usage and travel behavior—A case study of Harbin, China”. 
Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 36, pp. 118–
130, 2012. 
[17] H. Bar-Gera, “Evaluation of a cellular phone-based system for 
measurements of traffic speeds and travel times: A case study 
from Israel”. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging 
Technologies 15(6), pp. 380-391, 2007. 
[18] O. Järv, R. Ahas, E., Saluveer, B. Derudder, and F. Witlox,  
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

“Mobile Phones in a Traffic Flow: A Geographical 
Perspective to Evening Rush Hour Traffic Analysis Using 
Call Detail Records”. PLoS ONE, 7(11), pp. e49171, 2012 
[19] I. Semanjski and S. Gautama, Sensing Human Activity for 
Smart Cities' Mobility Management, InTech, 2016 (In Press) 
[20] I. Semanjski and S. Gautama, “Smart City Mobility 
Application—Gradient Boosting Trees for Mobility Prediction 
and Analysis Based on Crowdsourced Data”, Sensors, vol. 15, 
no. 7, pp. 15974-15987, 2015. 
[21] I. Semanjski, A. Lopez Aguirre, J. De Mol and  S.  Gautama, 
“Policy 2.0 Platform for Mobile Sensing and Incentivized 
Targeted Shifts in Mobility Behavior”, Sensors, vol. 16, no.7, 
pp. 1035-1053, 2016 
[22]  Ghent University, "Routecoach," Google Play, [Online]. 
Available: 
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.move.route
coach. [Accessed 27 May 2016]. 
[23]  New Integrated Smart Transport Options, "NISTO," [Online]. 
Available: http://www.nisto-project.eu. [Accessed 03 MarcN 
2016]. 
[24] Official mobility statistics for Flanders, OVG, [Online] 
Available: http://www.mobielvlaanderen.be/ovg/. [Accessed 
27 May 2016]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

