Detecting Signs of Mental Disorders on Social
Networks: a Systematic Literature Review
Ayrton Herculano, Glauco Gomes, Damires Souza, Alex Rˆego
Professional Master’s in Information Technology (PPGTI)
Federal Institute of Education, Science and Technology of Paraiba (IFPB)
Jo˜ao Pessoa, Brazil
Email: {ayrton.herculano, glauco.gomes}@academico.ifpb.edu.br, Email: {damires, alex}@ifpb.edu.br
Abstract—Social networks have been used more and more by
people to share feelings and emotions. This scenario helps to
create an environment which may provide additional information
regarding signs of mental disorders users carry. In this light, this
study investigates the state of the art on how the literature has
considered techniques or strategies related to identifying signs of
mental disorders on social networks. Some analyses have been
made to answer questions regarding methods, data, labelling and
other aspects related to such identification. Challenges and gaps
are also discussed in this work.
Keywords–mental health; social media; pre-processing;
labeling; systematic review.
I. INTRODUCTION
The use of social networks has increasingly gained more
and more popularity. By joining communities on social net-
works, users have provided more information about themselves
including, sometimes, feelings and opinions. Feelings or opin-
ions are published on these platforms by means of texts, pho-
tos, emoticons or videos [1]. The emotion and language used
on social media by means of such posts may, at times, indicate
feelings of worthlessness, guilt, loneliness, helplessness, and
self-hatred that may characterize, for example, a propensity
for depression or for other kinds of mental disorders [2].
A mental disorder is characterized by a clinically significant
confusion in an individual’s cognition, emotional regulation,
or behaviour [3]. Research on mental health in the areas
of psychiatry, psychology, sociolinguistics and neuroscience,
combined with computational support from specific tools of,
for instance, sentiment analysis, can increase the understand-
ings about the relationship between human behavior and the
feelings expressed on social profiles. This is due to the fact
that users with mental disorders tend to present different online
behaviors from users who do not suffer from any disorder
when using social networks [2] [4].
With this scenario in mind, this work presents a Systematic
Literature Review (SLR) with the objective of investigating
how works are identifying signs of mental disorders on social
networks. In this sense, this work provides some findings on
methods, data and features, data labeling strategies and other
related aspects to the theme at hand. It also provides answers to
some defined research questions and a list of 19 studies, which
have been selected on the topic. As a result, it is able to discuss
some identified impacts, challenges and critical success factors
described by the selected works when working on identifying
signs of mental disorders. An important finding concerns the
still recurrent lack of more appropriate and effective strategies
when labeling training data in this scenario.
The remaining parts of the paper are organized as follows:
Section 2 introduces some theoretical background. Section 3
discusses some related work. Section 4 describes the method-
ology used in this study. Section 5 presents the results obtained
and a discussion relating these findings to the research ques-
tions. Finally, Section 6 provides some concluding remarks
and indicates future work.
II. THEORETICAL FOUNDATION
A mental disorder is conventionally defined as a syndrome
with characteristics that cause significant clinical changes
in a person’s cognition, emotion or behavior, causing psy-
chological and biological diseases [5]. The most common
mental disorders are [6] [7]: depression, insomnia, anxiety
disorders, eating disorders (e.g., anorexia), bipolar disorder,
schizophrenia, self-harm, post-traumatic stress disorder and
drug or alcohol use disorders. The term “disorder” is used to
characterize symptoms and/or behaviors that can be clinically
identified and, in most cases, are linked to an individual’s
suffering and cognitive disturbance [7]. The discovery of these
signs in advance can help in clinical assistance and treatments,
making it possible to prevent recurrences or even hospital
admissions [8].
To help matters, sentiment analysis strategies have been
used to identify signs of some mental disorders such as
depression. Sentiment analysis seeks to establish and/or use
techniques capable of extracting subjective information from
data such as text, images, emoticons, emojis, or audios.
Examples of these data include opinions or feelings that are
usually provided in natural language, which implies the need
of creating structured data from those. The idea is using such
data to assist some kind of decision [9]–[11].
Through these strategies, it can be determined whether a
piece of writing or image is positive, negative, or neutral.
The definition of a sentiment is a combination of beliefs
and emotions, which, in general, may be considered good
or bad according to a given real scenario (e.g., depression).
In the light of depression, for instance, “loss of interest or
pleasure” may be a sign of negative sentiment. On the other
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-994-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Data Analytics

hand, a neutral sentiment occurs when there is a lack of
emotion or opinion in such a way that it can not be detected.
A sentiment analysis strategy for text, for instance, usually
combines Natural Language Processing (NLP) and Machine
Learning Techniques to assign weighted sentiment scores to
the entities, topics, themes, and categories within a sentence
or phrase [12].
NLP is a subfield of computing dedicated to the natural
understanding of human language by computational machines
[13]. It includes techniques capable of analyzing and charac-
terizing texts in order to perform language processing sim-
ilar to the way human beings perform [14]. NLP strategies
include a set of pre-processing tasks to obtain a structured
representation of a less sparse set of words in the text for
computational processing. Another approach used in NLP
is the use of lexicons. Lexicons provide a vocabulary with
preceding information about the type and intensity of each
phrase or word and correlate it to a degree of polarity [15].
Words or phrases that have meaning in a lexicon are called
lexemes. Such strategy is accomplished by the examination of
a document or text looking for words that express a positive
(e.g., good, perfect, nice, beautiful, etc.) or negative (e.g.,
bad, sad, etc.) feeling. In addition, automatically discovering
topics from noisy and short texts posted on social networks is
paramount. Due to this fact, topic modeling methods, based
usually on classical probabilistic or recent neural approaches,
have been considered [16]. As an illustration, the Latent
Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) method is one of the most adopted
in the literature. It is a generative and probability approach
based on word co-occurrences [17].
The Machine Learning (ML) field relies on computational
algorithms which is used to optimize a performance criterion
using example data or past experience [18]. To this end, a
model is produced up to some parameters, and learning is
obtained by means of the model using the training data or past
experience. The model may be predictive to make predictions
in the future, or descriptive to gain knowledge from data,
or both [18]. Supervised learning relies on using examples
to provide predictions. Unsupervised learning does not use a
target variable thus, instead of telling the machine to predict Y
for specific data X, it asks what is possible to understand from
data X [19]. Supervised learning is usually accomplished by
classification or regression tasks [19]. For unsupervised ML,
one of the most used tasks is clustering. According to [20], its
objective is grouping objects that are similar to each other in
clusters, based on the characteristics that these objects have.
Considered as a subfield of ML, deep learning is a category
of techniques that allows processing various levels of data
abstractions using computational models, which can be applied
in various tasks, such as associating posts and products with
user preferences and also selecting content on social networks
[21].
III. RELATED WORKS
In this section, some secondary works related to the SLR
previously mentioned are discussed.
In [22], the authors carried out a SLR in order to discuss the
state of the art on how studies used techniques for analyzing
feelings and emotions to identify depressive mood disorders.
The researchers analyzed which social networks, techniques,
emotions and feelings were used most in discovering prede-
cessors of depression. The SLR showed that text is the most
used kind of data to identify depressive disorders. In addition,
the research revealed that the selected works, for the most
part, proposed strategies joining ML classifiers to lexical ones.
Some gaps were also identified in the studies found, such as
the little exploration of data as images, videos and emojis.
The systematic mapping produced by [23] aimed to provide
insights on sentiment analysis and ML techniques used to
identify profiles with a depressive tendency on social networks.
This work identified which types of labeling techniques were
proposed to the datasets of the studies found. The authors
analyzed papers published from 2013 to 2019 and found that
most of the works used supervised ML algorithms for the task
of classifying depressive profiles on social networks. Lexical
dictionaries, such as the Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count
(LIWC), Affective Norms for English Words (ANEW) and
NRC Emotion Lexicon (Emolex) were also used by the works
found for the same purpose. The research showed that only
one study used a dataset in Portuguese, while English was the
most used language.
The research developed by [6] carried out a literature review
seeking to analyze works that used social media texts for
mental health surveillance, with greater attention to studies
that approached depression and suicide. The researchers in-
vestigated which data collection techniques were used as well
as features used in training ML models to predict population-
level mental illness. They also considered which classifiers
were adopted for training models. The results showed that the
selected works collected data from questionnaires, such as the
PHQ-9 (Patient Health Questionnaire), and scales, such as the
Depression Scale Center for Epidemiological Studies (CES-D)
used in psychiatry. Other forms of data collection highlighted
by the review authors were the self-reports of people with de-
pression or suicidal ideation on social networks, in addition to
mental health support forums. The articles found indicated that
most of the works used supervised ML algorithms combined
with lexicons, exploring linguistic, semantic, behavioral and
user profile features such as post volume and time.
In [7], the authors conducted a survey looking for works that
proposed computational methods in the assessment of mental
state from posts on social media. Most of the studies found by
the researchers analyzed depressive, eating and post-traumatic
stress disorders. The authors highlighted that the discussed
articles performed resource extraction using topic models,
such as the Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) and lexical
approaches such as LIWC or ANEW. They also employed
techniques such as bag-of-words, word embeddings, writing
behavior (frequent use of 1st person pronouns), social engage-
ment (frequency and time of posts) and syntactic structures
such as the use of negative words. The research also re-
vealed that supervised ML algorithms, such as Support Vector
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-994-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Data Analytics

Machines (SVM), Na¨ıve Bayes, Logistic/Linear Regression,
Random Forest, Ada Boost and K-Nearest Neighbours (KNN),
were the most applied ones by the works to online mental
state assessment. Some articles proposed the use of deep
learning models as the ones which are currently expanding.
Regarding the usage of deep learning, some works used simple
neural networks such as the Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) to
identify mental disorders, while others adopted more complex
networks, such as the Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) and
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN). In addition to ML
models, some articles used rule-based approaches such as
Character Language Models (CLMs), Sequential Incremental
Classification (SIC), Decision List, and Temporal Mood Vari-
ation.
The current work extends some of the aspects discussed
in previous related works. This work investigates various
kinds of mental disorders on social networks. It also studies
issues and aspects related to data, pre-processing methods,
NLP techniques, labeling strategies and languages usually used
to build corpora. Another concern regards the identification
of linguistic terms or pronouns which may help identify-
ing a mental disorder (e.g., depressive terms, first person
pronouns). Likewise, behavioral (e.g., engagement, interval
between posts) and social media features (e.g., number of
reposts, comment tree) which may also be used are discussed
in this work.
IV. RESEARCH METHOD
This work complies with the guidelines and practices estab-
lished by [24] for conducting SLR. Thus, the research process
accomplishes the following steps: (i) research planning, (ii)
data search, and (iii) data selection, data extraction and data
synthesis.
A. Research planning
The main research question that motivates this work is RQ:
What is the state of the art on identifying signs of mental
disorders on social networks profiles? Given the broad scope
of such question, the following specific research questions may
provide evidence to help answering RQ:
RQ1. What sentiment analysis strategies have been pro-
posed/applied to detect signs of mental disorders on social
media posts?
RQ2. Which behavioral characteristics or features have been
used most in discovering predecessors of mental disorders?
RQ3. Which languages are most commonly used to build
corpora?
RQ4. What data pre-processing strategies have been pro-
posed/employed?
RQ5. What kind of techniques have been proposed/used
for post training data labeling? What types of labels have
commonly been used?
RQ6. What evaluation metrics have been used to assess the
quality of results?
RQ7. What challenges and gaps have been found?
B. Data search
From the research questions presented along with some
synonym adaptations, the authors extracted the constructs to
be used to enable the data search, as follows:
(”sentiment analysis” OR ”text mining” OR ”emotion”)
AND (”social networks” OR ” social media” OR ”social
posts”) AND (”depression” OR ”depressive disorder” OR
”mental disorder”).
The strategy of this research used the following scientific
web databases (libraries or proceedings): ACM Digital Library,
IEEE Xplore Digital Library, Science Direct, Brazilian Journal
of Information Systems (iSys), Journal of Information and
Data Management (JIDM), Brazilian Conference on Intelligent
Systems (Bracis), Symposium on Knowledge Discovery, Min-
ing and Learning (KDmile), Brazilian Symposium on Multi-
media and Web Systems (WebMedia), Brazilian Workshop on
Social NetWork Analysis and Mining (Brasnam) and Brazilian
Database Symposium (SBBD).
Two inclusion criteria were applied to filter the articles: (I1)
works that answer at least one of the research questions and
(I2) primary studies. The exclusion criteria used were: (E1)
studies without scientific relevance; (E2) secondary or tertiary
works; and (E3) articles published prior to 2016.
C. Data selection, data extraction and data synthesis
The studies collected by the search string went through a
filtering process set in three phases. In Phase 1, the protocol
analyzed the studies’ title, abstract, and keywords. The arti-
cles selected in this first phase went to Phase 2, in which
researchers read the studies’ introduction and conclusion. In
the same manner as Phase 1, this phase eliminated studies that
did not answer at least one of the research questions (RQ1
to RQ7), i.e., studies that did not address the subject of this
systematic review. In Phase 3, the authors read the papers
completely and selected the ones which complied with the
inclusion and exclusion criteria.
To assess the level of agreement among the authors and in
order to rank the works which would be the most relevant to
this research, an adaptation of the Likert scale was employed.
Thus, three levels of evaluation were defined along with a
respective value, as follows: (i) works that contributed little
- value 5; (ii) works that contributed reasonably - value 10;
(iii) works that contributed a lot - value 15. In addition, some
quality dimensions were added to score articles based on
the following criteria: 1 point, if only one of the research
questions was answered, 2 points, if the work answered two
or more research questions, 3 points, if it answered two or
more questions and used machine learning techniques, lexical
dictionaries (important to answer the RQs), and 4 points, if in
addition to the criteria already mentioned, the work used the
Portuguese language to build corpora.
After data extraction, some synthesis tasks were performed.
The synthesis was then carried out for each RQ following
specific methods adapted to each question’s proposal.
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-994-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Data Analytics

V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
In total, 19 papers were found likely to contribute to
this review. Table I shows the number of works collected
or selected along the review process, grouped according to
the scientic data source and phases employed. Figure
1
shows the publication timeline of the final selected papers.
There has been an increase in works published in recent
years on this subject. This may be due to the fact that the
theme ”metal disorders” has been increasingly highlighted on
social networks in recent times, specially in the context of
pandemics.
Some general findings of this SLR are pointed out in
the following. Then, each one of the research questions is
discussed. Table II shows the list with the references and titles
of the selected works. References are used as identifiers of the
selected papers in this section.
TABLE I
NUMBER OF SELECTED STUDIES: DIGITAL LIBRARY VS PHASE.
Digital library
Phase 1
Phase 2
Phase 3
Final result
ACM Digital Library
477
100
24
8
IEEE Xplore
34
19
9
6
Science Direct
11
9
2
1
iSys
4
0
0
0
JIDM
7
1
0
0
Bracis
3
2
1
0
Brasnam
7
7
3
2
KDMile
2
2
1
1
SBBD
1
2
1
1
Webmedia
3
2
0
0
Total
549
147
44
19
Fig. 1. Timeline of publications.
Regarding mental disorders, the selected articles revealed
that depression (60%) is the most studied one. Articles that
addressed anxiety (4%), bipolar disorder (4%), borderline per-
sonality disorder (4%) and stress (4%) were also found. Some
studies have tried to identify positive or negative feelings,
excessive sadness and behavioral change through posts on
social networks. The research developed by [26] deserves to
be highlighted for using data from Reddit (specific subcom-
munities) to analyze indicators of depression, self-harm and
anorexia. In the work of [28], the authors proposed to use
TABLE II
SELECTED STUDIES.
Title
[25] A knowledge-based recommendation system that includes
sentiment analysis and deep learning
[26] An emotion and cognitive based analysis of mental health
disorders from social media data
[27] Sentiment analysis in brazilian portuguese tweets
[28] Characterization of anxiety, depression, and their comorbidity
from texts of social networks
[29] Depression detection using machine learning techniques on Twitter data
[30] DepressionNet: Learning multi-modalities with user post
summarization for depression detection on social media
[31] Detecting stress based on social interactions in social networks
[32] Early detection of depression: social network analysis and
random forest techniques
[33] Emotional and linguistic cues of depression from social media
[34] Identifying depression among Twitter users using sentiment analysis
[4] Mining Twitter data for signs of depression in Brazil
[35] Modeling and detecting change in user behavior through his
social media posting using cluster analysis
[36] User emotional tone prediction models in mental health
communities on Reddit
[37] Multimodal sentiment analysis to explore the structure of emotions
[38] Semi-Supervised approach to monitoring clinical depressive
symptoms in social media
[39] Subconscious Crowdsourcing: a feasible data collection mechanism
for mental disorder detection on docial media
[40] Tracing the emotional roadmap of depressive users on social media
through sequential pattern mining
[41] Using Twitter social media for depression detection
in the Canadian population
[42] What about mood swings: identifying depression on
Twitter with temporal measures of emotions
deep learning to identify depression and anxiety. Figure
2
shows the disorders found in the 19 works that stood out the
most.
Fig. 2. Most studied mental disorders.
Most of the selected works used Twitter posts as data
source (58%). The second most mentioned social network was
Reddit (27%), followed by Facebook (5%). The study by [37]
used the blogging platform Tumblr (5%). The authors of [31]
obtained their data from Sina Weibo (5%), which is a kind of
Chinese Twitter. In the following, we present the RQs and the
results found by the teams in the data extraction and synthesis
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-994-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Data Analytics

activities.
RQ1: For the task of predicting symptoms of mental
disorders from social media posts, most researchers used
combined ML approaches and lexical dictionaries, such as
LIWC, VADER, ANEW and NRC Emolex. The vast majority
of works used supervised ML algorithms, such as SVM, Naive
Bayes, KNN and ensembles, such as Random Forest, Gradient
Boosting and AdaBoost. Three works used unsupervised ML
with the K-means algorithm. The work developed by [38] pro-
posed a topic modeling using LDA to detect clinical depression
from Twitter posts. Articles that applied deep learning through
neural networks were also selected: CNN, LSTM and MLP.
Figure 3 depicts some topic modeling and ML methods found,
grouped by supervised, unsupervised and deep learning that
were most used in the 19 highlighted works. It is also noticed
that the use of deep learning models for this type of task has
been increased. The reason underlying that may be linked to
how these methods perform the analysis and learning.
Fig. 3. Topic modeling and machine learning methods.
RQ2: Research has identified features to perform data
analysis and explore them through some sentiment analysis
strategy. The behavior patterns of users on social networks
were essential in identifying some mental disorders. Table
III presents the main features found that are grouped into
3 categories: Behavioral, that means how people act on
networks; Linguistics, regarding the way they write their
posts; and Features in the social network about information
related to personal profiles. However, such properties were
little explored over a certain period in the timeline of user
posts on their profile. Interaction-related features, such as
responses and comments between users with mental disorders
and their friends, were also under-examined. The analysis of
these characteristics taking into account the timeline of posts
can bring new characteristics and discoveries of behavioral
patterns to the study of mental disorders from social networks.
RQ3: The language most found in the data analyzed by
the works was English (79%). For the Portuguese language,
there were 3 articles (16%), highlighting the research by [4]
that analyzed Twitter posts to predict signs of depression, and
[25] that used facebook posts to predict signs of depression
TABLE III
FEATURES CATEGORIES.
Category
Feature
Behavioral
Time of posts, engagement, interval between posts,
frequency on the networks, insomnia index,
number of publications;
Linguistics
Antidepressant drug names, depressive terms,
first person pronouns,
syntactic features (verb, adverb);
Social network
Number of followers,
number of reposts, comment tree,
interaction with friends.
and stress. Only one study evaluated data by considering the
Chinese language. There is a lack of research focused on
studying mental disorders from social networks, exploring,
in particular, datasets in Portuguese. This might be due to
the difficulty in working with this language that has nuances,
such as slang and regional dialects. According to the region
of the country, the same word has different meanings, and can
express different feelings according to the place where the user
of the social network lives. For a more accurate computational
diagnosis, this cultural diversity becomes a challenge, as the
linguistic variety needs to be taken into account in steps such
as pre-processing and labeling, when using ML algorithms.
Otherwise, there is the possibility of erroneous analysis, and,
consequently, false computational diagnoses. In addition, there
is a shortage of lexical dictionaries in the Portuguese language,
specifically to deal with mental disorders. Thus, here is an
open field to improve existing solutions. The development of
lexicons in the Portuguese language, for specific domains e.g.
depression, anxiety, anorexia, presents itself as a promising
line of research.
RQ4: Before being analyzed by models such as ML algo-
rithms, the data collected from social media posts usually go
through the pre-processing step. The selected works showed
that techniques, such as stopword removal, tokenization, lem-
ming, stemming and Term Frequency - Inverse Document
Frequency (TF-IDF) are the ones that appear the most. The
articles also showed that it was necessary to anonymize
the posts by removing user names, mentions, URLs or any
information that could identify the owner of the profile on
the social network. Emojis and emoticons in most of the
works were removed or transformed into text. The work of
[34] stands out, using the demoji, a library developed in
Python, and transformed the emoticons and emojis that appear
in text. The exclusion or conversion of hashtags, emojis and
emoticons in texts, or even exclusion of words with repeated
letters, indicating intensity, could be better handled to provide
a dataset with more subsidies and characteristics that would
help in the evaluation of ML models.
RQ5: Labeling strategies used in the selected studies were
largely done through self-reports of social network users,
parsing and identifying sentences, such as: “I was diagnosed
with depression” on their profiles. Some research carried out
the labeling manually and had the help of experts to identify
whether or not a particular post showed signs of a mental
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-994-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Data Analytics

disorder. Only one article found focused on a proposal for au-
tomatic labeling using Textblob to punctuate the sentence and
label it. We highlight the work of [29] who used Textblob, a
library used by Python to calculate the sentiment score of a text
according to subject and polarity, thus classifying sentences as
-1 (negative), 0 ( neutral) and 1 (positive). When the calculated
value was less than 0, the sentences were labeled as depressive
and when greater than 0, non-depressive. Regarding labeling
training data, works have demonstrated that this is indeed
the largest bottleneck in deploying machine learning models
applied to sentiment analyses. Manual labeling can present
subjectivity and different interpretations by human annotators.
Experts are supposed to significantly enhance this process,
although it demands a lot of time and effort to accomplish
this task. The volume of data may be a restriction. In turn,
the use of libraries such as Textblob can speed up the labeling
step, however, it needs to be developed in such a way that
may provide specificities to the data domain at hand. Thereby,
there is a lack for more research and proposals to label training
data to the mental disorders scenario. An automated or even
semi automated strategy for labeling training data on mental
disorders may bring two main benefits: (a) reducing the effort
employed in the usual labeling step; and (b) contributing to
find out new examples that could not be easily found by
performing manual labeling. As a result, it may also increase
the performance of the classifier used to predict signs of mental
disorders.
RQ6: In order to measure the performance of ML models,
evaluation metrics were used. Most articles used precision,
recall, accuracy and F-measure. A possible explanation for this
is that for the task of predicting signs of mental disorders, the
classification problem is usually binary. Besides the mentioned
metrics, in [26], the Area under the Receiver Operating Char-
acteristic curve (AUC) was used to evaluate the performance of
the models proposed in the research. The authors considered
this metric to be less sensitive to the imbalance of the data
set used in the work. Another highlight was the research in
[33] which, in addition to accuracy, calculated the micro-
F1 and macro-F1 scores to evaluate the Gradient Boosted
Decision Trees classifier in the task of identifying emotional
and linguistic signs of depression on Twitter.
RQ7: The main challenges are related to the development
of approaches that can allow a more automated training data
labeling, perhaps using lexical dictionaries specific to the
mental disorder. Automatic training data labeling avoids the
situation of depending on user reports on their networks or
the need of performing manual annotations in large datasets.
Likewise, there is lack of studies specifically focused on
signs, emotions and linguistic, behavioral and associated with
the timeline of user posts. Thus, it is worth studying some
specific chronology on users to enhance such analysis on the
propensity to mental disorders. The construction of a lexical
dictionary in Portuguese specialized on a mental disorder
such as depression as well as the investigation of behavioral
resources and social interaction over a period of time using a
database in Portuguese are gaps that still need to be filled.
VI. CONCLUSION
The analysis of data from social networks focused on
research to detect signs of mental disorders emerges as a
promising topic in the field of sentiment analysis. This work
carried out an SLR with the objective of investigating how the
literature presents the sentiment analysis techniques proposed
to identify mental disorders from posts on social networks. The
characteristics and languages used were analyzed, revealing
that few studies with data in Portuguese were found. The
pre-processing methods were also analyzed, showing that
features such as emoticons and emojis can be further explored.
Training data labeling was accomplished manually or through
user reports. Furthermore, it was revealed that the works are
proposing the combination of ML methods and lexical dictio-
naries to detect signs of propensity to mental disorders. The
most discussed disorder found in the studies was depression.
The works identified behavioral and linguistic characteristics
that helped in the early detection of depression. Thus, future
investigations of this disorder are relevant. We also sought
to find out which metrics evaluated the performance of the
strategies proposed in the works. Finally, challenges and gaps
to be filled according to the work obtained were identified.
In future work, we can explore the development of automated
or semi-automated training data labeling strategies, which are
indeed important to detect mental disorders such as depression
on social media.
REFERENCES
[1] J. W. G. Duque, A. L. Raymundo, and P. F. Neto, “An application of big
data for twitter depressive sentence classification,” H-TEC humanities
and technology magazine, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 82–95, 2018.
[2] M. De Choudhury, M. Gamon, S. Counts, and E. Horvitz, “Predicting
depression via social media,” in Seventh international AAAI conference
on weblogs and social media, 2013, pp. 128–137.
[3] WHO, “World health organization,” 2022, https://www.who.int/news-
room/fact-sheets/detail/mental-disorders Last accessed 04 Sep 2022.
[4] O. V. Sperling and M. Ladeira, “Mining twitter data for signs of depres-
sion in brazil,” in Anais do VII Symposium on Knowledge Discovery,
Mining and Learning.
SBC, 2019, pp. 25–32.
[5] American Psychiatric Association, Diagnostic and statistical manual of
mental disorders: DSM-5.
American psychiatric association Washing-
ton, DC, 2013, vol. 5.
[6] R. Skaik and D. Inkpen, “Using social media for mental health surveil-
lance: a review,” ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), vol. 53, no. 6, pp.
1–31, 2020.
[7] E. A. R´ıssola, D. E. Losada, and F. Crestani, “A survey of computational
methods for online mental state assessment on social media,” ACM
Transactions on Computing for Healthcare, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 1–31,
2021.
[8] S. Abdullah and T. Choudhury, “Sensing technologies for monitoring
serious mental illnesses,” IEEE MultiMedia, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 61–75,
2018.
[9] M. Huang, H. Xie, Y. Rao, J. Feng, and F. L. Wang, “Sentiment strength
detection with a context-dependent lexicon-based convolutional neural
network,” Information Sciences, vol. 520, pp. 389–399, 2020.
[10] A. V. Tardelli, A. F. d. S. Dias, and J. B. d. S. Franc¸a, “Introduction to
sentiment analysis with word clouds,” Brazilian computing society, pp.
38–67, 2019.
[11] F. Benevenuto, F. Ribeiro, and M. Ara´ujo, “Methods for sentiment
analysis in social media,” Brazilian computing society, pp. 31–59, 2015.
[12] D. Sharma, M. Sabharwal, V. Goyal, and M. Vij, “Sentiment analysis
techniques for social media data: A review,” in First international
conference on sustainable technologies for computational intelligence.
Springer, 2020, pp. 75–90.
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-994-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Data Analytics

[13] T. Beysolow II, Applied Natural Language Processing with Python:
Implementing Machine Learning and Deep Learning Algorithms for
Natural Language Processing.
Apress, 2018.
[14] E. D. Liddy, Natural language processing.
In Encyclopedia of Library
and Information Science, 2nd Ed. NY. Marcel Decker, Inc., 2001.
[15] A. Yadollahi, A. G. Shahraki, and O. R. Zaiane, “Current state of text
sentiment analysis from opinion to emotion mining,” ACM Computing
Surveys (CSUR), vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 1–33, 2017.
[16] R. Albalawi, T. H. Yeap, and M. Benyoucef, “Using topic modeling
methods for short-text data: A comparative analysis,” Frontiers in
Artificial Intelligence, vol. 3, p. 42, 2020.
[17] D. M. Blei, A. Y. Ng, and M. I. Jordan, “Latent dirichlet allocation,”
Journal of machine Learning research, vol. 3, no. Jan, pp. 993–1022,
2003.
[18] E. Alpaydin, Introduction to machine learning, 2nd edition.
MIT Press
Cambridge, 2010.
[19] P. Harrington, Machine learning in action.
Simon and Schuster, 2012.
[20] R. Linden, “Clustering techniques,” FSMA Information Systems Maga-
zine, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 18–36, 2009.
[21] Y. LeCun, Y. Bengio, and G. Hinton, “Deep learning,” nature, vol. 521,
no. 7553, pp. 436–444, 2015.
[22] F. T. Giuntini et al., “A review on recognizing depression in social
networks: challenges and opportunities,” Journal of Ambient Intelligence
and Humanized Computing, vol. 11, no. 11, pp. 4713–4729, 2020.
[23] V. Casani, R. G. Mantovani, A. C. C. Souza, and F. C. M. Souza,
“Identification of depressive profiles in social networks using machine
learning: a systematic mapping,” Anais do Computer on the Beach,
vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 183–190, 2020.
[24] B. Kitchenham, “Procedures for performing systematic reviews,” Keele,
UK, Keele University, vol. 33, no. 2004, pp. 1–26, 2004.
[25] R. L. Rosa, G. M. Schwartz, W. V. Ruggiero, and D. Z. Rodr´ıguez, “A
knowledge-based recommendation system that includes sentiment anal-
ysis and deep learning,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics,
vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 2124–2135, 2018.
[26] A.-S. Uban, B. Chulvi, and P. Rosso, “An emotion and cognitive based
analysis of mental health disorders from social media data,” Future
Generation Computer Systems, vol. 124, pp. 480–494, 2021.
[27] D.
P.
Kansaon,
M.
A.
Brand˜ao,
and
S.
A.
de
Paula
Pinto,
“Sentiment analysis in brazilian portuguese tweets,” in Anais do
VII Brazilian Workshop on Social Network Analysis and Mining.
Porto Alegre, RS, Brasil: SBC, 2018, pp. 37–48. [Online]. Available:
https://sol.sbc.org.br/index.php/brasnam/article/view/3578
[28] V. B. Souza, J. Nobre, and K. Becker, “Characterization of anxiety,
depression, and their comorbidity from texts of social networks,” Anais
do XXXV Simp´osio Brasileiro de Banco de Dados. SBC, Porto Alegre,
RS, Brasil, pp. 121–132, 2020.
[29] K. A. Govindasamy and N. Palanichamy, “Depression detection using
machine learning techniques on twitter data,” in 2021 5th international
conference on intelligent computing and control systems (ICICCS).
IEEE, 2021, pp. 960–966.
[30] H. Zogan, I. Razzak, S. Jameel, and G. Xu, “Depressionnet: learning
multi-modalities with user post summarization for depression detection
on social media,” in proceedings of the 44th international ACM SIGIR
conference on research and development in information retrieval, 2021,
pp. 133–142.
[31] H. Lin et al., “Detecting stress based on social interactions in social
networks,” IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering,
vol. 29, no. 9, pp. 1820–1833, 2017.
[32] F. Cacheda, D. Fernandez, F. J. Novoa, and V. Carneiro, “Early detection
of depression: social network analysis and random forest techniques,”
Journal of medical Internet research, vol. 21, no. 6, p. e12554, 2019.
[33] N. Vedula and S. Parthasarathy, “Emotional and linguistic cues of
depression from social media,” in Proceedings of the 2017 International
Conference on Digital Health, 2017, pp. 127–136.
[34] F. Azam, M. Agro, M. Sami, M. H. Abro, and A. Dewani, “Identifying
depression among twitter users using sentiment analysis,” in 2021
International Conference on Artificial Intelligence (ICAI).
IEEE, 2021,
pp. 44–49.
[35] D. J. Joshi, N. Supekar, R. Chauhan, and M. S. Patwardhan, “Modeling
and detecting change in user behavior through his social media posting
using cluster analysis,” in Proceedings of the Fourth ACM IKDD
Conferences on Data Sciences, 2017, pp. 1–9.
[36] B. Silveira, A. P. C. da Silva, and F. Murai, “Models for predicting
the emotional tone of users in mental health communities on reddit,”
in Anais do IX Brazilian Workshop on Social Network Analysis and
Mining.
SBC, 2020, pp. 13–24.
[37] A. Hu and S. Flaxman, “Multimodal sentiment analysis to explore
the structure of emotions,” in proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD
international conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, 2018,
pp. 350–358.
[38] A. H. Yazdavar et al., “Semi-supervised approach to monitoring clinical
depressive symptoms in social media,” in Proceedings of the 2017
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Advances in Social Networks
Analysis and Mining 2017, 2017, pp. 1191–1198.
[39] C.-H. Chang, E. Saravia, and Y.-S. Chen, “Subconscious crowdsourcing:
A feasible data collection mechanism for mental disorder detection
on social media,” in 2016 IEEE/ACM International Conference on
Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining (ASONAM).
IEEE,
2016, pp. 374–379.
[40] F. T. Giuntini et al., “Tracing the emotional roadmap of depressive users
on social media through sequential pattern mining,” IEEE Access, vol. 9,
pp. 97 621–97 635, 2021.
[41] R. Skaik and D. Inkpen, “Using twitter social media for depression
detection in the canadian population,” in 2020 3rd Artificial Intelligence
and Cloud Computing Conference, 2020, pp. 109–114.
[42] X. Chen, M. D. Sykora, T. W. Jackson, and S. Elayan, “What about
mood swings: Identifying depression on twitter with temporal measures
of emotions,” in Companion Proceedings of the The Web Conference
2018, 2018, pp. 1653–1660.
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-994-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Data Analytics

