Dynamic Scenario-based Selection of Data Aggregation Techniques
Oladotun Omosebi∗, Nik Bessis∗, Yannis Korkontzelos∗,
Evangelos Pournaras†, Quanbin Sun∗ and Stelios Sotiriadis‡
∗ Department of Computer Science, Edge Hill University, Ormskirk, United Kingdom
Email: {Oladotun.Omosebi, Nik.Bessis, Yannis.Korkontzelos, Quanbin.Sun}@edgehill.ac.uk
† Professorship of Computational Social Science, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
Email: epournaras@ethz.ch
‡ Department of Computer Science and Information Systems, Birkbeck, University of London
Email: s.sotiriadis@dcs.bbk.ac.uk
Abstract—The Internet of Things introduces a new paradigm
where small scale sensor devices can be used to capture data
on physical phenomena. The potential scale of data that will be
captured by such devices stands to transcend the capabilities of
today’s client-server architectures. The necessity to reduce the
data volume has been reﬂected in enormous research interests
dedicated towards developing new data aggregation techniques
for sensor networks. However, the application-speciﬁc nature of
data aggregation techniques has resulted in the development of
a large volume of options, thereby introducing new problems of
appropriate selection. This paper introduces a unique method to
deal with this problem by proposing a classiﬁcation approach
for data aggregation techniques in wireless sensor networks.
It presents the theoretical background for the selection of a
set of high-level dimensions that can be used for this purpose,
while a use case is presented to support the arguments. It also
discusses how the dimensions dictate data collection procedures
and presents how this framework can be used to develop an
adaptive model for the dynamic selection of data aggregation
techniques based on the characteristics of a sensing application
use case.
Keywords–Internet of Things; Wireless Sensor Networks; Big
Data; Data Aggregation; Adaptive Model.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Sensor devices consist of physical devices that have sensor
capabilities to capture data on selected phenomena. Examples
of such phenomena include weather conditions and city pollu-
tion. They host a limited source of power, networking and
memory. A combination of such devices forms a Wireless
Sensor Network (WSN), which can be deployed into various
environments to sense and track various forms of phenomena
[1]. WSNs are especially applicable to scenarios where the
environment is not conducive for human habitation, such as
in earthquake, tsunami or tornado events, or in continuous
monitoring situations such as city carbon monoxide pollu-
tion or for weather monitoring. Due to the characteristics of
such scenarios, implying that they may never be repaired or
maintained, they need to manage their processing in order
to extend their internal power supplies [2], [3], [4]. In order
to ensure this, the generated data needs to be accumulated
and reduced in size before transmission to a base, a process
referred to as data aggregation. Data aggregation becomes
possible because most sensor deployments keep sensors in
close proximity for communication purposes. This leads to
sensors capturing similar data, which become duplicates when
transmitted. Thus, the goal of a data aggregation technique
is to reduce the data duplication and perform further data
compression, before transmission [5], [6]. This task has also
drawn much attention due to the emerging Internet of Things
(IoT), where a multitude of physical objects will be equipped
with sensors and networking capabilities [7], [8], [9], [10].
Data aggregation techniques need to be application-speciﬁc
to manage power consumption efﬁciently [3], [7], [11]. This
has led to the proposal of a large number of techniques for
various application scenarios, thus leading to a large pool of
options. Selecting the right technique for the right scenario
becomes a challenge, especially for researchers [12]. This
challenge becomes ampliﬁed in the IoT, where sensors would
be expected to have some form of self-organization.
This paper presents a proposal for a unique classiﬁcation
method for data aggregation techniques used within WSNs.
It identiﬁes a set of dimensions that can be used to classify
the different operational stages of a data aggregation tech-
nique. The term Dimensions in the context of this study is
used to represent a high level identiﬁable feature of a WSN
technique. It serves as an encompassing term for several low
granularity characteristics. Under these dimensions, the WSN
characteristics that are important for a technique, such as
node homogeneity, node count and location awareness, are
associated with the technique and referred to as its attributes.
Several selected techniques are matched with their attributes
to compile a database of associations. These data will be
used to build a model to utilise the correlation to dynamically
classify techniques based on application characteristics and
thus, provide a recommendation in the form of one or more
techniques [13], [14].
The remaining of the paper is organized as follows: Section
II presents the background to our study. Section III presents
a use case scenario that will serve as a reference point for
our discussions. Section IV discusses our proposed method.
Section V presents our evaluation plan and Section VI provides
a conclusion and discusses our next steps.
II.
BACKGROUND
A. Wireless Sensor Networks and Data Aggregation
Distributed data aggregation involves the decentralized
computation of signiﬁcant properties within a network that
can be utilized by applications . Examples include the average
workload distribution across the network or the number of
nodes active on the network. Such a task is especially appli-
cable within a WSN, where the aggregation or compression
of data is based on the several network-based parameters
such as node location, distribution and resource distribution
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-681-1
DATA ANALYTICS 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Data Analytics

TABLE I. LIST OF VARIOUS CLASSIFICATION APPROACHES
Article & Author
Dimensions used for classiﬁcation
A Survey of Distributed Data Aggrega-
tion Algorithms [6]
Data
aggregation
function
types
(e.g.
duplicate
sensitive
and
duplicate insensitive); Communication
requirements;
Routing
protocol;
Network
Type
(e.g.
structured-
hierarchical,
unstructured-
ﬂooding/broadcast, etc.)
Data Aggregation in Wireless Sensor
Networks: Previous Research, Current
Status and Future Directions [12]
Topology type; Objective
Practical data compression in wireless
sensor networks: A survey [16]
Energy efﬁciency
A Taxonomy of Wireless Micro-Sensor
Network Models [17]
Communication function; Data delivery
model; Network dynamics with respect
to power demand
Issues of Data Aggregation Methods
in Wireless Sensor Network: A Survey
[18]
Strategy; Delay; Redundancy; Accu-
racy; Energy consumption; Trafﬁc load
Data-aggregation techniques in sensor
networks: A survey [19]
Network lifetime; Latency; Data accu-
racy; Security
A survey on sensor networks [20]
Protocol layer
[6], [15]. Researchers have in the last decade, proposed nu-
merous techniques for data aggregation dedicated to unique
WSN scenarios. The volume of options has grown to such
unmanageable proportions and presented a new challenge of
selecting right technique for the right application. This has
motivated other researchers to propose classiﬁcation methods
for the various options.
B. Classiﬁcation Approaches
While most technique classiﬁcation approaches are based
on surveys, they have selected a set of WSN characteristics to
guide their classiﬁcation method. Some approaches identiﬁed
in literature are listed in Table I.
Table I presents the classiﬁcation approaches taken by
several researchers. The right column shows the various WSN
characteristics used as yardsticks in the classiﬁcation process,
which provide a reliable means of evaluating the techniques.
The following observations can be made: a group of WSN
techniques, which have optimised certain characteristics to
achieve efﬁcient data aggregation, have been compared by the
authors based on those characteristics; based on the approach
taken by the authors, minimal effort has been applied to
establishment of correlations between two or more techniques.
In contrast to these, this paper proposes a uniquely differ-
ent approach. We identify dimensions to enable us classify
WSN characteristics within the scope of data aggregation.
The dimensions will allow us to develop correlations between
techniques and their attributes. For example, the Low-Energy
Adaptive Clustering Hierarchy (LEACH) protocol [21] utilises
an algorithm, random cluster head rotation, in order to evenly
distribute energy consumption accross all nodes. This algo-
rithm would be categorized under a dimension, referred to as
Algorithms, and associated with the LEACH technique as an
attribute. The association of attributes to techniques will help
us to compare and contrast them with similar techniques, as
well as to relevant application scenarios. This strategy also
enables us to explore opportunities for new approaches to data
aggregation [22]. The next section discusses the theoretical
background of the identiﬁed dimensions.
C. Dimensions
The top goals of a data aggregation technique as used
in a WSN include the minimization of energy consumption,
latency, bandwidth, and the extension of network lifetime. In
order to achieve these goals, a data aggregation technique
needs to closely match the target application scenario. To
develop a model that will enable this functionality, there is
need to develop a classiﬁcation method to identify appropriate
techniques based on the use case. This approach involves the
deﬁnition of a set of dimensions into which WSN character-
istics can be classiﬁed. Afterwards, the characteristics can be
associated with techniques. In summary, we identiﬁed seven
dimensions namely: Assumptions, Objectives, Speciﬁcations,
Algorithms, Applications, Performance Metrics, and Evalua-
tion. While the dimensions are expected to follow an order as
presented, a subject that is expatiated further in a later section,
the theoretical background for their identiﬁcation is presented
in the following paragraphs.
Most WSN applications have inherent constraints that are
determined by their topology, network structure and accept-
able communication channels. For example, a wildﬁre event
demands that sensors are deployed after the event has started,
and that sensors are well protected and have similar character-
istics in order to obtain reliable data. Within literature, such
constraints are stated as assumptions. For instance, in [23] as-
sumptions are made about sensor nodes having a single sensor,
while the network consists of a single cluster. In [24], the
authors highlight the need for nodes to have prior knowledge of
the network-wide data correlation structure. In [2], the authors
specify that all nodes use a ﬁxed compression factor. We
selected the term Assumptions as one of our dimensions based
on further literature review. Within our context, we therefore
deﬁne Assumptions as the set of pre-conditions under which
a technique must operate. Thus, the variables representing
assumptions are considered immutable during the operation
of the technique.
After a realization of the constraints of the application con-
text, identiﬁed as assumptions of the technique, the objectives
of the technique can be stated. In [24], the authors deﬁne
the application context in which their objective of “solving
the Slepian Wolf coding problem” can be realized. In [25],
the authors state their objective as “Efﬁcient Cluster Head
Selection Scheme”, while also deﬁning the context in which
the objective will be realised. In [26], the authors state their
objective, based of group communications in multiple target
scenarios, thereby implying the constraints. This essentially
motivated us to select Objective as a high-level dimension to
use in our classiﬁcation process.
On identifying the constraints and objectives of the tech-
nique, a set of parameters are selected. Such variables are
considered mutable and used to optimize the technique. In
this paper we refer to such variables as Speciﬁcations. Such
variables have been used extensively in literature on data
aggregation. For instance, [23] emphasise the need to specify
appropriate number of nodes in their technique to apply the
K-means algorithm. [26] proposed an algorithm, the Two-
Tier Aggregation for Multi-target Apps (TTAMA), which is
expected to be aware of the communication settings of nodes
in order to effectively perform aggregation. [27] use node count
in the network to adjust the response of their technique based
on the objective to develop a low-cost topology construction al-
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-681-1
DATA ANALYTICS 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Data Analytics

gorithm. In conclusion, we deﬁne a technique’s Speciﬁcations
as the parameters that can be modiﬁed during the operation of
the technique, and thus, are applicable for optimization.
With the combination of the assumptions, objectives and
speciﬁcations, the technique requires a set of algorithms to
perform its functions. Essentially, a data aggregation technique
achieves its objective based on selected algorithms. For in-
stance, the Shortest Path Tree [28], Minimum Spanning Path
[29], and use of Euclidean Distance [30]. In [28], the authors
combined the sleep and awake algorithm, with a threshold-
based control system to apply adaptability to their technique.
[31] proposed a structure-free protocol to aggregate redundant
data in intermediate nodes to dynamically compute the data
transmission delay for nodes based on their position. In [32], a
framework to enable decentralized data aggregation was devel-
oped by using a routing algorithm based on a gossip protocol.
In [33], the authors developed a gossip-based decentralised
algorithm for data aggregation that relies on crowd-sourced
data and computational resources. In this paper, we have thus,
selected Algorithms as a dimension.
After the last four dimensions, a simulation is essential to
generate data that can be used to validate that the technique
has met its objectives. This strategy is demonstrated by many
proposals from literature [26], [28], [34]. We identify this
step as a dimension called Application, since it represents the
running of the technique in a given use case.
After the simulation, the technique can be evaluated based
on generated data. In our classiﬁcation approach, we have
identiﬁed two more dimensions to cater for this: Perfor-
mance Metrics, and Evaluation. We deﬁne the Performance
Metrics as the selected attributes of a technique that can
be used to evaluate its performance. These are expected to
relate directly to the set of objectives and speciﬁcations as
discussed earlier [12]. For instance, authors in [35] selected
metrics such as energy dissipation over time, data received
over time, and node lifetime over time, in order to compare
the LEACH and LEACH-C techniques. In [28], in order to
evaluate the Adaptive Energy Aware Data Aggregation Tree
(AEDT) technique, which targets extending network lifetime,
the authors selected metrics such as average end-to-end delay,
average packet delivery ratio, energy consumption and network
lifetime. Similarly, in evaluating the TTAMA technique [26],
the authors selected number of communication rounds and
node energy level after each round.
The dimension termed Evaluation has been chosen to
represent the values that can be used to compare techniques
based on their performance. Thus, Evaluation holds the results
of Simulations and Measurements with respect to the Perfor-
mance Metrics. It is hoped that a generalized reference point
can be developed to be utilized in the comparison of techniques
using the values under this dimension.
III.
CONTRIBUTION
Our contribution in this paper includes the proposal of a
unique classiﬁcation approach for data aggregation techniques
as used in WSNs. These dimensions will enable the classiﬁ-
cation of techniques based on selected WSN characteristics.
The dimensions will be used to develop an adaptive model
that will enable the dynamic selection of techniques based
on the context. From an academic perspective, such a model
would enable researchers to identify relevant and related
characteristics of different techniques and their applicable
scenarios. It also enables a researcher to strategically select
a technique based on a set of characteristics representing a
target application scenario.
IV.
USE CASE DESCRIPTION
We present a use case in this section to serve as an illustra-
tion for further discussions. Wildﬁres are a frequent occurrence
in summer weather, where high temperature levels remain
persistent in the midst of low humidity [36]. They present a
situation where several uncontrolled events lead to tremendous
damage if left unabated. In order to monitor the wildﬁre event,
the value of a few context-based parameters need to be known.
For example, in order to detect the movement or direction of
the ﬁre, it is necessary to observe the temperature distribution
in the region in real-time. This will require frequent sensing
of temperature levels as the ﬁre moves across the region. In
order to ensure that the nodes can continue to provide this
data, they could be made homogenous, implying that they
have similar computing, sensing or power capabilities. This
reduces the inherent complexity of calculating approximate
temperatures since only an average need be obtained across
all nodes on a frequent basis. This demonstrates the necessity
for the right data aggregation technique to be chosen for a
given scenario. The selected technique must be able to obtain
accurate values for the network-wide resource distribution and
application context parameters such as the need for real-time
frequent sensing.
The above scenario represents one out of numerous use
case scenarios. While a huge number of techniques have been
proposed in the past, there remains the possibility that one
or more use cases have not been catered for. The IoT in
conjunction with new 5G services is especially expected to
provide new use cases that have not been considered yet. This
underscores our proposal for the need to develop an adaptive
and dynamic model for data aggregation techniques. Such
a model can be used to assess current and new application
contexts, to select the right data aggregation techniques and
procedures, as well as establish new approaches for new
scenarios.
V.
PROPOSED METHOD
A. Framework Development
Based on the foregoing discussions, Figure 1 presents
the workﬂow across the mentioned dimensions. We discuss
the diagram with respect to the numbering of the paths.
A data aggregation technique is developed for a particular
set of Objectives. However, before these objectives can be
realised, the application context constraints must be identiﬁed.
This relationship is identiﬁed by line 1. Once the objectives
are stated, they should be validated when the technique is
applied to a use case. This is possible by selecting appropriate
parameters that can be used to represent the objective. For
instance, a technique targeting energy reduction needs to select
energy consumed, etc., as an evaluation metric. In order to
effectively use this parameter for evaluation, its value needs
to be adjustable in order to compare different states of the
technique’s operation. The set of parameters that will enable
this adjustment fall into the Speciﬁcations dimension of the
technique. These relationships are represented on paths 2
and 7. On selecting the speciﬁcation parameters and stated
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-681-1
DATA ANALYTICS 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Data Analytics

Figure 1. Links/workﬂow between the various high-level dimensions
Figure 2. Representation of hierarchical dimensions that enable the
categorization of technique characteristics
objectives, a group of Algorithms (paths 3 and 4) are applied
to implement the technique. Parameters under the foregoing
dimensions can then be used to develop a simulation of the
technique for a speciﬁc application, represented as path 5. The
application (simulation) will generate data that can be used to
validate the objectives by applying the Performance Metrics
(path 6). The results obtained from applying the metrics to the
application would provide the Evaluation results (path 8 and
9).
Figure 2 represents the full illustration of a WSN technique
based on our proposed framework. It shows a hierarchy with
three levels, specifying levels on which a technique can be
deﬁned. The top level is referred to as Dimensions. The second
level, named Subdimensions provides a categorization function
for the set of characteristics. The third level, called Attributes,
represents the WSN characteristics.
A further illustration of how this framework can be used to
identify the relationship between two techniques is shown in
Figure 3. In this case, the techniques LEACH [21] and HEED
(Hybrid Energy-Efﬁcient Distributed) [3] are chosen as sample
techniques. Their associated attributes are used to build an
association between the two enable a process of matching the
techniques. In Figure 3, the middle column with blue circles
represents the commonly shared attributes between the two
techniques. For instance, both techniques, i.e. LEACH and
HEED, share the attribute homogeneous network, a character-
istic that falls under the Assumptions dimension. This creates
an association between the two techniques.
Figure 3. Illustrating how high-level dimensions enable identiﬁcation of
correlations between two data aggregation techniques
Figure 4. Database structure for storage of technique attributes
B. Data Collection
Based on the deﬁned framework, data needed to be gath-
ered from sources that could provide primary descriptions for
new data aggregation techniques. Based on this, the primary
source of data were academic articles on data aggregation
techniques, supported by books that discussed data aggregation
in WSNs. The framework was used as a guide to select values
for the attributes, and to build the subdimensions. Figure
4 shows the database structure that was used to store the
data. The boxes represent the tables in the database, while
the lines between them indicate that they share foreign key
relationships.
Presently, the number of techniques stored is 125, while 7
dimensions, 132 subdimensions, and 385 attributes have been
identiﬁed. An example of a technique “signature” based on
the content of the database is shown in Table II represented in
JSON format.
VI.
MODEL DESIGN AND EVALUATION
Some analysis of the data already stored within the
database is shown in Figure 5. It represents the currently
identiﬁed correlations between techniques and their attributes.
The x axis holds a number for each attribute, while the y
axis shows the total number of techniques that have the same
attribute. Figure 5 presents a high level visualisation of the
correlation between techniques and attributes.
Figures 6 and 7 depict the preliminary plan for the ar-
chitecture of the model, indicating the expected input and
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-681-1
DATA ANALYTICS 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Data Analytics

TABLE II. JAVASCRIPT OBJECT NOTATION (JSON)
REPRESENTATION OF A TECHNIQUE
BASED ON THE DEFINED FRAMEWORK
LEACH {
assumptions: [“homogenous initial energy”],
objectives: [“Extend Network Lifetime”],
speciﬁcations: [“2-Stage Operation”, “Centralised Control”, “Periodic Sensing”],
algorithms: [“stochastic election”, “TDMA Timing”, “Code Division Multiple
Access”, “Uniform Initial Energy”, “Cluster Formation by Associates”],
performance metrics: [“network lifetime”],
application: [“base in proximity”, “packet size”, “network size”, “node count”,
“radio propagation power”],
evaluation: [] }
Figure 5. Technique-Attributes correlations graph based on the data stored
within the database
output formats. The ﬁgures present a single use case scenario
where application characteristics serve as the input data. The
term “technique signature” is used in Figure 6 to indicate
that a set of attributes can be used to uniquely distinguish
a technique from another, otherwise referred to as its signa-
ture. Figure 6 indicates that the input is expected to be in
JSON and should describe the request based on a format that
will need to be determined. Each circle represents a single
attribute, such as location awareness. Thus, a combination of
circles arranged vertically represent a single technique’s set
of attributes and is referred to as a “Technique Signature”.
A technique signature is expected to uniquely distinguish a
technique. The group of 3 shown in Figure 6 represents a
larger collection of techniques that are used at this stage to
compare and match input requirements with stored or learned
correlations between techniques and attributes. Thus, this stage
could be implemented as an Artiﬁcial Neural Network. The
input will consist of a speciﬁcation describing the application
scenario and set of requirements. The output will consist of a
recommendation of a technique or a combination of techniques
applicable to the given scenario. Figure 7 represents the stage
that receives the output from Figure 6, where the output is
validated based on prior learning. The output from this next
stage provides the expected output from the model. The design
will be improved upon as we progress.
VII.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have presented a design of our proposal
for an adaptive model that is able to dynamically select data
aggregation techniques based on application context metadata.
This capability ﬁnds utilization in the emerging Internet of
Things where the number of active sensors, and subsequently
Figure 6. Preliminary plan for an advanced stage of the model — ﬁrst part
Figure 7. Preliminary plan for an advanced stage of the model — second part
the generated data, is expected to grow exponentially. We
intend to improve on the output shown in Figure 5 by obtaining
more data, while ensuring that the data is consistently cleansed
to make it suitable for its purpose. We will then apply machine
learning to the ﬁnal data in order to develop the adaptive
model. A set of use cases will be developed to test the model
to ensure its effectiveness.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Boubiche, D. E. Boubiche, A. Bilami, and H. Toral-Cruz, “Big data
challenges and data aggregation strategies in wireless sensor networks,”
IEEE Access, vol. 6, 2018, pp. 20 558–20 571.
[2]
A. Avokh and G. Mirjalily, “Dynamic balanced spanning tree (dbst) for
data aggregation in wireless sensor networks,” 2010 5th International
Symposium on Telecommunications, 2010, pp. 391–396.
[3]
S. Chand, S. Singh, and B. Kumar, “Heterogeneous heed protocol for
wireless sensor networks,” Wireless Personal Communications, vol. 77,
no. 3, 2014, pp. 2117–2139.
[4]
M. Trovati, N. Bessis, A. Huber, A. Zelenkauskaite, and E. Asi-
makopoulou, “Extraction, identiﬁcation, and ranking of network struc-
tures from data sets,” in 2014 Eighth International Conference on
Complex, Intelligent and Software Intensive Systems.
IEEE, 2014,
pp. 331–337.
[5]
T. Du, S. Qu, K. Liu, J. Xu, and Y. Cao, “An efﬁcient data aggregation
algorithm for wsns based on dynamic message list,” Procedia Computer
Science, vol. 83, 2016, pp. 98 – 106, the 7th International Conference
on Ambient Systems, Networks and Technologies (ANT 2016) / The
6th International Conference on Sustainable Energy Information Tech-
nology (SEIT-2016) / Afﬁliated Workshops.
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-681-1
DATA ANALYTICS 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Data Analytics

[6]
P. Jesus, C. Baquero, and P. S. Almeida, “A survey of distributed data
aggregation algorithms,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials,
vol. 17, 2015, pp. 381–404.
[7]
Y. Shen, T. Zhang, Y. Wang, H. Wang, and X. Jiang, “Microthings:
A generic iot architecture for ﬂexible data aggregation and scalable
service cooperation,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 55, no. 9,
2017, pp. 86–93.
[8]
C. W. Tsai, C. F. Lai, M. C. Chiang, and L. T. Yang, “Data mining for
internet of things: A survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials,
vol. 16, no. 1, 2014, pp. 77–97.
[9]
S. Yang, “Iot stream processing and analytics in the fog,” IEEE
Communications Magazine, vol. 55, no. 8, 2017, pp. 21–27.
[10]
E. Pournaras, J. Nikolic, P. Vel´asquez, M. Trovati, N. Bessis, and
D. Helbing, “Self-regulatory information sharing in participatory social
sensing,” EPJ Data Science, vol. 5, no. 1, 2016, p. 14.
[11]
L. Krishnamachari, D. Estrin, and S. Wicker, “The impact of data aggre-
gation in wireless sensor networks,” in Proceedings 22nd International
Conference on Distributed Computing Systems Workshops, 2002, pp.
575–578.
[12]
S. Randhawa and S. Jain, “Data aggregation in wireless sensor net-
works: Previous research, current status and future directions,” Wireless
Personal Communications, vol. 97, no. 3, 2017, pp. 3355–3425.
[13]
F. Xhafa, E. Asimakopoulou, N. Bessis, L. Barolli, and M. Takizawa,
“An event-based approach to supporting team coordination and decision
making in disaster management scenarios,” in Third International Con-
ference on Intelligent Networking and Collaborative Systems (INCoS).
IEEE, 2011, pp. 741–745.
[14]
D. J. McCloskey, M. Trovati, and C. S. Zimmet, “Using a dynamically-
generated content-level newsworthiness rating to provide content rec-
ommendations,” 2013, international Business Machines Corp. US Patent
8,386,457.
[15]
V. Daiya, T. S. S. Krishnan, J. Ebenezer, K. Madhusoodanan, S. A. V.
SatyaMurty, and B. Rao, “Dynamic architecture for wireless sensor
network-implementation analysis,” in 2016 International Conference on
Wireless Communications, Signal Processing and Networking (WiSP-
NET), 2016, pp. 1206–1211.
[16]
T. Srisooksai, K. Keamarungsi, P. Lamsrichan, and K. Araki, “Practical
data compression in wireless sensor networks: A survey,” Journal of
Network and Computer Applications, vol. 35, no. 1, 2012, pp. 37–59,
Collaborative Computing and Applications.
[17]
S. Tilak, N. B. Abu-Ghazaleh, and W. Heinzelman, “A taxonomy of
wireless micro-sensor network models,” SIGMOBILE Mob. Comput.
Commun. Rev., vol. 6, no. 2, 2002, pp. 28–36.
[18]
S. Sirsikar and S. Anavatti, “Issues of data aggregation methods
in wireless sensor network: A survey,” Procedia Computer Science,
vol. 49, 2015, pp. 194–201, proceedings of 4th International Conference
on Advances in Computing, Communication and Control (ICAC3’15).
[19]
R. Rajagopalan and P. K. Varshney, “Data-aggregation techniques in
sensor networks: A survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys Tutorials,
vol. 8, no. 4, 2006, pp. 48–63.
[20]
I. F. Akyildiz, W. Su, Y. Sankarasubramaniam, and E. Cayirci, “A survey
on sensor networks,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 40, no. 8,
2002, pp. 102–114.
[21]
M. J. Handy, M. Haase, and D. Timmermann, “Low energy adaptive
clustering hierarchy with deterministic cluster-head selection,” in 4th
International Workshop on Mobile and Wireless Communications Net-
work, 2002, pp. 368–372.
[22]
V. K. K. S. Ghai, “Data aggregation to improve energy efﬁciency in
wireless sensor networks,” International Journal of Innovative Research
in Information Security, vol. 3, 2016, pp. 9 – 12.
[23]
H. Harb, A. Makhoul, D. Laiymani, A. Jaber, and R. Tawil, “K-
means based clustering approach for data aggregation in periodic sensor
networks,” in 2014 IEEE 10th International Conference on Wireless and
Mobile Computing, Networking and Communications (WiMob), 2014,
pp. 434–441.
[24]
Z. Huang and J. Zheng, “A slepian-wolf coding based energy-efﬁcient
clustering algorithm for data aggregation in wireless sensor networks,”
in 2012 IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC),
2012, pp. 198–202.
[25]
M. Arshad, M. Alsalem, F. A. Siddqui, N. Kamel, and N. M. Saad,
“Efﬁcient cluster head selection scheme in mobile data collector based
routing protocol,” in 2012 4th International Conference on Intelligent
and Advanced Systems (ICIAS2012), vol. 1, 2012, pp. 280–284.
[26]
A. Riker, E. Cerqueira, M. Curado, and E. Monteiro, “A two-tier
adaptive data aggregation approach for m2m group-communication,”
IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 16, no. 3, 2016, pp. 823–835.
[27]
K. Beydoun, V. Felea, and H. Guyennet, “Wireless sensor network
infrastructure: Construction and evaluation,” in 2009 Fifth International
Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications, 2009, pp. 279–
284.
[28]
D. Virmani, T. Sharma, and R. Sharma, “Adaptive energy aware data
aggregation tree for wireless sensor networks,” Computing Research
Repository (CoRR), vol. abs/1302.0965, 2013.
[29]
W. Wang, B. Wang, Z. Liu, L. Guo, and W. Xiong, “A cluster-based
and tree-based power efﬁcient data collection and aggregation protocol
for wireless sensor networks,” Information Technology Journal, vol. 10,
2011, pp. 557–564.
[30]
D. Mantri, N. R. Prasad, and R. Prasad, “Grouping of clusters for
efﬁcient data aggregation (gceda) in wireless sensor network,” in 2013
3rd IEEE International Advance Computing Conference (IACC), 2013,
pp. 132–137.
[31]
P. Mohanty and M. R. Kabat, “Energy efﬁcient structure-free data
aggregation and delivery in wsn,” Egyptian Informatics Journal, vol. 17,
no. 3, 2016, pp. 273–284.
[32]
M. Jelasity, S. Voulgaris, R. Guerraoui, A.-M. Kermarrec, and M. van
Steen, “Gossip-based peer sampling,” ACM Transactions on Computer
Systems (TOCS), vol. 25, no. 3, 2007.
[33]
E. Pournaras, J. Nikolic, A. Omerzel, and D. Helbing, “Engineering
democratization in internet of things data analytics,” in 31st IEEE
International Conference on Advanced Information Networking and
Applications, AINA 2017, Taipei, Taiwan, March 2017, pp. 994–1003.
[34]
P. Nie and B. Li, “A cluster-based data aggregation architecture in wsn
for structural health monitoring,” in 2011 7th International Wireless
Communications and Mobile Computing Conference, 2011, pp. 546–
552.
[35]
H. Rahman, N. Ahmed, and I. Hussain, “Comparison of data aggrega-
tion techniques in internet of things (iot),” in 2016 International Confer-
ence on Wireless Communications, Signal Processing and Networking
(WiSPNET), 2016, pp. 1296–1300.
[36]
National
Georgraphic,
“Learn
more
about
wildﬁres,”
www.nationalgeographic.com/environment/natural-disasters/wildﬁres/,
online; accessed 25 July 2018.
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-681-1
DATA ANALYTICS 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Data Analytics

