Integrity, or Lack Thereof, of the Electronic Record Systems of the Courts of the 
State of Israel 
Joseph Zernik 
Human Rights Alert (NGO) 
Jerusalem 
e-mail: 123456xtz@gmail.com  
  
Abstract— The Human Rights Alert (NGO) submission for the 
Universal Periodic Review of Human Rights in the State of 
Israel, filed in May 2012, is probably a first – being narrowly 
focused on analysis of integrity, or lack thereof, of the 
electronic record systems of the courts of the State of Israel, 
and being primarily based on data mining of this unique target 
area.  Supreme Court: On or about March 2002, integrity of 
the electronic records was seriously compromised.  Numerous 
fraudulent decision records were discovered.  District Courts:  
The publicly accessible records were found invalid, primarily 
for failure to display visible, reliable digital signatures of 
judges and authentication records by clerks.  Detainees 
Courts:  The insecure, unsigned decisions of the detainees 
courts, often created long time after the dates of the hearings, 
could not possibly be considered valid legal records.  The 
detainees ID numbers show suspicious discontinuities and 
failure to correlate with time of issuance, which should raise 
concerns regarding establishment of ”black hole” prisons and 
”field courts”.  This study is a call for action by computing 
experts in general, and data mining experts in particular, in 
the safeguard of Human Rights and integrity of governments 
in the Digital Era. 
Keywords-e-courts; e-government; information systems; 
validation; electronic signatures; certification; authentication, 
State of Israel. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The courts worldwide, including Israel, have been 
implementing in recent years electronic information systems 
for efficient management of court cases and public access to 
court records.  Reports of the United Nations on 
Strengthening Judicial Integrity encourage this transition.  
Indeed, there is no doubt that such systems could improve 
the management of valid court records and transparency of 
the judicial processes. [1,2] 
Court procedures, and in particular, the maintenance of 
valid court records, have evolved over centuries (in the case 
of the State of Israel – thousands of years, since the law of 
the State of Israel is in part based on Jewish Law) and are at 
the core of Fair Hearings.   
The transition to electronic case management and public 
access systems, in any court, amounts to a sea change in 
these procedures. However, previous studies have shown that 
the transition to electronic record systems in the courts and 
prisons is not risk-free. [3-6] 
This paper summarizes the results of a study of the 
electronic records systems of the courts of the State of Israel, 
which has been recently submitted for the January 2013 
Universal Periodic Review of Human Rights in the State of 
Israel by the Human Rights Council of the United Nations 
(see Online Appendix 1). The information systems of the 
Supreme Court, the district courts, and the detainees’ courts 
were examined, as well as records, pertaining to the 
implementation and enforcement of the Electronic Signature 
Act (2001). 
The study presents the application of data mining 
techniques to a unique target area, and the ability of data 
mining techniques to analyze the integrity and validity, or 
lack thereof, of the systems, even under conditions, where 
the courts deny access to critical records, in apparent 
violation of the law. 
II. 
THE LEGAL FOUNDATION FOR THE ADMINISTRATION 
OF THE OFFICE OF THE CLERK 
While the primary responsibility of the judicial arm is in 
adjudication, the primary responsibility of the ministerial 
arm (clerks) is in the maintenance of honest court records, 
service and notice of judicial records, guaranteeing public 
access, and certification of judicial records.  The authority, 
duties and responsibilities of the clerks and or registrars in 
the State of Israel were defined in a series of laws and 
respective regulations.  The regulations, which were 
promulgated in 2003-5, during the period of implementation 
of the current electronic record systems of the courts are of 
particular interest.  The laws and regulations are at times 
inconsistent in their basic terms and leave considerable 
amount of ambiguity in defining the procedures of the Office 
of the Clerk and the duties and responsibilities of the Chief 
Clerk and/or Registrar.  On such legal background, it is also 
clear, that in developing and implementing the electronic 
record systems of the courts, the first step, e.g., defining the 
specifications of the electronic record systems, was 
particularly sensitive.  Either the authorities, duties and 
responsibilities of the Chief Clerk and/or Registrar, and the 
respective procedures were to be unequivocally and 
unambiguously defined, or else an invalid electronic records 
system would be developed and implemented.   
III. 
METHODS 
The study was narrowly focused on analysis of integrity 
of the electronic record systems in the national courts 
(Supreme Court, district courts, detainees’ courts).  The 
study was not based on legal analysis of these records, or 
challenges to the rationale of the adjudication, except for the 
laws pertaining to the maintenance of court records.  Instead, 
irregularities in date, signature, certification, and registration 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-242-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2012 : The First International Conference on Data Analytics

procedures were examined through data mining methods, 
executed on the online public records of the courts. 
Initially, integrity of the basic components of the systems 
was examined: indices of all cases, calendars, dockets (lists 
of records in a given file), indices of decisions, and 
compliance of these components with the Regulations of the 
Courts, pertaining to the maintenance of court records. and 
consistency of data among these components (e.g., the date a 
record was filed, as listed in the docket, and as indicated in 
the body of the record itself, see Online Appendix for links 
to data). 
Subsequently, a cursory survey was conducted of the 
pattern of judges’ signatures and clerk’s certification of 
records over the past two decades. The significance of events 
around 2001-2003 was identified. 
Accordingly, a more detailed survey was conducted of 
records of that period, including data mining relative to 
changes in distribution of specific word combinations, 
related to certification over time (e.g., “Chief Clerk”, 
“Registrar”, “Shmaryahu Cohen” (the late Chief Clerk of the 
Supreme Court), “Boaz Okon” (former Registrar of the 
Supreme Court), True Copy).   
Subsequently, court records that were identified as 
outliers in such distributions (e.g. Decision records bearing 
the name of the late Chief Clerk Shmaryahu Cohen, issued 
later than the date of his death) were individually examined. 
Such data mining procedures enabled the discovery of 
hundreds of fraudulent decision records. 
Once the death of the late Chief Clerk of the Supreme 
Court on March 7, 2002, was identified as a key event in this 
context, Google searches were conducted to further elucidate 
the event.  It turned out that he reportedly died of “sudden 
cardiac arrest”, after toasting a retiring staff member in an 
office party.  Additionally, Google searches discovered a 
complaint, filed with the Israel Police by a family 
member/friend two weeks after the event, alleging murder.  
However, the complaint failed to present any reasonable 
motive for such murder.  Regardless, web pages were 
discovered with various conspiracy theories in this regard. 
Based on the findings from such data mining efforts, 
requests were filed on the Ministry of Justice and the 
Administration of Courts, pursuant to the Freedom of 
Information Act, for records that would provide the legal 
foundation for the profound changes in certification patterns 
between 2001-3,  the appointment records of the current 
chief clerks of the courts, the appointment records of the 
Registrars of Certifying Authorities, pursuant to the 
Electronic Signature Act (2001), secondary legislation that 
might have authorized the changes, etc. 
Additionally, outside sources were reviewed for 
information regarding the history of the development and 
implementation of the electronic records systems of the 
courts: media reports, and in particular the 2010 State 
Ombudsman’s Report 60b.  
The analysis was also based on consultations with Israeli 
law and computing/cryptology experts. 
IV. 
THE SUPREME COURT 
The March 7, 2002 untimely death of Chief Clerk of the 
Supreme Court Shmaryahu Cohen is tightly correlated with 
precipitous corruption of the electronic records of the 
Supreme Court.  Today, identity of the Supreme Court’s 
servers is not verified, and all Supreme Court decisions are 
published unsigned by judges, uncertified by the clerks, and 
subject to “editing and phrasing changes” (Figure 1).  In the 
transition period (2001-2003), numerous Supreme Court 
decisions were falsified (Figure 2). 
Today, the Supreme Court refuses to comply with the 
law regarding service of its decisions by the Clerk and denies 
public access to the authentication records – the certificates 
of delivery, even to a party in his/her own case. 
False and deliberately misleading certifications of 
Supreme Court decisions, recently issued by the office of the 
Chief Clerk were also discovered.  
Effectively, the Supreme Court established a ‘triple-
book’ record system, where the public and parties to 
litigation are not permitted to distinguish between valid and 
simulated, i.e., fraudulent decisions (see Online Appendix 
for further details and links to data).  
V. 
DISTRICT COURTS 
The evidence shows that implementation of Net Ha-
Mishpat, the electronic record system of the district courts, 
undermined the integrity of the records of the courts, and in 
particular, the accountability of the Chief Clerks relative to 
the integrity of the records. 
The 2010 State Ombudsman’s Report 60b reviewed the 
development and implementation of Net Ha-Mishpat. [7]  
The report describes a system that was developed with no 
written specification and with no core supervision by State 
employees, the issuance of contracts to outside corporations 
with no bidding, and acceptance of the system with no 
independent testing of its performance by State employees.  
Most alarming, the Ombudsman’s Report indicated that 
unknown number of individuals had been issued double 
Smart ID cards.  The Ombudsman pointed out that the 
development and implementation of the system was 
conducted in violation of State law. However, the report 
failed to evaluate the validity of the system as a whole. 
The records of the district courts, which are publicly 
accessible in Net Ha-Mishpat, cannot possibly be deemed 
valid legal records (Figure 3).  
News media reports revealed material conflicts of 
interests by individuals, who were in key positions, relative 
to the development and implementation of Net Ha-Mishpat. 
VI. 
DETAINEES’ COURTS 
Analysis of the detainees’ ID numbers, as they appear in 
the online publicly accessible records, showed discontinuity 
in the ID numbers, and lack of correlation between the ID 
numbers and date of issuance (Figure 4). 
The refusal of the Ministry of Justice to disclose the 
number and locations of such courts in response to a 
Freedom of Information request, combined with the invalid 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-242-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2012 : The First International Conference on Data Analytics

Detainee Numbers should raise concerns that ‘black hole’ 
prisons with makeshift ‘field courts’ have been established. 
Review of news media revealed numerous reports of 
abuse of Due Process in the detainees’ courts.  In 2010 
Haaretz daily reported the conduct of a simulated hearing 
and the issuance of simulated court order in the case of a 
detainee. [8] Haaretz quoted the spokesperson of the 
Ministry of Justice, referring to the report as “a tempest in a 
teapot”, and claiming that the case was only a secretarial 
error in data entry. 
VII. COMPLIANCE WITH STATE OF ISRAEL LAWS 
The 
evidence 
shows 
that 
development 
and 
implementation of the new electronic record systems of the 
courts should be deemed in violation of the law of the State 
of Israel. 
A. The Israeli “Constitutional Revolution” 
The State of Israel has not established a constitution to 
this date.  In the early 1990s, the Knesset (legislature) 
enacted two “Basic Laws”, in effort to establish 
fundamental Human Rights by law. Moreover, under the 
tenure of Presiding Justice Aharon Barak  (1995-2006), and 
to a lesser degree under the tenure of Presiding Justice Dorit 
Beinisch (2006-2012) the Supreme Court purportedly spear 
headed a “Constitutional Revolution” (see also Online 
Appendix). [9] Various “Constitutional Rights” were 
purportedly construed by the Supreme Court, e.g., in  Israeli 
Civil Rights Association v Minister of Justice  (5917/97). 
On the other hand, the current study documents 
precipitous corruption of the courts of the State of Israel, in 
particular – the Supreme Court, during the very same years 
that the Supreme Court’s rhetoric regarding “Constitutional 
Revolution” and “Constitutional Rights” reached its zenith.   
B. Basic Law – Human Dignity and Liberty (1992) 
The Basic Law – Human Dignity and Liberty (1992), 
together with academic papers by former Presiding Justice 
Aharon Barak on the subject, are often credited with 
launching the “Constitutional Revolution”.  However, some 
legal experts opined that the Basic Law is vague and 
ambiguous.  To the degree that Basic Law guarantees 
Human Rights, such as Due Process/Fair Hearings, Access 
to Justice and national tribunals for protections of rights, the 
current study documents that the Supreme Court disregards 
the Basic Law.  
C. Laws and regulations pertaining to the administration of 
the courts 
The Chief Clerk of the Supreme Court did not comply 
with the Regulations of the Courts – Office of the Clerk 
(2004), and provided fraudulent certification of Supreme 
Court decisions (Figure 5).  
The Supreme Court’s refusal to duly serve and 
authenticate its own decisions, was also out of compliance 
with the Supreme Court’s decision in Israeli Bar 
Association v Minister of Religious Affairs et al (6112/02).  
Additionally, the Supreme Court’s refusal to permit a 
party to inspect court records in his own case, was also out 
of compliance with the Supreme Court’s decision in Israeli 
Bar Association v Minister of Justice (5917/97).  
The 2010 State Ombudsman’s Report 60b also 
documented violation of the Regulations of the Courts – 
Office of the Clerk (2004), relative to the removal of the 
servers of the electronic records from the offices of the 
Clerks of the Courts onto corporate grounds. 
The 
fraudulent 
Apostille 
certification 
procedure, 
published online by the Administration of Courts documents 
violation of the Regulations of the Courts – Office of the 
Clerk (2004), since the procedure purports to permit notaries 
to certify court records, which the regulations authorize only 
the Chief Clerks to certify.  Both the Administration of 
Courts and the Ministry of Justice refused to respond on the 
Freedom of Information requests, pertaining to legal 
foundation of the Apostille certification procedure and the 
identity of those, who authorized its publication.  
The refusal of the Administration of Courts to produce 
the appointment records of the Chief Clerk of the Supreme 
Court and the district courts, should raise concerns 
regarding the lawful nature of their appointments.   
Together, the use of servers, whose identity is not 
certified, the publication of court decisions, which are 
neither signed, nor certified by the clerk, and dubious 
accountability of those, who serve today as chief clerks of 
the courts, conditions were set, where integrity of the 
electronic records of the State of Israel should be deemed 
dubious at best. 
With it, the study identified an abundance of falsified 
court records, and simulated, illegal public records (e.g. the 
Apostille certification procedure), that were published 
online by the courts and the Ministry of Justice.  
D. Electronic Signature Act (2001) 
The Act and the respective regulations were signed and 
became effective in 2001.  In pertinent parts, the Act says: 
Chapter 2. Validity of a Secure Electronic Signature 
… 
2. (a) For any law, requiring a signature on a document – 
such requirement may be fulfilled, in respect of any 
electronic message, by use of an electronic signature, 
provided that it is a certified electronic signature… 
3. An electronic message, signed with a secure 
electronic signature is admissible in any legal 
procedure… 
4. A certified electronic signature is presumed to be a 
secure electronic signature. 
Pursuant to the Act, a Registrar of Certification 
Authorities (qualified as a district judge) was to be 
appointed in the Ministry of Justice.  Discontinuities in 
certification authorities of the Supreme Court in late 2001-2, 
which ended with no certification at all, followed closely, 
and were possibly related to the signing of the Act and 
regulations.  Several individuals purportedly served in the 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-242-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2012 : The First International Conference on Data Analytics

position of Registrar over the past decade, Guidelines and 
Standards were published, and enforcement was conducted. 
In 2009, Director of newly minted “Law, Technology, and 
Information Authority” was appointed, as part of 
reorganization in the Ministry of Justice.  It appears that 
since then the position of Registrar ceased to exist (see 
additional details in the Online Appendix).   
Requests, pursuant to the Freedom of Information Act 
(1988), pertaining to the implementation of the Electronic 
Signature Act and appointment records of the Registrars of 
Certifying Authorities of the past decade, were not answered 
by the Ministry of Justice and the Administration of Court, 
or answered in a manner that should be deemed false and 
deliberately misleading.   
Combined, the evidence shows that the Ministry of 
Justice has deliberately undermined the implementation of 
Electronic Signature Act (2001) over the past decade.   
E. Freedom of Information Act (1988) 
Both the Administration of Courts and the Ministry of 
Justice refused to answer, or provided invalid, or false and 
deliberately 
misleading 
responses 
on 
Freedom 
of 
Information requests, pertaining to integrity of the electronic 
records of the courts, e.g., legal records, which would 
provide the foundation for the changes in certification 
practices in the Supreme Court, or the Apostille certification 
procedures, appointment records of the chief clerks of the 
courts, appointment records of Registrar of Certifying 
Authorities, the identities of any Certifying Authorities that 
may have been assigned to the courts, names of individuals, 
who hold the ultimate administrative authority for the 
servers of the courts, the names and locations of the 
detainees’ courts, etc (see Online Appendix for complete log 
of Freedom of Information requests and responses).  
VIII. COMPLIANCE WITH RELEVANT TREATIES AND 
CONVENTIONS 
The Hague Convention (1961), to which the State of 
Israel is a party, established an Apostille certification 
procedure, in order to validate legal public records, which 
are taken from the courts of one nation to another.  The 
Apostille certification procedure, which was published 
online by the Administration of Courts, unsigned, undated, 
and with no reference to any legal foundation, is opined as a 
deliberate effort to undermine the integrity of Apostilles, 
originating in the courts of the State of Israel (Figure 5). 
IX. 
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
The results of the current study show that senior 
members of the judiciary and the legal profession exploited 
the transition to new electronic record systems in the courts 
of the State of Israel over the past decade to undermine the 
integrity of the justice system.  It appears that updates in the 
electronic records systems and the passage of the Electronic 
Signature Act made it necessary to decide between the 
development 
of 
systems, 
based 
on 
valid, 
lawful 
specifications and lawful digital signatures, or systems based 
on no specifications and no digital signatures at all. 
The results show that effectively, decision was made 
around 2002 in favor of the latter option.  The most obvious 
trait of the systems now in place, is that among thousands of 
electronic public legal records, which were examined as part 
of the current study, not a single digitally signed record was 
discovered.  
Furthermore, the findings suggest that such decision 
required the neutralization of the main watchdogs, relative to 
integrity of legal records: the chief clerks of the Supreme 
Court and the district courts, and the Registrar of Certifying 
Authorities.   
It was also necessary to devise ways to circumvent the 
valid certification procedures, still in existence in paper 
form, as documented in the fraudulent certifications by the 
office of the Chief Clerk of the Supreme Court (see Online 
Appendix for figures an data), and the fraudulent Apostille 
certification procedure (Figure 5). 
Finally, although the online publication of court records 
could have increased public access and transparency of the 
courts, ways were devised, whereby the online public access 
system would not permit the public to distinguish between 
valid and void court records. Separate data bases were 
concealed in the case management system of the courts, 
where public access is denied.  Therefore, the perception of 
public access was created, while in fact public access and 
transparency of the courts were undermined. [10] 
The outcome, best documented in the Supreme Court and 
the Detainees’ Courts, was the enabling of the publication of 
simulated court decisions and conduct of simulate court 
proceedings.  
The resulting conditions are likely to lead to deterioration 
in the Human Rights of the People of the State of Israel, 
albeit, some years may pass before the full impact is 
manifested.  Furthermore, the failure to uphold the 
Electronic Signature Act has ramifications far beyond the 
justice system. It is likely to place Israeli financial markets at 
high-risk of instability.   
Therefore, the implementation of invalid electronic 
record systems in the courts holds serious implications 
relative to Human Rights and banking regulation in the State 
of Israel. (see Online Appendix for further details).    
The findings should also require reassessment of any 
faith and credit, which may be given to legal public records 
originating in the courts of the State of Israel by other 
nations, including, but not limited to those, who are parties to 
the Hague Convention (1961).  
The findings hold serious implications relative to Human 
Rights and banking regulation in the State of Israel.   
The Human Rights Alert submission recommends: 
1. The electronic records systems of the courts should be 
examined and repaired by Israeli computing and legal 
experts, under accountability to the legislature. 
2. A Truth and Reconciliation Commission should be 
established to examine the conduct of members of the 
judiciary and the legal profession, who were involved in 
undermining the integrity of the electronic record systems;   
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-242-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2012 : The First International Conference on Data Analytics

3. No court of any nation should be permitted to develop 
and implement its own electronic record systems, since such 
systems effectively amount to establishment of new 
regulation of the courts. Typically, the authority to establish 
such regulations is reserved for one of the other two branches 
of government. 
The results of the current study are not unique to the 
State of Israel.  The Human Rights Alert submission for the 
2010 Universal Periodic Review of Human Rights in the 
United States was in part based on analysis of the lack of 
integrity in the electronic record systems of the California 
courts and prisons.  The submission was reviewed by the 
United Nations professional staff and incorporated into the 
official report with a note referring to “corruption of the 
courts and the legal profession in California”. [11]  An 
accompanying paper describes the fraud inherent in the 
electronic record systems of the courts of the United States, 
which were implemented a decade earlier than the systems 
described in this study.  Preliminary inspection suggests that 
similar faults also exist in the electronic record systems, 
which have been recently implemented in other “Western 
Democracies”. 
Finally, this study is a call for action by computing 
experts in general, and data mining experts in particular, in 
the safeguard of Human Rights and integrity of governments 
in the Digital Era. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The author thanks Israeli computing/cryptology and legal 
experts for their assistance. 
ONLINE APPENDIX 
[1] The online appendix includes further details, links to the 
original data, and enlarged and additional figures: 
Human Right Alert (NOG), 2013 State of Israel UPR Appendix to 
Submission: “Integrity, or lack thereof, in the electronic record 
systems 
of 
the 
courts 
of 
the 
State 
of 
Israel” 
http://www.scribd.com/doc/82927700/ 
REFERENCES 
[1] United Nations Drug Control and Crime Prevention Center, 
“Report of the First Vienna Convention Strengthening 
Judicial Integrity”, CICP-6, 2000 
[2] United Nations Drug Control and Crime Prevention Center, 
“Strengthening Judicial Integrity Against Corruption”, CICP-
10, 2001 
[3] J. Zernik, “Data Mining as a Civic Duty – Online Public 
Prisoners’ Registration Systems”, International Journal on 
Social Media: Monitoring, Measurement, Mining 1: 84-96, 
2010 
[4] J. Zernik, “Data Mining of Online Judicial Records of the 
Networked US Federal Courts”, International Journal on 
Social Media: Monitoring, Measurement, Mining, 1:69-83, 
2010 
[5] J. Zernik, “Fraud and corruption in the US courts is tightly 
linked to failing banking regulation and the financial crisis”, 
Proceedings of the 16th World Criminology Congress, Kobe, 
Japan, 345, 2011 
[6] J. Zernik, “Invalid case management and public access 
systems, implemented in the Israeli courts, undermine Human 
Rights”, Proceedings of the 16th World Criminology 
Congress, Kobe, Japan, 348, 2011 
[7] State of Israel Ombudman, “Report 60b (2010) - Ministry of 
Justice Computerization pp 693-747, 2010  
[8] D. Weiler, “Court Decision Appeared in Court File Prior to 
Proceedings”, Haaretz, February 8, 2011 
[9] A. Barak, “A Constitutional Revolution – Israel’s Basic 
Laws”, Constitutional Forum 4:83-85, 1992 
[10] N. Sharvit, Chief Justice Dorit Beinish: The new case 
management system (Net Ha-Mishpat) would require 
restricting public access to court records, Globes, October 8, 
2009  
[11] Human Rights Council,  Working Group on the Universal 
Periodic Review,  Ninth session, “National report submitted 
in accordance with paragraph 15 (a) of the annex to Human 
Rights Council resolution 5/1, United States of America” (1–
12 November, 2010 
 
Figure 1. Changes in the Supreme Court’s Chief Clerk’s Certification of Electronic Decision Records of the Supreme Court of the State of 
Israel Between 2001-2003  
(a) Until early 2002, all electronic decisions of the Supreme Court carried certification by the late Chief Clerk Shmaryahu Cohen.  (b) 
Since 2003, none of the electronic decision records carries any certification, or any reference to the Office of the Clerk.  Instead they carry 
a disclaimer “subject to editing and phrasing changes”, and reference to an “Information Center”, which has no foundation in the law.  The 
Administration of Courts refuses to disclose, in response to Freedom of Information request, the legal foundation for such profound change 
in the records of the Supreme Court in 2001-2003.  
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-242-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2012 : The First International Conference on Data Analytics

 
Figure 2. Fraud in Electronic Decision Record of the Supreme Court of the State of Israel. 
The Decision, in Judith Franco Sidi et al v Authority pursuant to the Persons Disabled by Nazi Persecutions Act (1582/02) in the 
Supreme Court in part says: 
Issued this date, February 14, 2007 
Boaz Okon 
Registrar 
_________ 
This version is subject to editing and phrasing changes. 
Shmaryahu Cohen – Chief Clerk 
In the Supreme Court an information center is operated, Tel: 02-6750444 
The Court is open to comments and suggestions: pniot@supreme.court.gov.il 
The courts’ web site: www.court.gov.il 
By February 2007, Boaz Okon was no longer Registrar of the Supreme Court, and Shmaryahu Cohen was dead for about five years. 
Numerous other records of the same nature were discovered. 
 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-242-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2012 : The First International Conference on Data Analytics

 
 
Figure 3. Invalid Electronic “Post-it” Decision Record of the Jerusalem District Court  
The record belongs to the file of State of Israel v Awisat et al (9739-01-11) in the Jerusalem District Court. The background document, 
is a motion, titled: “Request by Joint Stipulation for Continuation of Hearing Date.” The Motion record is graphically signed by the 
attorney who filed the motion in the lower left corner.  The small framed image, superimposed on the Motion records in the upper right 
corner, is a “Post-it Decision”.  The yellow heading states: 
January 25, 2011 
Judge Amnon Cohen, Decision 
The framed text below the yellow heading states:  
The Request is denied. Moreover, it was filed out of compliance with the Guidelines of the Presiding Judge. 
The decision is neither visibly signed by Judge Cohen, nor certified by the Clerk of the Court, and it fails to bear the seal of the Court. No 
visible electronic signatures, pursuant to the Electronic Signature Act (2001) were implemented in the electronic records systems of the 
courts of the State of Israel. The Administration of Courts refuses to produced the appointment records of the Chief Clerks of the district 
courts, or to disclose, who holds the ultimate administrative authority over the electronic records of the district courts.  
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-242-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2012 : The First International Conference on Data Analytics

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Lack of Integrity in Detainees’ ID Numbers, in Records of the Detainees Courts of the State of Israel 
The lack of correlation between dates of issuance of the decisions, and Detainee Numbers, and the apparent discontinuity in Detainees’ 
ID numbers, should be deemed a fundamental failure of integrity of the Detainees Courts electronic record system. (See the raw data at 
Table 3 in the online appendix).  Only a selection of the Detainees Courts records is published online, as insecure Word files, most of 
which were created a long time after the fact (at times – years).  The Ministry of Justice refuses to disclose, how many Detainees Courts are 
operating in the State of Israel, their names and locations, and the names of the Chief Clerks of the detainees courts, if any exist.  
Combined, the findings should raise concern that “black hole” prisons and makeshift “field courts” have been established in the State of 
Israel. 
 
aa 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Fraud in Apostille Certification Procedure, Pursuant to the Hague Apostille Convention (1961), Published Online by the “Judicial 
Authority”  
Left:  True apostille form, as authorized by the Hague Apostille Convention (1961); Right: A sample apostille form, published on the 
web site of the “Judicial Authority” of the State of Israel, falsely represented as the true apostille form, as authorized by the Convention. 
The form, published by the “Judicial Authority”, purports that an “Advocate”, acting as a Notary, is permitted to certify court decisions, 
which the Regulations of the Courts – Office of the Clerk (2004) authorize only the Chief Clerks to certify. Furthermore, the latter form 
permits a member of the staff of the office of the clerk, to sign the apostille form, as certification of the signature of the Notary, with the 
Seal of the Court, in a manner that appears as a valid certification by a chief clerk of the attached court decision.  In fact, the arrangement, 
published online, specifically states that in executing the apostille, the office of the clerk certified ONLY the signature of the notary, but 
not the attached court record.  The arrangement is opined as fraud on the People of the State of Israel, and also on the People and the courts 
of all other nations, who are parties to the Convention. It is part of a pattern of false certifications of records of the courts of the State of 
Israel.  Both the Administration of Courts and the Ministry of Justice refuse to disclose, who authorized this procedure, and who and when 
authorized its online publication.  The Chief Clerk of the Supreme Court refused to provide apostille certification of judicial records of the 
Supreme Court. 
julio 24, 1998
diciembre 6, 1999
abril 19, 2001
septiembre 1, 2002
enero 14, 2004
mayo 28, 2005
octubre 10, 2006
febrero 22, 2008
julio 6, 2009
noviembre 18, 2010
abril 1, 2012
agosto 14, 2013
0
200000
400000
600000
800000
1000000
1200000
1400000
1600000
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-242-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2012 : The First International Conference on Data Analytics

