 
Overview of European Union Guidelines and Regulatory Framework for Drones in 
Aviation in the Context of the Introduction of Automatic and Autonomous Flight 
Operations in Urban Air Mobility 
 
Elham Fakhraian 
Industrial Systems Engineering and Product Design 
Ghent University 
Industrial Systems Engineering (ISyE), Flanders Make  
Ghent, Belgium 
elham.fakhraian@ugent.be 
 
 
Silvio Semanjski 
SEAL Aeronautica S.L. 
Barcelona, Spain 
silvio.semanjski@sealaero.com 
 
 
 
El-Houssaine Aghezzaf 
Industrial Systems Engineering and Product Design 
Ghent University 
Industrial Systems Engineering (ISyE), Flanders Make  
Ghent, Belgium 
 elhoussaine.aghezzaf@ugent.be 
 
 
Ivana Semanjski 
Industrial Systems Engineering and Product Design 
Ghent University 
Industrial Systems Engineering (ISyE), Flanders Make  
Ghent, Belgium 
 ivana.semanjski@ugent.be 
 
Abstract—Over the past years, Unmanned Aircraft Systems 
(UAS) operations surged exponentially. Due to new air mobility 
concepts, industries tend to use more advanced technology to 
build the UASs. So, it is essential to develop regulations in the 
new and rapidly evolving contexts in which these new 
technologies are imposed. The European Union drone 
regulation is in the transition period, in which the existing 
regulations in individual European member states are replaced 
with a unified regulation framework across the European 
Union. However, this European regulatory framework is very 
young and will be subject to further development. In this sense, 
efforts must be made in the scientific literature focusing on the 
regulatory framework of Europe. This paper provides a solid 
understanding of the drone's legal framework in the European 
Union. 
Keywords- Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS), Drones, Urban 
Air Mobility (UAM), EU regulation, Regulatory framework. 
I. INTRODUCTION  
Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) are becoming 
popular. In recent years, drones have been used in various 
sectors such as agriculture, inspection, media, and 
entertainment. It is imaginable that remotely piloted aircraft 
will enter the area of commercial flights, in the near future [1]. 
Over the last years, new operational concepts based on 
innovative technologies, such as UAS and Vertical Take-Off 
and Landing (VTOL) aircrafts, have led to creating new air 
mobility concepts [2]. Although UAS's operational and 
technological capabilities have matured to the point where 
UASs are expected to gain greater freedom, most civil 
operations of UAS are conducted in low-level uncontrolled 
areas or in segregated controlled airspace due to safety 
concerns [1].  
A wide range of literature is published around the world, 
trying to answer the research question of how to adapt UAS 
with Urban Air Mobility (UAM) and regulations. Clarke [3] 
investigated the impacts of civilian drones’ regulation on 
behavioral privacy. He also presented the impacts of the 
civilian drones’ regulation on public safety [4]. Thomasen [5] 
considered the robots (including drones) and robot regulation 
impact on public spaces. This paper highlights the importance 
to regulate robotic systems that operate in public spaces. She 
also presented a feminist perspective on drone privacy 
regulation. This article contributes to drone privacy literature 
to examine the technology's impacts on women’s privacy and 
related regulations [6]. Li and Kim [7] examined the dynamics 
of local drone policy adoption in the largest registered drone 
population in the United States, California. West et al. [8] 
reviewed the public’s opinions about drone policy, and its 
fluctuation over time. In the work done by Merkert, Beck, and 
Bushell [9], they adopt the theoretical road pricing framework 
to investigate the willingness of drone operators to pay for 
Low-Altitude Airspace Management (LAAM). Winkler, 
Zeadally, and Evans [10] highlighted the concerns and needs 
of privacy and operation of civilian drone regulations. Nelson 
and Gorichanaz [11] analyzed the emergence of drones and 
the evolving regulation in 20 cities in southern California, and 
they suggested trust as an ethical value in emerging 
technology governance. 
While the aviation industry is subjected to an international 
framework, it is fair to state that efforts must be made to 
achieve the same framework for civil drones [12]. In the 
available literature and the official aviation organizations and 
regulatory authorities’ documents in Europe and worldwide, 
there is no agreed and consolidated definition of the notion of 
UAM. However, European Union Aviation Safety Agency 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-994-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Data Analytics

 
 
 
(EASA) recently introduced the UAM concept for the purpose 
of standardizing communication in the European Union, and 
for future requirement developments: " The safe, secure and 
sustainable air mobility of passengers and cargo enabled by 
new generation technologies integrated into a multimodal 
transportation system conducted in to, within or out of urban 
environments" [2]. There is also a need to establish a 
comprehensive regulatory framework addressing the safety, 
security and environmental aspects of this new form of 
mobility of people and cargo by air in order to ensure its 
adequate acceptance and adoption by European citizens. 
Some elements of this regulatory framework have already 
been established with the adoption of Commission 
Implementing Regulation (EU) 2019/947, Commission 
Delegated Regulation (EU) 2019/945, and Commission 
Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/664 of 22 April 2021 on 
a regulatory framework for the U-space [2]. 
It is fair to state that there are no efforts in the scientific 
literature focusing specifically on the regulatory framework of 
Europe, so far. One of the reasons is that the drone European 
Union (EU) regulatory framework is currently under 
transition, and it was fragmented before 2020. So, this paper 
provides a comprehensive overview of the developed UAS 
regulation in the European Union considering the regulations 
provided by the European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) to 
develop a reliable basis for future studies of drones' EU 
regulatory framework. The structure of the paper is as follows: 
Section II introduces the existing and upcoming European 
regulatory framework for UASs. Section III defines the UAS 
operational categories developed by the EASA. Section IV 
briefly discusses the existing and upcoming European 
regulatory framework and standards regarding Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) and autonomous flights. Section V explains 
how the regulations apply to drones according to the risk 
assessments. Section VI discusses the potentials and 
challenges before presenting the conclusion in Section VII. 
II. EUROPEAN UNION REGULATORY FRAMEWORK 
TRANSITION 
Before 2020, the drone EU regulatory framework was 
fragmented. The member states regulated civil drones with 
less than 150 kg operating mass, while the EASA regulated 
civil drones with over 150 kg operating mass. The difference 
in extent, content, and level of detail of national regulations 
led to unreached conditions for mutual recognition of 
operational authorization between the EU Member States [2]. 
Since 2020, the European Union drones’ legal framework 
officially subjected to a uniform regulation by European 
Union Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) under the Regulation 
2019/947 and 2019/945. Regulation 2019/947 was expected 
to be implemented on 1 July 2020; however, due to the 
COVID-19 crisis, it was delayed to 31 December 2020 [13]. 
Aircraft airworthiness concerns the safety standards in all 
construction aspects such as structural strength, safeguard 
provisions, and design requirements relating to aerodynamics, 
performance, electrical and hydraulic systems [14].  
 
Figure 1. European Union regulatory framework transition 
Easy Access Rules for Airworthiness and Environmental 
Certification (Regulation (EU) No 748/2012) contains the 
applicable rules for Airworthiness and Environmental 
Certification of aircraft and related products, parts, and 
appliances, as well as for the certification of design and 
production organizations [15]. In general, international and 
national regulations are focused on safety. Nevertheless, small 
drones avoid many of these requirements, as they pose fewer 
risks to people [12]. Figure 1 presents an overview of 
European Union regulatory framework transition. 
III. CIVIL DRONE OPERATIONS CATEGORIES IN THE 
EUROPEAN UNION REGULATORY FRAMEWORK  
Civil drones' operational framework in the European 
Union (EU) is Regulations 2019/947 and 2019/945. These 
regulations conduct a risk-based approach considering the 
weight, the specifications, and the intended operation of the 
civil drone. Regulation 2019/947 defines three categories for 
civil drone operations: the open, the specific, and the certified 
category [16], as shown in Figure 2. 
 
Figure 2. Drone categories in the European Union regulatory framework 
Drones Operational Categories
Open
Specific
Certified
EU Member 
States: 
drones less 
than 150kg 
EASA: drones 
in all sizes and 
weights 
EASA: drones 
in all sizes and 
weights 
National 
Aviation 
Authorities 
2020 
2023 
EASA: 
drones more 
than 150kg 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-994-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Data Analytics

 
 
 
A. The open category (low risk)  
Drones in low-risk operations (e.g., leisure drone activities 
and low-risk commercial activities) are categorized as the 
open category. This category has three sub-categories: 
•  A1: fly over people but not over assemblies of people  
•  A2: fly close to people 
•  A3: fly far from people 
Each sub-category comes with its own requirements, 
depending on the drone's weight. The maximum operational 
weight in this category is 25 kg [17]. 
B. The specific category (medium risk) 
Riskier drone operations, which fall out of the open 
category's scope, are in the specific category. Based on the risk 
assessment outcome conducted under Article 11 of 
Regulation (EU) 2019/947, operational authorization (issued 
by the competent authority of registration) is required in this 
category, unless the operation is covered by a Standard 
Scenario (STS) that is a predefined operation described in the 
appendix of EU regulation 2019/947 [18]. 
C. The certified category (high risk) 
The highest level of risk in drone operations and future 
drones onboard passenger flights (e.g., air taxis) are covered 
in the certified category. Based on the outcome of risk 
assessment conducted under Article 11 of Regulation (EU) 
2019/947, drones can also be classified in the certified 
category. These aircraft will always need to be certified. The 
UAS operator will need an air operator approval issued by the 
competent authority, and the remote pilot is required to hold a 
pilot license. In the longer term, drone automation 
development is expected to reach a level to have fully 
autonomous drones without remote pilot intervention. The 
approach used to ensure the safety of these flights will be very 
similar to the one used for manned aviation, and almost all the 
aviation regulations will need to be amended. So this will be 
a major task, and EASA is decided to conduct this activity in 
multiple phases [19]. 
Overall, if drone operations contain any of the below 
conductions, they are certainly classified in the certified 
category: 
• 
The UAS has a dimension of 3 m or more in the 
operation involves flying over assemblies of people 
(flying over assemblies of people with a UAS that has 
a dimension less than 3 m may be in the specific 
category unless the risk assessment concludes that it 
is in the certified category) 
• 
The operation involved transport of people  
• 
The operation involved transport of dangerous goods 
if the payload is not in a crash-protected container 
[20]. 
IV. AUTONOMOUS AND AUTOMATIC UAS 
With the advancement of technology, autonomous and 
automatic UASs are expected to conduct safe operations in  
 
Figure 3. EASA trustworthy AI building-blocks: : AI trustworthiness 
analysis, learning assurance, AI explainability, and AI safety risk 
mitigation [21] 
Urban Air Mobility (UAM); major differences are between 
autonomous and automatic concepts. With the help of 
artificial intelligence, autonomous UAS must cope with 
unforeseen conditions and unpredictable emergencies to 
conduct a safe flight without the pilot's intervention. However, 
the automatic UAS flies on pre-determined routes, and the 
remote pilot intervenes in case of unforeseen events not 
programmed in pre-determined operation. While automatic 
drones are allowed in all categories, autonomous drones are 
not allowed in the open category. Instead, they can operate in 
the specific category and the certified category, where the 
Regulation includes more flexible tools to verify requirements 
and level of robustness.  [22].  
The key research question is how autonomy can be safely 
used in UAM [23]. In 2020, EASA published the first 
guidance, EASA AI roadmap, for the safe use of artificial 
intelligence in aviation [21] in several domains such as aircraft 
design and operation, aircraft production and maintenance, 
drones, open-air mobility, safety risk management, and 
cybersecurity [24]. Figure 3 presents the definition of the 
trustworthy AI building block, which is one of the important 
contributions of this document [21]. The schedule presented 
in the EASA AI roadmap document foresees the first 
approvals of AI starting in 2025 [24]. 
V. OPERATIONAL RISK ASSESSMENT FOR DRONES IN SPECIFIC 
CATEGORY 
The volume and scope of drone operations have increased 
in Europe. To ensure safety, particularly in operations 
conducted in populated areas, the design verification of the 
drone by EASA is needed depending on the operation’s level 
of risk [25]: 
• 
In drone operations classified as high risk operations 
(i.e., Specific Assurance and Integrity Level (SAIL) 
V and VI according to Specific Operation Risk 
Assessment (SORA)), EASA will issue a type 
certificate according to Part 21 (Regulation (EU) 
748/2012) [15]. 
• 
In drones operation classified as medium risk 
operations (i.e., SAIL III and IV according to SORA), 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-994-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Data Analytics

 
 
 
a more proportionate approach, leading to a design 
verification report, will be applied [25]. 
The work in [20] describes the operational risk assessment 
for drones in detailed steps, and this paper presents an 
overview of these steps. Overall, there are three categories in 
the operational risk assessment. The first lower risk category 
is the operations in Standard Scenarios (STS), and the second 
category is Predefined Risk Assessment (PDRA). This 
category also tends to cover some deviations from STS. When 
the operation is not subject to STS or PDRA, it will be 
categorized as Specific Operation Risk Assessment (SORA), 
the last category. 
A. Standard scenario (STS) 
Due to the lower risks in UAS operations when complying 
with STSs listed in TABLE I, a declaration may be submitted. 
B. Predefined risk assessment (PDRA) 
EASA intends to publish several PDRAs considering the 
most common operations in Europe. Instead of conducting a 
full risk assessment, a request for authorization may be 
submitted based on the mitigations and provisions described 
in the PDRA when the UAS operation meets the operational 
characterization described in TABLE II. 
While STSs are described in a detailed way, PDRAs are 
described in a rather generic way to provide flexibility. Two 
types of PDRAs are provided: the first category is derived 
from STSs, which allow the UAS operator to conduct similar 
operations without the UAS class label that is mandated by the 
STS; and the other category is the more generic PDRAs. The 
codification of a PDRA includes the letter ‘G’ (used for 
generic PDRAs) or ‘S’ (used for PDRAs that are derived from 
an STS) [20]. 
 
 
TABLE I.  LIST OF THE STANDARD SCENARIOS (STS) PUBLISHED [20] 
STS#  
Edition/date  
UAS characteristics  
BVLOS/
VLOS**  
Overflown area  
Maximum 
range 
from remote pilot  
Maximum 
height  
Airspace  
STS-01  
June 2020  
Bearing 
a 
C5 
class 
marking 
(maximum 
characteristic dimension of 
up to 3 m and MTOM* of 
up to 25 kg)  
VLOS  
Controlled 
ground 
area that might be 
located in a populated 
area  
VLOS  
120 m  
Controlled 
or 
uncontrolled, with low 
risk of encounter with 
manned aircraft  
STS-02  
June 2020  
Bearing 
a 
C6 
class 
marking 
(maximum 
characteristic dimension of 
up to 3 m and MTOM of 
up to 25 kg)  
BVLOS  
Controlled 
ground 
area that is entirely 
located in a sparsely 
populated area  
2 km with an AO*** 
1 km, if no AO  
120 m  
Controlled 
or 
uncontrolled, with low 
risk of encounter with 
manned aircraft  
* Maximum TakeOff Mass 
** Beyond Visual Line of Sight / Visual Line of Sight 
*** Airspace Observer
TABLE II.  LIST OF THE PREDEFINED RISK ASSESSMENTS (PDRA) PUBLISHED [20] 
PDRA#  
Edition/date  
UAS characteristics  
BVLOS/
VLOS  
Overflown area  
Maximum 
range from 
remote pilot  
Maximum 
height  
Airspace  
AMC#* to 
Article 11  
PDRA-
S01  
1.0/July 2020  
Maximum characteristic 
dimension of up to 3 m 
and MTOM of up to 25 
kg  
VLOS  
Controlled 
ground area that 
might be located 
in a populated 
area  
VLOS  
120 m  
Controlled 
or 
uncontrolled, 
with low risk of 
encounter 
with 
manned aircraft  
AMC4  
PDRA-
S02  
1.0/July 2020  
Maximum characteristic 
dimension of up to 3 m 
and MTOM of up to 25 
kg  
BVLOS  
Controlled 
ground area that 
is entirely located 
in 
a 
sparsely 
populated area  
2 km with 
an AO  
1 km, if no 
AO  
120 m  
Controlled 
or 
uncontrolled, 
with low risk of 
encounter 
with 
manned aircraft  
AMC5  
PDRA-
G01  
1.1/July 2020  
Maximum characteristic 
dimension of up to 3 m 
and 
typical 
kinetic 
energy of up to 34 kJ  
BVLOS  
Sparsely 
populated area  
If no AO, up 
to 1 km  
150 m  
(operational 
volume)  
Uncontrolled, 
with low risk of 
encounter 
with 
manned aircraft  
AMC2  
PDRA-
G02  
1.0/July 2020  
Maximum characteristic 
dimension of up to 3 m 
and 
typical 
kinetic 
energy of up to 34 kJ  
BVLOS  
Sparsely 
populated area  
N/a  
As established 
for 
the 
reserved 
airspace  
As reserved for 
the operation  
AMC3  
* Acceptable Means of Compliance 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-994-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Data Analytics

 
 
Figure 4. Graphical representation of the SORA semantic model [20] 
C. Specific operation risk assessment (SORA) 
SORA evaluates the safety risks in the UAS operation 
considering any UAS class and size, or type of operation [20]. 
Figure 4 provides a visual reference to the SORA 
methodology. Robustness is one of the concepts to account for 
when conducting SORA. SORA presents three robustness 
levels: low, medium, and high. Risk mitigations and 
Operational Safety Objectives (OSO) can be demonstrated at 
different robustness levels. Risk is another key concept. Many 
works of literature exist to define risk. SORA defines risk as: 
‘the combination of the frequency (probability) of an 
occurrence and its associated level of severity’. SORA focuses 
on the assessment of air and ground risks. Figure 5 outlines 
the needed ten steps to support the SORA methodology. If 
UAS operates in different environments, some steps may need 
to be repeated [20]. 
Before starting the SORA process, it is important to verify 
the operational feasibility. If the operation is not categorized 
as the open category or the certified category, not covered by 
a standard scenario or by a predefined risk assessment, and not 
subjected to a specific NO-GO from the competent authority,  
the SORA can be applied [20]. 
VI. DISCUSSION 
One of the distinctive features of the future cities in 
science fiction movies and novels is flying cars and transport 
systems. This is one of the basic concepts accepted by society 
when imagining the future. The technological advances make 
us wonder if we are a few steps away from having safe 
automatic and autonomous air transport systems for urban 
areas in the near future. UAS are becoming popular and it is 
only a matter of time before they will enter UAM as a way of 
transporting goods and even individuals. For this vision to 
become feasible, it is essential to develop a regulatory 
framework accepted by society. As presented in Figure 1, the 
European Union regulatory framework for UASs was 
fragmented before 2020 and each EU Member states were in 
charge of drones with a Maximum Take-Off Mass (MTOM) 
of less than 150 Kg and EASA was responsible for drones 
with MTOM of more than 150 Kg. In 2020, the regulation 
transition started and EASA has become responsible for 
drones of all sizes and weights. This young regulatory 
framework is still under further development. So, the national 
aviation authority of each country will help this regulation to  
 
Figure 5. Determination of robustness level [20] 
fill its gaps until the year 2023 when this regulatory 
framework becomes fully developed. 
Autonomous and automatic UASs are expected to conduct 
safe operations in UAM. With the help of artificial 
intelligence, the autonomous UAS conducts a safe flight 
without the pilot's intervention, while the automatic UAS flies 
Step 0: Pre-application evaluation 
Step 2: Determination of the UAS intrinsic ground risk 
class (GRC) 
Step 3: Final GRC determination 
Step 4: Determination of the initial air risk class (ARC) 
Step 5 (optional): Application of strategic mitigations to 
determine the final ARC 
Step 6: Tactical  Mitigation Performance Requirement 
(TMPR) and robustness levels 
Step 7: Specific Assurance and Integrity Level  (SAIL) 
determination 
Step 8: Identification of operational safety objectives 
(OSOs)  
Step 9: Adjacent area / airspace considerations 
Step 1: Concept of Operations (ConOps) description 
Is the GRC less than 
or equal to 7? 
The OSOs take into account the 
risks of the operation; the 
combination of the mitigation 
measures, competency of the 
personnel, and technical features 
is adequate 
Other process 
(e.g., category 
certified ) or new  
modified ConOps 
YES 
YES 
NO 
NO 
Step10: Comprehensive safety 
portfolio: Are the mitigations 
and objectives required by the 
SORA met with a sufficient 
level of confidence? 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-994-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Data Analytics

 
 
 
on pre-determined routes, and the remote pilot can intervene 
in unforeseen events. With a quick comparison between 
autonomous and automatic flights, it can be concluded that 
there is no human safety net in case of unforeseen events when 
conducting an autonomous flight. So, precise regulations have 
to be developed in the context of artificial intelligence to make 
sure of conducting a safe autonomous flight. In 2020, EASA 
also published the first guidance, the EASA AI roadmap, for 
the safe use of artificial intelligence in aviation in several 
domains. However, it is still a long way for the dream of 
having Science fiction flying transport systems to come true 
as the schedule presented in the EASA AI roadmap document 
foresees the first approvals of AI in 2025. 
A wide range of literature is published around the world, 
trying to answer the research question of how to adapt UAS 
with UAM and regulations. However, there is not much 
literature effort in the context of the drone EU regulatory 
framework since this regulatory framework is currently under 
transition, and it was fragmented before 2020. As mentioned, 
the concept of drone regulation in the context of the European 
Union regulation and UAM adaptation to carry cargo and 
individuals is young. While the devoted regulations for this 
type of operation, mainly the certified category, are still in the 
development phase, even in the specific category, lots of 
factors and parameters need to be considered for the 
determination of robustness level, as presented in Figure 4, to 
ensure a safe flight without any complications. For instance, 
preparing ConOps and calculating the GRC and ARC requires 
operating conditions data. Moreover, UAS autonomous 
flights are not currently conducted in most European countries 
due to safety reasons and uncompleted regulation 
development. When a new concept is arising, the lack of 
literature and documents is inevitable in the early stages. So, 
the first and most important challenge at this moment is to 
keep track of the developments and changes of the regulation. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
The popularity of UAS operations increased over the past 
years and new air mobility concepts have been created. It is 
essential to develop regulations in this new technological 
context.  The European Union drone regulation is in the 
transition period and this young regulatory framework will be 
subject to further development. This causes a scientific 
literature gap of no efforts focusing on the regulatory 
framework of Europe. In this paper, we provide a 
comprehensive overview of the developed UAS regulation in 
the European Union to fill this gap and to provide a solid 
understanding of the drone's legal framework in the European 
Union for future studies.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme 
(H2020-MG-3-6-2020 Research and Innovation Action 
“Towards sustainable urban air mobility”) under Grant 
Agreement No. 101007134. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Z. Liu, K. Cai, and Y. Zhu, “Civil unmanned aircraft system 
operation in national airspace: A survey from Air Navigation 
Service Provider perspective,” Chinese Journal of Aeronautics, 
vol. 
34, 
no. 
3, 
pp. 
200–224, 
Mar. 
2021, 
doi: 
10.1016/J.CJA.2020.08.033. 
[2] European Union Aviation Safety Agency (EASA), “EASA 
publishes world’s first rules for operation of air taxis in cities.” 
https://www.easa.europa.eu/newsroom-and-events/press-
releases/easa-publishes-worlds-first-rules-operation-air-taxis-
cities (accessed Oct. 20, 2022). 
[3] R. Clarke, “The regulation of civilian drones’ impacts on 
behavioural privacy,” Computer Law & Security Review, vol. 
30, 
no. 
3, 
pp. 
286–305, 
Jun. 
2014, 
doi: 
10.1016/J.CLSR.2014.03.005. 
[4] R. Clarke and L. Bennett Moses, “The regulation of civilian 
drones’ impacts on public safety,” Computer Law & Security 
Review, vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 263–285, Jun. 2014, doi: 
10.1016/J.CLSR.2014.03.007. 
[5] K. Thomasen, “Robots, Regulation, and the Changing Nature 
of Public Space,” Ottawa Law Review , vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 275–
312, 2020. 
[6] K. Thomasen, “Beyond Airspace Safety: A Feminist 
Perspective on Drone Privacy Regulation,” Canadian Journal 
of Law and Technology, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 307–338, 2016. 
[7] X. Li and J. H. Kim, “Managing disruptive technologies: 
Exploring the patterns of local drone policy adoption in 
California,” Cities, vol. 126, p. 103736, Jul. 2022, doi: 
10.1016/J.CITIES.2022.103736. 
[8] J. P. West, C. A. Klofstad, J. E. Uscinski, and J. M. Connolly, 
“Citizen support for domestic drone use and regulation,” 
American Politics Research , vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 119–151, 2019. 
[9] R. Merkert, M. J. Beck, and J. Bushell, “Will It Fly? Adoption 
of the road pricing framework to manage drone use of 
airspace,” Transp Res Part A Policy Pract, vol. 150, pp. 156–
170, Aug. 2021, doi: 10.1016/J.TRA.2021.06.001. 
[10] S. Winkler, S. Zeadally, and K. Evans, “Privacy and civilian 
drone use: The need for further regulation,” IEEE Secur Priv, 
vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 72–80, 2018. 
[11] J. Nelson and T. Gorichanaz, “Trust as an ethical value in 
emerging technology governance: The case of drone 
regulation,” Technol Soc, vol. 59, p. 101131, Nov. 2019, doi: 
10.1016/J.TECHSOC.2019.04.007. 
[12] M. de Miguel Molina and V. Santamarina-Campos, Ethics and 
civil drones: European policies and proposals for the industry. 
Springer Nature, 2018. 
[13] European Union Aviation Safety Agency (EASA), “EASA 
provisions: the applicability dates under EU regulation 
2019/947 and 2019/945.” https://www.easa.europa.eu/the-
agency/faqs/drones-uas (accessed Oct. 20, 2022). 
[14] T. H.G. Megson, Aircraft structures for engineering students, 
5th ed., no. 1. Butterworth-Heinemann, 2012. 
[15] European Union Aviation Safety Agency (EASA), “Easy 
Access 
Rules 
for 
Airworthiness 
and 
Environmental 
Certification 
(Regulation 
(EU) 
No 
748/2012).” 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-994-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Data Analytics

 
 
 
https://www.easa.europa.eu/document-library/general-
publications/easy-access-rules-initial-airworthiness (accessed 
Oct. 20, 2022). 
[16] European Union Aviation Safety Agency (EASA), “Civil 
drones 
(unmanned 
aircraft).” 
https://www.easa.europa.eu/domains/civil-drones 
(accessed 
Oct. 20, 2022). 
[17] European Union Aviation Safety Agency (EASA), “open 
category 
of 
civil 
drones.” 
https://www.easa.europa.eu/domains/civil-drones/drones-
regulatory-framework-background/open-category-civil-drones 
(accessed Oct. 20, 2022). 
[18] European Union Aviation Safety Agency (EASA), “Specific 
Category 
of 
Civil 
Drones.” 
https://www.easa.europa.eu/domains/civil-drones/drones-
regulatory-framework-background/specific-category-civil-
drones (accessed Oct. 20, 2022). 
[19] European Union Aviation Safety Agency (EASA), “Certified 
Category 
of 
Civil 
Drones.” 
https://www.easa.europa.eu/domains/civil-drones/drones-
regulatory-framework-background/certified-category-civil-
drones (accessed Oct. 20, 2022). 
[20] European Union Aviation Safety Agency (EASA), “Easy 
Access Rules for Unmanned Aircraft Systems (Regulation 
(EU) 
2019/947 
and 
Regulation 
(EU) 
2019/945).” 
https://www.easa.europa.eu/document-library/easy-access-
rules/easy-access-rules-unmanned-aircraft-systems-
regulation-eu (accessed: Oct. 20, 2022) 
[21] European Union Aviation Safety Agency (EASA), “EASA 
Artificial Intelligence Roadmap - A human centric approach to 
AI in aviation,” https://www.easa.europa.eu/newsroom-and-
events/news/easa-artificial-intelligence-roadmap-10-published 
(accessed: Oct. 20, 2022) 
[22] European Union Aviation Safety Agency (EASA), “The 
difference between autonomous and automatic drones.” 
https://www.easa.europa.eu/the-agency/faqs/regulations-uas-
drone-explained (accessed Oct. 20, 2022). 
[23] C. Torens, F. Jünger, S. Schirmer, S. Schopferer, T. 
Maienschein, and J. C. Dauer, “Machine Learning Verification 
and Safety for Unmanned Aircraft-A Literature Study,” AIAA 
Scitech 2022 Forum, 2022. 
[24] C. Torens, U. Durak, and J. C. Dauer, “Guidelines and 
Regulatory Framework for Machine Learning in Aviation,” 
AIAA Scitech 2022 Forum, 2022. 
[25] European Union Aviation Safety Agency (EASA), “EASA 
issues guidelines for the design verification of drones operated 
in 
the 
specific 
category.” 
https://www.easa.europa.eu/newsroom-and-events/press-
releases/easa-issues-guidelines-design-verification-drones-
operated (accessed Oct. 20, 2022). 
  
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-994-2
DATA ANALYTICS 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Data Analytics

