Using Data Mining Techniques for Information System Research Purposes – An 
Examplary Application in the Field of Business Intelligence and Corporate 
Performance Management Research
Karin Hartl, Olaf Jacob 
Department of Information Management 
University of Applied Sciences Neu-Ulm 
Neu-Ulm, Germany 
karin.hartl@hs-neu-ulm.de, olaf.jacob@hs-neu-ulm.de 
 
Abstract—Corporate Performance Management (CPM) is a 
management concept based on performance measures. These 
measures are supplied by Business Intelligence (BI), which 
transformed information technology in companies from data 
storage solutions towards decision support systems. It is 
believed that BI enhances CPM and that BI needs CPM for a 
purposeful commitment. To gain a detailed insight in the 
relationship between these two constructs a Data Mining 
approach is used. Data Mining is a data driven statistical 
approach for knowledge discovery. In comparison to commonly 
used Information System research approaches, like Structural 
Equation Modelling, in Data Mining no hypothesis have to be 
developed beforehand. Therefore, otherwise undiscovered 
patterns, information and hypothesis embedded in a given 
dataset can be discovered. As an example, Association Rule 
Discovery has been applied to a questionnaire based dataset 
investigating the relationship between BI and CPM. The results 
of the Data Mining approach show indeed more detailed 
information about the connection of BI and CPM than the 
usually applied research methods Exploratory Factor Analysis 
and Structural Equation Modelling. 
Keywords-Data 
Mining; 
Association 
Rule 
Discovery; 
Business Intelligence; Corporate Performance Management. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This research aims to explore the connection between 
Business Intelligence (BI) and Corporate Performance 
Management (CPM) to make the business value of BI 
tangible. The approach used is Data Mining. Data Mining are 
data-driven and hypothesis free methods, identifying patterns, 
information and hypothesis embedded in a given dataset 
[23][16]. In Information System (IS) research – especially 
regarding the connection between BI and CPM – Explanatory 
Factor Analysis (EFA) and Structural Equation Modelling 
(SEM) are the commonly used approaches. Before applying 
the statistical analysis, research assumptions and hypothesis 
have to be developed and later confirmed with data collected 
for this specific research purpose. This approach has one 
major limitation, its reliance on human imagination for 
generating research assumptions [20]. Instead, Data Mining 
techniques are working up from the data [23]. Hypothesis are 
not necessarily developed beforehand, making the detection 
of new and unexpected connections in the dataset possible. It 
is believed, that more detailed knowledge can be discovered 
by using exploratory Data Mining techniques.  
Association Rule Discovery is a widely used and well-
known Data Mining method and therefore has been identified 
as a suitable first approach in exploring the value Data Mining 
has for IS research. Association Rule Discovery searches for 
structural connections in a dataset, formulate If-Then-
Statements and can take all available research criteria into 
account. In this research example, the results of the 
Association Rule Analysis could allow conclusions on the BI 
capabilities supporting successful CPM. As both CPM and BI 
consist of several characteristics, the Data Mining approach 
could help to focus on the important features in each area too. 
In Section 2, a short introduction on the importance of the 
thematic research background is given, pointing out why an 
investigation of the connection between BI and CPM is 
necessary. Section 3 discusses the subject related research and 
the empirical approaches used in these studies. In Section 4, 
the motivators for using the non-traditional IS research 
approach Data Mining are evaluated. In Section 5, the 
research approach to the exemplary subject is described, and, 
in Section 6 the results for this example are presented. Section 
7 discusses the sample results and the conclusion in Section 8 
summarizes the benefits of using the Data Mining approach. 
II. 
THEORY AND RESEARCH BACKGROUND 
The challenge companies have to face nowadays for 
success and existence proves to be increasingly difficult. 
Globalization intensifies the competition and digitalization 
leaves enterprises with an immense amount of mainly 
unstructured data. These data and the contained information, 
however, are assumed to be the key to ensure the survival of 
an enterprise in the rapidly changing business environment. 
BI as a method of analysing data and the business environment 
promises companies to support their decision making process 
[1][23]. The support is achieved by acquiring, analysing and 
disseminating information from data significant to the 
business activities [7]. Accordingly, BI is seen as a source for 
quality data and actionable information. This implies that the 
appropriate use of BI systems supports the success of 
organizations [10].  
As BI projects are not exempt from the increasing pressure 
in companies to justify the return on IT investment, the 
business value of BI needs to be measured [18]. Due to the 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

abstract nature of BI, capturing its value is a strategic 
challenge [14][28]. Generally, BI systems do not pay for 
themselves strictly by cost reduction. Most BI benefits are 
intangible and hard to measure [18]. Williams and Williams 
[28] point out that the business value of BI lies in its use within 
the management processes. Therefore, the concept of CPM 
evolved, which is understood as the appropriate context to 
prove the value proposition and benefits of BI [14][15]. It is 
defined by Gartner as “an umbrella term that describes all 
processes, methodologies, metrics and systems needed to 
measure and manage the performance of an organization” [3]. 
CPM presents the strategic deployment of BI solutions and is 
born out of a company need to proactively manage business 
performance [4][13]. Inferentially, CPM needs BI to work 
effectively on accurate, timely and high quality data and BI 
needs CPM for a purposeful commitment [3]. As a 
consequence, it is expected that the effectiveness of CPM 
increases with the effectiveness of the BI solution and 
therefore company success improves as well [22].  
III. 
SUBJECT RELATED RESEARCH 
In the last couple of years, various studies regarding the 
relationship between BI and performance management 
emerged.  
Miranda [15] brought BI into context with CPM by 
summarizing CPM as a business management approach that 
supports companies in their way of operation by using 
business analysis. CPM is identified as a suitable framework 
for determining the business value of BI. Although no 
observable empirical background and foundation is provided, 
this article supplies the foundation for more detailed research 
in the field, including the following.  
Empirical studies on the investigation of the connection 
between BI and CPM have mainly been realized just recently. 
Aho [1] evaluates the differences and similarities between BI 
and CPM by conducting a literature study and action oriented 
research. The results indicate that BI and CPM need to work 
together to be efficient and effective. However, the rather 
weak empirical background does not deliver any details on the 
relationship of BI and CPM. 
Yogev et al. [29] address the question of the business value 
gained by implementing a BI system in an enterprise by using 
a process oriented approach. The research model identifies 
key BI resources and capabilities as possible explanatory 
factors of the value creation that can be accomplished with the 
implementation and application of a BI system. Hypothesis 
are formulated and tested using Explanatory Factor Analysis 
(EFA) and Structural Equation Modelling (SEM). The results 
illustrate that BI has a positive effect on both the operational 
and the strategic level of the company. Nevertheless, the 
empiricism does not provide any details about the BI related 
resources creating this positive effect.  
Saed [24] investigates the relationship between BI and 
business success using regression and correlation analysis. 
While these statistical techniques provide room for detailed 
results, only aggregated explanations have been provided. 
Richards et al. [22] are the first to directly investigate the 
impact and connection of BI on CPM using EFA and SEM. 
The research model supposes that BI directly influences and 
supports 
measurement, planning 
and analytics. The 
effectiveness of planning, measurement and analytics, again, 
influences the effectiveness of the company processes. 
Through a large-scale survey, sample data has been collected. 
Afterwards, with EFA the number of variables comprised in 
the questionnaire has been reduced followed by the Partial 
Least Square (PLS) analysis. Even though the research 
identifies a direction of how BI influences CPM, the specific 
BI mechanisms that do so are not defined. 
This research project complements the subject related 
work, as the previous findings have been used as the initial 
point. But besides discovering and proving a positive 
connection between BI and CPM, these researches lack detail. 
Instead of grouping the characteristics and measurement items 
describing BI and CPM with EFA and SEM together, all items 
are considered separately. It is believed that this approach 
helps to get an in-depth insight into the relationship between 
BI and CPM.  
IV. 
MOTIVATION FOR THE DATA MINING APPROACH 
The common approach in the research field of determining 
the value of BI is using EFA first and then CFA second. With 
the EFA correlating items are organized together in groups 
and summed up as a factor [2]. Data can be structured and 
reduced this way. This structured and reduced data are then 
analysed with the PLS method by seeking the optimal 
predictive linear relationship to assess the previously defined 
causal relationship [26][27]. The creation of factors for 
compacting information might be the right approach for many 
research subjects, but it must not be the only correct approach 
to explore connections in IS research. It is assumed that Data 
Mining can highly contribute to the subject. Data Mining is a 
data driven approach and supports the discovery of new and 
sometimes unexpected knowledge [20]. Instead of only 
testing assumed hypothesis, with Data Mining otherwise 
undiscovered data attributes, trends and patterns can be 
explored [6]. Especially with explanatory Data Mining 
techniques, a better understanding of connections in the 
dataset can be achieved [5]. Although Data Mining is often 
only seen as most suitable for large datasets, Natek and 
Zwilling [17] disclose that the use of small datasets in general 
are not limiting the use of the tool. Data Mining can be 
understood as an extension of statistical data analysis and 
statistical approaches [9]. Both approaches aim to discover 
structure in data, but Data Mining methods are generally 
robust to non-linear data, complex relationships and non-
normal distributions [25]. These differences between Data 
Mining and the commonly used statistical approaches are 
assumed to supply more detailed and surprising results for the 
research field of BI and CPM. In particular, the research is 
working with Association Rule Discovery. Through 
Association Rule Discovery, the research aims to identify the 
strongest co-occurrence relationships between BI and CPM. It 
is believed that the results indicate the BI items most 
supporting to a successful and effective CPM. Furthermore, 
the outcomes will most likely provide more detailed insights 
in the relationship of BI and CPM. 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

V. 
RESEARCH METHOD AND RESULTS 
A. Research Procedure 
In the Data Mining literature, two main research 
procedures can be found, the Cross Industry Standard Process 
for Data Mining process model (CRISP-DM) or the overall 
procedure model Knowledge Discovery in Data bases (KDD) 
[5]. Both have the main process steps in common. The ones 
shown in Fig. 1 will be followed in this research. As the 
dataset is comparatively small, no selection of the appropriate 
dataset was seen as necessary. Therefore, the starting point for 
the data analysis was the pre-processing of the data. The data 
has been cleansed and missing, as well as conflicting values 
corrected. Cleve and Lämmel [5] suggest alternatives for 
dealing with missing values depending on the data structure. 
The important items of the questionnaire are formatted as 
Likert scale items and can be interpreted as metric data. Metric 
data can be pre-processed by replacing the missing values in 
the sample by the mean value of all item-based compiled 
answers. Alternatively, the mean values can be stated by 
contemplating the datasets closest to the dataset with the 
missing value. This idea follows the k-nearest neighbours 
(kNN) approach. Joenssen and Müllerleite [11] assess the 
kNN approach as practicable imputation method for missing 
Likert scale values if the dataset is small. Therefore, the 
missing values in the dataset were imputed using the kNN 
approach. After pre-processing, the data have been 
transformed in the required format for the applicable Data 
Mining technique. The applied Apriori Algorithm needs 
binary data [5]. Therefore, the Likert scale items have been 
transformed into binary variables. In the penultimate step, the 
data have been mined. Afterwards, in the discussion, the 
outcomes have been interpreted and evaluated. The 
interpretation 
and 
evaluation 
presupposes 
a 
subject 
knowledge background. As in every research, not all findings 
are valuable and of real-life meaning. Hence, only sensible 
research results should be discussed and applied. The decision 
about the sensibility of the research rests with the researcher 
and field experts. 
Data Selection
Data Pre-
processing
Data 
Transformation
Data Mining
Evaluation and 
Interpretation
 
Figure 1. Research Procedure Model KDD 
B. Data Collection 
 This research is based on the findings of [8], where a set 
of criteria that is seen as suitable to represent CPM on one 
hand, and BI on the other hand, has been identified. After an 
additional evaluation and definition of the pre-defined items, 
20 CPM related items and 28 BI related items have been 
selected for further research (Table 1). A study has been 
conducted to bring the criteria of both fields together and to 
clarify the relationship between BI and CPM. Therefore, the 
identified criteria have been transformed into questionnaire 
items, which had to be answered on a five-point Likert scale. 
The anchor points at the ends of the scale have been “does not 
apply” and “fully applies” and an additional definition 
“applies half and half” for the mid stage has been defined. The 
data collection has taken place from December 2014 until 
March 2015 using telephone interviews and an online 
questionnaire. Subjects were German companies who use BI 
for supporting their performance management. Hence, 
decision makers from management, controlling and IT were 
addressed. In total 169 questionnaires were completed 
resulting in a response rate of 11.3%. The participating 
companies are mainly mid-sized to large German firms 
belonging to the manufacturing industry. 
VI. 
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS 
Data Mining as a technique to discover new and 
unexpected patterns and relationships in data is the approach 
used to explore connections and associations between the BI 
and CPM criteria. In comparison to correlation or regression 
analysis, many Data Mining techniques do not imply 
connections in advance but discover them automatically. 
Association Rule Discovery is a popular pattern discovery 
method 
[20]. 
With 
association 
rules, 
co-occurrence 
relationships between data items can be discovered, taking 
into account as many research items as needed and available 
[5]. This indeed can lead on the upside to more detailed results 
and on the downside to an enormous amount of discovered 
association rules. Unmanageable amounts of association rules 
easily can be organized by instating measures to evaluate and 
select association rules based on their potential interestingness 
for the researcher [20]. These interestingness measures 
include Lift, Support and Confidence [5][16]. To generate 
association rules, many algorithms are available. The Apriori 
Algorithm is the classic procedure and works in two steps 
[21][30]. First, frequent itemsets exceeding the pre-defined 
Support threshold are identified. Therefore, the Apriori 
Algorithm initially finds itemsets containing of one item only. 
In the following steps, the algorithm includes one more item 
each round to the previously identified frequent itemsets until 
no more frequent itemsets are found [30]. Second, out of all 
frequent itemsets exceeding the pre-defined Support threshold 
confident association rules are generated. Hence, all identified 
frequent itemsets are separated into two subsets. The measure 
influencing which rules are understood as interesting is the 
Confidence measure [5]. 
In this research, Association Rule Discovery has been 
applied to find relation rules between BI and CPM. Before 
applying the Apriori Algorithm to the compiled dataset using 
the freeware Data Mining tool RapidMiner, the data had to be 
transformed into binary variables. This transformation can be 
done directly in RapidMiner. Questionnaire characteristics 
“does not apply” to “applies half and half” (1-3) have been 
transformed to does not apply and “does apply” and “fully 
applies” (4-5) to does apply. Furthermore, the minimum levels 
for the interestingness measures have been defined. Only 
association rules (X→Y) with a minimum Support≥0.6 have 
been considered as interesting, meaning that in at least 60% of 
the cases in the dataset the association rule has to show [16]. 
The confidence level has been set at Confidence≥0.7. This 
determines that in at least 70% of the rules where the first part 
of the rule (X) is shown, the second part of the rule (Y) has to 
show as well [16]. The measure Lift needs to be Lift>1 to show  
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

 
a positive dependency between the items of a rule for the 
occurrence of the items [5]. Regarding the minimum settings 
of the measures, 103 association rules have been discovered. 
Association rules do not imply causality. They find items 
that imply the presence of other items [20]. As the research 
focus is on the benefits of BI for CPM, the attention lies on 
association rules beginning with BI items, leaving 52 
association rules to evaluate. The association rules with the 
highest Support are shown in Table 2. 
It is conspicuous that especially the CPM items Data in 
business management processes are relevant and Data in 
business management processes are current apply in a 
company, if specific BI items apply either. In more detail, 
these two CPM items most likely apply in a company, if in 
addition to the items in Table 2 the following BI items apply 
as well: 
• 
Data consistency (“Single Version of the Truth”), 
• 
Only compulsory BI tools are used, 
 
• 
Master data changes are traceable, 
• 
Clear roles and responsibilities for the BI-
development between the company’s departments and 
the IT throughout the whole enterprise. 
Also, the BI item Use of applications for automatic text 
processing and Text Mining is found in combination rules 
with the item Clear roles and responsibilities for operating 
with the BI system and Data integrity during simultaneous 
use. Different from these two, Use of applications for 
automatic text processing and Text Mining has the 
characteristic does not apply. Still, the CPM items Data in 
business management processes are relevant and Data in 
business management processes are current apply, indicating 
that data currency and relevance is rather given if Text 
Mining and context processing tools are not used in a 
company. 
Furthermore, the association rules illustrate that: 
TABLE I 
OVERVIEW BI AND CPM ITEMS 
BI items 
CPM items 
BI1_1: Clear roles and responsibilities for operating the BI systems 
CPM1_1: Business management processes are transparent and traceable for 
managers 
BI1_2: Data consistency (“Single Version of the Truth”) 
CPM1_2: Business management process are documented throughout the 
company 
BI1_3: 24/7 operation of the BI systems 
CPM1_3: Business management processes are communicated throughout the 
company 
BI1_4: Only compulsory BI tools are used 
CPM2_1: Business management processes base on a common database 
BI1_5: Data integrity during simultaneous use 
CPM2_2: Management methods are fully automated and linked without 
manual support 
BI1_6: Clear roles and responsibilities for the BI-development between the 
company’s departments and the IT throughout the whole enterprise 
CPM2_3: Data in business management processes are complete 
BI1_7: BI-architecture is documented 
CPM2_4: Decision makers manual expenditure to edit reports is marginal  
BI1_8: Master data changes are traceable 
CPM3_1: Data in business management processes are relevant 
BI1_9: BI relevant master data can be saved in various versions 
CPM3_2: Data in business management processes are current  
BI2_1: Use of feature set for predictive forecasting 
CPM3_3: Effective use of external data (market data) 
BI2_2: Use of feature set for describing data analysis 
CPM4_1: Alignment of business management processes across all business 
functions 
BI2_3: Use of feature set for information visualization 
CPM4_2: Alignment of business management processes across all business 
units 
BI3_1: Use of applications for scenario modelling 
CPM4_3: Alignment of strategic and operational planning 
BI3_2: Use of applications for statistical analysis 
CPM5_1: Use of measurable indicators in all business functions 
BI4_1: Each BI project is carried out using a standardized procedure model 
CPM5_2: Use of measurable indicators in all business units 
BI4_2: Each BI project bases on a standardized design method 
CPM5_3: Use of measurable indicators in all operational business processes 
BI4_3: Documentation standards for BI projects are clearly defined 
CPM5_4: Use of measurable indicators in all strategic business processes 
BI4_4: BI projects use agility 
CPM6_1: Existence of feedback loops in operational business processes 
(e.g., complaint management) 
BI5_1: Use of applications for adding describing comments 
CPM6_2: Existence of feedback loops in strategy development (adjustment 
of vision, mission and the company’s strategy to environmental changes) 
BI5_2: Use of applications for sharing comments throughout the enterprise 
CPM6_3: Existence of feedback loops in strategic planning processes 
BI5_3: Use of applications for automatic text processing and Text Mining 
 
BI6_1: Denotations and spellings are standardized in the BI databases 
 
BI6_2: BI tools for strategic business management are interoperable 
 
BI6_3: Manual expenditures for ensuring standardized spelling and 
denotations are marginal 
 
BI7_1: Applications for mobile usage of the BI Systems are available 
 
BI7_2: Applications for the mobile usage of the BI Systems are used 
 
BI8_1: Use of BI applications for implementing alerts linked to automated 
workflow data  in operational business processes 
 
BI8_2: Use of BI applications for implementing alerts linked to automated 
workflow data in strategic business processes 
 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

• 
Use of BI applications for implementing alerts linked 
to automated workflow data in strategic business 
processes does not apply, 
• 
Use of applications for sharing comments throughout 
the enterprise does not apply, 
• 
Use of applications for adding describing comments 
does not apply, 
• 
Use of applications for automatic text processing and 
Text Mining does not apply 
the CPM item Management methods are fully automated and 
linked without manual support does not apply as well. 
VII. DISCUSSION 
CPM is a management strategy for decision support [19]. 
This support is achieved by using measures and KPI’s (Key 
Performance Indicator) from data. The information gained is 
used by decision makers and managers to monitor the 
companies target achievements. If necessary, strategy, 
processes and goals are adjusted to ensure the company’s 
survival and success. Data is the quintessence in CPM but 
only useful if provided when needed and of high quality. The 
association rules show that if BI items related to the subject 
of data quality and data provision (e.g., Data consistency, 
Data integrity during simultaneous use) are high and apply 
in a company the Data in the business management processes 
are relevant and current. The rules illustrate the connection 
between data and business management processes and 
therefore the connection between BI and CPM. Supported 
with high quality data, decision makers can act and rely on 
actionable information to manage the enterprise. The rules 
underline the function of BI as a decision support tool needed 
for a successful CPM. The concentration on business 
management processes as the CPM part of the rule highlights 
the understanding of CPM as a multiplicity of business 
management processes connected and integrated into each  
 
other [12]. If the processes in a company are managed, based 
on needed high quality data, it is the initial point for an overall 
effective CPM. Nevertheless, a CPM strategy is not 
implemented in one run. The implementation is a slow 
process carried out in sub-steps [19]. The focus of the 
association rules on Data in business management processes 
is relevant and current supports this theory. It is indicated that 
first the attention has to lie on the management processes 
separately. Once a company is working on high quality data 
when needed, a good connection throughout the enterprise is 
given as well. The lack of association rules containing further 
CPM items might be an indicator that most companies are 
assumedly still working on implementing a thorough 
performance management.  
The second set of association rules discovered that if no 
opportunity to use and share comments within an enterprise 
is given as well as the opportunity to use unstructured data a 
full automation and linkage of the company’s management 
methods without manual support is not given as well. 
Management 
methods 
are 
ideally 
accepted 
process 
descriptions for dealing with certain issues (e.g., Balanced 
Scorecard) [19]. These methods can only be successful if goal 
oriented, 
understood 
and 
used 
continuously 
[19]. 
Consequently, management methods are focused on the 
definition and analysis of measures. For all measures to be 
useful, a reference magnitude is needed, which can be 
supplied by adding and sharing comments. Furthermore, the 
association rules imply that fully automated management and 
planning methods are dependent on the use of comments for 
ensuring transparency as well. Only if supported by 
describing comments, automated management processes and 
planning methods are understandable throughout a company 
and manual support is minimalized.  
Text Mining enables knowledge discovery from semi-
structured or unstructured data. This is a rather advanced 
TABLE II. 
STRONGEST ASSOCIATION RULES, STARTING WITH BI ITEMS 
BI items 
 
CPM items 
Interestingness 
Data integrity during simultaneous use=applies 
→ 
Data in business management processes are 
relevant=applies 
Support=0.83 
Confidence=0.92 
Clear roles and responsibilities for operating the BI systems=applies 
→ 
Data in business management processes are 
relevant=applies 
Support=0.80 
Confidence=0.93 
Data integrity during simultaneous use=applies 
→ 
Data in business management processes are 
current=applies 
Support=0.78 
Confidence=0.86 
Data integrity during simultaneous use=applies and Clear roles and 
responsibilities for operating the BI systems=applies 
→ 
Data in business management processes are 
relevant=applies 
Support=0.76 
Confidence=0.93 
Data integrity during simultaneous use=applies 
→ 
Data in business management processes are 
relevant=applies and Data in business management 
processes are current =applies 
Support=0.74 
Confidence=0.83 
Clear roles and responsibilities for operating the BI systems=applies 
→ 
Data in business management processes are 
current=applies 
Support=0.74 
Confidence=0.86 
Clear roles and responsibilities for operating the BI systems=applies 
→ 
Data in business management processes are 
relevant=applies and Data in business management 
processes are current =applies 
Support=0.73 
Confidence=0.84 
24/7 operation of the BI systems=applies 
→ 
Data in business management processes are 
relevant=applies 
Support=0.70 
Confidence=0.91 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

analysis method of BI and the rules indicate that if there is no 
or not much usage of automatic text processing and Text 
Mining, Data in business management processes are still 
relevant and current but the Management methods are not 
fully automated or linked without manual support. Text 
Mining is an advanced research method used to gain new 
information from texts. The association rules suggest, that 
this feature of BI is rather not important for the data currency 
and relevance in the business management processes. 
Therefore, it might to be ignored in the establishment process 
of CPM. But it seems to be interesting once the automation 
of management methods without manual support wants to be 
achieved.  
The association rules discovered only comprise 3 
different CPM related items Data in business management 
processes are current, Data in business management 
processes are relevant and Management methods are fully 
automated and linked without manual support. This awakes 
the awareness that BI is not the only technological support in 
companies. Enterprise Resource Planning Systems (ERP), 
Customer Relationship Systems (CRM) and Supply-Chain-
Management System (SCM) also play an important role for a 
successful performance management. Before focusing on 
implementing a BI solution, the predominant step might be to 
focus on existing software first and afterwards built an 
effective BI solution on top. 
VIII. CONCLUSION 
In comparison to the subject related research, the results 
of the Data Mining approach show more detailed information 
about the connection of BI and CPM. Instead considering BI 
and/or CPM as a whole, with Data Mining all BI and CPM 
features have been taken into account, allowing researchers 
and practitioners comprehensive insights into the relationship 
between these two interdependent disciplines. Besides 
simply proving a positive relationship, the research outcomes 
allow conclusions on a path of action for improving a 
company’s 
CPM 
through 
the 
correct 
usage 
and 
implementation of BI. Although these inferences still need 
further investigation in practice, it has been possible to 
identify the BI and CPM items with the strongest connection 
through association analysis. Inferentially, the Data Mining 
approach presents itself as a suitable research procedure in IS 
research.  
But this research still is only a first step in exploring the 
possibilities Data Mining holds for IS research. Future 
studies need to evaluate if and how Data Mining can be used 
to gain detailed research insights. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
M. Aho, "The Distinction between Business Intelligence and 
Corporate Performance Management - A Literature Study 
Combined with Empirical Findings", Proceedings of the 
MCSP 2010 Conference, 2010. 
[2] 
K. Backhaus, B. Erichson, W. Plinke, and R. Weiber, 
Multivariate analysis: An application-oriented introduction, 
13th edn., Springer, Berlin, 2011. 
[3] 
J. Becker, D. Maßing, and C. Janiesch, "An evolutionary 
process model for introducing Corporate Performance 
Management Systems", Data Warehousing, pp. 247–262, 
2006. 
[4]  www.researchandmarkets.com/reports/1055897, retrieved: 2, 
2015. 
[5]  J. Cleve and U. Lämmel, Data Mining, De Gruyter 
Oldenbourg, München, 2016, p. 187, 216 ff., 235. 
[6]  M. L. Gargano and B. G. Raggad, "Data Mining ‐ a powerful 
information creating tool", OCLC Systems & Services: 
International digital library perspectives, 15(2), pp. 81–90, 
1999. 
[7]  M. Hannula and V. Pirttimäki, "Business intelligence empirical 
study on the top 50 Finnish companies", Journal of American 
Academy of Business, 2(2), pp. 593–599, 2003. 
[8]  K. Hartl, O. Jacob, F. H. Lien Mbep, A. Budree, and L. Fourie, 
"The Impact of Business Intelligence on Corporate 
Performance Management", Proceedings of the 49th HICSS 
Conference, pp. 5041–5051, 2016. 
[9]  J. Jackson, "Data Mining; A Conceptual Overview", 
Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 
8(1), pp. 267–296, 2002. 
[10]  O. Jacob and F. H. Lien Mbep, "Factors to Determine the Value 
of 
Business 
Intelligence 
to 
Corporate 
Performance 
Management", University of Applied Sciences Neu-Ulm, 
2014. 
[11]  D. W. Joenssen and T. Müllerleite, "Missing Data in Data 
Mining", HMD Praxis der Wirtschaftsinformatik, 51(4), 
pp. 458–468, 2014. 
[12] M. Lang, ed., Handbook of Business Intelligence: Potentials, 
Strategies, Best Practices, 1st edn., Symposion, Düsseldorf, 
2015. 
[13]  F. H. Lien Mbep, O. Jacob, and L. Fourie, "Critical Success 
Factors of Corporate Performance Management (CPM) 
Literature Study and Empirical Findings", BUSTECH 
Conference Proceedings, pp. 6–14, 2015. 
[14]  http://legacy.wlu.ca/documents/22449/07_Measuring 
_the_Benefits_of_BI_Viva.pdf, retrieved: 02, 2016. 
[15]  S. Miranda, "Beyond BI: Benefiting from CPM Solutions", 
Financial Executive, 20(2), pp. 58–61, 2004. 
[16]  R. M. Müller and H.-J. Lenz, "Business Intelligence", Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2013. 
[17]  S. Natek and M. Zwilling, "Data Mining for small student 
datasets - knowledge management system for higher education 
teachers", Management, Knowledge and Learning Conference, 
pp. 1379–1398, 2013. 
[18] S. Negash, "Business Intelligence", The Communications of 
the Association for Information Systems, 13(1), pp. 177–195, 
2004. 
[19] K. Oehler, Corporate Performance Management with Business 
Intelligence tools, Hanser, München, 2006. 
[20]  K.-M. Osei-Bryson and O. Ngwenyama, "Advances in 
Research Methods for Information Systems Research: Data 
Mining, Data Envelopment Analysis, Value Focused 
Thinking", Springer, New York, 34, 2014. 
[21]  H. Petersohn, Data Mining: Methods, Processes and 
Application Architecture, Oldenbourg, München, 2005. 
[22]  G. Richards, W. Yeoh, A. Y.-L. Chong, and A. Popovic, "An 
empirical study of business intelligence impact on corporate 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

performance management", Proceedings of the Pacific Asia 
Conference on Information Systems 2014, pp. 1–16, 2014. 
[23]  S. Rouhani, A. Ashrafi, A. Zare Ravasan, and S. Afshari, "The 
impact model of business intelligence on decision support and 
organizational benefits", Journal of Enterprise Information 
Management, 29(1), pp. 19–50, 2016. 
[24]  R. A. Saed, "The Relationship between Business Intelligence 
and Business Success: An Investigation in Firms in Sharjah 
Emirate", American Journal of Business and Management, 
2(4), pp. 332–339, 2013. 
[25]  A. J. Stolzer and C. Halford, "Data mining methods applied to 
flight operations quality assurance data: a comparison to 
standard statistical methods", Journal of Air Transportation, 
12(1), pp. 6–24, 2007. 
[26]  N. Urbach and F. Ahlemann, "Structural equation modeling in 
information systems research using partial least squares", 
JITTA: Journal of Information Technology Theory and 
Application, 11(2), pp. 5–40, 2010. 
[27]  V. E. Vinzi, C. Wynne, J. Henseler, and H. Wang, Handbook 
of partial least squares: Concepts methods and applications, 
Springer, Berlin, 2010. 
[28]  S. Williams and N. Williams, "The Business Value of Business 
Intelligence", Business Intelligence Journal, 8, pp. 30–39, 
2003. 
[29]  N. Yogev, L. Fink, and A. Even, "How Business Intelligence 
Creates Value", Proceedings of the ECIS Conference, 2012. 
[30] R. Agrawal and R. Srikant, "Fast Algorithms for Mining 
Association Rules", Proceedings of the 20th VLDB 
Conference Santiago, Chile, pp. 487-499, 1994.
 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

