Space Race 2.0 
Expanding Global Internet Accessibility 
Robert Spousta III, Steve Chan 
Dr. Steve Chan Center for Sensemaking, AIRS 
Swansea University NSRC and Hawaii Pacific University 
Swansea, Wales, U.K.; Honolulu, HI, USA 
Email: spousta@mit.edu, stevechan@post.harvard.edu 
Bob Griffin 
General Manager and Co-Director 
IBM and IBM Center for Resiliency & Sustainability 
Armonk, NY; San Diego, CA, USA 
Email: (care of) alkassam@us.ibm.com
 
Abstract—In this paper, we examine cyber electromagnetic 
activities and avenues for expanding Internet accessibility. 
Delivering fast and reliable Internet access to people, whose 
physical isolation precludes connectivity by wires and other 
traditional means, is challenging. In response, key industry 
players are racing to take on this challenge both with serious 
financial backing as well as their own methodologies for 
creating a more accessible global Internet. However, each 
approach must overcome its own set of technological hurdles. 
By way of example, satellites can deliver Internet access to 
sparsely populated areas, but the cost of using satellite data 
connections can be very high. Drones, in comparison, can 
reach those customers at a much lower cost. Yet, both 
platforms rely on the Ku-band, which is essentially saturated 
during the day and thereby subject to low throughput and long 
delays. Even if satellites and drones utilize another part of the 
electromagnetic spectrum, such as Ka-band, rain fade remains 
a persistent problem. High-altitude planes that fly above 
commercial airlines and the weather can utilize lasers, which 
are at the cutting edge of connectivity research for their 
incredible accuracy and high throughput; however, laser 
beams get scattered by clouds. Finally, the challenges of 
keeping a network of balloons — that are traveling on the edge 
of space — on course and without leaking are plentiful. The 
main technological challenge to the underpinning mesh 
network backbone is the frequency of power outages that 
disrupt the network. In any case, the next generation 
Generativity Principle holds promise not only for optimizing 
the flow of data throughout the Internet, but also for 
maximizing the primary infrastructure of Internet access. 
Keywords-Big Data, brittleness, generativity principle, net 
neutrality, Internet accessibility  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
With the number of networked devices surpassing the 
number of humans on the planet in 2008 [1], the Internet of 
Things (IoT) has become a ubiquitous aspect of daily life for 
one third of the world’s population, the majority of whom 
live in developed countries [2]. The creation of the Internet 
was driven by a need to share resources, and today there is a 
challenge to share the Internet itself as a resource. In 
bringing the Internet to the remaining two thirds of the global 
citizenry, there is a balance to be struck between reach and 
resilience. On the one hand, the Internet is a valuable tool [3] 
for supporting the universal human right of accessing 
information [4], and maximizing its reach is clearly 
beneficial. On the other hand, the Internet must operate 
reliably in order to be of value, and efforts to expand its 
reach quickly should not come at the expense of the system’s 
resilience. As collective reliance on Internet connectivity 
increases and a variety of actors endeavor to expand global 
Internet accessibility, the underlying communications 
infrastructure remains brittle in key areas. This brittleness is 
a potential blind spot compromising the resilience of 
essential functions such as international commerce, national 
defense, and disaster preparedness, which have become 
highly dependent on the Internet. In the effort to increase 
Internet accessibility, infrastructural resilience must remain a 
primary consideration. In this regard, much discourse has 
centered around smart cities [5]. Although urban centers are 
home to 80% of the global population and appropriately are 
a major focus of infrastructure improvement and protection 
[6], the importance of internet connectivity for rural and 
physically isolated areas cannot be overlooked. Indeed, for 
archipelagoes like Hawaii maintaining connectivity is a very 
real challenge, as broadband capacity is projected to run out 
by as early as 2017.  
Therefore, we explore what options are available for 
expanding 
broadband 
Internet 
capacity 
for 
isolated 
populations such as those in Hawaii. We survey the current 
variety of endeavors being undertaken to expand access, and 
identify challenges related to each approach. In Section II, 
we begin with an overview of terrestrial and fixed 
broadband, including direct subscriber lines, fiber-optic 
cable, and mobile broadband. In Section III, we explore the 
capabilities and limitations of satellite broadband. In Section 
IV, we identify additional methods of broadband delivery 
being pursued by various actors, including the use of 
unmanned aircraft systems (UAS), high altitude platform 
(HAP), and balloons. In Section V, we evaluate efforts to 
expand internet accessibility in the context of the 
generativity principle and net neutrality debate, and we 
conclude in Section VI.  
II. 
A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE INTERNET AND TERRESTRIAL 
CONNECTIVITY 
Since the inception of the four-node  Advanced Research 
Projects Agency Network (ARPANET) was connected by 
terrestrial hard line with 50 kbps of bandwidth in 1969 [7], 
the Internet has grown into a vast web of diverse connections 
spanning land, air, sea, and space with over 160,000 gbps of 
bandwidth powering over 185 million active websites [2]. 
Just as ARPANET’s architects envisioned a network of only 
a few hundred national-level resources, and had to adapt 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

their operating principles to address the unforeseen growth in 
traffic precipitated by local area networks, today myriad 
stakeholders are contemplating how the Internet can be 
expanded to reach every individual on the planet. Although 
the foundational building blocks of packet switching and the 
attendant protocol suite (e.g., transmission control protocol 
(TCP), internet protocol (IP), and user datagram protocol 
(UDP)) remain in place and much work has been done to 
unite what were once fragmentary networks [8], the modern 
Internet is so large and complex that obtaining a clear picture 
of how data are flowing through it is no longer feasible [9]. 
Whereas it is difficult to analyze what is happening inside 
the Internet at any given moment, certain facts about its 
accessibility are clear. The Internet has fundamentally 
changed the nature of human communication by providing a 
platform for truly novel developments such as the World 
Wide Web, yet over four billion people in the world are 
living without Internet access [10]. As stylized in Figure 1, 
below, how to bring it to them is a key question. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The first potential course of action is continued 
expansion of the land and subsea-based fixed connections 
upon which the Internet was originally built. However, as 
the International Telecommunications Union (ITU) notes in 
its most recent report [2], the growth of fixed broadband in 
the form of asynchronous direct subscriber line (ADSL) and 
fiber-optic cable is leveling off at over 700 million 
subscriptions, or roughly ten percent of global penetration in 
favor of mobile broadband, with 85% of the fixed network’s 
11 million km of underwater lines in the Asia Pacific region. 
While the worldwide average price for fixed broadband 
subscriptions has dropped 70% in the past eight years [2], a 
digital divide has persisted in that developed countries with 
the highest connection speeds enjoy the lowest cost 
subscriptions, while consumers in developing countries with 
less robust backbone infrastructure must pay more for 
slower connection speeds. By way of example, in Serbia 
consumers pay the highest broadband subscription rates in 
Europe at 3.8% of Gross National Income per capita (GNI 
pc) for 5 mbps of bandwidth, while in many African 
countries the cost of an entry-level fixed broadband 
subscription with speeds of 1 mbps or less can cost more 
than 100% of the GNI pc due to low income generation and 
a limited number of cables linking the continent to the 
international Internet [2]. Conventional fixed Internet access 
through fiber-to-the-premises, cable modem, and direct 
subscriber lines represents a large investment on the part of 
industry as it is expensive to lay and maintain, which 
translates to high subscription rates for consumers.  
 
Such high expense is particularly cost-prohibitive 
for physically isolated communities who are located far from 
central infrastructural hubs and unable to attract investment. 
Submarine 
cable 
systems 
that 
provide 
the 
crucial 
intercontinental connections linking the global Internet are 
dominated largely by only three groups; Alcatel-Lucent, TE 
SubCom, and NEC. With such limited competition, there is 
little incentive to improve upon the cost or durability of 
undersea cable networks, as the cost of constructing new 
systems has remained relatively fixed at approximately $35 
thousand per kilometer and designed for a 25-year lifespan, 
with the first cables laid in 1988 nearing the end of their 
service life [11]. Part of this low competition and high cost is 
due to the inconsistent growth of the industry, which saw a 
brief period of over-investment during the dotcom boom, 
particularly in 2001, which led to a largely dormant cable 
industry until recent years. Undersea cables connect all but 
15 countries, providing 87 tbps in global transoceanic 
bandwidth. However, in light of the huge capital required for 
their development, cable routes cater to the world’s financial 
hubs, as depicted below in Figure 2. At the same time, fixed 
Internet routed through submarine cable is not without its 
vulnerabilities. Indeed, shark attacks, anchor snares, fishing 
accidents, and other unintentional anthropogenically-induced 
damage accounts for as many as 150 outages per year [12]. 
For physically isolated locations that are unable to attract 
investment in the form of cable landing sites, an alternative 
to fixed broadband is required, which takes us back to the 
Internet’s early days. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Research on wireless packet switching networks emerged 
simultaneously with the development of ARPANET, and 
Figure 1. Artistic Rendering of Global Internet Connectivity
Figure 2. TeleGeography Global Submarine Cable Map
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

since then wireless complements to the fixed Internet have 
continued to evolve. The ALOHANET was the first 
instantiation of wireless computer communication, whereby 
University of Hawaii computing resources dispersed over the 
islands exchanged data through radio channels with each 
other and eventually ARPANET [13] 1.This concept was 
adapted to achieve a lightweight and mobile packet 
switching capability for military applications through the 
Packet Radio Network (PRNET) in the 1970s [14].  
Advances in wireless communications capability continued 
through the 1980s and 90s with cellular technology, and in 
2010, the number of mobile broadband subscriptions 
surpassed that of fixed broadband subscriptions [15].  
 
However, broadband Internet delivered through 
universal mobile telecommunications systems is constrained 
in several fundamental ways. First, mobile broadband access 
consumes significantly more power per user than fixed 
connections [16]. Second, mobile broadband connections are 
more inconsistent than fixed connections and subject to 
increased disruptions in service [17]. Just as fixed broadband 
relies on the abundance of backbone infrastructure, mobile 
connections rely on the strength of cellular signals and the 
proximity of towers. Finally, and perhaps most significantly, 
mobile broadband networks suffer from comparatively 
limited bandwidth capacity due to finite spectrum 
availability [18], which necessitates data offloading to fixed 
network connections through various means, including 
wireless fidelity (WiFi), femtocells, and IP flow mobility 
[19]. In fact, in 2014 26.4 exabytes of data representing 46% 
of total mobile broadband traffic was offloaded to fixed 
connections [20], demonstrating that mobile broadband is a 
complementary extension of the wired Internet, not a stand-
alone replacement for it. Similarly, the Worldwide 
Interoperability for Microwave Access (WiMAX) Forum is 
helping to provide broadband without the need for each user 
to have a fixed connection, but the networks still require a 
large infrastructure of base stations that would be cost-
prohibitive in isolated communities [21]. Therefore, we find 
that without significant infrastructural investment, neither 
fixed nor mobile broadband are viable options for connecting 
isolated populations.      
III. 
INTERNET IN SPACE: SATELLITES 
Although science fiction writer and futurist Arthur C. 
Clarke’s first speculation about the potential for achieving a 
global broadcast capability through extraterrestrial relays 
seemed far-fetched to skeptical audiences in 1945, his vision 
has proved to be truly prophetic [22]. Indeed, the use of 
satellites for Internet connectivity is nearly as old as the 
Internet itself, however there are significant technical 
challenges associated with bringing the Internet to space. 
Geostationary orbiting (GSO) satellites have been used for 
some time to provide backbone connections for regional 
networks, with the Atlantic SATNET being an early example 
of implementing satellite communication for Internet 
protocols, as it provided a 64 kbps connection between the 
                                                           
1  Incidentally, this packet broadcasting technique also gave rise to 
Ethernet technology for local area networking. 
ARPANET and research networks in Europe from the late 
1970s into the mid 1980s [23].  However, GSO satellites 
suffer from two major drawbacks; their enormous cost, and 
the latency of their communications. GSO satellites are 
located 35, 786 km from the Earth’s surface,  which can 
enable a single satellite to have broadcast coverage over a 
third of the planet’s surface, yet also takes a signal 
approximately 280 milliseconds to travel each way, which 
amounts to over half a second in latency for roundtrips [24]. 
In contrast, low Earth orbiting (LEO) satellites located up to 
3,000 km from the Earth’s surface can overcome this latency 
problem, but given the proximity to the surface, their 
coverage area is severely limited, and therefore a network of 
satellites is required to relay signals. However, as depicted in 
Figure 3, below, early satellite Internet communications 
relied on a bent pipe configuration, whereby Earth uplinks 
were concatenated to Earth downlinks, and the satellites 
served as little more than signal relay points incapable of 
signal processing or dynamic routing [25]. Due to these 
limitations, early instantiations of the satellite-provided 
Internet were characterized by relatively high cost and low 
quality [26].   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
With the explosive growth of internet users in the 1990s, 
demand for bandwidth appeared to be outpacing terrestrial 
network providers’ ability to lay new wire and cable, and in 
response, companies endeavored to leverage satellites as an 
augmentation to the wired Internet. Hughes Network 
Systems’ DirectPC Satellite System developed in 1996 
enabled users to request data by phone line and modem, and 
download the results through 400 kbps direct link with 
Hughes’ Galaxy GSO leveraging digital video broadcast by 
satellite (DVB-S) and very small aperture terminals (VSAT) 
[27]. Hughes expanded its services by incorporating medium 
Earth orbit (MEO) satellites in its Spaceway system in 2002, 
but was not alone in delivering broadband internet through 
GSO and MEO satellites on the DVB-S platform, as 
Cyberstar, ISky, Lockheed Martin’s Astrolink, the European 
satellite conglomerate SES’s Astra, Eutelsat’s Hot Bird, 
Inmarsat, and Matra Marconi Space’s Wideband European 
Satellite Telecommunications (WEST) represented some of 
the competition. GSO satellites using DVB-S platforms in 
Figure 3. Bent Pipe Satellite Communications Architecture
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

the Ku Band have been very effective for broadcast and non-
time sensitive communication, but simply cannot facilitate 
the kind of broadband switched services required for the 
peer-to-peer networking applications that individuals and 
business have come to rely upon. Nevertheless, for rural and 
other physically isolated communities, satellite broadband is 
the only option. Hence, regionally-focused GSO providers 
such as Eutelsat’s Tooway in Europe, IPSTAR in the Asia-
Pacific, and North American providers Hughes, Telesat 
Canada, and ViaSat have all optimized their capabilities by 
migrating to the Ka Band and are able to deliver service with 
as little as a single satellite. Many of these networks having 
undergone recent upgrades boosting bandwidth to as high as 
130 gbps, and GSO satellites will certainly remain 
significant components in the Internet ecosystem [28]. 
In the late 1990s and early 2000s, there was considerably 
less competition in delivering internet communication 
through satellites in low Earth orbit, in light of the many 
technological challenges associated with ensuring continuity 
of connections, quality of service (QoS), and achieving 
operational intersatellite links. However, there was great 
enthusiasm in the telecommunications community for 
leveraging LEO satellites, with the development of the 
Iridium and Globalstar communication systems representing 
over $8 billion in investment and 1000 new patents at the 
close of the 20th century [29].  
The two early experiments in global broadband LEO 
networks, Teledesic and Skybridge each approached the 
myriad technical challenges from different angles. Teledesic, 
a $9Billion joint venture between Microsoft’s Bill Gates, 
cellular technology magnate Craig McCaw, Boeing, and 
Motorola aimed to provide an affordable worldwide core and 
access broadband network with a constellation of 2882 LEO 
satellites operating in the Ka Band with an equivalency to 
optical fiber networks. Their only competitor, Skybridge was 
a venture between the world’s leading submarine cable 
manufacturer Alcatel, Loral, and Qualcomm, which utilized 
an 80 satellite constellation to provide a broadband access 
network, operating in the Ku Band frequency at a cost of 
$4.2Billion, and relying largely on terrestrial gateway 
networks for switching and routing procedures [30]. For both 
systems, the estimation of available resources and the 
dynamic allocation of resources, or bandwidth was a key 
technical challenge to be overcome, as the systems aimed to 
accommodate traffic from as many as 20 million 
simultaneous users [31]. However, just as Iridium and 
Globalstar were unable to develop a sufficient customer base 
amidst a burgeoning terrestrial cellular market and were 
forced into bankruptcy and restructuring, Teledesic and 
Skybridge were unable to realize a cost-effective LEO 
alternative to expanding ADSL and cable networks, and both 
folded before the systems were put in place [32]. 
Although the unfulfilled promise of global satellite 
broadband networks such as Teledesic and Skybridge 
stymied further investment in non-GSO platforms during the 
                                                           
2 Teledesic’s system designers originally envisioned a constellation of 
840 satellites, which was reduced to 288 as designs progressed, and finally 
down to 30 satellites before the project was cancelled.  
early 21st century, continued research and advances in 
technology have illuminated alternate pathways for 
extraterrestrial networking while leaving the door open for 
LEO platforms. With an increased focus on deep space 
travel, delay-tolerant networks (DTN) and bundling 
protocols were developed to mitigate the latency issues of 
disparate networks such as GSO satellites, with the ultimate 
intent of achieving a future interplanetary internet [33]. 
Historically, the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space 
Administration (NASA) developed unique communications 
systems for each of its missions, a tendency which became 
clearly untenable as NASA’s systems were incompatible 
with the many emerging international, military, and 
commercial satellite capabilities [34]. As a result, the 
Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems was formed  
to promote shared infrastructure and develop universal Space 
Communications Protocol Standards (SCPS) based on 
Internet protocols and modified for the unique operating 
conditions of outer space [35]. International collaboration on 
the development and refinement of the SCPS has helped to 
facilitate rapid advances in technology that have significantly 
improved satellite capability. In particular, the development 
of onboard processing (OBP), switching (OBS), and routing 
(OBR), performance enhancing proxies (PEP) boosting the 
TCP slow start algorithm, and the integration of 
asynchronous transfer mode (ATM) protocols have led to 
improved intersatellite links, signal regeneration, error 
correction, 
and 
dynamic 
data 
routing 
[24]. 
Such 
advancements have led to renewed interest in LEO 
constellations for Internet connectivity, as depicted below in 
Figure 4. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In light of this recent progress, a new set of actors is 
taking the stage to deliver global broadband Internet through 
satellites. First is O3B (The Other 3 Billion) Networks, 
which began emplacing its initial constellation of eight MEO 
satellites in 2010 and became commercially operational at 
the end of 2014. It will ultimately scale up to a network of 16 
satellites, each of which deliver 10 spot beams in the Ka 
Band, building on the design and operating principles 
developed for Teledesic and Skybridge and capable of 
delivering a total capacity of over 160 gbps of bandwidth 
[36]. Orbiting at 8,000 km above the Earth, signals from 
O3B’s satellites have a roundtrip time of 150 milliseconds, 
still considerably less than that of GSO counterparts. With 
Figure 4. Stylized Depiction of Global LEO Constellations 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

significant financial support from investors such as the 
Virgin Group and Qualcomm, O3B’s creators are in the 
process of launching OneWeb, a 648-LEO satellite 
constellation with aspirations that are reminiscent of 
Teledesic’s vision to construct a satellite constellation to 
match the fixed Internet in terms of coverage, capacity, and 
reliability by 2019 [37]. While OneWeb is in the early stages 
of development, a critical step forward has been its ability to 
secure Ku Band wireless spectrum rights from the ITU [38], 
through which the network will interface with mobile 
broadband network operators and individuals with OneWeb 
receivers. Yet, constructing a satellite constellation is 
resource-intensive as a single launch costs $300 million, let 
alone the cost of building hundreds of satellites. Despite the 
resource-intensive prospect, Space Exploration Technologies 
(SpaceX) also recently announced plans to field an LEO 
satellite constellation to provide global broadband Internet 
access [39]. With over $1 Billion raised thus far from 
investors such as Google, Fidelity Investments, and Founders 
Fund, SpaceX plans to construct a network of roughly 4,000 
satellites beginning in the next 5 years [40]. 
Whereas these recent developments in expanding Internet 
accessibility through large scale satellite networks are 
certainly promising, the success of such endeavors is 
challenged by significant technical obstacles. For systems 
such as OneWeb, the saturation of the Ku Band and need to 
develop viable spectrum sharing mechanisms among various 
satellite networks remains an open area of investigation [41]. 
In addition, although the vulnerability of both the Ku and Ka 
Bands to signal attenuation in moist atmospheric conditions 
has been well known for some time [42], effective rain fade 
countermeasures have yet to be developed. The details of 
SpaceX’s LEO network design remain unclear, but one 
immediately apparent concern is that of how a constellation 
of 4,000 assets can operate sustainably and reliably in an 
environment characterized by significant amounts of residual 
orbiting debris [43], as little as 1 cm’s worth of which is 
capable of inflicting significant damage to small assets. At 
the same time, the affordability and quick turn-around time 
in production make micro-satellites an attractive option for 
populating fleets of orbiting devices that number near the 
thousands [44].   
IV. 
OUTSIDE OF THE BOX: ALTERNATE METHODS FOR 
EXPANDING INTERNET ACCESSIBILITY 
Just as the open and collaborative spirit of the Internet 
Engineering Task Force has led to the achievement of a 
global information infrastructure through the request for 
comments (RFC) process and the dynamic exchange of ideas 
[45], the effort to expand Internet accessibility can benefit 
from collaboration between actors. However, the potential 
benefits of collaboration and rough consensus have to be 
balanced against the economic imperative of profit making 
for the investors involved. In that vein, it should come as no 
great surprise that some of the most innovative research with 
regard to increasing global Internet access are being pursued 
separately in parallel by two of the most influential and 
revenue-generating forces on the World Wide Web; the 
search engine Google and the social networking application 
Facebook.  
In addition to its investment in a future satellite network, 
Google has pursued several equally ambitious avenues for 
improving and expanding Internet accessibility. First, it is 
constructing its own fiber-optic cable network in the United 
States, delivering broadband service speeds that drastically 
outperform existing Internet Service Providers (ISP) [46]. 
Second, it has conducted pilot programs to deliver 4G LTE 
wireless broadband access to remote areas via high-altitude 
superpressure envelope balloons equipped with a payload of 
solar panels, a battery, flight computer, altitude control 
system, radio, and antennae. Dubbed Project Loon, the mesh 
network of balloons receive and relay mobile broadband 
signals from  telecommunications operators’ cell towers and 
down to anyone in range with a 4G-capable device while 
cruising at an altitude of just over 20,000km, staying aloft for 
up to 100 days in the stratosphere, where temperatures can 
be as low as -117º Fahrenheit (-83º Celsius) [47]. Although 
Google has collaborated with manufacturers to produce 
special-purpose lithium-ion batteries for the balloons’ 
electronic systems, such cold temperatures remain a 
particular challenge for sustaining power, in addition to 
keeping the balloons aloft for longer durations [48]. Project 
Loon builds on earlier concepts such as the Israeli 
ConSolar/Rotostar system and Sky Station stratospheric 
telecommunications platform, developed privately by former 
U.S. Secretary of State Alexander Haig in cooperation with 
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory in the late 1990s [49]. 
Whereas Sky Station was unable to get off the ground, 
Project Loon has completed a pilot experiment with 30 
balloons communicating to specialized ground antennae 
(pictured below in Figure 5) in 2013 over New Zealand’s 
South Island and more recently in Brazil and Nevada [50]. 
Although Google is continuing to expand the project, aiming 
to have 100 balloons aloft by the end of 2015, a global 
network will have to overcome the aforementioned technical 
challenges as well as negotiate international over-flight 
rights and spectrum usage licenses in each country the 
system crosses over, political obstacles which ultimately 
proved insurmountable for Sky Station and similar platforms 
[51].  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Project Loon Signal Receiver 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

While Google moves forward with its mesh balloon 
network, Facebook has announced a similar pursuit of 
expanded broadband access. In addition to GSO and LEO 
satellite options, it is exploring ways to leverage high-
altitude solar powered unmanned aircraft systems (UAS) and 
free space optical (FSO) communication to deliver the 
Internet to isolated populations [52]. UAS such as Helios, 
Pathfinder, and Proteus have demonstrated the ability for 
aircraft to remain aloft for extended periods and to serve as 
viable 
high 
altitude 
platform 
stations 
(HAPS) 
for 
telecommunications, 
however 
signal 
attenuation 
and 
spectrum allocation have been among the greatest challenges 
to implementation [53]. The ITU has allocated a small 
section of the Ka Band for HAPS broadband services, 
however rain fade remains a persistent problem, particularly 
for systems deployed over isolated tropical areas that 
experience significant precipitation [54]. At the same time, 
FSO communication systems that utilize lasers as an 
alternative signal medium are attractive for their high 
bandwidth capacity, license-free usage, and immunity to 
electromagnetic 
interference, 
however 
they 
cannot 
effectively transmit through clouds and remain subject to 
atmospheric absorption, attenuation, and backscatter [55]. 
Although methods to mitigate atmospheric effects that 
include photon counting receivers and coherent reception 
techniques have been identified, for the moment they remain 
sufficiently resource-intensive so as to preclude widespread 
commercial application [56]. Indeed, HAPS such as Project 
Loon and those envisioned by Facebook hold great promise 
for increasing global Internet accessibility; however 
significant technical and political hurdles remain to be 
overcome.  
V. 
GENERATIVITY AND NET NEUTRALITY 
As the Internet’s vast communicative power lies in the 
generativity of its many diverse data pathways and content 
contributors, it is appropriate that a multitude of gateways 
exist for its accessibility. However, the openness of these 
gateways is an important consideration that impacts both the 
network’s reach and resilience. In order to maximize the 
network’s reach, barriers to entry such as identity 
verification are minimized. Meanwhile, to ensure the 
resilience of the network, access control and security 
protocols are needed to prevent malicious activity. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
While any of the aforementioned methods can help 
increase connectivity in physically isolated areas, a separate 
question remains as to providing Internet access for 
underprivileged communities who simply cannot afford to 
pay. If access to information is truly a human right, then 
perhaps the economic principles governing the Internet’s 
for-profit development warrant revision in light of its role in 
global 
information 
dissemination, 
and 
vehicles 
for 
delivering free Internet to the underprivileged bear increased 
consideration [57].  
The business model of capitalizing on free labor in the 
form of user-generated content has allowed a small number 
of individuals to amass vast fortunes [58]. However, is there 
a fundamental conflict in the Internet being both a gold 
mine for industrious prospectors and the primary delivery 
mechanism for a basic human right? Whereas initiatives 
such as Facebook’s Internet.org appear helpful for bringing 
the Internet to the world’s underprivileged populations 
through negotiated access with certain regional ISPs, these 
efforts are facing stiff resistance for the role they play in 
privileging certain web sites and services [59]. Indeed, the 
prerogative to maintain net neutrality is in question if the 
aforementioned efforts to expand Internet accessibility only 
translate into expanding access to circumscribed pieces of 
the Internet. Amidst the debate over net neutrality, the 
Federal Communications Commission (FCC)’s Open 
Internet Order categorizes broadband as a Title II 
telecommunications service and is therefore subject to the 
terms of the 1934 Communications Act [60]. As a result, 
blocking, throttling, or paid prioritization of any content 
provider is illegal for the time being. However, efforts to 
circumvent the neutrality of the Internet ecosystem by 
providing free access to certain limited content undermines 
the technology’s main function of facilitating end-to-end 
communication. Expanding Internet accessibility to the as-
yet connected portion of the world’s population will 
undermine the system’s overall resilience if it comes at the 
cost of creating a two-tiered Internet for those who can 
afford to buy access to all information and others who can 
only afford free access to some information.    
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
Although alternative means for expanding global Internet 
accessibility are in order, current endeavors to do so remain 
challenged by the same limitations that have hindered 
conventional Internet service delivery methods in the past. 
High infrastructural investment costs, signal attenuation, and 
efficient power generation are among the most notable 
obstacles to be overcome in making the Internet a truly 
global resource. Ambitious developments such as Project 
Loon, OneWeb, and Green Networking [61] all have the 
potential to enhance the resilience and reach of the Internet, 
provided they can surmount numerous remaining obstacles.   
 
Figure 6. Satirical Commentary; Toles, The Washington Post 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank the Cyber Futures 
Center, an initiative of the Sensemaking-U.S. Pacific 
Command Fellowship, and the Dr. Steve Chan Center for 
Sensemaking — one of the centers of the Asia-Pacific 
Institute for Resilience and Sustainability (AIRS), which is 
jointly anchored at Swansea University’s Network Science 
Research Center and Hawaii Pacific University — for the 
opportunity to study the challenges facing Hawaii and other 
archipelagos, and to contribute towards the various Public 
Private Partnership Initiatives aimed at developing solutions 
to overcome those challenges.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
C. Aggarwal, N. Ashish, and A. Sheth, "The Internet of Things: A 
Survey from the Data-Centric Perspective," in Managing and Mining 
Sensor Data, C. C. Aggarwal, Ed., ed: Springer US, 2013, pp. 383-
428. 
[2] 
ITU, "Measuring the Information Society Report 2014," International 
Telecommunications Union, Geneva, Switzerland2014. 
[3] 
V. G. Cerf, "Internet access is not a human right," New York Times, 
vol. 4, p. 55, 2012. 
[4] 
M. McDonagh, "The Right to Information in International Human 
Rights Law," Human Rights Law Review, vol. 13, pp. 25-55, March 
1, 2013 2013. 
[5] 
H. Chourabi, N. Taewoo, S. Walker, J. R. Gil-Garcia, S. Mellouli, K. 
Nahon, et al., "Understanding Smart Cities: An Integrative 
Framework," in System Science (HICSS), 2012 45th Hawaii 
International Conference on, 2012, pp. 2289-2297. 
[6] 
G. Bugliarello, "Urban security in the United States: An overview," 
Technology in Society, vol. 27, pp. 287-293, 2005. 
[7] 
B. M. Leiner, V. G. Cerf, D. D. Clark, R. E. Kahn, L. Kleinrock, D. 
C. Lynch, et al., "A brief history of the internet," SIGCOMM 
Comput. Commun. Rev., vol. 39, pp. 22-31, 2009. 
[8] 
Toward a National Research Network. Washington, DC: The 
National Academies Press, 1988. 
[9] 
R. Yuan and W. Gong, "On the complexity and manageability of 
Internet infrastructure," Frontiers of Electrical and Electronic 
Engineering in China, vol. 6, pp. 424-428, 2011/09/01 2011. 
[10] D. M. West, "Digital divide: Improving Internet access in the 
developing world through affordable services and diverse content," 
The Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C.2015. 
[11] Terabit, 
"Submarine 
Telecoms 
Industry 
Report," 
Submarine 
Telecoms Forum, Cambridge, MA2014. 
[12] J. K. Crain. (2012) Assessing Resilience in the Global Undersea 
Cable Infrastructure. Naval Postgraduate School. Available: 
http://www.dtic.mil/cgibin/GetTRDoc?Location=U2&doc=GetTRDo
c.pdf&AD=ADA562772, accessed June 10, 2015 
[13] N. Abramson, "Development of the ALOHANET," Information 
Theory, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 31, pp. 119-123, 1985. 
[14] M. Gerla and L. Kleinrock, "Vehicular networks and the future of the 
mobile internet," Computer Networks, vol. 55, pp. 457-469, 2011. 
[15] B. Commission, "The State of Broadband 2014: broadband for all," 
International Telecommunications Union, Geneva, Switzerland2014. 
[16] K. Hinton, J. Baliga, M. Z. Feng, R. W. A. Ayre, and R. Tucker, 
"Power consumption and energy efficiency in the internet," Network, 
IEEE, vol. 25, pp. 6-12, 2011. 
[17] D. Baltrunas, A. Elmokashfi, and A. Kvalbein, "Measuring the 
Reliability of Mobile Broadband Networks," presented at the 
Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Internet Measurement 
Conference, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2014. 
[18] R. N. Clarke, "Expanding mobile wireless capacity: The challenges 
presented by technology and economics," Telecommunications 
Policy, vol. 38, pp. 693-708, 2014. 
[19] A. Aijaz, H. Aghvami, and M. Amani, "A survey on mobile data 
offloading: 
technical 
and 
business 
perspectives," 
Wireless 
Communications, IEEE, vol. 20, pp. 104-112, 2013. 
[20] CISCO, "Visual Networking Index: Global Mobile Data Traffic 
Forecast Update, 2014–2019," San Jose, CA2015. 
[21] S.-I. Chakchai, R. Jain, and A. K. Tamimi, "Scheduling in IEEE 
802.16e mobile WiMAX networks: key issues and a survey," 
Selected Areas in Communications, IEEE Journal on, vol. 27, pp. 
156-171, 2009. 
[22] A. C. Clarke, "Extraterrestrial relays," Wireless world, vol. 51, pp. 
305-308, 1945. 
[23] H. D. Clausen, L. Linder, and B. Collini-Nocker, "Internet over direct 
broadcast satellites," Communications Magazine, IEEE, vol. 37, pp. 
146-151, 1999. 
[24] H. Yurong and V. O. K. Li, "Satellite-based Internet: a tutorial," 
Communications Magazine, IEEE, vol. 39, pp. 154-162, 2001. 
[25] C. Metz, "IP-over-satellite: Internet connectivity blasts off," Internet 
Computing, IEEE, vol. 4, pp. 84-89, 2000. 
[26] A. Botta and A. Pescape, "On the performance of new generation 
satellite broadband internet services," Communications Magazine, 
IEEE, vol. 52, pp. 202-209, 2014. 
[27] M. Williamson, "Can satellites unblock the Internet?," IEE Review, 
vol. 45, pp. 107-111, 1999. 
[28] J. P. Conti, "Satellites bring broadband home," Engineering & 
Technology, vol. 5, pp. 60-63, 2010. 
[29] J. Beesemyer, R. Adam, and R. Donna, "Case Studies of Historical 
Epoch Shifts: Impacts on Space Systems and their Responses," in 
AIAA SPACE 2012 Conference & Exposition, ed: American Institute 
of Aeronautics and Astronautics, 2012. 
[30] D. J. Bem, T. W. Wieckowski, and R. J. Zielinski, "Broadband 
satellite systems," Communications Surveys & Tutorials, IEEE, vol. 
3, pp. 2-15, 2000. 
[31] J. Farserotu and R. Prasad, "A survey of future broadband multimedia 
satellite systems, issues and trends," Communications Magazine, 
IEEE, vol. 38, pp. 128-133, 2000. 
[32] E. W. Ashford, "Non-Geo systems—where have all the satellites 
gone?," Acta Astronautica, vol. 55, pp. 649-657, 2004. 
[33] S. Burleigh, A. Hooke, L. Torgerson, K. Fall, V. Cerf, B. Durst, et al., 
"Delay-tolerant networking: an approach to interplanetary Internet," 
Communications Magazine, IEEE, vol. 41, pp. 128-136, 2003. 
[34] K. Bhasin and J. L. Hayden, "Space Internet architectures and 
technologies for NASA enterprises," International Journal of Satellite 
Communications, vol. 20, pp. 311-332, 2002. 
[35] A. J. Hooke, "Towards an interplanetary internet: A proposed strategy 
for standardization," in Proceedings of Space Operations Conference 
and World Space Congress, 2002. 
[36] M. Williamson, "Connecting the other three billion," Engineering & 
Technology, vol. 4, pp. 70-73, 2009. 
[37] A. Vance. (2015, January 22, 2015) The New Space Race: One man's 
mission to build a galactic internet. Bloomberg Business. Available: 
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/features/2015-01-22/the-new-
space-race-one-man-s-mission-to-build-a-galactic-internet-i58i2dp6 
accessed April 18, 2015 
[38] P. B. d. Selding. (2015, January 23, 2015) SpaceX-Google Matchup 
Sets Up Satellite Internet Scramble Space News. Available: 
http://spacenews.com/spacex-google-matchup-sets-up-satellite-
internet-scramble/ accessed April 18, 2015 
[39] R. Winkler, E. Rusli, and A. Pasztor. (2015, 2015 Jan 20) SpaceX 
Gets $1 Billion From Google, Fidelity; Investment in Musk's 
Company Aimed at Helping to Provide Internet Access Via Satellites. 
Wall 
Street 
Journal 
(Online). 
Available: 
http://www.wsj.com/articles/spacex-gets-1-billion-from-google-
fidelity-1421795584  accessed April 18, 2015 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

[40] J. Hsu. (2015, January 27, 2015) SpaceX Raises $1 Billion from 
Google and Fidelity for Satellite Internet Project. IEEE Spectrum. 
Available: 
http://spectrum.ieee.org/tech-
talk/aerospace/satellites/spacex-raises-1-billion-from-google-fidelity-
for-satellite-internet-project accessed April 18, 2015 
[41] T. D. Cola, D. Tarchi, and A. Vanelli-Coralli, "Future trends in 
broadband satellite communications: information centric networks 
and enabling technologies," International Journal of Satellite 
Communications and Networking, 2015. 
[42] A. Safaai-Jazi, H. Ajaz, and W. L. Stutzman, "Empirical models for 
rain fade time on Ku- and Ka-band satellite links," Antennas and 
Propagation, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 43, pp. 1411-1415, 1995. 
[43] D. J. Kessler, R. C. Reynolds, and P. D. Anz-Meador, "Orbital debris 
environment for spacecraft designed to operate in low Earth orbit," 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Houston, TX1989. 
[44] C. d. Aenlle. (2001, June 19) U.K. Firm Finds Niche in ‘Discount’ 
Satellites. 
The 
New 
York 
Times. 
Available: 
http://www.nytimes.com/2001/06/19/news/19iht-rsat.html, 
accessed 
June 9, 2015 
[45] S. D. Crocker, "How the Internet got its rules," The New York Times, 
p. 29, 2009. 
[46] J. Davidson. (2015, April 14, 2015) Google Fiber has Internet 
providers scrambling to improve their service. Fortune. Available: 
https://fortune.com/2015/04/14/google-fiber-has-internet-providers-
scrambling-to-improve-their-service/ accessed April 18, 2015 
[47] N. Davidson. (2015, April 14, 2015) How it Works: Project Loon's 
Global 
Internet. 
Popular 
Science. 
Available: 
http://www.popsci.com/how-it-works-project-loon-global-internet 
accessed April 18, 2015 
[48] A. Barr. (2015, April 10) Google Gets Into Battery Arms Race. Wall 
Street Journal. Available: http://www.wsj.com/articles/google-gets-
into-battery-arms-race-1428694613 accessed April 18, 2015 
[49] L. Yee-Chun and Y. Huanchun, "Sky Station Stratospheric 
Telecommunications System, a high speed low latency switched 
wireless network," in 17th AIAA International Communications 
Satellite Systems Conference and Exhibit, ed: American Institute of 
Aeronautics and Astronautics, 1998. 
[50] S. Katikala, "Google Project Loon," Rivier Academic Journal, vol. 
10, Fall 2014 2014. 
[51] K. Maney. (2014, April 19) Dark Side of the Loon. Newsweek. 
Available: 
http://www.newsweek.com/2014/04/18/dark-side-loon-
248107.html accessed April 18, 2015 
[52] B. Fung, "Lasers, satellites and drones: How Facebook plans to 
deliver Internet to the developing world," in Washington Post, ed. 
Washington, D.C., 2014. 
[53] A. Widiawan and R. Tafazolli, "High Altitude Platform Station 
(HAPS): A Review of New Infrastructure Development for Future 
Wireless Communications," Wireless Personal Communications, vol. 
42, pp. 387-404, 2007/08/01 2007. 
[54] A. Mohammed, A. Mehmood, F. N. Pavlidou, and M. Mohorcic, 
"The Role of High-Altitude Platforms (HAPs) in the Global Wireless 
Connectivity," Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 99, pp. 1939-1953, 
2011. 
[55] D. Killinger, "Free Space Optics for Laser Communication Through 
the Air," Optics and Photonics News, vol. 13, pp. 36-42, 2002/10/01 
2002. 
[56] V. W. S. Chan, "Free-Space Optical Communications," Lightwave 
Technology, Journal of, vol. 24, pp. 4750-4762, 2006. 
[57] A. Sathiaseelan and J. Crowcroft, "The free Internet: a distant mirage 
or near reality?," University of Cambridge, Technical Report, vol. 
814, 2012. 
[58] M. Finn, A. Mathew, S. Yeo, L. Irani, S. Kelkar, A. Chia, et al., 
"(Invisible) Internet infrastructure labor," Selected Papers of Internet 
Research, vol. 3, 2013. 
[59] S. Rai. (2015, April 16, 2015) Facebook's Internet.org Faces Heat In 
India 
Over 
Net 
Neutrality. 
Forbes. 
Available: 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/saritharai/2015/04/16/facebooks-
internet-org-faces-heat-in-india-over-net-neutrality/ accessed April 
18, 2015 
[60] J. Pil Choi and B.-C. Kim, "Net neutrality and investment incentives," 
The RAND Journal of Economics, vol. 41, pp. 446-471, 2010. 
[61] A. P. Bianzino, C. Chaudet, D. Rossi, and J. Rougier, "A Survey of 
Green Networking Research," Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 
IEEE, vol. 14, pp. 3-20, 2012. 
 
 
 
 
 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-423-7
DATA ANALYTICS 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Data Analytics

