A Study of the OAuth 2.0 Protocol Extended Using SMS for Safe User Access
Chae Cheol-Joo
Dept. of R&D Information Convergence
Korea Institute of Science and Technology Information
Daejeon, Korea
cjchae@kisti.re.kr
Kwang-Nam Choi
Dept. of R&D Information Convergence
Korea Institute of Science and Technology Information
Daejeon, Korea
knchoi@kisti.re.kr
Abstract—Recently, diverse Web services and applications
have been provided to users. Since these services are provided
to the authenticated users only, users need to go through the
authentication process whenever they use the services. To take
care of this kind of inconvenience, the Open Authorization
(OAuth) protocol which allows a 3rd party application to have
restricted access authority against Web services has emerged.
This OAuth protocol provides convenient and flexible services
to users, but it has security weaknesses in acquiring authority.
Therefore, this study proposes a method to analyze and
improve security loopholes, which can occur in the OAuth 2.0
protocol.
Keywords
-
OAuth
2.0;
User
Access;
Authentication;
Authorization
I.
INTRODUCTION
The OAuth is a protocol which authorizes the authority to
use the services provided by diverse service providers after
going through user authentication just once between the user
and 3rd party application. Even though the OAuth provides
convenience and scalability, it has several security loopholes
in the authentication between the user and 3rd application.
Unlike the weakness of the conventional Web application
authentication, such problems can cause a serious security
problem because once a user successfully passes user
authentication once, he/she can get access to multiple
services without additional authentication procedures [1][2].
Therefore, this study proposes a 3rd application and user
authentication method which can analyze and overcome the
security weaknesses of the OAuth protocol. This paper is
structured as follows: In Section 2, the OAuth protocol is
described. In Section 3, the security weaknesses which can
occur in the OAuth protocol are stated. In Section 4, an
authentication method which can overcome the security
loopholes mentioned in Section 3 is proposed. In Section 5,
conclusion is given.
II.
USER AUTHENTICATION IN THE OAUTH 2.0
As a general procedure to operate the OAuth 2.0
protocol, the client requests an access token which represents
authority to get access to resources to the resource owner.
The authorization server issues the authority to get access to
the resources after authenticating the client and
user
information. Then, the client is able to approach user
resources. Figure 1 reveals the general operating procedures
of the OAuth 2.0 protocol [3][4].
Figure 1.
General Operating Procedures of the OAuth 2.0 Protocol.
III.
SECURITY VULNERABILITY OF USER AUTHENTICATION
IN THE OAUTH 2.0
In the OAuth protocol, if the access token having the
authority to get access to resources is stolen, security
vulnerability that users are able to approach resources using
diverse applications occurs. In terms of a way to steal such
access token, there are replay attack, phishing and spoofing
which are the common network security problems. In this
section the security vulnerability in which authority can be
stolen through the said attacks in the OAuth 2.0 protocol [5]
is described.
A.
Acquisition of authorization code using replay attack
For replay attack, an attacker captures authorization code
between the client and resource owner. Then, it can resend a
request to the client to login to the resource owner’s account
associated with authorization code, using the captured
authorization code redirection request. Through this kind of
replay attack, an attacker is able to acquire the authority to
get access to the resource server after getting the information
on the resource owner.
B.
Acquisition of ID and password using phishing
In order for the client to get the resource owner’s
information,
it
should
pass
the
authorization
server’s
authentication. In this process, an attacker is able to steal the
resource owner’s ID and passwords which are needed for
authentication by creating a malicious client. Using the
resource owner’s ID and password stolen through phishing,
an attacker is able to get the authority to login and use the
resource server.
137
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

C.
Acquisition of authorization code using spoofing
To attempt spoofing, the attacker first wiretaps and
intercepts the authorization code. Then, it actually blocks the
authorization code request to maintain the intercepted
authorization code. Then, the attacker starts an initial session
with the client. Once the session is begun, it can acquire the
authority to get access to the resource service, using the
intercepted authorization code.
IV.
SAFE USER ACCESS AUTHORIZATION IN THE OAUTH
2.0 PROTOCOL USING THE SMS
In this section, a method to issue an access token which
is the authority to get access to the resource server safely
after authenticating the resource owner, using SMS (Short
Message Service) before the issuance as a way to solve the
security problems that can occur in the OAuth 2.0 protocol
analyzed in Section 3. Figure 2 reveals the OAuth 2.0
protocol extended through SMS authentication to grant safe
user authority.
Figure 2.
Proposed Method for more Safe User Asscess Grant.
To allow the SMS authentication server to send an email
which includes authentication code to the resource owner
safely in Step 6, Elgamal algorithm was adopted. The SMS
authentication server creates a very large decimal (p) and
creates and issues a public key (
) which can
be compared to a private key (
) needed for the
resource owner in the SMS authentication server.
In Step 7, the resource owner decrypts and authenticates
{MASSMS
address, UserSMS address, c1, c2, MACMAS, TMAS}
received from the SMS authentication server.
Using the proposed method, the user authentication
security vulnerability in the OAuth 2.0 analyzed in section 3
can be overcome as follows:
•
In the replay attack vulnerability, a malicious
attacker can resend a request to the client to login to the
resource owner’s account associated with authorization
code after capturing and using the captured authorization
code redirection request between the client and resource
owner. Then, the attacker attempts to get the authority to
approach the resource server by getting user information.
In the proposed method, however, the issuance of an
access token to the resource owner is authorized by using
the SMS. Therefore, the attacker isn’t able to get access
to the resource server through the authorization code-
based replay attack. In addition, even though the attacker
retries replay attack using the SMS during authentication,
the validity of TMAS received after going through the
verification of
is verified in the
SMS authentication. Therefore, it is able to block replay
attack.
•
In phishing vulnerability, an attacker can attempt
proxy authentication using the values entered by the
resource owner after constructing a malicious client.
However, the resource owner and SMS authentication
server verify the MAC authentication code during the
SMS authentication of the proposed method. Therefore, it
is able to block the attacker’s phishing.
•
In spoofing vulnerability, an attacker wiretaps and
intercepts authorization code and blocks the user’s
request. Then, it starts normal protocol, using the
intercepted
authorization
code.
In
the
proposed
technique, however, SMS authentication on the user is
only performed. Therefore, it is able to avoid spoofing
vulnerability.
V.
CONCLUSION
The OAuth protocol is developed for the purpose of
standardizing different authentication methods. With this,
therefore, users are able to use many other applications
without going through additional authentication procedures.
Even though the OAuth protocol provides convenience and
scalability,
it
has
several
security
loopholes
in
the
authentication between the user and 3rd application. To
overcome such security problems which can occur in the
OAuth protocol, this study proposed a method which can
authenticate
user
authority
safely
by
verifying
the
authentication code, using the external authentication server.
The
proposed
method
overcomes
the
security
vulnerability of the OAuth protocol so that it is able to
provide active services, compared to the conventional
protocol. The proposed method-based OAuth protocol can
prevent a security accident. In addition, it could be applied to
the emerging OpenID and facilitate the protocol.
REFERENCES
[1]
Meng-Yu Wu, Tsern-Huei Lee, “Design and Implementation
of Cloud API Access Control Based on OAuth”, In Proc. Of
TENCON Spring Conference, 2013.
[2]
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OAuth
[3]
D. Hardt, “ The OAuth 2.0 authorization framework, ”
Internet Engineering Task Force(IETF) RFC 6749, 2012.
[4]
E. Hammer-Lahav, Ed, “The OAuth 1.0 Protocol”, Internet
Engineering Task Force(IETF) RFC5849, 2010.
[5]
M.
Jones
and
D.
Hardt,
“ OAuth
2.0
Authorization
Framework: Bearer token usage”, Internet Engineering Task
Force (IETF) RFC6750, 2012.
138
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-510-4
DATA ANALYTICS 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Data Analytics

