Big Data-driven Multimodal Traffic Management: Trends and Challenges
Ivana Semanjski*, **, Sidharta Gautama*, **,
∗ Department of Industrial Systems Engineering and Product Design, Ghent University,
Gent, Belgium
∗∗ Industrial Systems Engineering (ISyE), Flanders Make
Ghent, Belgium
e-mail:ivana.semanjski@ugent.be; sidharta.gautama@ugent.be
Abstract—Availability of big data on moving objects is strongly
affecting the way we view and manage mobility. Mobility in
urban areas is becoming more and more complex, posing the
challenge of efficient multimodal traffic management. So far,
existing solutions were mainly car oriented, failing to capture
the full complexity of the mobility within the city. In this
paper, we present the potential of big-data driven solution for
multimodal mobility management that capitalizes on the
existing data availability and is realized through the “guarded”
data architecture.
Keywords-big
data;
traffic
management;
platform
architecture, autonomous vehicles; digital twin.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Availability of big data on moving objects is strongly
affecting the way we view mobility. More and more
initiatives strive to enhance the traditional data gathering
processes for transportation planning and mobility studies by
integrating big data. As these data are more detailed than the
traditionally collected ones with higher spatial and temporal
resolution, new possibilities are also emerging. One of such
domain is data driven mobility and traffic management. In
this paper, we tackle the potential of the big driven traffic
management, particularly focusing on urban areas. The main
challenge here is the above mentioned data integration which
is, in all spheres of mobility, still at quite early stage coupled
with the multimodality, as the existing mobility management
solutions are still mainly car oriented. To tackle this, we
focus on identifying current trends and existing challenges
on a way to fully data driven traffic management. Here, we
identify six main challenges ranging from data, across
mobility to the business related challenges and five major
future trends in this domain. In our research, we focus only
on land transport modes that are integrated into the urban
traffic management ecosystem and propose a “guarded” data
platform architecture that could facilitate the data-driven
mobility management in urban areas.
The paper is organized as follows: in the Section 2, we
give detailed state of the art literature review on big data and
current status of the big data integration into mobility
management domain. Following this, in Section 3 we tackle
the traffic management and the existing challenges and
trends. In Section 4, we present the “guarded” big data
platform architecture as a potential solution for the existing
challenges in the traffic management domain. In the final
section, we give conclusion remarks and present the future
work on the topic.
II.
STATE OF THE ART
A. Big data definitions
Among first, and probably best known definitions of big
data, is the 3Vs definition [1]. 3Vs defines big data as the
increase of data volume (data scale becomes increasingly
big), variety between the data (data comes as structured,
semi-structured and unstructured data) and velocity of data
generation (data collection-processing chain needs to be
promptly and timely conducted to maximally utilize the
potential value of big data). As a big data based analytics
developed over time, one of the key elements distinguishing
among, simply, a large dataset and the big data turned to be
ability to extract intelligence and useful insight from the data
itself. Following this idea, a 4Vs [2][3] definition was
developed. In the 4Vs definition, original velocity is divided
into velocity and value, with the intention to acknowledge
the extraction of value from data as one of main big data
characteristics. Hence, the 4Vs stand for volume (great
volume), variety (various types of data), velocity (swift data
generation),
and
value
(huge
information
value
with
distributed with a very low density among data).
B. Big data in mobility studies
Traditionally, data on mobility are collected via travel
surveys, interviews and diaries. These cyclic data collection
processes are repeated every one, two, but more often, five
or even ten years formatting time series of the noted travel
behaviors. Based on the data collected in such a manner
transportation
planners
and
decision
makers
have
a
systematic overview of the mobility patterns and can follow
the main trends observed in the travel behavior. However,
numerous studies [4][5] have shown that data collected in
this manner deviated systematically from the actual travel
behavior. Today, more and more studies explore the
potential of big data when it comes to replacing the
traditional data collection methods for mobility studies [6]–
[9]. The most frequently explored big datasets can be
categorized as:

Pure Global Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSS)
data

Mobile network data

Mobile sensed data.
Pure GNSS data are collected via GNSS devices. The
GNSS devices record the timestamp and positioning data of
the moving object. Mainly these devices were installed in
149
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-681-1
DATA ANALYTICS 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Data Analytics

vehicles [10]. However, with the technology development,
portable handheld GNSS devices were also used. The use of
GNSS
data
for
mobility
studies
mainly
reflects
in
complementing the traditionally collected data on mobility
behavior with more detailed activity detection [6][11].
However, existing studies highlight several challenges:
discipline required to carry the portable device [12] and lack
of the ability to have a full multimodal overview when the
device is installed only in the vehicles [13][14].
Mobile network data are data collected by telecom
operators as a byproduct of their daily activities. Most often,
for mobility studies, these data include two elements. The
first element corresponds to traces triggered by the serving
network, so called network signalization data. The second
one corresponds to traces triggered by the user interaction
activity (e.g., call, SMS or data transfer activity), so called
Call Detail Record (CDR). The geographical precision and
time resolution of the CDR and network signalization data is
somewhat lower than this is the case with the GNSS data.
The reason for this lies in the fact that the network notes the
base station (antenna) location, which covers the area where
the user is located, and not the actual mobile phone device
location. For this reason, the mobile network data seem to be
a better candidate for longitudinal analysis of human
mobility patterns [15]–[20].
Mobile sensed data are data collected from mobile phone
sensors. This includes the above mentioned GNSS data as
one of the possible sensors integrated into the mobile phone.
However, the main characteristic of the mobile phone sensed
data is the fusion of data sensed from multiple different
sensors as accelerometer, microphone, gyroscope and others.
One of the examples are positioning data that can be sourced
from the GNSS sensor, Wi-Fi network location or mobile
networks’
base
station
location
readings,
or
as
the
combination of any of the positioning sensors integrated into
the mobile phone itself.
C. Big data in traffic management
When it comes to the use of big data in real-life
applications, several topics seem to be of particular interest.
The first one is the privacy related to the use of personal data
and, when it comes to mobility, traces of the individuals’
movements through the space [3][21]. The second one is the
business related intelligences and value that one can gain
from the big data oriented analytics [22]. The third one
comes from the technical challenges that come with the big
data integration as difficulties in regard to data capturing,
data storage, data analysis and data visualization [23][24].
Concerning the integration of big data into the traffic
management, literature shows that this area is still at quite
early stage and that majority of papers in this domain are
focused on car traffic and aspects as traffic flow prediction
[25]. Here, methods mainly use so called shallow traffic
prediction models and are still unsatisfying for many real-
world applications. Several papers look at the deep learning
methods,
but
still
keep
their
focus
on
motorized
transportation only [25]- [27]. Summary of these efforts can
be found in comprehensive literature reviews that highlight
advances and complexity in this domain [28][29].
In our paper, we focus on overcoming the limits of the
existing
solutions
by
considering
the
“guarded”
data
architecture that would be able to tackle the privacy issues
through the guarded and data access control oriented
solution. Furthermore, we focus on urban mobility from the
end-users oriented point of view, considering not only car
oriented traffic, but full spectrum of multimodal mobility
that one can find in the cities of today.
III.
TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT
Traffic
management
comprehends
organization,
arrangement, guidance and control of stationary and moving
traffic [30]. The sub terms exist per different branches of
transportation. Hence, the air traffic management is an
aviation term encompassing all systems that assist aircraft to
depart from an aerodrome, transit airspace, and land at a
destination aerodrome. The sea traffic management defines a
set of systems and procedures to guide and monitor sea
traffic in a manner similar to air traffic management [31].
However, the mobility in urban areas has become so
complex that the initial scope of the traffic management in
urban areas, mainly focused on car transportation, has
expanded to include a full spectrum of diverse transportation
modes and numerus interactions between them. Hence, the
traffic management in urban areas includes management of
motorized vehicles, public transport, pedestrians, bicyclists
and other flows and aims to provide safe, orderly and
efficient movement of persons and goods, as well as efficient
interaction between different transportation modes. For this
reasons, the traffic management in urban areas is one of the
most complex and challenging tasks when it comes to the
traffic management.
A. Big data integration challenges
As
mentioned
above,
current
solutions
for
urban
transportation management are mainly focused on motorized
transportation, namely the cars. Systems monitor, record
and/or guide car traffic flows by relying on sensing
equipment installed on roads. Take-up of such system
requires significant resources for city authorities. This
investment is two-fold: (i) purchasing of the system that is
vendor locked in and (ii) adjusting the, already existing
equipment on roads, to the requirements of such vendor
lock-in system. This often includes replacement of some
costly elements as traffic lights and/or Variable Message
Signs (VMS). It is a long-term commitment between the city
authorities and the system provider that leaves the city with
limited flexibility. On another hand, as cities strive to ensure
higher quality of life in their area and well balanced
transportation mode use that can ensure sustainability of the
mobility system, such solutions only partially satisfies city
needs as it mainly covers only one transportation mode.
Hence, the challenges (C) towards a big data driven traffic
management can be described as follows:
ܥ=(ܯܯ,ܱ݌݁݊,ܤ2ܤ,ܲ,ܦܫ,ܩ)்ெ
(1)
150
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-681-1
DATA ANALYTICS 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Data Analytics

where:
MM – stands for the multimodality as a challenge of
having a full spectrum of different transportation modes
present in the cities under one umbrella.
Open – stand for the challenge of integrating different
open datasets that might come from the city authorities or
different crowdsourcing campaigns and hence, can be
structured
with
clear
data
quality
standards
and
responsibilities or semi-structured / unstructured with the
“best effort” data quality responsibilities.
B2B – stands for business related challenges, as such
system
would
require
business-to-business
cooperation
among potential market competitors. Hence, clear IPR
(Intellectual Property Rights), licensing, data access and
processing conditions need to be integrated.
P– stands for data privacy challenge as big data often
include handling of moving object (e.g., private mobile
phones or cars data), camera feeds etc.
DI –stands for data integration challenge. This challenge
is mainly related to the lack of uniform data standards across
different transportation modes and/or geographic regions.
G – stands for data governance and traffic management
governance among different regions, as big data driven
traffic management relies also on traffic flows that approach
cities from regions outside of the city authority governance
(e.g., regional roads etc.). Hence, synchronization of the
traffic management strategies is needed among different
areas.
B. Trends
The existing trends in the big data driven traffic
management include:
ܶ = (ܶ, ܵ,ܯܯܫ,ܣܸ,ܤܵ)்ெ
(2)
where:
T – stands for transition of the traffic management
strategies across different transportation modes. As it was the
case in history that, for example, the aviation has taken over
some lessons learned and best practices from maritime traffic
navigation, telecommunications have taken over the data
flow management from air navigation, it is becoming
inevitable to translate and test different traffic management
strategies across multimodal data. One of the potential
polygons for this might be developing digital twins of urban
areas.
S – stands for different infrastructure access strategies
and levels of services that can be developed through such
integrated overview of urban mobility. For example, city
authorities can implement strategy to reward sustainable
mobility behavior by granting the access to the city events,
public transport tickets or high speed lines for private cars.
MMI – stand for integration of multimodal multisource
data on mobility.
AV- as it is expected that autonomous driving will
heavily rely on data, big data driven traffic management
plays an important role in the transition towards fused traffic
flows (combination of autonomous and traditional vehicles)
and purely autonomous vehicles traffic flows.
BS- stands for braking the silos and allowing the cities to
have a flexible solution without vendor lock-ins.
IV.
BIG DATA DRIVEN TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT PLATFORM
It is not a rare case that cities have started collecting data
on multimodal mobility by themselves and providing them
as an open data [32]–[34]. However, there is only a limited
level of adoption of such data sources in the traffic
management market. For this reason, it this paper, we tackle
the potential of integrating big data into a transportation
management framework that could provide cities with the
flexible and multimodal overview.
Figure 1 shows an example of the “guarded” big data
platform architecture for transport and mobility management.
The architecture includes several layers, namely:

Raw data layer – an entry point to any raw (low
lever, unprocessed) data on mobility that are being
integrated into the architecture

Data quality check layer – guards the input to the
architecture by checking the quality of the raw data
(e.g., is data structure and data collection frequency
of adequate level). Such layer has the possibility to
let the data further into the architecture structure
(with the notion of the initial data quality) or to
generate the report on the data quality so that the
detected issues can be corrected.

Standardized and normalized data layer – preforms
data cleaning and standardization so that, regardless
of the initial data source, at this layer all the data on
the same topic (e.g., speed data) have the same
format and can be processed further in a same
manner.

Data quality check layer (can be seen as a sub layer
of the Standardized and normalized data layer) –
layer where all the data transformation achieved in
the previous layer are noted. For example, to get the
speed data of the same format maybe one needed to
reduce the temporal resolution of the initial dataset,
hence has lower the quality of the initial data set.

Processed insights layer – layer where insights of the
higher level are created. For example, speed data
were used to produce the travel time map.

Access control layer – guards the access to the
processed data and insights.

User insights layer – layer where different users can
have an access to the data. These user groups can be
city operators, authorities, citizens’ initiatives or
private citizens. They can all have an access to the
subset of data (or all) depending on their access
rights (guarded by previous layer). One example of
this can be police officer who has authorization to
view the camera feed data, whereas city operator or
private citizen does not has this authorization due to
the privacy legislation. Another example can be the
151
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-681-1
DATA ANALYTICS 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Data Analytics

presence of the license protected data, hence one can
purchase the license and access the data or not.
Next to the bottom (data quality check) and top (access
control)
guarding
layers,
the
architecture
is
guarded
horizontally on both ends. This is because it is foreseen that
data can enter the architecture at different levels. For
example, one can provide the platform with the already
normalized
and
standardized
data,
but
the
platform
horizontally checks the input quality of this data and collects
or provides quality feedback to the data provider. The same
goes for each level of the architecture. On the other end,
based on the licensing conditions, one can collect the data
from the platform at each level. For example, the developers
might be granted the access to the standardized data on
mobility that they can use to produce different services. This
is done through the horizontal access control layer.
Figure 1. “Guarded” big data platform architecture
Figure 2 gives an example of the processing chain
thought the “guarded” architecture. In this example, a public
transportation company can integrate their data into the
mobility platform that has the “guarded” architecture. These
data can be integrated as one of the accepted standards for
the architecture (e.g., European NetEx standard). Data can
then be used by a local SME (Small Medium Enterprise) that
develops a routing app. For commercial purposes, the use of
the public transport data might be restricted by the license
conditions. Hence, the SME gets the granted the access to the
date if the license conditions are meet. The same dataset,
might also be processed thought the architecture into the
insights related to an public event organized by the city.
Hence, the traffic management officer in charge of the event
organization might have access to these data under different
conditions and mighty view them in a different form. For
example, these data can be an input to the alerting system
that indicates if the crowdedness in affected area is above the
certain threshold. In this context, the city event manager can
request additional public transportation vehicle in the area or
sent request to the police to regulate the smooth passing of
the public transportation vehicles.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
With the current developments in the mobility and big
data domains, it seems inevitable to move towards a data
driven traffic management framework. Such a framework
could allow cities and other mobility related authorities to
capitalize on already existing data sources to improve
mobility conditions in their areas. Furthermore, it is a
reasonable step towards integration of strongly data driven,
autonomous vehicles into the existing traffic flows, either as
part of the mixed traffic flows or as purely AV flows.
Although this is something that is not expected to happen in
the near future, industry developments strongly point in this
direction. Hence it is necessary to put cities in a position to
think forward on how to integrate such developments and
still efficiently manage overall multimodal mobility in their
areas. In this paper, we have identified the main trends and
challenges in this domain and suggested a “guarded” data
platform
solution
that
could
meet
these
challenges.
Furthermore, we recognized digital twins of urban areas as a
forward thinking solution that could be used by urban
authorities as a big data driven option for multimodal
mobility
management
and
a
testing
polygon
for
implementation of different strategies in real-life urban
environment.
152
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-681-1
DATA ANALYTICS 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Data Analytics

Figure 2. Process example
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research is funded by the EU Urban Innovation
Actions (UIA) under the TMaaS (Traffic Management as a
Service) project.
REFERENCES
[1]
D. Laney, “3-d data management: controlling data volume,
velocity and variety,” 2001.
[2]
B. J. Gantz and D. Reinsel, “Extracting Value from Chaos
State of the Universe : An Executive Summary,” IDC iView, 
no. June, pp. 1–12, 2011.
[3]
M. Chen, S. Mao, and Y. Liu, “Big data: A survey,” Mob.
Networks Appl., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 171–209, 2014.
[4]
P. R. Stopher and S. P. Greaves, “Household travel surveys:
Where are we going?,” Transp. Res. Part A Policy Pract., vol.
41, no. 5, pp. 367–381, Jun. 2007.
[5]
D. Ettema, H. Timmermans, and L. van Veghel, “Effects of
Data Collection Methods in Travel and Activity Research,”
Eur. Inst. Retail. Serv. Stud. Eindhoven, Netherlands, vol.
2000, no. i, 1996.
[6]
J. Wolf, M. Loechl, J. Myers, and C. Arce, “Trip Rate
Analysis in {GPS}-Enhanced Personal Travel Surveys,”
Transp. Surv. Qual. Innov., vol. 2000, no. August 2001, pp.
483–498, 2003.
[7]
S. Amin et al., “Mobile Century Using GPS Mobile Phones as
Traffic Sensors : A Field Experiment,” 15th World Congr. 
Intell. Transp. Syst., pp. 8–11, 2008.
[8]
H. Gong, C. Chen, E. Bialostozky, and C. T. Lawson, “A
GPS/GIS method for travel mode detection in New York
City,” Comput. Environ. Urban Syst., vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 131–
139, Mar. 2012.
[9]
I. Semanjski, S. Gautama, R. Ahas, and F. Witlox, “Spatial
context mining approach for transport mode recognition from
mobile sensed big data,” Comput. Environ. Urban Syst., vol.
66, 2017.
[10] S. Turner, W. Eisele, R. Benz, and D. Holdener, Travel Time
Data Collection Handbook. Arlington: Texas Transportation
Institute, 1998.
[11] T. Feng and H. J. P. Timmermans, “Detecting activity type
from gps traces using spatial and temporal information,” Eur.
J. Transp. Infrastruct. Res., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 662–674, 2011.
[12] I. Semanjski and S. Gautama, “Sensing Human Activity for
Smart Cities ’ Mobility Management”, Mobility Management,
Rijeka, Croatia, InTech, 2016. .
[13] T. Feng and H. J. P. Timmermans, “Transportation mode
recognition using GPS and accelerometer data,” Transp. Res.
Part C Emerg. Technol., vol. 37, pp. 118–130, Dec. 2013.
[14] J. Wolf, S. Bricka, T. Ashby, and C. Gorugantua, “Advances
in the Application of GPS to Household Travel Surveys,”
Househ. Travel Surv., 2004.
[15] R. Ahas et al., “Feasibility Study on the Use of Mobile
Positioning Data for
Tourism Statistics -
Consolidated
Report,” no. 30501, p. 46, 2014.
[16] F. Calabrese, M. Diao, G. Di Lorenzo, J. Ferreira, and C.
Ratti, “Understanding individual mobility patterns from urban
sensing data: A mobile phone trace example,” Transp. Res.
Part C Emerg. Technol., vol. 26, pp. 301–313, Jan. 2013.
Access
control
Public
Transportation
Company
(Standardized
dataset)
SME
(Routing app
development)
Standardized and normalized
data layer
Processed insights layer
Access control
City event
manager
Data quality
check
Stakeholders
Process
Data quality check
153
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-681-1
DATA ANALYTICS 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Data Analytics

[17] D. E. Seidl, P. Jankowski, and M.-H. Tsou, “Privacy and
spatial pattern preservation in masked GPS trajectory data,”
Int. J. Geogr. Inf. Sci., vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 785–800, 2016.
[18] A. Vij and K. Shankari, “When is big data big enough?
Implications of using GPS-based surveys for travel demand
analysis,” Transp. Res. Part C Emerg. Technol., vol. 56, pp.
446–462, Jul. 2015.
[19] O. Järv, R. Ahas, and F. Witlox, “Understanding monthly
variability in human activity spaces: A twelve-month study
using mobile phone call detail records,” Transp. Res. Part C
Emerg. Technol., vol. 38, pp. 122–135, Jan. 2014.
[20] A. Mishra, “Fundamentals of cellular network planning and
optimisation-,” Commun. Eng., p. 277, 2004.
[21] S. Sagiroglu and D. Sinanc, “Big Data : A Review,” 2013 
International Conference on Collaboration Technologies and
Systems (CTS), IEEE, pp. 42–47, 2013.
[22] H. Chen, R. H. L. Chiang, and V. C. Storey, “Business
Intelligence and Analytics: From Big Data to Big Impact,”
MIS Q., vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 1165–1188, 2012.
[23] C. L. Philip Chen and C. Y. Zhang, “Data-intensive
applications, challenges, techniques and technologies: A
survey on Big Data,” Inf. Sci. (Ny)., vol. 275, pp. 314–347,
2014.
[24] A. Labrinidis, Y. Papakonstantinou, J. M. Patel, and R.
Ramakrishnan, “Exploring the inherent technical challenges
in realizing the potential of Big Data,” Commun. ACM, vol.
57, no. 7, pp. 86–94, 2014.
[25] Y. Lv, Y. Duan, W. Kang, Z. Li, and F. Wang, “Traffic Flow
Prediction With Big Data : A Deep Learning Approach,” 
IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. PP, no. 99, pp. 1–9,
2014.
[26] L. Li, X. Su, Y. Wang, Y. Lin, Z. Li, and Y. Li, “Robust
causal dependence mining in big data network and its
application to traffic flow predictions,” Transp. Res. Part C
Emerg. Technol., vol. 58, pp. 292–307, Sep. 2015.
[27] A. Abadi, T. Rajabioun, and P. A. Ioannou, “Networks With
Limited Traffic Data,” Ieee Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol.
16, no. 2, pp. 653–662, 2015.
[28] Brian L . Smith ! and Michael J . Demetsky, “Traffic flow 
forecasting : 
comparison 
of 
modeling 
approaches,” 
Transportation (Amst)., vol. 123, no. 4, pp. 261–266, 1997.
[29] G. de Jong, A. Daly, M. Pieters, S. Miller, R. Plasmeijer, and
F. Hofman, “Uncertainty in traffic forecasts: Literature review
and new results for The Netherlands,” Transportation (Amst).,
vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 375–395, 2007.
[30] R. T. Underwood, Traffic management: an introduction.
North Melbourne, Victoria, Australia: Hargreen Publishing
Company, 1990.
[31] European
Commission,
“MONALISA
project,”
2018.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.sjofartsverket.se/en/MonaLisa/.
[retrieved:
September, 2018].
[32] Open Knowledge International, “Open Up Public Transport
Data.”
[Online].
Available:
http://opendatahandbook.org/solutions/en/Public-Transport-
Data/. [retrieved: August, 2018].
[33] US City Open Data, “Datasets / Transit,” US City Open Data
Census,
2017.
[Online].
Available:
http://us-
city.census.okfn.org/dataset/transit.
[retrieved:
September,
2018].
[34] European Union, “European Open Data in European cities,”
no.6, pp. 2016–2018., 2016.
154
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-681-1
DATA ANALYTICS 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Data Analytics

