Forecasting Burglary Risk in Small Areas via Network Analysis of City Streets
Maria Mahfoud1, Sandjai Bhulai2, Rob van der Mei1, Dimitry Erkin1, and Elenna Dugundji1
1 CWI National Research Institute for Mathematics and Computer Science
2 Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Faculty of Science, Department of Mathematics
Email: M.Mahfoud@cwi.nl, S.Bhulai@vu.nl, R.D.van.der.Mei@cwi.nl, Dimitry.Erkin@gmail.com, E.R.Dugundji@vu.nl
Abstract—Predicting residential burglary can beneﬁt from un-
derstanding human movement patterns within an urban area.
Typically, these movements occur along street networks. To take
the characteristics of such networks into account, one can use two
measures in the analysis: betweenness and closeness. The former
measures the popularity of a particular street segment, while
the latter measures the average shortest path length from one
node to every other node in the network. In this paper, we study
the inﬂuence of the city street network on residential burglary
by including these measures in our analysis. We show that the
measures of the street network help in predicting residential
burglary exposing that there is a relationship between conceptions
in urban design and crime.
Keywords–predictive analytics; forecasting; street network; be-
tweenness centrality; closeness centrality; residential burglary
I.
INTRODUCTION
Residential burglary is a crime with high impact for
victims. Substantial academic research has accordingly been
dedicated to understanding the process of residential burglary
in order to prevent future burglaries. In this attempt, several
studies have focused on the role of the urban conﬁguration
in shaping crime patterns; this is regarded as one of the
fundamental issues in environmental criminology, e.g., [1].
According to [2], environmental criminology is based on
three premises. The ﬁrst premise states that the nature of the
immediate environment directly inﬂuences criminal behavior,
thus a crime is not only reliant on criminogenic individuals,
but also on criminogenic elements in the surroundings of a
crime. The second premise states that crime is non-randomly
distributed in time and space, meaning that crime is always
concentrated around opportunities which occur on different
moments in a day or week, or different places in a given
geographical area. The third premise argues that understanding
the criminogenic factors within a targeted environment, and
capturing patterns and particular characteristics of that area,
can reduce the number of crimes within that area.
Understanding human movement patterns within an urban
area is essential for determining crime patterns [3]. These
movements occur along a street network consisting of roads
and intersections. Throughout the city street network, various
places are connected, allowing transportation from one point to
the next. Within the network, a street segment can be described
as the road, or edge, linking two intersections, or nodes. In
their study, [4] found that crime is tightly concentrated around
crime hotspots that are located at speciﬁc points within the
urban area. The urban conﬁguration inﬂuences where these
hotspots are located, suggesting that it is possible to deal with
a large proportion of crime by focusing on relatively small
areas. They found that crime hotspots are characterized by
being stable over time, and that the hotspots are inﬂuenced by
social and contextual characteristics of a speciﬁc geographical
location. To be able to understand and prevent crime, it is
important to examine these very small geographic areas, often
as small as addresses of street segments, within the urban area.
In an analysis of crime at street segment level, [5] reveal that
crime trends at speciﬁc street segments were responsible for
the overall observed trend in the city, emphasizing the need
for understanding the development of crime at street segment
level.
In urban studies, betweenness is a measure used to de-
termine popularity or usage potential of a particular street
segment for the travel movements made by the resident or
ambient population through a street network [6], [7]. In crimi-
nology, betweenness represents the collective awareness spaces
developed by people, including offenders, during the course
of their routine activities. This metric provides a means to
represent concepts, such as offender awareness, in empirical
analysis [8]. Several studies have been conducted to uncover
the effects of betweenness on crime. [8] investigated whether
street segments that have a higher user potential measured by
the network metric betweenness, have a higher risk of burglary.
Also included in their research was the geometry of street
segments via a measure of their linearity and different social-
demographic covariates. They concluded that betweenness is
a highly signiﬁcant covariate when predicting burglaries at
street segment level. In another study conducted by [9], a
mathematical model of crime was presented that took the street
network into account. The results of this study also show an
evident effect of the street network.
In this research, we examine for small urban areas (4-digit
postal codes: PC4) what the inﬂuence of the city street network
is on residential burglary by applying betweenness as well
as another centrality measure, closeness. These two centrality
measures give different indications of the accessibility of an
area and we study whether a more accessible area has a higher
risk of residential burglary compared to a less accessible area.
For comparison, we consider the same areas deﬁned in our
previous research [10]. In this earlier study, we predicted
residential burglaries within different postal code areas for
the district of Amsterdam-West. We extend the model of our
earlier research by including the centrality measures closeness
and betweenness as explanatory variables. Furthermore, we
investigate which of the two centrality measures gives better
outcomes, closeness or betweenness.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II describes
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-681-1
DATA ANALYTICS 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Data Analytics

the dataset and the data analysis. Section III provides the
methodological framework of this research. The results of the
analysis are discussed in Section IV. In Section V, conclusions
and recommendations for further research are presented.
II.
DATA
The data used for this research is collected from three
different data sources. The ﬁrst dataset is provided by the
Dutch Police and ranges from the ﬁrst of January 2009 to
30 April 2014. The original dataset includes all recorded
incidents of residential burglaries in the city of Amsterdam
recorded at a monthly level and grouped into grids of 125
× 125 meters resulting in 94,224 records. Next to residential
burglary, the dataset includes a wide range of covariates. These
covariates provide information on the geographic information
of the grid such as the number of Educational Institutions
(EI) in the grid. In addition to these covariates, the data
includes also spatial-temporal indicators of the following crime
types: violation, mugging, and robbery. These spatial-temporal
indicators measure the number of times a crime type happened
within a given grid cell for a given time lag. The second
dataset is obtained from the Statistics Netherlands (CBS) and
includes various demographic and socio-economic covariates
such as the average monthly income. This data is provided on
a six alphanumeric postal code level where the ﬁrst two digits
indicate a region and a city, the second two digits indicate a
neighborhood and the last two letters indicate a range of house
numbers usually a street or a segment of a street. The third
dataset is an internal dataset containing different centrality
measures calculated on the street network of Amsterdam.
As this research focuses on explaining and predicting
residential burglaries at the four-digit postal code level (PC4),
the data should be aggregated at this level. Before aggregating
the data we perform some pre-processing steps. First, we
check the crime records for missing postal codes: if the postal
code is missing then all linked data from CBS and the street
network will be missing. We observed that 309 of the total
1,812 grid cells had a missing postal code (PC6). Some of
these grid cells (34) were subsequently updated manually;
other grid cells referred to industrial areas, bodies of water,
railroads, grasslands, and highways. As a double check, we
also conﬁrmed whether there were residential burglaries in
the remaining grid cells with missing postal codes; in our
case, there were indeed none. These grid cells were further
removed from the dataset and the data were aggregated based
on PC4 conditioning on the district as some postal codes
(PC4) can cover different police districts. Discrete covariates
were aggregated by taking the sum of the covariate on all
PC6. For continuous covariates, this was done by taking the
average on all PC6. Exploring the data is done in a similar
way as discussed in [10], where an extensive data analysis
is applied to the crime data and the CBS data. To analyze
this data we extend the ﬁnal set of covariates by the different
centrality measures and repeat the same step again. The dataset
was assessed for outliers and collinearity. The presence of
outliers was graphically assessed by the Cleveland dot plot
and analytically by the Local Outlier Factor (LOF) with 10
neighbors and a threshold of 1.3. Results of this analysis show
that the training data exhibits a percentage of outliers of 7.6.
The majority of these occurred in December and January. Due
to the high percentage of outliers in the training set, we decided
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
G
1013
1052
1054
1056
1058
1060
1062
1064
1066
1068
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
fPC4
NRB
Figure 1. Boxplot of the number of burglaries conditional on the postal code
indicating heterogeneity of variance in the number of burglaries within the
different postal codes.
to apply the analysis initially without outliers then apply the
analysis with the outliers.
The collinearity was assessed by the calculating the vari-
ance inﬂation factor values (VIF) that measures the amount by
which the variance of a parameter estimator is increased due to
collinearity with other covariates rather than being orthogonal,
e.g., [11]. A VIF threshold of 2 is used to assess collinearity
[10]. This analysis results in the following set of covariates:
the temporal covariate MONTH; the number of educational
institutions (sEI), the number of restaurants (sRET), percentage
of single-person households (aSH), the number of persons that
generate income (sNPI), the total observed mugging incidents
in the grid and its direct neighborhood in the last three months
(sMuGL3M) and ﬁnally, the average monthly income (aAMI).
Furthermore, the relationship between residential burglaries
and the categorical covariates was assessed using conditional
box plots. Results show a temporal monthly effect and a spatial
postal code effect on the burglaries. The effect of the postal
codes on the burglaries is illustrated in Figure 1 where a clear
difference in the mean and in the variance of the monthly
number of burglaries is observed between the different postal
codes.
III.
METHODOLOGY
A. Centrality measures
Before discussing the centrality measures, we ﬁrst need to
introduce some important concepts of graph theory. A network
represented mathematically by a graph is deﬁned as a ﬁnite
non-empty set V of vertices connected by edges E. A graph
is usually written as G = (V, E) where V is the set of vertices
and E represents the set of edges where the number of vertices
in G is called the order and the number of its edges is called
the size. Two vertices u and v are said to be adjacent if there
is an edge that links them together. In this case, u and v are
also neighbors of each other. If two edges share one vertex
then these edges are called adjacent edges. Using this concept
of adjacency between all vertices represented in a matrix form
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-681-1
DATA ANALYTICS 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Data Analytics

results in an adjacency matrix that summarizes all information
describing a network.
Another concept for understanding centrality measures is
the one of paths and shortest paths. Informally, a path is a
way of traveling along edges from vertex u to vertex v without
repeating any vertices [12]. Formally, a path P in a graph G
is a subgraph of G whose vertices form an ordered sequence,
such that every consecutive pair of vertices is connected by
an edge. A path P is called an u − v path in G if P = (u =
x0, x1, . . . , xj = v) s.t. x0x1, x1x2, . . . , xj−1xj are all edges
of P. The number of edges in a path is called its length. The
path u−v with the minimum length is called the shortest path
between u and v.
In the context of our analysis, a vertex represents an inter-
section between streets and an edge is a transport infrastructure
supporting movements between the two intersections.
Paths can be considered as the key elements in deﬁning
centrality measures. In a transportation network, these central-
ity measures describe the ﬂow of trafﬁc on each particular
edge of the network identifying the most important vertices in
it. Some of these centrality measures that we will use in this
paper are the closeness (CC) centrality and the betweenness
centrality (BC).
Closeness is a very simple centrality measure to calculate.
It is a geometric measure where the importance of a vertex
depends on how many nodes exist at every distance. Closeness
centrality can be deﬁned as the average of the shortest path
length from one node to every other node in the network and
is given by:
CC(ν) =
1
P
d(u,ν)<∞ d(u, ν),
(1)
where d(u, ν) is the distance between u and ν. Informally,
closeness centrality measures how long it will take to spread
information from node ν to all other nodes in the network and
it is used to identify inﬂuential nodes in the network.
The closeness of an edge u−v can be calculated by taking
the average closeness values of the nodes u and v.
The betweenness centrality BC is a path-based measure
that can be used to identify highly inﬂuential nodes in the
ﬂow through the network. Given a speciﬁc node ν, the intuition
behind betweenness is to measure the probability that a random
shortest path will pass through ν. Formally, the betweenness of
node ν, BC(ν) is the percentage of shortest paths that include
ν and can be calculated as follows:
BC(ν) =
X
u̸=w̸=ν∈V
σu,w(ν)
σu,w
,
(2)
where σu,w is the total number of shortest paths between node
u and w. And σu,w(ν) is the total number of shortest paths
between node u and w that pass through ν. The betweenness
of an edge e can be regarded as the degree to which an edge
makes other connections possible and can be calculated in the
same way by replacing the node ν by an edge e. An edge with
high betweenness value forms an important bridge within the
network. Removing this edge will severely hamper the ﬂow
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
High node closeness
High node betweenness
Figure 2. Illustration of high node (edge) betweenness and closeness.
of the network as it partitions the network into two large
subnetworks.
High betweenness or closeness values indicate that a vertex
or an edge can reach other vertices or edges, respectively, on
relatively short paths. An example of a network is illustrated
in Figure 2. In this example, node 3 has the highest closeness
and node 4 the highest betweenness. The edge connecting the
nodes 3 and 9 has the highest closeness within this network.
This edge has also the highest betweenness together with the
edge connecting the nodes 3 and 4.
In practice, it is almost impossible to calculate the exact
betweenness or closeness scores. To make the calculations
feasible, one can set a cut-off distance d and allow only paths
that are at distances shorter or equal to d.
B. GAMM including centrality measures
In our paper [10], we used generalized additive mixed-
effect models with different structures of the random compo-
nent and showed that the one-way nested model with postal
code as a random intercept has the optimal structure of the ran-
dom component. Further, we showed that using the population
as offset captures the most variation in the data. Moreover, the
covariates month and the average monthly income seem to
be the most important predictors for the number of burglaries
within postal codes. In this paper, the optimal model discussed
in [10] will be extended by two different centrality measures
as covariates. We assess the effect of these centrality measures
on explaining and forecasting the number of burglaries within
the postal code. This model is given by:
yi,t ∼ Poisson(µi,t),
µi,t = exp(basei,t + CMi + ai),
ai ∼ N(0, σ2
P C4),
(3)
where ai is a random intercept for the postal code and
CMi represents the closeness CCi or the betweenness BCi.
The basei,t is given by:
basei,t =1 + sEIi + sRETi + aSHi + sNPIi +
sMugL3Mi,t + f1(aAMIi) + f2(Montht).
(4)
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-681-1
DATA ANALYTICS 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Data Analytics

Figure 3. Betweenness of the street segments in Amsterdam West. The
betweenness is calculated using the average speed on the street segment and
a time threshold of four minutes.
The models were ﬁtted using the Laplace approximate
maximum likelihood [13]. This allows comparing the models
based on the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC). All analyses
were conducted using the gamm4 package [14].
To assess the predictive performance of the models, the
Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE) is calculated for an out-of-
sample test. If yi,t denotes the realization in postal code i and
in month t, and ˆyi,t denotes the forecast in the same postal
code and in the same month, then the forecast error is given
by ei,t = yi,t − ˆyi,t and the RMSE is given by:
RMSE =
v
u
u
t 1
NT
N
X
i=1
T
X
t=1
e2
i,t.
(5)
IV.
RESULTS
In this section, we ﬁrst present the results of the centrality
measures. Then, we will discuss the results of the model
including these centrality measures as covariates.
As discussed in Section III-A, in practice it is computa-
tionally very expensive to calculate the exact betweenness and
closeness scores. In general, these can be estimated by setting
up a buffer zone using a cut-off distance d and calculating
these centrality measures by considering only the paths at a
shorter length than d. Using historical data, the average speed
per street segment was calculated and ﬁve different time cut-
offs were used. Segments that are reachable within one to ﬁve
minutes are used to calculate the centrality measures. Note that
these averages make sense because the centrality measures are
calculated for the whole city and not for each area separately.
The betweenness and the closeness on the street segment
level using a cut-off of four minutes are illustrated in Figure 3
and
Figure
4,
respectively.
The
corresponding
average
betweenness and closeness per area are illustrated in Figure 5
and Figure 6, respectively. Figures 3 and 4 show a wide red
road running from top to bottom. This road corresponds with
Figure 4. Closeness of the street segments in Amsterdam West. The
closeness is calculated using the average speed on the street segment and a
time threshold of four minutes.
the A10, which is the ring road of Amsterdam. Figure 3 also
shows that the roads with high betweenness correspond to the
main access roads within this district. Figure 4 reveals that
the roads within the areas situated on the right-hand side of
the A10 have a higher closeness in general. This part of the
city was built mainly before the Second World War [15] and
has a higher density due to enclosed building blocks creating
a more ﬁnely meshed network of roads when compared to the
left-hand side of the ring road. This part was built after the
Second World War and is characterized by a lower density
due to more open building blocks with an emphasis on more
green areas and better enclosure of the residential area via
main access roads. The blank areas in the district correspond
with green areas, such as parks, lakes and agricultural land.
Adding a centrality measure to the GAMM model results
in a better prediction based on the RMSE. The RMSE of
the GAMM model without centrality measure was about
4.5519 and as can be seen from Table I, extending the model
with the betweenness or the closeness results in a generally
lower RMSE. It is noteworthy that the closeness leads to
better predictions when using lower thresholds (lower or equal
3 min); see Figures 7 and 8. If the threshold is four minutes
or higher including the betweenness in the model results in
better predictions. This can be explained by the average time
an offender might need to ﬂee from the scene of the crime
on a residential street to the nearest main access road. In this
case, the closeness describes the number of different routes the
offender can take during his ﬂight. Within 4 or 5 minutes, the
offender can be traveling on the main access road in order to
create as much distance as possible from the crime scene.
The results in the area with the postal code 1067 differ from
the other areas. Including the closeness and betweenness does
not improve the model, the error on the other hand increased.
Taking a closer look at this area revealed that this area mainly
consists of green areas with few roads. With less alternative
routes available, the closeness gives a higher error.
When looking at the other areas, it is possible to say that the
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-681-1
DATA ANALYTICS 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Data Analytics

Figure 5. Average betweenness per postal code.
Figure 6. Average closeness per postal code using a threshold of four
minutes.
building density inﬂuences the effectiveness of the centrality
measures on the models. In areas with a lower density, the
centrality measures have almost no inﬂuence on the outcomes,
whereas in the urban areas with a high building density adding
the centrality measures to the model improves the outcomes
of the model.
Most studies use betweenness as a centrality measure,
however, these studies focus on social networks. Given our
results, we believe that the closeness is a better centrality
measure for modeling crime based on small geographic areas.
However, as shown there is a difference in effectiveness of this
centrality measure related to the building density of the area.
Table I. ROOT MEAN SQUARED ERROR (RMSE) VALUES FROM FITTING
THE GAMM MODEL WITH CLOSENESS AND BETWEENNESS USING
DIFFERENT THRESHOLDS.
Model
1 min
2 min
3 min
4 min
5 min
GAMM + CC
4.5297
4.5323
4.5366
5.5437
4.5478
GAMM + BC
4.5562
4.5497
4.5405
4.5279
4.5326
2
4
6
8
PC4
RMSE
1013
1051
1052
1053
1054
1055
1056
1057
1058
1059
1060
1061
1062
1063
1064
1065
1066
1067
1068
1069
GAMM + CC
GAMM + BC
GAMM
Figure 7. RMSE per PC4 base on an out-of-sample for the GAMM model,
the GAMM + CC and the GAMM + BC using a threshold of 1 minute.
2
4
6
8
10
PC4
RMSE
1013
1051
1052
1053
1054
1055
1056
1057
1058
1059
1060
1061
1062
1063
1064
1065
1066
1067
1068
1069
GAMM + CC
GAMM + BC
GAMM
Figure 8. RMSE per PC4 base on an out-of-sample for the GAMM model,
the GAMM + CC and the GAMM + BC using a threshold of 4 minutes.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
During this research, we have tried to determine the inﬂu-
ence of accessibility of the street network within small urban
areas on residential burglary by applying the centrality mea-
sures closeness and betweenness. We have found that adding
the centrality measures as a variable to our model has improved
the performance of this model as can be concluded from the
lower RMSE. Furthermorem we have shown that there is a
relation between the different conceptions in urban design
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-681-1
DATA ANALYTICS 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Data Analytics

over time and residential burglary. Our results show that the
pre-world War II neighborhoods suffer from more residential
burglary than the neighborhoods built after the Second World
War. Also, differences in the performance of the two centrality
measures were found. Closeness as a centrality measure gives
better predictions when taking into consideration a threshold
smaller than 4 minutes. If the threshold is 4 minutes or larger,
the betweenness gives better predictions. We can also conclude
that the centrality measures perform better when applied to
geographic areas with a high density, for example, a city center.
Our study has shown that there is a relationship between the
conceptions in urban design and crime. Neighborhoods built
under a certain conception of urban design tend to have a
higher risk of residential burglary, which can be explained by
how the public space is designed. Further research is necessary
to conﬁrm this hypothesis.
REFERENCES
[1]
P. J. Brantingham, and P. L. Brantingham, Environmental criminology.
Sage Publications Beverly Hills, CA, 1981.
[2]
R. Wortley and M. Townsley, Environmental criminology and crime
analysis.
Taylor & Francis, 2016, vol. 18.
[3]
P. Brantingham and P. Brantingham, “Crime pattern theory,” in Envi-
ronmental criminology and crime analysis. Willan, 2013, pp. 100–116.
[4]
D. Weisburd, E. R. Groff, and S.-M. Yang, The criminology of place:
Street segments and our understanding of the crime problem.
Oxford
University Press, 2012.
[5]
D. Weisburd, S. Bushway, C. Lum, and S.-M. Yang, “Trajectories of
crime at places: A longitudinal study of street segments in the city of
Seattle,” Criminology, vol. 42, no. 2, 2004, pp. 283–322.
[6]
L. C. Freeman, “Centrality in social networks conceptual clariﬁcation,”
Social networks, vol. 1, no. 3, 1978, pp. 215–239.
[7]
P. Crucitti, V. Latora, and S. Porta, “Centrality measures in spatial
networks of urban streets,” Physical Review E, vol. 73, no. 3, 2006,
p. 036125.
[8]
T. Davies and S. D. Johnson, “Examining the relationship between road
structure and Quantitative Criminology, vol. 31, no. 3, 2015, pp. 481–
507.
[9]
T. P. Davies and S. R. Bishop, “Modelling patterns of burglary on street
networks,” Crime Science, vol. 2, no. 1, 2013, p. 10.
[10]
M. Mahfoud, S. Bhulai, and R. van der Mei, “Spatio-temporal mod-
eling for residential burglary,” in Proceedings of the 6th International
Conference on Data Analytics.
IARIA, 2018, pp. 59–64.
[11]
D. Liao and R. Valliant, “Variance inﬂation factors in the analysis of
complex survey data,” Survey Methodology, vol. 38, no. 1, 2012, pp.
53–62.
[12]
A. Benjamin, G. Chartrand, and P. Zhang, The fascinating world of
graph theory.
Princeton University Press, 2015.
[13]
R. H. Baayen, D. J. Davidson, and D. M. Bates, “Mixed-effects
modeling with crossed random effects for subjects and items,” Journal
of memory and language, vol. 59, no. 4, 2008, pp. 390–412.
[14]
S. Wood and F. Scheipl, GAMM4: Generalized additive mixed models
using mgcv and lme4, 2014, r package version 0.2-3. [Online].
Available: http://CRAN.R-project.org/package=gamm4
[15]
G.
Amsterdam.
De
groei
van
Amsterdam.
[Online].
Available:
https://maps.amsterdam.nl/bouwjaar/?LANG=nl (2018)
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-681-1
DATA ANALYTICS 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Data Analytics

