IES’s UIEs for Generating LACs for Arguing that a CI Satisfies SPL 
Sigram Schindler 
TELES Patent Rights International, TU Berlin 
s.schindler@teles.de 
 
Abstract—The paper outlines the User Interface Entities of an 
Innovation Expert System which enables its users to generate 
the Legal Argument Chains determined by the FSTP-Test, as 
required for testing a claimed - classical as well as emerging – 
technology invention under the Substantive Patent Law of any 
National Patent System. In particular, under the 4 §§ 101/102/ 
103/112 of 35 USC and its interpretations provided by the 
Supreme Court’s KSR/Bilski/Mayo decisions. Such Legal 
Argument Chains, in real-time-mode, are helpful in arguing 
(e.g., in a patent court's hearing) about a claimed invention's 
inventive concepts making it satisfying Substantive Patent 
Law, i.e. patent-eligible and patentable). The Innovation 
Expert System and its functionalities presented here are 
worldwide unique. They are being implemented as a prototype 
in a major R&D project. 
Keywords-User 
Interface 
Entities; 
FSTP-Test; 
SPL; 
Inventive Concept. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The US Supreme Court’s Mayo decision [1][18][19] 
requires describing a claimed invention (CI) by its 
“inventive concepts, inCs” if it deals with emerging tech-
nology subject matter and hence is “model-based” – and 
thus stimulated Advanced IT [2] research on decision 
making in testing such CIs under Substantive Patent Law 
(SPL), also holding if describing the CI needs no model 
[11][18][19][25][36][45][72][79]. 
Some examples of such models are: The “ISO/OSI” 
model of telecommunications, “molecular bonding forces” 
models of nano-technology, “RNA/DNA” models of 
genetics, “Natural Language” models of Advanced IT – 
some standardized, all implicitly used by SPL precedents 
without being aware of this. The philosophical synonym of 
the term model is “paradigm”, the scientific one “reference 
system”, e.g., “coordinate system”. Using a model often 
enables de-scribing a CI precisely on top of it, though it 
itself is not understood precisely – as practiced with 
mathematics’ “axioms/theorems/proofs”, with physics’ 
“laws of nature”, and here with SPL’s “claimed inventions”. 
The here claimed invention is applicable to all model-based 
CIs. 
Previous studies [10][18][19][25][46][47] proved that 
“A CI satisfies SPL iff it passes the “FSTP-Test” (Facts 
Screening/ Transforming/ Presenting)”. Thus, the FSTP-Test 
may (semi-) automatically deliver all different “Legal 
Argument Chains, LACs” showing a CI satisfies SPL. This 
greatly facilitates every patent practitioner’s decision 
making as to testing a CI under SPL, in particular if it is 
model-based. SPL reasoning is always of finite first order 
logic (FFOL). 
While Section I gave the background of the paper’s 
topic, Section II introduces IES, UIEs and LACs, Section III 
talks about the LACs generated during the testing of a given 
CI, Section IV draws some conclusions about the scope of 
the CI of [59] and discusses the need for scientizing the 
reasoning about model-based CIs, and Section V will close 
by showing that this way of generating LACs (α) - ζ)) is 
patentable/patent-eligible, 
i.e., 
specifically 
something 
completely new. 
II. THE IES, ITS UIES AND LACS 
A system based on a CI's alias TT.0's (Technical 
Teaching) PTRSPL-DS (Pair of technical Teaching over 
a prior art Reference Set - Data Structure) [6][7] – 
which stores all SPL-relevant functional and non-functional 
properties of this CI – is called an “Innovation Expert 
System, IES”, iff it has a “User Interface Entity, UIE” 
enabling its user(s) to access of this CI all (legally non-
redundant) Legal Argument Chains (LACs) showing its 
satisfying SPL. An IES leverages on its PTR-DS 
embodying, by all results of its CI’s FSTP-Test, all 
"Arguable Subtests, ASTs" – these being the blueprints of 
all LACs of this CI. Automatic LACs generation according 
to this invention is not limited to CIs’ tests under SPL. 
The UIE of an IES is made-up from UIE.Ys, Y=1,2,..., 
any one comprising a knowledge representation “KR-
UIE.Y”, a human interaction “HI-UIE.Y”, and an interaction 
control “IC-UIE.Y” entity, in config-/real-time-mode used 
separately resp. synchronously. An IES or a user of it 
invokes between them an “interaction”. In config-mode, an 
interaction serves for generating or modifying of a UIE.Y by 
a user at least 1 of its just quoted 3 components. In real-time 
mode, an interaction serves for invoking, controlled by its 
IC-UIE.Y, the presentation of a HI-UIE.Y. In both modes, 
this interaction uses its KR-UIE.Y, which in turn uses the 
knowledge stored by PTR-DS [11][25]. A UIE.Y may be 
subdivided into (potentially nested) “UIE.Y Steps”; 
invoking a UIE.Y causes at least executing one of them 
partially. 
A LAC.Z, Z=1, 2, …, is presented by executing at least 1 
partial UIE.Y in real-time-mode. An AST.X, X=1, 2, …, is 
accessed by at least 1 KR-UIE.Y, each translated into at 
least 1 LAC.Z. An AST.X may be used in at least 1 “logics 
presentation”, tied to at least 1 HI-UIE.Y by its own IC-
UIE.Y, as customized by an IES user in config-mode – 
between which a user may toggle by invoking these IC-
UIE.Ys, i.e., in config-mode of the IES, any AST is (semi-) 
automatically transformable into its 1 or more LAC.Zs, 
being AST’s in various logics presentations translated into 
multimedia presentations by UIE.Ys – as needed by a judge, 
examiner, lawyer or an inventor. In real-time-mode, a user 
may toggle between these UIE.Ys of an AST.X for 
highlighting its aspects by the LAC.Zs into which AST.X is 
translated. 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-408-4
DBKDA 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

III. ON GENERATING ALL LACS FOR A CI’S TEST UNDER 
ANY FFOLLIN [A][B] 
This paper leverages on scientific insights achieved in 
the FSTP project and the reference list. They showed how 
all ASTs – all being non-isomorphic – of a CI/TT.0 tested 
under SPL, may semi-automatically be transformed, using 
an IES in config-mode, into their peer LACs, which in the 
real-time-mode of the IES then may be automatically 
invoked. The role of the FFOLLIN is explained after α)-ζ) 
below. 
For conveying the working of the IES in config-mode, 
the below bullet points specify technical features of an IES 
enabling a user of it to configure alias calibrate alias custom-
ize it according to the needs of its user(s) in its real-time-
mode. Thereby one or several users may use the IES simul-
taneously in config- and/or real-time-mode, thus directly or 
indirectly communicating with each other. The understan-
ding of the working of the IES in real-time-mode immedi-
ately follows from its config-mode understanding. They add 
such features sometimes redundantly, as explained already 
above and/or by these publications. 
These bullet points thus also disclose the scope of the CI 
of the patent application this paper is based on. 
 
According to Schindler et al. [25], a CI satisfies SPL 
iff it passes the FSTP-Test. And: A CI passing FSTP 
test.m, 2≤m≤10 (on top of a subset S resp. S’ of 
TT.0’s finite set of all its BED-inCs (binary 
elementary disclosed inventive concept) passes all 
FSTP test.n, 1≤n<m, on top of this set. The inverse 
of this implication evidently needs not to hold. 
 
The complete FSTP-Test is a program evaluating, 
for a CI under SPL test, the whole FFOL expression 
modeling the logics (see below) of and between the 
11 concerns embodied by the 35 USC SPL over the 
mirror predicates of BED-inCs of this CI, the 
conjunctions of these BED-inCs’ mirror predicates 
modeling the properties of the elements of the CI. 
Their peers in prior art TTs may or may not exist – 
as decided by an FSTP-Test user (and confirmed by 
the person of ordinary skill and creativity (posc) – 
forming the AN (anticipated non-anticipated) matrix 
[6][7][11][43][59].  
 
Any AST is a lexically and syntactically correct 
“sentence” alias FFOL term from within this whole 
FFOL expression. Hence, for any CI, there are only 
finitely many ASTs, and for any AST its semantic is 
evident (except the semantics of the above 
properties and the relations between them that the 
user/posc has input into the PTR-DS when 
generating it – here assumed to be correct). 
 
PTR dependent, only finitely many (usually few 
hundred) ASTs exist. All these ASTs are executable 
on top of these finitely many and PTR-dependent 
BED-inC subsets. All these ASTs, resp. their basic 
AST arguments (BASTAs) are the blueprints for all 
LACs. Other (legally non-redundant) LACs don’t 
exist – though different presentations to IES users of 
any AST as different LACs may. 
 
Any UIE.Y for any AST.X (to be translated into a 
LAC.Z) may be generated in config-mode by an IES 
user by its invoking the "UIE-stub" provided by 
any IES implementation and delivering to it this 
UIE.Y, depending on the parameters of this 
invocation being a fresh UIE.Y or an existing and 
defined UIE.Y for checking or changing the result 
of preceding input, or the interworking between 
presenting several UIE.Y invocations of LAC.Z, or 
its interworking with other LAC.Z' presentations. 
Thereby any UIE.Y may be composed by the user of 
one or several sequential "UIE steps, UIESes", 
whereby any UIES again may be composed by the 
user of one or several sequential such steps (nested 
UIE.Ys). Any UIE.Y and UIES.Y must be specified 
by the user – except automatic ones, depending on 
the 
particular 
IES 
implementation 
and/or 
configuration – as to the functionalities of their 3 
resp. KR-/HI-/IC-UIE.Ys or KR-/HI-/IC-UIES.Ys. 
 
The just mentioned 3 components of any UIEs may 
vastly be generated automatically by the IES or 
interactively generated by a user guided by the IES 
– not elaborated here – and would basically be the 
same or similar, i.e. are principally stereotypical. 
 
Thereby the objective of the claimed invention 
presented here, is not limited to providing for a 
given CI only all LAC.Zs for justifying solely its 
classical claim construction – such LAC.Zs would 
only show that the CI has a chance to satisfy SPL – 
but to provide all LAC.Zs showing CI satisfies SPL. 
 
After automatically or semi-automatically/inter-
actively having decomposed in config-mode, as 
deemed reasonable by an IES user, all the PTR-DS 
into all ASTs, any one potentially in a multitude of 
ASTs’ logics, into peer LACs’ multimedia repre-
sentations and user interaction capabilities (as 
shown by the below steps α)-ζ)), in real-time-mode 
these ASTs or LACs may be invoked automatically 
(e.g., by an acoustic word spotter of the IES), and/or 
(semi-) automatically by an IES user (see the below 
steps α)-ζ)). Thereby its execution may comprise 
specific items for communicating with a user, e.g., 
about any kind of management issues. Pertinent 
ordinary skill knows, e.g., from IVR systems and 
their audio pattern spotting and matching func-
tionalities how in principle to (semi-) automatically 
identify in real-time LACs to be instantly invoked, 
as the dialog just taking place generates an appropri-
ate pattern. Here such LAC identification and 
invocation processes in real-time-mode may be 
substantially supported by the IES calibration provi-
ding resp. hints to these processes, e.g., leveraging 
on graphical and/or acoustic patterns embodied by a 
related multimedia thesaurus construction based on 
“AST patterns”. 
 
The complete FSTP-Test of a CI for its satisfying 
35 USC SPL comprises the 10 FSTP test.o, 1≤o≤10. 
It is executed for the “set ∀ claim interpretations, 
SoI” of the CI, selected in (b) therein, i.e. all TT.0s 
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-408-4
DBKDA 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

of this CI – a CI may enable several interpretations, 
if disclosed by its patent’s (application’s) specifica-
tion [72][79]. The term/notion “technical teaching 0, 
TT.0” [6][7][11] then stands for one of them 
[72][79], i.e., the TT.0s are the elements of the CI’s 
“set of interpretations, SoI”. 
 
Note that there is a variety of execution sequences 
of the FSTP-Test for any one of these TT.0s: While 
the initialization sequence of the 10 FSTP test.o’s 
must be that of their natural number indexes, they 
may be executed exhaustively or overlapping – i.e., 
for the latter case holds: ∀ FSTP test.n check of this 
CI only those of its inCs already confirmed by the 
FSTP test.m ∀ m<n. 
 
Advanced IT knows that the input and commands 
provided by an IES user to the IES just as the 
latter’s output to an IES user must have, for being 
understandable by both, some before given – here a 
priori defined by the IES – alphabet (vocabulary) 
and syntax and semantics and pragmatics or these 
must be determined during the execution of the 
claimed invention’s FSTP-Test by the IES under 
rules given a priori by the IES and under the control 
by an IES user. 
 
The term/notion “legal argument chain, LAC” 
stands for what is commonly understood by any 
posc with knowledge of the SPL. Its broad meaning 
is not limited in any other way. The index “Z” 
identifies a particular LAC.Z, more precisely: an 
instantiation Z of the “type LAC” (in terms of 
programming languages). The same applies for the 
types/instantiations 
“AST”/”AST.X”, 
“UIE”/ 
”UIE.Y”, … . 
 
The above UIE-stub provided by an IES on top of a 
PTR-DS – representing a CI’s TT.0 to be tested for 
satisfying SPL - is available to an IES user all the 
time (unless locked by a user). As said above 
already: By means of the UIE-stub an IES user may 
define a broad range of UIE instantiations for 
configuring the UIE between an IES user and the 
IES for customizing the CI’s SPL test for the IES 
user: Such as to facilitate for it using the 
functionality provided by the IES for this test. 
 
Whether a UIE.Y is to be generated/integrated/mo-
dified or executed is determined by the mode the 
IES is in at UIE.Y invocation time – whereby this 
mode may be set by an IES user (e.g., the one 
performing this invocation or another one) or by the 
IES and/or at whatsoever time of the existence of 
this UIE.Y and of the function execution being 
invoked. Thereby conflicts may occur and must be 
resolved by the implementation of the IES, either 
automatically or interactively with an IES user. 
 
Any invocation may refer to only a step within a 
UIE instantiation. 
 
The content of a human interaction, i.e. its seman-
tics, is currently transparent to the IES unless it is 
automatically derived by the IES from the AST at 
issue, potentially occurring for very simple ASTs. 
The usefulness of the CI disclosed in the patent 
application this paper is based on – i.e. of the IES resp. of 
the method controlling it – is to be seen in the HI-UIEs’ 
capability of (semi-)automatic instant information presenta-
tions by one or several different LACs about any AST of a 
CI’s TT.0 under, e.g., SPL test to an IES user, in response to 
the latter’s invocation of some detail of the PTR-DS or its 
FSTP-Test representing this TT.0 resp. this detail. 
The invention of the patent application this paper is 
based on has been invented, in particular, for thus enabling 
the IES to present automatically or interactively a LAC in 
response to a question being asked, as if this response were 
provided by a human being of total knowledge about the 
TT.0 being SPL tested. 
To this end, this response must be represented by the IES 
– by having the person speaking and showing what it 
graphically uses for support of its presentation, both in 
reality or on a screen, anyway all media used in synchrony, 
what would be the normal cases in real-time mode use of the 
IES – as it were presented without the support by the IES. 
For achieving this, the IES enables a user first to acoustic-
cally and/or graphically input fragments of the arguments it 
later intends to present in its personalized fashion, then to 
combine these fragments into what it considers to be a 
complete legal argument chain, and finally to invoke the 
automatic reproduction of this argument. Responding this 
way to a listener/viewer of this LAC – to a question it or 
somebody else had input to the claimed invention before as 
a query – then would appear to the listener/viewer as a per-
sonal and potentially multimedia announcement/information 
of a smart IMR system (interactive multimedia response). 
This “user personalization” of the behavior of the above 
claimed invention’s IMR subsystem would comprise that an 
IES user and the IES may cooperate in jointly presenting a 
complex LAC by alternatively speaking or reacting on 
interposed questions by answering them immediately – 
whereby such prompt reactions may be configured, also by 
IC-UIE.Ys, to be interventions and/or accompanying illus-
trations, always under an IES user control.  
For achieving this result, the IES would execute many 
steps of such a whole process automatically or interactively, 
as outlined in α)-ζ) below, e.g., when directly or indirectly 
(i.e., on IES request) invoked by an IES user, the IES may 
basically: 
α) recognize by/for which “high level user interaction” 
– due to the FFOL nature of the problem only fi-
nitely many such user interactions are required by 
an IES – this invocation occurred, then 
β) derive, for this interaction, which technical items 
and/or legal items from the FSTP-DS it needs,  
γ) determine, by which “basic AST arguments, 
BASTAs” (see below) they are covered – due to the 
FFOL nature of the problem, i.e. of the FSTP-Test, 
there is only a finite number of BASTs (basic 
ASTSs) for any TT.0, the respective TT.0 inde-
pendent BASTAs would be provided by the IES, 
and the TT.0 dependent BASTAs would be input 
by an IES user into the IES under the latter’s 
guidance being controlled by the PTR-DS prior to 
using the IES as outlined by α)-ζ) – then  
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-408-4
DBKDA 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

δ) compile from these BASTAs some “sequence of 
BASTA, SoBASTA” – due to the FFOL nature of 
the problem any sequence is correct, yet second 
thoughts being useful – a single complete sequence 
of “low level answers” to these questions, and have 
a KR-UIE instantiation represent this SoBASTA, 
ε) translate this low level SoBASTA into one or 
several specific – but logically equivalent to each 
other and to the SoBASTA – sequences of future (if 
working in config-mode) or actual (if working in 
real-time-mode) multimedia outputs on what I/O 
devices, and have the same number of HI-UIE in-
stantiations represent these future/actual outputs, 
whereby each such instantiation provides, potential-
ly supported by the KR-UIE alias SoBASTA, a spe-
cific basis for one or several sequences of high-
level user interactions invoked above but executed 
under the control of ζ), and finally,  
ζ) determine, for any HI-UIE instantiation of ε), when 
in the future (if working in config-mode) or actually 
(if working in real-time-mode) on what event how 
to output on what I/O devices which part of this or 
another one of these HI-UIE instantiations of ε), 
and have for this HI-UIE instantiation its specific 
IC-UIE instantiation represent these future/actual 
interaction controls – thus linking, to commands of 
IES users, not only parts of HI-UIE instantiations of 
ε) but also what any latter part needs for its execu-
tion from a KR-UIE. 
Some comments on the steps α)-ζ) and, in particular, on 
this CI’s philosophy may be helpful: 
 
Any step requires some interactive input from or 
control by an IES user or executes fully automatic. 
 
These steps differ when invoked in different modes, 
e.g., i) in explorative/calibrating/config-mode, ii) in 
reply-testing-mode, iii) in “one-way”-reply-mode, 
iv) in “two-way”- alias “interactive”-reply-mode, v) 
in some “consolidation”-reply mode, etc.  
 
The BASTAs (= basic AST arguments) in step γ) 
represent a complete (usually, neither not unique, 
nor non-redundant) finite set of basic building 
blocks into which the whole FSTP-Test may be 
decomposed. In any BASTA, the term “basic” has 
the meaning that it deals with only a single factual 
alias “technical” and/or legal question as to one of 
the 10 FSTP test.o (which enables dealing, e.g., with 
the finitely many such details or evaluations or 
relations of some kinds of inCs or the FSTP test.o at 
issue), and the term “argument” indicates that the 
BASTAs are translated into the basic building 
blocks also of the LACs. 
 
While an embodiment of the CI of the patent appli-
cation this paper is based on working with the steps 
α)-ζ) uses the functionality specified for the CI in a 
pretty sophisticated manner, for the person of posc 
its implementation would nevertheless be straight-
forward realizable. This holds even more for the 
CI’s simpler embodiments, always achievable by 
appropriately limiting the I/O flexibility of such 
embodiments.   
 
In addition to the steps α)-ζ), an embodiment of the 
above claimed invention may provide “prototypes” 
of all user interactions and modes it provides, as 
well as macros for the stereotypically recurring parts 
when invoking them, such as repeating some 
passage in other words or particularly slowly, or 
skipping momentarily boring details, or prompting a 
user to continue, or asking for confirmation the 
understanding of the just said, or … .  
 
LACs may also be presented by their default 
configurations coming with user interactions speci-
fic for models of application areas. These prototype 
interactions are fine for inputting/defining/con-
figuring specific UIE instantiations by a user for its 
personalization of the IES and/or its LACs for adap-
ting them to the specificities of the actual PTR-DS 
under test; but, normally, these prototypes' func-
tioning is not yet what an IES user ideally would 
like to use. 
 
This paper nowhere uses peculiarities of an SPL [A] 
or its FSTP-Test, i.e., SPLs are too narrow for speci-
fying it. The next paragraphs shall clarify this and 
thus determine the scope of the CI of [59]. 
Speaking in terms of programming languages: SPL, 
“Substantive Copyright Law, SCL”, …, may be seen as a 
range of “directive” type declarations, the defining common-
ality of which is their being a ”finite FOL legal norm, 
FFOLLN”. Hence, any such directive type declaration may 
be called FFOLLN and is defined by a finite set of conjunc-
tively to be met requirements by any instantiation of this 
directive type, i.e., by any subject matter satisfying it. 
Here, any instantiation of a FFOLLN would occur by 
means of a subject matter being a CI of FFOL, thus by 
means of a finite set of BEDSCL-inCs generative for this CI 
[72]. Hence, this instantiation – being a subject matter 
defined by this CI of this FFOLLN – is called “finite FOL 
legal invention norm, FFOLLIN”.  
IV. CONCLUSION/DISCUSSION 
Based on this understanding, one sees that the scope of 
the above CI indeed comprises any IESFFOLLIN – which is 
confirmed by a careful analysis of the claims claiming this 
CI. Thus, from the above programming language considera-
tions and definitions follows (in generalization of the consi-
derations in, e.g., [10][18][19][25] mathematically recon-
sidered by [76] and putting it in terms independent of 
programming language and legal jargon): The scope of the 
patent application this paper is based on comprises any 
equally powerful “test of a creation necessary and sufficient 
for its meeting a given requirement, TC.NaS.MR”. 
Being “equally powerful” means: This CI (based on the 
patent application this paper is based on) enables building 
for any FFOLLIN an IESFFOLLIN, which by customization/ 
configuration becomes that knowledgeable that, if asked a 
question about this TT.0FFOLLIN’s satisfying a requirement 
its FFOLLIN instantiation states, it may instantly respond by 
one or several correct and complete LACs, their 
presentations being controllable by an IES user (as detailed 
above). 
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-408-4
DBKDA 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

This generalization evidently impacts also on the 
FSTPSPL-Test determining the PTRSPL-DS, implying that an 
FSTPTCNaSMR-Test determines a PTRTCNaSMR-DS. Writing 
just “FSTPFFOLLN-Test” and “PTRFFOLLN-DS” is less specific 
in notation, but implies the same. This generalization even 
may be expanded to the FFOLLN’s dependency on non-
finite parameters, e.g., time. I.e., the above discussed CI has 
a much broader application area – i.e. all FFOLxNs areas, 
“x” standing not only for “law” but also for any private 
“directive” – than the one repeatedly explicitly addressed 
above for exemplary purposes, namely 35 USC SPL. 
 
An IESFFOLLIN defined by some FFOLLIN creation 
alias “technical teaching.0, TT.0FFOLLIN” – defined 
to be a CI the properties of the elements of which 
are precisely describable by conjunctions of the 
mirror-predicates of this TT.0’s BEDFFOLLIN-inCs – 
is all-knowing (in the above described sense) as to 
TT.0FFOLLIN‘s satisfying this FFOLLN, and is com-
prised in [59]. E.g.: An IESSPL defined by a CISPL‘s 
BEDSPL-inCs and the FSTPSPL-Test is all knowing 
about CISPL’s satisfying this SPL. 
 
This enables several very interesting conclusions 
showing the total unreasonableness of trying to 
reason about model-based CIs without scientizing 
this reasoning. Namely, that  
o for implementing an IESFFOLLN (as claimed in 
[59]) – the 35 USC SPL is just a specific 
FFOLLN – neither a concrete FFOLLN nor the 
FSTPFFOLLN-Test is needed (i.e. it is sufficient to 
know that it is FFOL) nor a CIFFOLLN. By calibra-
ting a so implemented “abstract” IESFFOLLN by a 
CIFFOLLIN’s PTRFFOLLIN-DS (based on a concrete 
FFOLLN, concrete CIFFOLLIN, and concrete 
FSTPFFOLLIN-Test here needed for construing the 
PTRFFOLLIN-DS) it becomes an IESFFOLLIN all-
knowing about CIFFOLLIN‘s satisfying FFOLLN. 
o for none of the application areas of the CI 
disclosed by the patent application this paper is 
based on (one of them being the “35 USC SPL 
area”) – all being “FFOLLN areas” – the 
FSTPFFOLLN-Test can be defined without basing it 
on a FFOL CI, i.e., any FFOL CI from a 
FFOLLN area creates, by its FSTPFFOLLIN-Test, 
its specific compound metric for any prior just as 
posteriori art over the posc underlying this 
FFOLLN area.  
o recognizing any CI creates its own metric was not 
really necessary with classical technology CIs – 
there intuition insinuates it always is the same 
(though not understood by anybody prior to FSTP 
technology) – for model-based emerging techno-
logy CIs no intuition exists, thus making indis-
pensable the scientification of their tests for satis-
fying their FFOLLNs, whatsoever [79].  
 
The below quoted and underlined phrases used by 
[59] have the following meanings: 
a) “On direct or indirect request by an IES user” 
says that this IES user may by itself invoke a 
function (= request its execution directly) or 
else it may be prompted by the IES to invoke a 
function (= request its execution indirectly). 
b) “Several different LACs about any AST of a 
CI/TT.0” shall indicate that the existence of 
several LACs need not only be due to an IES 
user 
having 
defined 
several 
different 
multimedia presentations for a LAC, but may 
also be caused by the AST itself comprising 
different ways of reasoning, e.g., having 
different disclosures for an inC the AST deals 
with and/or having for a disclosure more than 
one legal justification. 
c) An answer provided by the IES to a query put 
by an IES user (as to at least one aspect of at 
least one inC of the CI at issue) is called 
“complete and concise” iff it addresses and 
comprises all relevant legal and technical infor-
mation and presents this information such that it 
shows the CI meets all respective requirements 
stated by SPL – unlike information provided by 
the classical claim construction, as missing both 
these objectives. 
d) “A question raised by an IES user intentionally 
or not” says that the user may raise this question 
quite purposefully, i.e., targeted, or incidentally, 
i.e., by chance, e.g., in presenting an argument. 
e) The different “logics" of an AST denote the 
various kinds this AST may present some issue, 
e.g. justify why an inC is disclosed by the 
specification or why the inCs in a set are inde-
pendent. 
f) “All ASTs for a given CI and its FFOLLIN” 
says that any part of this CI’s FSTPFFOLLIN-Test 
is covered by an AST, i.e. the CI’s complete 
FSTPFFOLLIN-Test understood as a logical 
conjunction of basic logic statements is decom-
posed into sets of BASTs (see γ) above). 
g) Two LACs are “non-redundant”, if the ASTs 
they represent share no BAST. 
V. THE IES’S UIE PATENT APPLICATION’S CI SATISFIES 
THE 35 USC’S SPL 
Considering [11][25], the claimed invention in [59] 
satisfies the 35 USC §§ 101/102/103/112 as it passes all 10 
FSTP tests.o. It namely passes [C] the following tests: 
1) The FSTP-Test prompts the user to input 
 
<no “multi-interpretable CI” until [137]> 
(a) ∀TT.i ∧ 0≤i≤I=|RS| ∧ 1≤n≤N=N(TT.0): 
 
the pair (Xin, BAD-crCin):  
(b) ∀1≤n≤N justof: (X0n,BAD-crC0n) is definite; 
(c) S::={BED-crC0nk|1≤k≤Kn, 1≤n≤N}: 
 
BAD-crC0n=∧1≤k≤KnBED-crC0nk 
∧ 
K::=∑1≤n≤NKn; 
(d) ∀1≤k≤Kn ∧ 1≤n≤N justof: BED-crC0nk is 
definite; 
2) ∧ ∀ ϵ S for justof: their lawful disclosure;   
3) ∧ ∀ ϵ S for justof: their definiteness under § 112.6; 
4) ∧ ∀ ϵ S for justof: their joint enablement of TT.0; 
5) ∧ ∀ ϵ S for justof: their joint independence;  
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-408-4
DBKDA 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

6) ∧ ∀ ϵ S for justof: their joint KSR/posc-non-equiva-
lence 
˄ define the BED*-AN matrix by  
 BED*-inCik ∷= N    ∀ 1≤k≤Kn  ∧ 0≤i≤I; 
 BED*-inC0k∷= A    if BED-inC0k ϵKSR posc; 
 BED*-inCik∷= A   BED-inCik =KSR BED-inC0k, 
1≤i≤I;  
7) ∧ for justof: by NAIO [*] S is not an abstract idea 
only; 
<see iii) of [136] > 
8) ∧ for justof: S contains a patent-eligible BED-
crC0nk 
<see iii) of [136] > 
9) ∧ for justof: S is a patent-eligible combination; 
 <see iii) of [136] >   
10) ∧ for justof: by NANO [**] S is patentable on Spat-el 
 S. 
<see iii) of [136] > 
Hence, as stated in [59], the there claimed invention 
satisfies 35 USC’s SPL.  
Finally, it is worthwhile noticing that this CI passes, by 
passing all 10 FSTP tests, even 16 tests – of which the clas-
sical claim construction only performs 6 ones, as explained 
by [25]. To put this insight into the Mayo context: If the 
classical claim construction were allegedly seen as an in-
vention being that useful as to determine whether a claimed 
invention satisfies the US SPL or not, it would be – as seen 
by Bilski/Mayo – just an “abstract idea only” of a claim 
construction. Though, strangely enough, the classical claim 
construction never has been set out to be that useful. Indeed, 
it is more misleading than guiding to the complete and 35 
USC conforming and by Mayo required claim construction 
[B][C]. 
 
REFERENCES  
[A] While today differences still exist between the “Substantive Patent 
Laws, SPLs” of the US and other regions/nations, e.g., the EU with 
the SPL of its EPC, these should disappear soon, as internationally 
harmonizing so understood SPLs is politically not too controversial 
and economically highly beneficial for all parties as then being 
“Highest Courts” proof – in the US totally, in the EU and many 
Industrial nations vastly. Similar processes occurred in the past, e.g., 
with the national accounting procedures of public companies, today 
harmonized by the worldwide IFRS (International Financial 
Reporting Standard). Here, the PatentHighwayProgram of several 
large PTOs may play a decisive role. 
[B] Due to their novelty, many details – also evident ones – were briefly 
explained in Section III of this paper. Such trivialities ought to be 
superfluous in a patent application. If a future patent application were 
supported by its PTR-DS – or even by an IES as discussed here – all 
such explanations, also trivial ones, would be presented to a user on 
its request in real-time, potentially in utmost controllable multimedia 
presentation. 
[C] Performing the NANO test on the above CI determines its creative 
height to be ≥5 over posc, and there is no prior art or pragmatics 
which could reduce it. By [5][6] this CI’s creative height is 
 
larger than 1, thus warranting its novelty (as by the posc there is 
no prior art document anticipating one of the 5 BID-inCs [59]), 
and as it is especially at least 
 
5 or more, thus warranting its non-obviousness, due to the same 
reason. 
[*] 
The "Not Abstract Idea Only, NAIO" test prompts the user 
1) 
for input&justof: the CI specification discloses a problem, P, to 
be solved by TT.0 of CI;  
2) 
for input&justof: S alias TT.0 solves P; 
3) 
for input&justof: P is not solved, if in S a BED-inC0k is 
relaxed (i.e. the truth set of a BED-inC0k is enlarged);     
If 1)-3) apply, then <CI,S> is “not an abstract idea only”. 
[**] The "Not Anticipated And Not Obvious, NANO" test checks of 
RS all its “anticipation combinations, ACs” as to S [5,6]: 
1) 
It starts from the “anticipation/non-anticipation, AN” matrix of 
FSTP test.6, any one of the I+1 lines of which shows, by its K  
column entries, for i = 1,2,...,I, which of the peer TT.0 entries is 
anticipated/non-anticipated by a former one, and for i=0  is 
anticipated/non-anticipated by posc. 
2) 
It automatically derives from the AN matrix the set of all {AC} 
with the minimal number, Qplcs, of “N” entries. 
[1] 
S. 
Schindler: 
“US 
Highest 
Courts’ 
Patent 
Precedents 
in 
Mayo/Myriad/CLS/Ultramercial/LBC: 
‘Inventive 
Concepts’ 
Accepted – ‘Abstract Ideas’ Next? Patenting Emerging Tech. 
Inventions Now without Intricacies”. 
[2] 
AIT, “Advanced Information Technology”, denotes topical IT 
research areas, e.g., AI, KR, DL, NL, Semantics, … 
[5] 
S. Schindler: “Math. Model. Substantive Patent Law (SPL) Top-
Down vs. Bottom-Up”, Yokohama, JURISIN 2013. 
[6] 
S. Schindler: “FSTP” pat. appl.: “THE FSTP Expert System”, 2012. 
[7] 
S. Schindler: “DS” pat. appl.: “An Innovation Expert System, IES, & 
Its Data Structure, PTR-DS”, 2013. 
[10] SSBG's AB to CAFC in LBC, 2013. 
[11] S. Schindler: “inC” pat. appl.: “Inventive Concepts Enabled Semi-
Automatic Tests of  Patents”, 2013. 
[18] SSBG AB to the Supreme Court in CLS, 07.10.2013. 
[19] SSBG AB to the Supreme Court in WildTangent, 23.09.2013. 
[25] S. Schindler, A. Paschke, and S. Ramakrishna: ”Formal Legal 
Reasoning that an Invention Satisfies SPL”, Bologna, JURIX-2013. 
[36] S. Schindler: “Boon and Bane of Inventive Concepts and Refined 
Claim Construction in the Supreme Court's New Patent Precedents", 
Berkeley, IPSC, 08.08.2014. 
[43] S. 
Schindler: 
“LAC” 
pat. 
appl.: 
„Semi-Automatic 
Generation/Customization of (All) Confirmative Legal Argument 
Chains (LACs) in a Claimed Invention`s SPL Test, as Enabled by Its 
Inventive Concepts”, 2014. 
[45] SSBG's AB to the Supreme Court as to the CII Question, 28.01. 
2014. 
[46] S. Schindler: "Autom. Deriv. of Leg. Arg. Chains (LACs) from 
Arguable Subtests (ASTs) of a Claimed Invention's Test for 
Satisfying. SPL", University of Warsaw, 24.05.2014. 
[47] S. Schindler: "Auto. Generation of All ASTs for an Invention's SPL 
Test", submitted for publication. 
[59] S. Schindler: “UI” pat. appl.: “An IES Capable of Semi-Auto. 
Generating/Invoking All Legal Argument Chains (LACs)  in the SPL 
Test of a Claimed Invention (CI), as Enabled by Its Inventive 
Concepts (inCs)”, 2014. 
[72] .a) 
S. Schindler: “The Supreme Court’s ‘SPL Initiative’: 
Scientizing Its SPL Interpretation Removes 3 Evergreen SPL 
Obscurities”, Press Release, 08.04.2014.  
 
.b)  S. Schindler: “The Supreme Court’s ‘SPL Initiative’: 
Scientizing Its SPL Interpretation Removes 3 Evergreen SPL 
Obscurities – and Enables Automation in a CI’s SPL Tests and 
Argument Chains”, Honolulu, IAM2014S, 18.07.14. 
[76] D. Crouch: “En Banc Federal Circuit Panel Changes the Law of 
Claim Construction”, 13.07.2005. 
[79] S. Schindler: “On the BRI-Schism in the US National Patent System 
(NPS) – A Challenge for the US Highest Courts”, 22.05.2014, 
submitted for publication 
[136] S. Schindler: “High-Level Tutorial I to Claimed Inventions’ post-
Mayo SPL Testing”, submitted for publication. 
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-408-4
DBKDA 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

[137] S. Schindler: “The Rationality of a Claimed Invention’s (CI’s) post-
Mayo SPL Test – It Increases CI’s Legal Quality and Professional 
Efficiency in CI’s Use, and Stimulates/Inspires the Inventivity to/in 
CI’s Further Development”, in preparation. 
 
 
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-408-4
DBKDA 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

