 
  
 
From Synchronous Corpus to Monitoring Corpus, LIVAC: The Chinese Case 
Benjamin K. Tsou 
Andy C. Chin 
Research Centre on Linguistics &  
Language Information Sciences 
The Hong Kong Institute of Education 
Tai Po, Hong Kong 
btsou@ied.edu.hk 
andychin@ied.edu.hk  
Oi Yee Kwong 
 
Department of Chinese, Translation & Linguistics 
City University of Hong Kong 
Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong 
olivia.kwong@cityu.edu.hk 
Abstract—Very large corpora of properly processed textual 
materials are uncommon but they can provide important 
resources for language modeling in natural language 
processing, ranging from speech processing and text input to 
automatic IR and patent translation. However, when properly 
cultivated in spatial-temporal terms, they can foster innovative 
knowledge discovery in database applications by functioning as 
monitoring 
corpus 
and 
enhance 
the 
human 
centered 
communication environment by allowing more substantive 
introspection and comparison of linguistic and social-cultural 
developments of the relevant speech communities.  
This paper discusses how the gigantic synchronous and 
homothematic corpus of Chinese, LIVAC, can contribute to 
the monitoring the linguistic homogeneity and heterogeneity 
diachronically and synchronically. After processing media 
texts of more than 400 million Chinese characters over 16 
years, LIVAC has yielded a lexical corpus of 1.5 million words. 
This paper examines some aspects of the nature and extent of 
lexical and morphological divergence and convergence in the 
Chinese language of Hong Kong, Taipei and Beijing. 
Additional discussions cover creation and relexification of 
neologisms, categorial fluidity and the associated challenges to 
terminology standardization, such as renditions of non-Chinese 
personal names. This paper also explores how the associated 
socio-cultural developments can be fruitfully monitored by 
means of this unique spatial-temporal corpus.  
Keywords- 
monitoring 
corpus; 
synchronous 
corpus; 
homothematic coprus; LIVAC; the Chinese language  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Although Chinese is the native or official language in 
many communities such as Mainland China, Taipei, and 
Hong Kong, its homogeneity cannot be simplistically 
assumed. In fact, there are readily noticeable and significant 
linguistic 
differences 
among 
these 
Chinese 
speech 
communities as any casual newspaper reader from a 
community other than his or hers will readily testify. This 
phenomenon can be well illustrated by the lexical items. As a 
consequence of recent history and localized cultural 
developments, the differences are arguably much greater 
than those among British English, American English and 
Australian English if Chinese-English bilinguals have an 
opportunity to reflect on the two situations. These linguistic 
differences are not only significant for NLP and linguistic 
analysis but for monitoring the speech communities in which 
these linguistic variations are embedded. 
II. 
USING A SYNCHRONOUS & HOMOTHEMATIC CORPUS 
FOR MONITORING CHINESE LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT 
In order to explore the significance of the non-
homogeneity of the Chinese language in different Chinese 
speech communities, this paper attempts to exploit a viable 
and rigorous methodology which can provide, among other 
things, a useful foundation for research into terminology and 
standardization of the language. 
The use of corpus has been a major means for studying 
natural language in authentic use rather than in abstraction [1] 
[2] [3]. There is now an over-abundance of natural language 
data for constructing linguistic corpora. However, it is 
important to control the nature, size and time frame of these 
sources when building corpora, especially when we need to 
conduct synchronic and/or diachronic comparisons.  
Internet has become a major source for obtaining 
linguistic data because it is easily and readily accessible. 
However, we have to be cautious when drawing data from 
the Internet. One commonly seen phenomenon is data 
duplication where the same data with exact wordings and 
layout appear more than once on the Internet. Moreover, the 
timeframes of the data obtained from Internet are neither 
specified nor easily controlled. Overlooking these problems 
will lead to serious faults in drawing conclusion, especially 
when qualitative conclusions are based on the quantitative 
analysis of these data. Thus it is important to control the data 
rigorously in terms of both dimensions of time and content.  
One major approach in corpus linguistic research is using 
balanced corpus in which data of a language are drawn from 
a wide range of sources/registers. Examples in the English 
language include the British National Corpus (BNC) and 
American National Corpus (ANC). This type of corpus 
provides a comprehensive overview of the language of a 
particular community, such as British English and American 
English. It cannot however compare the same type of 
language in both spatial and temporal dimensions.  
In this paper, we argue that heterogeneity rather than 
homogeneity should be assumed in the Chinese language, 
both lexically and syntactically, across some major Chinese 
communities, such as Beijing, Hong Kong, and Taipei. The 
LIVAC corpus [4] initially developed at the Language 
Information Sciences Research Center at the City University 
175
DBKDA 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-115-1

 
  
 
of Hong Kong since 1995 is particularly suited for this kind 
of study.  LIVAC is synchronous and homothematic in 
nature, which rigorously and regularly draws comparable 
amount of data from similar sections such as front page, 
financial page, Cross-Strait news page, editorial page, 
entertainment page, sports page, and local news page, of 
printed Chinese media of major Chinese communities (see 
Table I) [5] [6]. In other words, the data are analyzed within 
the same framework in terms of size, time, domain as well as 
content across communities and this provides a common 
platform for meaningful synchronic and/or diachronic 
comparisons [7]. This “Windows” approach thus ensures that 
comparable data are extracted according to the same set of 
criteria [8].  
The use of massive news media materials for such a 
study is very much justified because the popular media 
should reflect the language and the readership of society and 
be responsive to their language preference [9] [10] [11] [12]. 
Moreover, such a database facilitates higher order 
knowledge discovery and the analysis of associated linguistic 
characteristics with the larger context of its human users. 
Currently LIVAC has obtained 1.5 million word types by 
accumulatively analyzing over 400 million Chinese 
characters of newspaper texts in major Chinese communities. 
1 Background details of LIVAC are summarized in Table I. 
TABLE I.  
SUMMARY HIGHLIGHTS OF LIVAC CORPUS 
Communities 
covered: 
Beijing, Hong Kong, Macau, Shanghai, Singapore, 
Taiwan, Shenzhen, Zhuhai, Guangzhou 
Source of data: 
Representative newspapers from each community 
Time span: 
Since 1995 (i.e., 16 years) 
Coverage: 
News sections: International, editorials,  Cross-Strait, 
local, financial,  entertainment,  sports, etc. 
Size of corpus: 
1.5 million word types culled from 400+ million 
Chinese character of texts  
With the Windows approach described above, the data of 
Hong Kong, Taipei and Beijing are rigorously processed and 
are normalized in terms of size and timeframes which can 
allow us to observe the differential trends of Chinese 
language and related linguistic developments. 
III. 
LEXICAL CONVERGENCE AND ACTIVE-CORE 
VOCABULARY 
Even though Hong Kong, Taipei and Beijing share the 
Chinese language, there are significant differences among 
their large lexical databases. Table II indicates the extent of 
lexical items shared by the three communities between 1995 
and 2004, based on the above Windows approach. 
TABLE II.  
OVERLAPPING LEXICAL ITEMS IN HONG KONG, TAIPEI 
AND BEIJING BETWEEN 1995 AND 2004 
% 
Hong Kong 
Taipei 
Beijing 
Hong Kong 
 
39 
34 
Taipei 
41.1 
 
33.6 
Beijing 
41.1 
38.6 
 
                                                           
1 All the texts have been automatically segmented with semi-automatic 
verification, and large sections have been POS-tagged and verified. Some 
details on the relevant information mining efforts have been reported in [5] 
and [6]. 
The corresponding percentages between any two 
communities are not necessarily identical because the total 
numbers of words in each community are different. Consider 
Hong Kong and Taipei, 39% of the 215k words from Hong 
Kong can be found in Taipei while 41.1% of the 205k words 
in Taipei appear in Hong Kong. These figures show that the 
number of lexical items actively shared by any two of these 
three communities over the 9-year period is not very high. 
Generally speaking, less than half of the lexical items used in 
any one community can be found in the other two 
communities. The extent of overlap between Taipei and 
Beijing is the least. Only 33.6% of such overlapping items 
are found in the Taipei corpus. This demonstrates that 
between Taipei and Hong Kong, as well as between Hong 
Kong and Beijing, there are more extensive overlaps than 
between Beijing and Taipei. This situation might reflect the 
social, cultural situation associated with real politics. 
In this 9-year period, over 56,000 lexical items were 
found in common in the three communities (see Table III).  
TABLE III.  
OVERLAPPING LEXICAL ITEMS AMONG HONG KONG, 
TAIPEI AND BEIJING (1995-2004) 
No. of  
overlapping items 
Hong Kong 
Taipei 
Beijing 
56693 
26.3% 
27.7% 
31.8% 
The extent of pairwise overlap between the communities 
is given in Figure 1. One may find it surprising that the 
extent of overlap is exceptionally low even though the three 
communities share the same language. Table III shows that 
such a core vocabulary only accounts for from 26% to 31% 
of the total items used in each community. It should also be 
noted that the same concept is not necessarily rendered by 
the same lexical item in the three communities. This is a 
partial reason leading to the low degree of lexical overlap. 
Therefore, lexical variation cannot be simply studied on a 
quantitative basis and a systematic qualitative investigation 
has to be carried out in order to compare lexical divergence 
across communities. This will be discussed in Section IV. 
 
Figure 1.  Extent of Lexical Overlap in Hong Kong, Taipei and Beijing in 
LIVAC (1995 – 2004) 
These overlapping words can be considered the active-
core vocabulary that is in current use in the language. Those 
non-overlap words can be considered ambient vocabulary, 
which can be divided into two sub-types: 
(a) Transparent and readily decodable: Even though 
the three communities use Chinese characters to coin words, 
mutual intelligibility cannot be always assumed. For 
176
DBKDA 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-115-1

 
  
 
example, 計程車 (ji-cheng-che, count-distance-car) and 出
租車 (chu-zu-che, hired-car) are used to refer to “taxi” in 
Taipei and Beijing respectively, members of each 
community should be able to understand the other word by 
adding up the meaning of each morpheme (i.e., 計(count), 程
(distance), 出租(hire) and 車(car)). These two words can 
thus be considered mutually intelligible between the two 
communities, as well as in other Chinese communities such 
as Hong Kong and Singapore where 的士 (di-shi) and 德士 
(de-shi) are used respectively. Another pair of example is 軟
盤 (ruan-pan, soft-platter) and 軟碟 (ruan-die, soft plate) for 
floppy disc: The former is used in Mainland China and 
Taipei, while the latter in Hong Kong. 盤 and 碟 are similar 
in meanings and people should not find problems in 
understanding the alternate term.  
(b) Opaque and non-readily decodable: Some words 
are less mutually intelligible across communities. For 
example, 的士 (di-shi) and 德士 (de-shi) meaning “taxi” 
used in Hong Kong and Singapore respectively cannot be 
simply derived from the meanings of their components (i.e., 
的(di), 士(shi) and 德(de)) because these two words are 
created by means of phonetic adaptation. They are thus less 
mutually intelligible to members of Beijing and Taipei. 
It is notable that beyond the Chinese context, there is also 
a considerable degree of mutual intelligibility between words 
used in Chinese and Japanese (i.e., those written with 
Japanese kanji) on vehicle-related words. Chinese readers are 
found to be able to understand more vehicle-related words 
written with Japanese kanji than vice versa [13]. It is also 
noted that the extent of overall mutual intelligibility for 
understanding Chinese items by Japanese has decreased from 
51% to 25% when the same window is taken 10 years later 
[14] and this deserves fuller investigation. One possible 
reason for the decrease is that many VEHICLE words in 
Chinese are phonetically adapted (mostly from English), 
such as ji-pu-che 吉普車 (jeep), mo-tuo 摩托 (motorbike). 
The meanings of these words are not transparent from the 
Chinese characters, i.e., the meaning of 摩托 is not simply a 
combination of the meanings of 摩 and 托.  
Although 的士 (di-shi), 計程車 (ji-cheng-che, count-
distance-car) and 出租車 (chu-zu-che, hired-car) appear in 
all three communities, their frequency distributions are 
significantly different across the three communities: 的士, 
計程車 and 出租車 are predominantly used in Hong Kong, 
Taipei and Beijing respectively. It is thus more appropriate to 
consider the other two items ambient vocabulary in each 
community. In this regard, we re-define ambient vocabulary 
as those items whose frequency in a particular community 
accounts for 80% or above of the total frequencies from all 
the three communities. Table IV provides the quantitative 
data of this type of vocabulary in the three communities. 
TABLE IV.  
WORDS WITH OVER 80%  LOCAL USAGE FREQUENCY  
% 
Hong Kong 
Beijing 
Taipei 
Type 
55.8 
51.8 
59.5 
Token 
12.8 
9.9 
11.7 
The data show that about half of the lexical items of each 
community have high local usage frequency. In terms of 
tokens, these local high frequency items only account for 
around 10% of the overall token usage. This again 
demonstrates that there is a high degree of lexical 
heterogeneity across these three Chinese communities. 
The above discussion draws attention to the considerable 
heterogeneity of the Chinese language among Hong Kong, 
Taipei and Beijing. Furthermore, we should also point out 
that non-reciprocal items found in one single community will 
subsequently spread to other communities upon frequent 
cross-communal contact and will gradually become the 
active-core vocabulary. This dynamic nature of lexical 
development will be explored in the next section.  
IV. 
RENDITIONS OF FOREIGN PERSONAL NAMES  
The tremendous growth and attrition of proper names in 
the Chinese language has become a challenge in NLP, 
especially for named-entity recognition [15] [16]. Chinese, 
unlike English, does not have any means, such as capital 
letters to identify proper names. Thus, in LIVAC, three types 
of proper names (personal names, geographical names and 
organization names) are separately tagged in multiple ways.  
While phonetic adaptation is commonly used to render 
foreign personal names in Chinese, the three communities 
show considerable variations which are critical to NLP in a 
cross-linguistic context. Such differences can be attributed to 
the use of different dialects for the transliteration template. 
For example, Cantonese is the local dialect providing the 
usual base for phoneticization in Hong Kong while Mandarin 
is the base for Beijing and Taipei. Furthermore, even for 
those popular figures whose names appear frequently in 
news media, discrepancies across communities also exist so 
that members from one community may not recognize 
readily that two different Chinese renditions in fact could 
refer to the same individual [17] [18]. Table V lists some 
well-known non-Chinese names rendered differently in the 
three communities, according to LIVAC. 
TABLE V.  
NON-CHINESE PERSONAL NAMES WITH DIFFERENT 
RENDITIONS IN LIVAC 
Names 
Hong Kong 
Taipei 
Beijing 
George W. Bush 
布殊 
布希 
布什 
Tony Blair 
貝理雅 
布萊爾 
布萊爾 
Saddam Hussein 
薩達姆 
哈珊 
薩達姆 
Zinedine Zidane 
施丹 
席丹 
齊達內 
Whoopi Goldberg 
胡比高拔 
琥碧戈柏 
烏比·戈德堡 
Brad Pitt 
畢彼特 
布萊德彼特 
布拉德皮特 
Besides the dialects involved in the recipient language, 
there are other communal differences, such as the number of 
syllables in the transliteration, as shown by the renditions of 
Brad Pitt and Whoopi Goldberg. Furthermore, even within 
the same community, different domains might have different 
principles for transliteration. For example, in the domain of 
entertainment, both first name and last name are always 
included in the transliteration, while in the political and 
sports domains, only the last names are transliterated. 
177
DBKDA 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-115-1

 
  
 
V. 
RELEXIFICATION 
The lexical divergence across Chinese communities can 
be reduced through relexification [8].  In the initial stage, 
there can be alternate lexical items referring to the same 
concept in different communities. Subsequently, these lexical 
variants compete among each other and some are retained 
and become core items. Internet and mobile phone are good 
examples to illustrate the relexification process.   
A. Internet 
The rapid developments in computer technology have led 
to the coinage of new words. The lexical variation in the IT 
domain can be best illustrated by those words designating 
Internet. In LIVAC, there have been at least 13 lexical items 
referring to this technology since it was first introduced, as 
shown in Table VI below. 
TABLE VI.  
ALTERNATE RENDITIONS OF “INTERNET” IN LIVAC 
1. 互聯網 mutual-link-net 
8. 網際網絡 inter-net-network 
2. 互聯網絡 mutual-link-network 
9. 網際網路 inter-net-network 
3. 交互網 cross-mutual-net 
10. 遞訊網 transmit-information-net 
4. 信息網 information-net 
11. 英特網 INTER-net 
5. 訊息網 information-net 
12. 因特網 INTER-net 
6. 國際網 international-net 
13. 萬維網 10K-dimension-net 
7. 國際聯網 international-link-net 
 
The data show that when Internet was first introduced, 
there were diverse renditions for this technology in the 
Chinese communities. Items 1 – 10 are created by means of 
semantic adaptation with the functions and characteristics of 
Internet being described. Items 11 - 13 are created by means 
of phonetic adaptation or hybrid (a combination of both 
semantic 
and 
phonetic 
adaptations) 
by 
which 
the 
pronunciation of “internet” in English is modeled. It is 
interesting to observe that after subsequent relexification and 
merger, 互聯網 (mutual-link-net) became the most popular 
term with 因特網 (INTER-net) as the next frequently used 
item by year 2000 (for more details on Chinese neologistic 
development, see [7], [19] and [20]). 
B. Mobile phone 
The LIVAC data point to at least 10 items referring to 
mobile phone in Chinese, as shown in Table VII below: 
TABLE VII.  
ALTERNATE RENDITIONS OF “MOBILE PHONE” IN LIVAC 
手持電話 hand-hold-phone 
無線電話 no-wire-phone 
手提電話 hand-carry-phone 
隨身電話 follow-body-phone 
行動電話 action-phone 
攜帶電話 carry-phone 
流動電話 transient-phone 
大哥大 Big-Boss-Brother 
移動電話 mobile-phone 
手機 Hand-phone 
We find significant convergent developments in 
Hong Kong, Taipei and Beijing, and discrete changes in 
the choice among alternate forms when comparison is 
made on with three consecutive annual windows (from 
1998 to 2001), as shown in Table VIII below: 
 
TABLE VIII.  DEVELOPMENT OF LEXICAL ITEMS RELATED TO “MOBILE 
PHONE” FROM 1998 TO 2001 
Years 
Hong Kong 
Taipei 
Beijing 
98-99 
手提電話 
hand-carry-phone 
行動電話 
action-phone 
移動電話 
mobile-phone 
 
 流動電話 
transit-phone 
大哥大 
Big-Boss-Brother 
大哥大 
Big-Boss-Brother 
99-00 
流動電話 
transit-phone 
行動電話 
action-phone 
手機 
hand-phone 
 
手機 
hand-phone 
手機 
hand-phone 
移動電話 
mobile-phone 
00-01 
流動電話 transit-phone 
手機 hand-phone 
手機 
hand-phone 
手機 
hand-phone 
 
-- 
行動電話 
action-phone 
移動電話 
mobile-phone 
The three communities initially had different neologistic 
renditions for mobile phone. 手提電話 (shou-ti-dian-hua, 
hand-carry-phone), 行動電話 (xing-dong-dian-hua, action-
phone) and 移 動 電 話  (yi-dong-dian-hua, mobile-phone) 
were used most frequently in Hong Kong, Taipei and Beijing 
respectively. In 1999-2000, the disyllabic item 手機 (shou-ji, 
hand-phone) was the most frequently used in Beijing while it 
was the next frequently used item in Hong Kong and Taipei. 
In 2000-2001, it completely took over other items and 
became the core item for mobile phone in all three 
communities. There can be a number of reasons for one item 
winning over the others and disyllabification could be one of 
such reasons since it is the major trend of lexical 
development in the Chinese language.  According to 
Masini’s study, the ratio between monosyllabic and poly-
syllabic words is approximately 1:6. Among these 
polysyllabic words, over 70% are disyllabic [21]. In her 
sociolinguistic study on the nature of “Chinese word” [22], 
Wang found that over 90% of the words segmented by her 
informants 
are 
disyllabic. 
The 
propensity 
for 
disyllabification has often been noted [23] [24] [25] [26]. 
 
VI. 
CATEGORIAL FLUIDITY IN CHINESE 
Chinese 
is 
an 
isolating 
language 
which 
lacks 
morphological markings to distinguish different parts-of-
speech (POS). For example, the word 懷疑 (huai-yi), with a 
verb sense (“to suspect”) to start with, should only appear as 
a verb in a dictionary, despite its variable usages found in 
real contexts, as in (a) – (c) below. 
(a)  我    懷   疑   他  是    賊  
wo   huai-yi   ta  shi    zei 
‘I suspect he is a thief’ 
(b) 他   滿    臉     懷    疑    表     情   
ta  man-lian   huai-yi    biao-qing 
‘He wears a suspicious look’ 
(c)  這     只  是    我   的  懷    疑 
zhe  zhi  shi    wo   de  huai-yi 
‘This is only my suspicion’ 
In (a), 懷疑 (huai-yi) is a verb. In (b), it is an adjective 
and in (c), it is a noun.  
178
DBKDA 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-115-1

 
  
 
We call this relative flexibility of a word being used for 
different grammatical functions and possibly different POSs 
categorial fluidity [27]. In the following, we only focus on 
the fluidity between verbs and nouns. We consider categorial 
fluidity a continuum. We will show, by means of the LIVAC 
data, how categorial shift takes places across Chinese 
communities and over time.  
 
A. Methodology 
First, all verbs (excluding copula verbs and auxiliary 
verbs) with their frequencies were extracted. Then out of 
these verbs, those which also exhibited noun or nominalized 
usages were extracted together with the corresponding 
frequencies. We call this set of verbs “VN words”. 
Next, a simple ratio (1) was computed for all VN words. 
The log ratio was used to give a linear scale. If verb usage 
outnumbers noun usage to a certain extent, i.e., when r >> 0, 
it suggests that the word is originally a verb and has just 
started to shift. If verb usage and noun usage are more or less 
equal, i.e., when r ≈ 0, then either the shift is mature enough 
or there is genuine ambiguity. If noun usage outnumbers 
verb usage by a lot, i.e., when r << 0, it would mean that 
either the verb has over shifted or the word is originally a 
noun and is occasionally denominalized. 
 
noun uses
verb uses
r
= log 2
 
(1) 
B. Results 
The results from Hong Kong, Beijing and Taipei are 
shown in Table IX. The column “No. in VN Shift” indicates 
the amount of VN words out of all verbs. Out of these we 
analyzed those with total frequency (including. both verb and 
noun usages) 5 or more for their r values, and the results are 
shown in the last three columns. Each place has about 60% 
of the words reaching this threshold. With r ≥ 1, verb usage 
at least doubles noun usage. With 1 > r > -1, verb and noun 
usages are quite balanced. With r ≤ -1, noun usage at least 
doubles verb usage. The results thus suggest that in real use, 
there are about 3-4% more nominalized uses of verbs found 
in Beijing than in Hong Kong and Taipei, which indicate 
quite a different, if not innovative, style of writing in Beijing. 
The 
figures 
also 
reflect 
the 
asymmetry 
between 
deverbalization of verbs and denominalization of nouns. 
TABLE IX.  
SUMMARY OF RESULTS (HONG KONG, BEIJING & TAIPEI) 
Source 
No. of  VN 
r ≥ 1 
1 > r > -1 
r ≤ -1 
(Only for word types with freq≥5) 
Hong Kong  
14.4% 
51.6% 
26.0% 
22.4% 
Beijing 
 18.5% 
45.5% 
29.7% 
24.8% 
Taipei 
15.5% 
49.1% 
27.1% 
23.8% 
The general observation is that Beijing demonstrates 
more nominalized usages of verbs than the other two 
communities. In addition, for Hong Kong and Taipei, on 
average about 50% of the VN words are just beginning to 
shift (with r ≥ 1) and their verb usages are still dominant.  On 
the contrary, only about 35% on average of the VN words 
have r ≥ 1 for Beijing. In other words, many words which are 
verbs originally do not actually play the role of verbs in 
Beijing. This might suggest that Chinese grammar is more 
seriously Europeanized in the Mainland. 
We also found that 105 VN words are shared by all three 
communities and their usages are quite different among the 
three communities. Some examples and the corresponding r 
values are shown in Table X. 
TABLE X.  
EXAMPLES OF VN WORDS COMMON TO THREE PLACES 
VN Word 
Hong Kong 
Beijing 
Taipei 
發揮  (to express) 
0.8074 
2.7004 
3.3219 
經營 (to run a business) 
1.5850 
-0.1375 
1.8074 
宣傳  (to promote) 
-1.3785 
1.5850 
0.4854 
合作  (to co-operate) 
1.3785 
-1.1635 
0.4594 
衝擊  (to attack) 
-0.3219 
1.3219 
-3.3219 
感受  (to experience) 
2.8074 
-1.4150 
-1.3219 
Table X shows that 發揮 (fa-hui, to express) maintains 
most of its verb usage in Beijing and Taipei, but is 
considerably balanced with its noun usage in Hong Kong. 
On the other hand, 感受 (gan-shou, to experience) is mostly 
used as a verb in Hong Kong, but its noun usage 
predominates in Beijing and Taipei. 
The above comparison indicates that the categorial 
fluidity phenomenon is relatively most common in Beijing – 
up to more than 18% of verbs undergo the verb-noun 
transitional process to various extents. These findings not 
only improve our understanding of this perennial problem in 
contemporary Chinese, but also have important implications 
for meaningful natural language applications. 
 
VII. SYNTACTIC CHANGE 
Besides lexical development, LIVAC also allows us to 
monitor syntactic change of the Chinese language. With its 
synchronic nature, we can trace how the new syntactic 
feature originates. In the following, we discuss the transitive 
verb 打造 (da-zao, to fabricate).  
In the Dictionary on Modern Chinese  published in 2003, 
the verb 打造 has the following definition: 
“to fabricate (mostly metallic objects such as tools and 
ships)” 
In a later edition published in 2005, one more definition 
has been added: “to create or to accomplish something such 
as brand names or company image”. 
These two definitions show that the objects of 打造 
change from concrete to less concrete or even abstract. It is 
thus meaningful to trace how this property of the syntactic 
argument changed. To be more specific, can we trace which 
Chinese community instigates this change first? 
In LIVAC, the objects of 打造 are classified into 3  types: 
(a) Concrete objects, such as ships, furniture 
(b) Semi-concrete objects such as the aircraft carrier of 
the automotive business. 
(c)  Abstract objects, such as New Taiwan, Peking operas, 
new brand names, new vista, new life, etc. 
When we compare the change of the syntactic object in 
terms of abstractness for 打造 across the three communities, 
179
DBKDA 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-115-1

 
  
 
we find that Taipei was the first to take on abstract objects 
for this verb, followed by Hong Kong and Singapore, then 
Shanghai and Beijing (non-government publications). The 
chronological order is summarized in Figure 2.  
 
Figure 2.  Chronological development of the abstractness of the syntactic 
object for 打造 (to fabricate) across Chinese communities2 
VIII. CONCLUDING REMARKS 
 In this paper, we have drawn attention to the innovative 
use of a gigantic corpus of Chinese which has been 
cultivated synchronously and homothematically and with the 
introduction of a Windows approach. Such a linguistic 
corpus provides much more value than for traditional 
language modeling efforts in NLP applications such as IR 
and named-entity recognition. It can function usefully for 
data mining as well as monitoring linguistic variations in 
spatial and temporal dimensions which is uncommon for 
traditionally morphology rich languages, as well as to 
monitor the deeper concomitant developments in the larger 
relevant social and cultural contexts with the associated 
language users. It is hoped that with the addition of more 
mature applications of data mining techniques, much more 
findings can be reported in future.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We have benefited from input by many colleagues: W. F. 
Tsoi, K. P. Chow, Tom Lai, Terence Chan, Amy Liu, and 
colleagues from the ChiLin Star Corporation in Zhuhai, PRC.   
REFERENCES 
[1] K. Church and R. Mercer, “Introduction to the Special Issue on 
Computational Linguistics Using Large Corpora,” Computational 
Linguistics, vol. 19.1, 1993, pp. 1-24. 
[2] T. McEnery and A. Wilson, Corpus Linguistics. Edinburgh: 
Edinburgh University Press, 1996. 
[3] D. Biber, S. Conrad, and R. Reppen, Corpus Linguistics: 
Investigating Language Structure and Use. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1998. 
[4] http://www.livac.org 
[5] B. Tsou, H. L. Lin, T. Chan, J. Hu, C. H. Chew, and J. K. P. Tse, “A 
Synchronous Chinese Language Corpus from Different Speech 
Communities: Construction and Applciation,” International Journal of 
Computational Lingusitics and Chinese Language Processing, vol. 2.1, 
1997, pp. 91-104. 
[6] B. Tsou, A Synchronous Dictionary on Pan-Chinese Syntactic 
Information, unpublished [in Chinese]. 
                                                           
2 A more detailed study on monitoring syntactic change in the Chinese 
language with the LIVAC corpus can be found in [28]. 
[7] B. Tsou and T. B. Y. Lai, “Chinese synchronous corpus and 
information mining,” in Critical Issues in Chinese Information 
Processing, B. Xu, M. Sun and G. Jin, Eds. Beijing: Science Press, 
2003, pp. 147-165 [in Chinese]. 
[8] B. Tsou, “A window on re-lexification in Chinese,” in In Memory of 
Professor Li Fang-kuei: Essays on Linguistic Change and the Chinese 
Dialects, P. H. Ting and A. Yue, Eds. Seattle/Taipei: University of 
Washington/Academia Sinica, 2000, pp. 53-72. 
[9] T. A. van Dijk, News Analysis: Case Studies of International and 
National News in the Press. Hillsdale: Lawrence Erlbaum, 1998. 
[10] T. A. van Dijk,  News as Discourse. Hillsdale: Lawrence Erlbaum, 
1998. 
[11] P. Garrett and A. Bell, “Media discourse: A critical overview,” in 
Approaches to Media Discourse, A. Bell and P. Garrett, Eds. Oxford: 
Blackwell, 1998, pp. 1-20. 
[12] R. Fowler, Language in the News: Discourse and Ideology in the 
Press. London: Routledge, 1991. 
[13] B. Tsou and L. Feng, “A comparative study on neologisms in Chinese 
and Japanese: Towards a windows approach on the creation of 
neologisms and relexification,” Studies on Language, vol. 3, 2000, pp. 
51-70 [in Chinese]. 
[14] B. Tsou and A. Chin, “A large synchronous corpus as monitoring 
corpus: Some comparative content analysis of Chinese and Japanese 
language developments,” in Proceedings of the 4th International 
Universal Communication Symposium (IUCS 2010), IEEE Computer 
Society, in press. 
[15] M. Sun, H. Huang, and J. Fang, “Identifying Chinese names in 
unrestricted texts,” Journal of Chinese Information Processing, vol.  
9.2, 1998, pp. 16-27 . 
[16] L. Cheung and B. Tsou, “Personal names in unrestricted Chinese 
texts: nature and identification,” in Proceedings of Workshop on 
International Standards of Terminology and Language Resource 
Management, Third International Conference on Language Resources 
and Evaluation, Las Palmas, Spain, May 28 – June 2, 2002, pp. 1-7. 
[17] B. Tsou and O. Kwong, “Aspects of MT requirements related to 
proper nouns in the Asian context” in Proceedings of Workshop on 
Survey on Research and Development of Machine Translation in Asia, 
2002, pp. 85-93. 
[18] R. Song and B. Tsou, “A preliminary study on Chinese proper 
names,” in Proceedings of the 20th Anniversary Conference of 
CIPSC, 2000, pp. 14-19.  [in Chinese]. 
[19] B. Tsou and R. J. You, A Dictionary of Chinese New Words in the 
21st Century, Shanghai: Fudan University Press, 2007. [in Chinese] 
[20] B. Tsou and R. J. You, A Dictionary of Chinese New Words, Beijing: 
Commercial Press, 2010. [in Chinese] 
[21] F. Masini, The Formation of Modern Chinese Lexicon and its 
Evolution toward a National Language: The Period from 1840 to 
1898. Journal of Chinese Linguistics, Monograph 6, Berkeley: 
Journal of Chinese Linguistics, 1993. 
[22] L. Wang,  A Sociolinguistic Study on Chinese Words, Beijing: 
Commercial Press, 2003. [in Chinese].  
[23] W. Pan, B. Ye, and Y. Han, A Study on Word Formation in Chinese, 
Taipei: Students Publisher, 1993. [in Chinese]. 
[24] J. Zhou, The Meaning and Structure of Words, Tianjin: Tianjin guji 
chubanshe.  1994. [in Chinese]. 
[25] S. Lü, “A preliminary study on disyllabicity in modern Chinese,” in 
Collection of Essays on Chinese Grammar, Beijing: Commercial 
Press, 1999, pp. 415-444. [in Chinese]. 
[26] Z. Tang, The Lexicon of Contemporary Chinese: Its Synchronic 
Situation and Change, Shanghai: Fudan University Press, 2001. [in 
Chinese]. 
[27] O. Kwong and B. Tsou, “A synchronous corpus-based study of verb-
noun fluidity in Chinese,”  in Proceedings of the 17th Pacific Asia 
Conference, October 2003, pp. 194-203. 
[28] B. Tsou, A. Chin, and O. Kwong, “On incipient linguistic variations 
in chinese: A corpus approach,” unpublished.  
Taipei (May 1997) 
 
Hong Kong (July 1998), Singapore (Sept 1998) 
 
Shanghai (Sept 1999) 
 
Beijing A (non-government publications) 
 
Beijing B (People’s Daily, Aug 2000) 
180
DBKDA 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-115-1

