Graph Learning for Prediction of Drug-Disease Interactions: Preliminary Results
Andrej Kastrin∗ and Dimitar Hristovski†
Institute of Biostatistics and Medical Informatics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana
Ljubljana, Slovenia
Email: ∗andrej.kastrin@mf.uni-lj.si, †dimitar.hristovski@mf.uni-lj.si
Abstract—One of the fundamental problems to complex network
research is understanding of link formation. We study the prob-
lem of representation learning in a bipartite drug-disease network
of semantic predications extracted from biomedical literature.
We employ DeepWalk and node2vec node embedding methods
with deep learning link predictor, as well as standard baseline
predictors including common neighbors, Jaccard coefﬁcient, and
Adamic/Adar. Experimental results show that both network
embedding algorithms outperform traditional link predictors.
Keywords–Complex networks; Network analysis; Network learn-
ing; MEDLINE.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The corpus of biomedical papers is growing at an exponen-
tial rate. For instance, MEDLINE [1], the largest bibliographic
database in biomedicine, at the time of this writing, aggregates
more than 28 million citations to life science papers. However,
a signiﬁcant amount of potentially useful knowledge still re-
mains undiscovered. It is hard to synthesize divergent research
evidence into coherently interpretable knowledge. Here, we
tackle the problem of unravelling hidden relations between
drugs and diseases using link prediction methodology from
biomedical literature.
An elementary problem in graph research is the analysis
of the connections between the nodes. In computer science
and statistics, this is known as link prediction problem. Al-
though novel research area, link prediction attracted numerous
researchers in the last decade. Link prediction refers to the
discovery of relations between nodes that are not connected in
the current snapshot of a given network but will be connected
in the future. The aim of link prediction in general is to
estimate the probability that a link exists among a pair of
nodes, based on the topology of existing nodes, edges, and
their attributes.
In the case of link prediction, we need to encode pairwise
properties between nodes, such as the number of common
neighbors or relationship strength. Traditional approaches rely
on summary network statistics (e.g., centrality measures) to ex-
tract structural information from networks. However, recently,
approaches have emerged that seek to learn representations that
encode structural information about the network and present
a powerful alternative to traditional feature engineering. The
general idea behind representation learning is to learn a map-
ping that embeds nodes as points in a low-dimensional vector
space (i.e., embedding space). The goal is to optimize this
mapping so that geometric relationships in this space reﬂect
the structure of the original network. The learned embeddings
can then be used as feature inputs for machine learning tasks.
Embedding methods can be generally categorized into three
groups [2]: (i) factorization methods (e.g., locally linear em-
bedding [3]), (ii) random walk techniques (e.g., DeepWalk [4],
node2vec [5]), and (iii) deep learning (e.g., structural deep
network embedding [6]).
In this work, we investigate the performance of two net-
work embedding algorithms, namely DeepWalk and node2vec.
More formally, we examine, how neural network predictor,
using computed embeddings from DeepWalk and node2vec,
behaves on the task of link prediction in a large-scale network
of semantic predications extracted from biomedical literature.
In addition, we examine these methods in contrast to tradi-
tional baseline predictors such as common neighbors, Jaccard
coefﬁcient, and Adamic/Adar.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section II,
we present dataset and methodology used in this study. Results
are presented in Section III. Finally, we conclude in Section IV.
II.
METHODS
A. Dataset
SemRep is a symbolic natural language processing tool that
extracts semantic predications from MEDLINE citations [7].
A predication is a formal representation of textual content
that consists of a subject, predicate, and object. Subject
and object arguments are concepts from the Uniﬁed Med-
ical Language System (UMLS) Metathesaurus [8] as avail-
able through MetaMap [9]. The predicate is from UMLS
Semantic Network [10]. These predications provide a nor-
malized representation of the meaning of the source text in
a machine-readable form for automatic processing. SemRep
extracts about 30 predicate types, related to clinical medicine
(e.g., TREATS, DIAGNOSES), substance interactions (e.g.,
INTERACTS_WITH, STIMULATES), genetic etiology of dis-
ease (e.g., ASSOCIATED_WITH), and pharmacogenomics
(e.g., AFFECTS). In this paper, we focus only on TREATS
relation. We extract all TREATS relations that connect drugs
(Metathesaurus concepts with semantic type “Pharmacologic
Substance”) and diseases (concepts with semantic type “Dis-
ease or Syndrome”).
B. Baseline Predictors
We implemented a link prediction baseline using various
proximity measures, which are used to ﬁnd similarity among
a pair of nodes. Our assumption is that similar nodes are more
likely to form a link in the future. For each non-observed
link (u, v) in a testing network, a link prediction computes
a score s(u, v), which can be considered as an estimate of the
presence of edge creation between nodes u and v. In our initial
settings we used common neighbors, Jaccard coefﬁcient, and
Adamic/Adar.
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-715-3
DBKDA 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

C. Network Embeddings
For network representation learning models, we used
two state-of-the-art algorithms, namely DeepWalk [4] and
node2vec [5]. Both methods employ random walk algorithm
to sample topological properties and node representations are
learned to preserve pairwise similarities of nodes.
DeepWalk learns an embedding by sampling random walks
from each node and applying skip-gram learning on those
walks. We use the default parameters described in the seminal
paper, i.e., walk length t = 80, number of walks per node
γ = 80, and window size w = 10. node2vec improves the
random walk step of DeepWalk by deﬁning hyperparameters
p and q that control the depth and breadth of random walks,
respectively. The special case with parameters p = 1 and
q = 1 corresponds to DeepWalk. In our settings we used the
same values for parameters as for DeepWalk; the remaining
parameters were set to p = 2 and q = 4.
After network embedding, we need to set up a statistical
classiﬁcation framework for link prediction. Both algorithms,
DeepWalk and node2vec, described above, are designed to
learn feature representations for nodes in a network. However,
in our study we are interested in prediction involving pairs of
nodes and not individual nodes. To this end, we need to deﬁne
a binary operator ◦ over the corresponding feature vectors
f(u) and f(v) in order to generate a composite representation
g(u, v). We consider three different alternatives for the ◦
operator:
1) concatenation: ui + vi,
2) average: (ui + vi)/2, and
3) Hadamard product: (ui ∗ vi),
where u and v are two vectors and ui and vi are i-th element
of u and v, respectively.
D. Machine Learning
For the classiﬁcation task, we use deep learning model im-
plemented in TensorFlow [11] as feed-forward neural network
with a single hidden layer. Input to the model is a vector
representation with the binary operator deﬁned above. The
output of the model is a probability of a link formation between
the input nodes. We draw a ﬁxed proportion of the existing
edges for training, and use the rest of edges for the testing.
Training was deﬁned for a time period from 1843 to 2003 and
testing for a time range from 2004 to 2018.
In this study, we used the following ﬁve measures to com-
pare the performance of the statistical learning: area under a
receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC), area under a
precision-recall curve (AUPR), mean average precision (mAP),
and precision at k (Prec@k).
III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
In our experiment we used the knowledge network, con-
structed as a subset of SemMedDB network [12], as deﬁned
previously in the Methods section. The network comprises
13,182 unique vertices that refer to drugs and 8856 vertices
that refer to diseases. In total, there were 170,707 relations
between both sets of nodes. The mean degree of the bipartite
network was 12.95 links and the average path length was 1.76
hops.
The results in terms of classiﬁcation performances of the
performed experiment are summarized in Table I. The best per-
former across all four performance measures is node2vec with
average merge type. If we consider only AUROC and AUPR
measures, the baseline predictors are slightly better than Deep-
Walk and node2vec. Common neighbors measure performs
best, followed by Jaccard coefﬁcient, and Adamic/Adar. mAP
and Prec@k scores for DeepWalk and node2vec are an order
of magnitude higher in comparison to baseline predictors.
TABLE I. PERFORMANCE MEASURES OF LINK PREDICTION ALGORITHMS
Method
Binary operator
AUROC
AUPR
Pred@k
mAP
CN
–
0.86
0.86
0.86
0.64
JC
–
0.85
0.84
0.86
0.62
AA
–
0.81
0.74
0.82
0.54
DeepWalk
Co
0.83
0.86
0.96
0.79
Av
0.83
0.86
0.97
0.80
Ha
0.72
0.72
0.82
0.65
node2vec
Co
0.83
0.86
0.96
0.80
Av
0.83
0.86
0.97
0.81
Ha
0.72
0.73
0.83
0.65
Note: CN = Common Neighbors, JC = Jaccard Coefﬁcient, AA =
Adamic/Adar; (Co)ncatenate, (Av)erage, and (Ha)damard merge type;
further details are provided in text
As far as we know, this is the ﬁrst work discussing
knowledge network, network embeddings as well as deep
learning approach to discover new drug-disease interactions
from literature. Results of this study show that both network
embedding algorithms, DeepWalk and node2vec, outperform
traditional link predictors such as common neighbors or Jac-
card coefﬁcient.
IV.
CONCLUSION
We investigate the representation learning in bipartite drug-
disease network of semantic predications. We design a deep
learning model that includes the network structure into the em-
bedding. Experimental results demonstrated that performance
measures in terms of AUROC and AUPR are comparable.
However, we found evidence that DeepWalk and node2vec
outperformed baseline predictors in terms of Pred@k and mAP
measures.
REFERENCES
[1]
“PubMed,” https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed, accessed: 2019-06-
27.
[2]
P. Goyal and E. Ferrara, “Graph embedding techniques, applications,
and performance: A survey,” Knowledge-Based Systems, vol. 151,
2018, pp. 78–94.
[3]
S. T. Roweis and L. K. Saul, “Nonlinear dimensionality reduction by
locally linear embedding,” Science, vol. 290, no. 5500, 2000, pp. 2323–
2326.
[4]
B. Perozzi, R. Al-Rfou, and S. Skiena, “Deepwalk: Online learning
of social representations,” in Proceedings of the 20th ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining.
ACM, 2014, pp. 701–710.
[5]
A. Grover and J. Leskovec, “node2vec: Scalable feature learning for
networks,” in Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining.
ACM, 2016,
pp. 855–864.
[6]
D. Wang, P. Cui, and W. Zhu, “Structural deep network embedding,”
in Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference on
Knowledge discovery and data mining.
ACM, 2016, pp. 1225–1234.
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-715-3
DBKDA 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

[7]
T. C. Rindﬂesch and M. Fiszman, “The interaction of domain knowl-
edge and linguistic structure in natural language processing: Interpreting
hypernymic propositions in biomedical text,” Journal of Biomedical
Informatics, vol. 36, no. 6, 2003, pp. 462–477.
[8]
O. Bodenreider, “The Uniﬁed Medical Language System (UMLS):
Integrating biomedical terminology,” Nucleic Acids Research, vol. 32,
no. Database issue, 2004, pp. D267–D270.
[9]
A. R. Aronson and F.-M. Lang, “An overview of MetaMap: Historical
perspective and recent advances,” Journal of the American Medical
Informatics Association, vol. 17, no. 3, 2010, pp. 229–236.
[10]
D. A. Lindberg, B. L. Humphreys, and A. T. McCray, “The Uniﬁed
Medical Language System,” Methods of Information in Medicine,
vol. 32, Aug. 1993, pp. 281–291.
[11]
M. Abadi, P. Barham, J. Chen, Z. Chen, A. Davis, J. Dean, M. Devin,
S. Ghemawat, G. Irving, M. Isard et al., “Tensorﬂow: A system
for large-scale machine learning,” in 12th USENIX Symposium on
Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI ’16), 2016, pp.
265–283.
[12]
H. Kilicoglu, D. Shin, M. Fiszman, G. Rosemblat, and T. C. Rindﬂesch,
“SemMedDB: A PubMed-scale repository of biomedical semantic pred-
ications,” Bioinformatics, vol. 28, no. 23, 2012, pp. 3158–3160.
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-715-3
DBKDA 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

