BA: Lean Manufacturing Indicators Applied to HR Applications - An
Implementation Study
Robson Thanael Poffo
Innovation
TOTVS
Joinville, Brazil
robson.poffo@totvs.com.br
Mehran Misaghi
Researcher
SOCIESC
Joinville, Brazil
mehran@sociesc.org.br
Abstract—In the last few years, the world witnessed a large
number of changes on the way to manage the production on
factories. This changes were motivated by a ﬁnancial crisis.
With each passing year the companies feel the need to be faster
when making decisions and one way to do this is through
indicators (KPIs and KRIs). Remember that the difference
between a company that grows its market share and the other
companies is how fast they make decisions. Based on the
mission, vision and values of the company, this article describes
indicators that are used on lean manufacturing and that can
be used in human resource management. Furthermore, it
describes the best way to design the data warehouse considering
the level of granularity and the level of data detail. First we
will analyze the lean manufacturing indicators addressed on
the academic literature. Then, we will analyze these indicators
with the other indicators used by leading research companies
in Brazil. After that, we will analyze the mission, vision and
values of the company to determine the KRIs and KPIs that we
need to monitor. Thereafter, we will design the data warehouse
to comport these indicators considering the level of granularity
and the level of data to analyze them. Finally, we will apply
these indicators and data warehouse in a software development
company to see the results. At the end of this project, we
would like to get the list of indicators that would be able to
manage and analyze the production and performance of the
employees in the factory. With these indicators, the factory
will be able to manage the team correctly despite the weather
of global ﬁnance. This approach allows us to determine the
indicators that will make a difference on the management of
the company analyzing the performance of human resources
associated with the performance of the manufacture. These
indicators will determine the way to implement BI solutions
associated with human resources systems and manufacturing
systems successfully.
Keywords-BA; Lean Manufacturing; Indicators; HR Systems.
I. INTRODUCTION
The study of lean manufacturing indicators applied to
people management with the purpose of reducing waste
involves many crucial concepts for the success of the project.
For this study, it is important to know the main concepts
of lean manufacturing, the main characteristics of people
management, the main characteristics of the indicators and
how to apply the management of indicators to people man-
agement. Finally, it is also important to acknowledge the
main characteristics of how to model a data warehouse in
order to use these indicator correctly.
Aiming to determine the main characteristics of lean man-
ufacturing, Pettersen [1] developed a research that contained
a total of 38 bibliographical references. After ﬁnishing his
research, Pettersen [1] identiﬁed only two concepts of lean
manufacturing equally described in all references:
1) Reduction of the preparation time;
2) Continuous improvement.
With the result obtained by Pettersen it is possible to see
not only how vast is the understanding of the concept of
lean manufacturing is but also which concepts are more
important. Carreira [2] highlighted that one of the main
concepts of lean manufacturing is the continuous elimination
of waste. For Hibbs, Jewett and Sullivan [3], one of the most
important proposals of lean manufacturing is to deliver the
ﬁnal product to the client as fast as possible.
Jekiel [4] points out that the application of the concepts
of lean manufacturing for people management had a limited
outcome in many companies because they were not ready
to provide the necessary support; in other words, applying
the concepts of lean manufacturing to people management is
not such a simple process and it needs monitoring to achieve
success.
Jekiel [4] recommends using the concepts of lean man-
ufacturing on people management in order to implement
the culture of continuous improvement with the purpose of
waste reduction. Jekiel also highlights the ﬁve main causes
that make it difﬁcult for companies to implement these
concepts:
1) Job positions limit people in their projects: the deﬁni-
tion of very speciﬁc roles and the attribution of many
processes end up limiting knowledge and people’s
experiences.
2) Power is limited to a select group of people: the
problem of power limitation is related to leadership, in
many cases, leaders believe to have more knowledge
than the rest of the group.
246
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-247-9
DBKDA 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

3) People do what they are asked of: Many people at
work do only what they are paid for.
4) To channel abilities creates a new job: the problem
related to channeling abilities relies in the absence
of an administration to manage the result of these
abilities.
5) There are no costs for people that work in inferior
capacities: The majority of assets inside a company
are measured according to their capacity, such as con-
structions or equipments, however, when it comes to
the percentage of production of an employee, abilities
that will be able to optimize the process are rarely
considered.
The reasons identiﬁed by Jekiel [4] have something in
common: they can all be monitored through indicators.
However, the question now is, how to correctly choose the
right indicators for this task.
There are three ways to measure development, according
to Parmenter [5]:
1) Key Result Indicators (KRIs): Inform the results ob-
tained in one perspective;
2) Performance Indicators (PIs): Inform what to do;
3) Key Performance Indicators (KPIs): Inform what to
do in order to drastically increase the performance.
Usually, the KRIs are reviewed in monthly or six-monthly
cycles, not daily or weekly, like it happens with KPIs
indicators.
The KPIs represent a series of measures to demonstrate
the most critical organizational development to the actual
and future success of the organization.
Besides understanding the concepts of KPIs and KRIs, it
is also important to understand the basic concepts related to
the indicators of development, according to Bancaleiro [6]:
1) Effort: Energy level and human creativity invested on
a task;
2) Performance: It is how to use the effort in order to
obtain a ﬁnal goal;
3) Objective: What you wish to obtain by conciliating
effort and development in a task;
4) Result: It is the consequence of using this energy;
5) Productivity: It is the proportion between the result
obtained and the amount of energy necessary to obtain
the result.
Fitz-enz [7] commented on a recently published report,
entitled The Conference Board, that only 12% of the inter-
viewees informed to use the management of human capital to
help achieving the strategic goals of the company. However,
84% of the same interviewees said that the use of human
capital related to the strategies of the company will be bigger
on the next 3 years.
Related to indicators of human capital management, Fitz-
enz [7] highlights that ﬁrst it is important to know what is
not working properly, the author calls this process system
failure measurement (or to measure what is important).
Two questions, according to Fitz-enz [7] help deﬁning
what must be measured inside companies:
1) What is the most important thing people management
must do?
2) How can it be measured?
We can only measure something that is indeed important,
for this reason, the second question is strongly related to the
ﬁrst.
According to Vercellis [8], a data warehouse depends on
the objective one desires to achieve. Before drawing a data
warehouse, it is necessary to bear in mind which questions
must be answered. At this moment, the deﬁnitions made by
Fitz-enz [7] relate themselves to the main purpose of a data
warehouse.
A different approach used by Rainardi [9] is to work with
data warehouse with two levels of granularity. With this data
warehouse it is possible to navigate with greater ﬂexibility
among the data from the data warehouse and their source of
formation.
In the next section, the way the concepts approached so far
were applied inside the project in execution will be shown.
II. STATE OF THE ART
This work in progress aims mostly to update the devel-
oped and detailed activities in the article published by Poffo
and Misaghi [10].
In this article, new concepts and new directions were
considered, taking into account all knowledge obtained and
discussed during the HR Metrics Brazil [11], in which many
Brazilian companies and multinationals showed how they
use the management of indicators inside their companies,
supporting the strategy of the company, increasing the in-
volvement of the employees and integrating the indicators
of people management to the indicators of the organizations.
III. METHODS
According to McClellan [12], for about 20 years, the MES
(Manufacturing Execution Systems) systems were the focus
of manufacture management. Initially developed to provide
the ﬁrst line of management, with visibility to coordinate
service orders and work unites attributions, the MES systems
were involved in the essential bond between stakeholders
and the events for process of production and logistics.
Because MES systems manage and store the events of
process of production and logistics they are very important
sources of accurate data in real time, integrating themselves
to the intelligence of the corporation.
Levinson [13] points out three rules to help identifying
development indicators in processes:
1) Indicators need to be objective: Indicators need to be
clearly deﬁned and need to be quantiﬁable (it must be
possible to measure through numbers);
247
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-247-9
DBKDA 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

2) The process measured through the indicator must be
under the subordination of the team or person respon-
sible for the measure (which means the indicator needs
its own control);
3) The indicator must encourage the work environment
and needs to help the company to obtain corporate
results. In addition to being related to the companys
wealth or goal it must be understood to all as such.
Besides the data identiﬁed by Levinson [13], it is im-
portant to consider that employees are measured by their
results and not by their work hours anymore, as Sabatini
[14] highlights on his research. In other words, an employee
that works many long hours but produces as much or less
than those who work the regular amount of time, is no good.
Parmenter [5] suggests that indicators of result (KRIs)
and indicators of development (KPIs) should be based on
the mission, vision and values of the company. This way,
the indicators will be consistent with the goal the company
pursuits, and also, it will be clearer for the partners of the
company to understand the rules they are being charged by.
One of the expectations, according to Parmenter [5], is to
motivate the partners, because the rules are clear to everyone
involved in the process.
Figure 1 shows an example of how to make the deploy-
ment of the mission, vision and values of the company to
deﬁne KPIs and KRIs indicators.
Figure 1.
KPIs and KRIs
Among the indicators considered on this work in progress,
it is possible to highlight the indicator below (the full paper
contains more indicators):
1) Indicator to show the quantity of items produced by
hour by an employee.
Productivity =
TotalofProducedUnits
TotalofProductionHours
2) Indicator to show the wage cost of each unit produced,
that is, the percentage of an employee’s wage that the
product retains by its manufacture process.
WageCostUnit = AmountofRemuneration
TotalofProducedUnits
3) Indicator to show the billing per capita (the value
invoiced by each partner, in case this value decreases
along time, it indicates an increase of unproductive-
ness).
Billingpercapita =
TotalNetRevenues
TotalNumberEmployees
4) Indicator to show productivity related to the value paid
to the employee for hour.
PaidHoursProductivity =
Netprofitperiod
totalhoursofwork
Renumberingtotalgross
totalhoursofwork
To design the data warehouse the star Model was used.
Laberge [15] describes the star model as the model that
contains, indeed, a central entity, in which it possesses all
the measures as attributes, and a relation with the entity of
dimensions.
The goal of this work in progress is to use the approach
presented by Rainardi [9] that deﬁnes the data warehouse
with multiple dimensions, allowing the visualization of the
data in a managerial level and once at a granular level.
Figure 2 is the simple implementation of the model of
data warehouse for the indicator Paid Hours Productivity,
shown on the list above.
Figure 2.
Data Warehouse Model.
This model of data warehouse considered the date di-
mension, company and establishment. In case it becomes
necessary to visualize any detail in a larger way, it is possible
to use the company dimension. In case it is necessary to
visualize any data in a smaller dimension (in a more focal
way) it is possible to visualize at establishment level. It is
possible to use other levels for this treatment, in order to be
brief, the other levels were omitted.
One of the proposals of this work in progress is to make
it possible to access the level OLTP of data in progress,
allowing managers to have access to the initial source of the
indicated indicators.
248
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-247-9
DBKDA 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

Based on this proposal, the data warehouse model shown
on Figure 2 has the objective of allowing managers to see
a macro view or detailed as needed. On this ﬁgure, through
the entities ’empresa’ (company) and ’estabelecimento’ (es-
tablishment) It is possible to create a macro view (company)
or a view in detail. The ﬁnal version of the work will contain
the details of all levels that are needed to achieve the goals
proposed by the indicators.
IV. EXPECTED RESULTS
Due to the fact that this article is about a work in progress,
the ﬁnal objective expected is the validation of the efﬁciency
of the proposed indicators for people management, with
the purpose of reducing waste. In this article, only some
indicators that will be fully developed were shown.
Nowadays, literature possesses many works related to
measuring the development of manufacturing processes,
however, our goal is to measure the development of human
resources connected to manufacture processes, considering
that in some manufacture processes, human resources are
essential.
DW modeling uses the following concepts to work with
the level of granularity of the DW model:
1) Dimension: Used to make the dimensions available, in
some cases, it will be the level of granularity of the
data to be shown;
2) Measures: They are the summarized data, according
to the dimension used to visualize the data.
At the present moment, the project ﬁnds itself at the ﬁnal
phase of mapping the indicators and elaborations of the DW
model that will be used to apply them.
The results obtained so far are related to the identiﬁcation
and categorization of which indicators are important to the
company’s core business.
By the end of this project, the full proposal of the data
warehouse used to implement the indicators will be vali-
dated, verifying the advantages and disadvantages obtained
by using them.
The DW model deﬁned in this work progress will be
validated through its application on a software development
project. The various cycles deﬁned in the project will be
measured separately, aiming to create ways that will enable
people to see the progress of the project.
V. CONCLUSION
This article reported the developed activities used to
list the indicators used in people management that have a
connection with the concepts of lean manufacturing.
Besides providing a study of concepts of lean manufactur-
ing, this article also provided a review of the main concepts
related to people management, indicators, data warehouse
and how to use people management though management of
indicators.
At this stage of the project, it is possible to conclude
that the indicators created so far will positively aggregate
on the process of people management, aiming to eliminate
the waste (reminding that this process must be continuous).
Finally, this article adds to a lack of material related about
creation of indicators to people management based on the
concepts of lean manufacturing.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank all the people who have directly
and indirectly helped the development of this work so far.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Pettersen, “Deﬁning lean production: Some conceptual
and practical issues,” International Journal of education and
Information Technologies, 2009.
[2] B. Carreira, Lean manufacturing that works: powerful tools
for dramatically reducing waste and maximizing proﬁts.
Amacom Books, 2005.
[3] C. Hibbs, S. Jewett, and M. Sullivan, The art of lean software
development.
O’ Reilly, 2009.
[4] C. M. Jekiel, Lean human resources: redesigning HR pro-
cesses for a culture of continuous improvement. Productivity
Press, 2011.
[5] D. Parmenter, Key Performance Indicators: Developing, Im-
plementing, and Using Winning KPIs.
John Wiley & Sons,
2009.
[6] J. Bancaleiro, “Indicadores tradicionais de recursos hu-
manos,” Seminar HR Metrics - IIR, Lisboa, 2006.
[7] J. Fitz-enz, The new HR analytics: predicting the economic
value of your company’s human capital investiments. AMA-
COM, 2010.
[8] C. Vercellis, Business Intelligence: Data Mining and Opti-
mization for Decision Making.
John Wiley and Sons, 2009.
[9] V. Rainardi, Building a Data Warehouse: With Examples in
SQL Server.
APress, 2008.
[10] R. Poffo and M. Misaghi, “Bi: Lean manufacturing indicators
applied to hr applications - an implementation study,” in
Fourth International Conference on Advances in Databases,
Knowledge, and Data Applications 2012 (DBKDA 2012).
Curran Associates, Inc. ( Apr 2012 ), 2012, pp. 34–37.
[11] H. Metrics, “Hr metrics 2012,” in HR Metrics Brasil.
Sao
Paulo: IQPC International Quality
Productivity Center, Jan
2012.
[12] M. McClellan, “The heart of intelligent manufacturing,” set.
[13] W. A. Levinson and R. A. Rerick, Lean Enterprise: A
Synergistic Approach to Minimizing Waste.
ASQ, 2002.
[14] T. Sabatini, “Vagas em ti: quatro exigncias das entrevistas de
emprego,” jun.
[15] R. Laberge, The Data Warehouse Mentor: Practical Data
Warehouse and Business Intelligence Insights. McGraw-Hill
Companies,Inc., 2011.
249
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-247-9
DBKDA 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

