Modeling Ontology-based User Profiles 
from Company Knowledge 
 
Silvia Calegari, Matteo Dominoni 
Department of Informatics, Systems and Communication (DISCo) 
University of Milano-Bicocca 
Milan, Italy 
e-mail: {calegari,dominoni}@disco.unimib.it 
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents a model based on the ontology 
paradigm to represent the knowledge of users who work in 
companies. The model guarantees to follow specific guidelines 
that can be used in defining user knowledge. The goal is to 
improve the development of processes and applications aimed 
at leveraging the information stored in companies to support 
users during their interactions with the system by considering 
all the advantages of the ontology-knowledge. 
This research was developed in the KBMS 2.0 project where 
an advanced portal has been defined with the aim to manage 
and search information effectively. The model to represent 
user knowledge has been defined by analysing the information 
of the KBMS 2.0 project stored in the database. 
User Profile, Ontology, Company Knowledge. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In the last few decades, many research activities have 
focused on the management of the growing amount of 
information on the Web or in any big repository. There are 
several problems that can afflict this issue, ranging, for 
example, from architectural aspects, i.e., how to define a 
robust architecture for addressing issue of scalability, to 
personalization aspects, i.e., how to model user profiles to 
represent the user's interests and preferences. The former 
allows to help systems retrieve information faster, whereas 
the latter is used to filter knowledge which is not related to 
the user's interest needs. 
In this paper, we focus on the definition of user profiles 
in the context of big companies, where thousands of pieces 
of information are stored in the repository. In this scenario, 
the problem is to support the user during his/her research 
activities, not only with the local search engine for retrieving 
relevant documents, but also with all the knowledge 
accessible in the company portal, such as news, emails, 
external links, etc., where the information is geographically 
distributed in the several locations of the company. This 
means that in a big company, besides the standard problems 
with a search engine on the Web, there are complex 
problems due to the several information access points of a 
user. In addition, in a company a user belongs to a 
hierarchical structure, where for each level users have a 
different role, meaning different access to the information. 
Thus, the definition of processes that exploit the knowledge 
represented in the user profile assumes a key role for 
managing knowledge in companies.  
The accurate definition of a user profile plays a central 
role in effective approaches to personalization: only if a user 
profile faithfully represents the information related to a user, 
can a system rely on it. Three main activities have to be 
considered during the building of a user profile, such as: (1) 
the identification of the knowledge which represents the 
user's interests, (2) the choice of a formal language used to 
represent this knowledge, and (3) a strategy for updating it. 
Regarding the first point, in the literature explicit and 
implicit approaches [1] are adopted in order to capture the 
user's interests and preferences. With the explicit approach 
the user must explicitly specify his/her preferences to the 
system by filling in questionnaires and/or by providing short 
textual descriptions. With the implicit approach, the user's 
preferences are automatically gathered by monitoring the 
user's actions, thanks to the use of click-through data 
analysis, log analysis, etc. The second point is on the choice 
of suited data structures for modeling a user profile; in the 
literature 
bags 
of 
words, 
vectors, 
graph-based 
representations, and some external knowledge sources (i.e., 
WordNet, or Open Directory Project) have been mainly used 
to define users' profiles. Ontologies are a recent powerful 
tool for knowledge definition, modeling and representation; 
and they allow to give a more structured and expressive 
knowledge representation with respect to the above 
mentioned approaches. In fact, they allow to enrich the 
expressiveness of the information represented in a profile by 
using 
formal 
languages 
like 
Resource 
Description 
Framework Schema (RDFS) or Ontology Web Language 
(OWL). The third point is the most complex as it has to 
guarantee a dynamic user profile, where the knowledge is 
always updated and related to the user's recent interests and 
preferences. The objective is to support the processes that 
exploit this fresh information to help users during their 
interactions with the system. 
In the literature, the existing models that build user profiles 
based on ontologies are mainly focused on approaches either 
relying on data mining techniques [2] or adopting external 
reference knowledge [3] to capture the meaning of the user's 
preferences that are represented in RDFS or OWL. With the 
use of formal ontological languages it is possible to define 
user profiles, thanks to the adoption of suitable logical 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-334-6
DBKDA 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

language constructs, but they do not give explicit guidelines 
on how to use them in order to solve specific tasks. The 
Ontology Design Patterns (ODP) [4] are a recent solution to 
make ontology as reusable solutions, and they are defined as 
a “reusable successful solution to a recurrent modeling 
problem”. ODP are aimed at reducing mistakes in 
ontologies, detecting uncovered requirements, improving 
qualities of produced ontologies, etc. [5]. 
In this paper, for the first time in the literature we make 
use of the ODP solution to define the skeleton of user 
profiles that can be reusable in any domain where users are 
involved. Our objective is to represent a richer knowledge of 
user profiles than the existing models previously defined that 
mainly acquire initial information from textual information 
or from a set of keywords related to the user's interests. To 
help us in the definition of the ODP for user profiles, we 
considered the knowledge gained from a research project 
with the Enel SpA energy company. In this case study, user 
knowledge is obtained by analysing the database of the 
company where only the portion of information useful for 
the definition of some crucial parts of the ODP-user profile is 
extracted. In addition, we have completed same portions of 
the defined ODP-ontology by considering the basic notion of 
the ODP solution, where it is possible to compose pieces of 
knowledge by considering other ODPs previously defined. 
An ODP is used across ontologies to define a richer 
knowledge based on ontologies, whereas an ontology is used 
across applications. Our intent is to obtain an accurate ODP-
user profile that can be used as a model for representing the 
user knowledge in any enterprise. The next phase of this 
work will consider the validation of the obtained user profile; 
at the moment this aspect is out of topics with respect to the 
goal of this paper. 
The paper is organised as follows. Section II describes 
how the main pieces of knowledge for defining the ODP-
user profile have been acquired. Section III presents the 
generic ODP-user profile for companies. Finally, in Section 
IV conclusion and future work are given. 
II. 
TOWARDS THE DEFINITION OF A ODP-USER PROFILE 
This section gives the steps performed to elicit 
knowledge used to define the ODP-user profile. We started 
from the knowledge stored in the database of the KBMS 2.0 
project (KBMS 2.0: Knowledge-Base Management System 
2.0 is a research project that has involved the University of 
Milano-Bicocca, Italy, together with the Enel SpA energy 
company) [6]. The KBMS 2.0 project is aimed at providing 
an advanced knowledge-based portal to manage knowledge 
innovatively, with the objective to support people in all the 
phases of their searches and also in the emergence of new 
knowledge in the system. This project is based on the open 
source edition of the Liferay portal and is based on several 
modules (by developing new modules or by extending some 
existing ones) in order to satisfy the requirements of the Enel 
SpA stakeholders. The most important modules developed 
for the KBMS 2.0 portal are: a workflow to guarantee a 
certified quality of the information, a personalised search 
engine to retrieve relevant documents for users, a grid of 
navigation to allow users immediate access to documents 
classified, thanks to the support of specific categories, a 
newsletter to send and filter news according to specific rules, 
spot-news to highlight emergent news, and my-links to 
personalise access to external web-links. All the information 
used by these modules is stored in the database. In detail, the 
Relational Database Management System (RDBMS) Oracle 
10g version has been used for the project by defining a total 
of 253 tables. Most of the tables have been automatically 
defined by Liferay during its installation, while some of them 
are not used for the project such as tables on market-place, 
wikipedia, kaleo, etc. Other tables, instead, have been 
introduced to support newly defined modules for activities 
not defined in the standard edition of Liferay. 
 
The database has been analysed to design for the 
extraction of some portions of knowledge useful in defining 
the skeleton of the user profile presented in Section III. 
Figure 1 shows the phases considered for our analysis that 
are: (1) view the tables stored in the database in order to 
consider only the subset related to the knowledge of users, 
(2) list the user's knowledge, and (3) define the ODP-user 
profile based on point (2). 
The list of user knowledge assumes a key role for the 
definition of the user profile model, which has been grouped 
in the following macro-areas: 
 
Personal 
data: 
describes 
personal 
user 
characteristics, such as name, address and age. 
 
User's company data: describes user characteristics 
of the company, such as login, password, nickname 
and job/role. 
Figure 1. Logical path for the definition of a ODP-User Profile. 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-334-6
DBKDA 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

 
 
Figure 2.  Example of a TWO-COLUMN figure caption: (a) this is the format for referencing parts of a figure. 
 
Company data: describes company information, 
such as name and address. 
 
Interests and preferences: describes user interests 
and preferences on topical arguments. They can be 
obtained by analysing, for example, the documents 
saved or viewed by the user. 
 
Expert on specific topics: indicates which topics a 
user is considered as an expert. Several processes 
can be adopted in order to establish the user's 
expertise, such as methodologies of voting or use of 
metrics defined in the literature. 
 
Actions performed on the information: monitors 
the actions on the information stored in the system, 
such as the pages/documents viewed, the time spent 
on a page/document, emails sent, etc. 
 
Social Actions: monitors the user's action on the 
system or documents, such as a methodology of 
rating on documents retrieved by a search engine, or 
on people contacted for suggestions, directed 
preferences on the information such as the use of 
like/not-like. 
 
People contacted: monitors the people who are 
working in the company that have been contacted by 
a user, for example, by emails or by using social 
applications. 
The knowledge considered from these macro-areas can 
be gathered by using both explicit and implicit approaches, 
as explained in Section I. In this phase, it is not important to 
understand the complex processes that exploit the data stored 
in the log files, generally used to monitor the user's actions 
(i.e., actions on information and social actions), in order to 
understand what information can be of interest to a user. Our 
objective is to analyse such preferred information to design 
the ODP model used for establishing the knowledge that has 
to be represented in a generic user profile (see Section III). 
III. 
ODP-USER PROFILE FOR COMPANIES 
The ODPs are used in the community to define reusable 
logical models with the aim to design conceptualizations of 
knowledge. In this section, we present the first ODP model 
defined to represent the knowledge of users who work in 
companies. Figure 2 shows the class diagram of the user 
profile-ODP where the main concepts are reported. The main 
concepts are organized by the taxonomic relation IS-A, 
whereas the other knowledge is represented by different 
relations (i.e., ObjectProperties) as described in this section. 
For the sake of readability, we have not introduced the pre-
defined Instances (e.g., male and female instances for the 
concept Gender), and the relations (domain and range) 
established 
with 
the 
DatatypeProperties 
and 
the  
ObjectProperties.  
The user profile is logically divided into two logical areas 
that are: Static and Dynamic with the intent of representing 
the two key aspects of the user's profile knowledge. The 
Static class represents long-term interests of user knowledge. 
The Dynamic class represents short-term interests of user 
knowledge, where the changes can happen every time that a 
user interacts with the system. This class identifies the most 
interesting part of the ODP-user profile, since it needs to 
represent the interactions of a user with the information 
stored in the system and the people who work in the 
company. Thus, we have classified the information into four 
categories that are: Documents, Webpages, Email, and  
News. For these categories the following common  
ObjectProperties have been defined: 
hasInterestedOn, 
hasPreference, 
hasRating, 
and  
hasRelevantConcepts:topicConcept. 
The  hasInterestedOn defines user interests on specific 
information stored in the system, the  hasPreference defines 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-334-6
DBKDA 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

the social actions on the information related to the like/not-
like preferences, and the hasRating defines the social actions 
on the information related to the rating preferences given, for 
example, by the star rating method.  
The  hasRelevantConcepts:topicConcept deserves a 
closer look, as it links the documents or email or news or 
webpages with the relevant concepts extracted from them. 
The relevant concepts are not defined, as bags of words or 
vectors, etc., as they are in many works presented in the 
literature (see Section I). In our work, the relevant concepts 
are represented as ontology-based knowledge, not extracted 
by external reference knowledge (i.e., Yet Another General 
Ontology (YAGO) or Open Directory Project or domain 
ontologies). To define the knowledge for representing the 
relevant concepts of user preference information, we have 
used the ODP schema on Topic [7] download from the 
official ODP's repository [4] with the intent of following the 
logic of the ODP models, i.e., to reuse pre-defined logical 
models in new ODP models.  
In the end, the class Colleagues defines the users who work 
in the same company that have interacted with the user. The 
idea is to create a network of users to establish, for example, 
people who share common interests. 
A. How to use the ODP-User Profile 
When the ODP-User Profile is defined, it is possible to 
use it in order to represent the knowledge of a user profile 
represented as an ontology. The next phase consists in 
modeling an ontology in the OWL language that is an 
instance of the ODP-User Profile. This step is easily 
performed by importing the ODP schema in the 
configuration part of the OWL file as follows: 
<?xml version="1.0"?> 
<rdf:RDF 
  ...   
  xmlns="http://www.ontologydesignpatterns.org/cp/ 
  examples/userprofile/enel.owl#" 
  xmlns:up="http://www.ontologydesignpatterns.org/cp/ 
  owl/userprofile.owl#" 
  xml:base="http://www.ontologydesignpatterns.org/cp/ 
  examples/agentrole/enel.owl"> 
    <owl:Ontology rdf:about=""> 
       ...     
      <rdfs:comment>It encodes the following:User Profile 
       in the Enel SpA company</rdfs:comment> 
     <owl:imports rdf:resource= 
      "http://www.ontologydesignpatterns.org/cp/owl/ 
      userprofile.owl"/> 
   </owl:Ontology> 
   <up:Profile> 
        ... 
   </up:Profile> 
</rdf:RDF> 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we have presented the ODP model for 
representing the user profile logical schema. An ODP model 
is a new frontier of research, as it allows to provide specific 
guidelines for defining knowledge based on specific logical 
schemas. In fact, the defined ODP-user profile can be used to 
represent the knowledge of users in  companies to facilitate 
the definition of applications and of processes by exploiting 
all the well known advantages of the ontology paradigm. The 
ODP-user profile has been designed by taking support from 
the knowledge stored in the database of the KBMS 2.0 
project. In this project, an advanced portal has been defined 
with the aim of satisfying the user's information needs by 
providing a certified quality of information and by 
supporting a user during his/her searches, with the goal of 
retrieving relevant documents faster.  
In the future, we plan to improve the ODP-user profile by 
including more details on the defined concepts and by 
defining axioms to classify user interests on information and 
on people to support the processes that are defined for this 
goal. Furthermore, we will consider its validation in order to 
establish the good quality of the obtained ODP-user profile. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank all the people who 
allowed us to make an in depth study for the development of 
the KBMS 2.0 system. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Teevan, S. T. Dumais, and E. Horvitz, “Personalizing 
search via automated analysis of interests and activities”. In 
Proceedings of the 28th annual international ACM SIGIR 
conference on Research and development in information 
retrieval, ser. SIGIR ’05. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2005, 
pp. 449–456, doi:10.1145/1076034.1076111. 
[2] X. Tao, Y. Li, and N. Zhong, “A personalized ontology model 
for web information gathering”. IEEE Trans. on Knowl. and 
Data Eng., vol. 23, April 2011, pp. 496–511, doi: 
10.1109/TKDE.2010.145. 
[3] S. Calegari and G. Pasi, “Personal ontologies: Generation of 
user proﬁles based on the yago ontology”. Inf. Process. 
Manage., vol. 49, no. 3, 2013, pp. 640–658, doi: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.2012.07.010. 
[4] Ontology Design Pattern, website. [Online]. Available: 
http://ontologydesignpatterns.org/wiki/Main  Page (October, 
2013) 
[5] V. Presutti, E. Blomqvist, E. Daga, and A. Gangemi, “Pattern-
based ontology design”. In Ontology Engineering in a 
Networked World, M. del Carmen Suarez-Figueroa, A. 
Gomez-Perez, E. Motta, and A. Gangemi, Eds. Springer, 
2012, pp. 35–64, doi:10.1007/978-3-642-24794-1_3. 
[6] S. Calegari, M. Dominoni, and E. Panzeri, “Towards the 
design 
of 
an 
advanced 
knowledge-based 
portal 
for 
enterprises: the KBMS 2.0 project”. The 27th International 
Conference on Industrial, Engineering & Other Applications 
of Applied Intelligent Systems, 2013, Unpublished. 
[7] Ontology Design Pattern, Topic schema, website. [Online]. 
Available:http://www.ontologydesignpatterns.org/cp/owl/topi
c.owl (October, 2013) 
 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-334-6
DBKDA 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

