Automatic Knowledge Transfer-based Architecture towards Self-Service  
Business Intelligence 
 
 
Safwan Sulaiman, Tariq Mahmoud, Jorge Marx 
Gómez 
Department of Computing Science 
Carl von Ossietzky University of Oldenburg 
Oldenburg, Germany 
{safwan.sulaiman, tariq.mahmoud, jorge.marx.gomez} 
@uni-oldenburg.de 
Joachim Kurzhöfer 
Lufthansa Industry Solutions 
Norderstedt, Germany 
joachim.kurzhoefer@lhind.dlh.de 
 
 
 
Abstract—Enterprises use business intelligence systems to 
support their decision making process and give them the 
superiority against their competitors. However, business 
intelligence systems integrate data from internal and external 
resources and this in turn makes these systems more complex. 
The consequence behind such complexity is that business users 
cannot get the required information at the right time unless 
they get help from IT or professional (power) users. This is also 
conditional just in case that power users will have enough time 
to answer the questions of business users. In this paper, we 
present a new architecture for business intelligence systems to 
support the self-service functionalities that enable business 
users to get answers about their business questions at the right 
time. The main idea of the proposed architecture is to extract 
the knowledge of the power users and transfer this knowledge 
to the business users while they use business intelligence 
systems.  
Keywords-Knowledge 
Transfer; 
Self-Services; 
Business 
Intelligence; Power User; Business User. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION AND PROBLEM DEFINITION 
In the last decade, business environments have changed 
to be more complex and dynamic. Enterprises should operate 
their business in a continuously changing environment, 
which is influenced by globalization, legal changes, volatile 
markets and technical progress [1]. Because of the rapid 
change in the internal and external conditions of current 
economic life, the demand for information as an important 
production factor is increased [1][2]. Therefore, enterprises 
adopt Business Intelligence (BI) systems that offer them 
solutions for these challenges. BI is defined as “an 
integrated, company-specific, IT-Based total-approach for 
managerial decision support” [1]. Therefore, the main goal of 
BI is the improvement of the decision making process by 
enabling business users to get the required information at the 
right time [3]. Based on Gartner research [4], the market 
share of BI systems and analytical applications is constantly 
growing. Gartner CIO’s Survey 2013 showed that analytics 
and BI came on top of CIO’s technology Priorities [5]. 
However, BI as an integrated system tries to integrate 
data from internal and external sources of the enterprise to 
one central point, which is the data warehouse. The goal of 
integrating data is to eliminate data redundancy and to have 
one single point of truth [6]. Consequently, this led to 
complexities in BI systems [7]. Moreover, even if a BI is a 
flexible and powerful system, it is still very complex for 
business users in the sense that they still face substantial 
difficulties while carrying out their ad-hoc analysis [3]. 
Furthermore, because of the high complexity and irrelevance 
of the provided information, less than 30% of target users 
could benefit from or use BI systems [8].  
To avoid the confusing of the terms’ usage, this work 
distinguishes between two types of BI users, business users 
and power users. Examples of business users include 
executives, managers and operation staffs. This kind of users 
tends more to be information consumers of easy-to-use BI 
tools like predefined reports or dashboards. Moreover, they 
lack the needed knowledge to use complex and more 
advanced BI tools like Online Analytical Processing (OLAP) 
and data mining. On the other hand, examples of power users 
include business analysts and IT professionals. They can use 
all kinds of BI tools with the different usage’s complexities 
by generating the information based on their needs, as well 
as answering business questions of business users [9][10]. 
Therefore, in case that business user requires information 
for her/his decision process, and because of the complexity 
of BI tools and lack of knowledge to use such tools, business 
users must send a request to one of the power users to answer 
their business questions. However, these latter cannot answer 
in most cases at the right time due to their time limitations, 
the large amount of such requests and the few number of 
employed power users. Consequently, this will make the 
decision making process slower. 
To conclude, the main goals of BI systems are 
eliminating guesswork and enabling enterprises to respond 
quickly to the market changes as well as customers’ 
preferences. The aforementioned problems hinder BI 
systems from reaching these goals. Consequently, there is a 
need to develop a new BI solution, which empowers 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-408-4
DBKDA 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

business users with the required knowledge to get the right 
information at the right time without the need to ask power 
users. This new approach is called Self-Service Business 
Intelligence (SSBI). 
The Data Warehousing Institute (TDWI) defined SSBI 
as: “the facilities within the BI environment that enable BI 
users to become more self-reliant and less dependent on the 
IT organization. These facilities focus on four main 
objectives: easier access to source data for reporting and 
analysis, easier and improved support for data analysis 
features, faster deployment options such as appliances and 
cloud 
computing, 
and 
simpler, 
customizable, 
and 
collaborative end-user interfaces” [11]. The approach 
presented in this paper focuses on achieving the objective 
“easier and improved support for data analysis features” to 
enable SSBI functionalities. Unlike other material assets of 
enterprises, which are decreased by using them, the 
knowledge will always be increased while it is recalled. The 
sharing of knowledge will enrich its receiver [12][13]. 
Therefore, most businesses recognize their knowledge as a 
sustainable source of competitive advantage [13][14]. The 
main idea of the resulted architecture is to transfer the 
knowledge from power users to business users. 
In the next section of this paper, the knowledge 
classification, conversion, and transfer will be explained. 
After that, the basic idea behind this work and the knowledge 
flow are illustrated. Section IV explains the resulted 
architecture and its component. It is then followed by the 
knowledge transfer model’s workflows. Section VI lists 
related work and finally this paper concludes with a short 
conclusion. 
II. 
KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT: CLASSIFICATION, 
CONVERSION AND TRANSFER 
In the literature, there are many definitions of the term 
Knowledge Management (KM), most of them are focusing 
on the KM processes. Davenport and Ponzi defined KM as 
the process of capturing, distributing, and effectively using 
knowledge [14][15]. Bhatia and Mittal defined KM as an 
approach to discover, capture, and reuse both tacit (in 
people’s heads) and explicit (digital or paper based) 
knowledge as well as the cultural and technological means of 
enabling the KM process to be successful [16]. Dalkir 
claimed that KM is a collaborative and integrated approach 
to create, capture, organize, access and use an enterprise’s 
intellectual assets [17]. Therefore, KM is considered as a 
disciplined, holistic approach to effectively use the expertise 
for competitive advantage [18]. 
A. Tacit Knowledge vs Explicit Knowledge 
In the literature, there are different classifications of the 
knowledge. This work is focusing on the following two types 
of knowledge namely: the tacit and explicit knowledge 
[19][20]. Tacit knowledge is known as personal know-how 
and it resides in the head of knower. It is difficult to 
articulate and to put into words or text. Tacit knowledge that 
represents the expertise and know-how is the most valuable 
knowledge [17][21]. In contrast to tacit knowledge, explicit 
knowledge represents the knowledge that has been captured 
in a tangible form like words, audio files and recording 
images [17]. 
Therefore, the processes of identifying, storing and 
retrieving explicit knowledge can be easily done by KM-
system [22]. 
B. The Modes of Knowledge Conversion 
Most enterprises try to externalize or convert the 
knowledge from tacit to explicit knowledge, after that they 
store this knowledge in their intranet or portal. The efforts in 
this sense must be set to improve the sharing of the stored 
knowledge [23][17][19]. 
Nonaka 
et al. 
explained 
in 
their 
Socialization, 
Externalization, Combination and Internalization (SECI) 
model how to transform processes between tacit and explicit 
knowledge [23]. As seen in Figure 1, there are four modes of 
knowledge transformation: 
1) Socialization - Tacit to Tacit 
In this case, the knowledge is converted through shared 
experience such as spending time together or living in the 
same environment, or face-to-face meeting. 
2) Externalization - Tacit to Explicit 
This is a process of articulating tacit knowledge into 
explicit knowledge by transforming the knowledge of 
people’s minds into electronic forms like storing it in wikis, 
forums and collaborating systems. 
3) Combination - Explicit to Explicit 
The knowledge here is converted based on the desire of 
the user. 
4) Internalization - Explicit to Tacit 
The intranet of the enterprise allows the end users to 
access the information, which is stored in the knowledge 
repository. In this mode, explicit knowledge is used and 
learned from the user to extend her/his tacit knowledge and 
to become part of it. Internalization is related to the concept 
“Learning by doing”. 
 
Figure 1.  The SECI Process 
 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-408-4
DBKDA 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

C. Knowledge Transfer 
Alavi and Leidner considered the knowledge transfer as 
an act of communication between source (the sender of the 
knowledge) and receiver (where the knowledge is transferred 
to). Both sides of the communication channel can be 
represented by a single person, as well as a team of people 
[18][24]. Knowledge transfer is the conveyance of 
knowledge from one place, person or ownership to another, 
and then this process can be considered as a successful 
process when it has a successful creation and application of 
the knowledge in the enterprise [25][26]. 
In the literature, the knowledge transfer process was 
described using models. Most of these models were focusing 
on the idea of collaboration and communication between the 
source and receiver of the knowledge [25]. Therefore, the 
basic knowledge transfer model consists of two main 
components namely: the source who share the knowledge 
and the receiver who acquire the knowledge. In addition, 
there are farther knowledge transfer modes, which describe 
different conversions between tacit and explicit knowledge 
(see the previous paragraph) [23][25]. 
III. 
BASIC IDEA AND KNOWLEDGE FLOW 
“A little knowledge that acts is worth infinitely more than 
much knowledge that is idle” - Khalil Gibran [13]. The 
incentive from this quotation is that we argue that the 
knowledge should not stay idle in a database or a portal of 
any enterprise. One of the advantages of the proposed 
solution is that the knowledge must be automatically 
transferred to the receiver (business user). 
In this work, the focus is on two modes of SECI 
knowledge conversion, which are the externalization and 
internalization. The transfer of knowledge between the 
expert and novice or specifically in this work between power 
and business users can be represented as socialization. 
However, in our case, it is not possible to use the tacit to tacit 
knowledge conversion. It is difficult from time and 
organization perspectives to put the power and business users 
in the same environment. Therefore, our approach uses two 
conversion modes. Firstly, in the phase of capturing or 
extracting the power user’s knowledge, it is tacit to explicit 
conversion - externalization. Secondly, in the phase of 
knowledge application or sharing it, it is internalization- 
explicit to tacit conversion. 
Figure 2 depicts an abstraction process model of the 
knowledge transfer that is independent from the technical 
components, which will be illustrated later in section IV. As 
shown in Figure 2, the process is divided into two steps. In 
the first step, the power user’s knowledge is captured and 
extracted. This step represents the externalization conversion 
mode based on Nonaka SECI model (tacit to explicit 
conversion). In the second step, the captured knowledge will 
be shared or applied to the business user. This step represents 
the internalization conversion mode (explicit to tacit 
conversion). 
 
IV. 
KNOWLEDGE TRANSFER-BASED ARCHITECTURE FOR 
SELF-SERVICE BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE 
The proposed architecture is based on top of the 
traditional business intelligence architecture to enable self-
service functionalities. It is illustrated in Figure 3. It depicts 
the components of the proposed architecture and the 
relationships 
between 
them. 
Therefore, 
the 
overall 
architecture consists of two sets of components.  
The first set represents typical components of BI-System 
architecture including data sources, ETL process, data 
warehouse and frontend – applications (in gray color). 
As for the second set of components, it includes tracking 
module, analysis module, recommendation engine and 
knowledge repository components (in blue color). 
Data sources represent all kind of storage resources like 
Enterprise Resource planning (ERP), Customer Relationship 
Management (CRM), Supply Chain Management (SCM) and 
any other external resources that include all data coming 
from outside the enterprise.  
ETL process is responsible of extracting, transforming 
and loading data into a data warehouse (DWH).  
As for the frontend - applications component, it offers BI 
users the access to the information in different formats and 
flexibility in the analyzing this information. BI users use the 
Single Sign-On (SSO) service to access the frontend 
applications (portal). 
In the following sections, the new components of the 
architecture and their functionalities will be explained in 
details. 
A. Tracking Module  
This set includes three subcomponents: 
1) User Interactions Catalogue 
The catalogue includes all possible interactions between 
BI users and frontend - application components. The content 
of this catalogue comes from analyzing different frontend 
applications to consider all users’ interactions that are 
filtered for the sake of knowledge extraction. 
2) Tracer 
This component traces the power user interactions that 
are previously defined in the user interactions catalogue. 
Then, it stores the trace log into the interactions database. 
 
Figure 2.  Knowledge Transfer Model 
 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-408-4
DBKDA 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

 
Figure 3.  Automatic Knowledge Transfer Architecture for SSBI 
 
 
3) Observer 
This component is responsible of observing the 
interactions of business users while they use the BI frontend 
– application component in order to provide such log later to 
the recommendation engine. 
4) Interactions Database 
This database is merely responsible of storing the logs of 
power users’ interactions. These logs can be stored either 
directly in the database or based on the power user’s session, 
they will be stored in binary files. 
B. Analysis Module 
This set includes just the pattern finder component. 
1) Pattern Finder 
This component gets the log files from the tracer 
component as an input and processes them to extract patterns 
from them to be provided to the recommendation engine via 
the knowledge repository. The extraction process is done 
based on sequential data mining algorithm. These patterns 
are called analysis paths and they represent the procedural 
knowledge of the power user. 
C. Knowledge Repository 
This set has two components, the power user knowledge 
and the domain knowledge. 
1) Power User Knowledge 
This database stores the power user’ analysis paths. It has 
a connection to the recommendation engine that uses these 
patterns to recommend similar paths to the business users. 
2) Domain Knowledge  
This database stores the typical knowledge harvested 
from the enterprise’s data warehouse. Such knowledge 
includes several repetitive analyses of each enterprise’s 
department. 
D. Recommendation Engine 
This set is responsible of offering business users with 
appropriate suggestions extracted from power users’ 
knowledge to ease the analysis process for them. This set 
includes three components namely sequence matcher, 
suggestion viewer and evaluator. 
1) Sequence Matcher 
The main functionality of this component resides in 
displaying or showing business users the paths of extracted 
suggestions. 
2) Suggestion Viewer 
The main functionality of this component resides in 
displaying or showing business users the paths of extracted 
suggestions. 
3) Evaluator 
In this component, business users are given the 
possibility to evaluate the displayed suggestions based on the 
relevance to their analyses. There are two ways to get the 
evaluation of business users. The first way is implicit and 
similar to the ranking system of the google search engine. 
The evaluator gives high weights to the analysis paths that 
are selected by business users. The second one is an explicit 
way that allows business users to evaluate the suggestions 
themselves. 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-408-4
DBKDA 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

 
Figure 4.  Knowledge Transfer Model Workflows 
 
V. 
KNOWLEDGE TRANSFER MODEL WORKFLOWS 
In this section, the interactions between the architecture 
components are illustrated as activity diagram in Figure 4. 
The interactions are illustrated for both business and power 
users. As can be seen in that figure, the first step represents 
the login of a BI user to the BI-Application. Based on the 
login information, the system recognizes the user type, 
because the users are already predefined as power or 
business users. Based on the user type, the system’s 
functions are executed either for power or business users. 
A. Power User Knowledge Extraction 
This section explains the activities that are done to 
capture or extract power users’ knowledge. After the system 
verifies that a user is a power user, the tracer component 
from the tracking module will trace all the interactions of this 
power user in a chronological manner. Then it stores its 
interactions into the interaction database or a log file. This 
log file will be then sent to the analysis module. The pattern 
finder applies a sequential pattern-mining algorithm to the 
log file or the interaction’s database to extract a pattern from 
them. This pattern represents the analysis path of the power 
user. After that, the extracted analysis path will be stored in 
the knowledge repository. In this latter, every analysis path 
has a weight. This weight is a combination of its repetition in 
the interactions database and the evaluation of business users 
based on its relevance with business users’ needs. Before 
storing an analysis path in the knowledge repository, there is 
a verification mechanism that checks whether an instance of 
this path is already stored in the repository or not. If an 
analysis path’s instance exists in the knowledge repository, 
the repetition value of this path will be increased by one. 
Otherwise, a new instance will be stored in the knowledge 
repository. 
B. Path Recommendation for Business Users 
The previous section explained how power user’s 
knowledge could be extracted and stored. This section 
illustrates how such extracted knowledge can be transferred 
to business users.  
After the system verifies that the logged-in user is a 
business user, the observer component of the tracking 
module will verify what the business user wants to do, i.e., to 
trace the steps when the user tries to perform an analysis. 
After that, the tracking module will communicate with the 
recommendation engine by sending it the subsequence of 
steps, which are performed by this business user. Next, the 
recommendation engine will compare such subsequence with 
the existing analysis paths in the knowledge repository. The 
result of the comparison can be more than one analysis path 
with different weights. Therefore, the sequence matcher 
sends the result to the suggestion viewer, which is 
responsible 
of 
showing 
the 
business 
user 
the 
recommendation result as a list of suggestions. The 
suggestions should be sorted based on their weights. The 
analysis path with the highest weight will be appeared on the 
top of the suggestions list. 
As soon as the business user sees the suggestions list, 
she/he can evaluate them to choose an analysis path. The 
repetition of this process will enhance the functionality of the 
whole system. This evaluator component will then evaluate 
the business user’s selection to increase the repetition of the 
selected analysis path to update its weight in the power user 
knowledge’s database. 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-408-4
DBKDA 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

VI. 
RELATED WORK 
Two related works that have conceptual similarities to 
this work are to be explained here in this section. Mertens 
and Krahn had provided an approach of “Knowledge based 
business intelligence for business user information self-
service” [3]. This approach is based on a semantic metadata 
layer, which is capable of modeling a semantic, machine 
readable and reasonable knowledge. This knowledge is 
imported and managed in the semantic metadata layer in 
form of domain ontology. It can be questions, analytics 
visualization or analysis results. However, the limitation lies 
in the issue that experts’ knowledge should be explicitly 
derived and modeled, and then imported to the analytical 
information system. In comparison with these two 
approaches, the proposed research in this paper will 
automatically extract the knowledge of power user. 
Another approach was provided by Baars about how to 
distribute BI knowledge [27][28]. This approach focused on 
the idea that the analysis results and templates should be 
accessed from other users in the enterprise via the knowledge 
management system. Analysis results can be interesting to 
the users of the same segment with the same needed 
information. Moreover, analysis templates can be used from 
users who belong to other segments or departments. This 
approach has several challenges. It requires combining 
different interfaces and formats. Moreover, it lacks 
motivating users to explain and distribute their knowledge to 
the 
knowledge 
management 
system. 
The 
proposed 
architecture tries to address the limitations of this approach 
by providing suggestions to the business users based on their 
functional usage of BI tools. 
VII. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper focused on presenting an extended BI 
architecture to enable self-service functionalities for business 
users. This architecture is based on a new knowledge transfer 
model that consists of two main processes. The capturing of 
the power user knowledge and sharing this extracted 
knowledge with the business users. Moreover, the functional 
components of this architecture have been explicated. 
Finally, two related works had been identified with their 
limitations to evaluate the strengths of the proposed 
approach. Future work will investigate the feasibility of this 
approach in the BI market. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We gratefully acknowledge that this work is supported 
by fund coming from Lufthansa Industry Solutions. 
REFERENCES 
[1] H.-G. Kemper, P. Rausch, and H. Baars, “Business 
Intelligence and Performance Management: Introduction,” in 
Advanced Information and Knowledge Processing, Business 
Intelligence and Performance Management, P. Rausch, A. F. 
Sheta, and A. Ayesh, Eds.: Springer London, 2013, pp. 3–10. 
[2] P. Chamoni and P. Gluchowski, Eds, Analytical Information 
Systems: Business intelligence technologies and applications, 
4th ed. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, 2010. 
[3] M. Mertens and T. Krahn, “Knowledge Based Business 
Intelligence for Business User Information Self-Service,” in 
Collaboration and the Semantic Web: Social Networks, 
Knowledge Networks, and Knowledge Resources, S. 
Brüggemann and C. d’Amato, Eds.: IGI Global, 2012, pp. 
271–296. 
[4] R. Van der Meulen and J. Rivera, Gartner Says Worldwide 
Business Intelligence and Analytics Software Market Grew 8 
Percent 
in 
2013. 
Available: 
http://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/2723717 
[retrieved: 
Apr, 2015]. 
[5] Gartner, Top 10 CIO Business and Technology Priorities in 
2013: Gartner, Inc, 2013. 
[6] R. Winter and B. Strauch, “Information Requirements 
Engineering for Data Warehouse Systems,” in Proceedings of 
the 2004 ACM Symposium on Applied Computing, New 
York, NY, USA: ACM, 2004, pp. 1359–1365. 
[7] N. Kulkarni, Information Management: Embrace the Future 
of BI: Self Service. Available: http://www.information-
management.com/newsletters/self-service-business-
intelligence-bi-tdwi-kulkarni-10022855-
1.html?zkPrintable=1&nopagination=1[retrieved: Apr, 2015]. 
[8] W. Kurzlechner, 3 levels of consumerization: Gartner: BI 
before 
radical 
change. 
Available: 
www.cio.de/knowledgecenter/bi/2283277 
[retrieved: 
Apr, 
2015]. 
[9] P. Gluchowski, R. Gabriel, and C. Dittmar, Management 
Support Systeme und Business Intelligence, 2nd ed.: Springer. 
[10] S. Sulaiman, J. M. Gómez, and J. Kurzhöfer, “Business 
Intelligence Systems Optimization to Enable Better Self-
Service Business Users,” in WSBI, 2013, pp. 35–46. 
[11] C. 
Imhoff 
and 
C. 
White, 
“Self-Service 
Business 
Intelligence‐ Empowering Users to Generate Insights,” 
TDWI best practices report. On the TDWI site: www. tdwi. 
org, 2011. 
[12] A. Brooking, Intellectual Capital: Core ASset for the Third 
Millenniurn Enterprise: London: Internah0nal Thornson 
Business Press, 1996. 
[13] A. Tiwana, The knowledge management toolkit: Practical 
techniques for building a knowledge management system. 
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall PTR, 2000. 
[14] T. H. Davenport and L. Prusak, Working knowledge: How 
organizations manage what they know: Harvard Business 
Press, 1998. 
[15] L. Ponzi and M. Koenig, “Knowledge management: another 
management fad,” Information Research, vol. 8, no. 1, p. 8, 
2002. 
[16] K. Bhatia and S. Mittal, Manpower Development for 
Technological Change: Excel Books India, 2009. 
[17] K. Dalkir, “Knowledge management in theory and practice,” 
McGill University, 2005. 
[18] S. Gasik, “A model of project knowledge management,” Proj 
Mgmt Jrnl, vol. 42, no. 3, pp. 23–44, 2011. 
[19] I. Nonaka and N. Konno, “The Concept of "Ba": Building a 
Foundation 
For 
Knowledge 
Creation,” 
California 
Management Review, vol. 40, no. 3, 1998, pp. 40–54. 
[20] A. C. Botha, D. Kourie, and R. Snyman, Coping with 
continuous change in the business environment: Knowledge 
management 
and 
knowledge 
management 
technology. 
Oxford, UK: Chandos Pub, 2008. 
[21] R. J. Sternberg and J. A. Horvath, Tacit knowledge in 
professional 
practice: 
Researcher 
and 
practitioner 
perspectives: Psychology Press, 1999. 
[22] J. L. Wellman, Organizational Learning: How Companies and 
Institutions Manage and Apply Knowledge: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2009. 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-408-4
DBKDA 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

[23] I. Nonaka, R. Toyama, and N. Konno, “SECI, Ba and 
Leadership: a Unified Model of Dynamic Knowledge 
Creation: nona,” Long Range Planning, vol. 33, no. 1, 2000, 
pp. 5–34. 
[24] M. Alavi and D. E. Leidner, “Review: Knowledge 
management 
and 
knowledge 
management 
systems: 
Conceptual foundations and research issues,” Mis Quarterly, 
2001, pp. 107–136. 
[25] C. Liyanage, T. Elhag, T. Ballal, and Q. Li, “Knowledge 
communication and translation‐ a knowledge transfer model,” 
Journal of Knowledge management, vol. 13, no. 3, 2009, pp. 
118–131. 
[26] E. Major and M. Cordey-Hayes, “Knowledge translation: a 
new perspective on knowledge transfer and foresight,” 
Foresight, vol. 2, no. 4, 2000, pp. 411–423. 
[27] H. Baars, “Distribution von Business-Intelligence-Wissen,” in 
Analytische Informationssysteme: Springer, 2006, pp. 409–
424. 
[28] H. Baars and H.-G. Kemper, “Management support with 
structured and unstructured data—an integrated business 
intelligence framework,” Information Systems Management, 
vol. 25, no. 2, 2008, pp. 132–148. 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-408-4
DBKDA 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

