Knowledge Enhanced Framework for designing e-Workflow Systems 
 
Farhi Marir, John Ndeta 
Knowledge Management Research Centre, 
Faculty of Computing, London Metropolitan University,  
London, UK  
e-mail: f.marir@londonmet.ac.uk,  ndetaj@hotmail.co.uk
 
 
Abstract- Traditional workflow framework in implementing 
e-business processes has ignored the worker knowledge, the 
user feedback and problems resulting of incompatibility of 
inter-organisation e-business processes. The limitation of 
this framework comes from its behavioural perspective, 
which focuses only on monitoring and detecting problems in 
the execution of homogenous intra-organisation business 
processes. As a result, e-business processes designed and 
implemented using this traditional workflow framework 
become increasingly inadequate in the new e-business 
environment which is characterised by an increasing pace of 
mobility, business collaboration between complementary 
organisations, discontinuous and unforeseen change in the 
business processes. This paper presents results of a research 
investigation confirming these limitations and proposes a 
knowledge enhanced framework for design e-workflow that 
captures the dynamics of e-business process. 
 
Keywords-e-workflow; framework; e-business process; 
knowledge management; design pattern  
 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 Workflow management systems are designed to 
support business process modelling.  Business process 
modelling is an effective tool for managing organisational 
change and is known to have brought benefits to many 
organisations. Organisations and their business processes 
undergo changes from time to time, and in some cases 
these changes are dynamic, discontinuous and complex. 
Organisations change either through anticipation of 
surprise (proactive) efforts to become more competitive or 
in response to a need to maintain competitiveness in a 
changing business environment [1]. During the last 
decade, workflow technology has become readily 
available [2]. They are built using a traditional framework 
for workflow modelling “Fig. 1” which is composed of 
four 
perspectives: 
functional, 
informational, 
organisational and behavioural Functional perspective 
decomposes process functionality into a task hierarchy 
that can be allocated to actors (human or software agents). 
Informational 
perspective 
however, 
describes 
the 
information objects that are consumed and produced. It 
also describes the business data, documents, and 
electronic forms that are transported between actor and 
the files and databases that store persistent application 
information. Organisational perspective specifies the roles 
and actors that are involved in the workflow execution 
and describes how the organisation configures its 
resources to perform business processes. Behavioural 
perspective specifies when and under which conditions a 
workflow is executed in which routes define the way the 
information and the knowledge are channelled through the 
different steps of the process and the rules reflecting the 
constraints of the business policies and practices.  
A major limitation of this traditional framework is that 
it can typically only support simple, static and predictable 
business processes, such as insurance and travel claim 
processing. It is well understood for traditional intra-
organisational workflow applications, which span only 
one organisation and are characterised by structured and 
predictable business processes and business environment. 
However, it is increasingly inadequate in the new online 
business (e-business) era that is characterised by 
increasing complexities, unpredictable and discontinuous 
change. Also, with the emergence of the Internet, e-
workflow design and evolution within e-business 
environments where most organisations cooperates or 
outsource parts of their internal process, a new framework 
with additional perspectives and modelling concepts are 
needed for specifying the processes and knowledge flow 
between these organisation [1][3][4][5]. Furthermore, the 
perspectives of the traditional framework are not 
parametrically modelled and as a result they are not 
flexible and difficult to change. 
 
Figure 1.  
Traditional Framework. 
These limitations are consolidated by several research 
works. Manolescu [6] started from the observation that 
current workflow systems do not provide the workflow 
functionality required in object-oriented applications; so, 
developers are forced to build custom workflow solutions. 
Furthermore, the thesis claimed that traditional workflow 
architectures are based on the requirements and 
assumptions that do not hold in the context of 
contemporary object-oriented software development. This 
143
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-247-9
DBKDA 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

mismatch makes current workflow systems unsuitable for 
developers who need workflow within their applications. 
Zhuge et al. Reference [7] cited the fact that traditional 
workflow approaches are too rigid to adapt to the changes 
of domain business and are not useful in rapid 
development of virtual organisations. Once the domain 
business has changed, the system has to be re-designed. 
Chung et al. [1] stated that, while existing workflow 
management systems are widely used for the streamlined 
management of ‘administrative’ business processes, 
current systems are unable to cope with the more dynamic 
situations encountered in ad hoc and collaborative 
processes. Furthermore, the author’s also stated that a 
major limitation of traditional workflow systems is that 
they can, typically, only support simple, predictable, but 
not the dynamically changing and complex processes that 
are present in many organisations. Ndeta and Marir [8, 9] 
confirmed through questionnaires and case studies the 
limitations of traditional framework when it comes to the 
development of e-workflow to support e-business 
processes.  
This paper addresses the above limitation by 
enhancing traditional framework with a knowledge 
perspective that provides workflow modellers with 
processes and methods to dynamically capture explicit 
and tacit knowledge generated within or outside the 
boundary of the organisation. This captured knowledge 
will play a proactive role as a change manager monitoring 
and updating the other perspectives actions to reflect the 
dynamic changes of e-business processes and to increase 
the flexibility of workflow design and evolution.  
The paper is organised as follows; section two is 
devoted to literature review and related work. Section 
three will present the proposed knowledge enhanced 
framework for e-workflow design, the workflow design 
pattern repository to support the proposed knowledge 
perspective and also the structure and access to the 
repository, and finally section four devoted to conclusion 
and future work. 
 
II. 
RELATED RESEARCH WORK 
Following the limitations of the traditional Workflow 
Management Systems (WFMS) as presented in the 
previous section, there have been numerous attempts to 
tackle these limitations. However, little of the published 
research work proposed to enhance the traditional 
framework instead most of the research works have 
focussed 
on 
the 
improvement 
of 
the 
workflow 
development within that traditional framework. Their 
approach focuses more on implementation issues and do 
not provide clear procedure on how to incorporate 
knowledge aspects in their e-workflow design.  
Ndeta [9] integrated knowledge-based techniques with 
a workflow management approach to support processes 
change, trace decisions and to provide notification 
mechanism. This approach was applicable in civil and 
software engineering and focuses more on implementation 
issues and does not look at the other perspectives of 
workflow modelling e.g., informational and organisational 
perspective. Dellen et al. [10] provides process-oriented 
architecture for modelling inter-organisational workflow 
for e-commerce. It uses Petri-net formalism to model 
behavioural/dynamic 
aspects 
of 
inter-organisational 
workflows and the concept of soundness to verify the 
workflow model. The work failed to show how to model 
the other perspectives, which are essential during 
workflow specification and modelling i.e., organisational 
and information perspectives. The TBPM project in is 
based on a work carried out in the Enterprise project and 
centres on an intelligent workflow engine that includes an 
interactive process planner [11]. This approach focuses 
more on the functional perspective and implementation 
issues of workflow application development. 
A number of research works use ontology as a tool for 
explanation and provides an algorithm to resolve the 
heterogeneity amongst the interfaces of web services and 
integrate it with workflow tasks. The approach focuses on 
the functional and information perspective of e-workflow 
modelling and fails to mention organisational and 
behavioural perspectives, which are essential if a 
complete picture of e-workflow modelling is to be 
exemplified. 
Zhuge et al. [7] proposed a simulation-based 
development 
framework 
for 
establishing 
virtual 
organisations. The framework consists of a federation-
agent-workflow (FAW) model, a set of rules for 
establishing the mapping from the domain organisation 
into the virtual organisation, a set of management services, 
and a macro development process. The framework unifies 
the traditional domain organisation and information 
system model into a virtual organisation model, and 
allows users to develop intuitive virtual organisations 
from the viewpoint of the domain. The virtual level is 
separated from the implementation level that consists of a 
runtime-support mechanism and a behaviour repository.  
The approach focuses on implementation issues in the 
form of a simulation framework. There are no clear 
procedure and step on how to model some of the 
workflow perspectives, i.e., functional and information 
perspectives. Chung et al.’s [1] their adaptive workflow 
approach uses the ontology and intelligent agents and 
knowledge based planning techniques to provide support 
for developing flexible workflow for the development of 
new product in the chemical industries, where the 
modelling focuses only on the functional perspective.  
Medeiros et al. [12] presented the on-going research on 
their scientific workflow framework called WOODSS. 
Conceived 
for 
supporting 
scientific 
work 
in 
environmental 
planning 
and 
distributed 
web-based 
applications for other scientific domains. The core of this 
144
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-247-9
DBKDA 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

work is based on creating repositories containing 
workflow specifications and providing mechanisms for 
accessing this repository for reuse. This work does not 
provide generic solution for e-workflow development by 
ignoring the different perspective of the framework and 
focussing on the implementation of the repository.  Van 
der Aalst et al. [13] used workflow-mining techniques to 
create a feedback loop to adapt the workflow model to 
changing circumstances and detect imperfections of the 
workflow design and also find explicit representations for 
a broad range of process models. The approach focuses 
more on the functional, organisational, behavioural and 
case perspectives and on implementation or operational 
issues in the form of reverse engineering. There is no clear 
procedure and steps on how to develop a workflow 
application. It is also not clear how the informational 
perspective of workflow modelling is dealt with in this 
approach.  
There are several issues that have driven the traditional 
workflow approach into obsolescence. Workflow for e-
business processes should be characterised by anticipating 
surprises, self-control in management, creation and 
renewal 
of 
knowledge, 
unstructured 
organisation, 
intangible assets and proactive work style instead of 
prediction, compliance, and utilisation of knowledge, 
tangible assets, and structured organisation and reactive 
respectively.. 
 
III. 
KNOWLEDGE ENHANCED 
FRAMEWORK 
Workflow modelling and design is well understood for 
traditional intra-organisational workflow applications, 
which span only one organisation with structured and 
predictable business processes and business environment. 
Traditional framework shown in “Fig. 1” for designing 
workflow is appropriate for modelling business processes 
of such organisation as the focus is on the internal work 
processes and information processes perspectives within 
the organisation. Thus, designing workflows in the 
traditional framework is limited to modelling four internal 
perspectives of the organisation: (i) decomposing 
organisation process functionality into task hierarchy that 
can be allocated to existing actors (human or software 
agents) of the organisation (functional perspective), (ii)  
describing the organisation information objects (business 
data, documents and product specs) which are consumed 
and produced within the organisation (informational 
perspective), (iii) specifying the roles and actors which are 
designated by the organisation management to be 
involved in the workflow execution and describes how the 
organisation configures its resources to perform business 
processes (organisational perspective), and (iv) specifying 
the way the information and the knowledge are channelled 
through the different steps of the process and the rules and 
constraints of the organisation business policies and 
practices 
(behavioural 
perspective). 
If 
traditional 
framework is successful in designing workflow to support 
traditional 
business 
processes, 
it 
is 
increasingly 
inadequate to model e-business processes as it requires 
not only modelling internal organisation perspectives but 
coping with unpredictability and continually changes 
brought by e-business environment [1][6][7][10]. 
 Furthermore, a questionnaire put by the team in 
collaboration with Workflow Management Coalition 
found that around 70% of workflow developers have 
noticed the limitations of traditional framework when 
designing e- workflow systems for organisation e-
business processes [9]. This confirms that a new 
framework for designing e-workflow systems became a 
necessity due to the impact of e-business processes on 
organisation survival and growth in this global and 
knowledge economy. 
This paper presents a new knowledge enhanced 
framework for designing flexible e-workflow systems, as 
shown in “Fig. 2” below.  
 
 
Figure 2.  
Knowledge Enhanced Framework for e-Workflow. 
This new framework enhances traditional framework 
with a new knowledge perspective and provides new 
methods for developing e-workflow systems to support 
dynamic e-business processes. The proposed framework 
shown in “Fig. 2” borrows concepts and solution from 
both design and rule patterns to support flexibility during 
workflow modelling, design and evolution in the new e-
business 
environment. 
Traditional 
approaches 
to 
workflow modelling mainly deal with the use of rules in 
specific contexts serving as a mechanism for workflow 
145
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-247-9
DBKDA 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

enactment and evolution [14]. The proposed framework 
focuses on providing abstraction mechanisms to represent 
in an implementation-independent manner the knowledge 
and experience associated with workflow design. The 
additional knowledge perspective is set to capture explicit 
and tacit knowledge generated within or outside the 
boundary organisation. The knowledge perspective will 
use the captured knowledge to trigger changes needed to 
both the organisation e-business processes and the four 
perspectives of the traditional framework to reflect and 
satisfy the new requirements of internal and external 
stakeholders of the organisation. Some examples of the 
role of this knowledge perspective could be extracting 
knowledge from data and information flowing between 
the other perspectives, memorising successful stories and 
best practices within or outside the boundary of the 
organisation or recording views of external stakeholders 
such as customer on the organisation e-business processes. 
The captured knowledge could be fed back into the 
organisation to be used to undertake changes to their e-
business processes and improve their e-workflow systems 
to respond to the e-business new requirements. 
 
To support the knowledge enhanced framework, the 
new knowledge perspective will be consolidated with an 
underlying knowledge repository, which maintains a 
history of process structure, relating each structure to the 
types of tasks for which it is a suitable method. 
 
A. Workflow Patterns-Based Knowledge Repository  
The knowledge repository is designed using the 
concept of design patterns successfully used in object-
orientation and component software engineering to 
suggest well-proven design patterns [15] in order to 
implement solutions for typical recurring problems. 
Patterns are a way for the designer to specify the 
workflow schema (process definition) by reusing previous 
experience and knowledge of the best e-business 
designers. This work is contributing to research work in 
the direction of formalising patterns in the workflow 
domain where substantial effort in the form of workflow 
patterns [2], workflow data patterns and workflow 
resource patterns [16] have been investigated. The 
proposed workflow design pattern repository is one of the 
possible ways to assist knowledge workflow designers 
and users in building their workflow models efficiently. 
This approach will avoid them re-inventing already 
existing solutions of problems, which are common in the 
domain context, thus enhances the competitive edge of the 
organisation. In addition to memorising previous 
successful workflow design, the knowledge repository 
will also memorise feedback and views from external 
stakeholders and competitors’ successful e-business 
processes to trigger changes required in the organization 
and update their e-workflow and e-business processes [9]. 
In the sub-sections below, we present the workflow design 
pattern scheme that composes the knowledge repository 
and how it is indexed and retrieved. [9]. 
 
B. Workflow Design Pattern Scheme 
Each workflow design pattern specifies a set of tasks, 
together with the ordering constraints and object flows 
between them. Thus, a workflow design pattern represents 
one possible means of achieving a given type of task by 
breaking it down into a particular structure of sub-tasks. 
Each workflow design pattern specifies a single level of 
structural decomposition. However, the decomposition is 
decomposed into a further set of tasks, for each of which 
further workflow design patterns may exist in the 
repository. These workflow design patterns may in turn be 
selected to specialise/instantiate the sub-tasks, and so a 
multi-level hierarchical process structure 
may be 
generated by composing many design patterns. 
 
For any given task, there may be multiple possible 
workflow design patterns, expressing different ways of 
breaking the task down for different situations. In this 
research we focus on the patterns in business problem 
domain, where control flow and data flow interact. We 
select UML as an implementation language as it allows 
modelling of the various perspectives, i.e., process, 
organisation, behaviour and data. A workflow schema 
shown in “Fig. 3” depicts a simple workflow definition 
(schema) for the business process of booking a travel 
service from a network centric travel service provider.  
The workflow schema has three other sub-workflow 
schemas relating to partner (associate) business service 
providers (BSP), airline reservation, hotel reservation and 
car rental reservation. Three additional sub-workflow 
design patterns are required, each for achieving the 
airline, hotel and car rental reservation sub-workflows 
task. 
 
C. 
Workflow Design Patterns Indexing and Retrieval  
Two main interconnected indexing schemes are 
provided in the workflow design pattern repository; 
workflow design pattern indexing scheme and the sub-
workflow design pattern indexing schemes as shown in 
“Fig. 4”.  
Each of the indexing schemes is composed of two types of 
indexes with different functionalities. This is to reflect 
general and local context-sensitive of the workflow design 
patterns 
and 
its 
sub 
workflow 
design 
patterns. 
Classification indexes represent the global and local 
context features of workflow design patterns and their 
sub-workflow design patterns that represent the acquired 
knowledge and experience in the workflow domain. These 
indices are considered as difference-based indexing 
scheme by their main function of differentiating a 
workflow design pattern from another similar workflow 
146
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-247-9
DBKDA 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

design pattern. However, these indexes are mainly used to 
classify and direct the retrieval to context-sensitive 
workflow design patterns and sub-workflow design 
patterns. This reflects the importance given to the context 
information which domain expert use to retrieve and adapt 
patterns. It also add an advantage to the proposed e-
workflow approach by reducing the scope of the retrieval 
search space of classes of similar workflow design 
patterns rather than the whole workflow design pattern 
repository 
 
Figure 3.  
Travel Booking service workflow definition 
 
 
Figure 4.  
Indexing schema for Workflow design patterns. 
. 
IV. 
EVALUATION OF THE PROPOSED 
FRAMEWORK 
The proposed framework for designing e-workflow 
from scratch requires less work than the traditional 
approaches do because of the process of reuse provided by 
the knowledge repository. Another advantage is that 
previous workflow cases can be adapted easily to new 
domain of business. Compared to traditional workflow 
approaches our proposed approach provides a consistent 
development process, so it meets the needs of virtual 
organisations for rapid, low cost and flexible development 
of workflow systems. The approach also takes into 
consideration all the perspectives involved in the design 
and modelling of e-workflow applications [17].  
 
The traditional workflow systems evolving around the 
traditional framework principles have failed to provide 
support for knowledge workers in order to assist them in 
performing their daily tasks. This often causes delays in 
the work process when an exception occurs due to the fact 
that the workflow participant is not empowered with 
context-specific knowledge about the task within the work 
process [13]. This also causes delays for workflow 
147
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-247-9
DBKDA 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

designers during workflow design and evolution in the 
new e-business environment.  
 
For instance, in traditional framework, the functional 
perspective decomposes process functionality into a task 
hierarchy that can be allocated to e-actors (human or 
software agents) on the Internet. These functions are 
difficult to adapt when there is a change in the business 
process or business environment. This is largely due to the 
fact that the workflow designers or users are not provided 
with sufficient business processes related knowledge that 
is necessary to facilitate workflow process adaptation and 
maintenance if there is a change in the business 
environment. However, in the proposed framework, the 
knowledge repository that underlines the knowledge 
perspective is there to provide relevant information and 
knowledge for the workflow designers to adapt the task at 
hand. 
 
The majority of conventional workflow systems have 
been designed to enable information management 
activities that target the capture of data and information as 
opposed 
to 
enabling 
knowledge 
management 
for 
harvesting knowledge itself [13]. Thus traditional 
workflow development frameworks and approaches 
focuses on information processing (or transaction led) 
rather than the knowledge creation and innovation which 
is vital for survival and growth in the new world of e-
business and the emerging global and knowledge 
economy.  
In 
the 
traditional 
workflow 
framework 
and 
development approaches, external roles are not well 
defined as the system fails to provide process related 
knowledge and knowledge flow for all the parties 
involved. If there is a breakdown during the execution of a 
workflow process, it is sometimes difficult to know who 
is responsible for the breakdown since the system fails to 
provide efficient flow of process related knowledge 
between the stakeholders involved in the execution of the 
e-workflow process.  While in the traditional framework 
modelling the behavioural perspective was based on a 
high level of structure and control reflecting the internal 
organisation policy, the dynamics of the new e-business 
environment in which more than one organisation are 
sharing that e-business process require a different 
approach to organisational and workflow design. The 
knowledge 
perspective 
provided 
in 
the 
proposed 
framework allows e-workflow designer or users to 
develop flexible rules agreed between organisations who 
share the e-business processes.     
The proposed framework has been tried successfully 
by a travel agent to assess their e-business processes. One 
of the e-business processes assessed was Flight + Hotel 
booking web based service. In the initial flight + hotel 
booking service, the customer while booking the flight is 
not given the possibility to alter the number of days 
required to spend in the hotel. We changed the Flight + 
Hotel booking service by providing on the web a facility 
for the user to put their comment why they did not 
proceed with the booking. When we analysed the 
comments of the customers we found that a large number 
of customers would like to book the flight with fewer days 
to spend in the hotel as they would like to spend some of 
the days with local friend or families within or outside the 
city deserved by the flight. Once, we changed the Flight + 
Hotel e-business allowing customers the flexibility to 
book Flight + Hotel with the possibility to alter the 
number of days to spend in the hotel, no customer has 
raised again that problem which might means that more 
customers have booked for Flight + Hotel service. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we have presented a new framework that 
takes into consideration the knowledge dimension for the 
development of e-workflow to support continual and 
unpredictable changes of current e-business processes. A 
significant contribution of our proposed framework is not 
only limited to adding a knowledge perspective to 
traditional framework but by setting new relationship and 
dynamics between this knowledge perspective and the 
existing functional, organisational, behavioural and 
informational perspectives. In the proposed knowledge 
enhanced framework, all perspectives are integrated and 
all of them harbour some knowledge through common 
access to a knowledge repository that memorise best 
practices, 
previous 
experiences 
and 
stakeholders 
experiences.  Furthermore, the paper has presented one 
realisation of the knowledge repository in the form 
workflow design pattern repository. We have also 
provided an input format for pattern creation, which 
would enable patterns content in the workflow design 
pattern repository to be structured and predictable. The 
paper has also provided an appropriate hierarchical 
structured indexing scheme for the repository to be able to 
retrieve most similar workflow and sub workflow design 
patterns. Future research work will focus on the 
architecture of the e-workflow design pattern providing 
mechanisms for accessing and managing the workflow 
design pattern repository and the use of exceptions as a 
basis for managing dynamic workflow evolution. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Chung, L.P.W., Cheung, H., Stader, J., Jarvis, P., and 
Moore. J., Macintosh, A. “Knowledge-based process 
management - an approach to handling adaptive workflow”, 
KBS, 2003, 16, pp. 149-160 
[2] Van 
der 
Aalst, 
W.M.P., 
ter 
Hofstede, 
A.H.M., 
Kiepuszewski, B. and Barros, A.P. (2003) “Workflow 
Patterns”. Distributed and Parallel Databases, 14(1):5-51, 
2003. 
[3] Fahey, L., Srivastava, R., Sharon, J.S. and Smith D.E. 
(2001) “Linking e-business and operating processes: the 
role of Knowledge management”, IBM Syst. J. 40 (4) pp. 
889-906 
[4] Madhusudan, T., Zhao, J.L. and Marshall, B. (2004) “A 
case-based reasoning framework for workflow model 
management”. Data & Know. Engineering, 50, pp. 87-115 
[5] R-Moreno, D.M., Borrajo, D., Cesta, A. and Oddi, A. 
“Integrating 
planning 
and 
scheduling 
in 
workflow 
domains”. Expert Systems with Applications, 2007, 33, pp. 
389-406. 
[6] Manolescu, 
D. 
 
“Micro-workflow: 
A 
Workflow 
Architecture Supporting Compositional Object- oriented 
Software Development. Ph.D. thesis, Graduate College of 
the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Urbana, 
Illinois, 2001. 
148
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-247-9
DBKDA 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

[7] Zhuge, H., Chen, J., Feng, Y., and Shi, X. “A federation-
agent-workflow 
simulation 
framework 
for 
virtual 
organisation development”, Information & Management, 
2002, 39, pp. 325-336. 
[8] Ndeta, J., Marir, F., and Choudhury, I. ”Knowledge 
enhanced e-workflow modelling – a pattern-based approach 
for the development of Internet workflow systems”, 
Proceedings of the 7th European Conference on Knowledge 
Management, 2006, Budapest, Hungary. 
[9] Ndeta, J. “Knowledge Enhanced Framework for the Design 
and Development of e- workflow Systems”, PhD Thesis,  
London Metropolitan University, 2008, UK. 
[10] Dellen, B., Maurer, F., and Pews, G. “Knowledge-based 
techniques to increase the flexibility of workflow 
management”, Data & Know. Eng., 1997, 23, pp. 269-295. 
[11] Van der Aalst. W.M.P. “Process-oriented Architecture for 
Electronic Commerce and Interorganisational Workflow”, 
Information Systems 1999, Vol. 24, No. 8, pp. 639-671 
[12] Medeiros, C. B., Perez-Alcazar, J., Digiampietri, L., 
Patorello, Jr. G. Z, Santanche, A., Torres, R. S., Madeira, E. 
and Bacarin, E. “WOODSS and the Web: annotating & 
reusing scientific workflows”. 2005, SIGMOD Record, 
Vol. 34, No. 3, pp. 18-23. 
[13] Van der Aalst, W.M.P., Reijers, H.A., Weijters, A.J.M.M., 
Van Dongen, B.F., Alves de Medeiros, A.K., Song, M. and 
Verbeek, H.M.W.  “Business process mining: An industrial 
application”, Inf. Systems, 2007, 32, pp. 713 – 732 
[14] Casati, F., Fugini, M. and Mirbel, I. “An Environment for 
designing Exceptions in Workflows”, Information Systems, 
1999, Vol. 24, No.3, pp. 255-273  
[15] Gamma, E., Helm, R., Johnson, R and Vlissidesn, J., 
“Design Patterns: Elements od Reusable Object-Oriented 
Software”, 1995, Addison-Wesley Professional Computing 
Series. Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, New York.   
[16] Russell, N., ter Hofstede, A.H.M., Edmond, D. and Van der 
Aalst, W.M.P. “Workflow Data Patterns”. QUT Technical 
report, 2004,  FIT-TR-2004-01, Queensland University of 
Technology, Brisbane.  
[17] Ndeta, J., and Marir, F.  “Towards the Development of a 
Conceptual Framework fro Knowledge Enhanced e-
Workflow Modelling”, Proc. 6th European Conference on 
KM, University of Limerick, Ireland, 2005. 
 
149
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-247-9
DBKDA 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

