A Multidimensional Data Modeling of the SEER Database from the USA National
Cancer Institute
Heidy M. Marin-Castro, Jose Torres-Jimenez and Diana I. Escalona-Vargas
Center of Research and Advanced Studies of the National Polytechnic Institute
Information Technology Laboratory
Scientiﬁc and Technological Park of Tamaulipas TECNOTAM, km 5.5
Cd. Victoria, Tamaulipas
{hmarin,jtj,descalona}@tamps.cinvestav.mx
Abstract—Nowadays, one of the main challenges in computer
science is to process the large amount of data available in
diverse data sources, such as databases or ﬁles, in order
to ﬁnd useful information. For this purpose, it is required
specialized tools that process raw data in a smart way to
discover knowledge. In this paper, we present the design of
a data warehouse and a tool called TDR (Tool Drill-Roll)
that allow to discover knowledge from the database SEER
(Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results) from the Cancer
Institute in the United States of America, which has more than
ﬁve million of records. The data warehouse is designed using a
multidimensional approach and the TDR tool allows to exploit
interesting information from SEER using drill-down and roll-
up (two operators of On line Analytical Processing (OLAP)).
The data warehouse can be seen at many levels of granularity.
Our developed TDR tool allows knowing the statistics of the
incidence, mortality and survival of patients with cancer along
of years and extract useful information related to this disease
that could be used to establish a relation between certain
characteristics of patients that has an speciﬁc type of cancer.
The knowledge discovered by our TDR tool could be of interest
for government, health care institutes or research community
for decision making. The main contribution of this paper is
the discovery of new knowledge from the SEER database. The
methodology used to design the data warehouse and the TDR
tool could be applied to others domains with minimal changes.
Keywords-data warehouse; OLAP; drill-down; roll-up; cancer-
database.
I. INTRODUCTION
Cancer is a disease fundamentally characterized by un-
controlled growth of malignant cells (known as carcinogenic
or cancerous). The associated terminology with the issue of
cancer is between benign and malignant tumors. A tumor
or neoplasm is any abnormal growth of cell, which may be
either benign or malignant. A benign tumor remains conﬁned
to its original location. It neither invades surrounding normal
tissue nor spreads to distant body sites. In contrast, a
malignant tumor is capable both of invading adjacent normal
tissue and of spreading to others tissues and organs [1].
There are more than 100 different types of cancer. Most
cancers are named for the organ or type of cell in which
they start [2]. According to a report presented in 2010 of the
U.S Population [3] approximately 789,620 men and 739,940
women will be diagnosed with cancer. Also, it is estimated
that 569,490 men and women will die due to cancer in 2010
considering all cities in the United States of America.
In this paper, we present the construction of a data ware-
house and a software tool called TDR to exploit interesting
information related with records of patients with cancer in
the United Stated of America using OLAP. We use informa-
tion provided by the SEER (Surveillance, Epidemiology, and
End Results) database which contain records of patients with
different types of cancer from 1978 to 2007. Our design is
based on a multidimensional approach for building the data
warehouse. We created a six dimensional model that allows
to uncover and grouping information not yet discovered with
different levels of granularity. The multidimensional model
was built in SQL language. To query the data warehouse
we implemented a tool called TDR (Tool Drill-Roll) that
incorporates the operators drill-down, roll-up and slice-
dice. This operators acts on the deﬁned hierarchies for
exploring and visualizing the information at different levels
of granularity. This ability makes our tool very useful to
discover new knowledge from the SEER database that could
be used by National Cancer Institute for decision making.
TDR is a friendly tool that present information in tabular
and graphical form making its use more easy to the end user.
TDR has a browser of information which displays 3D graphs
of the results of OLAP operators. Our design methodology
for the data warehouse could be applied to different domains
or databases with minimal changes.
Unlike well known tools for multidimensional analysis as
Business Object [4] and Talend [5], the TDR tool presented
in this work allows greater ﬂexibility to add ad-hoc analysis
on the data, and the possibility of calling proper functions
at the time the data is being manipulated visually. In addi-
tion, our tool allows visualizing the discovered information
displaying the recovered data in a 3D bar chart.
The rest of this document is organized as follows: next
section presents an overview of the literature, describing
general and related concepts and techniques. Section 3
describes the design process of the proposed data warehouse,
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-185-4

explaining the dimensional approach and how hierarchies
were deﬁned. Section 4 describes the six-dimensional data
cube designed in this work. Section 5 presents the architec-
ture of the TDR tool. In Section 6 are presented the results
achieved in this work and a discussion of them. Finally,
Section 7 presents the conclusions of this work.
II. LITERATURE REVIEW
The concept of data warehouse was deﬁned by W. H
Inmon [6] as a subject-oriented, integrated, time variant and
non-volatile collection of data in support of managements
decision making process. Another deﬁnition states that a
data warehouse is a collection of large amount of data or
a repository (collection of resources that can be accessed to
retrieve information) of organizations electronically stored
data, useful to generate reports [7]. The data warehouse
paradigm provides architectures and tools for business exec-
utives to systematically organize, understand, and use their
data to make strategic decisions. Data warehouse systems
are valuable tools in today competitive, fast-evolving world.
The data warehouse management is a relational database
that contains the data that is collected from a server that is
a data collection target. This data is used to generate the
reports for the System Data collection sets, and can also be
used to create custom reports.
The drill-down, roll-up and slice-dice operators are in-
cluded in the design of a data warehouse manager. These
operators allow the user to view the data at differing degrees
of summarization. The ﬁrst operator, drill-down builds a
view to go from a general level of granularity to an speciﬁc
level. The roll-up operator works in inverse sense to drill-
down, roll-up builds a view to go from an speciﬁc level to
a general level.
The data warehouse paradigm has been used in many busi-
ness contexts. Recently, it is being used in the biomedical
ﬁeld such as biological science on clinical and genomic
data [8]. The objective is to improve the capabilities of
the On-line Analytical Processing (OLAP) to make effective
medical decisions [9]. In the literature, there are few works
related to a multidimensional approach for processing data
in the domain of cancer disease. In [10] Wahet al. devel-
oped a complete multidimensional model design of a data
warehousing for a Lymphoma cancer used the relevant infor-
mation from the Internet. They proposed a six dimensional
model. However, in this work the design of hierarchies is
not considered as we do in our work.
III. DATA WAREHOUSE ARCHITECTURE
A. Database description
The study presented in this work uses the new version of
SEER [2] database during the years from 1973 to 2007 with
5,178,804 records covering to eight cancer types (breast,
colon and rectum, respiratory, female genital, urinary, male
genital, lymphoma in all sites, leukemia, and digestive). We
#
Item name
Positions
Length
1
Patient ID number
01-08
8
2
Registry ID
09-18
10
3
Marital Status at DX
19-19
1
4
Race/Ethnicity
20-21
2
7
Sex
24-24
1
8
Age at diagnosis
25-27
3
12
Month of diagnosis
37-38
2
13
Year of diagnosis
39-42
4
20
Grade
58-58
1
21
Diagnostic Conﬁrmation
59-59
1
87
Age Recode < 1 Year olds
183-184
2
107
SEER Summary Stage 1977
231-231
1
108
SEER Summary Stage 2000
232-232
1
115
Vital Status recode
255-255
1
TABLE I
ATTRIBUTES SELECTED FROM MULTIDIMENSIONAL MODEL.
organized the information of this database in dimensional
tables to exploit information of patients with any type of
cancer. Our study uses the attributes show in Table I of
Computer Record Format (CRF) of SEER data ﬁelds.
B. Facts and Dimensional Hierarchies
The number of patients with cancer has been increasing in
recent years. It could be interesting to know the statistics of
the incidence, mortality or survival along of years and extract
useful information related of the disease and establish a
relation between certain attributes of patients that has a type
of cancer. Therefore, the most important characteristics of a
data warehouse is the fact table that allows to quantify the
number of incidences of cancer recorded. Our study consists
in the quantiﬁcation of medical cancer events that happened
on certain dates, we can view how many patients are alive
or dead with an speciﬁc type of cancer and with certain
characteristics related to sex, group of age at diagnosis
(child, young, adult, senior), marital status. The design of
the data warehouse is based on a dimensional approach.
In this approach, the design is guided by the deﬁnition of
hierarchies that allows to exploit data at different granularity
levels. These hierarchies are designed from the tables in
SEER database according to the hierarchical relation among
the ﬁelds in such tables. In this work, these hierarchies are
expressed as a direct acyclic graph. One example of these
hierarchies is shown in Figure 1. In this ﬁgure, to the left
there is the hierarchy of the ﬁelds in the corresponding
dimension. Each node in the hierarchy is referred as a
category. To the right of the ﬁgure is the same hierarchy but
in terms of the possible values for each category. The pos-
sible values for category group study type are microscopical
and non-microscopical conﬁrmed. In the next level of this
hierarchy is the category name with values positive histology,
positive cytology, etc. Hierarchies, categories and values play
an important role in the design and implementation of the
proposed data warehouse in this work.
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-185-4
DBKDA 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

Root
Group Study
Type at Dx
Name
Study Type
Hierarchy
Study Type
at Dx
Microscopically
confirmed
Positive
Cytology
Not
Microscopically
confirmed
Direct
visualization
without
microscopic
Clinical
diagnosis
Positive
histology
Radiology and
other imaging
techniques
Positive
laboratory
test/ marker
study
Method not
specified
Figure 1.
Hierarchy model from dimension type of study
All information in tables of SEER database are related
by means of a table of facts called medical facts. This
table stores facts about patients such as if they are alive
or dead with due to speciﬁc type of cancer and with
certain characteristics related of sex, age group of diagnosis
(child, young, adult, senior), marital status among others
characteristics.
This characteristics are called variables, and they are
variables of interest tracked by the TDR tool. The diagram
of the table of facts allows to build reports that answer
questions such as:
• The number of patients of black race diagnosed with
breast cancer from 1990 to 2000.
• The number of women died due to mama cancer.
• The predominant marital status of patients having colon
rectal cancer.
IV. MULTIDIMENSIONAL DATA CUBE
We created OLAP cubes from a data model in order to
obtain answers to questions such as the ones listed at the end
of section III-B. An OLAP cube is not strictly a cuboid [11],
it is the name given to the process of linking data from the
different dimensions. In this work the data cube is created
using four out of seven available dimensions.
Figure 2 shows a cuboid using three dimensions. To the
right of this ﬁgure it is shown the four ways of data can
be explored from this cube by ﬁxing categories and values
at each dimension. In this work we use a data cube deﬁned
by four dimensions (X, Y , Z, W) instead three. This data
cube is commonly known as a teserac. For dimension four
(Z), we ﬁx one from all possible values for this dimension.
Then the associated cuboid given by (X, Y , Z) is processed
by OLAP operators in order to get the four possible view
of data.
A. Reﬁnement OLAP operators or querying manipulation
The main advantage when building a data warehouse is
the use of operators for facilitating the aggregation (con-
solidation) or the disaggregation (division) of data. The
operator roll-up (aggregation) allows to eliminate a grouping
criterion. The drill-down operator (disaggregation) allows to
introduce a new grouping criterion. These operators allow
querying the data source that can not be done using tradi-
tional operations like selections, projections, concatenations
or groupings.
Drill-down and roll-up OLAP operators make extensive
processing of hierarchies described in Section III-B. When
a dimension is selected in the teserac, all records of patients
in the data source are considered for querying (no grouping
restrictions are given). The hierarchies associated to the
selected dimensions are reset to the root node. From this
point, an specialized query can be done by selecting one
of the reached categories from the root node in one of the
hierarchies. The result is the selection of an slice, a subset
of data such as the ones shown in Figure 2. Several selected
slices form a dice. For example, when a category is selected,
all values for this category deﬁne several slices from the data
cube, that is, they deﬁne a dice.
If we want to descend in a hierarchy, we need to ﬁx
a value for the current category, which means to reduce
the data set only to that records meeting the condition
category = value. Now, for the new data subset we can
repeat the same process in case more descendants exist in
the hierarchy. Each time we perform a drill down operation a
new condition given by the expression category=value must
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-185-4
DBKDA 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

 
   
     
  
  
   
     
  
  
   
     
  
  
   
     
  
  
   
    
   
   
    
   
   
    
   
    
v1
v2
v3
v4
Dimension X
v1
v2
v3
v4
Dimension
Y
v1
v2
v3
v4
Dimension Z
(Variables)
Dimension X
Dimension Y
Dimension Z
View over
dimension Y
 
Dimension X
Dimension Y
Dimension Z
View over
dimension X
 
Dimension X
Dimension Y
Dimension Z
View over dimension Z
(Variables)
 
Dimension X
Dimension Y
Dimension Z
Ad-Hoc View
 
Figure 2.
Cuboid and four ways to explore data
be satisﬁed, together with the previous conditions. So, the
drill-down operator deﬁnes a path that speciﬁes a set of
conditions that group data for specialized querying. Drill
down operator can be applied over any dimension at any
time. The data grouped by the drill down operator is dis
grouped by the roll up operator. This means that we need to
go back one condition in the current built path. Doing this
causes the immediately previous data set be recovered and
used for querying.
Both drill down and roll up operators allow to obtain a
measure of facts, with restrictions given by the conditions
imposed over dimensions. The number of possible data
subsets that can be explored is given by the numbers of
paths that can be formed from the hierarchies, from the root
node to each leaf in the graph.
V. A GRAPHICAL USER INTERFACE FOR THE
MULTIDIMENSIONAL MODEL
We built a software tool called TDR to get data out for
users by applying the drill down and roll operators up over
the SEER database. However, this tool allows operate over
any other database with minimal changes.
All information about the dimensions, facts and hierar-
chies is stored in a database, so, this tool is scalable to
support new dimensions or hierarchies. In the reports we
focus on a single variable from the table of facts, like
“survival” or “mortality”. This is also possible for the user
to select the tracked variable.
Users can decide how to explore data in the SEER
database by selecting any of the available dimensions pre-
sented in Section 2.3. For each dimension, the user can go
down across the hierarchy associated to that dimension for
a more specialized query. If required, the user can go back
the hierarchy or select a different dimension at any time.
Always a dimension is selected, the associated hierarchy
is recovered and the navigation starts form the root node.
Drill down is the main operator for doing specialized queries
to the database. At the beginning, suppose that one of the
selected dimensions is “age”. The hierarchy associated to
this dimension indicates that the ﬁrst criterion is “year of
diagnosis”. Then, the tool presents all possible values in the
facts for this given current criterion. If the user wants to
descend in this hierarchy, he performs a drill down operator
by selecting one of the possibles values of this current
criterion. The hierarchy associated to dimension “age” in-
dicates that the next criterion is “month of diagnosis”, so
now we see in the output all possible values for this now
current criterion. The user can proceed in the same way
until no more descendants exist in the hierarchy. A roll up
operation on a hierarchy causes the grouping done by the
previous drill down operation be dissolved. Slice and dice
operations are implemented by selecting speciﬁc values for
current categories selected in dimension Z and dimension
four. Dimension Z is assigned to the tracked variables in
the fact table. The fourth dimension is traversed by its
corresponding hierarchy. In this case all possibles values for
the current criterion in the hierarchy is not shown in the
table of results due to this table will be very large in the
browser. Instead, just a single value is considered at a time,
which ca be selected from a combo box.
The software tool uses a plotting library for 3D graph-
ics that can be downloaded from [12]. All tables needed
for operating like dimensions and hierarchies are stored
in a database in MySQL. The tool uses the dimensions:
age-dimension, cancer-dimension, marital-status-dimension,
race-ethnicity-dimension, sex-dimension, study-dimen-sion.
Our developed tool uses four dimensions that can be
selected among the ones previously registered. From these
dimensions the user can determine the search criterion for
answering a given question for example “How many women
died because of a not solid cancer type in the year 1990?”.
In this case, the user must select the dimensions sex, cancer-
type and age-diagnosis. If user wanted specialize the above
query, he only needs to do a drill down operation on any
of the available dimensions, for example, specializing the
above query to the month September in the same year of
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-185-4
DBKDA 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

1990.
VI. RESULTS
In this study, we used the TDR tool to obtain new and
relevant knowledge about cases of cancer in patients that live
or die in the United States between the year 1973 to 2007.
In the ﬁrst analysis we obtained the rate of mortality and
survival of women with mama cancer. The results shown
104677 widowed women died due to mama cancer and
83448 survived. For this case, the rate of mortality and
survival is shown in the equations 1, 2 respectively. For the
case of single women, the rate of mortality of single women
is 31.67% and the rate of survival is 68.33%. These results
show that the mortality in widowed women is higher that in
single women. However, the survival rate for married women
is 71%, being the highest. It seem to be that the marital status
has an important effect asociated with the mortality and the
risk of mortality of widowed women over married women.
mortality rate = 104677 ∗ 100
188, 125
= 55.64
(1)
survival rate = 83448 ∗ 100
188, 125
= 44.36
(2)
In US, rectal colon cancer is the fourth cancer with more
incidence. It is more common in old people (around 50s)
and risk increasing with age. In our study we observe that
this cancer type affects in equal number to women and men.
This keeps true for patients that survive to this cancer.
Another interesting uncovered fact is that most of the
realized studies for detection of cancer were conﬁrmed
microscopically. It seems to be that patients rely on this
technique. We observe that the number of died patients
due to mama cancer diagnosed microscopically is higher
than the number of survived patients. In this case, the
number of patients died due to not solid cancer (leukemia)
diagnosed using any kind of study (not a microscopically
study) is around 10287. The number of cases conﬁrmed
microscopically were 272913 and the case conﬁrmed not
microscopically were 9673.
VII. CONCLUSION
This work presented the development of a data warehouse
based on the SEER database to ﬁnd relevant and useful
knowledge in data. We developed a tool called TDR that
makes extensively use of operators drill-down, roll-up, and
slice-dice to explore data at different granularity levels. We
found interesting information on the SEER database such as
the mortality and survival rate of patients for different types
of cancer. The development of data warehouse required of
some considerations. First, data cleaning played the most
critical role in the data warehouse development. It is a time
consuming task that must be handled thoroughly to avoid
no useful data. Second, the structure of the data warehouse
is designed in a ﬂexible way allowing further extensions
and adaptation to other domains databases. Finally, the
dimensional approach used for the construction of the data
warehouse allowed deﬁned the granularity of queries at
different levels.
The results presented in this work can be extended or new
knowledge could be explored using our TDR tool. The end
user has fully freedom to form questions and getting the
answers using our tool. For example, “How many women
were diagnosed with breast cancer in 1980?”.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was partially funded by the following
projects: CONACyT 58554-C´alculo de Covering Arrays,
51623-Fondo Mixto CONACyT y Gobierno del Estado de
Tamaulipas.
REFERENCES
[1] G. M. Cooper, The Cancer Book: A Guide to Understanding
the Causes, Prevention, and Treatment of Cancer.
Lon-
don,UK: Printed in the United States of America, 1993.
[2] National Cancer Institute, “Surveillance Eoidemiology and
End Results,” http://seer.cancer.gov.
[3] National Cancer Institute SEER, “NCI Fact Sheets,” http://
seer.cancer.gov/cancertopics/factsheet.
[4] SAP, Company, “Soluciones SAP para el almacenamiento
de
datos
,”
http://www.sap.com/mexico/solutions/
sapbusinessobjects/data-warehousing/index.epx.
[5] www.datawarehouse4u.info, “Talend Open Studio ,” http://
datawarehouse4u.info/Talend-Open-Studio.html.
[6] W. H. Inmon and R. D. Hackathorn, Using the Data Ware-
house.
New York: Wiley–QED, 1994.
[7] P. Vassiliadis, C. Quix, Y. Vassiliou, and M. Jarke, “Data
Warehouse
Process
Management,”
Information
Systems,
vol. 26, pp. 205–236, 2001.
[8] L.
Wang,
A.
Zhang,
and
M.
Ramanathan,
“Biostar
models
of
clinical
and
genomic
data
for
biomedical
data warehouse design,” Int. J. Bioinformatics Res. Appl.,
vol.
1,
pp.
63–80,
April
2005.
[Online].
Available:
http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1356096.1356101
[9] S. Palaniappan and C. S. Ling, “Clinical Decision Support
Using OLAP With Data Mining,” International Journal of
Computer Science and Network Security, vol. 8, no. 9, 2008.
[10] T. Y. Wah and O. S. Sim, “Development of a data
warehouse for lymphoma cancer diagnosis and treatment
decision support,” WSEAS Trans. Info. Sci. and App.,
vol. 6, pp. 530–543, March 2009. [Online]. Available:
http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1553642.1553661
[11] R. Kimball and J. Caserta, The Data WarehouseETL Toolkit:
Practical Techniques for Extracting, Cleaning, Conforming,
and Delivering Data e.
Canada: Wiley, 2004.
[12] L. Tautenhahn, “SVG-VML-3D 1.3 Graphic Library,” avail-
able at http://www.lutanho.net/svgvml3d/index.html.
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-185-4
DBKDA 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

