Towards using a Graph Database and Literature-based Discovery for 
Interpretation of Next Generation Sequencing Results 
Dimitar Hristovski 
Medical faculty 
Ljubljana, Slovenia 
dimitar.hristovski@mf.uni-lj.si 
Gaber Bergant 
KIMG, UMC Ljubljana 
Ljubljana, Slovenia 
gaber.bergant@kclj.si 
Andrej Kastrin 
Medical faculty 
Ljubljana, Slovenia 
andrej.kastrin@guest.arnes.si 
Borut Peterlin 
KIMG, UMC Ljubljana 
Ljubljana, Slovenia 
borut.peterlin@kclj.si
Abstract—The 
arrival 
of 
high-throughput 
sequencing 
technologies in routine diagnostic medicine has enabled the 
large scale use of these technologies; however, the challenges of 
interpreting the results for diagnostic purposes has recently 
become evident. For this reason, we aim to develop a 
bioinformatics tool for clinical genetics diagnostics support. 
We gathered the data for this project from several different 
sources, including semantic relations extracted with SemRep 
from the MEDLINE bibliographic database, clinical phenotype 
observations from clinical geneticists and finally genotype data 
produced by Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) annotated 
with population data and several theoretical pathogenicity 
prediction algorithms. We stored this data in a Neo4j graph 
database and employed it using a closed discovery approach to 
Literature-Based Discovery (LBD) as a complementary 
method in diagnostic NGS data analysis. All algorithms were 
implemented using the Cypher query language. The goal of the 
study was first to determine the usability of graph databases to 
represent heterogeneous clinical genomic data and secondly to 
determine the potential benefits of using LBD as a 
complementary approach in a diagnostic setting using NGS. 
Keywords- Literature-based discovery; Next-generation 
sequencing; Genomic data analysis; Semantic MEDLINE; 
Graph database; Neo4j. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Next Generation Sequencing (NGS), also known as 
high-throughput 
sequencing, 
is 
a 
term 
collectively 
describing several different technologies that integrate a 
massively parallel sequencing approach, thus enabling the 
sequencing of whole human genomes within reasonable 
timescales. 
The 
development 
of 
NGS 
technologies 
successfully spread the utility of (clinical) Deoxyribonucleic 
Acid (DNA) sequencing by reaching unprecedented speed at 
reduced cost, enabling wide spread clinical and research use 
and thus fueling the rapid growth of genomic sciences. This 
presents a challenge in that pursuing and incorporating the 
newly discovered data in analytical pipelines becomes more 
and more difficult. Targeting this issue, we present our 
preliminary 
research 
in 
using 
the 
Literature-Based 
Discovery (LBD) paradigm to improve the interpretation of 
NGS results.  
II. METHODS 
The goal of LBD is to generate novel hypotheses by 
analyzing the literature and optionally other knowledge 
sources [1]. For a recent review of LBD tools and 
approaches see [2]. We can approach LBD with one of two 
paradigms, either open or closed discovery. For this project 
we selected closed discovery. We also chose Neo4j [3] as a 
graph database for storing the collected data. Briefly, we 
deal with the data from a single patient at a time. The input 
is two sets of data for each patient, the genotype of 
discovered genomic variants and the phenotype as observed 
by the clinical geneticist. The genotype set X contains the 
genes with mutations as found by diagnostic NGS. The 
phenotype set Z contains the clinical observations provided 
by the clinical geneticist described using the human 
phenotype ontology (HPO) terms. 
After gathering the relevant datasets, we constructed a 
graph database in Neo4j. The graph database consists of two 
major types of nodes, patients and concepts of several types 
including phenotypes, genes, proteins, cell functions, 
genetic disorders and many other biomedical types. 
Connecting these nodes, we have several different 
relationship types. For example, the relationship PHENO 
connects patients with their corresponding phenotype nodes 
and the relationship GENO connects patients with their 
respective mutated genes. This relationship also holds the 
information of the variant location, the specific mutated 
nucleotide, the severity of the mutation type (mainly 
differentiating missense and loss of function variants), 
predictions of theoretical algorithms for pathogenicity 
prediction and population data from the repository of the 
Genome Aggregation Database (gnomAD) [4]. We used this 
additional information for filtration and prioritization of 
candidate genes, thus reducing the workload required for 
manual result review by a clinical expert. Additionally, we 
have included the 30 different types of semantic relations as 
extracted by SemRep [5] from all of MEDLINE (titles and 
abstracts) serving as a backbone for patient and phenotype 
node connection. SemRep is a rule-based, symbolic natural 
language 
processing 
system 
that 
extracts 
semantic 
relationships in clinical medicine, substance interactions, 
genetic etiology of disease, and pharmacogenomics (e.g., 
TREATS, 
INHIBITS, 
STIMULATES, 
CAUSES, 
PREDISPOSES, AUGMENTS). These relationships are 
publicly available as SemMedDB [6] (a MySQL database). 
This work is a continuation and extension of our previous 
work [7] in which we explained how to construct a Neo4j 
graph database from SemMedDB and how to implement 
generic LBD with Cypher. 
We assumed that the feasibility of our approach in 
routine 
clinical 
practice 
depended 
heavily 
on 
the 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-637-8
DBKDA 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

development of intuitive algorithms for final result filtration 
and prioritization. We also expected this to prove especially 
useful in the clinical setting where expert time is limited. 
Therefore, we implemented a practical prioritization 
algorithm, which outputs an ordered list of genes awaiting 
expert review. For this purpose, we used the integrated 
relevant statistical data, such as population frequencies 
extracted from several population databases encompassing 
worldwide healthy control populations as well as theoretical 
pathogenicity predictions from several available prediction 
algorithms. Finally, we programmatically employed the 
prioritization algorithm in the Cypher query language on a 
per patient basis, extracting a prioritized list of genes, 
hopefully leading to further diagnostic and research steps, 
possibly also improving the diagnostic yield of NGS. 
 
 
Figure 1. Illustration of novel clinical association prediction. Based on 
clinical genetic data and current biomedical knowledge (solid lines) we 
predict novel clinical associations (dashed arcs). 
Figure 1 illustrates our approach. The output of the 
algorithm is a set of relevant intermediate concepts Y (such 
as genetic functions and/or diseases) that link the genotype 
X to the phenotype Z. These Y concepts should provide a 
hypothesis that explains the mechanisms for the novel 
associations that link the genotype to the phenotype. Our 
algorithm is meant as a discovery support step in a clinical 
NGS data processing pipeline. We generate hypotheses 
(explanations 
and 
novel 
associations); 
however, 
a 
knowledgeable human expert is needed for the critical 
evaluation of these hypotheses. 
III. RESULTS 
The network we constructed consists of 1205 patient 
nodes. There are 262132 GENO relationships linking the 
patients to 15294 gene nodes. Multiple GENO relations are 
possible between a particular patient and a particular gene 
because sometimes there are multiple mutations (genetic 
variants) in the same gene for a particular patient. There are 
4751 PHENO relations between the patients and the 
corresponding phenotypes represented with 1450 HPO terms 
(represented as nodes). The 1450 HPO terms were mapped 
to 982 UMLS concepts, which are used as arguments in the 
SemRep semantic relations. With SemRep we extracted 
91567597 semantic relation instances from 55551193 
sentences from 27263265 MEDLINE bibliographic records. 
The semantic relations instances were aggregated into 
20818782 semantic relations between 277160 biomedical 
concept nodes, and were stored in our Neo4j database. The 
SemRep semantic relations represent general biomedical 
knowledge. The clinical patient data (the genotype and 
phenotype) are linked to the general biomedical knowledge 
through common concepts (represented as nodes).   
Essential for the clinical implementation of the graph 
database was the storage of genotype data within multiple 
relationships between the patient and the specific gene, 
where the mutations occurred, as that allowed for the 
possibility of storing sequencing information regardless of 
the number of variants occurring in this gene. 
IV. DISCUSSION AND FURTHER WORK 
In this preliminary work, we constructed the necessary 
bioinformatics infrastructure in such a way that it allows 
efficient import of clinical data and simple extraction of 
relevant results, which are necessary for its inclusion in the 
diagnostic pipeline. However, several challenges remain to 
be solved. From the clinical genomics perspective, we 
noticed that within the SemMed database, the relationships 
between some genes and their correlated biomedical 
concepts are underrepresented while other genes are highly 
connected with non-informative concepts. Another issue is 
that some concepts are too general and highly connected to 
other concepts rendering them non-informative. We plan to 
find ways for filtering out non-informative concepts by 
using network analysis centrality measures and community 
detection algorithms. Furthermore, within the ranking 
algorithm, we face Cypher language efficiency issues, 
which we plan to address by query optimization. We also 
plan to develop an interactive visualization tool, enabling a 
quick and easy visual analytics. And finally, we plan to 
evaluate the usefulness of our approach from the clinical 
genetics point of view. 
V. CONCLUSION 
Although the LBD paradigm has been used in a research 
context for some time, it has been underappreciated in the 
clinical genetic diagnostic setting.  With this preliminary 
study we show the potential of using LBD as a 
complementary method in clinical diagnostics of genetic 
disorders, with the emphasis on novel gene-phenotype 
associations. Furthermore, we determined that using a graph 
database such as Neo4j is suitable for storing heterogeneous 
genomic data needed for clinical genetics diagnostic support. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We thank Thomas C. Rindflesch for his comments and 
suggestions regarding this manuscript. 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. R. Swanson, “Fish oil, Raynaud’s syndrome, and 
undiscovered public knowledge,” Perspectives in Biology and 
Medicine, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 7-18, 1986. 
[2] D. Hristovski, T. Rindflesch, and B. Peterlin, “Using 
literaturebased discovery to identify novel therapeutic 
Patient 
Phenotype 
Gene 
e.g.cell function 
Novel association? 
X 
Z 
Yi 
Yj 
e.g.disease 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-637-8
DBKDA 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

approaches,” Cardiovascular & Hematological Agents in 
Medicinal Chemistry, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 14-24, 2013. 
[3] Neo4j website. Available at: http://neo4j.com. Last accessed 
March 10th 2018. 
[4] M. Lek, K. J. Karczewski, E. V. Minikel et al. Exome 
Aggregation Consortium. Analysis of protein-coding genetic 
variation 
in 
60,706 
humans. 
Nature. 
2016 
Aug 
18;536(7616):285-91. 
[5] T. C. Rindflesch and M. Fiszman, “The interaction of domain 
knowledge and linguistic structure in natural language 
processing: 
Interpreting 
hypernymic 
propositions 
in 
biomedical text,” Journal of Biomedical Informatics, vol. 36, 
no. 6, pp. 462-477, 2003. 
[6] H. Kilicoglu, D. Shin, M. Fiszman, G. Rosemblat, and T. C. 
Rindflesch, “SemMedDB: A PubMed-scale repository of 
biomedical semantic predications,” Bioinformatics, vol. 28, 
no. 23, pp. 3158-3160, 2012. 
[7] D. Hristovski, A. Kastrin, D. Dinevski, and T. C. Rindflesch, 
“Towards implementing semantic literature-based discovery 
with a graph database,” Proceedings of the GraphSM 2015, 
The Second International Workshop on Large-scale Graph 
Storage and Management, pp. 180-184, 2015.  
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-637-8
DBKDA 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

