Dr Warehouse - An Intelligent Software System for Epidemiological Monitoring, 
Prediction, and Research 
 
 
Vladimir Ivančević, Marko Knežević,  
Miloš Simić, Ivan Luković 
University of Novi Sad, Faculty of Technical Sciences 
Novi Sad, Serbia 
e-mail: dragoman@uns.ac.rs, 
marko.knezevic@uns.ac.rs, 
milossimicsimo@gmail.com, ivan@uns.ac.rs 
Danica Mandić 
University of Novi Sad, Medical Faculty 
Novi Sad, Serbia 
e-mail: mandiceva88@yahoo.com
 
 
Abstract—We present Dr Warehouse, an extensible intelligent 
web-based system for epidemiological analyses. It features a 
data warehouse containing medical data about registered 
disease cases and relevant demographical data. There is also a 
segment of the system that is devoted to presentation and 
analysis of epidemiological data collected in the data 
warehouse. The main objectives that we set out for Dr 
Warehouse include intuitive visualization of epidemiological 
data, discovery of epidemiological information, and prediction 
of epidemic dynamics. In the context of epidemiological 
knowledge discovery, we present a rationale for developing 
such a system, system architecture of Dr Warehouse, its 
functionalities, short review of similar systems, and ideas for 
future development. Furthermore, we describe in more detail 
choices regarding data modelling, as well as some of the 
featured predictions and data mining based analyses. 
Keywords-data 
warehouse; 
data 
mining; 
business 
intelligence; epidemiological analysis; absenteeism; disease 
outbreak prediction. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Frequent epidemics and various diseases continue to 
persist in modern world despite great medical discoveries 
and numerous countermeasures. However, the increase of 
medical knowledge has helped in the improvement of the 
overall quality and length of human life. One of the methods 
for battling diseases includes collection of epidemiological 
knowledge and its use in the prevention of outbreaks. Our 
main goal is to contribute to public health by building a 
software system that could help in the prevention and control 
of epidemics. This would be possible through the application 
of results of data analyses featured in the system. Such 
analyses would be executed on disease case records gathered 
in the system from various sources. 
By following this idea and applying the latest 
advancements in information technology to epidemiological 
domain, we created Dr Warehouse – a closed source 
software system that supports storing of epidemiological data 
and offers descriptive, as well as predictive, analyses of 
disease outbreaks. All necessary data are stored in a specially 
designed data warehouse, while supported analyses include 
various data visualization techniques, statistical methods, 
data mining algorithms, and epidemic models. Results of the 
analyses may be accessed through a rich web client, which 
offers all of the analyses included in the system, or a mobile 
device client, which offers a subset of analyses that might be 
of interest to non-experts. Given the rapid rate of discovery 
of new analysis methods and epidemic models, we made the 
system extensible and ensured that new types of analyses 
may be easily added. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
looks into our motivation for building such a system. The 
overview of the system and its components is given in 
Section III. Some of the predictive analyses supported by the 
system are presented together with sample results in Section 
IV. Section V offers a review of similar software systems 
and their comparison to Dr Warehouse. Section VI includes 
concluding remarks and ideas for further research. 
II. 
MOTIVATION 
A system that could provide its users with a piece of 
information important in the prediction of epidemics or 
understanding of disease dynamics would offer many 
indirect benefits including saving of lives, reduction in 
treatment costs, and decrease of everyday stress. However, 
we are also motivated by two more specific reasons: 
modernization of the healthcare system in Serbia and impact 
of absenteeism on the economy.  
As outlined in the national development strategy [1], the 
Serbian healthcare system is undergoing a significant 
transformation. Many segments of that system are being 
modernized and redesigned to rely more on electronic 
records as opposed to traditional paper records. Moreover, 
the expected interconnection of healthcare centres would 
allow a better electronic access to medical data and 
consequently better conditions for data analyses, as in the 
case of the health information system (HIS) for the Serbian 
Ministry of Defence [2]. In such circumstances, Dr 
Warehouse could be integrated into the main healthcare 
system and used for epidemiological analyses. The main 
system would only be utilized as a data source in the 
204
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-247-9
DBKDA 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

extraction of necessary data, which, after several processing 
steps, would be stored in the data warehouse within the Dr 
Warehouse system. Dr Warehouse has been developed also 
as a potential pilot solution that should demonstrate 
advantages of using a business intelligence (BI) system in 
the healthcare domain. It is primarily applicable in activities 
of institutions that concern themselves with disease 
prevention in a population, such as institutes of public health.  
Besides the fluctuation of labour, absenteeism, which is 
defined as “failing to report for scheduled work” [3], is the 
most important parameter that should be monitored by 
human resources managers in order to increase production 
potential. This is the case because high absenteeism has 
negative impact not only on colleagues and superiors, who 
must cope with greater workloads, but on the profit of a 
company as well. According to the research from 2009 led 
by the Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development 
(CIPD) from Great Britain [4], the most important reasons 
for the short-term absence from work (4 weeks as maximum) 
are: colds, influenza, stomach problems, headaches, 
migraines, injuries of the muscular and skeletal system, as 
well as pain in the lower back part. Most of these conditions 
are preventable non-communicable diseases (NCDs) whose 
rate reduction includes scientifically based cost-effective 
measures. According to data from population surveys, NCDs 
are a major health problem in Serbia. Although they are to a 
great extent preventable, there is no adequate prevention and 
control of NCDs in Serbia [5, p. 41]. 
There are several groups of potential users who might 
benefit from the system that we describe in this paper. Users 
in 
healthcare 
institutions 
that 
are 
dealing 
with 
epidemiological data could utilize our software system, 
which is specially tailored to the epidemiological domain, 
instead of relying on solutions that are intended for generic 
statistical analyses. An expected advantage of having a 
domain-specific system would be an increase in user 
productivity. Large amounts of data that are typical of 
modern HISs may be well utilized owing to the well-tried 
approach incorporated into our system – a data warehouse 
for data storing and data mining for efficient analyses. In this 
manner, the main system load may be reduced by running 
analyses primarily on data stored in the Dr Warehouse 
system. The second group of users includes scientists whose 
research is related to epidemiology. By utilizing the Dr 
Warehouse system, they may create, test, and improve 
epidemic models through adding, running, and modifying 
new 
extensions. 
New 
visualization 
techniques 
for 
epidemiological data may be similarly employed and 
evaluated. Furthermore, the system may also target users 
who are not medical experts but are interested in latest 
disease trends, forecasts, or results of some specific analysis.  
Bearing in mind the facts concerning the adverse health 
of the population in Serbia and the “white space” in terms of 
medical services aimed at predicting occurrence of certain 
diseases, our decision to develop a system that would allow 
the use of BI technologies in such a context is both socially 
and economically justified. 
III. 
SYSTEM OVERVIEW 
In this section, we present the system and give an 
overview of its architecture and functionalities. The featured 
data warehouse, which represents a foundation for data 
analyses, is explained in more detail. We also elaborate on 
the built-in support for adding new functionalities. 
A. System Architecture 
There are four principal components in the system:  
(i) database server, which has a built-in support for 
extensibility 
and 
includes 
subcomponents: 
relational 
database management system, services for data mining and 
multidimensional analysis, and services for extracting, 
cleansing, transforming, and loading data from various 
sources; (ii) application server, which supports extensibility 
and acts as an intermediary between database server and 
clients; (iii) web client application, which supports 
extensibility and smart card reading; and (iv) mobile device 
client.  
The system may fit into existing HISs and provide 
various services to other similar solutions. This architecture 
allows the possibility of having the database server and 
application server reside at different physical locations. 
Furthermore, in order to increase the scalability and 
performance of the system, the data mining and analysis 
services (currently implemented using Microsoft SQL Server 
Analysis Services [6]) may be located separately from the 
database server. In future versions of the system, the 
architecture may be extended to include terminals that would 
be publicly available and offer a set of functionalities similar 
to those in the existing web client application (currently 
implemented in Microsoft Silverlight [7]). 
B. Data Warehouse 
The data warehouse is modelled using a star schema, 
which consists of eight dimensions, two of which are role-
playing dimensions, and one fact table (Fig. 1). The fact 
table keeps track of events which lead to absenteeism, 
disease occurrences and time measured in days that person 
spent away from duty or workplace. Each dimension 
represents the context of disease occurrence and absence. 
Therefore, we can observe these events in the context of time 
(when an event occurred or ended), gender of the person 
involved, place where it happened, person’s profession, data 
source, absence cause, person’s age, and diagnosis that was 
established. Dimensions concerning diagnosis, place, and 
time have several hierarchical levels modelled as a fully 
denormalized 
structure, 
which 
enables 
multi-level 
classification of factual data. In the time dimension, we have 
two hierarchies: one defined as calendar year, quarter, 
month, and day, and the other one as calendar year, week, 
and day. The diagnosis dimension has three levels of 
hierarchy for diagnosis, disease subcategory, and disease 
category, while community (place) dimension has four levels 
of hierarchy for community, state, region, and continent. 
Although the normalization of our schema would remove 
redundant data and hence become easier to maintain and 
change, our initial considerations of the schema type led us 
to choose the star schema. Denormalization, which is typical 
205
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-247-9
DBKDA 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

for the star schema, helped us to reduce the number of 
foreign keys and to reduce the query execution time. As the 
system was designed to be used by a wide variety of users, 
ease of use was one of our priorities. For end users, the star 
schema is more comprehensible than snowflake schema and 
less complex queries are needed to satisfy their information 
needs. Since this is a pilot project, advanced cost-benefit 
analysis of normalizing our star schema into the showflake 
schema is a matter of our future work. The unavailability of a 
larger and more complex absenteeism data set was a major 
reason for simplifying the initial schema design and focusing 
on the aforementioned fact and dimensions. 
The data warehouse was implemented using Microsoft 
SQL Server 2008 [8]. It includes the following dimensions: 
DimCause, DimDiagnosis, DimGender, DimProfession, 
DimCommunity, DimDataSource, DimTime, and DimAge. 
DiseasePresence is the only fact table in the system. Each of 
these tables contains a surrogate primary key which allows 
us to deal with changes in natural key in a more convenient 
way and track slowly changing dimensions.  
Taking into consideration that the data in the system are 
expected to reflect the actual state of the health of a 
population, it is necessary to support acquisition and 
integration of medical data from multiple sources. We 
developed a solution within Microsoft Integration Services 
[9], which allows us to extract, clean, transform, and load 
(ECTL) the necessary data. We perform incremental 
extraction, i.e., we consider only data that were added to the 
HIS of a public health institute after the previous extraction. 
Extracted data serve as an input for a series of 
transformations in which we detect and eliminate errors and 
inconsistencies: (i) different domains of semantically 
equivalent attributes (as in the case of the attribute 
GenderName); (ii) different encodings of textual data 
(ProfessionTitle); (iii) different granularity of semantically 
equivalent attributes (DiagnosisCode). Diagnosis codes that 
are used in the source HIS are shorter versions of the codes 
that are featured in the 10th revision of International 
Classification of Diseases (ICD 10) [10]. We created a 
transformation that relies on regular expressions to resolve 
this issue. In this manner, we extended disease information 
with the disease name, subcategory and category. At the 
moment, there is only support for data insertion. Since the 
data set in the current version of the system is only a sample 
taken from a HIS, we decided to keep all data in the data 
warehouse, while leaving the implementation of a deletion 
policy for obsolete data, data that have little or no impact on 
the system output, to be included in the future version.  
In order to meet the needs for efficient and flexible 
consumption of valuable information produced by the 
system, we developed an online analytical processing 
(OLAP) database, which contains rich metadata. The OLAP 
cube makes our data organized in a way that facilitates non-
predetermined queries for aggregated information. As we 
used Kimball Method [11] to implement the dimensional 
model in the relational database, the OLAP design step was a 
straightforward translation from the existing design. The 
relational database serves as the permanent storage of the 
cleaned and conformed data, and feeds data to the OLAP 
database. Data mining structures and models are stored in the 
third database, which, together with the OLAP database, 
resides at the Analysis Server – the primary query server. 
C. System Functionalities 
The communication between the application server and 
clients is done via web services. At present, the client 
applications possess functionalities concerning: access to 
medical records stored in the data warehouse; access to the 
data cube and use of some of the cube’s advanced analytical 
operations; execution of advanced analyses and forecasts, as 
well as result retrieval; services specially tailored for mobile 
device client; upload of extensions; and their invocation. 
The system, whose public resources are available at [12], 
may be accessed via a web application in which each page 
groups a number of similar functionalities. Within Home 
page, users may access information about the most common 
causes of absenteeism for the current month. Analysis page 
contains functionalities regarding the execution of advanced 
analysis and forecasts that identify the most probable 
diseases (or causes of work absence) and the most frequent  
 
 
Figure 1.  The star schema of the data warehouse.  
206
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-247-9
DBKDA 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

 
 
diagnosis mismatches. Through this page, a user is able to 
generate predictions concerning a selected subpopulation for 
a particular quarter of a year. The subpopulation may be 
specified by selecting an age group, gender, and municipality 
(Fig. 2). What about me? page is a location from which we 
may generate and retrieve results of the personalized 
predictions concerning the most probable diseases (or causes 
of work absence). In order to generate these predictions, all a 
user needs to do is insert his or her identity card (ID card) 
into the attached smart card reader and a report is 
automatically generated. Execution of analytical operations 
and access to historical data is provided within Health 
Reports page. Users may perform operations such as dice 
and slice in order to analytically process the available data. 
Upload page offers functionalities regarding uploading of 
server and client extensions. Within Extensions page users 
may activate and run uploaded extensions. 
Some of the aforementioned functionalities are also 
available via a mobile application for Microsoft Windows 
Phone [13]. These include disease predictions for a selected 
location (or the current location of a mobile device) and 
personalized predictions similar to those featured in What 
about me? page in the web client. 
D. Extensibility 
New functionalities may be added to the system in the 
form of extensions. The support for extensibility was 
implemented using Managed Extensibility Framework 
(MEF) [14]. A user may upload an extension, which then 
becomes immediately available for use without a need to 
restart the system. There are two types of extensions: (web) 
client extensions and (application) server extensions. Both 
may be uploaded to the application server through the web 
client. A web client extension is automatically downloaded 
from the application server to a web client machine, where it 
is then executed. This is done upon the first invocation of the 
extension at the client side. Such extension is actually a 
Silverlight web page that is generally expected to act as a 
user interface to the built-in or user-added (via server 
extensions) queries and analyses. On the other hand, server 
extensions reside on the application server, where they are 
also executed upon the invocation initiated at the client side. 
These extensions are functions generally responsible for data 
operations, analyses, and epidemic models. 
Figure 2.  Section from the Analysis page in the web client. 
 
IV. 
FEATURED EPIDEMIOLOGICAL FORECASTS 
In this section, we present two types of epidemiological 
forecasts that are available in Dr Warehouse: forecasts that 
rely on data mining and forecasts that rely on compartmental 
models. In addition to describing a data set that was used, we 
offer exemplary results of these forecasts. 
A. Data 
Data set used in the testing of the system during the 
development is acquired from the HIS of The Institute of 
Public Health of Vojvodina in Novi Sad, Serbia. The 
obtained sample (an excerpt is featured in Fig. 3) has 
approximately 8,500 records about workplace absences that 
ended in 2009. It contains depersonalized information 
including: gender (represented by the variable pol), age 
(starost), municipality code (opstina), absence cause (uzrok), 
start (prvidan) and end date (krajdan) of absence, disease 
codes for initial (pdijag) and final (zdijag) diagnosis, and 
business activity code (delatn) of a person involved.  
Gender is represented by numbers 1 and 2 referring to the 
male or female respectively. Business activity code is 
represented by a five-digit code indicating sector, division, 
branch and group of a business activity in accordance with 
the 
classification 
of 
activities 
as 
defined 
by 
the 
corresponding law of the Republic of Serbia. Municipality 
code is a unique identifier of the municipality in which an 
absence was recorded. The cause of the absence is denoted 
by numbers from 1 to 12 that respectively correspond to: 
disease, isolation, accompanying sick person, maintenance of 
pregnancy, tissue and organ donor, injury at workplace, 
injury outside of workplace, occupational disease, nursing a 
child under 3 years, nursing a child over 3 years, care of 
other sick person, and maternity leave. Initial and final 
diagnosis codes are obtained by reducing the appropriate 
diagnosis codes defined by the 10th revision of International 
Classification of Diseases (ICD 10) to four characters. 
Codebooks of diseases, business activities, causes and 
municipalities may be gathered from official Internet sites of 
organizations that are responsible for their maintenance and 
distribution. Credibility of the data depends largely on the 
credibility of data sources. Therefore, we rely on sources that 
can guarantee the integrity and validity of provided data. 
Figure 3.  Excerpt from a data set used in the generation of predictions. 
  
207
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-247-9
DBKDA 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

 
 
B. Forecasts based on Data Mining 
In Dr Warehouse, we utilize three classification 
algorithms that are supported by Microsoft SQL Server 2008 
R2 Analysis Services: decision trees, naive Bayes, and neural 
network classifier. These classifiers are trained to estimate 
the individual share of each disease in all work absences 
attributed to the 15 most common diseases, as determined by 
examining the available data set, for a selected year quarter 
and subpopulation, as defined by age group and gender, in a 
selected municipality. In this manner, we may form coarse 
predictions of the distribution of the most common diseases 
in a selected subpopulation. In Fig. 4, we give a set of 
predictions for male employees in the city of Novi Sad who 
are between 40 and 61 years old. This example demonstrates 
how a share of some common diseases in that subpopulation 
may change throughout a year. These estimates are generated 
using the naive Bayes classification algorithm for Novi Sad. 
Predicted shares indicate that essential hypertension, 
dorsalgia (thoracic region), and lumbago with sciatica may 
be causes of a larger percentage of absence in quarters 2 and 
3 (spring and summer), while their share substantially 
decreases during quarters 1 and 4 (winter and autumn). On 
the other hand, viral infection is most responsible for 
absences in quarter 4 (autumn). 
C. Forecasts based on Compartmental Models 
Compartmental models are a group of epidemic models 
that are used to predict dynamics of an epidemic by dividing 
an 
analysed 
population 
into 
several 
compartments 
(subpopulations) and calculating the changes in compartment 
sizes given some initial conditions [15-17]. These conditions 
include sizes of compartments (generally expressed as 
percentages of a whole population) at a single moment in 
time. Population compartments correspond to infected, 
recovered, or some other group of individuals in a 
population. Furthermore, there are disease-related parameters 
that are needed in the calculation of changes in 
compartments sizes: contact rate, recovery rate, death rate, 
etc. Different models from this family feature different 
compartments and may be used to obtain forecasts for 
 
Figure 4.  Example of percentage disease shares for male employees in 
Novi Sad aged between 40 and 61 years, as predicted using a naive Bayes 
classifier. 
different diseases. Actual spread of a disease (transition of 
individuals between different compartments) is modelled by 
a system of differential equations.  
As an example of how Dr Warehouse may support 
standard epidemic models, we implemented the SIR 
(Susceptible/Infected/Recovered) model as an extension pair 
consisting of: (i) a client extension, which is used to set 
parameters, invoke model execution, and present results; and 
(ii) a server extension, which is an invoked function that 
numerically solves the system of equations and prepares 
results for the client side. 
The implementation is an adaptation of the model version 
featured in [18]. The name of the model is derived from the 
three compartments that are used to model a population 
struck by a disease: susceptible (S), infected (I), and 
recovered (R). A susceptible individual from the S 
compartment may become infected through contact with an 
infected individual from the I compartment, while an 
infected individual may become a member of the R 
compartment after a recovery period. A rate at which a 
disease is transmitted from an infected to a susceptible 
individual is the contact rate β, while a rate at which an 
infected individual recovers is the recovery rate γ. Actual 
values for the rates β and γ depend on a disease that is being 
modelled. Three ordinary differential equations describe the 
dynamics: 

dSdt– I S


dIdtI S – γI


dRdt γI.

Our implementation approximates the solution of this system 
by using the 4th order Runge-Kutta method for solving a 
system of ordinary differential equations. In Fig. 5, we give 
an example of a prediction that was generated by a 
chronological simulation using our implementation of the 
SIR model. The presented chart demonstrates a typical 
situation when equilibrium in a population is gradually 
reached after a peak in the number of infected individuals. 
Other compartmental models may be implemented in a 
similar manner. The only differences would be changes in a 
set of differential equations that model a disease and addition 
of new parameters or compartments. By adding the support 
 
Figure 5.  Example of a disease forecast obtained using the SIR model. 
208
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-247-9
DBKDA 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

for the SIR model in the form of a pair of extensions, we 
have demonstrated that Dr Warehouse may be used to 
predict the rate of spread of any disease for which there is an 
adequate compartmental model.  
V. 
RELATED WORK 
There are many software systems for epidemiological 
analyses and monitoring. One group of such systems 
provides mostly statistical procedures that are often used in 
epidemiology. Open Source Epidemiologic Statistics for 
Public Health (OpenEpi) [19] is an example of a freely 
available system that may be run in a web browser [20] 
because it is implemented in HyperText Markup Language 
(HTML) and JavaScript. It focuses on statistical calculations: 
calculation of confidence interval and sample size, 
estimation of power for different types of studies, execution 
of various statistical tests, etc. Another free solution is 
WinPepi [21], which is a set of desktop applications that are 
similar to OpenEpi and offer many statistical procedures that 
are useful in epidemiology. When compared to Dr 
Warehouse, both OpenEpi and WinPepi are projects of a 
narrower scope because they ignore data storage and 
management. Furthermore, they put emphasis on statistics 
and a large number of calculation modules whose input is 
mostly a small set of summarized values. Unlike Dr 
Warehouse, they do not support data mining, visual 
representation of data, epidemiological maps, nor user 
extensions. However, the source code of OpenEpi may be 
directly modified to include new procedures. 
The second group of epidemiological systems includes 
data storing and manipulation capabilities in addition to 
analysis procedures. Epi Info [22] is one such example of a 
desktop software application with a wider range of 
functionalities than OpenEpi and WinPepi. What sets it apart 
from other software systems for epidemiology is the support 
for form creation. A user may design custom forms through 
an integrated editor and later use them for data entry. Besides 
basic and advanced statistical procedures, this system 
supports data import and export, as well as basic data 
selection and transformation. It has good data visualization 
capabilities and offers various types of charts, tables, and 
even map overlay. Its main strengths with respect to Dr 
Warehouse are support for form creation, direct data entry, 
data transformation and data import/export for various types 
of data sources. However, there is a conceptual difference 
between these two systems regarding data storage. Epi Info 
is a tool that may be used over any data (in the supported file 
or database format) and, therefore, provides transformation 
functions, which a user utilizes in order to prepare data for 
analyses. On the other hand, Dr Warehouse features a data 
warehouse with a fixed set of facts and dimensions, and a 
carefully designed ECTL process, which is automatically 
executed. Therefore, there is generally no need for manual 
data import and transformation because data preparation is 
done automatically. In other words, Dr Warehouse may be 
seen as a more specialized and more automated solution in 
which the data warehouse has a prominent role. Our system 
relies on a strong dependency between the data warehouse 
schema and analyses, which helps to simplify the analysing 
process. This, in turn, alleviates much of the burden 
concerning data preparation, which is usually the longest 
activity in analysis projects. Some of the main features of Dr 
Warehouse that Epi Info lacks are data mining procedures 
and the support for adding user extensions. We consider data 
mining to be an essential part of the system because, unlike 
most statistical procedures, it is well suited for analysing 
large quantities of data that are efficiently stored in a data 
warehouse. We may summarize this comparison by 
generally classifying Epi Info as a solution that offers a fixed 
set of analyses for any set of data attributes and Dr 
Warehouse as a solution that features a fixed set of data 
variables but an extensible set of techniques for data 
presentation and analysis. 
The third group consists of typically web-based systems 
that focus on epidemiological monitoring and publicly 
presenting latest disease outbreak data for different regions 
throughout the world. They primarily rely on data from 
numerous Internet-related sources, which may be informal or 
official. HealthMap [23] provides a world map with the latest 
information on outbreaks by automatically collecting and 
integrating data mostly from several online news sources and 
reports from eyewitnesses and officials. There is also a 
mobile version of the system with similar functionalities.  
Another web system with a support for mobile devices is 
Outbreak Watch [24]. It does real-time analyses of data in 
social networks by evaluating keywords that are considered 
to be indicators of outbreaks. In this manner, the system 
tracks changes in the number of reports concerning relevant 
diseases. Google Flu Trends [25] was created as an attempt 
to estimate actual flu activity in various countries by 
analysing aggregated Google search queries that are related 
to flu. Since there is a relationship between an actual number 
of flu cases and search queries about flu, as confirmed by the 
overall match between the official surveillance data and the 
calculated estimates, this service offers near real-time results, 
which may help in preparing a response to a flu outbreak. Dr 
Warehouse is similar to these systems, as it may offer latest 
epidemiological data and forecasts in the form of charts, 
tables, and maps. In addition to supporting web access, it 
also features a mobile version with a selected set of services. 
On the other hand, the principle difference lies in the 
selection of data sources. The three monitoring systems use 
data that are available on the Internet (HealthMap and 
Outbreak Watch) or from web search queries (Google Flu 
Trends), while Dr Warehouse displays only data present in 
the data warehouse, which was planned to include credible 
data collected in healthcare institutions. However, the ECTL 
process in Dr Warehouse may be extended in the future to 
include data from public web sources. 
When compared to the three aforementioned groups of 
epidemiological software, Dr Warehouse is a complex 
system that possesses traits typical of all three because: (i) it 
may offer any statistical procedure that has been added as an 
extension; (ii) data management is one of the key segments 
of the system; and (iii) collected data are constantly available 
to users via web and mobile client, which makes the system 
suitable for epidemiological monitoring. 
209
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-247-9
DBKDA 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we introduced a software system that may 
be used in epidemiology for data collection, data mining, 
analyses and research. We expect that this system may have 
an important role in the activities concerned with epidemic 
control and better understanding of temporal and spatial 
disease patterns. In addition to a general description of the 
system’s structure and components, a special attention was 
given to the implementation of its data warehouse and data 
analyses. The presented examples of analyses illustrate just 
some of the results that may be obtained through the current 
version of the system. In order to support application of the 
latest advances in epidemiology and evaluation of new 
epidemic models, we incorporated extensibility that allows 
addition of new functionalities to the system. 
There are numerous ideas for future work and research 
on the presented system. We may modify the existing 
analyses and make them more generic so that they could 
support a greater number of queries. The data warehouse 
schema may be altered and extended in order to support 
additional analyses. We may also enforce a strict security 
policy by introducing user roles and separating the set of 
functionalities into subsets better suited for various user 
categories. A new version of the system could be 
implemented using open (and free) technologies, which 
could lead to a creation of a completely open version of the 
system. Due to the prominence of spatio-temporal and 
epidemiological data in Dr Warehouse, best practices from 
geographic information systems and constraint databases are 
topics also worth exploring in the future. Furthermore, 
significant additions to the system would be construction of 
an epidemiological knowledge base, which could be 
regularly updated or consulted during data analyses, and 
creation (or selection) of a convenient ontology. In this 
manner, the semantics may be expressed and the new version 
of the system could communicate with other systems that 
follow the idea of the Semantic Web. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The research was supported by Ministry of Education 
and Science of Republic of Serbia, Grant III-44010. The 
authors are most grateful to The Institute of Public Health of 
Vojvodina in Novi Sad for the provided absenteeism data 
sample and valuable comments.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Strategija razvoja informacionog društva u Republici Srbiji 
do 2020. godine [The Strategy for the Development of 
Information Society in the Republic of Serbia until the Year 
2020], (in Serbian), Službeni glasnik Republike Srbije, vol. 
51, 2010. 
[2] M. Fimić, M. Radulović, I. Vulić, and S. Atanasijević, 
“Zdravstveni informacioni sistem Ministarstva odbrane 
Republike Srbije – generičko rešenje za integraciju 
institucija” [The Health Information System of the Ministry of 
Defense of the Republic of Serbia – A Generic Solution for 
Institution Integration], (in Serbian), in Proceedings of YU 
INFO 2012, pp. 511-516. 
[3] G. Johns, “absenteeism,” in The Blackwell Encyclopedia of 
Sociology, G. Ritzer, Ed. Oxford, UK: Blackwell Publishing, 
2007, pp. 4-7.  
[4] “Absence management 2009 – Survey Reports - CIPD,” 
http://www.cipd.co.uk/hr-resources/survey-reports/absence- 
management-2009.aspx [Dec. 7, 2012]. 
[5] Đ. Jakovljević and P. Mićović, Zdravstveno stanje i 
zdravstvene potrebe stanovništva Srbije [Health Status and 
Health Needs of the Population of Serbia], (in Serbian), 
http://www.palgo.org/files/leaflet/brosura_zdravstvo.pdf 
[Dec. 7, 2012]. 
[6] “SQL Server Analysis Services,” http://technet.microsoft. 
com/en-us/sqlserver/cc510300.aspx [Dec. 7, 2012]. 
[7]  “Microsoft 
Silverlight,” 
http://www.microsoft.com/ 
silverlight/ [Dec. 7, 2012]. 
[8] “Microsoft 
SQL 
Server,” 
http://www.microsoft.com/ 
sqlserver/ [Dec. 7, 2012]. 
[9] “Microsoft Integration Services,” http://msdn.microsoft.com/ 
en-us/library/ms141026%28v=sql.105%29.aspx 
[Dec. 
7, 
2012]. 
[10] “International Classification of Diseases,” http://www.cdc. 
gov/nchs/icd/icd10cm.htm [Dec. 7, 2012]. 
[11] J. Mundy, W. Thornthwaite, and R. Kimball, The Microsoft 
Data Warehouse Toolkit: With SQL Server 2008 R2 and the 
Microsoft Business Intelligence Toolset, 2nd ed., Indianapolis, 
IN: Wiley Publishing, Inc., 2011. 
[12] “Dr Warehouse,” http://www.acs.uns.ac.rs/sr/node/237/1140/ 
[Dec. 7, 2012]. 
[13] “Microsoft Windows Phone,” http://www.microsoft.com/ 
windowsphone/ [Dec. 7, 2012]. 
[14] “Managed Extensibility Framework,” http://msdn.microsoft. 
com/en-us/library/dd460648.aspx [Dec. 7, 2012]. 
[15] W.O. Kermack and A. G. McKendrick, “A contribution to the 
mathematical theory of epidemics,” Proceedings of the Royal 
Society of London, vol. 115, no. 772, pp. 700-721, August 
1927. 
[16] R.M. Anderson and R.M. May, “Population biology of 
infectious diseases: Part I,” Nature, vol. 280, no. 5721, pp. 
361–367, August 1979. 
[17] R.M. May and R.M. Anderson, “Population biology of 
infectious diseases: Part II,” Nature, vol. 280, no. 5722, pp. 
455–461, August 1979. 
[18] M.J. Keeling and P. Rohani, Modeling Infectious Diseases in 
Humans and Animals. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press, 2007. 
[19] K.M. Sullivan, A. Dean, and M.M. Soe, “OpenEpi - a web-
based epidemiologic and statistical calculator for public 
health,” Public Health Reports, vol. 124, no. 3, pp. 471-474, 
May-June 2009. 
[20] “Open Source Epidemiologic Statistics for Public Health,” 
http://www.openepi.com/ [Dec. 7, 2012]. 
[21] J.H. Abramson, “WINPEPI updated: computer programs for 
epidemiologists, and their teaching potential,” Epidemiologic 
Perspectives & Innovations, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 1-9, February 
2011. 
[22] “Epi Info™ - Community Edition,” http://epiinfo.codeplex. 
com/ [Dec. 7, 2012]. 
[23] “HealthMap,” http://www.healthmap.org/ [Dec. 7, 2012]. 
[24] “Outbreak 
Watch 
Social 
Biosurveillance 
Network,” 
http://www.outbreakwatch.com/ [Dec. 7, 2012]. 
[25] “Google Flu Trends,” http://www.google.org/flutrends/ [Dec. 
7, 2012]. 
 
210
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-247-9
DBKDA 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

