Societal View on Knowledge Representation and Management: A Case Study of an 
ICT Consulting Company 
 
Cheng Chieh Huang 
Dept. of Information Management  
National Taiwan University,  
Taipei, Taiwan 
d94725007@ntu.edu.tw 
 
Ching Cha Hsieh 
Dept. of Information Management 
National Taiwan University, 
Taipei, Taiwan 
cchsieh@im.ntu.edu.tw 
 
 
 
Abstract—This 
article 
tries 
to 
understand 
knowledge 
management issues in markets instead of within organizations 
past literature focuses. It examines different knowledge 
integration and representation issues while facing different 
communities 
of 
practice 
in 
knowledge 
markets. 
In 
institutionalized markets, the knowledge commodity will tend 
to 
represent 
and 
integrate 
knowledge 
for 
dominant 
communities of practice in the regions or country. The 
practical 
issues, 
such 
as 
legitimacy 
of 
knowledge 
representation, complexity and dependences of knowledge 
boundaries, conflicts of social identities, bias of government 
technology policy are addressed. This paper contributes 
towards more societal views to understand knowledge 
exchange, representation value generation issues in knowledge 
markets. 
Keywords-Knowledge Respresnentation; Knowledge Market; 
Comunities of Practices 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
“Discussing logics for pushing ICT industry, and 
presenting to government project committee”, “Surveying 
the CIO‟s IT spending practices and providing to the 
software and service vendors”,  “Facing the media and 
various kinds of industries, speaking the ICT trends and 
visions” [11]. 
This is the work of a knowledge-intensive company 
which resides in the interfaces between organizations and 
social communities, bridges perceptual and practical 
differences among diverse communities in order to integrate 
and represent distributed knowledge. It produces and sells 
their knowledge in knowledge markets. 
Most literature on knowledge management focuses on 
knowledge 
transfer, 
create, 
innovate 
issues 
within 
organizations, but neglect knowledge management issues in 
markets [1]. In fact, organizations absorb a lot of knowledge 
from markets, such as market reports, industrial news or 
consulting company advisors or other organizations. These 
knowledge sources, such as consulting company, how they 
collect and manage knowledge? How they represent 
knowledge? How they package their knowledge as 
commodity?  
In this article, we discuss how the knowledge as 
commodity and mediate various communities in knowledge 
markets. Using community of practice concepts, we illustrate 
knowledge integration and knowledge representation issues 
while facing multiple communities of practice in an ICT 
consulting firm. This paper seeks to contribute towards more 
societal views to understand knowledge exchange, value 
generation and management in knowledge markets.  
In the following section, we first review literature of 
knowledge management and community of practice, and 
then propose an analysis framework. Second, we describe 
our methodology and contexts in our case. Third, the case 
story was illustrated using our research framework. Fourth, 
we present a discussion and fifth, we identify contributions, 
limitations and suggestions for future research. 
 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
The „community of practice‟ has achieved prominence in 
the context of wider debates on knowledge, learning and 
innovation in organizations. Lave and Wenger [2] define the 
„community of practice‟ as following: 
 
An activity system about which participants share 
understandings concerning what they are doing and what 
means in their lives and for their community. Thus, they are 
united in both action and in the meaning that action has, 
both for themselves, and for the larger collective. 
 
Brown and Duguid [3] also claims the knowledge shared 
and produced through the prism of practice, the way which 
work gets done. That knowledge is emergent and arise after 
the individuals begin to engage in collective practices. It 
focuses on practices, people rather than systems, technology 
that traditional knowledge management consideration.   
Collective knowledge is not only embedded in 
communities of practice within organizations but also 
between organizations [3][4]. The members of communities 
of practice did not work side-by-side or meet face-to-face in 
everyday practices but create and share the professional 
knowledge through conferences, workshops, newsletter, web 
pages and the like. This is a kind of disciplinary, 
occupational or professional communities of practice; the 
knowledge is embedded in the networks, the broader 
structures [3][5]. 
102
DBKDA 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-115-1

III. 
RESEARCH FRAMEWORK 
Based on the community of practice literature, we build 
up our framework (see Figure 1). Using this framework, we 
can examine knowledge representation and knowledge 
integration issues while facing multiple communities of 
practice in their different knowledge markets. 
 
Communities
of  Practice A
Social Contexts
• Practices
• Cognition
• Culture
• …
Communities
of  Practice B
Social Contexts
• Practices
• Cognition
• Culture
•…
Knowledge representation
Knowledge integration 
Consulting
Company
Perspective Making
Perspective Taking
Perspective Making
Perspective Taking
 
Figure 1.  Research Framework 
 
IV. 
METHODOLOGY 
This researcher‟s fieldwork in the ITR institution 
comprised observing different members each day and 
working alongside many of them, interviewing the industry 
vendors, discussing the interview results, reviewing the 
survey results or presentation files, publishing reports, 
presenting in the seminars, responding to the customers, 
prospects or medias. In addition to the spontaneous, informal 
interviews that regularly occurred while the field researcher 
was observing the work. The interactions and dialogues 
among the participants were recorded in field notes, and the 
reflections of the practices also included [10]. 
After half-year observation, the researchers find interest 
topic about why the consultants of different practice teams 
generate knowledge differently. Semi-structured questions of 
formal interviews were addressed the consultants to ask the 
questions that allowed they provided their practices in 
acquiring, transferring, and generating knowledge. These 
questions include: How they interact with different 
communities of practice? How they generate new ideas or 
knowledge? How they inscribed the knowledge into their 
publications? All the interviews were tape recorded and 
translated to transcripts. 
 
V. 
CASE STUDY 
A. Case Contexts 
The case company in this study is a well-known industry 
research and consulting firm, ITR institution. ITR is 
belonged to a legal body of financial group, which was 
established by Taiwan government more than 20 years ago, 
as a push for Taiwan ICT industry as well as an important 
think tank. Just because of the neutral role of the institution, 
and the importance of the Taiwan ICT industry in the global 
ICT supply chain, ITR gets an irreplaceable status in Taiwan, 
and even all over the world. [6] 
The institution divides the practice teams based on the 
product types, including such teams as PC, consumer 
electronic, 
network 
and 
communication, 
mobile 
communication, software and application, etc. 
There are two kinds of main practices of ITR institution. 
One is the research reports they publish to their subscriber, 
called „Product Practices‟. Second are the consulting projects 
to customers, called „Project Practices‟.  
No matter what kinds of work, the consultants collected 
data from specific industry, market data or other kinds of 
knowledge through face-to-face interviews, questionnaires or 
focus group methods. Then, they represent the knowledge, 
such as industry situations, market opportunities, trends, 
through market surveys or industry reports.  
Their subscribers, customers or media read their 
publication and understand current and future market 
intelligences. The ITR institution or their consultants also try 
to enrich their influences in different communities of practice 
through their knowledge and publications. 
 
B. Product Practices 
Producing reports about the ICT trends and applications 
is main practices of ITR institution. Through understanding 
current situations of ICT industries, consumers or 
enterprises‟ intention to invest ICT, ITR consultants analyze 
the current situations and predict the future for customers in 
vary communities of practice. 
Basically, ITR faces two industry communities: One is 
the well-known information and communication technology 
OEM (Original Equipment Manufacturing) industry. These 
vendors manufacture products for brand companies, such as 
HP, Dell and earn profits from their low manufacture costs 
(called „OEM‟ community for short). 
The other is information application and software 
industry (called „Application‟ community for short) in 
Taiwan market. These companies sell their IT services or 
software products to enterprises in Taiwan. 
While facing different communities, ITR practice teams 
(called „OEM‟ practice team, „Application‟ practice team) 
produce different reports, and encounter different knowledge 
management and representation issues.  
 
1) „OEM‟ Practice Team 
„OEM‟ practice team faces major global information and 
communication technology OEM manufactures in the world. 
These manufactures produce products for global brand 
enterprises, such as HP, Dell and SONY. Most of these 
OEMs headquarters locate in Taiwan and compete orders 
from global brands. „OEM‟ practice team‟s consultants 
analyze the shipment values and average selling prices by 
quarterly, and regularly provide reports to ITR institution‟s 
customers.  
Noticeably, 
these 
companies 
manufacture 
major 
information and communication technology products in the 
world, such as NB, PC (i.e. 90% quantities produced by 
these companies). Global or domestic securities firms and 
103
DBKDA 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-115-1

investment institutions are interested in purchasing these 
reports. Thus, the profit of „OEM‟ practice team is stable. 
However, the institution also encounters intense competition 
from other consulting companies.  
For „OEM‟ industry community, ITR institution‟s 
position is neutral, and it provides reliable statements for 
securities, investors or media. But, the shipment values, 
quantity or average selling prices in reports are not as 
important reference sources for „OEM‟ community itself. A 
senior consultant who left ITR institution and worked for an 
OEM manufacturer said:   
 
 “For us, shipment quantities in reports are not 
important! We are more interested in understanding the 
movements of other manufacturers!” 
 
However, since „OEM‟ practice team‟s quarterly reports 
on shipment values, shipment quantities of the manufacturers 
will influence stock market and economic in Taiwan and 
even represent global ICT boom. Also, it faces challenges 
from other competitors. Thus, consultants should be cautious 
about the numbers and trends they write in reports. In 
researcher‟s participant observation, consulting managers of 
the practice team seriously examine the sources of each 
consultant‟s numbers, trends and their reasons to shipment 
forecast. These reports should clearly define the logic of 
shipment forecast or trends. A consultant describes their 
logic of forecast:  
 
 “The logic of forecast is based on global market, 
product trends and movements of major global brand 
companies to analyze impacts on shipment quantity and 
average selling prices of OEM products.”  
 
2) „Application‟ Practice Team 
 „Application‟ practice team faces local software and IT 
services companies in Taiwan. These companies are not 
valued by shipment quantity like „OEM‟ industry community, 
and they cannot compete in global market. Competition 
information in the community is not so important. For them, 
it is critical to understand their clients‟ intention to buy their 
products or services. Consultants of practice team analyze 
market situations through market surveys or focus group 
methodology.  
Since „Application‟ community refers to small and 
medium firms, in comparison to manufactures in „OEM‟ 
industry community, most of the firms in „Application‟ 
industry community cannot afford to purchase these reports. 
Therefore, „Application‟ practice team consultants tend to 
engage more government projects to earn more profits. Due 
to less time in product practice, consultants usually exploit 
reports from engaging in government projects. Thus, ITA‟s 
clients usually complain reports do not meet their 
requirements. A business representative of ITR institution 
suggests that, 
 
“We have been complaining about it. We expect the 
consultants to write more reports fulfill the clients‟ 
requirement instead of exploiting reports from government 
projects engagement.” 
 
However, for „Application‟ practice teams‟ consultants; it 
is also not easy to integrate knowledge related to various 
consumers or enterprises‟ intention in different industries. 
Thus, the profits of these reports are low and also 
competitors are few.  
ITR institution is neutral identity for „OEM‟ industry 
community; however, it plays semi-official role for the firms 
in software and application community; the local small 
software and IT services firms expect to strive for some 
funds or influence government technology policy from ITR 
institution. A „Application‟ practice teams‟ consultants 
indicates,   
 
“Most of our interviewee s are the senior managers, such 
as general managers or CEOs. They are more familiar with 
their own industry than we young people! They are willing to 
spend time in talking to us since we represent the 
government. They would like to provide the suggestions of 
policy to government or understand funds opportunities from 
government through us! “  
 
A CEO of a firm in software and application industry 
community suggests,   
 
 “I know that you are not the major decision makers 
(government policy), but I believe that I can try to convince 
each person in order to enhance the possibility to change 
government policy! “  
 
Based on the above, the knowledge representation and 
knowledge integration issues are different when dealing with 
different communities in varies social environments. 
 
C. Project Practice 
Another practice of ITR institution is government 
projects engagement. ITR helps to understand the industry 
and market situations in order to propose effective projects to 
solve industrial issues and problems. Regarding the role of 
ITR institution in the government projects, the output reports 
allow government policy makers to understand industrial 
problems and also convince the reviewers (neutral scholars 
and experts) to agree the projects‟ directions. 
Since 
ITR 
institution is 
familiar 
with 
industry 
communities and knows how to represent the trends and gaps 
of industry, government policy makers or company want to 
get the government projects will very like to invite ITR 
institution in order to convince the reviewers to get projects. 
In the proposals, various companies which want to get the 
government projects must incorporate their original positions 
and demonstrate their logic of proposal to meet the industrial 
demand in order to persuade policy makers and reviewers. 
Thus, ITR institution tends to play the role as the main 
participant in knowledge integration and knowledge 
representation in the proposal.  
104
DBKDA 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-115-1

However, there will be the logical conflicts in knowledge 
integration and knowledge representation. Should ITR 
institution integrate or represent the project partners‟ logic? 
Or ITR integrate and represent real ICT knowledge and 
represent the real industrial logics?  
Noticeably, when industry trend is negative, government 
projects for pushing this industry will be meaningless. Once, 
a junior consultant published a report that indicated a product 
would not be future trend. The statement was widely used by 
the press. The consultant also involves in a project to 
promote the product, and partners of the government project 
called to complain about his opinions. A senior consultant 
advised the junior consultant:  
 
 “The contents of report should be presented tactfully 
and we should be more careful about the products we are 
involving in promoting!”  
 
Besides partners, the thoughts of different government 
departments 
will 
influence 
ITR‟s 
representation 
of 
government project reports. Some governmental departments 
intend to promote information communication technology 
hardware manufacturer industry in Taiwan, some expect to 
enhance the industries with inferior global competitiveness, 
and 
some 
suggest enhancing 
information 
technique 
application in different industries. The most significant 
ability of ITR institution is to integrate various kinds of 
knowledge and represent the different logics or reasoning to 
reviewers or decision makers in the projects.  
ICT trends in reports must fulfill interests of project 
members, but not always the real industry trends or 
companies‟ needs. 
 
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
A. Dependent Relationships and Knowledg Integration 
In this study, the ITR consultants face different demands 
from different communities of practice and encounter 
different 
knowledge 
management 
and 
knowledge 
representation issues (see Figure 2 and Table 1). 
For instance, „OEM‟ practice team‟s consultants provide 
international and local media and investment institutions to 
understand current situations of the major global ICT OEMs. 
Demand of international, local media and investment 
institutions for knowledge is upon shipment quantities, 
shipment values or average selling prices from „OEM‟ 
manufactures. For consultants, being trust in „OEM‟ industry 
community in order to obtain the related information will 
rely on their experience and relationship maintained with 
their informants. We call the knowledge dependent 
relationship is „partnership dependences‟. 
With costs consideration, „OEM‟ practice team‟s 
consultants usually collect competition information from less 
than ten major „OEM‟ firms and integrate their perspectives 
on industry trends. Reports from „OEM‟ practice team 
always take angle from big vendor‟s perspective that 
becomes constraint devices [7] represent the perspective of 
large OEM firms and screen small firms‟ opinions. 
In comparison to „OEM‟ practice team, „Application‟ 
teams‟ reports are integrated knowledge related to ICT 
spending intentions and applications of thousands of small 
and medium enterprises. ITR consultants acquire information 
by significant questionnaire surveys from enterprises‟ ICT 
spending intentions and sell to software and application 
vendors, we call the relationship is transactional dependences 
(see Figure 2).  
ITR‟s reports for software and application community 
will not be constraint devices representing large-scale 
enterprises. However, without sufficient resources to acquire 
perspectives from thousands of companies, consultants 
cannot produce reports with specific industrial perspectives. 
Thus, software and application teams‟ reports are not valued 
by software and application community which tends to have 
many complaints that not in depth analysis for software and 
applications community demands.  
 
„O‟
Global OEM
Manufactures
International/Local
Media
Investment/Analyst
Institutions
„A‟
Global/Local
Software and 
Applications Vendors
Local
Media
Local
Software and 
Applications Vendors
Local
different industry
enterprise s‟ ICT 
spending intentions
„P‟
Global OEM
Manufactures
Policy 
Makers
Local Software and 
Applications Vendors
Project
Partners
: Knowledge Integration
: Knowledge Representation
„O‟: „OEM‟ practice
„A‟：‟Application‟ practice
„P‟：‟Project‟ practice
Partnership Dependences
Transactional Dependences
Representation Dependences
 
Figure 2.  Three Different Dependent Relationships in ITR 
 The relationships between ITA consultants and industry 
community are representation dependences (see Figure2). 
The ITA consultants represent industry community‟ issues to 
policy makers. The project practice encounter issues that to 
represent 
project 
partners‟ 
interests 
not 
industry 
community‟s.  
Therefore, complexity and relationship dependences of 
communities will result in different problems of knowledge 
integration and representation (see Table 1). 
 
 
105
DBKDA 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-115-1

TABLE I.  
ISSUES OF KNOWLEDGE INTEGRATION AND 
REPRESENTATION IN DIFFERENT PRACTICES 
Practices 
Knowledge Integration and Representation 
Issues 
Demand 
Integration 
Issues 
Representation 
Issues 
„OEM‟ practice 
team 
shipment 
values or 
average 
selling prices 
trust 
only represent 
OEM logics 
„Application‟ 
practice team 
enteprise‟ 
ICT spending 
intents in 
various 
industries 
integrate 
various 
knowledge 
according to 
various 
industries 
various 
reasoning and 
logics 
„Project‟ practice 
project 
partners‟ 
objectivies 
integrate 
different 
knowledge to 
fulfill 
partners‟ 
reasoning 
logics for 
partners‟ 
reasoning,not 
the industry 
logics  
 
B. Power and Knowledge Representation 
This 
study 
also 
demonstrates 
that 
knowledge 
representations could become the resource of power.  
Regarding ITR institution‟ creation of report in project 
practice in this study, ITR institution consultants integrate 
various kinds of knowledge and represent the logic that 
fulfill the partners‟ interests. For example, represent the logic 
that 
promotes 
some 
kind 
of 
partners‟ 
technology 
development benefit to industry, but in fact, industry has 
developed similar technology.  
Knowledge representation becomes the resource to gain 
projects. The knowledge representations are not reflection of 
practical knowledge, but creation of „reality‟ [9]. Thus, 
resources and funds of government subsidized to project 
partners, and they might not the real practical demands for 
industry. Reports produced by project practice are no longer 
to communicate between policy makers and industry 
communities.  
Likewise, „OEM‟ practice, demand from media and 
analytical institutions for shipment numbers leads to 
knowledge representations of large ICT hardware OEMs. 
With long-term concern, knowledge representations become 
the habitual way to represent. An „Application‟ practice 
team„s consultant criticized one report from „OEM‟ practice 
team, “It is totally from the perspective of OEMs, and cannot 
probe into real industrial problems”. It is the obstacle for 
„OEM‟ practice team to create knowledge with new 
perspectives.   
However, intentions and perspectives from different 
industry enterprises‟ ICT spending are various, and thus, 
knowledge representations are inconsistent. It is not easy for 
ITR consultants to represent specific industry logic and get 
their legitimacy in software and application industry 
community. 
Thus, knowledge representations are influenced by power 
of communities, consistency of knowledge representations 
and institutionalization of long-term relationship. Knowledge 
representation is not only a selection but also a deflection 
impact by social contexts. 
 
C. Knowledge Management Implications  
 
TABLE II.  
KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT IMMPLICATIONS 
Knowledge Management Implications 
Consulting Company 
(knowledge supplier) 
Enterprise 
(knowledge consumer) 
1. design practice teams 
carefully on dependence and 
perspectives issues 
2. join and get perspectives 
from different communities 
of practice  
3. balance innovation and 
legitimacy perspective  
4. watch social identity issues 
5. employ different 
background employees 
1. understand consulting 
company or other knowledge 
sources logics and their 
perspectives 
2. balance absorbing 
knowledge from different 
knowledge sources and 
markets 
3. collect more opinions and 
perspectives from other 
markets before important 
R&D or marketing decisions 
4. employ different background 
employees 
 
In this study, the reports represent the large OEM 
perspectives and powerful groups‟ interests that influence the 
government‟s technology policy. The way of knowledge 
representation 
and 
integration 
are 
impacted 
the 
institutionalized knowledge markets. Thus, knowledge 
suppliers and consumers should consider the issues and take 
strategies to solve problems (see Table 2). 
For example, in consulting companies or knowledge 
suppliers, their managers should consider complexity, 
relationships, 
dependence 
of 
knowledge 
boundaries 
connected with practices while designing and creating 
reports.  
The firms should also consider balance of innovative or 
legitimacy perspectives under market mechanism in social 
contexts. The publications or knowledge spanning different 
communities of practice in knowledge markets also emerge 
conflicts issues of social identities. The firms should deal 
with the social identities issues carefully.  
The enterprise or knowledge consumers should examine 
logics of knowledge representation and other perspectives 
precisely to prevent losing other possible ICT applications or 
development opportunities. 
 
VII. CONCLUSION 
This study illustrates how knowledge as commodity 
selling in the market using communities of practice 
perspective. This study elaborates on why and how 
organizations produce knowledge commodity upon the 
influence of market mechanism and social contexts. Further, 
emerging issues such as knowledge integration and 
dependent relationships, knowledge representation and 
power in knowledge markets are worthy to address and 
further  
106
DBKDA 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-115-1

This study is limited to the comparison between practices 
and teams in one organization. Because of studying one 
organization, which experienced a particular history and 
regional location, we are unable to provide a wider 
understanding of the contexts under which changes of 
boundary objects might occur.  
However, our findings are potentially generalized to 
other knowledge markets in which knowledge goods creation, 
exchanged and institutionalized. Future research can conduct 
inter-organization study or comparisons, and probe into the 
roles, 
social 
identities, 
meaning, 
and 
knowledge 
representations, competing mechanisms of knowledge goods 
in various social contexts and knowledge markets. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] A. Lam, “Tacit Knowledge, Organztaion Learning and Soietal 
Institutions: An Intergated Framework,” Organziation Studies, 2000, 
pp. 487-513. 
[2] J. Lave and E. Wenger, Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral 
Participation, New York: Cambridge University Press, 1991. 
[3] J. S. Brown and P. Duguid, “Knowledge and Organization: A Social-
Practice Perspective,” Organization Science, 2001, pp. 198-213. 
[4] M. R. Tagliaventi and E. Mattarelli, “The Role of Networks of 
Practice, Value Sharing, and Operational Proximity in Knowledge 
Flows between Professional Groups,” Human Relations, 2006, pp. 
291-319. 
[5] J. Swam, H. Scarbrough, and M. Robertson, “The Construction of 
„Communities of Practice‟ in the Management of Innovation,” 
Management Learning, 2002, pp. 477-496. 
[6] E. Einhorn, “Why Taiwan Matters?” Busiess Week, May, 2005. 
[7] H. Karsten, K. Lyytinen, M. Hurskainen, and T. Koskelainen, 
“Crossing Boundaries and Conscription Participation: Representing 
and Integrating Knowledge in a Paper Machinery Project”, European 
Journal of Information Systems, 2001, pp. 89-98. 
[8] P. R. Carlile and E. S. Rebentisch, “Into the Black Box: The 
Knowledge Transformation Cycle”, Management Science, 2003, pp. 
1180-1195. 
[9] B. P. Bloomfield and T. Vurdubakis, “Re-presenting Technology: IT 
Consultancy Reports as Textual Reality Constructions”, Sociology, 
1994, pp. 455-477. 
[10] A. Strauss and J. Corbin, Basics of Qualitative Research: Grounded 
Theory Procedures and Techniques, Sage Newbury Park, CA, 1990. 
[11] P. Franson, “The Market Research Shell Game,”Upside, 1997, pp. 
78-116. 
. 
 
107
DBKDA 2011 : The Third International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011              ISBN:978-1-61208-115-1

