A Network-based Approach to Evolution of MEDLINE
Andrej Kastrin∗, Thomas C. Rindﬂesch† and Dimitar Hristovski‡
∗Institute of Biostatistics and Medical Informatics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Slovenia
Email: andrej.kastrin@mf.uni-lj.si
†Lister Hill National Center for Biomedical Communications, National Library of Medicine, Bethesda, USA
Email: trindflesch@mail.nih.gov
‡Institute of Biostatistics and Medical Informatics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Slovenia
Email: dimitar.hristovski@mf.uni-lj.si
Abstract—MEDLINE bibliographic database can be represented
as a network of nodes and edges, where the former represent
biomedical concepts and the latter represent relationships among
them. Nodes and edges are not uniformly distributed but rather
appear in locally dense communities. We investigate the dynamics
and evolution of MEDLINE using network analysis based on
community modeling. This study identiﬁes the major research
focuses and the current status and trends in the life sciences. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst analysis conducted on
such a large portion of the MEDLINE database.
Keywords–Complex networks; Network analysis; Network evo-
lution; MEDLINE.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The growth of science is increasingly dynamic and inter-
disciplinary. Barriers (silos), both physical and conceptual, that
once effectively isolated researchers are breaking down. One
consequence of this is that the biomedical literature is large
and complex, and the number of published papers is growing
at a considerable rate. It is therefore becoming ever more
important to identify and describe developing research trends
and to follow their evolution over time.
The premier repository of research in the life sciences is the
MEDLINE bibliographic database. It contains over 24 million
citations, with around 4000 citations added daily. MEDLINE
can be represented as a network of nodes and edges, where the
former represent biomedical concepts and the latter represent
relationships among them, as we have shown in previous
research [1]. Such a network can represent the structure and
dynamics of a complex system; topological properties of the
network can both elucidate static patterns and predict the future
by computing changes over time. Co-occurrence in the network
between concepts such as genes, diseases, biological processes,
or chemical compounds represents biomedical knowledge.
When a network represents the real world, its nodes
and edges are not uniformly distributed but rather appear
in locally dense clusters, or communities, embedded within
the larger structure [2]. Community structures are often of
particular interest as forming the basis of network analysis
aimed at elucidating knowledge represented by the network.
A community is deﬁned as a subset of nodes sharing similar
properties and recognizable as being distinct from the larger
network. A complex network representing the real world (such
as that representing MEDLINE) is an evolving structure that
change over time either by adding new nodes or by forming
new relations between existing nodes [3]. This expansion can
proceed over time with considerable speed in terms of size and
space over time.
Science as a complex system has been studied from the
point of view of network analysis, for example through co-
authorship network analysis [4] or single-word analysis [5].
In a related approach, network analysis of the development
of scientiﬁc knowledge may be valuable in building theoret-
ical models of the collective dynamics of science. Here, we
investigate the dynamics and evolution of MEDLINE using
network analysis based on topic modeling. Our hypothesis is
that the history of the biomedical domain can be summarized
in a series of co-occurrences of keywords (i.e., Medical Subject
Headings (MeSH) terms) that are associated with each MED-
LINE citation and that identify its important topics. MeSH
is a controlled vocabulary made up of biomedical terms at
several levels of speciﬁcity. We model scientiﬁc topics as
evolving communities of MeSH terms over time and explore
how the temporal characteristics of the MeSH network can
be used to provide insight into the historical evolution of
scientiﬁc thought in biomedicine. As a proof of concept, we
implemented a computational experiment based on over 20
million documents in MEDLINE, from 1966 through the end
of 2014. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst analysis
conducted on such a large portion of the MEDLINE database.
In particular, this analysis is of special interest to researchers
who seek to acquaint themselves about scientiﬁc topics, trends,
and collaboration opportunities.
The abstract is structured as follows. Section II describes
methodology of this study and Section III provides some
empirical evidence. Conclusions and the scope for future
research are presented in Section IV.
II.
METHODS
We processed MEDLINE from 1966 up to the end of 2014,
only including citations tagged with major MeSH descriptors.
In the constructed network, nodes represent major MeSH
descriptors, and edges between two descriptors represent co-
occurrence of those descriptors in the same MEDLINE cita-
tion. Recognizing the critical events that describe changes in
network structure over time constitutes one way of tracking
the development of communities. To capture critical events,
we converted the entire network into static subnetworks at
yearly snapshots, from 1966 through 2014. These subnet-
works embed the communities (groups of nodes) of MeSH
terms through which their development over time can be
observed. We used the Louvain community detection algorithm
to identify communities of nodes in each subnetwork [6].
After discovering communities, we computed relationships
between them, in order to track their evolution over time. The
Jaccard coefﬁcient was ﬁrst used to determine whether two
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-558-6
DBKDA 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

communities match [7]. Next, we characterized the content
of each community by computing its density and centrality.
Density measures both the strength of the edges that tie
the cluster of MeSH terms together, as well as the clusters
capacity to develop ever time. Centrality measures the degree
of interaction of a cluster with other parts of the network.
Finally, we created a strategic diagram for each time slot,
which is a graphical representation of the structure of the
particular scientiﬁc ﬁeld. We can identify four types of clusters
according to the quadrant in which they appear in the diagram:
(i) motor themes, which are both well developed and important
for a research ﬁeld; (ii) specialized and peripheral themes; (iii)
themes, which are either emerging or disappearing; and (iv)
themes, which are important for a research ﬁeld but are not
developed.
III.
RESULTS
This study identiﬁes the major research focuses and the cur-
rent status and trends in the life sciences. Overall, we extracted
about 1700 different evolving communities. Figure 1 depicts
heat map of evolving communities for various timeslots. As the
shade of cell darkens, the size of the community increases. We
could observe interesting pattern from the plot; it seems that
each community build its existence on the basis of previous
communities, therefore the trend line is diagonal with rare
exceptions that extends over large periods of years.
Next, in this study we provide a description of the intellec-
tual structure and dynamics of the entire ﬁeld of biomedicine
from the perspective of frequently appearing MeSH descrip-
tors. The results of this study show that (i) using MeSH terms
is plausible for tracking historical events in the biomedical
domain; (ii) the evolution of MEDLINE occurs in an incremen-
tal fashion; (iii) over the years increasingly diverse research
disciplines are involved in the complex process of scientiﬁc
evolution, and links among them become stronger; and (iv)
different research areas have different dynamic evolution pat-
terns.
IV.
CONCLUSION
When compared to existing research, this work is innova-
tive in three respects: (i) the experimental design incorporates
the longitudinal framework based on dynamic communities,
(ii) we provide visualization of the evolution of research topics,
and (iii) we propose a simple community labeling approach
based on MeSH terms. There are also many opportunities for
future work. First, we should address the problem of ﬁltering
co-occurrences. Second, we should address automatic cluster
labeling, while manual labeling is tedious, time-consuming,
and expensive task. Our long-term interest is also to include
temporal frequent pattern mining into the analysis.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Kastrin, T. C. Rindﬂesch, and D. Hristovski, “Large-scale structure
of a network of co-occurring MeSH terms: Statistical analysis of macro-
scopic properties,” PloS One, vol. 9, 2014, p. e102188.
[2]
M. E. J. Newman and J. Park, “Why social networks are different from
other types of networks,” Phys Rev E, vol. 68, 2003, p. 36122.
[3]
P. Holme and J. Saramki, “Temporal networks,” Phys Rep, vol. 519,
2012, pp. 97–125.
[4]
M. E. J. Newman, “The structure of scientiﬁc collaboration networks,”
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, vol. 98, 2001, pp. 404–409.
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
Year
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
Community
Figure 1. Heatmap of evolving communities for each timeslot
[5]
T. Kuhn, M. Perc, and D. Helbing, “Inheritance patterns in citation
networks reveal scientiﬁc memes,” Phys Rev X, vol. 4, 2014, p. 41036.
[6]
V. D. Blondel, J.-L. Guillaume, R. Lambiotte, and E. Lefebvre, “Fast
unfolding of communities in large networks,” J Stat Mech Theory Exp,
vol. 2008, 2008, p. P10008.
[7]
P. Jaccard, “The distribution of the ﬂora in the alpin zone,” New Phytol,
vol. 11, 2012, pp. 37–50.
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-558-6
DBKDA 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

