Business Intelligence in an Educational Landscape 
 
Marcio Rodrigo Teixeira 
Instituto Superior Tupy 
Educational Society of Santa Catarina (SOCIESC) 
Joinville, Brazil 
e-mail: marcio.teixeira@sociesc.org.br 
Mehran Misaghi 
Instituto Superior Tupy 
Educational Society of Santa Catarina (SOCIESC) 
Joinville, Brazil 
e-mail: mehran@sociesc.org.br
 
 
Abstract—This paper reports a work in progress about the 
effectiveness of Business Intelligence in the academic 
environment. Business management, competitiveness, excess of 
information and dispersion of data in the organizational 
environment have proven to be important barriers that need to 
be overcome by managers today, both in process improvement 
and decision making. This paper presents an initial study on 
this topic and shows the benefits of Business Intelligence 
application to assist private educational institutions to achieve 
better academic results in their whole process of management. 
Our preliminary results indicate that BI is a great differential 
to promote a successful management. 
Keywords-academic environment; business intelligence; data 
warehouse; knowledge 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
With the development of management models and 
society, information and knowledge have to be considered 
the main assets of an organization, contributing to its success 
and differentiation. However, the over-dispersion of data and 
information end up becoming barriers that need to be 
overcome in order to improve processes and decision 
making. 
We can say that control and management of information 
play an important role in strategic planning and decision 
making in all sectors of society, including education. 
The fast transformation of the contemporary world has 
given organizations, including educational ones, a great 
challenge to overcome. How to get passed them and monitor 
changes effectively, seeking to maintain competitive 
advantages are the issues of management today. 
According to Tachizawa and Andrade [1], a new era in 
terms of competition is emerging, not only from known 
competitors in traditional markets (or other organizations 
that enter in certain economic sectors), but also through the 
disintegration of access barriers to markets previously 
isolated and protected. 
Educational institutions cannot feel excessively confident 
by market slices and competitive positions already 
conquered, instead, they should seek to reduce operational 
costs, increase the profit margin and improve the quality of 
services provided. 
Many industries felt the shock of competition and 
survived; now, the time has come to teach these institutions. 
They can either adhere to a more contemporary and 
responsive business model or accept that in the next years, 
many private higher education institutions will be sold or 
close doors [2]. 
In this context, it is necessary to use technological 
information in order to accelerate the competitive 
intelligence in private educational institutions. 
Data analysis is very important for an efficient 
management. Through Business Intelligence [13] it is 
possible to take action and make more assertive decisions. 
While someone deals with management information, others 
can detect changes in the market. This way, it is possible not 
only to obtain advantages but also to achieve goals 
successfully. 
This paper relates directly to this topic: knowledge 
discovery and intelligent knowledge querying. It reports a 
work in progress on business intelligence, its architecture 
and components, and finally, the benefits of its application 
applied in an educational landscape. 
II. 
ANALYTICAL INTELLIGENCE AND BUSINESS 
INTELLIGENCE 
Analytical intelligence consists in the use of data and 
systemic reasoning in the process of decision making [3]. 
According to Pinheiro [4], analytical intelligence 
constitutes the use of knowledge through practical 
applications and markets that can generate competitiveness 
to a company. 
With the capacity expansion of data storage and 
computerization of processes, the volume of data available in 
organizations is increasing; however, these data contribute 
very little to decision-making. It is necessary to transform 
them to be used strategically, in a way that they can interact 
in the process of making decisions according to the needs of 
the institution. In this context, analytical intelligence is 
essential. 
This information allows a company to recognize their 
strengths and weaknesses, making actions more substantial 
and efficient [4]. 
A. History and Concept of BI 
In the early 1980s, the concept of executive information 
systems (EIS) appeared, increasing the computerized support 
to managers and top-level executives. Some of the 
introduced 
features 
were 
dynamic 
multidimensional 
reporting (ad hoc or on demand), predictions and forecasts, 
trend analysis, details, status and access to critical successful 
factors. These features appeared in dozens of commercial 
242
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-247-9
DBKDA 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

products in the middle of the 1990s. The same features and 
some new ones appeared under the name BI. 
According to Power [5], in 1989, Howard Dresner 
proposed "business intelligence" as an umbrella term to 
describe concepts and methods to improve business decision 
making by using fact-based support systems. 
According to Atre and Moss [6], BI is neither a product, 
nor a system. It is an architecture and a collection of 
integrated operational programs as well as decision-support 
applications and databases that provide to the business 
community an easy access to business data. 
According to Kimball and Ross [7], Business Intelligence 
is a term that has emerged and evolved over the past few 
years and is now often used to describe all systems and 
processes an enterprise uses to gather, process, provide 
access to, and analyze business information. The term data 
warehouse is now used to mean the platform for all forms of 
business intelligence. 
Business refers to a commercial activity for profit. 
Intelligence is intelligence, refers to the ability of learning 
and understanding. 
The process of BI is based on transforming data into 
information, decisions, and then, finally, into action. 
B. Results of Surveys about IT and BI 
2.335 chief information officers (CIO) responded to the 
Gartner 2012 CIO Survey, the annual appraisal of CIO 
priorities, including all major industries and geographies [8]. 
The survey result has identified that analytics and BI will be 
the top technology priorities for CIOs this year. 
According to Goasduff and Pettey [9], analytics/business 
intelligence was the top-ranked technology for 2012, as CIOs 
are combining analytics with other technologies to create 
new capabilities. For example, analytics plus supply chain 
for process management and improvement. 
The research results reveal that Business Intelligence is 
an essential tool for businesses because it allows making the 
best choices while minimizing the risks of a wrong decision. 
C. Architecture and Components of the BI 
Figure 1 shows the flow of data, their transformation into 
information, and finally, knowledge that serves as basis for 
better decision making. Although this figure shows an 
architecture with very high level (because it has all the 
components of a BI tool), it can be used either as a model for 
a new initiative (according to need of the institution), or as a 
mean of assessing the current status of an existing 
architecture in relation to all the components shown in the 
figure, thus enabling those new components to be added over 
time. 
According to Dresner [10], BI tools and technologies 
include query and reporting, OLAP (online analytical 
processing), data mining and advanced analytics, end-user 
tools for ad hoc query and analysis, enterprise-class query, 
analysis and reporting, including dashboards for performance 
monitoring, and production reporting against enterprise data 
sources. 
 
Figure 1.  BI Architecture 
A BI architecture typically contains the following 
components: 
 
People (Business Users, Administrators, Developers, 
Technical Support): People are fundamental in 
Business Intelligence architecture, as well as the 
processes 
and 
technologies 
involved. 
The 
community of BI users is diverse, but the vast 
majority focuses on the tactical and strategic levels 
and their relation to each other. 
 
Metadata and Master Data Management: Metadata 
can be defined as "data about data." The metadata is 
stored and managed in a database and is used to 
describe the definition of the structure, policies and 
data management of a company. The objective of 
Master Data Management is to provide processes to 
collect, aggregate, combine and consolidate data, 
ensuring quality to distribute these data across the 
organization to ensure consistency and control 
maintenance and use of this information. 
 
Data Sources: The data may have several shapes and 
be obtained from various sources, such as CRM and 
243
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-247-9
DBKDA 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

ERP. These many data sources make up the 
landscape of business intelligence company. 
 
Data Integration Layer: This is where the data 
gathered by the applications is refined into a 
corporate structure [11]. Through components such 
as Data Warehouse, Data Mart, ETL, Ad-Hoc Query 
Application, it is possible to transform data into 
quality information that can be useful for any 
company, especially in decision-making process. 
 
Data Access Layer: The components as Cubes, Data 
Mining, OLAP application, BI application allow 
performing business analysis more efficiently and 
effectively and are the basis for better decision 
making. 
III. 
BUSINESS INTELLIGENCE APPLIED IN AN PRIVATE 
ACADEMIC ENVIROMENT MANAGEMENT 
Private educational institutions are making extensive use 
of business intelligence and predictive modeling in 
marketing, recruitment and retention [12]. To achieve these 
goals, they develop the IT infrastructure with new software 
and process, taking into account "operational efficiency" and 
"customer intimacy". They understand the needs of students 
and employers and adapt the curriculum and course offerings 
in order to promote an alignment with the requirements of 
the job. Many educational institutions are also deploying 
academic analysis to create predictive models to improve the 
retention of students in order to develop an individual 
learning plan [12]. The assertiveness level in decision 
making, planning and resource allocation and process 
improvement have been observed. Some institutions have 
developed specific analysis to accompany new students in 
courses, mainly targeting disadvantaged students, and the 
financial aspect of performance; therefore, making possible 
to intervene early if a negative factor is identified, thereby 
aiming to act as a responsible institution that cares about its 
students. Analysis focused on issues related to access, 
learning and students performance at all stages of their 
academic life, allows them to take greater responsibility for 
their success, in collaboration with parents, teachers and 
employers. It is noteworthy that the application of Business 
Intelligence effectively requires a cultural change where 
decision making and action are based on evidence. This 
cultural change in an educational institution requires the 
support of managers in activities, emphasizing performance, 
creating incentives to support innovation, promoting a 
change in the traditional academic culture at all levels of the 
institution [12]. 
IV. 
OUR RESEARCH 
Aiming to verify the effectiveness of a Business 
Intelligence tool deployed in an educational landscape, we 
started a research project in 2012 with completion scheduled 
for 2013 in an educational institution in Brazil. The scope of 
the research and a summary of the information collected to 
date are described below. 
A. The Educational  Institution 
The Educational Society of Santa Catarina - SOCIESC is 
an educational, cultural and technological institution in 
Brazil that has existed for 53 years. It possesses 7 campus in 
two states, and has more than 100 partnerships in E-
learning’s Centers. It currently has about 20,000 students 
enrolled in classroom, 4,000 students enrolled in e-learning 
mode and 1,200 employees that support this whole structure. 
It operates in various levels as undergraduate, graduate, 
business training. In addition, a differential of SOCIESC 
over other educational institutions is that it offers 
engineering services, consultancy and management for the 
development of new technologies for national and 
international companies. Services are offered from modern 
infrastructure with laboratories in the areas of metrology, 
chemical and mechanical, through the areas of Technology 
Management & Research and Development, Tooling, 
Foundry and Heat Treatment. SOCIESC is certified NBR 
ISO9001. 
B. Research Question 
What are the benefits of using a BI tool in an educational 
institution? 
C. Proposal of Research 
Analysis the contribution of the use of Business 
Intelligence Tool in management processes and decision 
making: A Case study in an educational institution 
(SOCIESC). 
D. Methodology 
 
Interview with employees of IT department in 
SOCIESC who are responsible for the project and 
support of BI in the institution. 
 
Analysis of the data collected. 
E. Study Sample 
3 interviews were conducted in the IT department, 
including one manager and two system analysts who use the 
BI tool. 
F. The BI Tool 
The SOCIESC has currently the TOTVS BI Version: 
1.11.30. Some features of this tool are: 
 
Integration with LOGIX ERP [14], currently used in 
SOCIESC. 
 
Online information access, using different browsers. 
 
Enables integration with various data sources, such 
as Oracle database [15] and Microsoft Excel 
spreadsheets [16]. 
 
Developed in Java [17] and runs through a server 
Apache Jakarta [18]. 
 
Operates on Linux [19] and Microsoft OS [20]. 
 
Simple and quick search of information and export 
data to spreadsheets, analysis customization and 
graphical views, schedule and automatic send of 
information via e-mail and security access through 
system access profiles and analysis access. 
244
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-247-9
DBKDA 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

G. The BI Architecture 
The current BI architecture comprises a data warehouse 
created in Oracle 10G, which is loaded with data extracted 
from tables of academic ERP (WAE) and business ERP 
(Logix) that are also on Oracle 10G database. 
H. User Profiles and Departments that use BI 
Currently 84 employees distributed in 46 different 
departments of SOCIESC make use of BI. The audience of 
BI is: 14 directors representing 17% of audience, 23 
managers representing 27% of audience, 38 analysts 
representing 45% of audience and 9 technicians representing 
11% of audience. 
I. 
History of BI in SOCIESC 
According to the interviews, the initiative to use a BI tool 
in SOCIESC started in 2007 by the IT department that 
developed some analysis in order to leverage and maximize 
their management decision making. Once the results were 
positive, the tool was adopted by other departments of the 
institution contemplating the administrative area and also 
teaching. Over time, new versions were released by TOTVS, 
making it more agile and with new features which 
contributed to a rapid deployment and user training. 
J. 
Analysis Developed in BI 
The BI tool of SOCIESC currently contains about 22 
analysis developed over the years which help users make 
better decisions about trade issues, costs, purchasing, human 
resources, information technology and education. When it 
comes to numbers, just education alone possesses 10 
different types of analysis that allow monitoring of entries in 
selection 
processes, 
enrollment, 
financial 
monitoring 
organization, institutional research conducted by students 
and teachers. 
V. 
NEXT STEPS OF RESEARCH 
The next steps of the research are (i) conduct more 
interviews and apply questionnaires with users of other 
departments that use the BI tool, (ii) analyze the data 
collected, (iii) describe the analysis of BI, (iv)  and describe a 
case study pointing contributions of BI tool in the 
management of processes and decision making in an 
educational institution. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
Aiming to verify the effectiveness of a BI tool deployed 
in an educational landscape, we started a research project in 
2012 with completion scheduled for 2013 in an educational 
institution (SOCIESC) in Brazil. So far, we have collected 
various information through interviews about the profile of 
institution, the BI tool, the architecture of BI, the profile of 
users and departments that use the tool, history of BI in the 
institution, and analysis developed. 
Our work in progress has demonstrated so far that the 
current global competitive environment has also impacted 
the educational sector and that educational institutions are 
seeking to adjust its strategic. Several educational institutions 
are looking for the potential of BI, and, therefore, are 
adopting BI architectures, applying mainly in predictive 
modeling in marketing, recruitment and retention of students. 
The architecture is accessible through the Internet, which 
provides a greater analytical power, allowing users (parents, 
students, teachers and analysts) to access and analyze data, 
information, contextualize and interpret the results and then 
make the best decisions. 
REFERENCES 
[1] T. Tachizawa and R. Andrade, “Gestão de instituições de ensino,” 
Brazil, Editora FGV, pp. 21-23, 2006. 
[2] L. Machado, “Gestão estratégica para instituições de ensino superior 
privadas,” Brazil , Editora FGV, pp. 15-17, 2008. 
[3] T. Davenport, et al., “Inteligência analítica nos negócios: Como usar a 
análise de informações para obter resultados superiores,” Brazil, 
Elsevier, pp. 1-3, 2010. 
[4] C. Pinheiro, “Inteligência Analítica – Mineração de Dados e 
Descoberta de Conhecimento,” Brazil, Editora Ciência Moderna ltd., 
Brazil, pp. 3-10, 2008. 
[5] D.J Power, “A Brief History of Decision Support Systems,” 2007. 
http://dssresources.com/history/dsshistory.html [retrieved: October, 
2012] 
[6] S. Atre and L. T. Moss, “Business Intelligence Roadmap: the 
complete project lifecycle for decision-support applications.” Pearson 
Education, Boston, pp. 4-5, 2008. 
[7] R. Kimball and M. Ross, “The Kimball Group Reader; Relentlessly 
Practical Tools for Data Warehousing and Business Intelligence.” 
Wiley Publishing, Indiana, pp. 103-105, 2010. 
[8] Gartner, 
“CIO 
Agenda 
Report 
- 
Key 
Insights,” 
2012. 
http://imagesrv.gartner.com/cio/pdf/cio_agenda_insights.pdf 
[retrieved: October, 2012] 
[9] L. Goasduff and C. Pettey, “Gartner Executive Programs Worldwide 
Survey of More Than 2,300 CIOs Shows Flat IT Budgets in 2012, but 
IT Organizations Must Deliver on Multiple Priorities,” 2012. 
http://www.gartner.com/it/page.jsp?id=1897514 [retrieved: October, 
2012] 
[10] H. Dresner, “The Performance Management Revolution: business 
results through insight and action. John Wiley & Sons,” New Jersey, 
pp. 12-14, 2008. 
[11] W. H. Inmon, C. Imhoff and R. Sousa, “Corporate Information 
Factory.” John Wiley & Sons, Canada, pp. 7-9, 2001. 
[12] D. Norris, L. Baer, J. Leonard, L. Pugliese and P. Lefrere,  “Action 
Analytics: Measuring and Improving Performance That Matters,” 
2008. http://net.educause.edu/ir/library/pdf/ERM0813.pdf [retrieved: 
October, 2012] 
[13] M. R. Teixeira and M. Misaghi, “Business Intelligence Aplicado a 
Gestão 
de 
um 
Ambiente 
Acadêmico 
Privado,” 
2012.  
http://www.sociesc.org.br/congressos/SearchCONEPRO/artigos/064_
2012_Publicacao.pdf [retrieved: October, 2012] 
[14] http://www.totvs.com/software/erp [retrieved: December, 2012] 
[15] http://www.oracle.com [retrieved: December, 2012] 
[16] http://office.microsoft.com/en-us/excel/ [retrieved: December, 2012] 
[17] http://www.oracle.com/us/technologies/java/overview/index.html 
[retrieved: December, 2012] 
[18] http://jakarta.apache.org [retrieved: December, 2012] 
[19] http://www.linux.org [retrieved: December, 2012] 
[20] http://windows.microsoft.com [retrieved: December, 2012] 
245
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-247-9
DBKDA 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

