Sales Prediction with Parametrized Time Series Analysis
Michael Schaidnagel∗, Christian Abele∗, Fritz Laux†, Ilia Petrov†
Fakult¨at Informatik
Reutlingen University
D-72762 Reutlingen, Germany
{michael.schaidnagel|christian.abele}@student.reutlingen-university.de∗
{fritz.laux|ilia.petrov}@reutlingen-university.de†
Abstract—When forecasting sales ﬁgures, not only the sales
history but also the future price of a product will inﬂuence
the sales quantity. At ﬁrst sight, multivariate time series seem
to be the appropriate model for this task. Nontheless, in
real life history is not always repeatable, i.e. in the case of
sales history there is only one price for a product at a given
time. This complicates the design of a multivariate time series.
However, for some seasonal or perishable products the price
is rather a function of the expiration date than of the sales
history. This additional information can help to design a more
accurate and causal time series model. The proposed solution
uses an univariate time series model but takes the price of
a product as a parameter that inﬂuences systematically the
prediction. The price inﬂuence is computed based on historical
sales data using correlation analysis and adjustable price
ranges to identify products with comparable history. Compared
to other techniques this novel approach is easy to compute
and allows to preset the price parameter for predictions and
simulations. Tests with data from the Data Mining Cup 2012
demonstrate better results than established sophisticated time
series methods.
Keywords-sales prediction, multivariate time series, price-
sales correlation, parametrized predictor.
I. INTRODUCTION
Sales prediction is an important goal for any time series
based analysis [1], [2]. The task consists of forecasting sales
quantities given the sales history. This can be achieved by
extending the time series into the future.
The prolongation of the time series into the future is
determined by the underpinning time series model [3]. If this
model is not well supported by the empirical data it is likely
that the accuracy of the forecast is low. So the challenge is to
ﬁnd data build ”similar” products or situations (e.g. time or
price) and form clusters of products for building a prediction
model. If a major sales factor like the product price changes,
the model based solely on previous sales will lead to wrong
forecasts. Therefore, it is important to include the price as
parameter into the model in addition to the sales history.
Standard solutions to this problem have been to supply
a long history of sales with sufﬁcient data to validate the
model and to correlate the sales data with the variable prod-
uct price. The mathematical tools of choice for analyzing
multiple time series simultaneously are multivariate statis-
tical techniques like Vector AutoRegressive (VAR) models
[4], [5] or such as the Vector ARIMA (AutoRegressive
Integrated Moving Average) [6]. The model parameters are
estimated with least square or Yule-Walker functions [4, p.
181]. The accuracy of the estimator depends on the number
of observations and its ”strength” of correlation.
To illustrate the process consider an excerpt from the Data
Mining Cup 2012 [7] dataset (Table I:
Table I
SAMPLE DATA, DATA MINING CUP 2012
day
Prod#
price
quantity
1
1
4.73
6
1
2
7.23
0
1
3
10.23
1
1
4
17.90
0
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
1
570
7.91
0
2
1
4.73
12
2
2
7.23
1
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
42
569
9.83
2
42
570
7.84
0
43
1
5.35
?
43
2
7.47
?
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
43
570
7.84
?
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
56
570
8.12
?
The information provided comprises a collection of 570
products whose history of sales and prices are given over
a period of 42 days. The task was to predict the sales
quantities for the next 14 days where the daily sales price
was preset. The majority of products produced only low
quantity sales. Comparisons with other sales data showed
a similar distribution [8] [9] which indicates that the sample
is typical for larger collections.
When we tried to predict the future sales with commercial
ARIMA products we experienced a low prediction quality
with a relative accuracy of only 47%.
The disappointing results from professional tools imple-
menting ARIMA encouraged us to look for a simpler and
better prediction model. First of all we assumed that the
future price is causally inﬂuenced and should not be treated
as stochastic variable. Second, it might be helpful to ﬁlter
166
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-247-9
DBKDA 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

out cyclic behavior from the ”white noise” in case of low
volume sales. Third, the proposed approach is suitable for
online scenarios: (i) it has low computational overhead,
the underlying model is simple and maintainable; (ii) the
algorithm can operate on partial datasets and can be used
for incremental forecasting.
A. Structure of the Paper
In the next subsection follows a discussion of related work
and we contrast it with our contribution.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: The data
proﬁle under investigation and the research problem will be
described formally in Section II. In Section III we present
our parametrized time series algorithm that predicts sales
volumes with variable product prices and low data support.
The following Section IV gives a description of the technical
framework for the implementation of the prototype. The re-
sults are discussed in Section V and compared with standard
methods found in commercial products like ARIMA. From
these experiences we draw our conclusion in the last section.
B. Related Work
Adaptive correlation methods for prognostic purposes
have been proposed early in the 1970th by Griese [10]
and more speciﬁcally as AutoRegressive Moving Average
(ARMA) method by Box and Jenkins [11]. As ARMA is
constrained to a stationary stochastic process the ARIMA
is of more practical use as it can handle time series with a
linear trend and is therefore widely implemented.
The idea behind ARMA and ARIMA is that the model
adapts automatically to a given history of data. A natural
extension is to include other inﬂuential factors beside the
prognostic value itself. This leads to multivariate models,
namely Vector Autoregressive (VAR) models [6]. The de-
velopment of the model was inﬂuenced and motivated by
critiques of Sims [12] and Lucas [13]. In essence, their
statement is: every available data is potentially correlated.
If the model is extended to cover the inﬂuence from
correlated data this leads to a vectorial stochastic model
(Xt(π, πr)) that allows not only the serial time dependence t
of each component but also the interdependence of products
π and product prices πr. We prefer to use parentheses () for
a stochastic process instead of braces {} because it is rather
a sequence of stochastic variables than a set.
To estimate the parameters of such a multivariate ARMA
process the following equation ([14, p. 417], [4, p. 167]) has
to be solved:
Φ(L)Xt(π, πr)
=
Θ(L)Zt
(1)
where L denotes the backshift (lag) operator and
Φ(x)
:=
I − Φ1x − Φ2x2 − . . . − Φpxp
(2)
Θ(x)
:=
I + Θ1x + Θ2x2 + . . . + Θqxq
(3)
Figure 1.
Seven day periodicity for the overall sales data (DMC2012) and
a typical low selling product (item # 153)
are matrix-valued polynomials with dimensions of p (order
of regression) and q (order of moving average). Zt denotes
a multivariate ”white noise” process.
There is one major drawback to this approach in our
problem setting. The model treats all historical input values
as stochastic variables. However, the product price does
not vary stochastically, its value is preset by the vendor.
Economic models assume a causal dependency between the
price of a product and its sales quantities (see Arnold [15,
chap. 17]). Variations in consumer demand are caused by
various factors like price, promotions, etc [16]. This causal
dependency is not modeled by VAR methods. This is an
issue for the multivariate model.
Another complication arises from the noisy periodicity
resulting from low volume sales. The low sales quantity
introduces a kind of random pattern that makes it hard to
ﬁnd even a known periodicity. In the sample data the overall
sales history shows a clear 7-day periodicity (see Figure 1)
but not for individual products.
Cyclic sales quantities are a typical behavior for short
shelf-life products and are important for building a causal
sales model. Doganis et al. [17] investigated the sales
quantity of fresh milk (a short shelf-life product) in Greece.
They used a genetic algorithm applied to the sales quantities
of the same weekday of last year. Our approach is only
similar in that we take corresponding weekdays but it differs
in how we analyse the weekly periodicity and correlate it
with the sales prices.
To recapitulate, there are two general arguments against
the multivariate VAR approach sketched above: Granger
and Newbold [18] showed that simpler models often out-
performed forecasts based on complex multivariate models.
And Lucas [13] criticized that the economic models are too
static and that ”any change in policy will systematically alter
the structure of the econometric model”. Applied to the sales
forecast situation the variation of the price does not play a
167
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-247-9
DBKDA 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

Figure 2.
Seven day periodicity for the sales of item # 153
stochastic, but a systematic, i.e. a functional, role.
Our idea is to ﬁlter the seasonality by a period-based
”folding” of the sales quantity, i.e. the aggregation of sales
quantities for the same weekdays. This cancels the stochastic
variation and accumulates the seasonal effect. Applying such
a model improves the prediction coverage and accuracy for
low volume data with a cyclic behavior.
II. PROBLEM DESCRIPTION AND CONTRIBUTION
In Section I we pointed out that the nature of the data and
its sales proﬁle play an important role for the time series
analysis. In particular, the inﬂuence of price and periodicity
are dominant factors as we will see in the following. For
this reason we present ﬁrst the characteristics of the data.
A. Data Proﬁle
The 570 products of the sample data realized a total of
86641 units sold. The average price ranged between 14.46
and 15.92 over the period of 42 days. The maximum price
variability of a single product is ±48%, but on average
the price varies only by ±9%. However, for high selling
products (> 500 units) the variability stands at ±15%.
The total sales quantity per product ranged from 17 to
2083 over the 6 weeks. Broken down to the day level the
product price ranged from 0.24 to 152.92 and the sales
quantities between 0 and 193. The sample had average sales
per product of 152 units with a standard deviation of 257
which indicates a high sales variability of the items.
This conjecture is conﬁrmed by the product sales ranking
that roughly follows a shifted hyperbolic distribution (see
Figure 3) which supports that low volume sales contribute
signiﬁcantly to the overall sales and may not be neglected.
506 products out of 570 sell less than 250 units in total but
contribute with approximately the same quantity sold (43991
units) as the 64 high selling products.
The low volume sales (sum of sales < 250) showed a
strong positive trend (≈ 40% increase over 42 days) whereas
the high volume sales (sum of sales ≥ 250) had a more
stationary behavior. In the sample data are more than 100
Figure 3.
Sales quantity ranking of sample data (DMC2012)
Figure 4.
Sales quantity and average price time series of sample data
(DMC2012)
products that sell less than six units a day. Nearly all of
them sell none at half of the time.
The above properties require that an adequate forecasting
algorithm, which has to allow for low volume sales with high
variability and be able to accustom for some price variability.
A 7 day sales periodicity was highly visible over the
whole sample (see Figure 1) but not on the product level.
Tests with sample low selling products with an assumed
periodicity of 7 days produced better results than without
this assumption. Again, the cumulative values of sales quan-
tities and prices plotted over time give clear indication for
a negative price-quantity correlation and a 7 day periodicity
except for the ﬁrst week (Figure 4). These results indicate
that our algorithm has to deal with hidden periodicity.
In order to avoid the risk that our method is tailored
for a particular data set we investigated a second data set
with a completely different proﬁle. The data records contain
Piglet Market Data (PMD), including price and quantity sold
for weekly auctions over a period of six years. The PMD
does not show any clear periodicity but the market tended
lower towards the end of the year. It is characterised by
the following quantities: (i) Min. Qauntity - 701; (ii) Max.
Quantitiy - 2063; (iii) Min. Price - 20 e; (iv) Max. Price -
168
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-247-9
DBKDA 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

71.5 e; (v) the trace sequence length spans 311 data points;
(vi) Qantity standard deviation - 207.97; (vii) price standard
deviation - 10.38 e which depicts a similar variance as the
previous time series but without periodicity. We will show
in Section V that our method produces a more accurate
prediction.
B. Formal Problem Description
The problem consists of developing a parametrized time
series model that is able to forecast future sales quantities
depending on the given sales history and a price parameter.
The solution of the stochastic Equation (1) is a multidimen-
sional mapping
F :
(Π, T) −→ (R+, N0)
(4)
(π, t) 7−→ (ˆπr, ˆxt)
where Π is the set of products and T are consecutive time
intervals. A product π ∈ Π is described by its identiﬁcation
number πi and its price πr. The mapping F computes sales
quantity ˆxt and price ˆπr for every product π and time
interval t .
The vector time series (ˆπr, ˆxt) is a concrete realisation of
the stochastic process (Xt) of Equation (1). The mapping
F has to be adjusted so that the process (Xt) explains best
a given realisation. This can be done by various estima-
tor functions: least square error, Yule-Walker, maximum-
likelihood, or Durbin-Levison algorithms. This is where our
approach differs from the traditional because in real business
the price is not a stochastic variable but is preset by the
vendor. Instead of predicting the future price ˆπr we use the
price as input parameter.
Having ﬁxed the model in this way it is possible to
transform the mapping F to the following form:
Fr :
(N, R+, T) −→ N0
(5)
(πi, πr, t) 7−→ ˆxt
With this predictor Fr(πi, πr, t) it is possible to forecast
the sales quantities for future time periods t > T (T is the
present time) of a product π ∈ Π using the future price πr
as input.
C. Contribution
By restricting our approach to model a linear trend,
seasonality, and using historic and future prices as causal
parameter leads to a predictor function that is easy to
compute and explain. It yields higher accuracy for data
with hidden periodicity and variable prices than the ARIMA
model. The novelty of our contribution comprises:
• a model that has a causal explanation
• where the future price is a major input factor and
• the overall periodicity is respected by individual items.
The prediction function can also be used for simulation to
see how the price will inﬂuence the sales quantity.
III. THE PARAMETRIZED TIME SERIES MODEL
For a causal predictor function Fr we need to identify
and quantify all inﬂuencing factors. Therefore we analyzed
different correlations of the attributes quantity, price and
time. We used the standard Pearson Correlation [19] as a
measure to determine the linear dependence between two
time series. It is widely used and can range between −1
and +1. This section will present the relations which have
been analyzed.
A. Price-Sales Correlation
The main conjecture was that the price has a causal
inﬂuence on the quantity. This is justiﬁed by the price
elasticity of demand theory by Alfred Marshall [20]. As
the correlation coefﬁcients of all 570 products ranged from
−0.6515 to +0.3471, we expected that the products with
strong correlation exhibit a better prediction accuracy. Sur-
prisingly this seemed not to be the case.
A systematic analysis with three synthetic time series lead
to an explanation. The ﬁrst series had a growing price trend,
the second and third had a cyclic price development where
one product responded immediately and the other responded
with a delay. ARIMA did recognize the price trend but fore-
casted a constant quantity instead of a decreasing one. This
was the result of the low integer sales numbers that produced
a monotone decreasing step function. Our approach managed
to forecast the right quantities as long as a matching price
was present in the history.
Surprisingly ARIMA could not deal well with the system-
atic cyclic price development and a detailed analysis showed
that the step function of the price (price was kept constant
for two days) was the reason. Figure 5 shows the result of
the ARIMA compared to our Fr algorithm (see equation 5).
The lower Qty (Figure 5) values at the extrema produced by
our algorithm results from the delay in the response to the
price change. Without lag, no damping of extrema occurs in
Fr.
B. Price Similarity
We analyzed correlations between the price development
of different products. The assumption was to ﬁnd product
bundles which are linked together via their price devel-
opment. For the analysis the prices were ﬁrst normalized
such that we could easily compare the different price levels.
Several bunches of products were linked together via their
prices. But the corresponding sales ﬁgures of these products
were not related. This is why we ignored the possible cross
price inﬂuence from other products for the forecast.
C. Sales Periodicity
One of the most interesting properties of the given data
was the periodicity of the total sales curve. It showed a
clear 7 day period (Figure 1). This period was not directly
observable in most sales time series of individual products.
169
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-247-9
DBKDA 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

Figure 5.
Forecast of synthetic time series with delayed price-sales
dependency
Also the Pearson Correlation between the sum curve and
the single products was too low to draw any conclusions.
Nevertheless, since the total sales curve consists of all
products, there must be a hidden periodicity within the
individual products.
When we used this 7-day periodicity and summed up the
sales of corresponding days most products conﬁrmed the 7-
day periodicity. Cumulative sales quantities over matching
weekdays reveal hidden cyclic pattern even for low volume
sales products. Figure 2 shows the periodicity pattern of
product #153 that cannot be seen from its original time series
(Figure 1).
Using this 7-day periodicity we were able to improve the
forecast quality of our method. The algorithm takes only
prices from the same days of each period (see Figure 7 for
an example) and computes its trend (trend(Qtylist)). The
trend computation can be performed in different way; for
our purses we use linar trend. A more detailed explanation
will follow in the next subsection.
A systematic spectral analysis discovered not only the
dominant weekly patterns but weaker 4, 5 and 14 days
patterns.
D. The Parametrized Predictor Function
Putting all correlation observations together the result is
a function Fr whose pseudocode is shown in Figure 7.
As an input, it takes the price πr of a product π at the
prediction day t, the periodicity and a price range δ. The
upper and lower price limits are set to ±δ percent. Using the
periodicity from the previous analysis the algorithm looks
for prices πr(w) that occur on days w = t modulo period.
For example, if the prediction day is 43 and the periodicity
is 7 days, only the information from the days 36, 29, 22,
15, 8 and 1 will be considered (see Figure 6). If the price
Input: t > T // prediction day
πr (input) // price at day t
δ (input) // price range (e.g. ± 10%)
period (input)
Def: u, l // upper & lower price limit
QtyList // list of sales quantities
w // = t - n * period
ˆxt // predicted quantity at day t
for each π ∈ Π {
u := πr(1 + δ/100); l := πr(1 − δ/100)
w := t − period
while (w ≥ 1) {
if (πr(w) < u) & (πr(w) > l)
QtyList.add(p(w)) // p(w) is Qty on day w
w := w − period
}
if (QtyList ̸= ∅)
ˆxt := trend(QtyList)
return ˆxt
else
return nil
}
Figure 7.
Parametrized Sales Prediction Algorithm Fr
on such a day is outside of the upper or the lower limit
(day 1 in our example), the sales quantity is ignored. If the
price is within the bounds, the corresponding quantity on
that day (p(w)) is inserted into the quantity list (QtyList).
After all matching quantities have been selected, the forecast
quantity is computed as linear trend (trend(Qtylist)) of
these quantities.
If all prices are outside of the upper and lower limit, no
forecast is produced. The procedure may be repeated with
enlarged upper and lower limits if needed. This algorithm
deﬁnes a simple forecasting model that takes into account
the sales trend, the periodicity, and the price inﬂuence to
predict sales quantities.
IV. TECHNICAL FRAMEWORK AND INFRASTRUCTURE
This section covers some technical details about execution
and implementation of the two models discussed in this
paper.
A. ARIMA Model Execution
The Microsoft Visual Studio 2008 and Microsoft SQL
Server 2008 were used to apply the ARIMA model on the
given data set. In order to run the ARIMA mining models a
OLAP cube was build. It consists of the dimensions price,
product and time. In the corresponding time series mining
model we used itemId and day as key attributes and the
price attribute as input. The quantity was set as predictable
attribute. Most model parameters were left as default, except
the minimum series value and the periodicity hint. The
170
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-247-9
DBKDA 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

Figure 6.
Illustration of prediction concept using trend, periodicity, and a parametrized price
following listing shows all model parameters used:
AUTO DETECT PERIODICITY
0.6
FORECAST METHOD
ARIMA
HISTORIC MODEL COUNT
1
HISTORIC MODEL GAP
10
INSTABILITY SENSITIVITY
1.0
MAXIMUM SERIES VALUE
+1E308
MINIMUM SERIES VALUE
0
MISSING VALUE SUBSTITUTION
None
PERIODICITY HINT
7
PREDICTION SMOOTHING
0.5
B. Implementation of the Suggested Model in Java
Our own approach is implemented in Java. We used
Eclipse (Version: Indigo Service Release 1) with Java Plat-
form Standard Edition 6.0 (JRE6). The data was stored
in a MySQL database on an Apache web server (2.2.21).
During execution time the data is queried from the database,
the model parameters computed and the forecast results
are instantly stored in the corresponding result table in
the database. The model was developed using the standard
java.sql.* package which was used to interface with the
database and for SQLException handling.
V. RESULTS
The absolute prediction error was measured as |realQty−
predictQty|. The performance of Fr was measured against
ARIMA and the results are given as sum of absolute
error numbers over 14 prediction days. The Fr algorithms
beneﬁted from two input parameters: the hidden periodicity
that was calculated in a previous step and the predeﬁned
future price. The hidden sales periodicity contributed for
an improvement of about 20%. The overall forecast was
improved by 26.7%. The price inﬂuence was less dominant
than expected, but was determinant for a cluster of 26
products. Cluster characteristics: (i) correlation < −0.25;
(ii) relative standard error < 0.25; (iii) sales quantity > 160;
and (iv) price variation ((max(πr)−min(πr)) > 4). In total,
Fr could forecast this cluster 36.4% better than ARIMA.
A. Comparison of Results with ARIMA
In this section we compare the results of ARIMA and
our Fr method. The following table shows the prediction
error points of both ARIMA and Fr. The prediction error
is calculated as sum of the absolute difference between
real and predicted values (P | realQty − predictedQty |,
predictedQty ∈ {predictedARIMA, predictedFr}). The
total error of all 570 products was 30152 for the ARIMA and
22093 for Fr. This is an improvement of 26.7% compared
to ARIMA (Table II). For further analysis we splitted the
products into disjoint sets according to different criteria.
This allowed us to ﬁnd the strengths and weaknesses of our
algorithm in terms of total sales quantity, sales sparsity, and
171
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-247-9
DBKDA 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

price.
In the case of PMD we predicted the sales quantities for
a full year. The result analysis for this forcast yields an
improvement of 20% for the Fr alogrithm over ARIMA.
This is less than for the DMC set but with more then 20%
still substantial.
Table II
COMPARISON OF ARIMA PREDICTION ERROR WITH Fr ALGORITHM
Class
ARIMA
Fr
improvement
All products
30512
22093
26.7%
quantity < 500
24338
17248
29.1%
quantity ≥ 500
6174
4845
21.5%
(quantity = 0)
19178
15942
16.9%
in < 1/3 time
(quantity = 0)
11334
6151
45.7%
in ≥ 1/3 time
avg(πr) < 20
26756
18711
30.1%
avg(πr) ≥ 20
3756
3382
10.0%
top 100 items
15805
6131
61.2%
least 470 items
16167
15962
1.2%
PMD
10841
8612
20, 6%
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The broad range of products with its hidden periodicity
made the analysis difﬁcult. The low volume sales further
complicated the analysis of the inﬂuence of the price on
the sales quantities. The conclusions drawn from the above
results can be reduced to the following three statements:
1) Data proﬁling is crucial for choosing the best time
series model
2) Low sales volume can hide a cyclic sales behavior and
the price should be treated as input parameter
3) Simple
models
for
sales
forecasting
based
on
causal parameters can outperform some sophisticated
stochastic models.
Cross inﬂuence from other products should be further
investigated. This could lead to clusters of products that
behave coherently. Sometimes products are complementary.
This has not been investigated. The overall sales had a signif-
icant periodicity length of 7, the available data covered only
56 days. Hence, a longer time history would be needed to
verify this and to look for overlaying periodicities. A spectral
analysis on a individual product level could further improve
the prediction accuracy. For products with a strong monotone
price development our approach to look for similar prices is
not well suited. The price trend should be computed instead.
The Fr algorithm can be used with incomplete time series.
This is particularly useful for real-time analysis used in
recommender systems and should be further investigated.
REFERENCES
[1] August-Wilhelm Scheer, Absatzprognosen [engl. Sales Fore-
casting], Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1983
[2] Manfred H¨uttner, Markt- und Absatzprognosen [engl. Market
and Sales Forecasting], Kohlhammer, Stuttgart, 1982
[3] Yang Lan and Daniel Deagu, ”A New Approach and Its
Applications for Time Series Analysis and Prediction Based
on Moving Average of nth-Order Difference”, in: Dawn E.
Holmes and Lakhmi C. Jain (Eds.), Data Mining: Foundations
and Intelligent Paradigms, Vol 2: Statistical, Bayesian, Time
Series and other Theoretical Aspects, pp. 157 - 182, Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2012
[4] Klaus Neusser, Zeitreihenanalyse in den Wirtschaftswis-
senschaften [engl. Time Series Analysis in Economic Sci-
ences], B. G. Teubner Verlag, Wiesbaden, 2006
[5] Alan Julian Izenman, Modern Multivariate Statistical Tech-
niques - Regression, Classiﬁcation, and Manifold Learning,
Springer Science + Business Media, New York, 2008
[6] Helmut L¨utkepohl, New Introduction to Multiple Time Series
Analysis, corr. repr., Springer Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg, 2007
[7] N. N., DATA MINING CUP 2012, prudsys AG, Zwickauer
Str. 16, D-09113 Chemnitz, [Online] http://www.data-mining-
cup.de/en/review/dmc-2012, last access: 13.01.2013
[8] Sam Oches, ”Top 50 Sorted by Total Units”, Special Report
of QSR Magazine, Journalistic Inc., August 2011, [Online]
http://www.qsrmagazine.com/reports/top-50-sorted-total-units
[9] Economist
Intelligence
Unit,
”Denmark:
Market
Indicators
and
Forecasts”,
[Online]
http://datamarket.com/data/set/1wmo/
(indicators:
Private
consumption, Consumer goods ), last access: 30.08.2012
[10] Joachim
Griese,
Adaptive
Verfahren
im
betrieblichen
Entscheidungsprozess [engl. Adaptive Methods in Operational
Decision-Making], Physica Verlag, W¨urzburg - Wien, 1972
[11] Georg E. P. Box and Gwilym M. Jenkins, Time Series
Analysis: Forecasting and Control, 1st rev. ed., Holden
Day,Oakland, San Francisco, 1976
[12] Christopher A. Sims, ”Macroeconomics and Reality”, in:
Econometrica, Vol. 48, No. 1, pp. 1 - 48, 1980
[13] Robert E. Lucas, ”Econometric policy evaluation: A critique”,
In: K. Brunner and A. H. Meltzer (Eds), The Phillips Curve
and Labor Markets, Vol. 1, Carnegie-Rochester Conference
Series on Public Policy, pp. 19 - 46, Amsterdam, North-
Holland, 1976
[14] Peter J. Brockwell and Richard A. Davis, Time Series: Theory
and Methods, 2nd Edition, Springer Science + Business
Media, New York, 2006
[15] Roger A. Arnold, Economics, 9th ed., South-Western College
Publ., 2008
[16] Jack G. A. J. van der Vorst, Andrie J. M. Beulens, W. de
Wit, Paul van Beek, ”Supply chain management in food
chains: Improving performance by reducing uncertainty”, in:
International Transactions in Operational Research, Vol. 5(6),
pp 487 - 499, 1998
172
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-247-9
DBKDA 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

[17] Philip Doganis, Alex Alexandridis, Ranagiotis Patrinos,
and Haralambos Sarimveis, ”Time series sales forecast-
ing for short shelf-life food products based on artiﬁcial
neural networks and evolutionary computing”, Journal of
Food Engineering 75, pp. 196 - 204, Elsevier Ltd., 2006,
[Online] http://www.elsevier.com/locate/jfoodeng, last access:
30.08.2012
[18] Clive W. J. Granger and Paul Newbold, ”Economic Fore-
casting: The Atheist’s Viewpoint”, in: G.A. Renton (ed.),
Modelling the Economy, pp. 131 - 148, Heinemann, London,
1975
[19] Horst Rinne and Katja Specht, Zeitreihen - Statistische Mod-
ellierung, Sch¨atzung und Prognose [engl. Time Series - Sta-
tistical Modelling, Estimation and Prediction], Verlag Vahlen,
M¨unchen, 2002
[20] Alfred Marshall, Principles of Economics, 8th ed., Cosimo
Classics, 2009, ﬁrst publ. 1890
173
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-247-9
DBKDA 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

