A Knowledge Management Methodology for Studying Health Science Students’ 
Development of Misconceptions 
 
Meaghen Regts, Arturo Fernandez Espinosa, Miguel Vargas Martin, Jayshiro Tashiro  
University of Ontario Institute of Technology  
Oshawa, Ontario, Canada 
{meaghen.regts, arturo.fernandez, miguel.vargasmartin, jay.tashiro}@uoit.ca 
 
 
Abstract- Development of misconceptions by health care 
students and providers can be deadly to patients during health 
care planning and delivery. However, ongoing research of 
methodologies for knowledge management and knowledge 
discovery has provided ways to study and then remediate 
misconceptions. Effective use of data warehousing coupled to 
automated data mining has been successfully integrated to 
around complex learning objects.  Such integrations allow for 
monitoring and analysis of students’ and practicing healthcare 
providers’ processes of learning and decision making. In this 
paper, we describe how such coupling enables new types of 
methodologies which can lead to a better understanding of 
misconception development.  
 
Keywords-complex correlations; misconception development; 
navigational pathways; pattern recognition process mining.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 
The research literature does not provide a definitive 
understanding 
of 
how 
students 
and 
professional 
practitioners in healthcare develop misconceptions [1][2]. 
This deficiency in the literature is found across all academic 
and training levels. Yet, development of misconceptions are 
dangerous both to the individual who has a misconception 
as well as to others who may depend on that individual to 
use their knowledge and skills when making life and death 
decisions. For example, many health sciences students train 
to become nurses, doctors, and other allied health 
professionals. In their professional lives, these practitioners 
are frequently in situations requiring accurate pattern 
recognition of emerging signs and symptoms of a patient’s 
disease-injury state and then make decisions about 
appropriate treatment for the patient. 
Importantly, 
few 
evidence-based 
frameworks 
for 
education have been broadly deployed during the ongoing 
transformation of education in which there has been 
increased use of digital media and e-learning modalities [1-
3]. Of course few evidence-based frameworks were deployed 
for education prior to this transformation. However, the 
enormous pressure on faculty to deploy e-learning solutions 
for courses and curricula, as well as increased use of digital 
media and simulations as teaching-learning resources, has 
resulted in a plethora of educational methods and materials 
that have little empirical foundation supporting their actual 
effectiveness in improving learning and knowledge transfer. 
We found no broadly-based, generalizable studies probing 
how and why misconceptions are formed. Consequently, we 
have both an opportunity and an obligation to study how 
misconceptions are developed and how to mitigate or at least 
minimize development of misconceptions that impair clinical 
judgment during health care planning and delivery. 
 Tashiro, et al. [1] studied the critical issues outlined by 
the US National Research Council. A more recent literature 
review identified critical gaps in our knowledge, some 
identified in the National Research Council analysis, but 
others not identified. We found the development of 
misconceptions was one of 10 gaps in knowledge about how 
educational materials ―really work‖ to change an individual’s 
learning outcomes and willingness as well as ability to 
sustain behaviours related to learning [1][2][4][5]: (1) How 
does an educational environment impact disposition to 
engage in a learning process? (2) What are the relationships 
between the level of realism in an educational environment 
and learning outcomes? (3) How do you define the threshold 
of experience within an educational environment that leads 
to measurable learning outcomes? (4) What are the 
knowledge domains being developed during learning? (5) In 
which knowledge domain is learning being retained and how 
stable is the retention? (6) What is the disposition to act on 
the knowledge gained during work within an educational 
environment? (7) How well can the knowledge be 
transferred? (8) What learning outcomes (conceptual and 
performance competencies) are developed during the 
learning process while working within an educational 
environment? (9) How are misconceptions developed during 
and sustained after working within an educational 
environment? (10) How do teacher-student and student-
student social networks or e-communities impact learning. 
Interestingly, initial work indicated that development of 
misconceptions was the gap that was most difficult to study. 
However, as we conducted research on how to study 
misconception development, we began to test a methodology 
that allowed study of all 10 gaps. We report this newly 
developed methodology in this paper, using the study of 
misconceptions as a detailed example.  
As a starting point, a study of diverse research literature 
bases and interviews with educators led us to pose the 
following definition for the dynamic condition of a 
―misconception‖ [1][5-7]: The state of being unaware that 
your own knowledge domains and cognitive processing are 
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-185-4
DBKDA 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

incomplete or incorrect.‖ In this context, we are using 
knowledge domains and cognitive processing in the sense of 
Bloom’s Revised Cognitive Taxonomy [1][5][6][8][9], 
wherein knowledge domains include facts, concepts, 
procedures, and metacognition, while cognitive processing 
includes remembering, understanding, applying, utilizing, 
evaluating, and creating. While some researchers might 
choose a different taxonomy, the key point is that whatever 
taxonomy might be chosen it can be used to build a 
knowledge management system to study how people learn. 
Furthermore, a knowledge management system based on a 
cognitive taxonomy can be coupled to a second knowledge 
management system that contains multiple frameworks, each 
framework based a theory of cognition and theory of 
behaviour change [11][15]. Our research team worked 
through the integration of these two knowledge management 
systems and coupling them to a knowledge discovery system 
to study how misconceptions are developed during a learning 
process. Together, these systems can be used to create new 
types of research platforms that could be used to study 
misconceptions in concept development and how such 
misconceptions could be expressed during knowledge 
transfer into behaviors expressed through knowledge-skills 
transfers based on prior learning [19].  
The research platform can be conceptually described as a 
multi-tiered array of knowledge management and knowledge 
discovery systems.  A researcher engages at on tier and 
selects a theory of cognition and a theory of behavior 
change. At this tier, the knowledge management system 
algorithms 
select 
templates 
for 
instructional 
design 
consistent with the theories of cognition and behavior that 
were chosen by the researcher. The template is then mapped 
to 
learning 
activities, 
learning 
resources, 
learning 
assessments for each activity, and diagnostic feedback for 
each assessment.  
The next tier of the research platform then loads the 
learning activities, resources, assessments, and diagnostic 
feedback into the template so that the template becomes a 
suite of learning objects that together comprise an 
educational environment. The educational environment can 
then be loaded into a Web-based stand-alone simulation or 
into a module nested within a learning management system. 
The educational environment then is integrated with a 
knowledge discovery system. The knowledge discovery 
system has two subsystems. First there is a subsystem 
comprised of monitoring and reporting algorithms that can 
track all of a student's’ choices within the educational 
environments and how much time is spent in each choice of 
learning activity, resources, assessment, and diagnostic area 
loaded into that environment. The tracking-timing data are 
loaded to arrays collated by a set of reporting algorithms. 
The second subsystem then receives data arrays from the 
reporting algorithms and loads these arrays into data analysis 
options that can be selected by the researcher. Such data 
analysis options include a variety of data mining techniques. 
These types of multi-tiered educational environments 
designed as research platforms can then be opened to access 
and be used by students in classes or healthcare providers as 
part of professional development training. Such research 
platforms are critical to development of empirical 
frameworks for studying what really works in education, a 
challenge first posed in 1997 by Tashiro and Rowland 
[20][21]. However, even as digital media uses within all 
levels of academia and training has increased dramatically 
[22], there still are few evidence-based practice frameworks 
for education.  
Importantly, diverse learning environments based on 
digital media are becoming embedded in health care 
education and training at multiple levels ranging from all 
levels 
of 
academia, 
job 
training, 
and 
professional 
development and enhancement [1][2]. Do such educational 
digital media really work to improve learning and to reduce 
misconception development? In 2005, Aldrich stated that use 
of web-based learning as pedagogy has erupted so quickly it 
is comparable to the delivery of fast food. Just as fast food 
chains produce food that compromises nutritional value and 
increases health risks, educational interventions without 
substantive evidence for effectiveness may increase learners’ 
development of misconception. Since Aldrich’s paper was 
published, software companies and academic publishers have 
been flooding the educational and training markets with a 
variety of digital media and e-learning environments 
designed to serve diverse audiences in many disciplines. 
However, lack of a substantive empirical foundation for how 
effective such environments are in improving educational 
outcomes may actually lead to ineffective educational 
practices and dangerous misconceptions in health care 
education [23].  
The digital media transformation of education still has 
too few well-developed frameworks for evidence-based 
learning that might provide guidance for development of 
educational methods and materials that really work to 
improve educational outcomes in health care education 
[1][2]. We now turn to describing how misconception 
development can be analyzed by the multi-tiered research 
platform we have described.  
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows; 
Section II discusses the significance of this study while 
Section III describes our methodology. Results and 
discussion are provided in Section IV.   
 
II. 
SIGNIFICANCE OF STUDY 
The significance and primary outcome of the research has 
been a methodology of building systems for knowledge 
discovery that could be applied to analyzing the cognitive 
and behavioural paths leading to misconception development 
in health science students and practitioners. In addition, we 
were able to evaluate specific types of research platforms in 
which we had embedded digital media and e-learning 
environments. Studies of these platforms and their capacity 
for collecting and analyzing data within teaching-learning 
environments led to sensible and logistically feasible 
capacities for improved data analysis of large educational 
data sets. Such data sets from our educational research 
platform allow automated data collection, management, 
database construction, and data analysis with appropriate 
data mining methods that had to be applied and evaluated. 
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-185-4
DBKDA 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

Data mining and knowledge discovery have emerged as an 
important field of research with growing usage in 
educational research [24]. Data mining in education is an 
extension of the broader data mining research field. Common 
educational data mining applications include, but are not 
limited to, student models [29], educational software [23], 
collaborative learning environments [7], web logging [28], 
and factors associated with student development of 
misconceptions [1][7].  We have chosen to focus on the 
study of processes for collecting, managing, analyzing and 
interpreting data for investigating health science students and 
practitioner’s development of misconceptions. Reduction of 
misconception development in healthcare education and 
professional development will improve patient care and 
safety. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
The methodology developed to study processes of 
misconception formation evolved through four phases of 
research.  
Phase 1.—Teaching-Learning Simulative Environment  
The first tier of the research platform was simplified so 
that research tested a constructivist model consistent with 
one cognitive theory (Situative Learning Theory) and one 
theory of behavioural change (Planned Behaviour). This 
choice of a constructivist model was studied in the context 
of ways to improve healthcare education in the area of 
interprofessional care, which resulted in a template for 
interprofessional 
education 
instructional 
design. 
The 
template was then mapped to learning activities, learning 
resources for each activity, learning assessments, and 
diagnostic feedback for each assessment item. 
The second tier of the research platform was then built 
as a virtual world with multiple healthcare settings, each 
containing 
a 
complex 
patient 
(funding 
from 
HealthForceOntario in Canada). Using the instructional 
design template and learning objet mapping, we then 
developed a simulative teaching-learning environment that 
had instructional design attributes based on prior evidence-
based educational research [1-3][25]. This environment was 
called IPSims, an abbreviation for Interprofessional 
Simulations. As mentioned above, IPSims was developed to 
improve interprofessional care among healthcare students 
and providers and designed as a Web-delivered Flex-based 
set of patient simulations. The initial target audience was 
undergraduate health sciences students and the educational 
goal 
was 
to 
improve 
students’ 
development 
and 
demonstration of skills in interprofessional care of complex 
patients.  
IPSims was substantially derived from earlier work 
building and studying virtual hospital simulations for 
nursing students, a virtual medical office for medical 
assistant students, and virtual patient encounters simulations 
for paramedic training (funded by the United National 
Science Foundation and the United Sates National Institute 
of Nursing Research). As described by Tashiro and 
colleagues [25], the interprofessional care simulations were 
developed from a learning map of interprofessional core 
competencies that all health care providers should be able to 
demonstrate. The simulations were developed by teams of 
clinical experts, educational researchers, and software 
architects, with iterative review by expert panels. These 
experts provided evidence of construct validity in the patient 
cases and realism of the simulative teaching-learning 
environment of IPSims.  
The usability of components of the simulations was 
studied within focus groups of Canadian health care 
providers. This research was part of a second grant funded 
by HealthForceOntario that supported a project for 
improving interprofessional care planning and delivery by 
health care providers in Southern Ontario, Canada. 
Components of the simulations were demonstrated in the 
situated context of how they might be used for 
interprofessional care education of health care providers. 
Project researchers recorded comments within a qualitative 
phenomenological approach. Information from these studies 
was passed to software architects as the simulations were 
built.  
 
Phase 2.—Monitoring-Timing System  
After three iterations of qualitative probes of usability 
and construct validity studies, a software architecture and 
engineering team created the third tier of the research 
platform. We integrated a set of algorithms that identified 
each place within the IPSims a student visited, and started a 
timer for that place. Consequently, we had place-time data 
that were extracted and saved to data arrays as a student 
navigated through IPSims and engaged in any or the 
―places‖ within the simulation, which were basically 
learning activities, learning resources, assessments, or 
feedback systems. This monitoring-timing set of algorithms 
was derived from a patent by Vargas Martin, Hung, and 
Tashiro, providing a systematic method for studying 
learning processes and outcomes of health care students and 
practicing professionals [19].  
This set of algorithms was named PathFinder and was 
designed to expand our understanding of a student’s 
navigational decisions and time spent in simulation 
compartments while they were immersed in the online 
learning environment. The coupling of the second tier 
knowledge management system of IPSims with the third tier 
monitoring-timing 
system 
provided 
an 
automated, 
systematic teaching-learning environment that could be 
monitored and timed a student’s choices and engagements 
within the simulation, streaming data to a data warehouse to 
create a database of choices made by students and times of 
engagement with each choice. Such databases could then be 
called into data mining frameworks, e.g., to analyze possible 
associations with student learning outcomes. In particular, 
these types of data were tracks of students learning process 
and allowed us now study relationships between learning 
processes 
and 
learning 
outcomes 
indicative 
of 
misconceptions in knowledge or skills domains.  
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-185-4
DBKDA 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

The model for this type of research platform evolved 
from 
analyses 
of 
earlier 
work 
on 
misconception 
development. These earlier studies led us to conclude that 
sequences of choices by students during learning and 
expression of skills based on learning were critically 
important to exploring the complex associations among 
decisions made while learning, learning outcomes, and 
expression of learning as conceptual and performance 
competencies. These earlier studies led to research focused 
on navigational pathways which we termed decisional 
sequelae. We believed the research literature supported the 
idea that decisional sequelae are the key traces of cognitive 
and behavioral choices leading to learning, including 
learning in ways that lead to the development of 
misconceptions.  
The three tiers of the research platform provided us 
with the model system for studying health care students’ 
development of misconceptions. This is possible due to the 
PathFinder tracking mechanism within IPSims of student 
navigational pathways or decisional sequelae. We feel these 
navigational patterns or choices are an expression of 
cognitive processes that lead to effective metacognitive 
pattern recognition that is imperative for knowledge transfer 
within the health care domain [1]. Student misconceptions 
can occur prior to engaging in the learning environment, 
while immersed in the learning environment, and after the 
student has completed the learning activities. Consequently, 
misconceptions can lead to erroneous concepts in 
conceptual and performance competencies [26]. We believe 
misconceptions are defined as a state of being unaware of 
cognitive and behavioural deficits. As previously stated, 
misconceptions developed by health care students can lead 
to negative patient outcomes and we felt strongly that there 
should be a sense of urgency and responsibility to 
implement research on the development of health care 
students’ misconception development within teaching-
learning environments like IPSims and other educational 
digital media learning environment.  
 
Phase 3.—Testing in Health Sciences Courses 
When the IPSims environment was completed, the patient 
simulations were introduced into courses within the Health 
Sciences Faculty of the University of Ontario Institute of 
Technology. Student usage patterns were evaluated by 
reviewing discussion board threaded comments as well as 
emails to the faculty member teaching the courses. While 
being principally a qualitative phenomenological study, the 
results indicated the simulations were easily accessible from 
the BlackBoard learning management system used for the 
courses and that the navigational schema and content were 
usable by diverse students. These students were part of the 
Bachelor of Applied Health Sciences program that provided 
a baccalaureate curriculum to practicing heath care 
providers who had been initially trained in two-year 
undergraduate college programs.  
 
Phase 4.—Pre-processing Data for the Data Mining 
Analytical Tool  
Although we could easily record decisional sequelae and 
time spent in any part of an educational environment, we 
still had to solve issues related to preparing the data for a 
database to apply data mining methods to our data from the 
IPSims. We simplify a bit here, but the basic model 
conceptualizes 
the 
learning 
environment 
as 
a 
multidimensional array of ―places‖ in which a student can 
engage in learning activities, using learning resources, and 
take learning assessments that are coupled to diagnostic 
feedback arrays related to each assessment activity. Within 
the multidimensional array, navigation from a graphic user 
interface allows the student to ―move‖ from place to place 
and in each place engage in some type of learning. The 
PathFinder engine follows students as they move from place 
to place and starts a time clock at the entry to each place. 
The clock is stopped when the student exits that place. 
Through time, PathFinder records the places visited, which 
becomes the decisional sequela for each student. That is, the 
decisional sequela is the sequence of places visited within 
the educational environment. With the clock function 
always coupled to the place, the decisional sequela of a 
place within the multidimensional educational environment 
has concomitant time spent in each place visited. These data 
are collected and stored in a database that captures 
multidimensional data arrays for each student that reflects 
that student’s journey within an educational environment, 
such as IPSims. The data from the database is then 
configured, normalized, and transformed as necessary for 
the appropriate data mining methodology to which it has 
been coupled.  
Consequently, we have been able to track the 
development of health science students’ misconceptions by 
tracking their cognitive processes and behaviours within 
IPSims learning environment. With such data, we can ask 
fundamental questions related to misconception formation, 
such as, ―What are the complex relationships between an 
individual students learning and skills outcomes and the 
processes they expressed while learning?‖ Such questions 
are suitable for analysis and interpretation by data mining 
techniques. In this current work, we look at Association 
Rule mining for our data analysis method. This choice is 
based on the types of data we have, the assumptions of the 
Association Rule model, and our need to delineate processes 
of cognitive processing and behaviours in the context of 
what students can demonstrate they have learned and how 
they transfer that knowledge. 
IV. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
We have now completed the first major study using our 
research platform,, with the first tier allowing choices of 
cognitive and behavioral theories to express instructional 
design templates, with the second tier being a virtual world 
for active engagement by the student, and the third tier being 
the monitoring-timing system we call PathFinder. The 
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-185-4
DBKDA 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

research platform was used to conduct a study at the 
University of Ontario Institute of Technology (UOIT). In this 
paper, we have focused on the methodology for building 
knowledge management systems into research platforms to 
study misconception development.   
The IPSims-PathFinder research platform was built by an 
interdisciplinary collaboration of researchers. The first tier 
emerged from researchers conducting studies of theories of 
cognition and behavior change that looked at how 
instructional templates could be generated from grounded 
theory. The second tier emerged from a research team who 
built simulations based on instructional templates. This team 
included content experts who assembled case studies of 
complex patients and the realistic scenarios in which such 
patients would be found within heath care settings. 
Additionally, this team included educational researcher who 
took these scenarios and mapped them to the instructional 
design template for a particular combination of theories of 
cognition and behavioral change. Such mapping was based 
on a target audience of undergraduate Health Sciences 
students who would need the kind of interprofessional 
training for which IPSims was being designed. Together, the 
content experts and educational researchers created a 
learning map for the simulations that delineated the places 
within the virtual world that patients would exist at each 
moment in time as their simulation unfolded. Within each 
place, educators and researchers selected a set of learning 
activities, learning resources, learning assessments, and 
diagnostic feedback for students for each learning 
assessment. The Learning Map was then provided to a 
software 
design-engineering 
team, 
which 
had 
the 
responsibility of translating the Learning Maps into the 
designs of each immersive learning experience in the IPSims 
teaching-learning-assessment system. The designs were 
translated into immersive environments so that each 
environment becomes a functioning portion of Flex-based 
IPSims simulations. The design was prototyped and passed 
through usability tests. An important intermediate step was 
creating a prototype that allowed iterative use case analyses. 
Finally, the software design-engineering team integrated the 
PathFinder monitoring-timing system. 
In Figure 1, we show an interface from the IPSims 
system. Again, IPSims was developed as the prototype for an 
immersive experience in which undergraduate health 
sciences 
students 
could 
develop 
and 
demonstrate 
competencies in interprofessional planning and delivery of 
health care services. The IPSims system shown in Figure 1 
allowed researchers to express every pathway that a student 
might take in an immersive environment. In the case of 
IPSims, there were three scenarios developed by clinical 
experts to portray different facets for the care of each patient, 
with six patients in total. Figure 1 shows a graphic user 
interface (GUI) for a simulation of an elderly male patient. 
On the Figure 1 GUI, you can see three buttons on a top 
navigational bar Scenario1-Scenario3, which allow a 
researcher to quickly shift scenarios. In this case of elder 
care, the GUI shows Scenario1 selected, in which we can 
explore possible interprofessional health team interactions in 
a hospital emergency room after the man fell and injured 
himself. Scenario 2 portrays the elder man’s in his home and 
the interactions during a home health visit as a follow-up to 
hospital discharge. Scenario 3 portrays a meeting in the elder 
man’s home involving him, his daughter, and a mental health 
team. The GUI also shows a top navigational bar for Library, 
Scopes of Practice, and IP Competencies. These are 
Learning Resources that would be available within the 
immersive environment for every scenario of every 
immersive environment for improving competencies related 
to elder care in this simulation.  
The left-side navigation bar in the GUI of Figure 1 
provides interactions specific to a particular scenario. So, 
when the Scenario1 button is clicked on the top navigation 
bar, data are loaded so that the left-hand navigational bar 
buttons access data relevant only to the emergency room 
visit that was conceived as the immersive environment of 
Scenario1. The IPSims environment allows for iterations of 
use case analyses to probe how and why a student might 
make choices within an immersive teaching-learning-
assessment environment. One example of a use case iteration 
is provided below in Figure 1. The use case of Figure 3 
unfolds in the following manner.  
 
 
 
 
1. Three students enter the teaching-learning-assessment 
environment. They have been assigned to complete the same 
learning activity in Scenario 1. Each selects Scenario 1, and 
selects the Learning Activity button on the left side of the 
GUI.  
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-185-4
DBKDA 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

2. The Learning Activity functionality opens an 
instruction page. A sample page is provided below, along 
with an interprofessional care core competency.  
 
Scenario 1: Emergency Room  
Competency 3.1.1 – Respects complementary nature 
of health team members’ scopes of practice.  
Learning Activity 1 — You are providing care for an 
elder man who has fallen in his home and has been 
transported to the Emergency Department. Your 
colleagues include an Emergency Department triage 
nurse and physician, as well as a Geriatric Emergency 
Management RN. All of you are working together in the 
Emergency Room to care for this elder man. What should 
your colleagues’ roles be in providing care for this 
patient? How are these roles complementary? In what 
ways do these practitioners fulfill their designated roles 
and in what ways do they not work within their scopes of 
practice?  
 
3. Each student begins to work on this Learning Activity, 
but imagine that each of the three students chose a different 
pathway through the simulation. You can see in Figure 1 that 
we show a representation of how the three students could 
have taken different pathways within the IPSims teaching-
learning assessment environment.  
Indeed, you can see in Figure 1 that Student1 went to the 
library to review articles on interprofessional care. Student2 
also went to the Library but then came back to the Learning 
Activity, and finally decides to go to the Scopes of Practice 
resource. Student3 decided first to view the Case Records, 
but then went back to the Learning Activity and 
subsequently decided to examine the Scopes of Practice 
Resource, but went to a different area of that resource than 
Student2. 
The key point of this methodology is that at each of the 
―places‖ visited by the student, PathFinder records the 
location and starts a clock. The clock times the student’s 
presence within the location and when the student navigates 
out of the location, the time is recorded for that moment of 
the student’s journey through the IPSims learning 
environment. Figure 1 shows the decisional sequela of each 
student, that is, the place to place journey within the IPSims 
environment, and along that decisional sequela is the time 
spent in each location of the journey. However, the usage of 
term location needs to be reined here. Some locations are just 
like a real hospital room in the sense that a student can 
engage in many interactions with a patient, equipment, 
electronic health records, and so on.  
Figure 1 is a representation of three students’ possible 
excursions into the IPSims learning environment. In this 
figure, the paths of three different students are described, 
showing the choices at each level of navigation (1st, 2nd, and 
so on).  
In our usage of ―location‖, we are evoking the 
multidimensional sense of the database structure mentioned 
earlier. That is, a student within IPSims can go to locations 
that are analogous to a room. Within that room, there are 
locations that allow access too many types of interactions, 
such as accessing and using as-needed teaching and learning 
resources. So, Student1 went to the library to review articles 
on interprofessional care. Student2 also went to the Library 
but returned to the Learning Activity location before 
navigating to the Scopes of Practice resource. In contrast, 
Student3 decided viewed the Case Records, next went back 
to the Learning Activity, then navigated Scopes of Practice 
resource, but went into a different area of that resource than 
Student2. The term ―location‖ has a variety of different 
meaning. Some locations are analogous to a physical place 
(e.g., Library, Patient’s Room for a Case Encounter, a Web-
link resource within the Scopes of Practice functionality. 
Other locations are analogous to an activity, such as reading 
a paper in the Library, exploring a Web-site for Scopes of 
Practice of different types of clinicians, reading one of the 
different types of patient records within the Case Records 
functionality.  
Consequently, we had to explore how the decisional 
sequela and time data for each student could be 
contextualized in semantic and workflow meaning. For 
example, if a student navigated to the Scopes of Practice 
location, they would find Web-links to over a hundred 
different types of health care providers and for each type of 
provider a description of their respective scope of practice. 
So PathFinder would record accessing the Scopes of Practice 
portal and start a clock. If the student accessed a Web-link 
that location would be recorded and another clock would 
start. This would be true for any Web-link accessed with the 
Scopes of Practice location, with each Web-link accessed 
becoming a new location with a new clock. These types of 
analyses of students’ journeys and work convinced us that 
the locations within the teaching-learning-assessment 
environment could be conceptualized as locations within a 
cognitive process. So, the term ―location‖ was not 
particularly problematic, despite its usual implication for 
physical space or something analogous to physical space.  
We continued studying the methodology for building and 
using the IPSims-Pathfinder combined education and 
research system. Although the delineation of a user’s 
decisional sequelae and associated time coding were robust, 
the research literature suggests there are other types of data 
that may be critical to understanding the complexities of 
cognitive processing and behavioural choices. Therefore, we 
began building into the IPSims environment a variety of data 
collection pathways that could complement the data 
representation of a student’s journey through the learning 
environment of IPSims.  
One of our studies built in a data collection process that 
would provide a student user profile. This profile was a set of 
variables, with variable values collected when a student 
entered the IPSims environment for the first time. These 
variables were taken from the research literature as possible 
covariates shaping learning processes. Our choice of 
variables included, age, gender, prior academic knowledge, 
perceived academic success, discipline major, academic 
class, and a cluster of variables assessing digital literacy.  
A second study examined choices of variables that 
research literature suggests are important in shaping 
cognitive processes and behavioural choices. These included 
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-185-4
DBKDA 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

variable clusters for measuring disposition to engage in 
higher order reasoning, formal operational reasoning, and 
value placed on a learning experience, expectations for 
success in a learning experience, perceptions of and 
preferences for digital learning objects and online learning 
modalities, and perceptions of usability of learning objects 
and simulations with the different situated experiences of a 
virtual world.  
These additional data are now being integrated into the 
database for automated data collection systems of the 
coupled IPSims-PathFinder teaching-learning-assessment 
system. The methodology described in this paper provides a 
means to study misconception development. We recently 
completed a study of 67 students in the Health Sciences 
Faculty of UOIT. A subsequent paper will describe the 
methodology in action and the detailed analysis of how 
misconceptions development can be studied and remedied. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
In conclusion, we have developed a methodology that 
allows us to study learning processes as a sequence of 
decisions an time spent within learning activities, learning 
resources, leaning outcomes assessments, and diagnostic 
feedback for any assessment item. Such activities, resources, 
and so on, are ―places‖ within an educational environment. 
We have called these earning processes decisional sequelae 
in the context of how data related to the processes are 
collected and analyzed as decisions made by a student to 
engage and spend time at certain ―places‖ within a learning 
environment.  Importantly, such decisional sequelae now can 
provide an opportunity to study students’ development of 
misconceptions. In a subsequent paper we will provide the 
data analyses of the first set of student research subjects who 
were undergraduates in the Health Sciences Faculty at UOIT. 
This next paper will show the efficacy of the methodology 
for identifying learning processes as decisional sequelae that 
lead to misconception development. 
However, 
our 
ongoing 
work 
using 
knowledge 
management systems to study misconceptions is part of a 
larger research program to build and evaluate an inclusive 
and adaptive teaching-learning-assessment-diagnostic system 
in which we can embed a diverse array of educational 
environments. Certainly, we believe in the importance of 
identifying decisions and patterns of learning engagement 
that lead to misconception development. Nevertheless, 
difficulties studying misconception development is only part 
of a larger set of barriers to transforming education into a 
more evidence-based praxis. Our ongoing research has 
become increasingly focused on creating human-computer 
interfaces that are truly inclusive in the way these interfaces 
engage learners, probe and adjust to their accessibility needs, 
and identify their preferences for learning. Our model of 
these interfaces will create a learner profile that can then be 
used to adapt a computer-based learning environment 
dynamically in order to meet the learning attributes of the 
respective 
learner’s 
profile. 
Knowledge 
management 
systems can be used to configure a teaching-learning-
assessment-diagnostic educational environment based on the 
learner profile. The methodology for studying student 
outcomes, including misconception development, can then 
be integrated into this educational environment.  
Furthermore, we already have developed meta-level 
knowledge management systems that can be used to select 
theories of cognition and behavioral change, along with their 
respective associated instructional design templates. These 
templates can be integrated with the inclusive-adaptive 
interface to allow instructors or researchers to select 
combinations of theories of cognition and behavior change. 
Consequently, a learner’s profile can then be mapped to 
instructional templates based on a particular combination of 
theories and the teaching-learning-assessment-diagnostic 
environment configured to be consistent with that theory 
combination. The result is a truly inclusive-adaptive 
educational environment based on grounded theory and 
nested within a research platform. Such research platforms 
will allow cross-theory studies that will advance our 
understanding of how to build evidence-based frameworks 
for educational methods and materials. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported in part by the Social Sciences 
and Humanities Research Council of Canada.   
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Tashiro, J., Hung, P., and Vargas Martin, M.: Evidence-Based 
Educational Practices and a Theoretical Framework for 
Hybrid Learning. In R. Kwan et al. (eds.): ICHL 2011, LNCS 
6837, pp. 51–72, 2011.Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 
(2011)  
[2] Tashiro, J., Hung, P. C. K., and Vargas Martin, M.: ROAD-
MAP for Educational Simulations and Serious Games. In 
Tsang, P., Cheung, S. K. S, Lee, C. S. K., Huang, R. (eds.) 
Hybrid Learning – Proceedings of The Third International 
Conference ICHL, pp. 186-204. Beijing China (August 2010)  
[3] Garcia-Ruiz, M.A., Tashiro, J., Kapralos, B., and Vargas 
Martin, M.: Crouching Tangents, Hidden Danger: Assessing 
Development of Dangerous Misconceptions Within Serious 
Games For Health care Education. In Hai-Jew, S. (ed.). 
Virtual Immersive and 3D Learning Spaces: Emerging 
Technologies and Trends, pp. 269-306. IGI Global, Hershey 
(2011)  
[4] Federation of American Scientists: Summit on Educational 
Games – Harnessing the power of Video Games for Learning. 
Federation of American Scientists, Washington, DC (2006)  
[5] Patel, V.L., Yoskowitz, N. A., Arocha, J. F., and Shortliffe, E. 
H.: Cognitive and learning sciences in biomedical and health 
instructional design: A Review with Lessons for Biomedical 
Informatics Education. Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 42, 
176-197 (2009)  
[6] Anderson, L. and Krathwohl, D.: A Taxonomy For Learning, 
Teaching, and Assessing. Longman, New York (2001)  
[7] Baker, R. and Yacef, K.: The State of Educational Data Mining 
in 2009: A Review and Future Visions (2009)  
[8] Michael, J.A., Richardson, D., Rovick, A., Modell, H., Bruce, 
D., Horwitz, B., Hudson, M., Silverthorn, D., Whitescarver, 
S., and Williams, S. Undergraduate students' misconceptions 
about respiratory physiology. Advances in Physiology 
Education, 22(1), 127-135. (1999).  
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-185-4
DBKDA 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

[9] Balkissoon, R., Blossfield, K., Salud, L., Ford, D., and Pugh, C. 
Lost in translation: Unfolding medical students' 
misconceptions of how to perform a clinical digital rectal 
examination. The American Journal of Surgery, 197, 525-532. 
(2009).  
[10] Sorden, S.D.: A Cognitive Approach to Instructional Design 
for Multimedia Learning. Informing Science Journal, 8, 263-
279 (2005)  
[11] Mayer, R.E., Fennell, S., Farmer, L., and Campbell, J.: A 
Personalization Effect in Multimedia Learning: Students 
Learn Better When Words Are in Conversational Style Rather 
Than Formal Style. Journal of Educational Psychology, 96(2), 
389-395 (2004)  
[12] Martin, L., Haskard-Zolnierek, K., and DiMatteo, M.R.: 
Health Behavior Change and Treatment Adherence: 
Evidence-based Guidelines for Improving Health Care. 
Oxford University Press, New York (2010)  
[13] Prochaska, J.O., Redding, C.A., and Evers, K.E.: The 
Transtheoretical Model and stages of change. In Glanz K., 
Rimer B., Viswanath K. (eds.) Health Behavior and health 
Education, pp. 97-121. Jossey-Bass, San Francisco (2008)  
[14] DiMatteo, M.R., & DiNicola, D.: Achieving Patient 
Compliance. Pergamon Press, New York (1982)  
[15] Fishbein, M., Hennessey, M., Kamb, M., Bolan, G., 
Hoxworth, T., Latesta, M., et al.: Using Intervention Therapy 
to Model Factors Influencing Behavior Change: Project 
RESPECT. Evaluation and Health Professions, 24(4), 363-
384 (2001).  
[16] Bensley, R., Mercer, N., Brusk, J., Underhile, R., Rivas, J., 
Anderson, J., Kelleher, D., and Lupella, M, de Jager, A.C..: 
The e-Health Behavior Management Model: A Stage-based 
Approach to Behavior Change and Management. Preventing 
Chronic Disease, 1(4), A14. (2004)  
[17] Baranowski, T., Cullen, K., Nicklas, T., Thompson, D., and 
Baranowski, J.: Are Current Health Behavioral Change 
Models Helpful in Guiding Prevention of Weight Gain 
Efforts? Obesity Research (Suppl.), 23S-43S (2003)  
[18] Leventhal, H., Halm, E., Horowitz, C., Leventhal, E., and 
Ozakinci, G.: Living with chronic Illness: A Contextualized, 
Self-Regulation Approach, In Sutton, S, Baum, A. and 
Johnston, M. (eds.) Handbook of Health Psychology, pp. 159-
194. Sage Publications, London, (2004)  
[19] Vargas Martin, M., Hung, P.C.K., and Tashiro, J.: Method for 
Competency Assessment of Health care Students and 
Practitioners. U.S. Patent (pending) No. 61/162,597. U.S. 
Patent and Trademark Office, Washington, DC: (2009)  
[20] Tashiro, J.S. and Rowland, P.M..: What Works: Empirical 
approaches to restructuring courses in biology and 
environmental sciences. In McNeal A, D’Avanzo, C. (eds.), 
Student Active Science – Models of Innovation in College 
Science Teaching, pp. 163--187. Harcourt, Brace, & 
Company, New York (1997)  
[21] Tashiro, J.: Ethical Analysis of Publisher and Faculty Roles in 
Building and Using Electronic Educational Products. Journal 
of Electronic Commerce in Organizations, 7(1), 1-17 (2009)  
[22] Rudak, L. and Sidor, D. Taxonomy of E-courses. In Islander, 
M., Kapila, V., Karim, M. A. (eds.) Technological 
Developments in Education and Automation, pp. 275-280. 
Springer Science and Budiness Media, New York (2010).  
[23] Aldrich, C. Learning by doing. San Francisco, CA: Pfeiffer. 
(2005).  
[24] Cios, K. and Kurgan, L.: Trends in Data Mining and 
Knowledge Discovery (2009)  
[25] Tashiro, J., Byrne, C., Kitchen, L., Vogel, E., and Bianco, C.: 
The Development of Competencies in Interprofessional 
Health care for Use in Health Sciences Educational Programs. 
Journal of Research in Interprofessional Practice and 
Education, 2.1, 1-20. (2011)  
[26] Ozmen, H. Some student misconceptions in chemistry: A 
literature review of chemical bonding. Journal of Science 
Education and Technology, 13(2), 147-159. (2004).  
[27] Berthold, M.R., Borgelt, C., Hoppner, F., and Klawonn, F. 
Guide to Intelligent Data Analysis: How to Intelligently Make 
Sense of Real Data. Springer-Verlag, London. (2010). DOI: 
10.1007/978-1-84882-260-3_4 
[28] Romero, C. and Ventura, S.  ( 2010).  Educational Data 
Mining: A Review of the State of the Art.  IEEE transactions 
on Systems, Man, and cybernetics-Part C:  Applications and 
Reviews.  40(6) November.  DOI:  
10.1109?TSMCC.2010.2053532  
[29] Scheuer, O. and McLaren, B. 2011. Educational Data Mining:  
Encyclopaedia of the Sciences of Learning, Springer.
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-185-4
DBKDA 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

