BI: Lean Manufacturing Indicators Applied to HR Applications - An
Implementation Study
Robson Thanael Poffo
Innovation
TOTVS
Joinville, Brazil
robson.poffo@totvs.com.br
Mehran Misaghi
Researcher
SOCIESC
Joinville, Brazil
mehran@sociesc.org.br
Abstract—In the past years the world has witnessed a
large number of changes
motivated by the ﬁnancial crisis
concerning how the process of management occurs on produc-
tion on factories. A way to control this situation is through
indicators. This article describes not only usual indicators
in lean manufacturing that can be used in human resource
management but also the best way to design the data warehouse
considering the level of granularity and the level of data
detail. To begin with, we will analyze the lean manufacturing
indicators addressed in the academic literature. Furthermore,
we will analyze these indicators with the indicators used by
leading research companies in Brazil. Lastly, we will design
the data warehouse to comport these indicators considering
the level of granularity and the level of details to analyze
these data. By the end of this project, we intend to get
the list of indicators capable of managing and analyzing the
production and performance of the employees in factories.
With these indicators, the factory will be able to manage the
team correctly, whatever the situation of global ﬁnance is. This
approach allows us to determine the indicators that will help
the company identify problems on the team management for
increasing the production and it will also contribute for real
growth of the company. The indicators identiﬁed in this article
will determinate the way to implement successfully BI solutions
associated with human resource systems and manufacturing
systems.
Keywords-BI; Lean Manufacturing; Indicators; HR Systems.
I. INTRODUCTION
Everything we do has a goal. The goals of generating
indicators are many, and the focus of this article is studying
the lean production indicators that can be applied to people
management. Carreira [1] comments that maybe one of the
essential principles of the lean production is the continuous
elimination of waste. In order to reduce or eliminate the
waste of any activity / process, as lean production preaches,
we need ﬁrst to measure this activity / process. Without
the follow-up of the executed processes, it is not possible
to indicate if anything needs enhancement. Based on this
assumption, this article studies the indicators for monitoring
and reducing the waste associated to people management
systems. The ﬁrst question is: why applying the principle of
lean production to monitor indicators in people management
systems? The answer is simple: waste reduction can be
achieved through employee performance or allocation. Waste
is not only associated to raw material, but also to the
processes that occur inside the company. When we think
about waste, the ﬁrst thing that comes to mind is physical
material, but we cannot forget that even employees can be
a part of waste (or even wasted).
As Hibbs and Sullivan [2] say, the purpose of lean
manufacturing is to deliver the ﬁnal product to the client
as fast as possible, and one way to do that is ﬁnding and
eliminating waste. However, identifying what is and what
isn’t waste is not always an obvious task. Shigeo Shingo
[3], co-developer of Toyotas production system, identiﬁed
seven types of waste (and one additional type) that can be
easily remembered by the acronym DOTWIMP:
1) Defects: This is probably the most obvious type of
waste, lean production focus on preventing defects
differently from the usual ﬁnding and repairing them.
2) Overproduction: producing more than necessary or
producing before it is necessary is regularly seen as
stocking.
3) Transportation: Unnecessary movement between pro-
cesses. When moving material or items between fac-
tories, work cells, ofﬁces or machines, no value is
generated.
4) Waiting: People or items waiting for the next produc-
tion process.
5) Inventory: All material, work in progress and ﬁnal
product that is not initially processed. Inventory over
the minimum will take on space and generate delays
on identifying ﬂaws.
6) Motion: People or equipment in motion or moving
more than necessary to execute the necessary.
7) Processing: Processing the ﬁnal product to the client
beyond necessary, which only add costs and no value
to it.
8) Additional eighth waste: This is regularly noted as
an additional waste to the seven original ones, and
it refers to under using the creativity and abilities of
the employees.
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-185-4
DBKDA 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

Having identiﬁed the waste possibilities related to the em-
ployees, it will be necessary to determine a data warehouse
that might uphold this data, and that will allow us to focus
on the problem.
According to Vercellis [4], a data warehouse depends on
the objective that is aimed to achieve. Before designing a
data warehouse, we need to bear in mind which questions
we would like to answer. For example, which cost center
is spending more, or from the most costly center, which
is the employee generating more costs? The answer to this
question is directly related to the granularity of the data
warehouse, and it is extremely important for the success of
the project. With all these premises, by the end of the project
we will have indicators connected to the lean manufacture
that will be able to be applied to the human resources
management. Besides that, we will have a data warehouse
implementation proposal correspondent to the level of data
granularity necessity.
II. METHODS
According to McClellan [5], for approximately 20 years
the Manufacturing Execution Systems (MES) were the focus
for manufacture management. Initially, it was developed
for providing the ﬁrst management line, with visibility to
manage the job requests and the attributions of the work
units. The MES systems were involved on the indispens-
able connection between the stakeholders and the logistics
production processes events. For the fact that the MES
system can manage and execute the log of events of the
logistics and production processes, they are an important and
accurate real-time data source, becoming integrated to the
corporation intelligence. In another way, the MES systems
are a collection of business processes that provide a real time
vision of events that are happening in the factory execution
plan, or calculates how much and what must be produced,
according to data received from the Enterprise Resource
Planning (ERP) system.
Wang [6] comments that the maximum priority of the lean
manufacture is to measure the performance of the processes.
The measurement of the process performance provides the
desirable level of results, which is the objective for taking a
decision on production and it helps identifying the desired
production level for the programmed activities. Now, be
careful with the objective that you are willing to ﬁnd through
the indicators; you might achieve them is what said Levinson
and Rerick [7]. Meaning, many times the indicators will
reveal information that we are not willing to listen to or
recognize.
Levinson and Rerick [7] highlights 3 rules for identifying
process performance indicators:
1) Indicators need to be objective. The indicators must be
precisely deﬁned and quantiﬁable (needs to be possible
to measure in numbers).
2) The process measured through the indicator needs
to be under the control of the team or person that
will execute the measurement (the indicator needs self
control).
3) The indicator needs to encourage the work environ-
ment and needs to help the company to obtain corpo-
rate results. Besides the indicators being related to the
objectives of the company, it needs to be understood
by all as such.
The items above highlighted the indicators characteris-
tics, in order for it to have an expected goal that can be
understood by everybody in the company as constructive
indicators. This will help the teams to manage these indi-
cators and work positively on obtaining such, or else the
indicator might be seen as criticism directly connected to a
team or process. The highlighted items showed the objective
of the indicators related to the manufacture process to the
processes inside a factory. The responsible body of execution
of processes inside factories is human resources, or, besides
worrying about how the processes are being managed, there
is a need to stay alert to the individual performance of the
human resources (people).
According to Gawron [8], there are two ways to evaluate
the performance of a person:
1) Subjective method: through opinion obtained in inter-
views and questioning or through the work environ-
ment follow-up.
2) Experimental method: through data collection for mea-
suring performance.
The main way of measuring production is though gath-
ering of data for performance measurement. This analysis
form is easier, as it can be executed in an automatic way
through an information gathering system and can be seen
in a synthesized way (making people groups, processes
and sector analysis easier) or in an analytical way. For the
generation of lean manufacture indicators related to people
management, the work must use long-standing references
on people management processes, i.e. Before entering on
detailing of a few selected indicators, some concepts must
be understood:[9]
1) Effort: Level of energy and human creativity put in a
task.
2) Performance: Way of using the effort to achieve a ﬁnal
goal.
3) Goal: What is wanted to obtain joining effort and
performance on a task.
4) Results: the consequence of using this energy.
5) Productivity: the proportion between the obtained re-
sult and the amount of energy necessary to obtain the
result.
As some examples of indicators that will be dealt with on
the ongoing task, we quote a few indicators below:
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-185-4
DBKDA 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

1) Indicator to show the quantity of items produced by
hour by an employee.
Productivity =
TotalofProducedUnits
TotalofProductionHours
2) Indicator to show the wage cost of each unit produced,
that is, the percentage of an employees wage that the
product retains by its manufacture process.
WageCostUnit = AmountofRemuneration
TotalofProducedUnits
The generation of the indicators shown above and other
indicators that will be worked on, will depend on obtaining
data. The methods for obtaining the necessary data for
generating the indicators for its turn will depend on the area
of execution of the indicators. The indicators generated in
this task can be applied to several types of manufacturing
companies, considering that in some cases the possibility of
investment of the client for producing data will be limited.
The gathering of information for the indicator generation
may vary from manual data input, the manufacture item
read through QR Code or through the manufacturing items
through the RFID readers. All these processes can be
grouped according to the request related to the process of
obtaining data.
III. EXPECTED RESULTS
Because this article is a work in progress, the expected
ﬁnal result is establishing a list of indicators connected
to the manufacturing and applicable to human resources
management.
As highlighted on Section II, the process of measurement
of the current situation is necessary to execute the production
planning of a factory. Using, as focus, sectors that depend on
human power to develop its part, there is a need to measure
the performance of not only the processes, but also of human
resources. Nowadays, there is extensive literature related to
measuring the development of processes of manufacture, but
our objective is to execute the performance measurement
of the human resources connected to the manufacturing
processes, being the human resources, in some processes of
manufacturing, essential. The proposal of data warehouse
that we will have by the end of the project must gather all
clients needs, that is, the level of granularity must be from
a managing level to an operational level. Considering that
the main goal in deﬁning these indicators is waste reduction
(employee) and faster delivery of the ﬁnal product to the
client, we must consider these characteristics on the data
warehouse deﬁnition (taking into account the dimensions).
Initially, the following pattern can be used for the deﬁnition
of the data warehouse (this will suffer alterations as the work
evolves):
1) Dimensions: It will be used to deﬁne the granularity
of data in the moment of the indicators exhibition.
2) Measurements: It will be used to deﬁne the granu-
larity of data in the moment of the exhibition of the
indicators.
For proving the work efﬁciency executed, the indicators
and the model of data warehouse will be applied to the
process of manufacturing of a software house (where the
data is collected through a managing system of software de-
velopment management). Other clients will be used for val-
idation of the projects efﬁciency. The company responsible
for the project development counts with about 20 thousand
clients from many different areas. The article ﬁnds itself
at this moment on the conclusion step of the deﬁnition of
which indicators will be developed. The technical deﬁnitions
concerning the data warehouse developed until now are
described in this article.
IV. STATE OF THE ART
In order to write this article, a research was made to ﬁnd
other existent articles that talked about the same topics of
this work in progress. The more important ones are listed
below:
1) Lupu, Bloga, Sabau and Muntean [10]: An article that
details the development of real projects of business
intelligence in an ERP system. The article deﬁnes
some success factors for BI projects integrated to ERP
systems.
2) Petterson [11]: An article that deﬁnes the concepts,
methods and results of lean manufacture and also ver-
ies the differences between other processes popularly
known as factory management.
3) George [12]: It presents concepts related to lean
manufacture and shows how companies can use them
to reduce waste and increase competitive advantage
considering the current global economical situation.
The written works used in this article will help to develop
this project in a way that each of the mentioned references is
able to connect in a specic way to the work to be produced.
In [12], George details the Six Sigmas of lean manufacture
and how to implement them in order to prevent the company
from having a ﬁnancial crisis (as the one that happened in
2008), the work in progress detailed in the article possesses
a work line very similar to the one developed in [12], the
difference is that this work in progress focus on deﬁnition
and complementation, where lean manufacture indicators
are related to people management. Choosing the topic of
this work in progress was inspired by the needs of the
market to implement indicators for people management as a
solution for the ones already existent in people management.
Another motivating factor is the lack of written works in
this area. By the end of this article, we will have the
deﬁnition of a data warehouse ambiance to contemplate lean
manufacture indicators related to people management. The
main difference between this article and the ones mentioned
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-185-4
DBKDA 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

above are the deﬁnition of lean manufacture and how to
apply them in a software of people management in the
Brazilian market.
V. CONCLUSION
This article briefs objectives and activities that are in-
tended to be achieved with this project. This way, partially,
we conclude that this paper will help deﬁning the indi-
cators to be used by people management systems. Using
manufacture indicators as background, this article identiﬁes
manufacturing indicators applicable to people management,
with the goal of eliminating waste, remembering that this
objective is continuous on implementing lean manufacturing.
With the absence of literature with this level of focus on the
subject, this article has the objective of gathering academic
material to this area of great importance on industries.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank all the people who helped directly
and indirectly the development of this work so far.
REFERENCES
[1] B. Carreira, Lean manufacturing that works: powerful tools
for dramatically reducing waste and maximizing proﬁts.
Amacom Books, 2005.
[2] S. J. Curt Hibbs and M. Sullivan, The art of lean software
development.
O’ Reilly, 2009.
[3] S. Shingo, A Study of the Toyota Production System.
Pro-
ductivity Press, 1989.
[4] C. Vercellis, Business Intelligence: Data Mining and Opti-
mization for Decision Making.
John Wiley and Sons, 2009.
[5] M.
McClellan,
“The
heart
of
intelligent
manufacturing,”
2004.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.informationweek.com/news/software/bi/22103211
[6] J. X. Wang, Lean Manufacturing: Business Bottom-Line
Based.
CTC Press, 2010.
[7] W. A. Levinson and R. A. Rerick, Lean Enterprise: A
Synergistic Approach to Minimizing Waste.
ASQ, 2002.
[8] V. J. Gawron, Human Performance Measures Handbook.
CRC Press, 2000.
[9] J. Bancaleiro, “Indicadores tradicionais de recursos hu-
manos,” Seminar HR Metrics - IIR, Lisboa, 2006.
[10] A. R. Lupu, R. Bologa, G. Sabau, and M. Muntean, “In-
ﬂuence factors of business intelligence in the context of erp
projects,” International Journal of education and Information
Technologies, 2007.
[11] J. Pettersen, “Deﬁning lean production: Some conceptual
and practical issues,” International Journal of education and
Information Technologies, 2009.
[12] M. O. George, The lean six sigma guide to doing more with
less : cut costs, reduce waste, and lower your overhead. John
Wiley Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey, 2010.
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-185-4
DBKDA 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

