 
 
A Business Intelligence Solution for Supporting Making Decision in Fulfillment 
Process 
Thi Kim Hien Le, Thuong Pham Thi, Sheng-Tun Li 
Department of Industrial and Information Management 
National Cheng Kung University 
Tainan, Taiwan 
Email: hienltk.90@gmail.com,  
                          hocduong_2003@yahoo.com.hk            
          stli@mail.ncku.edu.tw 
 
Abstract — There are many researches about applying 
Business Intelligence (BI) in supporting decision in many fields 
but there are very few researches about how to utilize this 
technology to assist the decision making in business processes. 
To address this gap, this study aims to apply On-Line 
analytical 
processing 
(OLAP), 
which 
is 
a 
significant 
component of BI that enables users to easily and selectively 
extract and view data from different points of view to back the 
manager make better decisions in fulfillment process. This 
study investigates the sales management theory, as well as 
balanced scorecard and OLAP technology to propose the 
decisions and the sample reports in the process which could be 
supported by OLAP including: the sales volume, the main 
product of the company, the salary and the bonus for sales 
staff, the credit limit and the price policy for customers. 
Keywords-business intelligence; OLAP; fulfillment process; 
support decision-making; balanced scorecard . 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
On-Line analytical processing (OLAP) involved in a 
decision 
support 
system 
provides 
administrators 
a 
multidimensional view, on many aspects of a problem, with 
large amounts of data, thereby making timely and accurate 
decisions, raising high competitive advantage for businesses 
[1]. 
In 2017, Bouakkaz et al. [3] have carried out a research 
about performing textual data, which is a key tool to 
demonstrate textual data analysis in OLAP for decision 
support systems. This investigation indicated that provided 
techniques and tools for both databases and data warehouses 
just focus mainly on numerical data. Therefore, they have 
provided a new classification framework to support making 
decision based on text mining in OLAP. Moreover, Hamoud 
et al. [6] applied OLAP at Iraqui Hospital to a registry data 
warehouse to facilitate rapid decision-making on clinical 
pathology. This application allowed physicians to have a 
multi-dimensional view of the patient's disease with large 
amounts of information synthesized in a short time, enabling 
physicians to make quick decisions about the patient 
condition and take timely treatment. In addition, a library 
management system based on data warehouses and OLAP 
has been developed by Xu et al. [12]. In their research, the 
authors proposed a data warehouse model with the 
management of metadata consistent with the growing 
amount of data in the library, the traditional way of archiving 
is no longer appropriate. Besides that, the paper also outlines 
the application of OLAP techniques to support decision-
making in library management, including decisions about the 
selection and arrangement of books and some other critical 
decisions with multidimensional view supported by OLAP 
technology [12]. Furthermore, a study by Yin et al. [13] 
developed a comprehensive decision support system in the 
field of broadcasting and television. This support system is 
based on the construction of a data warehouse that 
aggregates data from a variety of sources, including radio 
and television, and application of OLAP data processing 
techniques and mining techniques. These techniques support 
the manager figure out the laws as well as provide multi-
level view on multiple levels to assist media managers make 
decisions about the line, coverage areas and other significant 
decisions. 
The preceding studies demonstrate the importance of 
applying OLAP technology to supporting decision making 
for managers. This paper will implement OLAP applications 
in decision support in the field of business, namely, the 
application of OLAP techniques to assisting making decision 
in fulfillment process.  
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In 
Section 2 we discuss some fundamental theories about 
OLAP technology in supporting making decision as well as 
the benefit of OLAP in sales management and through that 
we propose the research model. In Section 3, we describe the 
OLAP report assisted for making decision in fulfillment 
process. Finally, Section 4 includes the findings and 
conclusions 
highlighting 
theoretical 
and 
practical 
implications, as well as points out the limitation and propose 
the future work. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW  
In the literature review, we will figure out how OLAP 
technology could be applied to supporting decision making 
in sales management. 
A. OLAP and supporting making decision 
As presented in Figure 1, OLAP is a fundamental 
component of a decision support system. It provides the 
ability to create reports in a multidimensional, flexible, 
intuitive way. Furthermore, it supports to create the reports 
from detail to synthesis, pivot, slice, chart. Therefore, OLAP 
assists the decision-making process to be more efficient and 
effective. Besides, due to fast and timely data processing, 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-637-8
DBKDA 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

 
 
OLAP also supports managers to master the nature of the 
problem and through that makes better decisions. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Supporting decision making model [5] 
Business analysts must work closely with spreadsheets to 
capture and analyze the company's financial status. However, 
the creation and management of spreadsheets will be 
hampered by too many reports need to be created, as well as 
data scattered in many places. OLAP technology enables 
analysts to extend the spreadsheet analysis model to work 
with data in the data warehouse - with characteristic of 
greater data availability, single location focus, analysis, 
business elements (time, geography, and so on), capable of 
creating multi-dimensional reports. 
B. The benefits of OLAP to sales management 
OLAP provides organizations with the ability to access, 
display and analyze sales data in a flexible way. First, OLAP 
delivers data to the user through a natural intuitive data 
model. Users could see and understand information in a data 
warehouse more efficiently and thus allow organizations to 
more clearly appreciate the value of their data. In addition, 
OLAP also accelerates the transfer of information to the user, 
displaying multidimensional structures. The combination of 
easy access and fast execution allows users to view and 
analyze their data faster and more efficiently than using 
relational database systems. 
Current reports have some limitations, such as "tend to 
shrink in their functional departments". In general, financial 
reports, governance, internal controls in organizations are 
usually prepared according to the scope of functions. For 
instance, business unit data is compiled from departmental 
and final reports will be collected as part of the overall 
organization picture. Another limitation of traditional 
reporting is that "reports do not fit into many levels of the 
organization." This limitation is caused by the synthesis of 
company-wide reporting, the aggregate staff will provide 
information at an increasingly high level until it becomes 
almost unrecognizable and becomes useless in the decision-
making of most managers as well as employees [10]. 
With OLAP technology decision support systems, these 
restrictions will be eliminated. OLAP reports use data 
extracted from a data warehouse in which data is collected 
from all departments. Therefore, those reports will not be 
confined to functional departments. On the other hand, 
OLAP report with the decision-making for managers at all 
levels is not limited by the fact that information is too 
general and does not make much sense in supporting 
decision-making for senior leaders.  
C. Fulfillment Process 
The sales process goes through many different steps 
across many departments. At the first stage, the sales 
department will receive the request for quotation and order 
from a customer. Based on that, the credit department will 
examine and approve the credit limitation for this customer. 
Next, the warehouse department will check inventory and 
post goods issue and then the product will be delivered to the 
customer from delivery department. After the goods are 
received, the customer pays based on orders and delivery 
vouchers. Finally, the accounting department records 
payments from the customer [2].  
Figure 2 shows the change in the sales process under the 
influence of internet and information systems. At each step 
of the sales process, we use information technology to 
improve performance. First, at the request for quotation step, 
we utilize the Customer Relationship Management (CRM) 
systems to manage and promote customer relationship. 
OLAP can be supported in CRM to assist in decision making 
on defining who are potential customers as well as sales 
volume and appropriate sales prices for each customer. 
Second, we use OLAP to discover the customer's financial 
ability to support automated credit approval at the credit 
review step. Finally, at the collection step, we could use 
OLAP to predict customer debt. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Fulfillment process under the influence of the Internet and 
information systems [2] 
D. Research Methodology  
We propose an appropriate research model for this study 
in Figure 3. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Research Model 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-637-8
DBKDA 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

 
 
First, we examine the fulfillment process and come up 
with a conclusion for which decisions in this process can be 
supported by OLAP technology. To do this, we need to 
investigate the steps of this process and the balanced 
scorecard theory. Those help to shape the decisions in 
fulfillment process which can be assisted by OLAP report as 
well as form the OLAP report context. 
Second, we build the OLAP cubes based on data that was 
already obtained in sales data warehouse. After discovering 
the decisions during the fulfillment process, we build up two 
OLAP cubes that allows fast data analysis for two significant 
objectives. The first objective is the human resource 
objective involving all objectives that focuses on maximizing 
employee productivity. The second one is the financial 
objective covering all objectives that aim to maximize the 
company’s profit. 
Third, this study figures out the reports which are 
appropriate at each step in the fulfillment process. We reveal 
four reports that will help the manager make better decisions 
compared to when they do not have those reports. These are 
pricing policy decision, sales volume decision, company’s 
key 
products 
decision, 
sale-person’s 
salaries 
and 
compensation decision and the credit limitation decision 
report. 
III. 
RESULTS 
We have built up the OLAP cube with the star schema 
demonstrated in Figure 4. This model provides a clear view 
for technical aspect of an OLAP cube. 
 
Figure 4.  Star Schema  
The model involves one fact table named “FactSalesOrder” 
linked to associated dimension tables – “DimCustomer”, 
“DimProduct”, 
“DimEmployee”, 
“DimTime”, 
“DimRegion” via primary or foreign key. Based on this 
cube, we propose the sample report for some sales 
management decisions below. 
A. Pricing policy decision  
In the sales process, at the price quotation step, 
enterprises need to provide information about the price and 
quantity of products for customers. The OLAP report will 
assist the sales manager in setting up appropriate pricing 
policies for each sales area, considering incentives for 
customers in the priority area of the market [8]. 
B. Sales volume decision 
At the price quotation step, the company not only needs 
to inform the price of each product to the customer, the sales 
department also has to notify the quantity of each product to 
them. The OLAP report demonstrates sales figures and 
various considerable metrics for each market, thereby 
enabling sales managers determine the sales volume for each 
customer (group of customers) or each area. The report 
supports in allocating appropriate sales targets due to market 
situation and company’s objectives [9]. 
 
 
Figure 5.  The OLAP report sample supports decision pricing and sales 
quantity 
This report, which is illustrated in Figure 5, carries out 
an exploration of decision pricing and sales quantity based 
on some significant metrics, such as revenue, profit, gross 
profit, capital cost, receivable debt, and credibility level. 
C. Company’s key products decision 
Determining the key products of the company will assist 
to promote the product to the right audience. Moreover, the 
identification of the key product will affect the production 
plan of the company. In the sales process, key product 
decisions will assist the warehouse in increasing the number 
of these items in stock [9]. In order to make the right 
decision at this step, decision makers could be supported 
with an OLAP report with some recommended metrics 
including financial and non-financial metrics, such as: 
revenue, profit, gross profit, market share, discount rate, 
customer vote. 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-637-8
DBKDA 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

 
 
 
Figure 6.  OLAP report sample supports decision-making key products 
Figure 6 gives a sample report with some suggestion 
metrics. Based on that, users could easily handle OLAP 
report manipulation by drill-down the dimensions to capture 
the detail results for any desired level.  
D. Salespersons’s salaries and compensation decision 
In the fulfillment process, besides the technological 
infrastructure, the human factor plays a primary role, which 
is the decisive factor for success in implementing the 
process. In fact, if human resources are facilitated to promote 
self-efficacy and engagement with the company, then the 
sales force will generate a greater efficiency and stimulate 
the productivity for the whole process. Therefore, payroll 
decisions play a significant role in creating motivation for 
employees and also the basis for creating success for the 
whole process [8]. 
 
 
Figure 7.  The OLAP report sample supports decision making for staff 
compensation 
Besides the financial metrics like revenue or profit, this 
study proposes some other metrics, which played a critical 
role to evaluate the staff performance, presented in Figure 7. 
Some of these metrics are: respone time – the average time 
that a sales staff respone to a customer’s order, training time 
– total time participated in training courses in a year, 
community participation – number of times this staff spent 
on community activities in one year. 
E. The credit limitation decision  
In the process of granting credit to customers, businesses 
have to deal with credit risks. As a result, the customer fails 
to perform or fails to fulfill his financial obligations when 
due. Not only that, the credit also affects the sales volume, 
the relationship between the customer and the company. 
These risks can be limited when managers are supported by 
flexible, historical sources of information from OLAP 
reports. Determining the credit limitation will assist in the 
credit approval step in the fulfillment process. 
 
 
Figure 8.  The OLAP report sample supports decision making credit 
limitation 
Each customer may have different credit limitation 
depending on some metrics presented in Figure 8; some of 
these metrics are customer's class, priority. This report 
provides the figure for each region and each customer’s 
class. It is extremely useful reference channel for the sales 
manager to support their decision making. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
After carrying out the research, we came up with the 
conclusion about theoretical and managerial implications as 
well as limitation and future works. 
A. Theoretical and managerial implications 
This study adds a novel method to existing literature 
related to applying business intelligence to manage business 
process. It explores OLAP technology and the role of OLAP 
in decision support systems in enterprises. In addition, we 
also explore fulfillment process and sales management 
decisions which could be supported by OLAP report. This 
finding also highlights the contribution of non-financial 
measures and the importance of non-financial measures in 
the current economic climate. 
In the managerial implication aspect, this study provides 
the OLAP model and sales decision support reports at the 
most general level - with two important decisions toward 
human resource goals and profitability goals (through 
analysis business performance) including: the sales volume, 
the main product of the company, the salary and the bonus 
for sales staff, the credit limit and the price policy for 
customers. According to these results, companies could build 
up a business intelligence system with OLAP technology to 
manage effectively their fulfillment process. These will 
support managers more convenient in building their self-
report. 
B. Limitation and Futurer work 
This study discusses the application of OLAP in decision 
support for credits, price policy, sales volumes, key products, 
as well as employee compensation decisions in the 
fulfillment process. Besides its contributions, this study just 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-637-8
DBKDA 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

 
 
focused on fulfillment process and analyzed the decisions in 
this process but there are many processes in a company. 
Furthermore, the database just limited on internal sources 
skewed on financial scales may lead to inaccuracy precision. 
 With the desire to contribute more to OLAP application 
in decision support, the author proposes to build more 
channels to display reports, such as website or share point. In 
addition, other business processes could be examined to 
address the question: How to apply business intelligence to 
support the decisions making in those processes? At the 
same time, the study expects to apply OLAP text-mining 
with the focus on text data to shape a better metric to make 
more accurate decisions. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] C. Adamson, “Mastering data warehouse aggregates: 
solutions for star schema performance”, John Wiley & Sons, 
2006. 
[2] A. Deshmukh, “Digital Accounting: The effects of the 
Internet and ERP in Accouting”, 2006. 
[3] M. Bouakkaz, Y. Ouinten, S. Loudcher, and Y. Strekalova , 
“Textual aggregation approaches in OLAP context: A 
survey,”  International Journal of Information Management, 
pp. 684-692, 2017. 
[4] C. Adamson, “Mastering Data Warehouse Aggregates: 
Solution for Star Schema Performance,” Wiley Publishing,  
2006. 
[5] TBT. Dong, “Applied OLAP technology to the deployment of 
information systems EIS,” Workshop, A selected number of 
issues of information technology, pp. 248-261, 2000. 
[6] A. C. Hamoud, and T. A. Obaid, “Using OLAP with Diseases 
Registry Warehouse for Clinical Decision Support,” 2014. 
[7] W. H. Inmon, “Building the data warehouse,” John wiley & 
sons, 2005. 
[8] M. W. Johnston, and Marshall, G. W., “Sales Force 
Management: 
Leadership, 
Innovation, 
Technology”, 
Routledge, 2013. 
[9] P. Kotler, and G. Armstrong, “Principles of Marketing,” 15th 
Global Edition,  Pearson, 2013. 
[10] P. R Niven, “Balanced scorecard step-by-step: maximizing 
performance and maintaining results,” John Wiley & Sons, 
2002. 
[11] R. Kimball and M. Ross, “The data warehouse toolkit Second 
edition,” Willey Publishing, 2002. 
[12] M. L. Xu, and X. Y. Li "Construction of the Library 
Management System Based on Data Warehouse and OLAP." 
Applied Mechanics and Materials 380, pp. 4796-4799, 2013. 
[13] F. Yin, J. Chai and J. Lin., “Synthetic Decision Support of 
Broadcasting and Television System” In Proceedings of The 
Eighth International Conference on Bio-Inspired Computing: 
Theories and Applications (BIC-TA), Jan.2013, pp. 759-766, 
Springer 
Berlin 
Heidelberg. 
 
 
 
 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-637-8
DBKDA 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

