A Novel Approach to User Involved Big Data Provenance Visualization 
 
Ilkay Melek Yazici, Mehmet S. Aktas  
Computer Engineering Department   
Yildiz Technical University 
Istanbul, Turkey 
email:ilkay.yazici@std.yildiz.edu.tr, 
mehmet@ce.yildiz.edu.tr 
                                Mehmet Gokturk 
Computer Engineering Department  
Gebze Technical University 
Koceli, Turkey 
email: gokturk@bilmuh.gyte.edu.tr
 
 
Abstract—We are living in the “big data” age. In many ways, 
big data is equivalent to complexity or mess.  Extracting 
relevant information from any complex environment is a 
challenging but necessary task required in every scientific 
field.  An assortment of graphs, figures, and charts have been 
developed to visualize n-dimensional data since the early ages 
of science. In the recent past, the number of dimensions in a 
visualization 
were 
limited 
by 
computational 
factors.  
Visualizing n-dimension is difficult but achievable by using 
data projection and reduction methods. Unfortunately, these 
methods often introduce ambiguities and inaccuracies, which 
can subtly corrupt results. Data provenance chronicles the core 
life cycle of a data set, which includes data source and creation 
processes, accounts for many of the processing techniques that 
a data set is subject to, like debugging, auditing and quality 
control. Additionally, data protection mechanisms such as data 
access control and authenticity valuation methods are also 
tracked by provenance. In this paper, we introduce an effective 
method to visualize and analyze semantic provenance data by 
adhering to the Human Computer Interaction principles. Our 
proposed data provenance visualization system involves the 
user in the visualization process. By capturing and analyzing a 
user’s attentiveness and perception level, we develop a 
provenance visualization system with specific visualization 
types and methodologies. 
Keywords-big data; provenance; visualization; open provenance 
model (OPM); human machine interface(HMI). 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Data provenance records the journey of data from its 
creation to its application [1]. Data provenance is produced 
with complex transformations and processes like workflows 
[2]. Data provenance collection systems capture provenance 
on the fly. However, their collection mechanisms may be 
faulty and have dropped provenance notifications. Hence, 
provenance records may be partial, partitioned, or simply 
inaccurate [3]. Incompleteness and inconsistency of 
provenance records, if they exist, are a challenge for 
analyzing provenance datasets.  
As more information technology (IT) systems are 
developed and implemented, the interpretation requirements 
for big provenance data also increase [4].  Data visualization 
is an important field, which offers many techniques to 
develop an intuitive interpretation of data, often by way of 
efficient visualization capabilities [5]. Therefore, data 
visualization is an important step in the process of 
maximizing perception efﬁciency [6].  
Data visualization is considered visual communication by 
many experts. Many visual communication techniques create 
processes that improve visual data representation via 
diagrammatic displays that use data properties, variables, and 
information units. Effective visualization can assist users 
with analyzing and evaluating data by making complex data 
more accessible, clear and usable [7]. 
In this paper, our goal is to help users by generating an 
effective provenance visualization process that complies with 
Human Computer Interaction (HCI) principles and user 
navigation models. A mind map for an experimental protocol 
will be used to jointly explore provenance and user 
interaction. To achieve these goals, this study states the 
following objectives, which are briefly described below: 
Objective 1: Achieve user-assisted visualization of Big 
Provenance.  We will develop real-time and offline 
visualization 
techniques 
by 
capitalizing 
on 
existing 
visualization techniques from relevant fields. In our case, we 
concern ourselves with the social media domain. We will 
research existing provenance visualization methods for 
temporal provenance data and analyze the various 
visualization techniques and methodologies.  A user’s 
preference 
for 
customized 
visualizations, 
and 
their 
perception of these preferred methods, will be analyzed 
using HCI evaluation methods. The results will be used to 
improve the visualization system.  
Objective 2: Design and create Big Provenance 
visualization methods, such as visualization layouts, and 
templates. Few research studies on provenance visualization 
exist in the literature. We will study and extend the existing 
methodologies and introduce novel visualization layouts that 
deal with temporal provenance data. We argue that new 
customized layouts and visualization methodologies can be 
developed. The techniques need to be based on both the 
provenance data domain and user requirements.  
Objective 
3: 
Develop 
domain-independent 
Big 
Provenance visualization. We will study existing domain-
independent 
provenance 
specifications 
for 
data 
representation. 
Particularly, 
we 
will 
consider 
Open 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-558-6
DBKDA 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

Provenance Model (OPM) and Provenance Ontology 
(PROV-O) specifications.  
     The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: 
Section II provides the relevant literature review. Section III 
discusses various application scenarios to describe the scope 
of this research. Section IV reviews our proposed 
methodology and Section V describes the aspects of Human 
Machine Interface (HMI) that are important to this study. 
Finally, Section VI presents the conclusion and future work 
of our paper. 
II. 
LITERATURE SUMMARY 
Kunde’s seminal work [12] on Provenance Visualization 
Components provides us with an important set of 
requirements, summarized below: 
a) Process: a summary of the process as a sequence of 
data inspection steps; 
b) Results: user-centric and includes the intermediate- 
and end-results of interactions; 
c) Relationship: the relationship between actors or 
interactions; 
d) Timeline: observations of time; 
e) Participation: the accuracy of the participants 
f) 
Compare: describes the distinction between two 
subjects  
g) Interpretation: the individual visualization related to 
the end user’s special questions 
     In his considerable research, Chen’s visualization goal is 
to satisfy the audience or reader. He addresses Kunde’s 
requirements as follows: a-c) Chen’s visualization tool is 
based on a known provenance model called Open 
Provenance Model (OPM) for provenance representation. 
This model represents entities and relationships as nodes 
and edges on a graph [9]. OPM models can represent a full 
graph with process steps and process results, an abstract 
graph with any of them; d) OPM represents time 
information as edges and nodes; e) OPM represents 
participation by agents. Chen’s tool enable users to evaluate 
the accuracy of the participations visually; f) a tool is used 
for comparing attributes of nodes. Chen extended the 
DePiero graph-matching algorithm to compare provenance 
graphs; g) Chen developed a customized layout algorithm 
and a visual style to interpret specific use cases.  
    In Chen’s research, network application provenance is 
studied from large-scale distributed apps that run on large 
testbeds like the Planet Lab or in network simulations like 
the provenance data from NASA satellite imaginary. 
    Provenance visualization research is often restricted to 
small graphs, graph matching techniques and graph layouts. 
Taverna is a scientific workflow management system 
(SWMS) that benefits from Chen’s visualization method. 
Taverna helps answer questions based on experimental 
results. VisTrails is another SWMS that can navigate 
workflows by using the users intuition to compare 
workflows, intermediate- or end- results, or to evaluate the 
results. Probe-It is a popular SWMS that allows scientists to 
focus on intermediate or final visualization results for back 
and forth provenance [8]. 
    The Prototype Lineage Server (PLS) enables users to get 
lineage information by searching metadata groups that can 
provide helpful details about the workflow transformations 
and data products. Pedigree Graph is a tool in Multiscale 
Chemical Science (CMCS) and Multi-Scale Chemistry 
(MSC); it uses a portal to view multi-dimensional 
provenance. The My Grid tool displays graphs based 
representations of RDF-coded provenance by using 
Haystack. 
Provenance 
Explorer, 
reliable 
provenance 
visualization tool that creates customized dynamic views of 
scientific 
provenance 
data 
depending 
on 
the 
user 
requirements and access privileges. 
    In another study [8], Chen collected e-science provenance 
data, which yielded an OPM visualization Direct Acyclic 
Graph (DAG). The temporal representation of provenance 
graphs has generated partitions that maintain temporal order 
between node subsets by using the Logical-P algorithm [8]. 
Graph annotations and fully labeled graphs are visualization 
tools for representation. Temporal representation failures 
can be detected in workflow executions or the provenance 
capture. 
III. 
APPLICATION FEATURES 
Features of study like ontology model, layout components, 
use cases and visualization tool are presented in this section. 
A. Ontology 
Ontologies are at the heart of any semantic technology. 
An ontology is formally defined as a set of specifications 
associated with a concept. Many researchers use ontologies 
as mechanisms for sharing and reusing information. 
Ontologies can easily express relationships between 
identifiers. They share many qualities with knowledge 
representation systems.  
PROV-O: The PROV ontology (PROV-O) is an OWL-
based ontology that allows PROV-data models to use RDF 
mapping developed by W3C. The PROV-O terms are 
defined as classes and properties, and they are grouped into 
three categories: starting point terms, expansion terms and 
qualifying relationship terms to provide an incremental input 
to the ontology [11]. 
Starting point term classes and properties are used to 
creating simple provenance descriptions that can be detailed 
using the terms of other categories. Ultimately, starting point 
term classes are a small set of classes and properties that 
create simple, initial provenance descriptions. PROV-O 
categories are listed and defined below: 
 
 
Entity: An entity is a conceptual, digital, physical or 
virtual object with specific aspects. It can be real or 
imaginary.  
 
Activity: An activity is an action that repeats over a 
period-of-time and is acted upon by entities; actions 
may include processing, consuming, modifying, 
transforming, using, relocating or generating entities.  
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-558-6
DBKDA 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

 
Agent: An agent is an operation (or operator) that is 
responsible for activities, for the existence of an 
entity, and for the activities of other agents.  
The three main classes are correlated and use the 
properties that are illustrated in Figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Starting Point classes and their properties. This figure is 
obtained from the PROV-O Ontology document in [11].  
Extended classes and properties provide additional 
actions that may be used to relate classes in the Starting 
Point category. Qualified classes and properties provide 
elaborate information about relations using Starting Point 
and Expanded features. 
B. Layouts 
    A layout is a main component in data provenance 
visualization; it improves the comprehension of a user. A 
layout depends on user requirements and the origin of 
provenance data [9]. A researcher often needs to see 
multiple layouts and determine the layout , which is the 
most meaningful and relevant. As an example, the 
hierarchical provenance visualization layout is a provenance 
graph that is separated into layers according to relationships; 
the most important relationships appear at the top layer and 
the final results appear at the bottom of visualization. 
Figures 2, 3 and 4 shows customized layout examples. 
As mentioned earlier, in provenance visualization a circle 
denotes a process while a square denotes an artifact [15]. 
C. Use Cases 
Provenance visualization concepts are difficult to 
develop. To have a general visualization technique, care 
must be taken to prevent the loss of connection between an 
application domain’s speciﬁc requirements and data 
provenance interpretation. 
The main purpose of this study is to develop several 
visualization concepts and evaluate them based on concrete 
requirements. The provenance community supports the 
development of different visualization techniques and 
evaluates them for possible application domains.  
In the proposed research, to define scope, we outline 
potential application areas and their associated Interactive 
Provenance Visualization solution requirements. 
 
 
Figure 2.  The time-to-complete process and artifacts 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  The time-to-complete individual processes and artifact 
relationships 
 
 
Figure 4.  Lineage or process order 
1) Social Media Provenance Visualization: 
     We have witnessed social media growing at an 
unprecedented rate in the last decade. Social media has 
inherent characteristics and pathways that enable nefarious 
activities, which could hinder its growth. Social media 
provide users with a platform to communicate with a large 
audience in a simple way. The unprecedented scale by, 
which users can communicate and the rate of information 
transfer is virtually unseen in conventional media like 
newspaper, radio, T.V.  Social media data is user-generated, 
massive, distributed, noisy, dynamic, and unstructured-in-
nature.  
    Social media data is primarily available in the form of an 
individual users’ attributes, user-user connections (links), or 
user-generated content such as text, photos, and videos. The 
visualization requirements of age-based social life data from 
creation to archiving is one of the motivations of this work 
[10]. 
 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-558-6
DBKDA 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

2) E-Science Provenance Visualization: 
     e-Science is computational, science-intensive data found 
in highly distributed network environments. Research into e-
Science provenance focuses on the capturing, modeling, and 
storage of provenance data. In e-Science, considerably larger 
volumes of data with higher complexity exists because their 
systems are continuously running for extended periods to 
support scientific experimentation [8]. 
One of 
the 
motivations of this research is to find methods to improve 
visualization data provenance in the e-Science domain. 
D. CYTOSCAPE 
Cytoscape is an open source software platform that 
provides visualization tools using the interaction between 
networks and biologic pathways to integrate multiple 
networks that have expression profiles, annotations, and state 
data. Cytoscape was developed and designed for molecular 
biological research, but later became a general platform for 
complex visualization and analysis. Cytoscape’s basic set of 
features include analysis, integration and visualization; they 
are provided by the core distribution of Cytoscape. 
    One of the strongest features of Cytoscape is that it allows 
the use of plugins to develop new visualization techniques. 
By supporting detailed and overlaying visualization with 
supplementary tools, Cytoscape is a suitable development 
environment 
for 
general 
provenance 
visualization. 
Provenance graph visualization that can interact with a 
Karma provenance server to extract provenance in XML 
form, can be created via a Cytoscape plugin [9]. 
IV. 
METHODOLOGY 
In this study, temporal representation and stream data 
provenance visualization will be analyzed. We will research 
how to achieve provenance visualization of temporal 
provenance data by developing a set of visualization 
techniques and methodologies. Real-time visualization and 
offline visualization will be implemented. We apply 
developed methods on test case scenarios in social media 
domains. 
    Chen’s provenance visualization steps will be used as a 
base for our test case scenarios [9].  
A. Incremental Loading 
Provenance data can be very large and dense. The lineage 
records or PROV-O 
annotations 
alone provide 
an 
opportunity to capture additional information about data 
execution or creation. To support visualization over large 
graphs, a system must be able to read XML-formatted 
provenance graphs with and without annotations. A 
KOMADU system will be the basis of this research. A 
KOMADU system is a data capture and visualization system. 
It was developed for scientific data provenance in the Data to 
Insight Center at Indiana University. KOMADU generates 
PROV-O compliant XML files that doesn’t have annotations 
for Processes or Artifacts.  
For scalability purposes, we will first investigate how to 
manage scalability in our developed solution. Provenance 
data features, i.e., lifecycle metadata on activities, will be 
reduced to create a reduced-dimension visualization. We will 
eliminate redundant data and generate provenance data 
partitions to group different visualization items to increase 
user’s perception [9]. Data scalability for the proposed 
temporal representation process can be improved by using 
MapReduce programming paradigm [16].   
B. Customized Layouts 
Customized layouts developed in Chen’s study include 
extending the hierarchical layout algorithm that sorts sibling 
nodes, grouping layout algorithms, creating concatenated 
string-embedded layout algorithms for provenance data like 
a history chain [9], which will be referenced in our study. 
Research on the improvement of existing layouts and the 
development of new customized layouts will be realized by 
considering user navigation models, HCI principles and 
provenance data nature.  
The Bilkent University data visualization research group 
[13] has several projects on compound graph visualization 
based on several different customized layout displays. Their 
layout model handles the followings: 
 
levels of nesting 
 
inter-graph edges span multiple levels of nesting 
 
non-leaf nodes links in the nesting hierarchy 
C. Visual Style 
    In data provenance visualization, Chen has created a 
default visual style for provenance graphs, using magenta for 
artifacts, different predefined colors for a different type of 
edges [9].  
    New visualization styles, according to HCI studies on 
related attributes like size, color, etc., and Gestalt rules 
parameters, are subject to the study. We will research how to 
achieve provenance visualization of temporal provenance 
data that is associated with different existing visualization 
techniques 
and 
methodologies. 
User 
attraction 
and 
perception towards the customized visualizations will be 
handled by user HCI evaluations and will be used to improve 
the visualization system.  Gestalt rules will be examined to 
find adaptation-related principles to increase usability of the 
system [9]. 
D. Abstract View 
     Provenance relationships are complex graphs that 
overwhelm researchers. To eliminate and summarize 
provenance visualization, Chen’s two approaches are:  
 
Clustering neighbor nodes 
 
Eliminating process/artifact 
The process of clustering neighboring nodes into a single 
node was introduced using a plug-in in Cystoscape. This 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-558-6
DBKDA 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

approach is helpful while exploring a provenance graph and 
dealing with graphs that have many nodes [8]. 
     In the second-phase, a process of elimination removes 
process nodes that connect two artifact nodes with a “was 
generated by” incoming edge and “used” outgoing edge. The 
process node is changed by a new “was derived from” edge. 
This process of graph abstraction and pruning removes any 
unnecessary info and limits the graph size  
     In this section, we will study new approaches for 
summarization and elimination processes of provenance 
data. Using MapReduce programming paradigm, data 
abstraction on the proposed temporal representation process 
can be enhanced.   
E. Graph Comparison 
     To satisfy provenance analysis, graph comparison is a key 
process. In Chen’s study, Direct Clustering Algorithm 
(DCA) is used to compare two provenance graphs by finding 
the best matched and unmatched nodes [9]. The DCA 
algorithm basically depends on the order of inputs. For 
example, B to A is not same as A to B. In this research, an 
improved 
DCA 
algorithm 
will 
be 
developed 
and 
implemented to compare graphs. The comparison of more 
than two graphs is also an important task, for reasons below. 
 
Provenance data can exist in a high-dimensional 
space. This causes graphs to have thousands of 
nodes and attributes, which makes clustering of 
such data tremendously difficult 
 
Difficult to locate both structural and nonstructural 
information and combine it into a single uniform 
attribute space 
V. 
HUMAN MACHINE INTERACTION ASPECTS 
    In this study, we propose an improved data provenance 
visualization system that involve user in the visualization 
process by capturing and analyzing user’s attention and 
perception level towards specific visualization types and 
methodologies.  
A. User Involved Visualization  
   The proposed system involves the user; the user can 
improve usability and increase the system’s effectiveness. 
The system will support user-based navigation by capturing 
a user’s attraction to and perception of a specific set of 
layouts/methodologies. At first, the distinct existing layouts 
will be studied to visualize big provenance data. If necessary, 
depending on the characterization of the provenance data and 
user requirements, new customized layouts will be 
introduced.    
B. HCI Model Construction 
    We will measure the user’s perception and analyze the 
level of provenance visualization for a set of abstract layouts 
by capturing and analyzing a user’s attention, attraction and 
perception level. After that, the correlation between the 
attraction/perception level and type of provenance data 
visualization 
will 
be 
determined 
to 
find 
suitable 
layouts/visual styles for specific kind of requirements or 
specific data domains. A layout/visual style HCI model will 
be constructed to verify this process. In the user perception 
level, the following 2 methods are proposed: 
1. Questionnaire: a set of questions based on 
experimental protocols will be asked to analyze 
attraction/perception level 
2. Eye Tracking: gaze parameters are used to extract 
perception 
information 
based 
on 
literature 
parameters. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
    We have discussed provenance and techniques for 
provenance visualization. We are interested in providing an 
effective solution to visualize and analyze semantic 
provenance data by adhering to HCI principles.  Efficient 
visualization helps users to analyze and understand data 
using valid evidence. Visualization makes complex data 
more accessible, understandable and usable. 
     According 
to 
provenance 
data 
interpretation 
requirements, the development of provenance visualization is 
difficult to create. One of the most enduring challenges is to 
maintain the relationship between the data and its 
application. 
    Our improved data provenance visualization system that 
places the user in the loop, captures and analyzes the user’s 
attention and perception level while he/she reviews specific 
visualization types and methodologies suggested by the 
system. The system then analyzes this information to 
determine the best type of visualization. In this way, the user 
determines the visualization process autonomously. 
    The goal of the system is to help the user navigate 
exploration provenance visualization. A user’s mind map 
typically determines what is going on in an experiment. A 
mind map model will be used to interact with the user and 
explore visualization activities. 
    The major contributions of this research include the 
following: 
 
We develop an effective user-navigated provenance 
visualization system. We will introduce a temporal 
provenance data visualization solution with aspects 
of HCI research. Our approach will be based on 
user preferences and perception levels after 
reviewing several visualization layouts and types of 
provenance 
visualization. 
To 
increase 
the 
effectiveness 
of 
visualization, 
a 
user’s 
attraction/perception level will be captured and 
analyzed. 
 
Domain independent visualization: We will abide 
by the recommendations of W3C’s PROV-O 
specifications for provenance representation. Since 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-558-6
DBKDA 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

PROV-O specifications are domain-independent, 
the representation does not provide domain-specific 
vocabulary for our case study domains (e.g. social 
media data). Ontologies that define related domains 
will 
be 
introduced 
for 
specific 
domain 
representations. 
 
Customized 
Visualization 
Layouts 
and 
methodologies: In this paper, to understand large-
scale data provenance, new abstract layouts, based 
on various studies, will be developed to provide 
customized layouts to the user.  
 
A 
highly 
scalable 
and 
high-performance 
visualization system will be used in our test case 
scenarios. We will deal with critically large scale 
provenance data. To make our system scalable, we 
will use techniques like incremental loading and 
compression. The effectiveness of visualization, 
graph matching, and partitioning will be improved 
to provide faster query times in provenance graph 
data.  
 
Real-time support for the continuous and real-time 
analysis of Big Provenance data and stream data 
visualization will be provided via a series of stream 
processing 
techniques. 
User-assisted 
real-time 
visualization, anomaly detection, and root cause 
tracing will be analyzed in terms of provenance 
graphs.  
 
A platform-independent PROV-O Cystoscope plug-
in will be developed to visualize provenance based 
on different layouts and visual style elements.  
       Our future work will be focusing on the details of the 
methodology that we briefly outlined in this discussion 
paper. Our work remains in applying our research to the use 
cases and conducting experiments based on our research 
methodology. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
      This study is being supported by the TUBITAK-3501- 
Career Development Program (CAREER) with the Project 
ID: 114E781. We would like to thank Yildiz Technical 
University Software Quality Laboratory for supporting this 
research and allowing us to use their computer facilities for 
this study. As always, we are grateful for the help of the 
extended team of our department. 
REFERENCES 
[1]  B. Glavic, “Big Data Provenance: Challenges and Implications   
for Benchmarking”, WBDB 2012 - 2nd Workshop on Big 
Data Benchmarking, pp. 72–80. 
[2]  Y. L. Simmhan, B. Plale, and D. Gannon, “A Survey of Data 
Provenance Techniques”, Technical Report IUB-CS-TR618 
[3]   Oxford English Dictionary (OED), “The fact of coming from 
some particular source or quarter, source, derivation”, (2017, 
April 20) Retrieved from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ 
Provenance.  
[4]  R. Hasan, R. Sion, and M. Winslett, M., “Preventing History 
Forgery with Secure Provenance”, ACM Transactions on 
Storage, 5(12), May 2009. 
[5]   E. Olshannikova, A. Ometov, Y. Koucheryavy, and T. Olsson, 
“Visualizing Big Data with Augmented and Virtual Reality: 
Challenges and Research Agenda”, Journal of Big Data, 2015. 
[6] R. Tard´io, A. Mat´e, and J., Trujillo, “An Iterative 
Methodology for Big Data Management”,2015 IEEE 
International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), 2015, pp 
545-550. 
[7]   J. Steele, and N. Illinsky, “Beautiful Visualization, Looking at 
data Through the Eyes of Experts”, O’Reilly Media, 2010. 
[8]   P. Chen, and B. A. Plale, “Big Data Provenance Analysis and 
Visualization”, IEEE/ACM International Symposium on  
Cluster, Cloud and Grid Computing, 15th, 2015.  
[9]   P. Chen, B. Plale, Y. W. Cheah, D. Ghoskal, S. Jensen, and Y. 
Luo, “Visualization of Network Data Provenance”, 978-1-
4673-2371-0/12/$31.00, IEEE, 2012. 
 [10] G. Barbier, Z. Feng, P. Gundecha, and H. Liu, “Provenance 
Data in Social Media” , Synthesis Lectures on Data Mining 
and Knowledge Discovery, 2013. 
[11] T. Lebo, S. Sahoo, and D. McGuinness, “W3C PROV-O: The 
PROV Ontology Proposed Recommendation 12.03.2013”, 
Technical report, W3C, March 2013. 
[12] M. Kunde, H. Bergmeyer and A. Schreiber, “Requirements 
for a Provenance Visualization Component”, IPAW, 2008. 
[13] U. Dogruoz, E. Giral, A. Cetintas, A. Civril, and E. Demir, “A 
Layout Algorithm for Undirected Compound Graphs”, 
Information Sciences, 2009, pp 980-994. 
[14] P. Chen, and B. Plale, “Visualizing Large Scale Scientific 
Data Provenance”, 2012 Super Computing Conference, High 
Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis 
(SCC) Workshop, USA, 2012. 
[15] P. Chen, B. Plale, and M. S. Aktas, “Temporal Representation 
for 
Scientiﬁc 
Data 
Provenance”, 
978-1-4673-4466-
1/12/$31.00, IEEE, 2012, pp 1-8. 
[16] J. Dean, and S. Ghemawat, “MapReduce: A Flexible Data 
Processing Tool.” Commun. ACM 53(1), (2010), pp 72-77. 
 
 
 
 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-558-6
DBKDA 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

