Enriching Dimension Hierarchies with Topological Relations to Improve
the Development of Spatial Data Warehouse
Sana Ezzedine
LTSIRS Laboratory, National School of Engineers,
University of Tunis El Manar, Tunisia
sana.ezzedine@gmail.com
 Sami Yassine Turki and Sami Faiz
LTSIRS Laboratory, National School of Engineers,
University of Tunis El Manar, Tunisia
 yassine.turki@isteub.rnu.tn and
sami.faiz@insat.rnu.tn
Abstract—The design of a spatial data warehouse depends
on operational data, spatial and non spatial requirements
in order to support the decision-making process required
by final users. It is crucial to consider decision maker
requirements in the conceptual level of the construction of
a  spatial  data  warehouse.  Furthermore,  updating  a
spatial data warehouse and especially the addition of a
new user’s requirement after the construction of a spatial
data warehouse is a great need for users. In this paper, to
overcome  this  problem,  dimension  hierarchies  will  be
specified in the Spatial Data Warehouse using topological
relationships  among  spatial  objects.  Dimension
hierarchies added show spatial requirements which are
necessary to improve decision-making process. Decision
makers  thus will be able to achieve their information
needs for analysis. Finally, we show the benefits of our
approach by providing a case study, which defines an
enriched conceptual model of a spatial data warehouse.
Keywords-spatial data warehouse; updating; spatial 
requirements; decision-making.
I.
INTRODUCTION
If we consider the definition proposed by Inmon [1],
a Spatial Data Warehouse (SDW) is “a  subject  oriented,
integrated,  non-volatile,  and  time  variant  collection of
spatial data  in  support of  management’s  decision”. 
The design of a SDW is based on a Multidimensional
Model,  which  contains  facts  and  dimensions.  Facts
contain  the  business  metrics  (i.e.,  measures)  and
dimensions describe facts and context to analyze these
facts using dimension attributes organized in hierarchies.
Several approaches are proposed to model the design
of a SDW. They did not define formal and standard
transformations  between  the  design  and  the
implementation  of  SDWs  in  a  specific  platform.
Moreover,  they  did  not  suggest  an  automatic
transformation from the conceptual model to the possible
logical representation. In addition, they did not consider
needs  related  to  the  spatial  Decision  Maker  (DM)’s
requirements. To overcome these problems, we defined
an approach [2] based on the Model Driven Architecture
(MDA)  models  and  the  Unified  Modeling Language
(UML). This approach considers both spatial and non
spatial  requirements,  described  by  a  Geographic
Computation Independent Model (Geo CIM), the first
MDA Model. The Geo CIM is integrated by means of
transformation  rules  into  a  Geographic  Platform
Independent Model (Geo PIM), the second MDA model,
which defines the conceptual Multidimensional model of
a SDW.
Within this approach,  once user requirements  are
correctly  captured,  we  obtain  automatically  the
corresponding Multidimensional and conceptual model
of a SDW. Nevertheless, in this approach, we find that
the  required  multidimensional  model  does  not  take
account  of  the  updating  requirements  of  a  DM.
Therefore, the final SDW will not completely satisfy
final user requirements. 
Our aim is to improve the  quality  of  dimension
hierarchies  by  means  of  adding  new  hierarchy
aggregation  levels,  which  allow  SDW DMs to achieve
their  analysis  information  needs  [2].  Dimension
hierarchies  enable  also  to  the  adding  of  new
requirements  to  better  support  the  decision-making
process. 
 In this paper, we present an approach that treats
updating in terms of adding new spatial requirements.
We propose to enrich dimension hierarchies by adding
new levels of aggregation in order to obtain the required
hierarchies.
To  accomplish  this,  we  propose  the  use  of
semantic relations  among  spatial concepts  provided  by
topological relationships [3].  The initial hypothesis is
that both SDWs and Topological relationships present
hierarchical structures:  dimension  hierarchies  in SDWs
show  the  relationships  between  value  domains  from
different   dimension  attribute  (set  by  levels  of
aggregation)  [4],  while  topological  relations  present
hierarchical   semantic   relations   between   spatial
concepts,   such   as   adjacency  or  inclusion  or
intersection, etc. [3].  Therefore, our approach is based
on using these topological relations to add new levels to
dimension hierarchies in order to obtain the required
hierarchies. Figure. 1 summarizes this scenario.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows.
Section  2  presents  an  overview  of  works  about  the
development of SDWs and the addition of dimension
Hierarchies in the conceptual level.  Section 3 defines
our approach for enriching dimension hierarchies using
topological relationships. In Section 4, a case study is
presented. Finally,  we point out our conclusions and
sketch some future work in Section 5.
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-334-6
DBKDA 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

Figure1: Using Topological Relations to enrich the Multidimensional Model of SDW
   
II.
RELATED WORK
It is widely accepted that the development of SDWs
must be based on a conceptual model. Therefore, in this
section, we focus on briefly describing  the  most  relevant
approaches  for  the  conceptual  modeling  of  SDWs  and,
more generally, the addition of dimension Hierarchies in
conceptual modeling.
A. Conceptual Modeling of SDWs
Various approaches for the conceptual design of SDW
systems have been proposed in the last few years. In this
section, we present a brief discussion about some of the
most well-known approaches.  
The first attempt integrated  spatial information and
ensured  correct  aggregation  over  spatial  [4][5].  Other
works  defined  a  multidimensional  analysis  tool  that
modeled spatial Data in a SDW [6][7][8][9]. Alternatively,
authors defined a query language [10][11] that allowed the
use  of  multidimensional  and  spatial  and  topological
operators such as GeoMDQL [12]. All these approaches
did  not  present  an  unequivocal  and  automatic
transformation  to  every  possible  logical  representation
from  a  conceptual  model.  In  addition,  they  did  not
consider needs related to the DM’s requirements.
More recently, some approaches have tried to   overcome
these limitations, especially the problem of the automatic
transformations.  These  approaches  used  standards
framework as MDA. MDA provides a set of guidelines to
structure specifications expressed as models. An alignment
of multidimensional spatial model with MDA is proposed
in [13]. The same approach is extended [14] to include
spatial data in the SDW design level. It allows DM to
define  his  geographical  queries  independently  of  the
logical presentation. [15] proposed to consider the DM’s
aims and defined [16] some spatial elements describing the
top DM’s goals. In the same context, a Case tool based on
Unified Modeling Language (UML) standard is used by
[17] to model both spatial and non spatial data in the SDW
design. [18] focused on the use of transformations based
on  MDA  to  automatically  generate  the  data  and  the
analysis models.
Every  of  the  above-described  approaches  presented
conceptual  models  lacked  the  integration  of  all  DMs’
spatial  needs  in  the  SDW  design.  To  overcome  this
problem,  [2]  proposed  an  approach,  which  aims  to
integrate  DM’s  requirements  in  the  SDW  Design.  It
presented  an approach  that automatically generates the
design of SDW from a requirement’s model. 
This approach does not consider updating requirements
in terms of adding new contexts to the requirements model
after the development of SDW. This must be taken into
account in stages of the development process, i.e., the
conceptual modeling of the SDWs.  
B. Adding Dimension Hierarchies in SDWs
Mazón  and  Trujillo  [19]  suggested  enriching
dimension hierarchies in terms of structure and data. They
considered dimension hierarchy as semantic relationships
between  values  and  they  proposed  to  exploit  the
hypernymy/hyponymy  relationships  ("is-a-kind-of")  and
Meronymy/Holonymy  ("is-a-part-of")  WordNet.  In  this
approach, levels of granularity are created at the end of
hierarchy.
Favre et al. [20] proposed to enhance the dimension
hierarchies by exploiting the knowledge of users. This
knowledge is represented by a meta-aggregation rule and
different  rules.  A  meta-aggregation  rule  represents  the
structure of the link aggregation between two levels of
granularity. And rules "if-then" represent the link at the
instances.  The  levels  created  can  be  inserted  into  a
hierarchy or created at the end thereof.
III.
USING TOPOLOGICAL RELATIONSHIPS  TO
ENRICH DIMENSION HIERARCHIES
Dimension  hierarchies  in SDWs  show  the  relationships
between  domains  of  values  from  different  dimension
attributes  (set  in  levels  of  aggregation). Topological
relationships  also  present  hierarchical  relationships
between  spatial  concepts,  such  as  adjacency  and
connectivity. Thereby, we use topological relationships to
automatically  complete  dimension  hierarchies  in  a
conceptual model of a SDW.
In this paper, we use classes’ stereotypes defined in [2].
These classes are based on Unified Modeling Language
(UML) as shown in Table1.
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-334-6
DBKDA 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

TABLE 1.  STEREOTYPES USED TO DEVELOP THE
CONCEPTUAL MODEL OF A SDW
Stereotype 
Description 
Presentation
Fact Class
Facts
 
contain
business measures 
Dimension Class
Dimensions
describe Facts
Base Class
Base
 
represent
Dimension
Hierarchy
 
with
their attributes 
In this paper, we define another stereotype based also on
UML named Spatial Hierarchy, as shown in Table 2.
Spatial Hierarchy is added in the conceptual model of a
SDW  when  the  DM  needs to take  account  of a  new
context of spatial requirements in the developing of the
SDW.
Our  proposal  consists  of  identifying  topological
relationships between existing dimensions and bases in the
conceptual  model of SDW and the new added  spatial
requirements given by the user.
With each identified topological relationship, we create a
Spatial Hierarchy, which is named with the same name of
the identified topological relationship and has as attributes
the characteristics of the added requirement.
Following, we explain the main steps of our approach (an
overview is shown in Figure. 2).
TABLE 2. SPATIAL HIERARCHY STEREOTYPE USED TO
DEVELOP THE CONCEPTUAL MODEL OF A SDW
Stereotype
Description
Presentation
Spatial
Hierarchy
Spatial Hierarchy
present  spatial
Dimension
hierarchy  with
their attributes.
Prerequisite 1.  A dimension attribute is chosen from the
initial conceptual model of the SDW. The spatial hierarchy
will be enriched starting from this attribute.
Prerequisite 2. A new spatial requirement has been added
by the DM, which is in relation with one of existing
dimensions in the initial conceptual model. 
Step 1. Extract  different  instances from  the dimension
attribute chosen from the initial conceptual model.
Step 2. Identify topological relationships between spatial
objects recently required with spatial objects existing in
the dimension attribute chosen.
Step 3. If  there are relationships between the required
spatial objects and the existed ones, a spatial hierarchy for
every relationship is created having the same name as the
topological relationship. 
Step 3’. If there are no relationships between the required
spatial  objects  and  the  existed  ones,  a  new  record  is
inserted in the selected dimension without creating a new
hierarchy.
In Figure. 2, every step of our approach is illustrated. From
a  dimension  or  a  dimension  hierarchy  in  a
Multidimensional model, which not accomplishes all user
requirements, a dimension attribute is chosen. Then the
topological relationships are identified between instances
of the dimension attribute chosen and the new requirement
in order to create a new level of the spatial dimension
hierarchy.  If  there  are  no relationships between  added
requirement  and  existed  dimensions,  a  new  record  is
inserted. Iterations are repeated until all required spatial
objects are classified.
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-334-6
DBKDA 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

 
 
Figure 2. Overview of our approach
IV.
CASE STUDY
In this section, we show the benefits of our approach
by providing a case study, in which Spatial hierarchies
are enriched in the conceptual Model of a SDW. Our
case study consists of defining a conceptual model of a
sales manager who wants to analyze sales operations in
stores situated 2 km around the airport. Then, he needs
to extend the analysis region by adding others streets.
The  initial  conceptual  model  before  adding  spatial
requirements and applying our approach is presented in
Figure. 3. In this case, the added requirements are the
extended streets.
As is described previously, we should choose firstly a
dimension  attribute.  In  this  case,  we  choose  the
dimension spatial cover and the dimension attribute
spatial  objects.  Then  we  identify  relations  between
spatial objects and streets added. We found that some
streets have an intersection relationship with existed
streets; others have an inclusion relationship and others
streets  having  no  relationships  with  existed  spatial
objects. 
The conceptual model is extended according to the
different stages of the approach as shown in Figure. 4.
The  initial  conceptual  model  contains  facts  and
dimensions  presenting  the  spatial  and  non  spatial
requirements. The facts presented in Figure. 3 are: Sale
and Spatial Cover. The dimensions are: Product, Time,
Operational,  DMcharacteristic,  Presentation  and
Semantic.
Figure.3 presents the spatial and non-spatial data that
are  necessary  for  the  decision  maker,  the  sales
manager, to make the right decision. We use classes of
the  Unified  Modeling  Language  UML  to  model
requirements. Each class is a one of the requirements
expressed by the sales manager.
After the addition of new spatial requirements, we
identify two types of relations, as shown in Figure.4,
inclusions’  relations  and  intersections’  relations
between spatial objects and added spatial objects. 
Consequently,  two  spatial  hierarchies  are  added
according to the two relationships identified.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Spatial Dimension hierarchies are important to support
the  decision  making  process,  since  they  allow  the
analysis of data at different levels of detail (i.e., levels
of aggregation). Then, obtaining the required spatial
hierarchies captured from decision maker is crucial for
specifying a successful SDW.
In  this  paper,  we  propose  the  application  of
topological  relationships   to   obtain   the  required
hierarchies.  The  advantage  of  our  proposal  is  clear:
the  enrichment  of the conceptual model of the SDW
by  adding  new  aggregation  levels  in  order  to
satisfy  the  required DM requirements.
These required hierarchies allow SDW users to satisfy
their  information  analysis  needs,  since  they  better
support the decision-making process. 
Our proposal can be generalized to generate a star
scheme or a snowflake scheme of a conceptual model
of a SDW appropriate for a group of DMs.
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-334-6
DBKDA 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

Figure 3. The conceptual model of the SDW used by the sales manager [2]
      REFERENCES
[1] W. Inmon, “Building the Data warehouse”. In John Wiley
& Sons, Chichester , 1996.
[2] S. Ezzedine, S. Y. Turki, and S. Faiz  “An approach based
on Model Driven Engineering for data integration in a spatial
data warehouse’,  in CODIT’13, 2013.
[3] J. Egenhofer and R. D.Franzosa “Point-Set Topological
Spatial Relations”, in International Journal for Geographical
Information Systems, vol. 5, pp. 161-174, 1991.
[4] S. Bimonte, A. Tchounikine, and M. Miquel, “Geocube, a
multidimensional  model  and  navigation  operators  handling
complex measures: Application in spatial olap’, Advances in
Information  Systems  (ADVIS)”,  pp.  100–109,  Berlin  /
Heidelberg, Germany, 2006.
[5]  S.  Bimonte,  A.  Tchounikine,  and  M.  Bertolotto
“Integration of geographic information into multidimensional
models”,  in ICCSA, pp. 316–329, 2008.
[6] A. Escribano, L. Gomez., B. Kuijpers, and A. Vaisman
“Piet:  a  gis-olap  implementation”,  in  DOLAP  ’07:
Proceedings of the ACM tenth international workshop on Data
warehousing and OLAP, pp 73–80, New York, NY, USA,
2007. 
[7] L. Gomez, S. Haesevoets, B. Kuijpers, and A. Vaisman
“Spatial  aggregation:  Data  model  and implementation”,  in
CoRR, abs/0707.4304, 2007.
[8] E. Malinowski and E. Zimanyi “Representing spatiality in
a  conceptual  multidimensional  model”,   in  GIS  ’04:
Proceedings of the 12th annual ACM international workshop
on Geographic information systems, pp. 12–22, New York,
NY, USA, 2004.
[9]  E.  Malinowski  and  E.  Zimanyi  “Implementing  spatial
datawarehouse  hierarchies  in  object-relational  dbmss”,  in
ICEIS, pp. 186–191, 2007.
[10] J. Da Silva, V. C. Times, A. C. Salgado, C. Souza, R. do
Nascimento  Fidalgo,  and  A.G.  de  Oliveira  “Querying
geographical data warehouses with geomdql”, in SBBD, pp.
223–237, 2007.
[11] N. Stefanovic, J. Han, and K. Koperski “Object-based
selective  materialization  for  efficient  implementation  of
spatial data cubes”, in IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and
Data Engineering, vol.  12. N. 6, pp. 938–958, 2000.
[12] S. Rivest, Y. Bedard, and P. Marchand “Toward better
support  for  spatial  decision  making:  Defining  the
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-334-6
DBKDA 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

characteristics  of  spatial  on-line  analytical  processing”,  in
Geomatica, vol. 55, N. 4, pp.539–555, 2001.
[13] O. Glorio and J. Trujillo, “An MDA Approach for the
Development of Spatial Data Warehouses”, In DaWaK '08,
2008.
[14] O. Glorio and J. Trujillo, “Designing Dhata Warehouses
for Geographic OLAP querying by using MDA”, in ICCSA
'09, 2009.
[15]  J.  Mazon  and  J.  Trujillo,  “A  Hybrid  Model  Driven
Development Framework for the Multidimensional Modeling
of Data Warehouses”, in SIGMOD, 2007.
[16] O. Glorio, J. Mazón, I. Garrigós, and J. Trujillo, “Using
Web-based Personalization on Spatial Data Warehouses”, in
EDBT '10, 2010. 
[17] R. Fidalgo and A. Cuzzocrea, “An Enhanced Spatial Data
Warehouse Metamodel”, in CAiSE Forum, Vol. 855 of CEUR
Workshop Proceedings, pp.32-39, 2012.
[18]  A.  Cuzzocrea,  J.  Mazon,  J.  Trujillo,  and  J.  Zubcoff
“Model-driven data mining engineering: from solution-driven
implementations  to  'composable'  conceptual  data  mining
models”,  in  Int.  J.  of  Data  Mining,  Modelling  and
Management, 2011 Vol.3, No.3, pp.217 – 251, 2011.
[19] J.N. Mazón, and J. Trujillo, “Enriching Data Warehouse
Dimension  Hierarchies by Using Semantic  Relations”,   in
XXIIIrd British National Conference on Databases (BNCOD
2006), Vol. 4042, pp. 278–281. Springer, 2006.
[20] C. Favre, F. Bentayeb, and O. Boussaïd, “Dimension
Hierarchies  Updates in Data  Ware-houses  : a  User-driven
Approach”, in IXth International Conference on Enterprise
Informa-tion Systems (ICEIS 07), Funchal, Madeira, Portugal,
2007.
Figure 4. The extended conceptual model of the SDW after adding spatial requirements
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-334-6
DBKDA 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

