Analysing CV Corpus for Finding Suitable Candidates using Knowledge Graph and 
BERT 
 
Yan Wang 
Capgemini Engineering DRI 
Vélizy-Villacoublay, France 
Email: yan.wang2@altran.com 
 
Yacine Allouache 
Capgemini Engineering DRI 
Vélizy-Villacoublay, France 
Email: yacine.allouache@altran.com 
 
Christian Joubert 
Capgemini Engineering DRI 
Vélizy-Villacoublay, France 
Email: christian.joubert@altran.com 
 
 
Abstract—Recruiter and candidate are the two main roles in the 
process of employment. Even though there is an abundance of 
job openings and a scarcity of qualified candidates to fill those 
openings, the objective is to offer only the profiles that fit the 
requirements of clients. Bidirectional Encoder Representations 
from Transformers (BERT) have been proposed in 2018 to 
better understand client searches. The challenges today are the 
frequent evolution of the experiences in Curriculum Vitae (CV) 
and the need of adaptive data for the specific staffing tasks of 
BERT. In this paper, we present an approach of ranking 
candidates based on competence keywords. There are four 
stages. First, we use Term Frequency–Inverse Document 
Frequency (TF-IDF) Vectorizer to calculate the score of 
matching between a competence keyword and a corpus of CVs. 
Second, we apply the Weighted Average Method to calculate a 
global score of CV based on two types of competence keywords 
– function and specialty. Third, we construct a Knowledge 
Graph (KG) from the structured Competence Map (CMAP), 
which can classify the relationships of bidirectional association 
and aggregation. At last, we propose to use the Named-Entity 
Recognition (NER) and Masked Language Modeling (MLM) of 
BERT to better identify tokens from the input inquiries of the 
client. The experiments are using the CVs from the HR (Human 
Resource) management system of Altran. 
Keywords—CV; CMAP; Knowledge Graph; BERT; TF-IDF 
Vectorizer; NER; MLM; HR-analytics; Job Matching. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION   
HR-analytics is always essential for companies to improve 
workforce performance. It allows many companies to exploit 
the immense amounts of data collected from their customers, 
their markets, social networks, real-time applications, and 
even the cloud. There is a coherent connection between 
engagement, performance and profit. It is imperative to 
generate performance results at all levels of the organization 
in order to take a position in the market and to stimulate 
growth. Recruiting talented candidates is not enough. 
However, it is important that people are assigned to specific 
roles where their talents will have the greatest impact on 
achieving company goals and where they are most likely to 
remain fully engaged. Job matching involves defining 
superior performance of each position and using objective 
criteria to determine who gets employed. Traditional hiring 
methods that only use a job description and a list of desirable 
candidates, 
technical, 
educational 
and 
professional 
experiences as filters, with a favorable interview are not 
working effectively. The process of job matching goes beyond 
conventional employment methods to create the most 
comprehensive definition of the job. This makes clients 
choose the right person for the job that suits them best. The 
result is a person who is happier at work and who makes good 
progress in meeting performance goals. Job Matching issues 
always exist in the center of operational and staffing concerns. 
The similarity calculation is the mechanism that consists 
in evaluating the distance between two objects. Similarity 
measurements make it possible to solve problems from 
various fields such as text mining, image recognition, Nature 
Language Processing (NLP), computer vision, speech 
processing, image processing, and so on. In recent years, the 
recruiting 
process, 
Chatbot, 
search 
engines 
and 
recommendation systems have brought these technologies up 
to date. In this paper, we focus on the search engine for 
recruitment 
and 
staffing 
whereas 
Chatbot 
and 
recommendation systems are studied in future work.  
Most staffing search engines do not consider about the 
evolution of the experiences. The objective of this paper is to 
use the NER of BERT [1] to extract relevant competence 
keywords from candidate experiences and client requests. To 
achieve this, the model of BERT that we use is fine-tuned by 
the vocabulary of competence keywords using the MLM of 
BERT. A Knowledge Graph is proposed for a semantic 
structure to help users find more precise results. However, the 
vector BERT assigns to a word is a function of the entire 
sentence. The vectors can be different with the same word. To 
deal with this problem, TF-IDF Vectorizer and Weighted 
Average Method are proposed to calculate the score based on 
the static vector. 
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides the 
related work of information parser, job matching and BERT. 
Section 3 explains the approach of extracting competence 
keywords and constructing the KG for recommendations. 
Section 4 shows the experiment of comparing the tool BERT 
with Linx. The conclusion and perspective are in Section 5. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Most of staffing software for recruiting and staffing in 
information extraction from CVs is either privatized by 
companies as an in-house tool or sold as a commercial 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-857-0
DBKDA 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

product, for instance the private HR management system Linx 
in Altran. Artificial intelligence has contributed to great 
success in this field, but due to the confidential rule, some 
works are not well seen by the research community. Resume 
parsers have been proposed to extract information from the 
Internet [2], Github [3] and PDF [4], as well as from the 
general non-LinkedIn formats [5]. In case of Linx, only pre-
processing is required instead of the parser.  
For the purpose of improving the matching rate between 
jobseekers and available jobs, an ontology based expert 
system [6] can improve the accuracy of this matching. [7] 
proposes to extend the matching to multiple slots available to 
accept contracts. [8] presents a survey of exact string matching 
and approximate string-matching algorithms. Machine 
learning can continue to improve the performance of matching 
rate such as unsupervised feature extraction [9], using 
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) [10] and deep Siamese 
network [11]. At last, by combing the knowledge graph and 
recommendation system, we expect to improve the matching 
quality with the help of the relationships between entities, for 
example, by using embedding-based methods [12] or path-
based methods [13]. Considering the user preference [14] can 
also be interesting. In this paper, we consider the matching 
based on the competence keywords. 
BERT is known as a more powerful and efficient 
technique than the other NLP tools like RNN, CNN and 
LSTM, which understands inquiries better than ever before.  
The embedding models word2vec [15] and GloVe [16] have 
been presented to be less effective in documents recognitions. 
The performance also differs from section to section [17]. In 
recent years, BERT has been used for sentence classification 
based on the suitability of job description [5] and semantic 
search over the corpus [18]. BERT will become more and 
more important in the staffing software. 
III. 
THE PROPOSED APPROACH 
 
Figure 1.  Structure of proposed approach to construct the KG. 
The structure of the proposed approach is shown in Figure 
1. In Section III.A, we define the competency keywords as 
the vocabulary. Section III.B and III.C will explain how to 
calculate the matching score. The pyramid represents the 
structure of the knowledge graph in Section III.D. Section 
III.E proposes to use MLM and NER of BERT to identify the 
features in client inquiries. The process of this approach is 
first to extract the keywords using NER of BERT, and then 
return a list of the ranked candidates from Knowledge Graph. 
A. Competency keyword 
The structure of a CV from Altran contains several 
sections. In this paper, we focus on four sections – 
experience, core skills, skill keywords and activity keywords. 
Competency keywords are used as a vocabulary for a client 
to search for candidates. Competency keywords are collected 
from the core skills, skill keywords and activity keywords 
sections, where they are stored by the HR system of Altran. 
But they are not standardized and refined. Accordingly, some 
keywords may have the same meaning in the semantic 
competency. In order to deal with the confusing keywords, a 
pre-processing of data is required. The purpose of cleaning is 
to remove ambiguous data, for example “JS” represents “Java 
Script”. The competency keywords are also classified into 
two types – function and specialty. Function refers to the 
position of the job coming from activity keywords such as 
“software developer” and specialty refers to the specific skill 
coming from skill keywords such as “mobile application”. 
B. TF-IDF Vectorizer for Matching Score 
The TF-IDF method is used at first to represent text as a 
vector of dimension D such that D is the number of words in 
the vocabulary - competency keywords. So, for each word of 
the vocabulary, we compute its TF-IDF in each section of the 
document – experience, core skills, skill keywords and 
activity keywords. To compute this score, we proceed in two 
steps. The first step is to compute the TF, which is the number 
of occurrences of the word in the document. Then, we 
calculate the IDF, which is a metric of the importance of the 
word. The intuition behind the definition of IDF is if a term is 
present in more documents, then it is more important.  
 
                        𝑤𝑖,𝑗 = t𝑓𝑖,𝑗 × idfi 
 
      (1) 
 
id𝑓𝑖 = log (
1+𝑁
1+𝑑𝑓𝑖)  
 
      (2) 
w𝑖,𝑗 = score of term i in document j 
t𝑓𝑖,𝑗 = number of occurrences of term i in document j 
d𝑓𝑖 =  number of documents containing the term i 
N =  total number of documents  
 
TF-IDF Vectorizer allows us to have an explainable 
representation, as each dimension i of our vector represents 
the score of word i in a document j or in the client query. 
C. Weighted Average Method for Global Score 
The text of each section in a CV – experience, core skills, 
skill keywords and activity keywords can be given a 
matching score. However, the strength of the connection in 
each of the four sections may be different. A Weighted 
Average Method has been proposed to calculate a global 
score concerning all four sections. The weighted average 
method is defined by the following equation: 
     S =
∑ 𝜇(𝑠)∙𝑠
∑ 𝜇(𝑠)   
 
      (3) 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-857-0
DBKDA 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

where s is the score of matching in each section and µ 
represents the possibility of each section. The possibility of 
each section is pre-defined, but the value may change 
according to the types of competence keywords. For 
example, if the competence keywords are in the type of 
function like “software developer”, the possibility of activity 
keywords is higher than core skills and skill keywords. 
Conversely, the same is true for the type of specialty like 
“mobile application”.
 
Figure 2.  The competency lines and disciplinary fields in candidate environment of CMAP 
 
Figure 3.  ER diagram of relational database for the profil of candidate and mission. 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-857-0
DBKDA 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

D. Knowledge Graph from CMAP 
CMAP has been proposed as a homogeneous description 
of the competencies in Altran. The purpose is to allow and 
support competency-based management. It is not only a 
knowledge management system, but also a strategic 
workforce planning. CMAP contains a client environment 
and a candidate environment. Figure presents the structure of 
the candidate environment. The keywords in dark blue belong 
to the competency lines and the keywords in light blue belong 
to the disciplinary fields. 
In this paper, a knowledge graph is proposed to ensure 
search results are contextually relevant to requirements. The 
first version of the KG with structed data is stored in the graph 
database [17]. The Neo4j Graph Platform that we choose for 
KG is an example of a tightly integrated graph database and 
algorithm-centric processing, optimized for graphs. There are 
three labels in the KG, where the label marks the node as the 
part of a group. The first label is constructed by the 
competency lines and the second label is generated from the 
disciplinary fields. The relationship of aggregation is 
identified such that the first label contains the second label 
based on CMAP and each second label contains several 
competency keywords represented by the third label. In 
addition, two competency keywords can have a relationship 
of bidirectional association which indicates a close 
connection between each other. The first version of the labels 
in the Knowledge Graph is based on structured data. It is a 
tree and sparse graph as well as bipartite graph distinguished 
between function and specialty. 
E. MLM and NER using BERT 
BERT [1] is a feature extractor based on deep Neural 
Probabilistic Language Models proposed in 2018. MLM is a 
fill-in-the-blank task, where a model uses the whole context 
words to predict the masked word. In our approach, BERT is 
first trained by the MLM method to modify the model 
distribution to be specific to our domain. This method 
consists of masking the tokens of a sequence with a masking 
token <MASK> and asking the model to fill this mask with the 
appropriate token. These tokens come from the keywords of 
Knowledge Graph, such that if the word belongs to the 
Knowledge Graph, we mask it with a probability P. If not, we 
mask it with a probability 1-P. A threshold of P > 0.5 is set 
to allow the model to focus on the competency keywords. 
This allows the model to be attentive to both the right context 
- tokens on the right of the mask, and the left context - tokens 
on the left of the mask.  
Secondly, we continue the training of BERT with the 
NER method in order to extract the competency keywords 
from the profiles of candidates and the requests of clients. 
NER can classify tokens based on a class, for example, 
identifying a token as a person, an organization, or a location. 
In this approach, we use this technique to classify tokens as 
FUNC, SEP or NONE, such that FUNC means function, SEP 
means specialty, and NONE means a simple token. Therefore, 
we can further enrich our Knowledge Graph with the new 
competency keywords detected by BERT, which allows us to 
create a cycle of both refining BERT with the Knowledge 
Graph and developing the Knowledge Graph with BERT. 
IV. 
EXPERIMENT 
A. Dataset 
In the HR management system of Altran - Linx, there is a 
searching engine for CVs. Location, keyword, availability, 
industry sector, competence domain, activity, certificates and 
years of experience are the options for searching. In order to 
evaluate our proposed approach, we make a search of 
“engineer” and “available” in “France”. In total, 106 CVs are 
exported in Excel, and 45 competence keywords are collected 
after pre-processing of removing confusing keywords. The 
interesting part of these CVs are filtered and then stored in the 
relational database MySQL shown in Figure 3. In this Entity 
Relationship (ER) diagram, the table employee stores the 
main information of the candidate as well as the availability 
time and years of experiences. For privacy, we keep name and 
personal contact information of the candidate as empty. 
Another table stores the content of experience. Five key tables 
store the keywords of certificate, function, specialty, location 
and language, respectively. At last, the table of permission is 
used to define the authentication of the user to login the 
system. The tool BERT implemented by the approach 
proposed in this paper is executed as a Micro-Service 
connected with the frontend. 
 
Figure 4.  Knowledge Graph in the label of Information System. 
The Knowledge Graph is constructed in Neo4j using 45 
competency keywords and CMAP. To be different, MySQL 
is used to store the CVs and other original data and Neo4j is 
used to construct the KG for recommendations of competence 
keywords. Figure 4 presents the Knowledge Graph in the label 
of Information System. All the eight disciplinary fields 
surrounding this label have the aggregation relationship of 
“has”, for example “Information System” has a relation of 
“has” with “IT Quality”, “IT Security”, etc. 19 competency 
keywords are attached to the corresponding disciplinary field. 
Among the competency keywords, some of them can have a 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-857-0
DBKDA 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

bidirectional association relationship of “relate”, for example 
“Java” is related to “Eclipse”. The relationship of “relate” can 
recommend the related keyword with explanation based on 
the request of the client.  
B. Results 
The CVs extracted from Linx are written in both English 
and French language. A multi-language tokenizer is used for 
pre-processing at first. To perform a search using BERT, we 
extract the competency keywords from the profiles of 
candidates, which allows us to represent a candidate as a list 
of competency keywords. The profile is represented by ID and 
the competence keyword is represented by KEY. Then, we 
apply the TF-IDF model to calculate the scores of KEY in 
each section of the profile and then Weighted Average 
Method to calculate the global stores of KEY. The global 
scores are stored by the index of ID:KEY and the inverted 
index KEY:ID in a Redis database. Secondly, for the query of 
clients, we have as input a list of words that represent the 
criteria searched by the client. This query is passed to the NER 
tool, especially multi-language DistilBERT base model [20], 
to extract the competency keywords. The model of 
DistilBERT that we choose can understand both English and 
French language. Since the inverted index contains KEY:ID, 
Redis can return a list of profiles containing these competency 
keywords sorted in decreasing order.  
The NER tool is implemented using the model of 
DistilBERT-base-multilingual-case and is pre-trained by 
MLM. This tool is able to understand the language of both 
English and French. The objective of this tool is to use BERT 
methods to automate the recognition and extraction of 
keywords from the context. 
At last, we compare the results obtained with Linx and 
BERT. However, Linx is a tool where the search principle is 
only based on the competency keywords presented in the 
platform and we are limited on how to express our query such 
that it must be written in a Boolean way containing only the 
competency keywords of the skills that we want. For this 
reason, we have implemented this tool using BERT in order 
to express our needs with natural language. So, for our query 
“Java” we chose to search the first 3 consultants that are 
proposed by our models. With the limitation of the pages in 
this paper, we choose three top ranking candidate results from 
both Linx and BERT in Table 1. The sections Experience, 
Core Skills and Skill keywords contain original data that we 
use for analysis. It is obvious to see that Linx does not pay 
attention to the experiences of candidates and the results of 
Linx only focuses on the sections of core skills and skill 
keywords, while BERT considers both the experiences and the 
skills. All the three candidates from BERT have experiences 
of Java and this skill is also highlighted in the sections of core 
skills and skill keywords. Especially, the first candidate from 
BERT has the experience of “Eclipse” which is related to 
“Java” in the knowledge graph. The volume of CVs and the 
latency are not considered in this experiment as we focus on 
the measurement of semantic similarity. 
 
TABLE I.  
THREE TOP RANKING CANDIDATE RESUTLS IN BOTH LINX AND BERT 
Linx 
BERT 
ID_ 
candidate 
Experience 
Core Skills 
Skill 
Keywords 
ID_ 
candidate 
Experience 
Core Skills 
Skill 
Keywords 
16874 
Developer at ENGIE - France 
Developer within the Genesys team 
then WattsOn at GEM 
IS Consultant at SFR - France 
Project manager / IT Engineer MOE - 
Scalable and corrective maintenance 
of various applications. 
IS Consultant at SOCIETE 
GENERALE - France 
IT MOE Engineer - Scalable and 
corrective maintenance of several 
applications 
Test 
automation,  
Analysis & 
development of 
software 
requirements, 
Software 
design 
 
DDD, 
Microsoft 
Visual Studio 
2010, 
Entity 
Framework 
4.0, 
C# 4.0, 
Java 
TDD 
346575 
Developer at AIRBUS - 
France:  
Creation of a Platform for 
Icing studies 
Developer at AIRBUS - 
France:  
Prerevolution 
Software Developer at 
DASSAULT AVIATION - 
France:  
Eclipse RCP based 
Verification Tool 
development for SCADE 
ENSO 
Modelling, 
Model-Based 
Systems 
Engineering, 
IT Test & 
Validation, 
Automation 
JUNIT, 
Maven, 
EMF, 
Tortoise Git 
Java 8 
17071 
Study engineer at BNP PARIBAS - 
France 
Universal Plug application - migration 
from Exadata to AIX, optimization 
Technical consultant at SOCIETE 
GENERALE - France 
I2R - Performance optimization of the 
Oracle Exadata database; migration 
from Oracle 11gR2 to 12c 
Technical consultant at SOCIETE 
GENERALE - France 
Optimization of the AGORA-AIR 
application database 
DBA study, 
Database 
development, 
System and 
database 
Oracle 
PL/SQL, 
Oracle 
Exadata, 
Oracle 12c, 
Oracle SQL 
Developer, 
Java 8 
67747 
Developer at ALTRAN - 
France:  
Clinuikali project - Java 
Application development 
Developer at ALTRAN - 
France:  
Python Application 
development 
Testing & Validation 
Engineer at ALTRAN - 
France:  
ACS - Automatic Testing 
within Continuous 
Integration 
Software 
design, 
Marketing 
studies and 
strategy, 
Integration 
Validation 
Verification & 
Qualification, 
Python, 
Software 
Development, 
Java, 
CSS 3, 
Html5 
15868 
Tester at HP ENTERPRISE 
SERVICES COMMUNICATION & 
MEDIA SOLUTIONS - France 
System Tests and Functional Tests on 
a virtualized system of the 4G network 
Functional 
testing and 
validation, 
Test and 
technical 
validation, 
Collabnet 
Svn, 
Teamforge 
Svn, 
Microsoft 
Office, 
67711 
Developer at ACS - France:  
OA: The system quantifies 
the fatigue at work for an 
employee during his 
working hours. 
Developer at ACS - France:  
Application 
WEB, 
Core network 
mobile circuits, 
HTML, 
JavaScript, 
AngularJS, 
Angular, 
Java 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-857-0
DBKDA 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

Linx 
BERT 
ID_ 
candidate 
Experience 
Core Skills 
Skill 
Keywords 
ID_ 
candidate 
Experience 
Core Skills 
Skill 
Keywords 
core, 2G / 3G environment (MAP, 
Diameter, AAA, EIR protocols) 
Integrator at HP ENTERPRISE 
SERVICES COMMUNICATION & 
MEDIA SOLUTIONS - France 
Integration of software solutions - Pre-
Integration Tests Management of off-
shore teams 
Industrialization & production 
engineer at TOTAL - France 
Outsourcing control on data transfer 
applications Definition of new flows; 
Dedicated projects with high business 
impact 
Collaboration 
and networking 
HP ALM, 
Collaborative 
Tools 
LBS: Tracking the 
movement of physical 
assets on indoor and 
outdoor topology, by 
scanning barcode labels 
attached to assets or using 
smart labels, such as LORA 
or Antiote labels, which 
broadcast their location. 
Developer at ACS - France:  
OA: The system quantifies 
the fatigue at work for an 
employee during his 
working hours. 
Product design 
and 
development 
V. 
CONCLUSION  
This paper presents a keyword-based search engine for 
recruitment and staffing using knowledge graph and BERT. 
NER of BERT pre-trained by MLM can better recognize the 
competence keywords from the corpus of CVs and the natural 
language of client inquires. The knowledge graph composed 
of CMAP and competency keywords can recommend good 
results in the neighborhood domain. The proposed approach 
provides a way to use BERT for this specific task. The 
experiment based on BERT shows a better performance on 
finding good candidates than Linx.  
The future work contains three parts. A method of using 
BERT to compute the score of the word embedding is required 
to replace the TF-IDF Vectorizer; the first version of KG that 
we propose in this paper is based on structed data. A richer 
KG is needed with the properties of each node and weighted 
relation for the dynamic management in case of a new 
competence; in Figure 2, the information about mission is also 
stored in the relational databases. A recommendation system 
with KG embedding method is needed for the matching 
between the profile of a candidate and the description of a 
mission. 
Unifying 
knowledge 
graph 
learning 
and 
recommendation is highly suggested to improve the matching 
efficiency. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This paper is sponsored by Direction of Research and 
Innovation (DRI) of Capgemini Engineering in France. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Devlin, M. W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, Bert: Pre-
training of deep bidirectional transformers for language 
understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805, 2018. 
[2] C. Mang, Online job search and matching quality. Ifo Working 
Paper, 2012. 
[3] C. Hauff and G. Gousios, Matching GitHub developer profiles 
to job advertisements. IEEE/ACM 12th Working Conference 
on Mining Software Repositories. IEEE, pp. 362-366, 2015. 
[4] J. Chen, L. Gao, and Z. Tang, Information extraction from 
resume documents in pdf format. Electronic Imaging, pp. 1-8, 
2016. 
[5] V. Bhatia, P. Rawat, A. Kumar, and R. R. Shah, End-to-End 
Resume Parsing and Finding Candidates for a Job Description 
using BERT. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.03089, 2019. 
[6] V. Senthil Kumaran and A. Sankar, Towards an automated 
system for intelligent screening of candidates for recruitment 
using ontology mapping (EXPERT). International Journal of 
Metadata, Semantics and Ontologies, pp. 56-64, 2013. 
[7] S. D. Kominers and T. Sönmez, Matching with slot‐specific 
priorities: Theory. Theoretical Economics, pp. 683-710, 2016. 
[8] S. I. Hakak et al., Exact string matching algorithms: Survey, 
issues, and future research directions. IEEE Access, pp. 69614-
69637, 2019. 
[9] Y. Lin, H. Lei, P. C. Addo, and X. Li, Machine learned resume-
job matching solution. arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.07657, 2016. 
[10] C. Zhu et al., Person-job fit: Adapting the right talent for the 
right job with joint representation learning. ACM Transactions 
on Management Information Systems (TMIS), pp. 1-17, 2018. 
[11] S. Maheshwary and H. Misra, Matching resumes to jobs via 
deep siamese network. Companion Proceedings of the The 
Web Conference 2018. pp. 87-88, 2018. 
[12] F. Zhang, N. J. Yuan, D. Lian, X. Xie, and W. Y. Ma, 
Collaborative knowledge base embedding for recommender 
systems. Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international 
conference on knowledge discovery and data mining. pp. 353-
362, 2016. 
[13] H. Zhao, Q. Yao, J. Li, Y. Song, and D. L. Lee, Meta-graph 
based recommendation fusion over heterogeneous information 
networks. Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD 
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data 
Mining. pp. 635-644, 2017. 
[14] Y. Cao, X. Wang, X. He, Z. Hu, and T. S. Chua, Unifying 
knowledge graph learning and recommendation: Towards a 
better understanding of user preferences. The world wide web 
conference. pp. 151-161, 2019. 
[15] T. Mikolov, K. Chen, G. Corrado, and J. Dean, Efficient 
estimation of word representations in vector space. arXiv 
preprint arXiv:1301.3781, 2013. 
[16] J. Pennington, R. Socher, and C. D. Manning, Glove: Global 
vectors for word representation. Proceedings of the 2014 
conference on empirical methods in natural language 
processing (EMNLP). pp. 1532-1543, 2014. 
[17] A. Singh, C. Rose, K. Visweswariah, V. Chenthamarakshan, 
and N. Kambhatla, PROSPECT: a system for screening 
candidates for recruitment. Proceedings of the 19th ACM 
international conference on Information and knowledge 
management. pp. 659-668, 2010. 
[18] A. A. Deshmukh and U. Sethi, IR-BERT: Leveraging BERT 
for Semantic Search in Background Linking for News Articles. 
arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.12603, 2020. 
[19] M. Needham and A. E. Hodler, Graph Algorithms: Practical 
Examples in Apache Spark and Neo4j. O'Reilly Media, 2019. 
[20] V. Sanh, L. Debut, J. Chaumond, and T. Wolf, DistilBERT, a 
distilled version of BERT: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter. 
arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.01108, 2019. 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-857-0
DBKDA 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

