 
 
Patent Threat Analysis Search Engine 
 
Yung Chang Chi 
Department of Industrial and Information Management and 
Institute of Information Management, 
 National Cheng Kung University,  
Tainan City, Taiwan ROC 
e-mail:charles.y.c.chi@gmail.com 
Hei Chia Wang 
Department of Industrial and Information Management and 
Institute of Information Management, 
 National Cheng Kung University,  
Tainan City, Taiwan ROC 
 e-mail:hcwang@mail.ncku.edu.tw 
 
 
Abstract-This paper proposes a framework for a patent threat 
analysis search engine. The framework employs text mining 
based on the patent map approach to identify which particular 
patent is similar to the one in dispute. The patent map is a 
visual representation that uses technological proximities 
among patents. The patent threat analysis method will analyze 
patent infringement issues from judgements in the USA and 
Europe. Having examined and compared the patent map and 
patent infringement analysis, we can identify what kind of 
product and technology are subject to the threat of patent 
infringement with the help of solution integration and analysis 
of the two different databases.  
Keywords-patent;patent threat;patent map;content analysis. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Patents are important knowledge sources for industrial 
research and product development because of their 
innovation and practicability. In recent years, patent analysis 
increased in importance for high-technology management as 
the process of innovation became more complex, the cycle of 
innovation became shorter and the market demand more 
volatile [22]. 
Patent analysis technologies include patent bibliometric 
data analysis [21], patent citation analysis [5], patent 
statistical 
analysis 
[26] 
and 
patent 
classification. 
Bibliometric analysis of patents provides information on the 
growth of the inventive activity and technological trends [22]. 
Patent mining is an emerging research topic that grew in 
recent years. So far, only few researches have been done on 
the topic. Patent mining consists of patent retrieval, patent 
categorization and patent clustering [25]. 
Retrieving patent documents can be done through the 
cluster-based approach [6]. Distributed information retrieval 
for patent can be done by generating ranking lists for the 
query by CORI (The collection retrieval inference network) 
or KL (Kernighan–Lin) algorithms [14]. Categorizing patent 
documents can be done automatically using the k-Nearest 
Neighbor classifiers and Bayesian classifiers [12][13], or by 
using a variety of machine learning algorithms [1], the k-
Nearest Neighbor on the basis of patent’s semantic structure 
[7], the classifier built through back-propagation network 
[19]. Patent documents can be clustered through the k-Means 
algorithm and represented in a visualized patent map [8], and 
the structured SOM (Self-Organizing Map) clustering 
algorithm [3]. Clustering algorithms can also be adopted to 
form a topic map for presenting patent analysis and 
summarization results [19], to create a system interface for 
retrieving patent documents [3]. 
Content analysis is indigenous to communication 
research and is potentially one of the important research 
techniques in social sciences. It seeks to analyze data within 
a specific context in view of the meaning someone –a group 
or a culture-attributes to them. Communications, messages, 
and symbols differ from observable events, things, properties, 
or people in that they inform about something other than 
themselves; they reveal some properties of their distant 
producers or carriers, and they have cognitive consequences 
for their senders, their receivers, and the institutions in which 
their exchange is embedded [9]. 
Content analysis is a research technique for making 
replicable and valid inferences from texts to the contexts of 
their use. As a technique, content analysis involves 
specialized procedure. It provides new insights, increases a 
researcher’s understanding of particular phenomena, or 
informs practical actions. Content analysis is a scientific tool 
[10]. 
The judgements of patent infringement, unlike the patent 
documents, can be mined using text mining techniques, since 
the judgements are legal documents. The judgements can be 
transformed into patterns by content analysis, and readers 
can easily access them the same way as reading newspapers 
to understand the key points and issues in dispute.  
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section II 
presents the research background. Section III states our 
objective. In Section IV, we describe our proposed research 
method. The paper concludes with expected results and 
future work considerations. 
II. 
RESEARCH BACKGROUND 
So far, patent analysis technologies include patent 
bibliometric data analysis [21], patent citation analysis [5], 
patent statistical analysis [26], and patent classification. 
Patent 
mining 
consists 
of 
patent 
retrieval, 
patent 
categorization and patent clustering [25] that focuses just on 
the patent documents analysis and patent mining. However,  
patent infringement constitutes the biggest threat in patents 
use. Through patent analysis and mining, one can just 
discover newly developed products and their similarity with 
127
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-408-4
DBKDA 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

 
 
the claims of other patents, but no one can foresee where 
potential patent threats are and the likelihood of patent 
infringement. 
This framework of patent database is based on the United 
States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) patent 
database and the European Patent Office (EPO) patent 
database. The patent infringement judgements are based on 
the case judgements in United States and European Union. 
III. 
RESARCH OBJECTIVE 
The purposes of this study is to provide the patent threat 
analysis and reference regarding patent infringement as well 
as technology trends for new product designers and 
technology research engineers at the stage before and after 
developing a new product or technology. This will also 
provide the information needed so that management can 
make strategic decisions. 
Because of a lack in legal background, it is difficult for 
ordinary readers to fully grasp the judgements rendered by 
professional judges. With the implementation of content 
analysis, ordinary people will be able to use content analysis 
technology to analyze the patent infringement verdict 
contents, and try to use big data concepts across different 
databases to discover any relation. 
IV. 
RESEARCH METHOD 
The patent documents can be collected from United 
States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) patent 
database and the European Patent Office (EPO) patent 
database. 
A. Patent documents analysis 
Base on the collected patent documents and the subject-
action-object (SAO) structures extracted by using Natural 
Language Processing (NLP), the study uses a content 
analysis approach to generate the patent map. 
NLP is a text mining technique that can conduct syntactic 
analysis of natural language; NLP tools include Stanford 
parser (Stanford2013)[27],  Minipar (Lin2003)[28] and 
KnowledgistTM2.5[29]. 
NLP tools will be used for build a set of SAO structures 
from the collected patents. 
Multidimensional scaling (MDS) is a statistical technique 
used to visualize similarities in data [11][16]. Patent 
documents in different fields have different key issues that 
trigger different Multidimensional scaling, so the paper will 
design a new algorithm to identify which particular patent 
field shall correspond to what extent of scaling. 
B. Patent infringement verdict content analysis  
The most obvious source of data appropriate for content 
analysis is text to which meanings are conventionally 
attributed: verbal discourse, written documents, and visual 
representations. The text in the patent infringement 
judgements is important because that is where the meanings 
are. For this reason, it is essential for the content analysis 
technology to analyze the patent infringement text in order to 
develop strategies and preventive measures in patent 
litigation. 
Content analyses commonly contain six steps that define 
the technique procedurally, as follows: 
Design. Design is a conceptual phase during which 
analysts define their context, what they wish to know and are 
unable to observe directly; explore the source of relevant 
data that either are or may become available; and adopt an 
analytical construct that formalizes the knowledge available 
about the data-context relationship thereby justifying the 
inferential step involved in going from one to the other. 
Unitizing. Unitizing is the phase of defining and 
ultimately identifying units of analysis in the volume of 
available data. Sampling units makes possible the drawing of 
a statistically representative sample from a population of 
potentially available data, such as issues of a newspaper, 
whole books, television episodes, fictional characters, essays, 
advertisements. 
Sampling. While the process of drawing representative 
samples is not indigenous to content analysis, there is the 
need to (1) undo the statistical biases inherent in much of the 
symbolic material analyzed and (2) ensure that the often 
conditional hierarchy of chosen sampling units become 
representative of the organization of the symbolic 
phenomena under investigation. 
Coding. Coding is the step of describing the recording 
units or classifying them in terms of the categories of the 
analytical constructs chosen. This step replicates an 
elementary notion of meaning and can be accomplished 
either by explicit instructions to trained human coders or by 
computer coding. The two evaluative criteria, reliability as 
measured by inter coder agreement and relevance or 
meaningfulness, are often at odds. 
Drawing inferences. Drawing inferences is the most 
important phase in a content analysis. It applies the stable 
knowledge about how the variable accounts of coded data 
are related to the phenomena the researcher wants to know 
about. 
Validation. Validation is the desideratum of any research 
effort. However, validation of content analysis results is 
limited by the intention of the technique to infer what cannot 
be observed directly and for which validation evidence is not 
readily available. 
C. Search engine 
Our proposed search engine is a program that has three 
parts: (1) The first part searches patent documents for 
specified keywords and returns a list of the documents 
where the keywords were found. Then, the engine will use 
data and text mining technology to design a specified 
algorithm (first algorithm) in order to analyze the legal 
documents and try to find out the most similar patents or 
patent group. (2) Next, the engine searches the patent 
infringement judgements for specific keywords and returns 
a list of the documents as above patent documents by 
introducing the content analysis technology into specified 
design algorithm (second algorithm) in order to analyze the 
infringement cases/precedents. It also finds the nearest 
infringement judgements/precedents. (3) Finally, the engine 
uses different analysis technologies in two different 
128
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-408-4
DBKDA 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

 
 
databases to render a cross comparison to generate a 
possible result algorithm (third algorithm) with the 
introduction of big data concepts. 
A search engine is really a general class of programs. 
However, the term is often used to specifically describe 
systems. Our proposed search engine core technologies are 
used to analyze patent infringement content and to use 
algorithms and the comparative analysis between two 
databases in order to generate accurate result. 
D. The framework of patent threat analysis search engine 
The framework of patent threat analysis search engine is 
depicted in Figure 1. The top part of Figure 1 represents the 
content analysis research process [9]. We implement the 
patent infringement judgement is this process. The process 
framework needs to be designed as algorithm. 
      The middle of Figure 1 is the framework of patent 
documents analysis process. The process includes SAO 
structure extraction (NLP) and patent characteristic 
measurement and visualization (MDS). Here, we attempt to 
generate the patent map. In this phase, the study has 
generated some results based on past research. 
      The lower part in Figure 1 represents the proposed 
search engine core technology. The study will construct the 
knowledge and technology database in order to support the 
findings of particular products that are likely to be sued, 
technology trends, and the threat of patent infringement. 
The cross patent comparison and analysis will also utilize 
big data concepts to construct the algorithm. 
V. 
EXPECTED RESULT AND FUTURE WORK  
This study aims to develop a search engine similar to 
Google for patent analysis. When the user enters a keyword, 
the engine does an analysis and will inform on the related 
patents as well as potential patent threats. It can also provide 
the technology trend analysis. 
The study aims to employ different analysis methods to 
analyze different databases and further use the analysis 
results by cross-comparison. An accurate algorithm in 
different fields can be constructed and achieved in patent 
threat analysis. 
The next step will be to employ the image recognition 
functions to identify drawings and pictures. If the search 
engine has the capability to analyze drawings and pictures, 
the accuracy of the results will be increased in the future. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] C. J. Fall, A. Torcsrari, K. Benzineb, and G. Karetka, 
Automated 
categorization 
in 
the 
international 
patent 
classification. “SIGIR Forum”. 2003, pp.10-25. 37(1). 
[2] S.H. Huang, H.R. Ke, and W.P. Yang, Structure clustering for 
Chinese patent documents. “Expert system with application”. 
2008, pp.2290-2297.34. 
[3] S.H. Huang, C.C. Liu, C.W. Wang, H.R. Ke, and W.P. Yang, 
Knowledge annotation and discovery for patent analysis. 
“International Computer Symposium”. 2004, pp.15-20. 
[4] H. Park, J. Yoon, and K. Kim, “Identification and evaluation 
of corporations for merger and acquisition strategies using 
patent information and text mining” Scientometrics. April 
2013, pp.883–909. 
[5] J. Michel, and B. Bettels, “Patent citation  analysis: a closer 
look at the basic input data from patent search reports”, 
Scientometrics. 2001, pp.185-201. Vol.51. no. 1. 
[6] I. S. Kang, S.H. Na, J. Kim, and J.H. Lee, Cluster-based 
patent retrieval. “Information Processing & Management”. 
2007, pp.1173-1182.43(5). 
[7] J.H. Kim, and K.S. Choi, Patent document categorization 
based on semantic structural information. “Information 
processing & Management”. 2007, pp.1200-1215.43(5).  
[8] Y.G. Kim, J.H. Suh, and S.C. Park, Visualization of patent 
analysis for emerging technology. “Expert System with 
Applications”. 2008, pp.1804-1812.34(3). 
[9] K. Krippendorff, Content analysis In E. Barnouw, G. Gerbner, 
W. Schramm, T. L. Worth, and L. Gross (Eds.), International 
encyclopedia of communication  New York, NY: Oxford 
University Press. 1989, pp.403-407.Vol. 1.  
[10] K. Krippendorff, “Content Analysis An Introduction to Its 
Methodology” second Edition, Sage Publications, Inc. 2004. 
[11] J.B. Kruskal, Multidimensional scaling by optimizing 
goodness of fit to a nonmetric hypothesis. Psychometrika. 
1964, pp.1-27.29(1). 
[12] L.S. Larkey, Some issues in the automatic classification of 
U.S. patents. In: Working notes for the AAAI-98 workshop 
on learning for text categorization. 1998, pp.87-90. 
[13] Larkey L.S. A patent search and classification system. In: 
Proceedings of the fourth ACM conference on digital libraries. 
1999, pp.79-87. 
[14] Larkey L.S., Connell, M.E., and Callan, J. Collection 
selection and results merging with topically organized US 
patents and TREC data. In Proceedings of ninth international 
conference on informaiton knowledge and management. 2000,   
pp.282-289. 
[15] D. Lin, Dependency-based evaluation of MINIPAR. In A. 
Abeille(Ed.), Treebanks: Building and using parsed corpora. 
Dordrecht: Kluwer, 2003, pp.317-332. 
[16] U. Schmoch, Evaluation of technological strategies of 
companies by means of MDS maps. “International Journal of 
Technology Management”, 1995, pp.4-5.10(4-5). 
[17] Stanford. The Stanford parser: A statistical parser. from 
http://nlp.standford.edu/software/lex-parser.shtml. Retrieved 
March 2013. 
[18] T. Joachims “Text Categorization with Support Vector 
Machines: Learning with Many Relevant Features” University 
Dortmund Informatik LS8, Baroper Str. 301 44221 Dortmund, 
Germany. 
[19] A.J.C. Trappey, F.C. Hsu, C.V. Trappy, C.I. Lin, 
Development  of a patent document classification and search 
platform using a back-propagation network. “Expert Systems 
with Applications”. 2006, pp.755-765.31(4). 
[20] Y.H Tseng, Y.M. Wang, Y.I. Lin, C.J. Lin, and D.W. Juang, 
Patent surrogate extraction and evaluation in the context of 
patent mapping. “Journal of Information Science”. 2007, 
pp.718-736.33(6). 
[21] V. K. Gupta, and N. B. Pangannaya, Carbon nanotubes; 
bibliometric analysis of patents, “World Patent Information”. 
Sep. 2000, pp.185-189.Vol.22,issue 3.  
[22] Y. Liang, R. Tan, and J. Ma, “Patent Analysis with Text 
Mining for TRIZ” IEEE ICMIT. 2008, pp.1147-1151. 
[23] Y.L. Chen, and Y.C. Chang, A three-phase method for patent 
classification ” Information Processing and Management”. 
2012, pp.1017-1030.48. 
129
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-408-4
DBKDA 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

 
 
[24] Y.L. Chen, and Y.T. Chiu, Vector space model for patent 
documents with hierarchical class labels ”Journal of 
Information Science”. 2012, pp.222-233.38(3)  
[25] Y.L. Chen, and Y.T. Chiu, An IPC-based vector space model 
for patent retrieval “Information Processing and 
Management”. 2011, pp.309-322.47. 
[25] Y. H. Tseng, C. J. Lin, and Y. I. Lin, “Text mining for patent 
mapanalysis”. Information Processing & Mangement”. Sep. 
2007, pp.1216-1247. vol.43, issue 5.  
[26] Y.H. Tseng, C.J. Lin, and Y.I. Lin, “Text mining techniques 
for patent analysis ” Information Processing and 
Managemnet”. 2007, pp.1216-1247.43. 
[27] The Stanford Natural Language Processing Group, The 
Stanford Parser: A statistical parser, 
http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/lex-parser.shtml 
[28] MINIPAR is a broad-coverage parser for the English language. 
http://webdocs.cs.ualberta.ca/~lindek/minipar.htm 
[29] Knowledgist retrieves, analyzes, and organizes information 
into a meaningful, robust, personal knowledge base. 
https://invention-machine.com/ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
130
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-408-4
DBKDA 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

 
 
 
                       
 
                                                      
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1. The framework of patent threat analysis search engine 
Cross 
comparison 
Threat 
Analysis 
Knowledge 
Technology 
Database 
Patent 
Threat 
Analysis 
Technology 
Trend 
Analysis 
Technology 
Trend 
Analysis 
131
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-408-4
DBKDA 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

