Hybrid Intelligence in Data Privacy Solutions 
 
 
Marek R. Ogiela 
AGH University of Science and Technology 
30 Mickiewicza Ave, 30-059 Kraków, Poland 
e-mail: mogiela@agh.edu.pl 
Lidia Ogiela 
AGH University of Science and Technology 
30 Mickiewicza Ave, 30-059 Kraków, Poland 
e-mail: logiela@agh.edu.pl 
 
 
 
Abstract—In this paper, we will present the idea of applying the 
hybrid intelligence technologies in data privacy. This new 
paradigm joins artificial intelligence (AI) with human 
intelligence, and allows to support creation of user-oriented 
cryptographic procedures. Such protocols will apply selected 
users’ preferences in protocols dedicated for increasing data 
privacy. 
Keywords-Hybrid Intelligence; data privacy; cryptograpic 
protocols. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Modern cryptographic algorithms may be oriented on 
particular person or group of users. To achieve such feature, it 
can be implemented using selected AI techniques. There are 
many contributions presenting security approaches focused on 
particular users e.g., defining personalized cryptographic 
protocols [1][2], which can implement personal features or 
special AI techniques to select unique parameters. Among 
such techniques we can also find solutions, in which artificial 
intelligence allows to extract behavioral features or cognitive 
skills [3][4]. Application of AI procedures allows to define a 
new area of IT security called cognitive cryptography [5]. 
Nowadays we can also observe development of new 
hybrid, i.e., human-AI solutions in security technologies. This 
means that also in IT security will be possible to introduce 
hybrid human-AI approaches, which can be focused to 
guarantee the high security level, and oriented for selected 
users. Such solutions allow to extend traditional security 
procedures towards more extensive and optimized analysis of 
security parameters (or features), and creation of security 
procedures strongly connected with particular persons. 
Extensive semantic analysis can be supported by AI solutions, 
which allow to select the optimal personal parameters or 
features for created user-oriented security protocols. 
Below will be described areas of application of such 
hybrid procedures, which can be defined for security 
purposes. 
 
II. 
HYBRID APPROACHES IN SECURITY PROTOCOLS  
The most important areas of application of hybrid security 
protocols are the following: 
• 
Secure information sharing with privileges 
• 
Knowledge-based authentication protocols 
• 
Visual cryptography  
• 
Personalized behavioral security procedures 
 
In such areas we can define user-oriented security 
procedures, which involve AI procedures. AI techniques 
perform optimization tasks, especially important in selection 
of parameters, or during evaluation of features implemented 
in security protocols. For example, when we try to define a 
personalized security protocol we often apply personal 
features or characteristics. Considering different biometric 
patterns as well as other specific users features we can 
evaluate for a particular person a very large feature vector with 
many personal characteristics. Having such personal record, 
we can easily select a some of the most distinctive personal 
features which can later be involved in personalized or user-
oriented protocol.  
Considering the above mentioned areas of application, we 
can define the most important features of such protocols as 
follows. 
In secure information sharing, hybrid intelligence can be 
applied in such manner that user preferences or personal 
features will have influence on selection of the sharing 
algorithm, and starting parameters like number of parts, 
privileges etc. The way of parts distribution can be dependent 
on AI procedures, which allow to perform division of secret 
information over several layers.  
Knowledge-based authentication protocols can be 
oriented for particular user or group of persons [6]. In such 
techniques, expertise knowledge and experiences can be 
considered, and authentication protocol will be related with 
thematic visual patterns. Personal features may be related to 
expertise areas connected with particular user. Having 
selected the thematic areas AI approaches allow to efficiently 
select or find visual patterns, which can be presented to user 
during security procedures.  
Visual cryptography is one of the most important areas of 
application of hybrid intelligence security protocols. Such 
techniques allow to split visual secret information into several 
different parts. Usually personal recognition abilities are 
connected with perception function, and decide when 
particular user is able to recognize original secret. With such 
techniques will be possible to establish personal perception 
thresholds evaluated for different users. Perception levels can 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-969-0
DBKDA 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

also be dependent on user’s knowledge and experiences. In 
such protocols, knowledge and expectations define human 
factors, but perception abilities can be evaluated by AI 
procedures. 
Personalized behavioral security procedures allow to 
define a special type of security protocols, in which different 
movement feature can be considered [7]. It may contain very 
simple procedures for personal key generation or more 
complex protocols oriented for creation behavioral locks. 
Here we can consider different types of human body 
movements starting from palm gestures to more complex 
human motion patterns registered while doing special 
exercises [1]. 
In all described areas, the methodology of using hybrid 
intelligence is the same. To create hybrid human-AI security 
protocol, firstly the set of personal parameters should be 
defined. Having defined personal features, the selection of 
appropriate and unique features can be performed with 
application of AI methods. The selection of optimal features 
is usually a very complex task especially in situation when a 
very large feature vector is available. In such cases, AI 
approaches allow to quickly select the optimal feature set. 
Important advantage of application of AI techniques is 
possibilities to consider constantly changing parameters, 
which can have different values over the time. 
 
III. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper, we presented possible areas of application of 
hybrid intelligence techniques used in security protocols. 
More specifically, the way of application of personal features 
in advance security solution were described. Additionally, 
selection of the most important personal parameters can be 
performed with application of AI procedures.  
The most important features of hybrid intelligence security 
methods are efficiency, and personalization towards 
application by particular person. Such techniques allow to 
consider different personal features, and changing parameters 
associated with users. Hybrid intelligence methods will enrich 
the cognitive cryptographic approaches defined to join 
security methods with semantic features or personal 
parameters [8][9]. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been supported by the National Science 
Centre, 
Poland, 
under 
project 
number 
DEC-
2016/23/B/HS4/00616. This work has been supported by the 
AGH University of Science and Technology research Grant 
No 16.16.120.773.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. Ogiela, and M. R. Ogiela, “Cognitive security paradigm for 
cloud computing applications,” Concurr. Comput.: Pract. Exp. 
32(8), e5316, 2020, doi: 10.1002/cpe.5316. 
[2] S. Zapechnikov, “Privacy-Preserving Machine Learning as a 
Tool for Secure Personalized Information Services,” Procedia 
Computer Science, Vol. 169, 2020, pp. 393-399, doi: 
10.1016/j.procs.2020.02.235. 
[3] L. Ogiela, “Transformative computing in advanced data 
analysis processes in the cloud,” Inf. Process. Manage. 57(5), 
102260, 2020. 
[4] M. R. Ogiela, L. Ogiela, and U. Ogiela, “Biometric methods 
for advanced strategic data sharing protocols,”. In: 2015 9th 
International Conference on Innovative Mobile and Internet 
Services in Ubiquitous Computing IMIS 2015, pp. 179–183, 
2015, doi: 10.1109/IMIS.2015.29. 
[5] M. R. Ogiela, and U. Ogiela, “Secure information splitting 
using grammar schemes,” New Challenges in Computational 
Collective Intelligence. Studies in Computational Intelligence, 
vol. 244, pp. 327–336. Springer, Heidelberg, 2009, doi: 
10.1007/978-3-642-03958-4_28. 
[6] C. Guan, J. Mou, and Z. Jiang, “Artificial intelligence 
innovation in education: a twenty-year data-driven historical 
analysis,” Int. J. Innov. Stud. 4(4), 134–147, 2020. 
[7] N. Ferguson, and B. Schneier, “Practical Cryptography,” 
Wiley, 2003. 
[8] S. J. H. Yang, H. Ogata, T. Matsui, and N.-S. Chen, “Human-
centered artificial intelligence in education: seeing the invisible 
through the visible,” Comput. Educ.: Artif. Intell. 2, 100008, 
2021. 
[9] M. Del Giudice, V. Scuotto, B. Orlando, and M. Mustilli, 
“Toward the human – Centered approach. A revised model of 
individual acceptance of AI,” Human Resource Management 
Review, 2021, 100856, doi: 10.1016/j.hrmr.2021.100856. 
 
 
 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-969-0
DBKDA 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advances in Databases, Knowledge, and Data Applications

