Video Surveillance in the Cloud: Dependability Analysis
Aleksandra Karimaa
Turku Centre for Computer Science, Teleste Corp.
Turku, Finland
alkari@utu.fi
Abstract—Cloud  computing  with  storage  virtualization  and 
new service-oriented architecture brings a new perspective to 
the aspect of dependability of video surveillance solutions and 
other  safety-critical  applications.  The  existing  research  is 
focused mainly on security challenges of cloud applications in 
general.  The  area  of  safety-critical  systems  is  relatively 
unexplored especially beyond aspects of system security. We 
believe the overview of system dependability shall be done to 
cover  other  dependability  attributes.  It  shall  bring  new 
arguments for expansion of video surveillance systems towards 
cloud  technology,  global  resources  distribution  and 
virtualization. The article reviews the main drivers towards 
surveillance  in  cloud  technology.  We  research  the 
dependability characteristics in context of transition of video 
surveillance architecture towards cloud solutions. Finally, we 
propose the areas of focus for system development and design.
Keywords-surveillance; cloud; dependability
 INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION
The main motivations driving video surveillance towards 
cloud computing is the scalability of computing and storage 
resources which provide; cost effective scalability, flexibility 
of resource management and improve system performance.
The  transition  of  video  surveillance  towards  cloud 
solutions can be seen rather as a continuous process than a 
disruptive  innovation.  There  are  multiple  factors  which 
indicate that the development towards a cloud solution is a 
natural  evolution  for  the  development  of  surveillance 
systems. 
The architecture of video surveillance systems develops 
towards a model that includes dumb clients and a core of 
servers - it is identical with the architectural principles of 
cloud  computing.  Moreover,  the  systems  themselves  are 
becoming more often distributed, creating the structure of 
multiple local sites connected in mesh-like structures. The 
connectivity  between  single  locations  is  based  upon  IP 
(Internet Protocol). Additionally, there are ongoing processes 
of standardization for architectural solutions and external 
interfaces (refer to ONVIF [1], PSIA [2], and Web Services 
architecture standardization by W3C [3]). In  the case of 
surveillance  systems,  the  process  is  driven  by  the 
requirement for multi-vendor integration with open and well 
defined  interface  environment  enabling  a  cloud-based 
architectural  solution.  An  open  and  standardized 
environment  motivates  the  development  of  other  value-
added features (such as quality or security) which can then 
be  offered  as  a  product  differentiator  driving  market 
maturity.   Addressing  the  current  weak  points  of 
dependability should have a positive impact on a number of 
cloud-based  safety-critical  systems.  Finally,  typical  video 
surveillance systems have high demands for massive storage 
requirements  (recording  of  video  streams)  and  high-
performance  computing  (coding  the  streams  and  system 
intelligence)  which  are  major  advantages  of  cloud  and 
virtualization technologies.
However, system transition towards cloud solutions is 
not without its challenges. In order to benefit from a cloud-
based system, there is certain amount of system and software 
development  required.  The  systems  should  be  able  to 
accommodate automated mechanisms available in the cloud 
infrastructure, utilize advantages of cloud architecture and 
also handle cloud architecture limitations. A good example is 
the  video  format  conversions  requirement  which 
accommodates available service models (cost of storage at 
data centre and the cost of network transmission).  Another 
example includes extension of system failover mechanisms 
to accommodate virtual machine failover availability.
One of the problems with this transition towards a cloud-
based system might be the flexibility of the offering. A cloud 
service offering may be focused on supporting the scenario 
where the video transmission happens from the cloud to the 
user whereas in surveillance system the video is transmitted 
from  the user or camera  towards  the cloud  (for  storage 
purposes).
This article reviews  the transition alternatives from a 
traditional  to  a  cloud-based  surveillance  system.  An 
overview  of  dependability  objectives  for  a  surveillance 
system  is  also  described.  Next,  the  objectives  of 
dependability objectives: availability, security, reliability and 
maintainability  are  analyzed.  The  article  is  closed  by  a 
discussion chapter containing a short summary of the topic 
for the transition process.
TRANSITION ALTERNATIVES
The  process  of  transition  of  a  surveillance  solution 
towards  a  cloud-based  system  is  expected  to  be  quite 
complex, this is due to security concerns of cloud-based 
systems and the immaturity of the current market offering of 
cloud services. Therefore, it is expected that the transition 
will be gradual and some of scenarios will be more attractive 
than others. 
Hardware  virtualization  provides  an  interesting 
alternative for being a first step for the transition to cloud 
technologies.  It  changes  traditional  relationship  between 
software and hardware – software is no longer dependent on 
hardware  location.  One  application  can  run  in  multiple 
locations  and  many  applications  can  share  the  same 
hardware.  Hardware  virtualization  increases  resource 
92
DEPEND 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Dependability
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-149-6

utilization  and  efficiency,  as  well  as  lowers  capital 
investment and maintenance cost. Some level of hardware 
virtualization is well presented  even  for popular desktop 
environments. More advanced options can be introduced by 
Private  Clouds  and  Public  Cloud  as  part  of  IaaS 
(Infrastructure as a Service) services. 
Private  Enterprise  Clouds  are  an  especially  attractive 
scenario  as  they  offer  cost  efficiency  while  maintaining 
traditional level of security. A Private Cloud is a pool of 
resources  available for sharing within a given  private or 
enterprise entity. In the simplest form, it is dedicated storage 
or computation hardware with a virtualization layer allowing 
for the management of multiple virtual units under the same 
physical unit.  Private clouds offer effective resource sharing 
which provides cost efficient and a scalable alternative for 
dedicated  recording  hardware.  In  a  situation  where  the 
recoding  hardware  represents  a  significant  part  of 
surveillance deployment cost, this solution may offer a cost 
effective solution. Private Clouds offer advantages, such as 
reliability,  performance  and  without  (typical  for  cloud 
environments)  concerns,  such  as  level  of  security, 
management  of  hosting  (especially  sharing  multiple 
customer  installations  on  the  same  physical  resources). 
Additionally, a Private Cloud scenario might be encouraged 
from a business perspective to provide an adaptation period 
for  familiarization  with  cloud  technology  tools  and 
processes.  Another  argument  towards  Private  cloud 
computing  being  first  step  of  the  transition  to  cloud 
computing  is  the  cost  of  software  adaptation  which  is 
relatively low. The basic level of such adaptation should 
ensure that the system is able to accommodate distributed 
nature of system storage. 
However, the scalability of the Private Cloud might be 
limited in comparison to Public Cloud..
The choice between Public and Private Cloud computing 
should  be  evaluated  separately  for  each  part  of  the 
surveillance  system.  Typically,  security-critical  resources 
such as user access database, incident video recordings or 
audio  information  will not be placed  in a Public cloud. 
However, public camera video recordings or computational 
resources could be subjects of “full cloud conversion” under 
public domains. 
DEPENDABILITY ANALYSIS FOR SURVEILLANCE TRANSITION TOWARDS 
CLOUD 
The  dependability  is  one  of  main  properties 
characterizing the system, next to functionality, performance 
and cost [4]. 
There  are  multiple  definitions  of  dependability. 
Dependability of a system can be described by the ability to 
deliver a service that can be trusted and where potential 
service failures not frequent [4]. ISO definition is focused on 
availability.  IEC  definition  of  dependability  combines 
availability  with  reliability.  In  case  of  safety-critical 
applications,  the safety  and  security attributes, especially 
confidentiality  and  integrity  shall  be  addressed  where 
evaluating system dependability.  Additionally,  the system 
maintainability  shall  be  analyzed  providing  complete 
overview of dependability of the systems based on a cloud 
design.  Summarizing,  the  following  attributes  of 
dependability  shall  be  analyzed  for  video  surveillance 
systems:  availability,  reliability,  security  (confidentiality, 
integrity) and maintainability.
A.
Availability 
Availability  of  surveillance  system  is  focused  on 
ensuring service continuity by providing access to the system 
and its resources. Availability and disaster recovery is an 
essential value of all security-critical systems. Lack of access 
to system resources and inability to react, investigate and 
record  the  incidents  are  probably  the  largest  risks  for 
surveillance system dependability. 
High-end distributed video surveillance systems support 
high-  availability  is  already  implemented  providing 
availability near 99.999 % (five nines availability) of system 
uptime.  The  mechanisms  to  ensure  this  high  level  of 
availability include: keep alive communication, automatic 
failover  for  backup  devices,  software  and  hardware 
watchdogs, life cycle management and resource management 
programs, failover, redundancy and reliability support in the 
architecture,  but  also  services  offering  (to  provide  fast 
reaction times in case of system problems).
Cloud solutions can offer improvement for availability 
especially for two types of systems: local small installations 
and geographically distributed systems. In the case of local, 
one-box type installations, the offering of cloud services can 
be used to introduce redundancy mechanisms and disaster 
recovery tools – before not available for this class of system. 
It is worth to underline that in case of these local small 
systems improved availability and virtual accessibility opens 
new  business  opportunities,  for  example  outsourcing  of 
business processes which might be a major advantage for 
small  businesses.  In  case  of  distributed  systems  where 
topology consists of multiple interconnected entities clouds 
improves availability in a cost efficient way by introducing 
common redundancy and backup resources and tools. Also, 
the distributed nature of the cloud itself improves availability 
– a system hosted in single location is more vulnerable. 
A  cloud-based  offering  provides  improved  system 
redundancy and a new range of failover mechanisms, for 
example; the IaaS model disaster recovery service providing 
a cost competitive alternative to an internal system (both 
software and hardware) with built-in solutions traditionally 
relying  on  watchdog-like  applications.  The  process  of 
migration  of  a  surveillance  system  is  likely  to  require 
development to accommodate cloud internal mechanisms for 
failover  and  availability  and  to  build-in  failover  and 
redundancy mechanisms between hardware and software. 
The definition of availability can be extended further to 
guarantee access to system resources that are provided only 
for entitled users (unauthorized access is denied). A Cloud 
provider’s knowledge, awareness and best practices greatly 
contribute  to  the  level  the  availability  by  providing 
protection of the system infrastructure against low level DoS 
attacks whilst providing tools and services to protect the 
resources from being unavailable or corrupted. 
Despite the fact that a level of resource availability will 
be guaranteed by an IaaS cloud service provider (example 
for Denial of Service attacks) the development related to the 
improvement of system availability is one of the major tasks 
for surveillance transition toward cloud computing. There is 
93
DEPEND 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Dependability
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-149-6

a significant amount of system development required for the 
improvement  of  the  authentication,  authorization  and 
accounting (AAA) mechanisms as traditionally, these rely 
partially on high security level of physical access.  Special 
attention  shall  be  paid  to  improving  identity verification 
which,  originally  being  part  of  accounting  now  plays  a 
critical  role  in  security  mechanisms  applied  for 
communication between the cloud and the rest of the system.
B.
Security 
Security of a cloud solution is of major concern in the 
context of a safety-critical system, mainly due to the fact of 
virtualization;  the  data  no  longer  resides  on  dedicated 
hardware on location that is easy to identify. System security 
vulnerabilities,  such  as  weak  passwords,  inefficient  virus 
protection, unauthorized use of access devices or too flexible 
access  rights  exist  and  should  be  addressed  in  both 
traditional and cloud environments.
Security is not defined as single attribute of dependability 
by Avižienis et al. [4] but it as composite notion of other 
dependability attributes. Similar approach has been described 
by Krutz and Vines [6] where security is the concurrent 
existence of confidentiality, and integrity when availability is 
ensured. 
Confidentiality guarantees the absence of unauthorized 
disclosure  of  system  resources  and  other  relevant 
information.  Confidentiality  is  traditionally  provided  by 
elements,  such  as:  network  security  protocols,  network 
authentication  services  and  data  encryption  protocols. 
Confidentiality  in  a  cloud  system  is  focused  on  the 
confidentiality of transferred data with use of these elements. 
This means that in the case of a safety-critical system based 
on cloud architecture there should be a clear security policy 
in place, defining the exchange of data. It should define 
entities authorized for access and exchange; the data itself 
shall be categorized as confidential, sensitive, private, and 
public  to  specify  the  level  of  protection  to  be  applied. 
Confidentiality  of  safety-critical  systems  based  on  cloud 
computing  shall  be  focused  on  addressing  authorization 
(including  identity  establishment),  access  control,  rights 
managements,  and  encryption  requirements  (mechanisms 
and  architectural  solutions).  Identity  establishment  and 
management play an important role as being a critical part of 
process of securing the communication channels between a 
system  and  the  cloud  infrastructure.  Cloud-based  safety- 
critical systems shall have at least two factor authentication 
where type 1 authentication is “something you know” (such 
as password), type 2 is “something you have” (such as smart 
card) and type 3 is “something you are“(such as fingerprint). 
The above suggest the popularity of bio-identification will 
increase  and  is  being  demanded  by  the  safety-critical 
application market. Additionally,  cloud-based surveillance 
systems  shall  introduce  a  public  key  infrastructure  and 
encryption  key  management  whilst  implementing  digital 
certifications  and  all  related  issues  such  as:  handling 
certificate revocations lists, key management, distribution, 
revocation, recovery,  renewal, and destruction. Additional 
mechanisms  can  be  applied  to  secure  system-to-cloud 
communication  channels,  including  layered  security, 
segmentation of virtual local area networks and applications, 
clustering of DNS (Domain Name System) servers for fault 
tolerance, load balancing and firewalls.
Integrity  defines  the  absence  of  improper  system 
alterations. The cloud system should ensure the integrity of 
data during transfer and storage. The system should be able 
to detect and/or correct data errors and alterations whilst 
identifying  the  origin  of the  data and  its  accuracy.  The 
integrity of the provided solution shall rely on access control 
and rights management. It shall be stressed that the integrity 
of the data shall be secured ‘end-to-end’ including the means 
of data export. The subject of data integrity is extremely 
important  in  the  case  of  video  surveillance  solutions 
providing  evidence  export,  reporting  and  auditing 
functionalities.
Video  surveillance  systems,  especially  the  ones  with 
focus on production and delivery of evidence, usually have 
data integrity mechanisms implemented: they include RAID 
(Redundant Array of Independent Disks) technologies (to 
maintain the integrity on the hardware level), file checksums, 
etc.  Data  integrity  on  the  physical  level  can  be  easily 
maintained by cloud technology and it is typically part of 
cloud  service  offering.  Higher  level  of  cloud  service 
offerings,  such as PaaS (Platform as a Service) or SaaS 
(Software as a Service) can also offer file level integrity tools 
even  for exported  material. It  offers  great  advantages  in 
terms of flexibility. Different integrity mechanisms can be 
provided for different surveillance system owners taking into 
account  their  different  needs  and  legal  considerations, 
without  any  internal  development  required,  including: 
firewall  services,  communication  security  management 
services and intrusion detection services.
C.
Reliability
Reliability is focused on service continuity by defining 
the mechanisms of fault prevention, tolerance (avoidance) to 
deliver  trusted  service  and  removal  (reducing)  and  fault 
consequence forecasting to define and meet required system 
dependability specifications. 
A Cloud offering provides improved reliability in the 
form of services and infrastructure. Reliability oriented cloud 
services  include  for  example;  automatic  backup  and 
redundancy  services,  incident  response  services  and  safe 
failover  mechanisms.  These  services  can  provide  the 
required reliability level without a large investment in capital 
and  human  resources,  for  example;  incident  response 
services  typically  provide  analysis  of  event  notification, 
response, escalation procedures, post-event follow up and 
incident response management (including for example risk 
mitigation planning). This type of service offering is very 
important for large scale applications; the scalability of the 
offering also provides cost efficiency for small installations 
where similar services were not previously available.
Automatic backup and redundancy services are provided 
by the architecture of cloud infrastructure and its distributed 
nature. It eliminates the need of expensive backup hardware, 
software and locations providing resources (such as SAN 
storage  areas  or  computational  resources)  on  demand. 
Koslovsi  et  al.  [5]  provides  an  overview  of  reliability 
advantages  brought  by  cloud  infrastructure  virtualization 
which  enables  transparent  and  customized  reliability 
provisioning. 
It should be underlined that in order to utilize reliability 
improvements available in cloud technologies  the system 
should  meet  specific  requirements,  which  include  secure 
94
DEPEND 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Dependability
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-149-6

access  from  remote  locations  and  towards  cloud,  truly 
distributed architecture where the available mechanisms are 
independent from location,  discipline in traffic monitoring, 
management  and  other  security  mechanisms  and  also 
associate processes to be in place.
D.
Maintainability 
Maintainability is the ability to undergo, modifications, 
and repairs without the need to disable access to the system. 
The advantage of the transition of video surveillance systems 
to the cloud depends in great on the service or infrastructure 
provider. The providers of the cloud infrastructure shall be 
carefully evaluated for their ability to maintain the agreed 
terms through service lifecycle starting from adoption phase. 
However, the current cloud offering is mature enough to 
provide full range of services assisting the system customer 
from early phases of the system planning, through phase of 
deployment, maintenance and ending on systems disposal 
services (for example to guarantee correct disposal of system 
information). It is a considerable improvement compared to 
traditional  systems  where  quite  often  the  availability  of 
resources to deploy surveillance systems project depends on 
maintenance demands for the existing installation. Therefore, 
the transition to cloud opens new opportunities in terms of 
business models for companies providing such systems.
CONCLUSIONS
The transition of video surveillance into a cloud service 
can offer great advantages on system dependability only if 
the challenges of the transition are known and addressed. 
Cloud technologies offer different service models of cloud – 
IaaS  (Infrastructure  as  a  Service),  PaaS  (Platform  as  a 
Service)  or  SaaS  (Software  as  a  Service).  The  cloud 
infrastructure of the IaaS-based model seems to be the most 
suitable  for  the  first  step  of  the  transition  of  video 
surveillance  by  providing  advantages  of  hardware 
virtualization,  cost  scalability  and  performance.  The 
transition shall be a continuous process. The plan of gradual 
transition into cloud computing shall be investigated for each 
system- external system functionalities such as video content 
analysis modules could be a good candidate for the first step 
of such transition.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author gratefully acknowledges the contribution of 
Pete Ward. It should be stressed that the views in this paper 
are authors own and do not necessarily represent the views 
of Teleste.
REFERENCES
[1]
ONVIF, www.onvif.org, visited 14.7.2011
[2]
Physical
 
Security
 
Interoperability
 
Alliance
 
PSIA, 
www.psiaalliance.org, visited 14.7.2011
[3]
World  Wide  Web  Consortium  W3C,  http://www.w3.org,  visited 
14.7.2011
[4]
A. Avižienis, J. C. Laprie, B. Randell, “Dependability and its threats: 
a  taxonomy,”  IFIP  International  Federation  for  Information 
Processing, vol. 154/2004, pp. 91–120.
[5]
G. Koslovsi, Wai-Leong Yeow, C. Westphal, Tram Truong Huu, J. 
Montagnat,  and  P.Vicat-Blanc,  “Reliability  Support  in  Virtual 
Infrastructures,” Proc. IEEE 2nd Internat.Conf. on Cloud Computing 
Technology and Science (cloudCom) IEEE Press, Dec. 2010, pp. 49-
58, doi: 10.1109/CloudCom.2010.23.
[6]
R. L. Krutz and R. D. Vines, “Cloud  Security: a comprehensive 
Guide  to  Secure  Cloud  Computing,”  Wiley  Publishing,  Inc., 
Indianapolis, 2010, ISBN: 978-0-470-58987-8. 
95
DEPEND 2011 : The Fourth International Conference on Dependability
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-149-6

