Beyond Integration Readiness Level (IRL): A Multi-Dimensional Framework to 
Facilitate the Integation of System of Systems 
 
Clarence L. Eder 
Systems Engineering PhD Candidate 
George Washington University 
Washington DC, United States of America 
Email: edercl@gwu.edu 
 
Abstract—Integration Readiness Level (IRL) can be an 
effective systems engineering tool to facilitate integration of 
systems.  With further research and the use of systems 
architecture methodology, IRL principles could enhance the 
use of systems integration in Department of Defense (DoD) 
Acquisitions.  DoD space systems are great examples of system 
of systems, and analyzing space systems’ integration issues will 
help identify critical integration variables.  Integration data 
will be collected to develop a framework to enhance IRL 
notional definitions that will help improve space systems’ 
availability and dependability.          
Keywords-Integration Readiness Level (IRL); Department of 
Defense (DoD) Acquisitions; Technology Readiness Level (TRL). 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Integration Readiness Level (IRL) was introduced to help 
understand the maturity of integrating one system to another 
[1]. The need to expand the use of IRL is increasingly 
becoming more relevant in the United States’ Department of 
Defense (DoD) Acquisitions as programs try to acquire 
systems with the intent to have multiple capabilities and 
interfaces.     
Throughout the years, DoD has continuously reduced the 
budget for weapon systems acquisitions.  DoD Acquisitions 
implemented several systems engineering processes and 
tools to help meet budgetary requirements and still produce 
the best weapon systems available.  The budget reduction 
along with the need to expedite the deployment of 
capabilities into operations trigger the drive to improve these 
processes and tools that program managers can depend on 
when making program decisions.   In order to make 
decisions about a system and the technology available for the 
system, DoD Acquisitions adopted the use of Technology 
Readiness Level (TRL) in 2002 [2].  TRL provides close to a 
quantitative measure for explaining the maturity of a system 
based on the technology used for that system.  
To further the use of TRL, IRL was introduced as an 
integration tool to complement TRL (Figure 1).  IRL was 
developed to align with the TRL definitions, but it was never 
officially implemented by DoD to help with integration 
assessment.  Other readiness levels such as System 
Readiness Level (SRL) and Test Readiness Level were also 
introduced 
but 
not 
officially 
recognized 
by 
DoD 
Acquisitions.  Although not implemented, the use of IRL 
could become a necessary tool to help reduce integration 
risks of complex systems.  Integrating system of systems are 
becoming more complex and the current definitions of IRL 
do not allow it to be independent of the TRL process, which 
could be one reason why IRL is heavily scrutinized in 
current systems engineering literature.     
 
Lvl 
Basic TRL reported 
IRL 
1 
Basic principles observed 
and reported 
An interface between technologies has 
been identified with sufficient detail to 
allow characterization of the relationship 
2 
Technology concept 
and/or application 
formulated 
There is some level of specificity to 
characterize the interaction between 
technologies through their interface 
3 
Analytical and 
experimental critical 
function and/or 
characteristic proof of 
concept 
There is compatibility between 
technologies to orderly and efficiently 
integrate and interact 
4 
Component and/or 
breadboard validation in 
laboratory environment 
There is sufficient detail in the quality 
and assurance of the integration between 
technologies 
5 
Component and/or 
breadboard validation in 
relevant environment 
There is sufficient control between 
technologies necessary to establish, 
manage, and terminate the integration 
6 
System/subsystem model 
demonstration in relevant 
environment 
The integrating technologies can accept, 
translate, and structure information for 
its intended application 
7 
System prototype 
demonstration in relevant 
environment 
The integration of technologies has been 
verified and validated with sufficient 
detail to be actionable 
8 
Actual system completed 
and qualified through test 
and demonstration 
Actual integration completed and 
mission qualified through test and 
demonstration in the system environment 
9 
Integration is mission 
proven through 
successful mission 
operations 
Execute a support program that meets 
operational support performance 
requirements and sustains the system in 
the most cost-effective manner over its 
total life cycle 
Figure 1. IRL and TRL Levels Defined [1] 
II. 
THEORY 
IRL can be an effective systems integration assessment 
tool and given the right multi-dimensional framework, it can 
facilitate the integration of system of systems.  Utilizing 
other integration variables and expanding the current 
notional definitions of IRL can significantly impact the 
assessment of integration of system of systems.  IRL was 
also proposed as an intermediate step by making it part of a 
matrix function with TRL in order to determine the SRL [2].  
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-429-9
DEPEND 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Dependability

When IRL is used as a function of SRL, IRL could be 
overlooked from being a significant independent assessment 
value, and the IRL level may be influenced by what is 
needed as the SRL value.  There are others who determine 
integration readiness can be assessed as part of DoD 
Acquisition’s Technology Readiness Assessment (TRA) 
process, which is the official process to determine TRL 
score, but this process does not capture the purpose of 
integration.  It is important to understand that a system with 
mature technology does not automatically equate to having a 
high IRL when interfacing with another system with mature 
technology.  The current high-level definition given to IRL 
levels from 1 to 9 allows room for different interpretations 
when working with complex systems.   
DoD space systems continue to provide examples of 
complex system of systems.  With very limited opportunities 
to do operational tests and analyses for satellite systems and 
rocket launches, space systems provide a platform to 
incorporate the latest technologies and processes to attain 
successful operational systems.  IRL can be used to assess 
the integration of these systems given a rigorous process that 
account for other variables.  An assessment based on the 
current definition, which allows subjectivity that may be 
misinterpreted, will not work with current space systems.     
A research is being performed to show the effectiveness 
of IRL in facilitating integration of system of systems.  The 
research will focus on understanding the integration points 
with additional critical variables, and focus on the 
development of a systems architecture that will provide the 
framework to explain enhanced IRL levels.  A systems 
architecture will be used as the methodology to prove the 
effectiveness of a newly defined IRL process.  
III. 
GOALS/RESULTS 
The goal is to expand beyond the IRL notional identified 
levels using architectural framework and assessed integration 
variables.  To determine the integration variables, the 
research will focus on understanding the integration issues of 
six major DoD space systems.  The data will be collected 
from the following family of systems: 1) Advanced 
Extremely High Frequency (AEHF) satellite; 2) Evolved 
Expendable Launch Vehicle (EELV); 3) Global Positioning 
Satellite (GPS); 4) National Polar-Orbiting Observing 
Satellite System (NPOESS); 5) Space Based Infrared 
Systems (SBIRS); and 6) Wideband Global SATCOM 
(WGS).  The research will focus on integration issues from 
1999 to 2014, and the data will be analyzed to understand the 
overall impact on capability, schedule, and cost.  The focus 
of the integration issues will be at the space segment 
integration points (Figure 2) along with the subsystems 
integrated into each of the space segment.   
The data collected will be used to construct an 
architectural framework and to determine weights for each 
identified variable.  The framework and weighted variables 
will determine an objective IRL level.  Initial integration 
variables that are being considered include: 1) Schedule 
(need date, allowed timeline to integrate); 2) Resources 
(Funding, 
Personnel, 
Available 
tools); 
3) 
Processes 
(Documented approach, Binding Agreements, Testing); 4) 
Policies 
(Directives, 
Guidance); 
5) 
Communication 
(Documentation, Semantics, Expectations); and 6) Risks 
(Cost, Schedule, Technical).  
 
 
Figure 2. Major DoD Space Systems Integration Points 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
The data will be validated through systems architecture 
application of the integration activities for all six space 
systems.  The data collected will also be manipulated 
through regression analyses to determine possible trends 
that can support or object to the theory being researched.  
The systems architecture methodology will help scope the 
data collected and help facilitate the use of critical 
integration variables into relevant products that can be used 
to support overall program decisions and improve system 
availability and dependability. 
The expected result is to have a list of integration issues 
and an understanding of how those issues impacted the 
system delivery through time, level of capability, and 
schedule.  This will help identify attributes that will be used 
as variables for systems integration.  Although the current 
DoD process of deploying space system capabilities for 
operational use does not require assessment of integration 
maturity, the result of this research should help quantify an 
integration tool that can further the use of IRL principles. 
Thus, making it very useful for stakeholders’ decisions.  
With further research, using IRL with additional variables 
applied into a multidimensional architectural framework 
will provide a systems engineering quantitative tool that can 
enhance the facilitation of integrating system of systems.          
V. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Sauser, B., Gove, R., Forbes, E., Ramirez-Marquez, J. (2010). 
Integration maturity metrics: Development of an integration readiness 
level.  Information. Knowledge. Systems Management., v 9, n 1, p 17-
46 
[2] 
Electronic Publications DoD Instruction 5000.02-R 
[3] 
McConkie, E., Mazzuchi, T., Sarkani, S., Marchette, D. (2013).  
Mathematical properties of System Readiness Levels. Systems 
Engineering, v 16, n 4, p 391-400. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-429-9
DEPEND 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Dependability

