Improving Consumer Satisfaction through Building an Allocation Cloud
Kuo Chen Wu
Institute of Computer and Communication Engineering
National Cheng Kung University
Tainan, Taiwan
kuchenwu@nature.ee.ncku.edu.tw
Hewijin Christine Jiau,
Kuo-Feng Ssu
Department of Electrical Engineering
National Cheng Kung University
Tainan, Taiwan
{jiauhjc, ssu}@mail.ncku.edu.tw
Abstract—Consumer satisfaction depends on the quality of
service. Services with high quality usually lead to high cost. Due
to the budget limitation, consumers tend to acquire services
with lowest cost. Feasible request allocation can improve
service quality or reduce service cost. Some request allocation
algorithms need the coordination with service consumers, but
the beneﬁts from consumers’ coordination are arranged by
service providers, especially for on-demand consumers. On-
demand consumers have no idea to improve service quality
or reduce service cost through allocating their requests, even
though service providers can collect on-demand requests to
perform feasible request allocation for efﬁcient service exe-
cution. To solve this issue, an allocation cloud is proposed
in this study. The allocation cloud assists consumers in al-
locating requests to optimize consumer satisfaction. Because
the allocation cloud contains various allocation algorithms and
collects a large amount of service requests, the allocation cloud
can coordinate service consumers to follow feasible request
allocation algorithms. Moreover, the allocation cloud can reveal
the relation between service consumers’ coordination and the
improvement of service execution. The revealed relation can
help service consumers decide beneﬁcial strategies to improve
their satisfaction. To evaluate the effectiveness of our approach,
a study of video delivery service is conducted. The results
conﬁrm that consumer satisfaction can be improved through
the proposed allocation cloud.
Keywords-Cloud Computing; Quality of Service; Request Al-
location; Consumer Satisfaction.
I. INTRODUCTION
High quality of service (QoS) leads to high consumer
satisfaction and also means high service cost. For example,
service respond time increasing usually needs to increase
network bandwidth, computation power, or cache size. The
addition of resources means the cost increasing. However,
service consumers always has budget limitation and need to
consider the trade-off between QoS improvement and service
cost increasing. Besides considering the trade-off between
QoS and service cost, consumers can try to reduce through
two approaches. One approach is making a favourable
service agreement with service providers and the other
approach is performing service sharing through appropriate
request allocation. However, On-Demand consumers ask
services when they need and usually send small numbers
of requests. Their characteristics make the cost reduction
through request allocation or service agreement becomes
difﬁcult. The reasons are listed as follows:
1) The amount of service requests from each On-Demand
consumer is small. It is hard for on-demand consumers
to gain beneﬁts by performing request allocation with a
small amount of requests.
2) An on-demand consumer cannot guarantee the amount
of service requests. Therefore, service providers do
not make a favourable service agreement with an On-
Demand consumer.
Therefore, it is difﬁcult for On-Demand consumers alone
to improve consumer satisfaction through request allocation
and service agreements. However, via collecting the requests
from on-demand consumers, service providers can still per-
form suitable request allocation for efﬁcient service exe-
cution. Through the suitable request allocation, on-demand
consumers can acquire efﬁcient service execution. However,
on-demand consumers have no idea to coordinate with
other on-demand consumers to follow feasible requestion
allocation and gain additional beneﬁts.
We propose an allocation cloud to coordinate on-demand
consumers for efﬁcient request allocation. The allocation
cloud contains two important concepts. The ﬁrst concept
is the collection of on-demand consumers’ requests. The
allocation cloud coordinates on-demand consumers to follow
request allocation according to these on-demand consumers’
requests. The requests contain the functional and non-
functional requirements of requesting services. The non-
functional requirements are presented as hard constraints
and soft constraints [1] in this study. Hard and soft con-
straints are criteria to evaluate request allocation in this
study. Furthermore, on-demand consumers’ coordination and
request allocation are based on the evaluation of hard and
soft constraints. The second concept is the request alloca-
tion algorithm set. A request allocation algorithm speciﬁes
targeted request collection, performs request allocation for
the request collection, and presents the effects of apply-
ing the request allocation. Multiple allocation algorithms
are available in the allocation cloud for different request
collections. With these allocation algorithms, the allocation
cloud can coordinate consumers to follow feasible allocation
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-212-7
DEPEND 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Dependability

algorithms for corresponding request collection. In addition,
the allocation cloud can further improve service execution
using how consumers’ coordination for more efﬁcient re-
source usage or better QoS. Keeping the relation between
consumers’ coordination and service execution is important
for making service agreements with service providers. On-
demand consumers and the allocation cloud can be aware
that their coordination really contributes the service quality
improvement. Therefore, the allocation cloud makes service
agreements with service providers for improving QoS or
reducing prices.
This paper is organized as follows: Section II lists rele-
vant studies which discuss the relation between consumer
satisfaction and cloud services. Section III introduces the
major concept of the allocation cloud. Section IV discusses
the effectiveness of the allocation cloud through an exper-
iment. The experiment which simulates the video delivery
service with Coordinated Channel Allocation [2] (COCA)
is attached. Section V is the conclusion of this paper.
II. RELATED WORK
Due to increasing popularity of cloud computing [3][4],
more and more service providers utilize clouds as their
deployment platforms [5][6][7]. There are sufﬁcient re-
sources for service executing in cloud platforms, and how to
allocate service requests adequately and optimize proﬁt [8]
or consumer satisfaction becomes important.
Several studies deﬁne and explore consumer satisfaction
of using cloud services. Tsakalozos et al. [9] explore the
consideration of Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) cloud ad-
ministrator to maximize cloud-consumer satisfaction. They
map cloud-consumer satisfaction into ﬁnancial proﬁt, which
is deﬁned as the difference between revenue and cost. Both
of revenue and cost are impacted by the cloud’s physical
resource usage. Besides that, there are two assumptions in
this study. The ﬁrst assumption is that a cloud-consumer
has a budget constraint. The second one is that the cloud’s
physical resources are limited. They develop the approach
for cloud administrators to maximize per-consumer ﬁnancial
proﬁt through allocating physical resources.
Kantere et al. [10] propose an pricing method to optimize
the proﬁt of cloud cache services. They expect that con-
sumer dissatisfaction from high service charge leads to the
dropping of service demand. Besides that, the cloud risks
to permanently lose the dissatisﬁed consumers. Base on this
expectation, consumer satisfaction is the factor of optimizing
proﬁt. The consumer satisfaction is an altruistic tend of the
optimization that is opposite to the egoistic tend of cloud
proﬁt. They express altruistic tend as: 1) a guarantee for
a low limit on consumer satisfaction, or 2) an additional
maximization objective. According to the expression, they
optimize cloud cache service proﬁt with consider consumer
satisfaction.
Figure 1.
Request allocation without the allocation cloud.
Figure 2.
Request allocation within the allocation cloud.
Chen et al. [11] develop an utility model for measuring
consumer satisfaction in the cloud. Since they focus on
the service provisioning problem, the utility model deﬁnes
consumer satisfaction with two factors: service price and
response time. They assume that consumer satisfaction is
decreased with higher service price and longer response
time. The developed utility model can help service providers
build services in the IaaS cloud platform with maximal
proﬁt.
III. ALLOCATION CLOUD
Consumers want to perform efﬁcient request allocation to
share services and reduce cost. However, consumers are lim-
ited to perform efﬁcient request allocation because they ask
for services independently and usually have a small amount
of requests. Figure 1 illustrates such situation. In Figure 1,
each consumer has one request to the same service. The
desired service provides two allocation algorithms. Both the
algorithm A and the algorithm B reserve request processing
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-212-7
DEPEND 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Dependability

units to serve request. The algorithm B allows three the same
requests to share the service. However, consumers can only
perform request allocation with allocation algorithm A since
each consumer does not know they can cooperate to perform
allocation algorithm B. The allocation cloud is proposed
to solve this issue. Figure 2 illustrates the overview of the
allocation cloud. In Figure 2, the allocation cloud includes
several allocation algorithms and a request collector. The
allocation cloud collects consumers’ requests and reserves
them in the request collector. The allocation cloud can ﬁnd
several requests that can be shared with the same service
because the allocation cloud can evaluate the global request-
ing situation. The allocation cloud subsequently performs
request allocation with allocation algorithm B. As a result
of service sharing, consumers can reduce cost and improve
satisfaction through the allocation cloud.
Besides the request allocation, there are two operations
in the allocation cloud which can improve consumer satis-
faction. The ﬁrst operation is the service agreement through
the allocation cloud. Because the allocation cloud reserves
requests, the allocation cloud can predict service requesting
situation and make service agreements according to the
prediction. While the actual service requesting fulﬁls the
prediction, the cost can be reduced and consumer satisfaction
can be improved. The second operation is the consumer
negotiation in the allocation cloud. The allocation cloud can
negotiate service requesting with consumers when actual
service requesting is not conformed to the expected situation.
If consumers accept to modify their requesting to fulﬁl the
expectation, consumer satisfaction can be improved.
In the following sections, the deﬁnition of consumer
satisfaction is described in Section III-A. Operations of the
allocation cloud, request allocation, service agreement, and
consumer negotiation, are explained in Section III-B, III-C
and III-D, respectively. Finally, Section III-E discusses the
restriction of building an allocation cloud.
A. Consumer Satisfaction
Consumer satisfaction in the allocation cloud is the sum of
all request satisfaction. Given all requests R = {r1, . . . , rm}
in the cloud, every request satisfaction is impacted by two
factors. One factor is the evaluation on the quality qr that
the service exhibits and the other factor is the service price.
QEr is the function of quality evaluation for request r and is
speciﬁed by hard constraints, CHr, and soft constraints, CSr.
The quality evaluation QEr on qr is presented as follows.
QEr(qr) = CHr(qr) · CSr(qr), where
(1)

CHr(qr)
∈
{0, 1}
CSr(qr)
=
[0.0, 1.0]
If qr does not conform to CHr, the value of CHr(qr) is
0 that means that qr is not satisﬁed with hard constraints.
Therefore, qr must conform to CHr ﬁrst and the inﬂuence of
CSr(qr) is revealed. Based on QEr, the request satisfaction
Sr is presented as follows.
Sr(qr) = QEr(qr)
P
(2)
The service price is represented as P. The low price and the
high quality of service lead the high request satisfaction.
Based on Sr, consumer satisfaction CS in the allocation
cloud is presented as follows.
CS =
P
r∈R Sr(qr)
| R |
(3)
The CS function is deﬁned as the ratio of total request sat-
isfaction values to the total request amount in the allocation
cloud. It should be noted that qr and P exhibited by a service
vary upon different service types. Also, the speciﬁcations
of CHr and CSr are related to service requests. Based on
CS function, the allocation cloud can improve consumer
satisfaction by performing optimization techniques. The
cloud operations on request allocation, service agreement,
and consumer negotiation can be executed to achieve the
optimization.
B. Request Allocation
The allocation cloud can perform alternative allocation
algorithms. Different allocation algorithms lead to a change
of service quality and service cost. The allocation cloud
needs to estimate the change of qr and P and attempts to
optimize consumer satisfaction deﬁned in (3) from available
allocation algorithms. Besides, there are some rules that
should be fulﬁlled before allocating requests, as listed as
follows.
∀r ∈ R, CHr(qr) ≤ CHr(q′
r)
(4)
X
r∈R
QEr(qr) ≤
X
r∈R
QEr(q′
r)
(5)
In (4) and (5), q′
r is the service quality with alternative
allocation algorithms. Equation (4) ensures that q′
r cannot be
worse that qr. If qr conforms to CHr, q′
r must also conform
to CHr. The allocation cloud needs to make sure that all
involved consumers are not sacriﬁced in alternative alloca-
tion algorithms. Equation (5) ensures that P
r∈R QEr(qr)
cannot be worse within alternative allocation algorithms. The
allocation cloud needs to promise that QoS of all requests
are not sacriﬁced in alternative allocation algorithms.
C. Service Agreement
Request allocation in the allocation cloud can lead request
fulﬁlment with lowest cost under the prerequisite of (4) and
(5). Besides, the allocation cloud has to prepare enough
services for requests with expected quality constraints. The
allocation cloud, instead of consumers, performs service
agreements with service providers to prepare enough ser-
vices. Figure 3 illustrates the communication protocol for
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-212-7
DEPEND 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Dependability

Figure 3.
A service agreement protocol.
making service agreements between the allocation cloud
and service providers. As shown in Figure 3, the allocation
cloud does not ﬁnd suitable services through service bro-
kers and does not actively contact with service providers.
Alternatively, service providers send query messages to the
allocation cloud to check the service requesting situation.
After conﬁrming the service requesting situation, service
providers can propose suitable service agreements according
to this situation.
The communication protocol has four steps, as follows
1) predict Service Requesting(): The allocation cloud can
collect historical service requesting records. Therefore,
the allocation cloud predicts service requesting according
to historical service requesting records and all other
related information. The prediction is represented as
R = {r1, . . . , rm} and ∀r ∈ R includes CHr and CSr
2) access Requesting Situation(Query Statement): Service
providers query service requesting situation in this step.
Service providers can specify query messages, such
as needed service amount or occupied time. Service
providers can concentrate on target service requesting
through specifying query messages. The allocation cloud
receives the query messages and returns service request-
ing situation according to the query messages.
3) propose Service Agreement(ID, Q, Request Constraints):
Service providers can decide whether to propose service
agreements or not according to the received service
requesting situation. If service providers judge that they
can propose proﬁtable service agreements, they continue
to propose service agreements to the allocation cloud.
The proposed service agreements need to contain three
parameters, ID, Q, and Request Constraints. The
ID is the identiﬁcation of this service agreement and is
used by the allocation cloud to recognize this service
agreement. The Q is QoS for this service agreement. The
allocation cloud uses this parameter to judge consumer
satisfaction of this service agreement. The Request
Constraints are the constraints which the allocated
requests must be conformed to. Service providers use this
parameter to specify target service requesting.
4) decide optimal Service Agreements(): The purpose of
step 4 is to select a set of service agreements from all
received service agreements. This selected set of service
agreements can optimize consumer satisfaction in the
allocation cloud. The ﬁtness function of the optimization
is the CS function deﬁned in (3). The allocation cloud
simulates the request allocation with different allocation
algorithms and calculates the value of CS. The allocation
cloud returns selected service providers to achieve service
agreements when deciding the set of service agreements
which can optimize consumer satisfaction.
This communication protocol is proposed for the listed
reasons.
• The allocation cloud can trigger service providers to
propose service agreements actively because the allo-
cation cloud keeps a large amount of service requests.
• Service providers can be aware of the service requesting
situation through the allocation cloud. Service providers
can propose the most proﬁtable service agreements
specialized for target service requesting.
• The allocation cloud does not need to specify service
speciﬁcation and ﬁnd suitable services. The allocation
cloud can concentrate on comparing proposed service
agreements and on deciding the set of service agree-
ments which lead to consumer satisfaction optimiza-
tion.
• Because service providers only propose their service
agreements for target service requesting, the amount of
proposed service agreements is less than the amount of
all service agreements which service providers can pro-
vide. This situation reduces the complexity of achieving
service agreements
D. Consumer Negotiation
The allocation cloud makes service agreements based
on the expected service requesting situation. Consumer
satisfaction optimization is achieved in accordance with the
expected situation. However, actual service requesting situ-
ation is different with the expected situation and consumer
satisfaction is not as good as the expectation. Consumer sat-
isfaction can be improved when the actual service requests
are adjusted to fulﬁl the expected situation. For this purpose,
the allocation cloud negotiates quality constraint reﬁnement
of service requests with consumers. The allocation cloud
negotiates with consumers who send requests fulﬁlled the
conditions, as listed as follows.
• The service request r ∈ R proposed by a consumer is
similar to the expected service request for a speciﬁc
service.
• Request satisfaction Sr will be improved if the alloca-
tion cloud modiﬁes quality constraints of this request
r.
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-212-7
DEPEND 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Dependability

• Consumer satisfaction CS in the allocation cloud will
also be improved if the allocation cloud modiﬁes qual-
ity constraints of this request r.
The purpose of the allocation cloud is to serve consumers
and improve consumer satisfaction. Therefore, the allocation
cloud must allow consumers to be aware of the modiﬁcation
of quality constraints and request satisfaction.
E. Restrictions
The major restriction of building an allocation cloud
are privacy and scalability concerns. The administrator of
the allocation cloud must be trusted by target consumers
because the allocation cloud collects service requests from
consumers. Besides that, the allocation cloud must collect
enough requests in order to trigger service providers to
propose their service agreements for the allocation cloud.
IV. EXPERIMENT
An experiment is conducted to evaluate the effectiveness
of the allocation cloud. In this experiment, streaming video
delivery service is selected as the targeted application. Due
to the high resource need and heavy workload, selectively
feasible allocation algorithm is important to guarantee sys-
tem capability with efﬁcient resource utilization. Some allo-
cation algorithms need to coordinate with service consumers,
such as coordinated channel allocation [2] (explained in the
next section). However, the beneﬁts of request allocation al-
gorithms only reﬂects on the service providers, even though
the request allocation algorithms need consumers’ coordi-
nation. We regard these allocation algorithms as services in
the allocation cloud for service consumers and evaluate the
improvement of consumer satisfaction using the allocation
cloud. There are two assumptions for resolving the concerns
for the restrictions mentioned in Section III-E. The ﬁrst
assumption is that consumers of the video delivery service
have minor privacy concerns and allow the allocation cloud
to allocate their video requests. The second assumption is
that the allocation cloud can collect large amount of requests.
We make the second assumption because streaming video
is popular and most consumers request video on-demand.
In the following contents, coordinated channel allocation is
introduced. The beneﬁts of the allocation cloud is explained
while applying COCA to the allocation cloud.
A. Coordinated Channel Allocation for Video Delivery Ser-
vices
COCA is based on batching techniques [12][13][14].
Therefore, these requests are grouped together in a small
interval. A scheduler with COCA negotiates with consumers
for reserving the requests with larger resource needs and
sets a deadline of starting service for each reserved group.
Based on the reserved groups, the scheduler with COCA
has two queues, reservation queue and regular queue. The
reservation queue keeps all reserving groups and performs
sort on groups according to group deadline. The regular
queue keeps all awaiting groups and performs sort on all
groups according to group arrival time and resource needs.
When there exists free channels and the deadline of the
group in the reservation queue is reached, the scheduler
with COCA allocate the group in the reservation queue to a
free channel. When there exists free channels but no group
deadline is reached, the Scheduler with COCA allocate the
group in the regular queue to a free channel. This algorithm
avoids that the groups with large resource needs occupy
channels for a long time and hinders other groups from using
the service.
According to COCA, delivery service providers perform
efﬁcient request allocation based on the arrival requests
and the coordination with consumers. In other words, if
consumers can coordinate with each other before requesting
services, consumers can negotiate with service providers
for additional beneﬁts. However, there are two reasons
make on-demand consumers unable to coordinate with each
other. First, on-demand consumers do not know other arrival
requests. Since consumers have no idea of other arrival
requests, they cannot coordinate with each other. Second,
on-demand consumers have no idea about efﬁcient request
allocations for the video delivery service. Moreover, video
on-demand consumers are usually end users and do not
have background knowledge of efﬁcient request allocations.
Even if they know other arrival requests, they still cannot
coordinate with each other because they have no background
knowledge to perform request allocation. Therefore, this
case is suitable to apply the allocation cloud. The allo-
cation cloud for video delivery services contains efﬁcient
request allocation algorithms and regard these algorithms
as services. The allocation cloud collects the information
of video requests and available video delivery services.
Through actively detecting the video requests and the avail-
able video delivery services, the allocation cloud can decide
feasible allocation services, such as COCA, and negotiate
with consumers for request allocation. Since the allocation
cloud can be aware of how consumer coordination impacts
the proﬁt of service providers, it can negotiate with service
providers for consumers’ addition beneﬁts, such as video
discount.
B. The Relation between Consumer Coordination and Ser-
vice Providers’ Proﬁt
Experiment Setting: It is assumed that a video delivery
service owns 500 videos and the average delivery time
of a video is 30 minutes. The allocation cloud predicts
the service requesting situation in the next one hour. The
request arrival rate is from 5 to 30 requests per minute and
is based on a Poisson distribution. The maximum waiting
period of each request is between 2.5 minutes and 7.5
minutes and is based on an exponential distribution. It is
assumed that there are four available allocation services,
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-212-7
DEPEND 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Dependability

Table I
COMPARISON THE DIFFERENCE OF RENEGE RATE FOR STRATEGIES WITHOUT COCA AND WITH COCA IN THE SIMULATION RESULT. RENEGE RATE
IS THE NUMBER OF RENEGED REQUESTS DIVIDED BY THE TOTAL NUMBER OF REQUESTS MADE IN THE EXPERIMENT.
Channels
On-Demand
PRC
Without COCA
With COCA
Difference
Without COCA
With COCA
Difference
100
60%
34%
26%
56%
29%
27%
120
55%
34%
21%
51%
27%
24%
140
52%
30%
22%
46%
26%
20%
160
46%
29%
17%
42%
24%
18%
180
41%
26%
15%
37%
23%
14%
Table II
COMPARISON THE IMPROVEMENT OF SATISFIED REQUESTS FOR STRATEGIES WITHOUT COCA AND WITH COCA IN THE SIMULATION RESULT.
SATISFIED REQUESTS IS THE NUMBER OF FULFILLED REQUESTS IN THE EXPERIMENT.
Channels
On-Demand
PRC
Without COCA
With COCA
Improvement (%)
Without COCA
With COCA
Improvement (%)
100
765
1227
60.39%
824
1326
27%
120
844
1231
45.85%
907
1354
24%
140
915
1301
42.50%
1004
1390
20%
160
1013
1330
31.29%
1330
1423
18%
180
1094
1375
25.69%
1375
1442
14%
On-Demand strategy [14], Pure-Rate-Control (PRC) strat-
egy [15], On-Demand + COCA [2], and PRC + COCA [2].
The allocation cloud simulates the request allocation and
the result is shown in Table I and Table II. Table I lists
the renege rate in different channel numbers. The renege
rate is the ratio of requests ﬁnally cancelled by service
consumers due to over request deadline. Table II shows the
number of satisﬁed requests in different channel numbers.
According to the renege rate and satisﬁed requests in Table
I and II, both on-demand allocation and PRC allocation can
improve the number of satisﬁed requests by applying COCA.
The more requests served, the higher proﬁt gained by the
service provider. Moreover, the proﬁt is from consumers’
coordination. Table I also displays the reduction of renege
rate due to consumers’ coordination. When video delivery
service provides 100 channels, COCA reduces renege rate
by 26% on the on-demand strategy and 27% on the PRC
strategy. The reduction on the on-demand strategy and the
PRC strategy is similar in different number of channels.
Table I also shows that the reduction is more notable when
the number of available channels is smaller. Table II displays
the improvement of satisﬁed requests due to consumers’
coordination. The result shows that satisﬁed requests can
be improved approximately 60% when the video delivery
service provides 100 channels. When the video delivery
service provides 180 channels, the improvement is still over
20%.
Applying COCA to the Allocation Cloud: In brief, the
result shows that video delivery services can have better
satisﬁed requests but video requests with larger resource
needs have to be reserved until the deadline. This indicates
that some requests have to sacriﬁce their average waiting
time to improve the total satisﬁed requests. Without the
allocation cloud, service consumers cannot coordinate with
each other and are not aware of their contributions on
improving the proﬁt of the video delivery service. With the
allocation cloud, these service consumers who sacriﬁce their
average waiting time can be aware of their contributions.
The allocation cloud can also make favourable service
agreements with video delivery service providers. Therefore,
service consumers can reduce service price if they can afford
to sacriﬁce their waiting time.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We propose the allocation cloud to deal with the re-
quest allocation for consumers. Consumer satisfaction can
be improved through the allocation cloud because it opti-
mizes service utilization and guarantees QoS. We introduce
the operations of the allocation cloud and demonstrate
its effectiveness through an experiment. According to the
experiment results, we conclude that the allocation cloud
collects service requests and reveals the relation between
consumers’ coordination and service execution. Therefore,
service consumers can be aware of how to improve their
satisfaction through feasible coordination. In the future, the
consideration of consumer satisfaction optimization must
be further explored. For this purpose, we need to decide
a speciﬁc service and a set of consumers which make
requests for the speciﬁc service. According to the speciﬁc
service and corresponding consumers, allocation algorithms
are selected in the allocation cloud. We plan to explore the
consumer satisfaction optimization based on these allocation
algorithms.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Part of this work has been supported by National Science
Council, Taiwan (NSC 100-2221-E-006-133-MY3, NSC
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-212-7
DEPEND 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Dependability

100-2628-E-006-028-MY3, and NSC 100-2221-E-006-136-
MY2).
REFERENCES
[1] L.
Zeng,
B.
Benatallah,
A.
H.
Ngu,
M.
Dumas,
J. Kalagnanam, and H. Chang, “Qos-aware middleware
for web services composition,” IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng.,
vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 311–327, May 2004.
[2] Y.-W. Ho, “Coordinated resource allocation for video delivery
services,” Master’s thesis, National Cheng Kung University,
Tainan, Taiwan, 2009.
[3] M. Armbrust, A. Fox, R. Grifﬁth, A. D. Joseph, R. Katz,
A. Konwinski, G. Lee, D. Patterson, A. Rabkin, I. Stoica,
and M. Zaharia, “A view of cloud computing,” Comm. ACM,
vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 50–58, Apr. 2010.
[4] M. Creeger, “CTO Roundtable: Cloud computing,” Comm.
ACM, vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 50–56, Aug. 2009.
[5] A. Ojala and P. Tyrv¨ainen, “Developing cloud business mod-
els: A case study on cloud gaming,” IEEE Softw., vol. 28,
no. 4, pp. 42–47, Jul./Aug. 2011.
[6] P. Louridas, “Up in the air: Moving your applications to the
cloud,” IEEE Softw., vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 6–11, Jul./Aug. 2010.
[7] M. Cusumano, “Cloud computing and SaaS as new computing
platforms,” Comm. ACM, vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 27–29, Apr. 2010.
[8] F. I. Popovici and J. Wilkes, “Proﬁtable services in an uncer-
tain world,” in Proc. 2005 ACM/IEEE Conf. Supercomputing
(SC’05), Seattle, USA, Nov. 2005.
[9] K. Tsakalozos, H. Kllapi, E. Sitaridi, M. Roussopoulos,
D. Paparas, and A. Delis, “Flexible use of cloud resources
through proﬁt maximization and price discrimination,” in
Proc. 2011 IEEE 27th Int’l Conf. Data Eng. (ICDE’11),
Hannover, Germany, Apr. 2011, pp. 75–86.
[10] V. Kantere, D. Dash, G. Franc¸ois, S. Kyriakopoulou, and
A. Ailamaki, “Optimal service pricing for a cloud cache,”
IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 23, no. 9, pp. 1345–
1358, Sep. 2011.
[11] J. Chen, C. Wang, B. B. Zhou, L. Sun, Y. C. Lee, and A. Y.
Zomaya, “Tradeoffs between proﬁt and customer satisfaction
for service provisioning in the cloud,” in Proc. 20th Int’l
Symposium on High Performance Distributed Computing
(HPDC’11), San Jose, USA, Jun. 2011, pp. 229–238.
[12] A. Dan, D. Sitaram, and P. Shahabuddin, “Scheduling policies
for an on-demand video server with batching,” in Proc. Sec-
ond ACM Int’l Conf. Multimedia, San Francisco, California,
USA, Oct. 1994, pp. 15–23.
[13] A. Dan, D. Sitaram, and P. Shahabuddin, “Dynamic batching
policies for an on-demand video server,” Multimedia Systems,
vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 112–121, Jun. 1994.
[14] Y. Zhang, M.-Y. Wu, and W. Shu, “Adaptive channel allo-
cation for large-scale streaming content delivery systems,”
Multimedia Tools and Applications, vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 253–
273, Mar. 2007.
[15] K. C. Almeroth, “Adaptive workload-dependent scheduling
for large-scale content delivery systems,” IEEE Trans. Cir-
cuits and Systems for Video Technology, vol. 11, no. 3, pp.
426–439, Mar. 2001.
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-212-7
DEPEND 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Dependability

