Reducing the Communication Complexity of Agreement Protocols By Applying A 
New Signature Scheme called SIGSEAM 
Omar Bousbiba 
Dependability of Computing Systems 
University of Duisburg-Essen 
Essen, Germany 
bousbiba@dc.uni-due.de 
 
 
Abstract—Distributed computing systems need agreement 
protocols when global consistency must be achieved in a fault-
tolerant way. However, solving the Byzantine agreement 
problem in an efficient way in terms of communication 
complexity is still a challenging task. In synchronous systems 
with stringent time requirements not only the fault tolerance, 
but also the limitation of the communication complexity are 
crucial for practical usability.  Many agreement protocols use 
digital signatures. This paper presents a novel signature 
generation technique to merge several signatures into a single 
one. This advantage opens a design space for agreement 
protocols with significantly reduced message overhead. 
Moreover, the new signature technique can also be applied to 
existing agreement and/or consensus protocols (Turquois and 
ESSEN, for example) without affecting the fault tolerance 
properties of the protocol.  
Keywords— Malicious Byzantine Faults; Agreement proto-
cols; Digital Signatures for Fault Tolerance.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Distributed systems are becoming more and more 
important in our electronic society. In case of safety 
relevance, it is important to make these systems resilient 
against faults. Fault tolerance techniques can be applied to 
increase various dependability properties. Many real-time 
applications require fail-operational behaviour. Take a fail-
safe brake-by-wire system as an example. It has to provide 
its functionality all the time. In the presence of a fault, the 
four-wheels braking is reduced to diagonal-wheel braking. 
Consequently, a decision has to be taken which pair of 
wheels has to be passivated (in a non-blocking way, of 
course).  
The agreement problem is recognized as a fundamental 
element in fault-tolerant distributed computing (i.e., safe 
brake, collision avoidance, semiautomated vehicles, etc.). 
The problem has been known for decades as Byzantine 
agreement (BA) [1][2]. In order to solve it, two conditions 
have to be satisfied, known as interactive consistency (IC): 
IC1: All fault-free nodes obtain exactly the same view 
IC2: The information provided by a fault-free node is 
part of this view. 
 Due to its paramount importance, the problem has 
attracted a great deal of attention in the past. It has been 
investigated extensively and many solutions have been 
proposed. Many of the approaches [3][4][5] focused on 
reducing the communication complexity in terms of the 
number of messages, the number of nodes (related to the 
number of faults to be tolerated), and required storage.  
Signature techniques contribute a lot to a reduction in 
communication complexity, because they protect the origin 
of the message against undetectable corruption when the 
message is forwarded from node to node [2]. 
Typical sequences of actions during the execution of an 
agreement protocol are the following ones: 
1. Send a signed message to one/more neighboring node(s) 
2. Forward a message from node to node(s), where each 
forwarding node cosigns the message 
3. Collect incoming messages (which can be numerous) 
including signature checks 
4. a) Take a local decision on the message to be sent in the 
next round, b) termination with some value or a con-
sistency vector [3][4]. 
The steps 1 to 4 may be repeated several times, depending 
on the particular protocol. 
Typically, the following situation occurs frequently: In 
some phases, a node X receives different messages 
M1,…,Mk all of which it has to forward to a neighbor node 
Y. If all the messages M1,…,Mk have been signed by 
different nodes N1,…,Nk and all nodes contain identical 
payload contents A (see Figure 1), then node X cannot 
summarize the messages and send only one message with 
payload contents A to node Y, because the signatures would 
be lost then. Instead X has to forward the k messages 
separately (in some protocols it is sufficient to filter out a 
subset of the messages). 
Consequently, a signature mechanism which allows 
messages to be merged has the potential to greatly reduce 
the communication overhead of an agreement protocol. 
Figure 1 illustrates an example of the idea behind signature 
merging. 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-429-9
DEPEND 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Dependability

Figure 1. (left) new (right) conventional - signature mechanism. 
A. Contribution and Outline 
The goal of this work is the provision of a novel 
signature mechanism, which opens an extended design 
space for agreement protocols with lower communication 
complexity in terms of message transmissions. By signature 
merging, the number of messages, and thus the overall 
transmitted information can be reduced. The new method 
does not use cryptographically strong signatures. Instead, 
the signatures are designed to withstand faults, even with 
Byzantine behaviour, but not intelligent attacks of humans. 
Besides the (very short) computation time for signature 
merging, the protocol does not need extra time for reaching 
agreement.   
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II 
characterizes the agreement protocols relevant for this 
paper. The new signature method is presented in Section III 
and its application to agreement protocols in Section IV. 
The improvement is shown in Section V by providing a 
quantification of the overhead. A summary and an outline of 
ongoing work are given in Section VI. 
II. 
CONSIDERED AGREEMENT PROTOCOLS 
A. Protocols 
Since the time when the agreement problem was intro-
duced by Lamport et. al. [1], many solutions have been 
proposed. Most of the work is focused on reducing the 
number of messages, the required number of nodes per 
tolerated fault and the storage consumption. 
It has turned out that signatured protocols need signifi-
cantly less messages. However, without signature merging 
there is a limitation to further reduction. In this paper, the 
merging approach is applied to two protocols: Turquois [3] 
and ESSEN [5]. For each of these protocols a variant is 
derived that takes benefit of signature merging. 
Turquois is a protocol which solves the consensus 
problem in asynchronous systems composed of n ad hoc 
nodes where a subset f (with 𝑓 <
𝑛
3 ) of them can fail in an 
arbitrary manner. It is the first work which addresses the 
problem of reaching consensus in the presence of omission 
faults. However, Turquois solves the problem at the expense 
of a relatively high communication and storage overhead. 
The high number of message transmissions is caused by the 
message validation process. In the worst case, a node has to 
transmit more than 
𝑛+𝑓
2  messages received from previous 
round(s). A signature technique has a great impact on the 
message and storage overhead as will be shown later in this 
paper.  
ESSEN is a protocol that solves the Byzantine agree-
ment problem even in the presence of “malicious coopera-
tion” faults. This means two faulty nodes may “secretly” 
exchange their information, such as keys and signed 
messages. In ESSEN, the communication complexity is 
very low for up to four arbitrary faults. The protocol 
requires a fully synchronous system (clock synchronization 
is presupposed). The message storage consumption is the 
space of only three messages. The required number of nodes 
grows quadratically with the number of tolerated faults. As 
with Turquois, the protocol uses signatures without merging 
functionality. The benefit of adding a signature scheme with 
merging capability will be shown later in this paper. 
B. Signatures 
For the purpose of fault tolerance, cryptographically 
strong signatures are not needed, because the signatures 
serve as countermeasures against “stupid faults” rather than 
“intelligent 
attacks”. 
Consequently, 
signatures 
with 
relatively low computation time can be used (as reported in 
[7]). Signature techniques greatly improve the communi-
cation complexity of agreement/consensus protocols. How-
ever, when using an existing signature technique [7][8] a 
receiver has only two options to deal with after a message 
has been received. Either each received signature is stored 
separately, as is done in Turquois, or some kind of filter 
mechanism is applied (e.g., only the message with the 
highest number of signatures is stored). In both cases the 
overhead for both message storage and communication may 
become high. 
By the proposed signature merging technique the 
receiver(s) get the opportunity to combine the messages into 
a single one without affecting the information about the 
signature source. This means, the new message will still 
contain the information of all signature sources (as shown in 
Figures 1 and Section III). 
III. 
NEW SIGNATURE SCHEME SIGSEAM 
The proposed signature scheme is intended to withstand 
arbitrary technical faults rather than intelligent attacks. For 
the purpose of fault tolerance simple signature generation 
methods are sufficient [6][7][8]). The signature technique 
presented in this paper is based on a multiplication scheme 
similar to [7]. It achieves almost the same effectiveness as 
Message M1 
A:N1 
Message M2 
A:N2 
Message M4 
A:N4 
Message M3 
A:N3 
Message M 
A:N1:N2:N3:N4 
  
received 
received 
New 
signature 
mechanism 
Conventional 
signature 
mechanis 
sent 
Message M 
A:Ni, i ϵ {1,2,3,4} 
sent 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-429-9
DEPEND 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Dependability

[7]. A thorough investigation on the new signature merging 
mechanism is still work in progress. Next, the algorithms 
for signature generation and checking are presented in 
detail.  
All calculations are done modulo m, where m is set to a 
power of two (m = 2x with x ϵ ℕ). Typical values may be   
m = 216 or m = 232. The generation of private and public 
signature keys is done as follows: Each node chooses two 
arbitrary natural numbers a, b from modd = [m/16, m/2]  
ℕ𝑜𝑑𝑑. The product c = a ▪ b is calculated. The value of 
parameter a is used as private key. The pair (b, c) is taken as 
public key, which is publically distributed to all nodes to be 
used for signature checking. 
Signature generation: The signature of the original 
sender of a message is calculated over the payload data d 
and the sequence number n (e.g., the sequence number is 
changed from round to round) only. The following signature 
function 𝜎0 and a usual CRC function are used by the first 
signing node (e.g., source node, indexed with zero): 

σ0(n, d) ≔ CRC(n, d) ∙ ai



Cosignature generation of a forwarding node is done as 
follows: The cosignature value is calculated over the 
signature value  σ𝑗 with j ≥ 0 by applying the following 
cosignature function σ𝑖. The index represents the number of 
signing and/or cosigning nodes:  

σ𝑖: = { σ𝑗 + CRC(n, d) ∙ (ai + 1), if j is even 
σ𝑗 + CRC(n, d) ∙ (ai − 1), otherwise    

where j < i. Depending on the number of signatures in σ𝑗 
the secret key ai of the cosigning node is used as either (ai + 
1) or (ai – 1) depending or whether or not the number of 
already added (co-) signatures is even. 
Compared to usual (co-) signature schemes there is an 
important point: In the proposed merging signature scheme 
the new cosignature 𝜎𝑖 replaces the existing (co-) signature 
in a message to be forwarded. However, the indices of all 
signing nodes are kept in the message. Thus, there is a list 
“Who has signed?” in each message.  
The signature value signed by j nodes can be expressed 
by the following sum function:  
𝑠 = CRC(n, d) ∙ ((j + 1) mod 2 + ∑
ai
j
i=0
).

A receiver uses the following signature check function 
τ(n, d, s) after reception of a message with number n, 
payload data d and signature s. The check is passed if the 
following equation is correct: 

𝑠 ∙ ∏
𝑏𝑖
𝑗
𝑖=0
=

CRC(n, d) ∙ (e ∙ ∏ 𝑏𝑖
𝑗
𝑖=0
+ ∑ [𝑐𝑖 ∙
∏ 𝑏𝑘
𝑗
𝑘=0,𝑘≠𝑖
]
𝑗
𝑖
).
If s has been signed by an odd number of nodes, then 
parameter e is set to zero. Otherwise parameter e is set to 
one. In case of an odd number of nodes having (co-) signed 
the message we obtain: 

𝑠 ∙ ∏
𝑏𝑖
𝑗
𝑖=0
= CRC(n, d) ∙ ∑
(c𝑖 ∙ ∏
𝑏𝑘
𝑗
𝑘=0,𝑘≠𝑖
)
𝑗
𝑖=0


𝑠 ∙ ∏ 𝑏𝑖
𝑗
𝑖=0
=  CRC(n, d) ∙ ((j + 1)mod 2 + ∑ ai
j
i=0
) ∙ ∏ 𝑏𝑖
𝑗
𝑖=0
⇔
𝑠 ∙ ∏ 𝑏𝑖
𝑗
𝑖=0
=  CRC(n, d) ∙ ∑ ai
j
i=0
∙ ∏ 𝑏𝑖
𝑗
𝑖
⇔
𝑠 ∙ ∏ 𝑏𝑖
𝑗
𝑖=0
=  CRC(n, d) ∙ ∑ a𝑖 ∙
𝑗
𝑖=0
b𝑖 ∙
∏
𝑏𝑘
𝑗
𝑘=0,𝑘≠𝑖
⇔
𝑠 ∙ ∏ 𝑏𝑖
𝑗
𝑖=0
=  CRC(n, d) ∙ ∑ (c𝑖 ∙
∏
𝑏𝑘
𝑗
𝑘=0,𝑘≠𝑖
)
𝑗
𝑖=0
  Q. E. D.
The implications from right to left are obvious. The 
implication from left to right based on the same conclusion, 
as shown in [8]. The proof is done by contradiction: Due to 
the fact that all calculations are done modulo m (m = 2x 
with x ϵ ℕ) for b ϵ modd the product 𝑠 ∙ ∏
𝑏𝑖
𝑗
𝑖=0
 returns a 
unique value in modulo m. However, parameter b is odd and 
the only prime factor of m is 2. Consequently, 2 must be a 
prime factor of value b ϵ modd (contradiction) Q.E.D. 
IV. 
MODIFIED AGREEMENT PROTOCOL 
A detailed explanation of the two protocols ESSEN and 
Turquois can be found here [3][5]. In the following, only the 
parts of the algorithm which have been modified are 
discussed in detail. The modified protocol variants are 
called SEAM and Turquois*, respectively. 
A) SEAM 
Storing of received messages: A data message is stored 
in the secondary buffer, when (in addition to the four 
conditions given in [5]) also the following two conditions 
are satisfied: 
1. The node is member of group ExtG (see [5]) 
2. The node has not transmitted a message yet.  
Otherwise, if all six conditions are not satisfied, the data 
message is rejected (for more details see [5]). 
Merging of signatures: The messages in the primary and 
the secondary buffer are merged, iff both messages contain 
at least 2f – 2 (parameter f indicates the number of tolerated 
faults) different signature sources. The content of the 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-429-9
DEPEND 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Dependability

secondary buffer is deleted after transmission (regardless of 
whether or not the message has been merged). Moreover, in 
contrast to [5], only the primary and default buffer are used 
for the final decision. All other parts of the algorithm remain 
unchanged. 
B) Turquois* 
Merging of signatures: In each round, all messages with 
identical content are merged (instead of stored separately). 
This means not more than two different messages are stored 
within a round. All other parts of Turquois remain un-
changed. Both variants SEAM and Turquois* have been 
simulated for up to 30 nodes and up to 109 rounds. The 
number of simultaneously faulty nodes has been limited to 6 
in case of SEAM and 9 in case of Turquois (for more details 
see [3][5]). In all simulation runs the interactive consistency 
was fully preserved. 
V. COMPLEXITY OF THE INVESTIGATED PROTOCOLS    
   
BY USING SIGSEAM 
In this section, the communication complexity in terms 
of redundant nodes as well as message transmission over-
head is quantified by simulation. The modified protocols 
SEAM and Turquois* are compared with their original 
versions ESSEN and Turquois, respectively. The outcomes 
are shown in Figure 2. Summarizing the results it can be 
said that the new signature technique greatly improves the 
communication complexity of both protocols. In case of 
ESSEN the number of redundant nodes as well as the 
number of required message transmissions has been reduced 
from 1 + f² + f
2 + ⌈(f – 1)
2
⌉ down to  
3f+2⌈f−1
2 ⌉+⌈ f²
2⌉
2
. In case 
of Turquois, the high number of (3f + 1)
(n+f+2)
2
 message 
transmission (worst case) has been reduced to a constant of 
3 messages per node, whereas the number of required nodes 
remains unchanged. This means 9f + 3 messages in all.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The simulation results have clearly shown that the proposed 
signature technique with merging functionality significantly 
improves the efficiency of agreement protocols and does not 
affect the time taken to reach agreement. 
The work on signature merging is still in progress. The 
coverage of special fault cases affecting the signatures 
themselves must be evaluated in detail. Besides bursts, bit 
flips, wrong data, also signature-related faults like copy-
and-paste of signatures between messages, etc., have to be 
assessed with respect to the achieved coverage. Moreover, 
these results will be compared with 16-bit or 32-bit “light” 
versions of existing cryptographic signature techniques.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The author gratefully acknowledges the helpful discussions 
with Prof. Klaus Echtle who participated in the development 
of the concept of signature merging.  
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Pease, R. Shostak, and L. Lamport, “Reaching agreement in the 
presence of faults”, JACM, vol. 27, Apr. 1980, pp. 228–234, doi: 
10.1145/322186.322188. 
[2] L. Lamport, R. Shostak, and M. Pease, “The byzantine 
generalsproblem”, ACM and TOPLAS, vol. 4, July 1982, pp. 382–
401, doi:10.1145/357172.357176. 
[3] H. Moniz, N. F. Neves, and M. Correia, “Turquois: Byzantine 
consensus in wireless ad hoc networks”, IEEE, DSN, Chicago, IL, pp. 
537-546,  June 2010, pp. 537–546, doi: 10.1109/DSN.2010.5544268. 
[4] M. Jochim and T.  M. Forest, “An Efficient Implementation of the 
SM Agreement Protocol for a Time Triggered Communication 
Systems”, SAE International Journal of Passenger Cars - Electronic 
and Electrical Systems, vol. 3, 2010, pp. 106-116, doi:10.4271/2010-
01-2320. 
[5] O. Bousbiba, “ESSEN - An Efficient Single Round Signature 
Protected Message Exchange Agreement Protocol for Wireless 
Distributed Networks”, ACRS 28th, Workshop Proceedings, March 
24 - 27, 2015, Porto, Portugal, ISEP, Berlin: VDE Verl., ISBN: 978-
3-8007-3657-7.  
[6] K. Echtle and T. Kimmeskamp, “Fault-Tolerant and Fail-Safe Control 
Systems Using Remote Redundancy”,  ARCS 22th, Workshop 
Proceedings, March 11, 2009, Delft, The Netherlands, Berlin: VDE 
Verl., ISBN: 978-3-8007-3133-6.   
[7] L. Martin, “Relative signatures for fault tolerance and their 
implementation”, Dependable Computing – EDCC-1, Lecture Notes 
in 
Computer 
Science, 
vol. 852, 
Oct. 
1994, 
pp. 
561–580, 
doi:10.1007/3-540-58426-9_158. 
[8] K. Echtle, “Avoiding Malicious Byzantine Faults by a New Signature 
Generation Technique”, Depenable Computing – EDCC3, Lecture 
Notes in Computer Science, vol. 1667, Sept. 1999, pp. 106-123, 
doi:10.1007/3-540-48254-7_9. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. The idea of signature merging. Communication complexity: (a) message transmission overhead (b) required number of redundant nodes. 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-429-9
DEPEND 2015 : The Eighth International Conference on Dependability

