Security Control Variations Between In-house and Cloud-based Virtualized 
Infrastructures 
 
Ramaswamy Chandramouli 
Computer Security Division, Information Technology Laboratory 
National Institute of Standards & Technology 
Gaithersburg, MD, USA 
mouli@nist.gov 
 
 
Abstract-Virtualization-related 
components 
(such 
as 
Hypervisor, Virtual Network and Virtual Machines (VMs)) in 
a virtualized data center infrastructure need effective security 
controls. However, the differences in scope of control (among 
stakeholders) over this component set between in-house and 
cloud-based virtualized infrastructures introduce variations in 
security control measures that can be deployed by the 
respective stakeholders. In this paper, we analyze those 
variations and their efficiency and security impacts. We also 
suggest technology enablers that can minimize those impacts 
and improve the overall security robustness of the basic 
computing units of a virtualized infrastructure, (i.e.,VMs). 
    Keywords-Virtual Machine; Virtual Network; Hypervisor; 
Virtualized Host; Cloud Service Model 
I. INTRODUCTION 
     Server Virtualization, in some instances augmented with 
storage virtualization, is becoming the trend for data center 
infrastructures in both enterprises and cloud provider 
environments. In fact, Virtualized Servers and Virtualized 
storage have become the platform for many enterprise 
applications such as Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) 
[1] because of the following: 
      (a) Efficiency in the utilization of processor and 
memory resources in a virtualized host because of the 
ability to run multiple Virtual Machines (VMs) as opposed 
to a non-virtualized host where only a single O/S stack can 
be run. Similar efficiencies can be achieved in the case of 
virtualized storage because of the presence of an abstraction 
layer above the physical storage layer, (e.g., disk arrays). 
     (b) Scalability and Elasticity that are enabled in Virtual 
Servers and Virtual Storage by the very nature of 
virtualization. An example is the capability to add VMs at 
will to a physical host with underutilized capacity and 
ability to add disk arrays transparent to the programs that 
gather, store, retrieve and process data. 
     There is general agreement in the security community 
that the security control measures used for protecting 
servers that run a single O/S stack (referred to as non-
virtualized hosts) alone are not sufficient for protecting 
servers that run multiple O/S stacks (referred to as 
virtualized hosts). The reason for the agreement is the 
presence of a single trusted layer, (i.e., the hypervisor) 
below multiple VMs  in virtualized hosts and the risk of 
compromise to this layer posing the risk of compromising 
the integrity of all VMs running in that host [2]. The 
detailed differences between virtualized hosts and non-
virtualized hosts are given below:  
     (a) In a non-virtualized host, the interface to the 
hardware is through a regular O/S, whereas in a virtualized 
host, the interface to the hardware is through a software 
module, called a hypervisor, which contains just the kernel 
of an O/S with some necessary additions such as device 
drivers, etc. 
     (b) A virtualized host has resident in it multiple Virtual 
Machines (VMs), each with its own stack of O/S and 
Applications. All of the VMs share the same physical 
resources provided by the virtualized host – such as the 
processor, memory and directly attached storage. The 
hypervisor mediates access to shared resources by the 
various VMs, and provides isolation between the VMs.  
     (c) To enable VMs to communicate to the physical 
network and to provide isolation among them, a Virtual 
network is defined within each virtualized host. A Virtual 
network can be looked upon as a set of logical 
(sub)networks within a shared physical network. A virtual 
network can be configured using a combination of 
software-defined communication interfaces called virtual 
network interfaces (or vNICs) inside a VM as well as 
software-based switches, called Virtual Switches,that can 
be defined within the hypervisor. 
     In a virtualized enterprise data center, catering to 
internal information technology (IT) processing needs of an 
18
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-212-7
DEPEND 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Dependability

enterprise (henceforth referred to as in-house virtualized 
infrastructure), all the components of a virtualized host are 
owned and controlled by the single entity, i.e., the 
enterprise. However, in the virtualized data center owned 
and operated by cloud service providers (henceforth 
referred to as cloud-based virtual infrastructure), while the 
virtualized host (the physical machine) and the software 
that provides the virtualization, (i.e., the hypervisor) are 
owned by the cloud service provider, the VMs in it are 
created and operated by the cloud service consumer. Hence, 
the internal configuration of VMs in a cloud-based virtual 
infrastructure belonging to an Infrastructure as a Service 
(IaaS) cloud provider is under the control of the cloud 
service consumer although the capabilities to configure a 
virtual network linking these VMs will still rest with the 
cloud service provider. Thus, we see that there are 
differences in the scope of control over the components of a 
virtualized infrastructure between in-house and cloud-based 
virtualized environments. 
     The main objective of this paper is to illustrate the 
variations in security control measures between the in-
house and cloud-based virtualized infrastructures that these 
scope of control differences introduce. A second objective, 
or rather a by-product of the illustration process is to show 
the impact of these variations (in security control measures) 
on the effectiveness and efficiency of the total set of 
security controls and how they can be addressed to improve 
the overall security robustness of the basic computing units 
of a virtualized infrastructure, (i.e., the VMs). 
     The organization of this paper is as follows. In Section 
II, we identify the differences in scope of control among 
stakeholders over the components of a virtualized 
infrastructure by looking at the layers of a cloud service 
architectural stack. Section III identifies threat scenarios 
relating to virtualization-related components. In that section 
we also look at the broad class of security control measures 
and identify whether these control measures may be 
affected by differences in scope of control between in-
house and cloud-based virtualized infrastructures. Section 
IV describes in detail the security control variations for VM 
protection at the Virtual Network layer and VM end-point. 
Section V provides the summary and conclusions. 
II. SCOPE OF CONTROL IN CLOUD-BASED 
INFRASTRUCTURES 
     In the case of in-house virtualized infrastructures, since 
all components are owned and operated by a single entity, 
i.e., the enterprise, differences in scope of control over the 
overall set of components do not arise. Hence we limit the 
scope of control analysis only to cloud-based virtualized 
infrastructures. In order to do that we digress a bit and look 
at the broad picture of cloud service models. The three 
widely accepted cloud service models are [3]: Infrastructure 
as a Service (IaaS), Platform as a Service (PaaS) and 
Software as a Service (SaaS), all of them consisting of two 
major players – the cloud provider and the cloud consumer. 
In the case of SaaS, the cloud provider makes available a 
software application while PaaS offers a set of development 
tools (or an application development environment such as 
J2EE [4] or .NET [4]) to develop and possibly host 
applications. In these two service offerings, (i.e., SaaS and 
PaaS) the underlying data center infrastructure used (or 
leased from another provider) by the corresponding 
category of cloud service providers need not be based on 
virtualized servers. In the case of IaaS, what is made 
available to the cloud consumer are computing units in the 
form of VMs.  Hence, the data center infrastructure in the 
case of IaaS cloud service providers should consist of only 
virtualized hosts. However, in this paper, we assume that 
the data center infrastructure of a cloud service provider 
irrespective of the cloud service model (because of 
efficiency, scalability and elasticity considerations) is a 
virtualized one consisting of virtualized hosts, virtual 
network and VMs. Based on this assumption, we can start 
taking a look at the various layers in a cloud service 
architectural stack. One such architectural stack based on 
slight variations from the model given by the Cloud 
Security Alliance [5] is given in Figure 1 below.  In this 
stack, we notice that the facility, networking infrastructure 
and the physical host layers are common to all IT 
infrastructures - whether virtualized or not- and hence these 
layers are not relevant for our scope of control analysis.  
Going up one more layer in the stack, we find that it is in 
the resource abstraction layer that the main engine 
providing the virtualization, (i.e., the hypervisor) and 
virtual network are defined. Virtual Machines - the main 
computing units of a virtualized infrastructure reside in the 
VM layer. Our focus of attention for identifying the 
differences in scope of control between in-house and cloud-
based environments is limited to these two layers. This is 
due to the fact that these are the two layers whose 
composition differs between virtualized and non-virtualized 
infrastructures. We give below our observations on the 
scope of control among stakeholders over components in 
cloud-based virtualized infrastructures used in all three 
cloud service-models. 
19
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-212-7
DEPEND 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Dependability

 
 
 
Figure 1. Cloud Service Layers. 
    
     
(a) In the resource abstraction layer (virtualization layer), 
all components - the hypervisor and the virtual network (in 
all three cloud service models) - are totally under the 
control of only one entity, (i.e., the cloud provider). 
     (b) In the case of VM layer, the single component it 
holds - the VM instance with its embedded Guest Operating 
System -is under the control of cloud service provider in 
the case of SaaS and PaaS service models but controlled by 
the cloud service consumer in the IaaS model (mainly due 
to the fact that the SaaS provider does not want to assume 
any administrative responsibility for it after a VM instance 
is configured and instantiated by an IaaS consumer).  
     Although not shown in the architecture diagram, 
conceptually, one can think of a data layer which contains 
the components for the management software and the 
physical artifacts for storing the data that applications 
generate and use. This layer is entirely under the control of 
a single entity, i.e., the cloud provider - in all three cloud 
service models and hence is not relevant for our scope of 
control analysis. It is worth mentioning that although all 
storage-related technologies (both virtual and physical) are 
under the control of cloud service providers, the 
responsibility for appropriate security control measures for 
data protection (through encryption of data in transit and 
data at rest - for the portion of data generated and used) still 
rests with the cloud consumer [6]. 
III. THREAT SCENARIOS & SECURITY CONTROL 
MEASURES FOR ENTIRE VIRTUALIZED 
INFRASTRUCTURES 
     Our scope of control analysis narrowed our focus to just 
two layers that contain all the artifacts relating to 
virtualization, i.e., the Resource Abstraction layer and the 
VM layer. Hence, our threat analysis is also limited to 
scenarios involving the components contained in these 
layers. These components are re-listed here for facilitating 
further discussion: 
     (a) Hypervisor and Virtual Network - from the Resource 
Abstraction Layer 
     (b) Virtual Machines (VMs) with their Guest O/S - from 
the VM Layer 
FACILITY 
NETWORK 
HARDWARE (PHYSICAL HOST) 
RESOURCE ABSTRACTION LAYER (HYPERVISOR + 
VIRTUAL NETWORK) 
VIRTUAL MACHINE 
(VM)/GUEST O/S 
 MIDDLEWARE 
APPLICATION 
20
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-212-7
DEPEND 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Dependability

      
 
                         
 
                     VM                                                   VM                                                 VM 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. A Virtual Network Configuration. 
The virtualization environment involving the above 
components can be described as follows. The VMs provide 
the complete, encapsulated computing stacks built up of 
Guest O/S with middleware and applications riding on top 
of the chosen O/S. A network linking these VMs , thus 
enabling communication among them is called a Virtual 
Network. An example of a virtual network configured using 
software-defined virtual network interface card (vNIC) 
within each VM and software-defined virtual switches 
(vSwitch) defined within the hypervisor is shown in Figure 
2. A virtual network provides communication not only 
among VMs residing on a single virtualized host but also 
connectivity with the outside world (the physical network), 
if any of the virtual switches is also connected to a physical 
network interface card (pNIC) of the virtualized host. In 
this virtualization environment, the most common (though 
not exhaustive) threat scenarios are identified below: 
     TS-1: The compromise of the hypervisor (by exploiting 
the vulnerabilities in the kernel - which is rare) can 
potentially compromise the security of multiple VMs (in 
fact potentially all) resident on that virtualized host [7]. 
     TS-2: A single VM that has been compromised can be 
used as a launching pad for attacking other VMs (especially 
if they share some common resources such as memory or 
there exists a communication channel between them due to 
the fact that these VMs constitute the different tiers 
(webserver, application server , database server etc) of a 
multi-tier application) [8]. 
     TS-3: Normally, the effect of all operations performed 
within a VM must be restricted to that VM. However, 
under some circumstances, a malicious program running in 
a VM, by exploiting vulnerabilities in the hypervisor 
software, can alter the state of other VMs, the hypervisor 
itself or even the hardware. Such a VM is called a rogue 
VM and it poses the threat of subverting the isolation 
property required to be provided by the hypervisor. 
     TS-4: Attacks on running guest VMs by a malicious 
hypervisor. The impact of this threat is the same as that of 
TS-3 but the threat source here is the hypervisor as opposed 
to a rogue VM in the case of TS-3.  
    For each of the threat scenarios, let us see the broad 
class of security control measures that are required and 
identify whether these control measures may be affected 
by differences in scope of control among stakeholders 
between 
in-house 
and 
cloud-based 
virtualized 
infrastructures. 
     TS-1 has to do with the compromise of the hypervisor. 
The usual security control measure adopted is to keep the 
    vNIC 
    vNIC 
    vNIC 
vSwitch 
vSwitch 
vSwitch 
pNIC 
pNIC 
HYPERVISOR 
21
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-212-7
DEPEND 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Dependability

patches from the hypervisor vendor up to date. This is a 
hypervisor-based security control measure and since the 
hypervisor is always under the control of the single entity 
in 
both 
in-house 
and 
cloud-based 
virtualization 
infrastructure, the potential for variation in security control 
measures due to differences of who has control does not 
arise. 
     TS-2, TS-3 & TS-4 have to do with compromise of the 
VM. Security control measures can be provided for VMs 
through a combination of: (a) Virtual Network-resident 
security controls and (b) VM-resident security controls [9]. 
In the case of in-house and SaaS/PaaS cloud-based 
virtualized infrastructures, both the Virtual Network and 
the VMs are under the control of a single entity. However, 
in the case of IaaS cloud-based virtualized infrastructure, 
the VMs to be protected are under the control of IaaS cloud 
consumer. This is where there is potential for variations in 
control measures for protection of VMs between in-house 
and 
cloud-based 
virtualized 
infrastructures. 
These 
variations are analyzed and discussed in the next section. 
 
IV. SECURITY CONTROL VARIATIONS FOR VM 
PROTECTION 
 
     Security controls for VM protection can be deployed 
both at the Virtual Network layer as well as in the VMs 
themselves. As we have already seen, both these layers are 
accessible to a single entity only in the case of in-house and 
SaaS/PaaS 
cloud-based 
virtualized 
infrastructures. 
However, only the Virtual Network layer is accessible for 
IaaS cloud provider and the VMs are accessible for IaaS 
cloud consumer. Hence variations in security controls for 
protection of VMs are introduced due to these differences 
in scope of control among stakeholders as discussed below: 
A.  Security Control Variations at the Virtual Network 
Layer 
     In virtualized infrastructures for in-house IT as well as 
for providing cloud services (all three service models), the 
configuration of a Virtual Network (the network linking 
all virtual machines within a single virtualized host) is 
entirely 
under 
the 
control 
of 
the 
data 
center 
owner/operator.  Leveraging the virtual network, there are 
two approaches to providing security for VMs. They are 
[10]: 
     (a) Extending the concept of Virtual LAN (VLANs)   
into the virtual network and 
       (b) Virtual Network Configuration-based solutions for 
VM protection 
     In the VLAN-based approach, the virtual switches 
defined in a hypervisor are made to recognize the VLAN 
tags and thus the concept of network isolation in the 
physical network is extended to the virtual network inside a 
virtualized host. As far as Virtual Network Configuration-
based solutions go, there are two types: In the first 
approach, VMs hosting sensitive resources such as fileshare 
VM or hosting sensitive applications such as data 
warehousing or payroll processing are connected to isolated 
virtual network segments which are not behind any firewall 
or Network Address Translation devices. In the second 
approach, a special-purpose VM called a Virtual Security 
Appliance [11] that contains a hardened Guest O/S and one 
or more security applications, is installed and configured to 
provide the necessary protection for VMs. The type of 
protection depends upon the security application(s) that is 
(are) packaged as part of the Virtual Security Appliance. 
Examples of popular security applications are Firewall and 
Intrusion Prevention [12]. In a firewall solution, the data 
center operator can provide protection to VMs by defining 
VM-specific rules that can control traffic to and from 
virtual machines. There are tools in the market place [11], 
which, using a combination of a management server and a 
set of security appliances, can control traffic in and out of 
an arbitrary set of VMs irrespective of the VLANs to which 
they belong. By placing the entire set of virtual machines to 
be protected on an internal-only virtual switch of the virtual 
network, all traffic is made to flow through the security 
appliance and thus the security appliance can act as a Layer 
2 bridge that controls all traffic flowing to and from the 
protected VMs without reconfiguring them in any way. The 
consequence of this is that firewall rules encompassing 
layers 2, 3 & 4, (i.e., including IP addresses and specific 
TCP or UDP port) can all be defined using this virtual 
network-based security appliance. However, in the case of 
an IaaS Cloud consumer, who owns and operates a set of 
VMs, the virtual network layer is not under his/her control. 
Hence a virtual network-based firewall cannot be deployed 
in this situation and this class of user can only provide the 
necessary traffic control by having a VM-based firewall. 
Deploying a VM-based firewall solution imposes a great 
deal of performance overhead compared to a virtual 
network-based firewall as this security application 
competes for the same resources, (i.e., CPU, Memory, etc.) 
as functional (business) applications do on each of the 
VMs. For example, if there are 10 VMs in a virtualized 
host, 10 firewall applications will be competing for its 
22
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-212-7
DEPEND 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Dependability

resources. On the other hand, providing the same firewall 
functionality using a Virtual Security Appliance will 
involve running a single instance of a firewall application 
instead of ten (in the case of VM-based solution), thus 
providing a significant performance improvement while 
accomplishing the same security objective of blocking 
unwanted/malicious traffic in and out of the VMs that the 
cloud service consumer has rented and is operating. 
B.  Security Control Variations at the VM end-point 
     The VMs (often called the endpoints) in a virtualized 
infrastructure need to have the same protection measures 
as a physical server in a non-virtualized environment. 
These protection measures include but not limited to [8]: 
• Anti Virus/Anti Malware Software 
• Intrusion Prevention 
     In the case of a virtualized infrastructure providing 
IaaS cloud service, the VMs are owned and operated by 
cloud consumers and hence the security of these VMs rest 
with them. Because of the fact that the hypervisor 
controlling these VMs is owned and under the control of 
the IaaS cloud provider, the only security control measure 
available to the cloud consumer is to run individual 
instances of above classes of software (anti-virus, etc.) in 
each of the VMs rented and operated by them. 
     In the case of virtualized infrastructures providing in-
house IT needs or providing SaaS or PaaS cloud services, 
both the hypervisor and the VMs are owned and operated 
by a single entity - data center owner or operator. Using 
the 
published 
interfaces 
(called 
the 
hypervisor 
introspection APIs) provided by the hypervisor vendor, 
the data center owner/operator can either develop (or 
procure from a third-party), a security application that can 
be installed as a security appliance on a special hardened 
VM. This security appliance thus runs as a single instance 
of security software and this instance would be running 
separate from all other instances of Guest O/Ss running in 
the various VMs that it would protect. For example, a 
security appliance for an antivirus solution can perform 
the functions of - memory scanning, monitoring of 
processes and investigation of network traffic - for all 
VMs and Guest O/Ss running on that virtualized host. The 
variations in security control measures that can be 
deployed by the stakeholder between the two virtualized 
infrastructure environments, (i.e., IaaS cloud Versus 
SaaS/PaaS cloud) for VM protection has the following 
efficiency and security implications: 
     (a) Multiple instances of say (an anti-virus solution) in a 
single physical (virtualized) host makes of the order of 
magnitude huge demands on the processor and memory 
cycles of that host as opposed to a single instance of 
security software. Related to this is the management issue 
of keeping these security solutions in synch in all of the 
VMs in a virtualized host. 
     (b) A rogue process within a Guest O/S can potentially 
shut down the anti-virus solution running in that same 
Guest O/S. However, the single instance of such a solution 
running in a security appliance in a hardened VM that runs 
in the same virtualized host is not only able to thwart such 
attacks on itself, but is also able to provide protection to all 
other VMs running in that virtualized host. 
V. CONCLUSION 
     In this paper, we saw that protection of VMs can be 
obtained through efficient and effective means in the case 
of in-house and SaaS/PaaS cloud-based virtualized 
infrastructures through the following: 
• 
Implementing VLANs in the virtual network 
• 
Creating isolated network segments for VMs 
running sensitive applications, and 
• 
Virtual Security Appliances utilizing hypervisor 
introspection API 
     However, the protections provided by the above 
measures have to be obtained through a less efficient way 
by means of individual VM-based solutions in the case of 
IaaS cloud-based virtualized infrastructures. This is due to 
the fact that the IaaS cloud consumer who needs to protect 
VMs does not have access to components of Resource 
Abstraction layer such as the Hypervisor and the Virtual 
Network. Analysis of such variations in security control 
measures and their relative effectiveness and efficiency 
impacts can lead to exploration of ways to minimize those 
impacts.  
    Specifically, to address the effectiveness and efficiency 
gap between security controls available for stakeholders in 
the in-house and cloud-based infrastructures, we propose 
the following: 
     (a) Provide selective visibility to cloud customers to 
VMs rented by them through hypervisor introspection API 
    (b) Define pre-defined VLAN segments for cloud 
customers to place the VMs created/rented by them.. 
    The justification for the above measures to improve the 
overall security robustness of VMs can be made based on 
the following observations: 
23
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-212-7
DEPEND 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Dependability

    (a) Any security/monitoring solution based on virtual 
network can significantly reduce the demand on the CPU 
cycles of the virtualized host compared to a host-based (i.e., 
VM-based) solution 
    (b) The vulnerability of the Guest O/S itself is not a 
factor with respect to the integrity of the security solution 
as these types of solutions that are based on visibility into 
the virtual network are run on dedicated VMs with 
hardened Guest O/Ss. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] M.Hoyer, K.Schröder, Daniel Schlitt, and D. Wolfgang Nebel,   
     ”Proactive Dynamic Resource Management in Virtualized Data  
      Centers”,  ACM  
      Conference on e-Energy, New York, NY, USA, May 2011. 
[2]  T. Garfinkel and M. Rosenblum, "When Virtual is harder than Real:  
       Security Challenges in Virtual Machine Based  Computing  
       Environments" ,Stanford University Department of Computer 
       Science. http://www.stanford.edu/~talg/papers/ HOTOS05/virtual- 
       harder-hotos05.pdf [Retrieved: July, 2012]  
[3] P. Mell and T. Grance,“A NIST Definition of Cloud Computing,” NIST  
      SP 800-145, http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/ #SP-  800-145,  
     [Retrieved: May, 2012] 
[4] D.M. Whittinghill, and K.D. Lutes, “Teaching Enterprise Application 
      Development: strategies and challenges”, ACM SIGITE’ 11  
      Conference, West Point, NY, Oct 2011. 
[5] Cloud Security Alliance, “Security Guidance for Critical Areas of  
     Focus in Cloud Computing, v2.1,”  www.cloudsecurityalliance.org/ 
      csaguide.pdf, pp. 61-64. 
[6] L.M. Kaufman,"Data Security in the world of cloud computing."  
      IEEE Security and Privacy, Vol. 7, No. 4, 2009          
[7] S. Jin, J.Ahn, S.Cha, and J.Huh, “Architectural Support for Secure  
     Virtualization under a Vulnerable Hypervisor, “ACM MICRO’11  
      Conference, Porto Alegre, Brazil, Dec 2011, pp. 272-283.                                                 
[8] J. Sahoo, S.Mohapatra, and R.Lath, “Virtualization: A Survey On  
      Concepts, Taxonomy And Associated Security Issues,” IEEE 2nd  
      International Conference on  Computer and Network Technology,  
      Bangkok, Thailand, Apr 2010, pp. 222-226. 
[9] J. N. Matthews, ‘et al.’“Running Xen – A Hands-On Guide to the Art  
      of Virtualization,” Prentice Hall, 2008 
[10] Five exciting VMware networking features in vSphere 5  
        http://searchvmware.techtarget.com/tip/Five-exciting-VMware- 
        networking-features-in-vSphere-5 [Retrieved: March, 2012] 
[11] S. Lowe “Mastering VMware vSphere 4,” Wiley  Publishing, 2009. 
[12] L. Garber, “The Challenges of Securing the Virtualized 
        Environment”, IEEE Computer, Volume 45 Issue 1, Jan 2012. 
      
 
 
 
 
24
Copyright (c) The Government of USA, 2012. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-212-7
DEPEND 2012 : The Fifth International Conference on Dependability

