DIGITAL 2021 : Advances on Societal Digital Transformation
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021. ISBN: 978-1-61208-927-0
39
Digital Transformation from Traditional Education Towards VR Education : Case
Study Plans
Luxia Dong
Curriculum and Teaching Methodology
Beijing Language and Culture University
Beijing, China
dongluxia1992@163.com
Abstract—As Virtual Reality (VR) technologies have become
popular and democratic in recent years, academic researchers
have been exploring ways to employ advanced VR technologies
in traditional education and edutainment. In this paper, we
present comprehensive digital transformation case study plans
about how to apply VR technologies to modern educations. In
our proposal, the teacher standing in front of a blackboard is
teaching in a classroom in a traditional way, while, after the
digital transformation through our case study plan, the teacher
will teach in virtual reality and students will present in a virtual
classroom. In this paper, we will explore and prospect important
considerations for achieving such a goal through our case study
plans.
Keywords—digital transformation; e-education; e-learning; edu-
tainment; virtual reality.
I. INTRODUCTION
With the rapid development of electronic multimedia tech-
nologies, education has become an interesting area for fast
digital transformation. Such evolution in digital transformation
from traditional education towards electronic education is
inevitable due to the upgrade of modern computer technolo-
gies. In particular, Computer Graphics Animations (CGA) and
Virtual Reality (VR) are two powerful areas that can affect
the education industry in a tremendous way. With a realistic
graphics rendering engine, various types of amazing effects
can be visualized realistically on screens, or even on immersive
devices such as virtual reality display headsets. This opens a
novel vision of how education can affect students’ lives.
Many recent research works have focused on VR education
and VR training. Some examples include: children education
proposed by Roussou et al. [1], immersive virtual reality
museum educational tool proposed by Huang et al. [2], and vir-
tual reality-based rehabilitation training applications for people
with intellectual disabilities developed by Standen et al. [3]. In
addition, Matsentidou et al. [4] developed a VR application for
training and enhancing the social skills of children with autism
through immersive visualizations in a VR cave environment,
Webster et al. [5] proposed an immersive virtual learning
environment for corrosion prevention and control training,
Chang et al. [6] proposed an immersive virtual environment for
foreign language teaching, Bastiaens et al. [7] studied the role
of virtual world design for supply chain education, Rahimian
et al. [8] developed an immersive game-like virtual real-
ity interface for Architecture-Engineering-Construction (AEC)
professionals education, Ali et al. [9] devised an interactive
virtual chemistry laboratory for simulation of high school 
experiments, Griol et al. [10] proposed an approach to de-
velop intelligent learning environments by means of immersive 
virtual worlds, Braun et al. [11] populated a virtual learning 
environment for interpreting students with bilingual dialogues 
to support situated learning in an institutional context, Kleven 
[12] proposed an approach for medical training and health 
education 
through 
a 
virtual 
university 
hospital, 
De 
Ribaupierre et al. [13] developed virtual reality serious 
games for healthcare training enhancement, Roussou [14] 
studied young learn-ers’ activity within interactive virtual 
environments, Detlefsen [15] proposed a method to teach 
middle-school children astronomy using ego-centric virtual 
reality, and Izatt et al. [16] proposed an immersive 
visualization and fitting tool for neutrino physics education.
However, no research works have proposed a comprehensive 
case study plan on how to apply a thorough digital transfor-
mation from traditional education towards VR education. In 
this paper, we discuss the important facts about the teaching 
strategies in VR. Next, we propose three detailed case study 
plans for elementary school classes for teaching Chinese as 
a second language in virtual reality. These case study plans 
include (1) VR classroom activities, (2) a full VR lesson 
design, and (3) a multi-cultural project. In the end, we illustrate 
the diagnostic assessments for differentiation of students in a 
VR class.
II. TEACHING STRATEGIES IN VR
An important question is: through VR technologies, what 
are the teaching strategies and activities that the teachers 
should plan to use to help students meet the lesson’s objec-
tives? In addition, what are the steps that the teacher will take 
to deliver this lesson (e.g., introduce the author, read the poem, 
etc.)? In this section, we list what we expect the teacher and 
students to do as part of this activity through VR teachings.
Critical Thinking. Critical thinking is very important for 
education. For example, in order to let the students think, 
students can be asked to write down the advantages and 
disadvantages of their choice of careers. Also, students can 
be asked to evaluate themselves and their peers, come up with 
a self-reflection, and revise the project at the end. In the end, 
such activity can be simulated in a virtual classroom that gives 
students rewards through virtual things such as VR flowers and

DIGITAL 2021 : Advances on Societal Digital Transformation
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021. ISBN: 978-1-61208-927-0
40
VR toys, etc. to increase the students’ interest in answering
questions.
Group Work. In a VR classroom, students can be asked
to evaluate their classmates and peers. Also, students can be
asked to finish a task in their group by collaborating in VR.
Literacy skills.
Finally, students can present their final
work in writing and deliver it through electronic documents.
This part can be done in VR living writing boards.
III. CASE STUDY PLAN I: VR CLASSROOM ACTIVITIES
In this section, we give some example of classroom activi-
ties planned for VR.
A. Activity1: Present Topic ”Me and My Family” in VR.
We design a class activity in VR that allows students
to present the topic ”Me and My Family” in the a virtual
classroom. In this class, the teacher will send the learning
material to the students in advance, and they will present what
they learn in the virtual class. The purpose of this activity is to
stimulate the students’ learning motivation, make connections
with the language skills and real-world, as well as prompt the
students’ critical thinking and group work skills.
Before the VR Class. The teacher will send the instruc-
tions’ video and the Quizlet link to the teams 3 days in
advance. The students will learn the new words by themselves
using Quizlet. The students will make a presentation about the
topic before the lesson and present it in the virtual class. After
the students finish their presentation, they will hand it in, and
the teacher will let them know if they need to add something
to reach the presentation standards.
During the VR Class. The students will present the topic
in the VR classroom, including basic information about family
members, their jobs and their own dream school, dream job,
what are the advantages and disadvantages of choosing their
dream school, why they choose a particular career, and so on.
The students can choose VR video or VR slides, or VR 3D
animation for this presentation. After that, the students will
be asked to review their own presentation and their peers’
presentation, writing feedback on the presentation through VR
interactions.
After the VR Class. The students will be asked to revise
their presentation and write down their self-reflection on what
they learned from the presentation and how they can make
it better next time. After that, they will hand in the final
work for evaluation by the teacher. Also, the students will be
asked to evaluate their experience in the VR classroom. This
is important for improving the VR classroom application.
B. Activity2: Learning new Vocabulary and Sentences in VR.
Through help with VR applications, teachers may give
the students more supportive and specific comments on their
work through VR interactions. Teachers can comment on the
students work and give them positive feedback, but that may
not be specific enough in traditional classroom. Rather, in a
VR classroom, teachers can give more specific feedback to the
students and make the students feel they really did a great job
on the presentation through VR gifts. Secondly, VR apps can
remind teachers to ask students’ opinions regarding previous
presenters. In addition, VR apps can make the students interact
more with each other, not only present by themselves. They
can also discuss some points with their classmates through VR
chat boards. Below is the detailed plan.
Before the VR Class. The students will be given the vocab-
ulary Quizlet link in advance. They will study by themselves
at home through the VR headset and will have a competition
that will include the entire VR class.
During the VR Class. The students will be evaluated by
the teacher if they already understand the pronunciation of
the new vocabulary during the VR class. Besides, there will
be a quiz competition to see if the students understand the
meaning of the new vocabulary. The teacher will observe and
take notes in the process of evaluating and make reteach plans
as necessary through VR animations.
After the VR Class. The students will be asked to draw a
picture or write a sentence using VR controllers, or explain in
a different language the words they found hard to understand
in VR.
IV. CASE STUDY PLAN II: A FULL VR LESSON DESIGN
Here, an example of a full VR lesson design is presented.
The target amount of time for the full lesson is 40 minutes.
During the VR class, first, let the students use Pin Yin to
read simple texts independently. Then, let the students write
in VR by dictating the Chinese characters to be learned under
the Four Skills Requirement (listening, speaking, reading, and
writing). After that, let the students understand basic, simple
language materials closely related to their personal lives and
everyday situations. In the end, let students continue to develop
good habits in listening and speaking. Students will be able
to present the topic ”Me and My family” in Chinese. Students
will be able to connect the prior knowledge (such as my
family, hobbies, etc.) to the new knowledge (such as career,
occupations, etc.). Students will be able to talk about their
dream school and dream job in a critical way.
Evaluations of VR Class. The evaluation of the VR class
can be done through three criteria: (1) Whether the students
can use Chinese to do presentations; (2) Whether the students
can pronounce different job names in Chinese correctly; (3)
Whether the students can work in a team or individually to
finish the Quizlet task on understanding the meaning of new
words.
Student Diversity and Differentiation. Different students
develop different skills according to their own personal weak
points. For listening, teachers can give the same instructions to
the whole class, but check with everyone if they understand
the instructions or if they need extra support. For example,
teachers can use some English to explain complicated instruc-
tions. Teachers can use Chinese to talk to advanced students to
meet their needs. For reading comprehension, students can be

DIGITAL 2021 : Advances on Societal Digital Transformation
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021. ISBN: 978-1-61208-927-0
41
asked to read most of the content. Teachers can ask students’
opinions to see if they need help through VR hints. Students
can use simple words and sentences in their presentation,
but VR gizmos can help students improve the vocabulary
when they need it. For speaking, when students are doing
presentations, since they prepare in advance, there might not
a big problem with it. However, when it comes to answering
questions, teachers can give them a chance to choose the
question they feel comfortable answering by doing VR quests.
This way, the students with lower speaking ability will not
feel nervous in the class. For writing, there can be writing
homework after the VR class.
Formative and Summative Assessments. As shown in the
described in-class activity of the presentation on the topic ”Me
and My Family”, students will present the topic in the VR
classroom, including basic information about family members,
their jobs and their own dream school, their dream job, what
are the advantages and disadvantages to choosing their dream
school, why they choose their career, and so on. They can
choose VR video or VR PPT for this presentation. As for
dictation, there can be a dictation in VR or by VR robot for
this unit about the words learned that day. There can also be a
Quizlet competition on vocabulary-related jobs. After the unit,
at the end of the week, there will be a summative assessment
on the topic of career, including speaking, reading compre-
hension, writing, listening, and other VR class activities.
V. CASE STUDY PLAN III: A MULTI-CULTURAL PROJECT
Project Overview. Here, we give an example of a VR class
project proposal called Minorities in China. The China Studies
program includes multi-cultural projects about the ancient
town of Lijiang and Naxi culture in China, in which students
will learn about China’s ethnic cultures and special cultural
practices. The Social Studies course includes ”Passport to the
World”, which will lead students to understand the cultures
and cultural differences around the world. Therefore, the idea
of this project was born with the idea of leading students to
understand the culture and cultural differences of China and
other parts of the world through the Google Earth VR app, and
by consulting materials and personal experience and making a
culture introduction VR PPT about a certain place on Google
Earth through virtual tours.
Project Objective. Students can learn to use VR technology
tools (such as Google Earth App) to search information and
sort out the information in a logical sequence. The community
can understand more about the minorities in China after
listening to the students’ presentations. The whole school
community would be more respectful of different cultures and
have a better understanding of the school mission.
Project Description. All the students are divided into four
groups. In the VR class of Chinese studies, they will learn
about the minority cultures of Naxi and the ancient town
of Lijiang under the guidance of the teacher and they will
experience the secrets of minority cultures in the process
of learning Dongba pictographs through VR applications.
Then, the teacher will introduce the cultural characteristics
of different countries in theme classes. Later, the teacher will
introduce several minority cultures other than Dongba culture,
such as African minority culture, American Indian culture,
etc. on VR Google Earth. The students will be allowed to
choose or search the minority culture they are interested in.
Later, the information will be collected in groups in order
for the students to learn about the cultural characteristics of
ethnic minorities they are interested in, to introduce them to
their parents at home, and make a VR PPT. In the end, the
students will collect information and write interview questions.
They will interview teachers or adults at school about their
understanding of the minority culture and their first impression
of it. The students will make VR posters to briefly introduce
this special culture and put them on the doors and windows in
the virtual classroom. These proposed VR class projects align
with the missions in art, technology, and culture. This project
aligns with culture. In the implementation of this VR project,
teachers will link it to the art class and students will create
VR posters to demonstrate different minorities. All students
will use VR technology tools to search for information and
show the presentation, so this project aligns with technology
and art as well.
Project Syllabus. In weeks 1-2, the teachers will introduce
the minority groups to the whole class through the VR
classroom. Then, the students will discuss what impressed
them and what are the minority groups they are interested
in. Then, the students will choose a minority group in China
to explore in the Google Earth VR app. Between weeks 3-6,
the students will work in a group to search information such
as facts, traditions, taboos, dress, etc. In week 7, the students
will present and make the survey in the VR classroom. They
will also be giving presentations to the community members
in the school to introduce different minorities and interview
the community’s opinions regarding different minorities. In
week 8, the students will have an evaluation. They will make
posters and post them in different places in the VR classrooms.
Teachers will use this rubric to evaluate the students work and
their projects.
VI. DIAGNOSTIC ASSESSMENTS FOR DIFFERENTIATION
Importance. The data collected from the pre-assessments
in VR education can help the teacher easily have a general
idea about the students’ learning stages. It is important to
know the students in-depth as well. It can also guide the
formative assessment or the summative assessment later in the
learning process. Teachers can target the students’ weaknesses
to give instructions and assessments for the students through
personalized VR classes. It is important for grouping as well.
Either for homogeneous or heterogeneous grouping methods,
the teachers need to know the differences between the students
in advance. Teachers can give specific support with the data
collected from the students. This is similar to a doctor helping
the patient according to the diagnostic results. For teachers
themselves, it can also be helpful. Teachers can use the data to

DIGITAL 2021 : Advances on Societal Digital Transformation
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021. ISBN: 978-1-61208-927-0
42
make teaching plans and learning objectives instead of wasting
time teaching subjects all the students already learned or
understand. For example, when the teachers get the data from
the pre-assessment, they can delete the object that may appear
on the standard guidelines, but actually, for these students, they
all get a good understanding of it. In this way, time can be
saved for both teachers and students. Meanwhile, the learning
proficiency and effectiveness are improved. This practice can
also help with school-wide learning. By getting the data on
the students, teachers from the whole school can find out the
weaknesses of the students and can also cooperate with each
other to help the students according to the pre-assessment data.
This is also useful for parents’ communication. With the data
of the pre-assessment, teachers can easily have the evidence to
show the parents how much their kids improved and in what
areas the progress was made.
Impact on Students. In a VR classroom, the students can be
both interested and challenged. They will listen more carefully
and pay more attention to what they are doing because the
teaching content can be both interesting and challenging for
most of the students due to the powerful algorithms employed
in VR applications. They will get a chance to improve them-
selves by focusing on whatever they need according to the pre-
assessment. The students will enjoy group work more because
teachers can form the groups according to the pre-assessment
results and the VR is user-friendly for easy interactions. The
grouping method will make all of the students feel comfortable
and safe, which can improve the working efficiency at the
same time. The students will get an idea on what the teachers’
expectation is and will have a clear aim about what they need
to do at the next stage. Students will be less stressed when they
face summative assessments at the middle or the end of the
semester because they know that, although there will not be the
exact same questions, the learning objective will be the same,
and if they work hard during the learning process, they will
make progress for sure. Students will be more motivated in the
VR classroom. Students will participate more in the different
VR activities because they know that all of the assessments
are related to each other; if they work hard, they can get a
good result at the summative assessment. Meanwhile, they will
enjoy the VR interface of the virtual school.
Pre-Assessment vs. Summative Assessment. How can
teachers align the pre-assessment and the summative assess-
ment for Chinese education in VR? After having the pre-
assessment (dictation for each unit) in VR, teachers will un-
derstand what they should focus on at the next teaching stage.
Then, teachers will finalize the learning goal for the whole
semester and arrange different goals into different learning
periods, such as monthly goals, weekly goals, even daily goals.
Then, when teachers prepare the summative assessment, they
can make sure all the content that appears in the assessment
had been taught already. Teachers can separate the small
goals into different learning units. They can give students pre-
assessment in VR (Quizlet and Kahoot, because for the CAL
students, most of the content are words and sentences.) on
every unit to find out the difficulties. After the pre-assessment,
the teachers can use the RTI method to separate students
into different groups. The teachers can give differentiated
instructions according to the pre-assessment results. They can
set up different goals for students in different tiers, give
different instructions, and design appropriate VR activities
for different students. They can summarize and review the
semester goal at the end of the semester. They can finalize
the summative assessment according to the students’ academic
performance in different tires and the pre-assessment results.
In addition, they can give students the summative assessment
containing the whole semester goal which aligns with the pre-
assessment as well.
Information from the Pre-assessment Data. Here, we
address the question on how can the data that teachers gather
from pre-assessment inform instruction and grouping practices
in the VR classroom as well as how to use this data to make the
teaching plan. Teachers will delete the objectives students al-
ready learned based on the pre-assessment data. Teachers will
focus more on the objectives students have common difficulties
with during the VR class activities. For the students who have
their own strengths, but show some difficulties, teachers will
differentiate when implementing activities. Teachers will use
the pre-assessment data to group the students according to
the different learning activities through the VR technologies.
Teachers will mix students with different levels when teachers
want them to help each other through VR communications.
Besides, when the teachers want to make the activity meet
each level of students’ needs, they will use a homogeneous
group of students. Collecting the pre-assessment data lets
teachers know exactly where each student stands compared
to their classmates and peers nationwide. So, teachers can
make different groups of students and give them differentiated
instructions. For example, if they have similar interests, they
will be grouped into one group when teachers have different
topics in the class, but towards the same teaching objectives.
When teachers want the students from different groups to
help each other, they will group students in a heterogeneous
way to mix students belonging to different levels into one
group. With the data of the pre-assessments, teachers can
use the it to develop individual academic learning goals with
students. Going beyond the individual student level, teachers
will collaborate with other teachers in the school and adjust the
school-wide goal. For example, the pre-assessment data can be
used when developing Chinese teaching VR apps. Teachers
will delete the learning objectives of the words and skills
all students already have based on the pre-assessment. The
teachers will make a record about the pre-assessment for other
teachers’ reference. If teachers feel a learning goal should be
moved from the VR classes, they will suggest making some
changes to the VR teaching package.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we present several thorough case study plans
for welcoming the digital transformation from traditional ed-
ucation towards VR education. We first discuss the important

DIGITAL 2021 : Advances on Societal Digital Transformation
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021. ISBN: 978-1-61208-927-0
43
facts about the teaching strategies in VR by addressing four
factors in VR language education: (1) Critical Thinking,
(2) Group Work, and (3) Literacy skills. Then, we propose
three detailed case study plans for elementary school classes
teaching Chinese as a second language in virtual reality.
These case study plans include (1) VR Classroom Activities,
(2) A Full VR Lesson Design, and (3) A Multi-Cultural
Project. In the end, we illustrate the diagnostic assessments
for differentiation of students in VR class. As for the VR
classroom activities plans, we propose two different in-class
activities: (1) student presentations in VR and (2) learning
new vocabulary and sentences in VR. In the full VR lesson
design, teachers will emphasize students’ skills in reading
using Pin Yin, students’ skills in writing with VR by dictating
the Chinese characters and students’ understanding of basic,
simple language materials closely related to their personal lives
and everyday situations. In the multicultural project, students
will learn about China’s ethnic cultures and special cultural
practices through VR Google Earth App and learn to speak
Chinese as a second language at the same time. In future
work, we will extend our proposal into a real VR teaching
application package and conduct a large-scale user study
to apply such teaching plans to elementary schools’ digital
education. We believe our proposal and follow-up works will
become stepping stones to open a new age of digital education
through virtual reality.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Roussou, “Learning by doing and learning through play: an explo-
ration of interactivity in virtual environments for children,” Computers 
in Entertainment (CIE), vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 10–10, 2004.
[2] Y.-C. Huang and S. R. Han, “An immersive virtual reality museum 
via second life,” in International Conference on Human-Computer 
Interaction. Springer, 2014, pp. 579–584.
[3] P. J. Standen and D. J. Brown, “Virtual reality in the rehabilitation of 
people with intellectual disabilities,” Cyberpsychology & behavior, vol. 8, 
no. 3, pp. 272–282, 2005.
[10] D. Griol, J. M. Molina, and Z. Callejas, “An approach to develop
intelligent learning environments by means of immersive virtual worlds,” 
Journal of Ambient Intelligence and Smart Environments, vol. 6, no. 2, 
pp. 237–255, 2014.
[3]
[4] S. Matsentidou and C. Poullis, “Immersive visualizations in a vr cave 
environment for the training and enhancement of social skills for 
children with autism,” in 2014 International Conference on Computer 
Vision Theory and Applications (VISAPP), vol. 3. 
IEEE, 2014, pp. 
230–236.
[5] R. D. Webster, “Corrosion prevention and control training in an immer-
sive virtual learning environment,” in CORROSION 2014. 
OnePetro,
2014.
[6] B. Chang, L. Sheldon, M. Si, and A. Hand, “Foreign language learning in
immersive virtual environments,” in The Engineering Reality of 
Virtual Reality 2012, vol. 8289. International Society for Optics and 
Photonics, 2012, p. 828902.
[7] T. Bastiaens, L. Wood, and T. Reiners, “New landscapes and new 
eyes: The role of virtual world design for supply chain education,” 
Ubiquitous Learning, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 37–49, 2014.
[8] F. P. Rahimian, T. Arciszewski, and J. S. Goulding, “Successful educa-
tion for aec professionals: case study of applying immersive game-like 
virtual reality interfaces,” Visualization in Engineering, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 
1–12, 2014.
[9] N. Ali, S. Ullah, A. Alam, and J. Rafique, “3d interactive virtual chem-
istry laboratory for simulation of high school experiments,” Proceedings 
of EURASIA GRAPHICS, pp. 1–6, 2014.
[11] S. Braun and C. Slater, “Populating a 3d virtual learning environment
for interpreting students with bilingual dialogues to support situated
learning in an institutional context,” The Interpreter and Translator
Trainer, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 469–485, 2014.
[12] N. F. Kleven, “Virtual university hospital as an arena for medical
training and health education,” Master’s thesis, Institutt for datateknikk
og informasjonsvitenskap, 2014.
[13] S. De Ribaupierre, B. Kapralos, F. Haji, E. Stroulia, A. Dubrowski, and
R. Eagleson, “Healthcare training enhancement through virtual reality
and serious games,” in Virtual, augmented reality and serious games for
healthcare 1.
Springer, 2014, pp. 9–27.
[14] M. Roussou, “Examining young learners’ activity within interactive vir-
tual environments,” in Proceedings of the 2004 conference on Interaction
design and children: building a community, 2004, pp. 167–168.
[15] J. Detlefsen, “The cosmic perspective: Teaching middle-school children
astronomy using ego-centric virtual reality,” Unpublished master’s the-
sis). Aalborg University, Medialogy, Aalborg, 2014.
[16] E. Izatt, K. Scholberg, and R. Kopper, “Neutrino-kave: An immersive
visualization and fitting tool for neutrino physics education,” in 2014
IEEE virtual reality (VR).
IEEE, 2014, pp. 83–84.

