Smart Contracts for Privacy-Preserving Identity Management: Ethics, Regulatory 
and Technical Challenges 
Carmela Occhipinti  
R&D Department  
CyberEthics Lab. 
Rome, Italy 
email: 
c.occhipinti@cyberethicslab.com
Tetiana Vasylieva 
R&D Department  
CyberEthics Lab. 
Rome, Italy 
email: 
t.vasylieva@cyberethicslab.com
Luigi Briguglio 
R&D Department  
CyberEthics Lab. 
Rome, Italy 
email: 
l.briguglio@cyberethicslab.com
Alessio Bianchini 
R&D Department  
CyberEthics Lab. 
Rome, Italy 
email: a.bianchini@cyberethicslab.com 
Sayonara Crestani 
R&D Department  
CyberEthics Lab. 
Rome, Italy 
email: s.crestani@cyberethicslab.com
Abstract— Access to online data and service is a fundamental 
human right recognized by the United Nations. The current 
digital era, characterized by a continuously evolving network 
infrastructure which allows broadband and ubiquitous 
communication, can ensure this fundamental right to a broader 
number of citizens. However, if not properly managed, this 
fundamental right may be threatened by cyber threats and 
related identity frauds. For this reason, Identity Management 
(IdM) systems lay the foundation to enable this fundamental 
right. In the context of the IMPULSE project, the research team 
is adopting an “ethics-by-conception” approach to embed ethics, 
regulatory, and technical perspectives into the development 
process of the IdM system. This paper describes the ethics and 
regulatory 
framework 
which 
identifies 
principles 
and 
regulations to be applied during the development of an IdM 
system and, based on this framework, the research team 
identifies potential concerns and measures. This approach 
allows to design, implement and validate an IdM by integrating 
blockchain technology and smart contracts mechanism. 
Moreover, this IdM proposes an iconic representation to 
simplify the comprehension of policies in the informed consent 
and, therefore, it empowers users to take better decisions on 
access and management of their own personal data.   
Keywords 
— 
Privacy-Preserving 
Technology; 
Identity 
Management; Ethics and Regulatory Framework; Smart 
Contract; Blockchain; Regulation; GDPR; eIDAS. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Internet access is recognised as a human fundamental right 
by the United Nations [1] and the implementation of 
broadband connection networks, including wireless and 
mobile technologies, is enabling this fundamental right for a 
continuously growing global population. Certainly, Internet 
access and online activities have become integral to human 
life for millions of citizens. 
Reliable Identity Management (IdM) and verification are 
crucial for various online services, ranging from blog and 
social media login to online banking and public administration 
services. Therefore, even though online IdM enables 
ubiquitous access to data and services to a broader number of 
users, however, online identity fraud and cyber threats pose 
significant risks, affecting millions of users and making their 
identities vulnerable to breaches. 
Privacy concerns also arise due to the exchange of 
personal information and for this reason, when accessing 
online services, users have to deal with the provision of grant 
to manage their own personal data (i.e., informed consent), in 
compliance with the General Data Protection Regulation 
(GDPR) [2]. Therefore, in theory, for each service, users have 
to manage consents during their lifecycle. In practice, user 
often grant consent to personal data management and forget 
which data they are making available and to whom.   
In response to these risks, threats and concerns, the 
European Commission, as well as academics, corporations, 
and public opinion are actively focusing on resolving the 
issues of IdM. 
In this scenario, the IMPULSE project [3] and its 
multidisciplinary team are focusing on the multidimensional 
and user-centric analysis of the transformative impact of two 
disruptive technologies (i.e., blockchain and artificial 
intelligence) on electronic IDentities (eID) for the 
improvement of digital public services.  
This paper aims at presenting an IdM, based on blockchain 
and smart contracts, and its impacts from ethics, regulatory 
and technical perspectives. The paper is structured in four 
main sections representing the steps during the research 
process. After the introduction, Section 2 deals with the 
analysis of “Identity Management” and related ethics and 
regulatory framework. This section is relevant to better 
comprehend the underlying framework composed by ethics 
principles and regulations (i.e., General Data Protection 
Regulation – GDPR, electronic Identification, Authentication 
and Trust Services - eIDAS) which impact IdM. This 
framework establishes “privacy-preserving” requirements and 
guidelines to be embedded into the development process and 
outputs. Section 3 describes the “Design Approach” which is 
built on top of the framework and benefits from a 
decentralisation model enabled by distributed ledgers (i.e., 
blockchain technology) and the smart contracts. This section 
provides an analysis from the legal perspective and describes 
the 
innovative 
approach 
proposed 
for 
an 
easier 
comprehension and management of informed consents, which 
are fundamental elements to legally binding data access to 
personal data according to the GDPR. Finally, Section 4 
provides conclusions on the work in progress of the 
IMPULSE project and the next steps. 
II. IDENTITY MANAGEMENT 
A. Literature Review 
In literature, there are multiple definitions of Identity 
Management, each stressing one or more facets of IdM.  
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-115-2
DIGITAL 2023 : Advances on Societal Digital Transformation - 2023

“Identity Management system provides the tools for 
managing all partial identities of an individual in digital world. 
A partial identity may or may not uniquely identify an 
individual.” [4] 
“Identity Management is a set of functions and 
capabilities, for administration, management, maintenance, 
discovery, information exchange, policy enforcement and 
authentication. This is used to ensure identity information and 
security. It provides tools for managing individual identities in 
a digital environment.” [5] 
“Identity Management seeks to solve the problem of 
remembering different user names and passwords for 
accessing organizations. It includes fair and lawful processing, 
purpose specification, data participation and control, 
disclosure and information security.” [6] 
“Identity Management systems are used to manage user 
identities across multiple systems and providing a way to user 
access in the organization. This is done for the whole life cycle 
of a user in the organization by single sign-on and keeping a 
check on user’s credentials.” [7] 
These definitions are collectively summarising various 
aspects of IdM. 
In order to better understand the concept of IdM, it is 
necessary to turn to its main component, namely the concept 
of identity. Examining it at the philosophical and legal levels 
becomes clear its complex nature. Throughout history, 
identity has been deeply connected to state control over 
individuals and people’s rights and the construction of the self 
through a set of relational structures. 
A unique identity is needed to recognise individuals' rights 
and responsibilities. However, being associated with a 
specific identity can grant privileges or lead to exclusion and 
discrimination. Additionally, the question arises whether 
identity can remain constant as a person evolves and whether 
individuals have the right to an identity that aligns with their 
self-perception. 
Manders-Huits [8] points out the risk of reducing an 
individual's identity to a simplified "administrative" notion of 
it, which fails to capture its true complexity. Ishmahev and 
Stokkink [9] emphasise the difficulty of overcoming the 
complexities of identity in a workable definition that can serve 
as the ethical foundation for an identity management system, 
whether digital or otherwise. 
Attempts to simplify the approach to "identity" inevitably 
impact key moral aspects like autonomy, self-determination 
and self-identification (Manders-Huits and Hoven) [10]. 
Ishmahev and Stokkink's analysis reveals a tension between 
an approach to identity management focused on the individual 
and his/her rights and the society. 
Ishmahev and Stokkink point to the tension between 
individual 
rights 
and 
societal 
interests 
in 
Identity 
Management, using the example of the Chinese "Social Credit 
System” (SCS) where social scoring aims to identify and 
isolate "bad elements," potentially favouring society over 
individual rights and well-being. 
The above is true of any Identity Management System but 
Zwitter et al. [11] highlight the new set of problems brought 
by Digital Identity, including the fragmentation of identity. In 
the digital space, individuals possess multiple Digital 
Identities issued by different providers, each with distinct 
attributes. This raises the question of whether we should strive 
for a single persistent identity and impose it. 
Digital identity has become a crucial infrastructure service 
with different rules and obligations for accessing various 
services. It is not neutral in its shaping and management, as 
each provider sets its own rules, leading to fragmentation.  
This raises ethical considerations about how much an 
individual can be considered accountable over his/her action, 
and how much anonymity and freedom can be favoured over 
public responsibility and liability. Lessig [12] emphasises that 
these choices are political and moral decisions when designing 
network capabilities and participation rules.  
There are three primary models of Identity Management: 
Centralised, Federated, and Decentralised. The IMPULSE 
solution aligns with the Decentralised model, following the 
Self-Sovereign Identity (SSI) model and is based on 
Blockchain (Blockchain-Based Identity Management System 
(B-Based IdM)). It is important to remark that the SSI model 
allows the users to fully control their own data, satisfying a 
fundamental right defined in the GDPR regulation [2], and for 
this reason the European Commission selected the SSI model 
to for its European Digital Wallet initiative.  
B. Ethics and Regulatory Framework 
Within the EU framework, there is no specific regulation 
for B-Based IdM, but the eIDAS regulation (910/2014) [13] 
addresses Identity Management in general. While only one 
standard directly focuses on B-Based IdM, other standards 
cover general IdM or distributed ledgers. Consequently, there 
is an urgent need for EU regulation and standardisation for B-
Based IdM Systems. In terms of relevant regulation law 
framework, the GDPR's [2] applicability to IdM systems 
based on Blockchain is a subject of debate. Limited scientific 
literature systematically addresses this issue, necessitating 
further understanding. Many scholars have identified several 
challenges to blockchain's GDPR compliance. Among them 
are: 
The immutability of Blockchain poses difficulties in 
fulfilling the "right to erasure" (Article 17 [2]) and the "right 
of rectification" (Article 16 [2]) since blocks cannot be deleted 
or modified without compromising the chain's integrity. 
Similarly, “withdrawing consent” (Article 7 [2]) and “defining 
data controllers” (Article 4 [2]) become complex due to 
Blockchain's replication and peer-to-peer nature. 
Additionally, the classification of hashed identifiers on the 
Blockchain as anonymised or pseudonymised data raises 
questions. While some argue that hashed personal data is 
pseudonymised, others consider it personal data subject to 
GDPR. The issue of pseudonymity or anonymity of hashing 
remains unresolved, creating a grey area. 
Moreover, Self-Sovereign IdM, Kondova & Erbguth [14] 
state that:  
“Self-Sovereign Identity (SSI) involves personal data. A 
detailed analysis of the system used and the use-case is 
required to determine what data components of the SSI 
constitute personal data, how the GDPR applies and who is 
considered to be a controller and what justifications exist. 
When storing some data on an immutable blockchain, it has to 
be ensured, that either the data stored on a blockchain will not 
or no longer constitute personal data, that the data subject is 
considered to be the controller, that the household exemption 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-115-2
DIGITAL 2023 : Advances on Societal Digital Transformation - 2023

applies or a permanent justification for continuous storage on 
the blockchain exists. In many cases, according to Art. 35 
GDPR [2], a data protection impact analysis (DPIA) will be 
required.” 
Concerning 
eIDAS 
(electronic 
Identification, 
Authentication and Trust Services) Regulation, it aims to 
establish trustable and reliable Digital Identities, replacing 
physical devices like smart cards with other authentication 
methods. eIDAS provides a common framework in Europe for 
e-signature and e-identity authentication. The Regulation 
distinguishes 
three 
assurance 
levels 
for 
electronic 
identification means, varying based on the degree of 
confidence in asserted identities.  
Although the literature on Blockchain's compliance with 
e-IDAS is limited, integrating Blockchain into existing eIDAS 
standards does not seem contradictory. Blockchain can 
enhance security and enable the signing of various object 
types. Immutability remains a significant concern, also in the 
case of digital seals and signatures, but it does not seem to go 
against any part of eIDAS. Further analysis is needed to ensure 
compliance between B-Based IdM systems and eIDAS 
regulation, considering the crucial role of digital signatures 
and certificates in identity management. 
Aiming to deliver a secure and trusted digital identity for 
all EU citizens, The European Commission (EC) on 3 June 
2021 proposed a framework for a European Digital Identity, 
which builds on the revision of the current eIDAS Regulation. 
The EU Proposal [15], which is commonly named eIDAS 2, 
is currently under trilogue negotiations.  
Among many amendments and changes to eIDAS, the 
Proposal has introduced a novel element, European Digital 
Identity (EUDI) Wallet which will be issued by every Member 
State and will be available to all EU citizens, residents, and 
businesses in the EU. The Wallet promotes social inclusion 
and fundamental rights, complying with the Charter of 
Fundamental Rights of the European Union. It emphasises 
personal data protection, security, reduced risk of ID theft, 
equality, solidarity, inclusion, engagement, freedom of 
movement, and residence. The EUDI Wallet aligns with the 
aims of the European Union, particularly regarding the 
protection and promotion of individual rights, personal data, 
access to services, and freedom of movement. Another 
innovative aspect presented by the European Commission in 
the Proposal concerns Article 45 (Section 11) regarding 
Electronic Ledgers which are effective against cyberattacks 
and they are present in Blockchain and Distributed Ledger 
Technologies (DLT). However, the European Parliament's 
vote on the electronic identification Regulation removed 
electronic ledgers as trust services, potentially impacting 
blockchain companies' business opportunities in providing e-
identity solutions. The European DIGITAL SME Alliance, 
together with major IT and Blockchain associations, has sent 
a letter [16] to the members of the European Parliament’s 
ITRE Committee, expressing concerns and calling for 
reinstating the provisions to ensure a future-proof eIDAS 2 
Regulation 
supporting 
innovation 
and 
economic 
development. 
III. DESIGN APPROACH 
The IMPULSE project design approach to IdM is built on 
top of the established ethics and regulatory framework. This 
approach aims at maximising benefits from decentralisation 
model enabled by distributed ledgers taking into consideration 
ethics guidelines and principles, regulatory constraints, and 
the impact of blockchain for electronic IDentities (eIDs) in 
public services from diverse standpoints, including legal, 
ethical, socio-economic and socio-political, technical and 
operational. 
Indeed, decentralised model of the blockchain guarantees:  
i) 
Tamper-resistance and data integrity - by design, 
the blockchain is a permanent and immutable storage of data 
blocks, therefore data added on the ledger cannot be 
intentionally or accidentally changed, altered or deleted by 
anyone. This maintains data integrity.   
ii) 
Data transparency and auditability - data in the 
blockchain can be traced and verified by everyone in the 
network belonging to the blockchain, as well as data blocks 
constitute themselves an auditable trail of data.  
iii) Data protection - the use of cryptography to process 
and store data in the blockchain protects from unauthorised 
accesses. 
iv) 
Data sharing and availability – each node of the 
distributed network replicates and shares a copy of data. This 
network of nodes ensures high availability infrastructure. 
These benefits lay the foundation for an effective IdM 
system [17].  
Moreover, to ensure compliance with the ethics and 
regulatory framework, IMPULSE enables data subjects to full 
control sharing of and access to their own personal data 
through informed consent. This means that the IMPULSE 
system has to provide a “Consent Management” feature 
allowing a user to consult policies, grant consents, show the 
history of provided consents, and modify (when feasible) 
provided consents. Moreover, by considering access to public 
services, the IMPULSE system has to provide a “Policy 
Management” feature allowing a public administration (PA) 
to create policies, modify existing policies and retrieve the 
status of the users’ granted consents. These two fundamental 
features derive from the consent mechanism defined in the 
GDPR regulation and for this reason the service is called 
GDPR Service. The use case diagram representing 
interactions among user, PA and GDPR Service is shown in 
Figure 1. 
The GDPR Service is implemented by combining the 
usage of blockchain and smart contracts.  
For the sake of clarity, usually, informed consents are too 
complicated to be fully interpreted and managed by users. For 
 
Figure 1. IMPULSE GDPR Service - use case diagram. 
 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-115-2
DIGITAL 2023 : Advances on Societal Digital Transformation - 2023

this reason, IMPULSE aims at simplifying this mechanism 
through the implementation of a more understandable and 
intuitive instance of informed consents, including a set of 
user-friendly meaningful icons. These icons allow user to 
understand what kind of personal data is going to be shared in 
a quick and simple way. 
A. Smart Contracts: Legal Perspectives 
The nature of a smart contract is subject to numerous 
conflicting viewpoints. 
Legally, a "smart contract" refers to a contract represented 
and executed by software. Programmers instead view smart 
contracts as algorithmic code that performs tasks when certain 
conditions are met, often on a distributed ledger. 
Nick Szabo was the first who proposed the concept of a 
smart contract in the late 1990s, defining it as a "computerised 
transaction protocol that executes the terms of a contract” 
[18]. Although not particularly innovative, Szabo argues that 
this idea distinguishes smart contracts by being purely digital 
and involving complex calculations, multipart deals, rights 
transfers, and encryption. It is crucial to acknowledge that a 
smart contract is not equivalent to a legal contract. In fact, it 
is often claimed that the term "smart contract" is misleading 
since, in many cases, smart contracts are neither intelligent nor 
contracts. Scholars aligned with the programmer's viewpoint 
contend that smart contracts do not meet the legal definition 
of contracts. Geiregat, instead, describes smart contracts as 
hardware or software “that initiates, controls, and/or 
documents legally relevant acts, depending on predetermined 
and digitally proven events, and by means of which legally 
binding contracts may be concluded, depending on the 
circumstances” [19]. 
Regarding the notion of smart contracts and their legal 
nature, there are two exact antipodes of opinion in the 
scientific community. Each perspective offers different 
solutions to the scientific challenge of establishing the legal 
force and effect of smart contracts. From the programmer's 
standpoint, a smart contract is a code designed to perform 
various tasks when specific conditions are satisfied. In 
contrast, another group of scholars supporting both traditional 
and eclectic views see a smart contract as a dual phenomenon 
that encompasses both technical and legal components. These 
two aspects do not merge into a unified whole. 
B. Implementation based on Smart Contracts 
Smart contracts are considered and used since the 
“onboarding” process, i.e., when users grant consent to a third 
party to access a set of predefined data, and applied during the 
“usage” process, i.e., when users can decide to or not to grant 
consent, or when necessary, to modify it according to specific 
needs and conditions. For these processes, users need to view 
and accept terms of usage of a given service and the IdM 
system provides them with a comprehensive view of required 
consents. To manage the informed consents, the IdM system 
defines a Consent Object which can assume two main states: 
• 
Denied: when users want to deny access to their data 
to an entity, that, in the specific case of IMPULSE 
project, is represented by a Public Administration 
Service (PAS); 
• 
Allowed: when users agree to a certain policy that 
enables a PAS to process data according to specific 
rules. 
At the beginning of its lifecycle, a Consent Object is, 
obviously, not yet created. It is created when a user accepts or 
rejects a certain policy presented by the requested entity. 
The Consent Object can change its own state, according to 
one of the following events: i) a user accepts the previously 
rejected policy; ii) a user rejects a previously accepted policy; 
iii) a user revokes the granted consent; iv) a policy change 
occurs; and v) a consent expires over time. 
Development with smart contracts and blockchain 
requires to mind the “immutability” constraint which implies 
the unsuitability to add in the smart contract data model users’ 
identifiers. To prevent this concern, the GDPR service will 
replace users’ identifiers with pseudo-identifiers (pseudo-ids): 
these act as links among users and their consent objects stored 
on the smart contracts.  Pseudo-ids are generated by using 
hash functions which ensure the following characteristics: 
• 
Deterministic: a specific input message returns 
always the same output hash message. This allows 
the GDPR Service to process identifiers from input 
data without managing pseudo-ids;  
• 
Unique: for each input message exists always a 
unique output message. This ensures security against 
brute force attacks and avoid collisions between 
pseudo-ids; 
• 
One-way: hash functions cannot allow to derive the 
input message from the hash output message. This 
ensures that there is no way to directly or indirectly 
identify users and their data. 
The GDPR service plans to make use of secure hash 
functions 
(e.g., 
SHA-256) 
to 
generate 
pseudo-ids. 
Pseudonymization mechanism can be enriched by combining 
other attributes (e.g., consent object data). The following 
schema in Figure 2 shows a possible approach where the 
pseudo-id is generated using as input the concatenation of 
user’s public key, pas id and policy id. 
By using the pseudo-ids, the GDPR Service works as an 
intermediary between personal data storages, which rely on 
traditional databases (such as PostgreSQL – see Figure 3), and 
third-party components, which need access to personal data to 
grant services. 
 
Figure 2. Pseudonymization approach. 
 
 
Figure 3. Component Diagram. 
 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-115-2
DIGITAL 2023 : Advances on Societal Digital Transformation - 2023

This approach ensures compliance with GDPR principles 
such as “right to modification” and “right to erasure”. Indeed, 
smart contracts are used to store transactions (i.e., consents) 
with references to data stored in the traditional database and 
by applying hashing functions. This ensures data integrity and 
auditability. To better clarify the typical use case scenario, it 
is considered the user requesting access to a public 
administration service through an application (e.g., IMPULSE 
app).  
The GDPR Service acts as intermediary between the 
mobile app and the public administration service, managing 
the smart contracts to allow i) user registration and ii) request 
of the user to access. The registration phase allows users to 
read and understand the terms and conditions to use the 
system, and if they agree with the policy in place, they accept 
the consent. Policy acceptance enacts the GDPR Service to 
register metadata of the consent object, generate the pseudo-
identifiers and create the smart contract.  
When users want to access a public administration service, 
the GDPR Service checks the existence and status of the 
consent object, therefore based on this consent verifies its 
validity 
and 
enables/disables 
access 
to 
the 
public 
administration service. In case the consent object is “not 
valid” (e.g., policy expiration, revocation or modification) the 
application will have to show users with policy and perform 
appropriate rectification to the consent by involving the 
GDPR Service.  
All these steps rely on actions performed by users which 
grant/revoke/modify consents based on policies defined with 
the Public Administration. Policies are described in the 
informed consents and therefore these have to be clearly 
understood to take the right decision. 
C. Icons for representing consent information 
To solve the long-standing problem of understanding 
often hard to grasp consent forms, the IMPULSE project 
proposes the use of a visual-based language, based on a 
selected and adapted set of icons from the Italian Data 
Protection Authority (see Figure 4) and integrated in the IdM 
system, with which citizens can make a complete decision 
about their data (e.g., who will have the permission of process 
their data, for which purpose, for how much time) in a fully 
informed, simpler and more comprehensible way. 
This approach strengthens the comprehension of policies 
described in the consent, in compliance with the GDPR rules, 
and it represents a novelty in Identity Management systems. 
This approach empowers users by respecting and 
protecting their fundamental rights (i.e., enabling full control 
of personal data), is used since the onboarding phase of the 
user (i.e., registration) as shown in Figure 5. 
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper described a proposed solution to tackle the 
identified concerns of Identity Management (IdM) taking into 
considerations ethics, regulatory and technical perspectives. 
To achieve this goal, the research team of the IMPULSE 
project has established an “ethics-by-conception” approach 
starting from the identification of ethics principles, guidelines 
and regulation constraints impacting the IdM system. 
Specifically, the IdM is expected to i) be compliant with 
current European regulations (i.e., GDPR and eIDAS); ii) be 
respectful of fundamental human rights (i.e., privacy and 
Internet access); iii) simplify user experience when dealing 
with full control of personal data and informed consents; iv) 
be built by adopting blockchain technology and smart 
contracts mechanisms. 
While the current implementation in the IMPULSE 
project is demonstrating the feasibility and validity of design 
approach, as well as its compliance with the established ethics 
and regulatory framework, the research team is working for 
defining a mobile application (app) which, integrated with the 
GDPR Service, will allow users to full control their own 
personal data and informed consents.  
A preliminary app is currently under development and the 
research team is working for finalizing and validating it.  
The human-centred approach adopted in the IMPULSE 
project demonstrates that the integration of Social Science 
and Humanities (SSH) perspectives into technology 
development improves the comprehension of aspects and 
details that usually might be hidden and overlooked from the 
technical team, due to lack of competences. Therefore, an 
integrated and multidisciplinary team, as the IMPULSE 
project experienced, allows to understand and identify the 
multifaceted aspects belonging to a system to be adopted in 
the society, including inter-alia its impacts, and this 
contributes to identify potential social barriers and adopt 
appropriate countermeasures. 
Adopting this approach since the beginning of the project 
and applying a continuous assessment allows a flawlessly 
development. 
Indeed, 
SSH 
experts 
and 
technology 
developers will be able to identify requirements and 
implement them since the beginning. Assuming that a single 
assessment will be able to ensure compliance with ethics and 
regulatory frameworks is practically unreasonable: new 
 
Figure 4. Set of icons to represent consent information. 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Two phases of the user’ registration. 
  
 
 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-115-2
DIGITAL 2023 : Advances on Societal Digital Transformation - 2023

requirements will come up during the assessment, and the 
implemented system will risk the regulatory compliance, the 
acceptance from citizens and its business objectives. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is part of the IMPULSE project that has received 
funding from the European Union's Horizon 2020 research 
and innovation programme under Grant Agreement No. 
101004459. 
REFERENCES 
[1] United Nations, "The promotion, protection and enjoyment of 
human rights on the Internet," July 2021. [Online] [Retrieved: 
August, 
2023]. 
Available: 
https://documents-dds-
ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/LTD/G21/173/56/PDF/G2117356.pdf  
[2] European Parliament and the Council, “The Regulation (EU) 
2016/679 on on the protection of natural persons with regard to 
the processing of personal data and on the free movement of 
such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data 
Protection Regulation),” [Online] [Retrieved: August, 2023]. 
Available: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2016/679/oj.   
[3] IMPULSE Project website, [Online] [Retrieved: August, 
2023]. Available: https://www.impulse-h2020.eu/. 
[4] S. Clauß and M. Köhntopp, "Identity management and its 
support of multilateral security," Computer Networks, vol. 37, 
no. 2, pp. 205-219, 2001.  
[5] D. Chadwick, "Federated Identity Management," Foundations 
of Security Analysis and Design, Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science, vol. 5705, pp. 96-120, 2009.  
[6] T. Olsen and T. Mahler, "Identity Management and Data 
Protection Law: Risk, Responsibility and Compliance," Circles 
of Trust. Computer Law & Security Report, vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 
342-351, 2007.  
[7] K. Tracy, "Identity management systems," IEEE Potentials, 
vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 34-37, 2008.  
[8] N. Manders-Huits, "Practical versus moral identities in identity 
management," Ethics and Information Technology, vol. 12, p. 
43–55, 2010.  
[9] S. Q. Ishmaev Georgy, "Identity Management Systems: 
Singular Identities and Multiple Moral Issues, Frontiers in 
Blockchain," vol. 3, 2020. [Online] [Retrieved: August, 2023]. 
Available: https://doi.org/10.3389/fbloc.2020.00015  
[10] N. Manders-Huits and J. van der Hoven, "The Need for a 
Value-Sensitive Design of Communication Infrastructures," 
Evaluating New Technologies. The International Library of 
Ethics, Law and Technology, vol. 3, pp. 51-60, 2009.  
[11] A. Zwitter, O.J. Gstrein, and E. Yap, "Digital Identity and the 
Blockchain: Universal Identity Management and the Concept 
of the ‘Self-Sovereign’ Individual," 28 May 2020.  
[12] L. Lessig, "Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace, Version 2.0," 
2006. ISBN 978-0465039142. 
[13] European Parliament and the Council, "The Regulation (EU) 
No 910/2014 on electronic identification and trust services for 
electronic transactions in the internal market and repealing 
Directive 1999/93/EC," [Online] [Retrieved: August, 2023]. 
Available: 
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32014R0910. 
[14] G. Kondova and J. Erbguth, “Self-Sovereign Identity on Public 
Blockchains and the GDPR”. Proceedings of ACM SAC 
Conference, Brno, Czech Republic, March 30- April 3, 2020 
(SAC’20), 
pp. 
342 
– 
345, 
2020. 
DOI: 
10.1145/3341105.3374066. 
[15] The Commission of the European Union, "Proposal for a 
Regulation amending Regulation (EU) No 910/2014 as regards 
establishing a framework for a European Digital Identity," 
[Online] [Retrieved: August, 2023]. Available: https://eur-
lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A52021PC0281. 
[16] "Open Letter for the preservation of the electronic ledger’s 
provisions in eIDAS 2," [Online] [Retrieved: August, 2023]. 
Available: 
https://inatba.org/news/savesection11-eidas2-
trusted-electronic-ledgers-open-letter/. 
[17] D. Augot, H. Chabanne, T. Chenevier, and W. George, "A user-
centric system for verified identities on the bitcoin blockchain," 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 10436 LNCS, p. 390–
407, 2017.  
[18] N. Szabo, "Smart Contracts: Building Blocks for Digital 
Markets," 1996. 
[19] S. Geiregat, "Cryptocurrencies Are (Smart) Contracts,” 
Computer Law & Security Review, vol. 34, issue 5, pp. 1144-
1149, 2018. ISSN  0267-3649.
 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-115-2
DIGITAL 2023 : Advances on Societal Digital Transformation - 2023

