Information Security Policy Awareness Beliefs versus Reality in Electronic Identity  
Systems 
A Case Study of the Ghanaian National Identity System 
 
Salim Awudu, Dr Sotirios Terzis 
Department of Computer and Information Sciences, University of Strathclyde, 
Glasgow, United Kingdom 
{salim.awudu, sotirios.terzis}@strath.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract— Electronic Identity Systems (EIS) have become a 
tool for economic, social, and political development in several 
countries. However, certain concerns by governments or their 
citizens have impeded wider adoption. These concerns are about 
EIS trustworthiness, privacy, and security. An effective Infor-
mation Security Policy (ISP) can be key in addressing these con-
cerns provided staff are aware and understand it provisions. A 
lot of work has been done on general ISP awareness in organi-
zations, but little attention has been given to ISP awareness in 
electronic identity systems. Moreover, people's awareness of 
these policies in organizations is typically measured with 
instruments that focus on staff beliefs about their 
knowledge and understanding of ISP provisions rather 
than their actual understanding and their ability to trans-
late ISP provision into protective behaviors. Staff belief is 
generally about how staff ISP awareness is typically 
measured while real awareness is about the prescribed 
behaviors of the staff. Using the Ghanaian National Identifi-
cation Authority (NIA) as a case study, this paper examines the 
relationship between staff beliefs about ISP awareness and the 
reality of knowing and understanding the prescribed behaviors. 
A questionnaire study was conducted with scales from litera-
ture, which shows that NIA staff beliefs match the reality, de-
spite the lack of a formal ISP and staff training. The study also 
indicates that a formal ISP and training can enhance staff un-
derstanding and confidence in their knowledge. It also shows 
that for EIS it is important that their ISP considers the organi-
zational context.  
Keywords: electronic identity systems; trustworthiness; infor-
mation security policy (ISP) awareness; ISP common violations 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Several countries and organizations depend on Electronic 
Identity Systems (EIS) to identify, authenticate, and verify 
their citizens and customers. These systems process identity 
data about individuals to create value for organizations, busi-
nesses and individuals through verified identities [17]. Alt-
hough these systems are used to achieve economic, social, 
and political purposes, there are increasing concerns about 
the security, privacy, and trustworthiness of these systems 
and the collected personal data [5]. According to Flowerday 
and Tuyikeze [3] “one important mechanism for protecting 
organizations’ assets is the formulation and implementation 
of an effective ISP”. Staff awareness of ISP provisions and 
their actual knowledge and understanding of them are key for 
its effectiveness, especially so for EIS that manage personal 
data. Effective protection of the sensitive data managed by 
EIS relies on knowing and understanding what protective be-
haviors are prescribe by the EIS ISP. However, research to 
date tends to measure ISP awareness using instruments that 
measure staff beliefs about their knowledge and understand-
ing. This introduces a risk for EIS in that staff beliefs may not 
match their actual understanding of the protective behaviors 
prescribed. Prescribed behaviors are actions or inactions that 
are specified in the ISPs of organizations.  So, for EIS it is 
essential to ensure that staff beliefs about ISP awareness 
match their knowledge and understanding in the ISP. 
This paper investigates the relationship between staff be-
lief of ISP awareness and the reality of their knowledge and 
understanding using the Ghanaian NIA as a case study. A 
questionnaire-based study was conducted using scales from 
literature for ISP awareness and understanding of common 
ISP violations for non-managerial staff of the NIA. The study 
finds that despite the particular NIA setting, where there is no 
formal ISP and no training provided, staff do not only believe 
that they know and understand the provisions of the NIA ISP 
but can identify common ISP violations as violations of NIA 
ISP. The study also shows that there is some room for im-
provement in staff understanding and confidence through ISP 
formalization and training. The study also indicates that, for 
the ISP of EIS, it is important to also consider the organiza-
tional context. Additional studies following alternative re-
search approaches can be used to confirm these findings, 
while further studies in other EIS organizations can help gen-
eralize them. 
We begin the paper with related work on EIS and ISPs, in 
II before we describe our methodology in III, and present our 
analysis and findings in IV, followed by a discussion in V, 
and finally conclude the paper with the identification, and di-
rections for future work in VI. 
II. RELATED WORK 
EIS are systems that are built to collect, process, store and 
use personal data or information about individuals in a de-
fined area or territory for the purpose of planning or provid-
ing services to the people both within the defined territory 
and beyond [9]. EIS can also be seen as “system[s] that in-
volve the collection of information or attributes associated 
with a specific entity” [15]. Several countries, including 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-014-8
DIGITAL 2022 : Advances on Societal Digital Transformation - 2022

Ghana, have fully operationalized an electronic identity sys-
tem.  
Despite the potentially immense benefits of EIS, several 
people have reservations about the potential negative effects 
they can cause. For instance,  Lyon and Bennett note that 
“once cards are mandatory, then they may be used to single 
out or even to harass visible minorities and those with alter-
native lifestyles” [7]. Further concerns are about Privacy, 
Trustworthiness, Confidentiality, Integrity, and Availability 
[10], especially as EIS present an appealing target for attack-
ers because of data that they collect, store, and manage. So, 
information security assurance is essential for EIS. 
According to Von Solms [14], information security (IS) 
is largely multi-dimensional, and organizations must con-
sider all aspects to ensure the security or protection of their 
information assets and environment. This “includes the phys-
ical security of buildings, fire protection, software and hard-
ware, personnel policies and financial audit and control” [16]. 
Furnell et al. [4] pointed out that employee attitudes and lack 
of security awareness are the most notable contributors to se-
curity incidents. To prevent such incidents, Johnson [6] iden-
tified the need for organizations to have an information pol-
icy that reflects local information security philosophy and 
commitments. According to Tryfonas et al. [12] and Canavan 
[2] an ISP is a set of rules or requirements that are related to 
information security and enacted by an organization to be ad-
hered to by all, to protect the confidentiality, integrity and 
availability of information and other valuable resources from 
security incidents. Organizations need to have an ISP and en-
sure staff are aware and comply with it, because Sipponen 
and Vance [11] have shown that violations of security poli-
cies occur through user’s negligence or ignorance of the ISP 
provisions. Staff understanding and appreciation of ISP pro-
visions is key. 
Although a lot of work has been on ISP awareness, e.g. 
[1, 11], in general, there has been little attention to ISP aware-
ness in EIS. Moreover, instruments to measure ISP aware-
ness, like the one proposed in [1], tend to focus on the beliefs 
of staff about their ISP knowledge and understanding without 
any attempts to investigate whether these beliefs reflect ac-
tual knowledge and understanding of the protective behaviors 
prescribed by the ISP. 
In this context, for any organization it is important to in-
vestigate whether staff beliefs about their awareness of ISP 
provisions match their actual knowledge and understanding. 
This is especially the case for EIS where information security 
is a necessity. 
III. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
To investigate the relationship between beliefs about 
awareness and actual knowledge and understanding of ISP 
provisions in the context of EIS, we pose the following re-
search questions: 1) Do EIS staff believe they are aware of 
the rules, regulations and responsibilities prescribed by the 
ISP of their organization? and 2) Do EIS staff appreciate key 
provisions of their organization’s ISP? 
To explore these questions, we focused our investigation 
on the Ghanaian National Identification Authority. Despite 
this, we believe that other countries with similar digitized EIS 
like Malaysian, Malawian, Nigeria, among others could po-
tentially associate with the findings of this research work. 
A. The NIA  
The NIA was established in 2003 with the mandate to is-
sue national ID cards to both citizens and residents as well as 
to manage the National Identification System (NIS). The 
Ghanaian Identification System is a digitized one where per-
sonal data of citizens and residents are collected and stored. 
The applicants are issued with a smart card to enable them to 
prove their identity when accessing basic services like mobile 
phone Subscriber Identity Module (SIM) card registration 
and banking services [8]. Currently, the NIA is issuing bio-
metric identity cards throughout the country. While this is on-
going, telecommunication companies and banking institu-
tions are required by law to reregister all customers by de-
manding the national ID card as proof of identity. 
Protecting collected citizens data is seen as an essential 
part of the NIA mission. So, at the outset the organization 
established an ISP specifying relevant requirements for its 
staff and introduced training for them. Over time, some up-
dates to the ISP were deemed necessary and a revision was 
carried out. However, the revised ISP has not been formally 
approved and there is currently no information security train-
ing provided to staff. This situation is concerning for the se-
curity of citizens’ and residents’ data making the NIA an in-
teresting case study to investigate its staff perceptions and the 
reality of its ISP awareness. 
B. Study structure and Procedures 
We designed a questionnaire to solicit the views of NIA 
staff about their awareness of the ISP provisions and to com-
pare them against their understanding of what constitute typ-
ical policy violations. This allowed us to assess whether staff 
beliefs about their knowledge translate into actual 
knowledge. 
More specifically, the questionnaire comprised two 
scales, one for ISP awareness consisting of 3 questions and 
adopted from Bulgurcu et al. [1], and one about common ISP 
violations with 9 questions adopted from Siponen and Vance 
[11]. Both scales use a Likert scale from Strongly agree to 
Strongly disagree. However, although we preserved the ac-
tual questions, we adapted them to a uniform 7-point Likert 
scale, which conforms to Stevens’s measurement framework 
where Likert scale type items are summed or averaged and 
presented horizontally [13]. 
In additions to the two scales, we also solicited demo-
graphic data from participants (Gender, Age range, Depart-
ment or Unit, Years of work, Educational background, and 
Type of employment) to check whether the participants form 
a representative sample of the organization’s employee pop-
ulation as captured in NIA Human Resource Data. 
C. Study Procedures 
Prior to the study, ethics approval was obtained from our 
department’s Ethics Committee. We also obtained approval 
from the NIA to engage the staff. 
We conducted a pilot study with 10 research students at 
our department and asked for their feedback, which was used 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-014-8
DIGITAL 2022 : Advances on Societal Digital Transformation - 2022

to improve the study design before the main data collection 
exercise. This uncovered some minor issues with typograph-
ical errors that were corrected. 
During the main data collection exercise, we printed and 
distributed 150 questionnaires randomly to staff of the NIA 
who are not in managerial positions. After the distribution, 
115 questionnaires were returned. Three questionnaires were 
excluded because they were incomplete. 
To ensure fair participation from each unit or department, 
a distribution formula was used. The distribution formula was 
primarily developed based on the actual staff strength of each 
unit or department. 
We used paper-based questionnaires to ensure easy ac-
cess to participants to avoid problems with unstable internet 
connectivity in some of the districts that the data was col-
lected from. All participants were over the age of 18 and con-
sented to participate in the study. 
IV.  DATA ANALYSIS AND RESULTS 
To facilitate analysis with the Statistical Package for So-
cial Studies (SPSS) software, the data of the paper question-
naires were entered to Qualtrics, and each participant was as-
signed a unique identifier. For the analysis, each participant’s 
data was divided into Demographic and Non-Demographic 
Data. The former describes the profile of the participant, 
while the latter, the information security questions that are the 
focus of the research.  
A. Participants’ Demographics 
Table I provides an overview of the participants’ demo-
graphic data (see column Participant Data) compared with 
data from the Human Resources department of the NIA (see 
column Organization Reality). Despite some differences, we 
consider participants largely representative of the organiza-
tion’s employees. 
TABLE I: OVERVIEW OF STUDY DEMOGRAPHIC DATA. 
 
 
Participant 
Data  
Organization 
Reality 
Gender 
Male  
54% (60) 
74.0% (172) 
Female 
46% (56) 
26.0% (61) 
Age Range 
20-30 
51.8% (58) 
44.9% (96) 
31-40 
38.4% (43) 
45.8% (98) 
41-50 
8.0% (9) 
7.0% (15) 
51-60 
1.8% (2) 
2.3% (5) 
Department 
or Unit 
Human Resources 
8.0% (5) 
2.0% (9) 
Administration  
6.3% (7) 
52.0% (112) 
Technology 
and 
Biometrics 
41. 1% (47) 
22.0% (48) 
Operations 
31.3% (24) 
11.0% (35) 
Finance 
3.6% (4) 
6.0% (12) 
Internal Control 
2.7% (3) 
1.0% (3) 
Other 
2.7% (3) 
3.0% (6) 
Procurement 
4.5% (5) 
2.0 (5) 
Years of 
Work 
Less than 1year 
55.4% (62) 
32.0% (68) 
1-2years 
12.5% (14) 
4.2% (9) 
3-9years 
4.5% (5) 
3.3% (7) 
More than 9years 
27.7% (41) 
60.7% (130) 
Employment 
Type 
Permanent 
30.4% (34) 
64.0% (137) 
Contract 
65.2% (70) 
33.0% (73) 
Seconded 
4.5% (5) 
3.3% (7) 
B. Information Security Questions 
The information security questions consisted of two 
scales, ISP Awareness (3 questions) and Most Common ISP 
Violations (9 questions). We evaluated the reliability of these 
two scales using Cronbach’s Alpha as the measure of reliabil-
ity. Table II shows the results that both measures have ac-
ceptable reliability with Cronbach’s Alpha above 0.8, so both 
are included in the analysis. We look more closely at the re-
sults for each scale in the following sections. 
TABLE II: SUMMARY OF THE CRONBACH ALPHA 
 
Cronbach's 
Alpha 
Cronbach's Al-
pha Based on 
Standardized 
Items 
No. of Items 
ISP Awareness 
0.915 
0.915 
3 
Most Common 
ISP Violations 
0.876 
0.882 
9 
C. ISP Awareness  
Figure 1 shows how participant responses are distributed 
for the 3 ISP awareness questions. Most of the staff agree that 
they know (86%) and understand (80%) the provisions of the 
NIA ISP and know the responsibilities it prescribes (84%). 
However, some disagree (9%, 12%, 10% respectively) while 
others are unsure (5%, 7%, 7% respectively). 
Looking more closely at those that disagree, we wanted 
to see whether there is any commonality in their characteris-
tics. So, we looked at their gender, experience (considering 
those working for the NIA for 3 or more years as experienced 
and those less than 3 years as inexperienced), and department 
or unit. As we can see in Table III, there are more female than 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-014-8
DIGITAL 2022 : Advances on Societal Digital Transformation - 2022

male participants that disagree, with a mix of experienced and 
inexperienced employees. These participants were also from 
a range of different departments and units (we do not show 
these numbers due to space limitations). As a result, there is 
no clear pattern in the characteristics of these participants that 
may explain their response. 
 
Figure 1: ISP Awareness. 
TABLE III: ISP AWARENESS CHARACTERISTICS OF DISAGREE-
ING PARTICIPANT. 
ISP Knowledge 
Gender 
Experience 
Count 
Male 
Experienced 
1 
Female 
Experienced 
4 
Inexperienced 
4 
ISP Understanding 
Gender 
Experience 
Count 
Male 
Inexperienced 
2 
Female 
Experience 
4 
Inexperienced 
4 
Knowledge of Responsibilities 
Gender 
Experience 
Count 
Male 
Experienced 
1 
Inexperienced 
1 
Female  
Experienced 
4 
Inexperienced 
2 
D. Most Common ISP Violations 
Figures 2a, 2b and 2c are distributed for the 9 most com-
mon ISP violations questions. We have grouped these ques-
tions thematically with Figure 2a showing information trans-
fer-related violations, Figure 2b password-related ones, and 
Figure 2c workstation-related ones.  
From the figures, one can see that in all cases most par-
ticipants agree that these are NIA ISP violations with infor-
mation transfer-related violations 95%, 92% and 84%, pass-
word-related violations 84%, 89% and 91%, and work-
station-related violations 88%, 90% and 91, respectively. 
Again, some participants disagree 1%, 4%, 8% for infor-
mation transfer-related violations, 8%, 2%, 5% for password-
related violations, and 5%, 6%, 4% for workstation related 
violations respectively. Other participants are unsure 4%, 
4%, 8% for information transfer related violations, 8%, 9%, 
5% for password related violations, and 7%, 4%, 6% for 
workstation-related violations, respectively. 
 
Figure 2a: Most Common Information Transfer-related ISP Violations. 
Looking more closely at Figure 2a, Figure 2b and Figure 
2c, we note that despite the very high overall agreement with 
all the violations, there are clear differences in the distribu-
tions which indicate differences in the degree of agreement 
between them. To tease out these differences we treated the 
Likert scales as ratios from 1 for Strongly agree to 7 for 
Strongly disagree and we calculated the mean and standard 
deviation for each of them, see Table IV. The table shows that 
the means for the common ISP violations range from 1.54 to 
2.39 with standard deviations between 0.879 to 1.537. Three 
of the violations “Creating easy to guess passwords”, “Using 
laptops carelessly outside” and “Failing to lock or log out” 
have means above 2, 2.39, 2.21, 2.03 respectively, with the 
former two also having the highest standard deviations, 1.331 
and 1.537 respectively. As a result, indicating the agreement 
to these constitute NIA ISP violation is not as strong as the 
rest. 
Finally, looking at how the means and standard deviations 
of the common ISP violation questions compare to those of 
the awareness questions, Table IV shows that the latter have 
higher means ranging from 2.46 to 2.72 and standard devia-
tions between 1.381 and 1.490. These indicate that agreement 
with the awareness questions is not as strong to the common 
ISP violations. 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-014-8
DIGITAL 2022 : Advances on Societal Digital Transformation - 2022

 
Figure 2b: Most Common Passwords-related ISP violations. 
 
Figure 2c: Most Common Workstation-related ISP Violations. 
V.  DISCUSSION 
Overall, our findings are reassuring for the NIA. Despite 
the lack of a formal ISP and any staff training on information 
security, our results show that staff believe they know and 
understand what is expected from them. More importantly, 
this is not just their perception. Their understanding of com-
mon ISP violations demonstrates that they appreciate their 
role and responsibilities in protecting NIA information secu-
rity, an indicator of a good security culture. 
That said, there is some room for improvement. First, our 
results show that for certain violations, NIA staff agreement 
is not as strong as for others. In some cases, such differences 
are indicative of typical tensions between security and usa-
bility. For example, logging out or locking workstations can 
slow down work, while coming up with passwords that are 
not easy to guess can be challenging. In such cases, staff 
training can help staff identify good strategies for managing 
these tensions. In other cases, the differences are indicative 
of lack of clarity in what is and isn’t acceptable. For example, 
NIA staff often use their personal laptops for work and with 
the absence of a formal ISP they may be unclear of what con-
stitutes careless use. In such cases, a formal ISP with cover-
age of bring-your-own-device expectations can help staff en-
sure that, the use of their laptops does not compromise organ-
izational security. Moreover, combining a formal ISP with 
relevant staff training can also increase the confidence of NIA 
staff in their knowledge and understanding further strength-
ening the information security culture of the organization. 
TABLE IV: MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATION OF ALL INFOR-
MATION SECURITY RELATIONS. 
 
Mean 
Std. Deviation 
I know the rules and regulations pre-
scribed by the Information Security Pol-
icy (ISP) of my organization 
2.46 
1.381 
I understand the rules and regulations 
prescribed by the ISP of my organization 
2.72 
1.490 
I know my responsibilities as prescribed 
in the ISP to enhance the Information 
Systems security of my organization. 
2.56 
1.475 
Failing to lock or log out of workstation 
constitutes an Information Security Pol-
icy violation 
2.03 
1.174 
Writing down personal passwords in vis-
ible places constitutes an Information Se-
curity Policy violation 
1.96 
1.193 
Sharing passwords with colleagues or 
friends constitutes an Information Secu-
rity Policy violation 
1.85 
1.100 
Copying sensitive data to unencrypted 
USB drives constitutes an Information 
Security Policy violation 
1.80 
1.229 
Revealing confidential information to 
outsiders constitutes an Information Se-
curity Policy violation 
1.54 
0.879 
Disabling security configurations consti-
tutes an Information Security Policy vio-
lation 
1.84 
1.167 
Using laptops carelessly outside of the 
company constitutes an Information Se-
curity Policy violation 
2.21 
1.537 
Sending confidential information unen-
crypted constitutes an Information Secu-
rity Policy violation 
1.88 
1.176 
Creating easy-to guess-passwords consti-
tutes an Information Security Policy vio-
lation 
2.39 
1.331 
For Electronic Identity Systems, our research reinforces 
the need for a formal ISP that clearly specifies requirements 
for staff. It also emphasizes the importance of staff training 
ensuring that policy provisions are fully appreciated and un-
derstood. In addition to this, it highlights the necessity to con-
sider the organizational context in the development and im-
plementation of the ISP. 
The main limitation of our research is the focus on staff 
of the NIA. This limits the generalizability of our findings. 
Similar studies in other organizations are necessary to gener-
alize them. In addition to this, our research was questionnaire 
based. This limits the extent to which we can extrapolate from 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-014-8
DIGITAL 2022 : Advances on Societal Digital Transformation - 2022

our findings, the information security behaviors of NIA staff. 
This would require an observation study to establish whether 
staff behave in ways to prevent ISP violations. Finally, the 
research focused on NIA staff in non-management positions. 
This means that the research is unable to incorporate manage-
ment’s view in the study and whether management views 
agree with those captured in the study. As a result, our find-
ings are limited to such staff and do not include management 
views. Surveying management views will address this. 
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
We conducted a questionnaire-based study using the Gha-
naian NIA as a case. The study shows that although there is 
no formal ISP and no staff training there is a positive infor-
mation security culture where staff not only believe they are 
aware of the ISP provisions but can identity common ISP vi-
olations of the NIA ISP. Our study reinforces the need for a 
formal ISP in EIS and training as the means for clarifying 
requirements and enhancing staff knowledge and understand-
ing. It also highlights the need to consider the organizational 
context in the development and implementation of the ISP. 
In addition to addressing the limitations above, future 
work could explore in more detail, the implementation of in-
formation security policy at the NIA by looking at how en-
gaged staff are in the development and evolution of its provi-
sions and how compliance is enforced.  
Again, similar research works could be replicated in other 
regions or countries to assess the generalizability of this re-
search findings in other jurisdictions 
The impact of covid 19 pandemic also affected the re-
search work. As at the time the data was being collected, the 
government-imposed restrictions on work attendance and this 
partly led to rotation of staff attendance. This in effect af-
fected the period for the data collection exercise. In the fu-
ture, such research work might need to consider longer time 
due to incorporate such natural occurrences. 
REFERENCES 
[1] B. Bulgurcu, H. Cavusoglu, and I. Benbasat, “Information secu-
rity policy compliance: an empirical study of rationality-based 
beliefs and information security awareness”, Management In-
formation 
Systems 
Quarterly, 
pp. 
523-548, 
2010 
https://doi.org/10.2307/25750690 
[2] S. Canavan, "An information security policy development      
guide for large companies." SANS Institute,2003. 
[3] S. V. Flowerday, and T. Tuyikeze, “Information security policy 
development and implementation: The what, how and who”, 
Computers & Security, pp. 169-183, 2016. 
[4] S. M. Furnell, P. Bryant, and A. D. Phippen “Assessing the se-
curity perceptions of personal Internet users”, Computers & 
Security, Vol. 26, no.5, pp. 410-417, 2007. 
[5] C. Handforth, and W. Matthew, “Digital Identity Country Re-
port: Malawi” 2019 Available: https://www.gsma.com/mo-
bilefordevelopment/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/Digital-
Identity-Country-Report.pdf [Accessed August, 25, 2019]. 
[6] E. C. Johnson, “Security Awareness: Switch to a better pro-
gramme”, Network security, Vol.2, pp. 15-18, 2006. 
[7] D. Lyon, and C. J. Bennett, “Playing the ID Card: Understanding 
the significance of identity card systems: Playing the identity 
card: Surveillance, security and identification in global per-
spective”, pp. 3-20, 2008. 
[8] National Identification Authority Act, Government of Ghana, 
“National Identification Authority Act, 2006 Act 707”, In: 
Ghana, G. O. (Ed.) Act 707. Accra: Parliament of the Republic 
of Ghana, 2006. 
[9] National Identification Authority, “NIA Draft Policy 2014” n.d 
Accra 
[10] B. G. Raggad, “Information security management: concepts 
and practice”, CRC Press,2010. 
[11] M. Siponen, and A. Vance, “Neutralization: New insights into 
the problem of employee information systems security policy 
violations” MIS quarterly, pp. 487-502, 2010. 
[12] T. Tryfonas, E. Kiountouzis, and A. Poulymenakou, “Embed-
ding security practices in contemporary information systems 
development approaches”, Information Management & Com-
puter Security, Vol.  9, pp. 183-197, 2001. 
[13] J. S. Uebersax, “Likert scales: dispelling the confusion” Statis-
tical methods for rater agreement, Vol. 31, 2006. 
[14] R. Von Solms, "Information security management: why 
standards are important", Information Management & Computer 
Security, 1999. 
[15] I. Wladawsky-Berger, (2016), “Towards a Trusted Framework 
for Identity and Data Sharing”, 2016. [Accessed October 20, 
2019]. 
[16] C. C. Wood, “Writing infosec policies” Computers & Security, 
Vol. 5, pp. 418, 1995. 
[17] World Economic Forum, “Identity in a digital world – A new 
chapter in the social contract” Cologny/Geneva: World Eco-
nomic Forum, 2018. 
 
 
 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-014-8
DIGITAL 2022 : Advances on Societal Digital Transformation - 2022

