Chaos-based Protection Data for Digital
Communication
Belqassim Bouteghrine
Lcoms
Universit´e de Lorraine
Metz, France
email:belqassim.bouteghrine@univ-lorraine.fr
Camel Tanougast
Lcoms
Universit´e de Lorraine
Metz, France
email:camel.tanougast@univ-lorraine.fr
Said Sadoudi
Laboratoire T´el´ecommunications
Ecole Militaire Polytechnique
Algiers, Algeria
email:sadoudi.said@gmail.com
Mohammed Rabiai
Laboratoire T´el´ecommunications
Ecole Sup´erieure Ali Chabati
Reghaia, Algeria
email:mohammed.rabiai2013@gmail.com
Abstract—Due to advancements in digital technologies in
recent years, the security of exchanged data has become the
most attractive topic for many researchers. Consequently, several
cryptography schemes have been introduced and proposed for
securing the exchanged sensitive data in the network. In this
paper, we propose new chaos-based protection in order to secure
both the exchanged identity text and the image data. In addition,
we applied the proposed encryption to secure the exchanged
heterogeneous data inside a C# chat application. The analysis
of the simulation results shows that the proposed scheme offers
a better performance in terms of security and robustness than
some similar schemes.
Keywords—data security; cryptography; chaos; C# application.
I. INTRODUCTION
With the advent in Internet and networking applications,
security becomes a major concern in the current era of
information technology. The security threats and attacks are
increased due to the huge amount of exchanged data over
the network. As a solution to these threats, information
security is a well known proposal which provides protection
to data availability, privacy, and integrity [1]. Moreover, data
encryption is considered as the most traditional technique
that secures highly conﬁdential information by using some
conventional algorithm, which already exists [2]. Looking for
more ﬂexibility and security, Saraf et al. [3] have proposed
an AES(Advanced Encryption Standard)-based encryption
and decryption for text and image data. For text encryption,
128-bit text inputs are synthesized and simulated using a
code composer studio tool in C developing language code.
For image encryption, a Java developing language code is
synthesized and simulated by Java Application Platform. By
combining the AES and the Elliptic Curve Cryptography
(ECC), [4] proposes an extension of a public-key-based
cryptosystem. To overcome the drawbacks shown in the
traditional 128-AES, the introduced scheme proposes a
hybrid encryption system including ECC and AES schemes.
The optimized technique includes a trade-off between the key
space (192 bit) and the number of iterations (12). For text
encryption application, a new technique has been proposed
in
[5]. The proposed new technique addresses the leak of
mapping the characters to reﬁne points in the elliptic curve
showed in classic techniques. The main idea of this solution
is to pair values of plain text and corresponding ASCII to
serve as input for the elliptic curve based encryption. The
proposed algorithm is designed to be used for encryption
and decryption of exchanged text data. In
[6], Singh et al.
presented a new encryption scheme based on symmetric key
encryption. The proposed algorithm converts the plain text to
get the corresponding ASCII values, which are considered as
the input text of the cryptosystem. Similarly, the decryption
process starts also by converting the cipher text to ASCII
values which will be the input of this process. In [7], Chandra
et al. proposed double encryption, which is a content-based
algorithm that implements a folding method and a circular
bit-wise operation. In this technique, encryption of plaintext
occurs two times with a secret key, providing cipher text by
using a circular bit-wise binary addition operation. Another
concept based on double encryption is proposed in
[8] to
provide high level of security. In this technique, the plaintext
is encrypted by an encryption technique using a secret key,
which is also encrypted by another algorithm. Then, the
plaintext is encrypted again using the encrypted secret key.
However, all of these proposals suffer from key distribution
and resources consumption, which make them less suitable for
constrained devices and real time applications [9]. Moreover,
more complex schemes have been highlighted by many
studies proving their high computational cost, which affects
mainly the resource-limited devices that are included in the
new networks [10].
One of the advanced cryptography techniques is Attribute-
Based Encryption (ABE), which was introduced to overcome
the limited functionalities of the traditional public key
cryptography schemes [11]. However, in multi-authority
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-927-0
DIGITAL 2021 : Advances on Societal Digital Transformation

systems, many complicated issues can be experienced when
the ABE systems are built (revocation problem) [12]. For
example, to tie the work of all authorities together, some
existing systems use a central authority, which can cause a
bottleneck problem and is contradictory to the distributed
control principle [12].
Nowadays, chaotic encryption method seems to be much
better than traditional encryption methods [13]. Chaos-based
schemes have introduced the use of chaotic system properties
such as sensitivity to initial condition and loss of information.
Therefore, many chaos-based encryption methods have been
presented and discussed in the last decades. Moreover,
Babaei
[14] included a logistic chaotic map as an input
of a One-Time-Pad algorithm (OTP) for image encryption
application. In addition, for text ﬁles encryption, authors
have proposed a new algorithm based on a chaotic selection
between original message strands and OTP DNA strands [14].
The obtained result of the proposed solution proved the
efﬁciency of the proposed algorithm in both image and text
encryption. However; all these schemes have shown some
shortcomings regarding the key space offered by the chaotic
system and the robustness of the used chaotic system. Hence,
unlike all the previous proposals, we introduce through this
paper a novel and dynamic chaos-based cryptosystem in order
to secure both the exchanged identity text and the image
data. In addition, we applied the proposed cryptosystem for
secure exchanged heterogeneous data inside a C# application.
Therefore, the main contributions of this paper are as follows:
(i) A new four-dimensional (4-D) chaotic system that shows
good chaotic properties; (ii) A new and a simpliﬁed algorithm
based on a chaos system and a hash function for multimedia
data encryption purpose.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section
2 gives the proposed chaotic system. Section 3 includes
the application of the conﬁgurable chaos-based cryptosystem.
Conclusion and some perspectives are given in Section 4.
II. THE PROPOSED CONFIGURABLE CRYPTOSYSTEM
The
proposed
conﬁgurable
chaos
system
is
multidimensional
system
including
several
systems
(2-
D, 3-D and 4-D systems) that are extracted from our proposal
given in [17].
The ﬁrst system is a 2-D dimension described as follows:
(
X(n + 1) = 1 − a ∗ X(n)2 + Y (n)
Y (n + 1) = d ∗ X(n)
(1)
The 3-D system deﬁned by ﬁve (05) nonlinear terms and
three (03) controllers is described as follows:





X(n + 1) = 1 − a ∗ X(n)2 + (Y (n) ∗ Z(n))
Y (n + 1) = 1 − b ∗ Y (n)2 + (X(n) ∗ Z(n))
Z(n + 1) = d ∗ X(n) ∗ Y (n)
(2)
Fig. 1: Signal Graph X(i) of the Proposed Chaotic System.
Fig. 2: Signal Graph Y(i) of the Proposed Chaotic System.
Finally, the proposed 4-D map with seven (07) nonlinear
terms is given as follows:









X(n + 1) = 1 − a ∗ X(n)2 + (Y (n) ∗ Z(n) ∗ P(n))
Y (n + 1) = 1 − b ∗ Y (n)2 + (X(n) ∗ Z(n) ∗ P(n))
Z(n + 1) = 1 − c ∗ Z(n)2 + (X(n) ∗ Y (n) ∗ P(n))
P(n + 1) = d ∗ X(n) ∗ Y (n) ∗ Z(n)
(3)
where X, Y , Z and P are the state variables and a, b, c and
d are the control parameters or the controllers of the system.
To obtain the chaotic behavior of the proposed system (
see Figures 1 to 10) , we deﬁne the values of the controllers
as: a=1.65; b=1.45; c=1.7 and d=0.35; all with initial state of
X(0)=Y (0)=Z(0)=P(0) = 0.1. All these values are selected
to ensure the chaotic behaviour of the proposed system, using
the algorithm presented in [18].
Figures 1 to 4 show the signals of the variables X, Y , Z and
P, which conﬁrm the behaviour of the system. Moreover, we
used the plan projection of the trajectories obtained through
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-927-0
DIGITAL 2021 : Advances on Societal Digital Transformation

Fig. 3: Signal Graph Z(i) of the Proposed Chaotic System.
Fig. 4: Signal Graph P(i) of the Proposed Chaotic System.
Fig. 5: Trajectory Graph X(Y) of the Proposed Chaotic Sys-
tem.
Fig. 6: Trajectory Graph X(Z) of the Proposed Chaotic System.
Fig. 7: Trajectory Graph X(P) of the Proposed Chaotic System.
Fig. 8: Trajectory Graph Y(Z) of the Proposed Chaotic System.
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-927-0
DIGITAL 2021 : Advances on Societal Digital Transformation

Fig. 9: Trajectory Graph Y(P) of the Proposed Chaotic System.
Fig. 10: Trajectory Graph Z(P) of the Proposed Chaotic
System.
these variables to conﬁrm the chaotic behaviour, as shown in
Figures 5 to 10.
III. APPLICATION OF THE PROPOSED CRYPTOSYSTEM
We present an application of the proposed conﬁgurable
chaos system to secure the exchanged sensitive data in digital
communications.
A. Algorithm Design and Implementation
A secure communication channel is a software application
that includes user’s interface and a cryptosystem to ensure
data encryption. Due to the variety of the exchanged data and
the high demand of lightweight cryptosystem, we introduce a
conﬁgurable chaos-based cryptosystem using the chaotic maps
deﬁned by equations (1), (2) and (3). The proposed algorithm,
Fig. 11: The Proposed Algorithm Flow Chart.
Fig. 12: Hash Function Design.
as shown in the ﬂow chart in 11), runs as follows:
(i) Once the communication is established, we distinguish
between two (2) main cases: sending data or receiving data;
(ii) In the case of sending data, we run the encryption process
according to the data type. For only text data, we use the 2-D
system for the encryption. Then, for only image data, we use
the 3-D system. Finally, we use the 4-D system in the case of
both image and text data;
(iii) In the case of receiving data, we run the same steps as in
(ii) for the decryption process according to the received data
type.
The reason of using the 2-D system for encrypting only text
data is that the text data does not require a higher dimensional
chaotic system. Moreover, we used the 3-D system only for
image encryption in order to follow the approach based on
the 3-D chaos system proposed in [18]. Finally, the 4-D
system is used for encryption of heterogeneous data (text and
image) by allowing three (3) components for the image and
one (1) component for the text.
To enhance the security of encrypted text, we include the
solution called SHA2 (Secure Hash Algorithm 2) or SHA256
(see Figure 12) as hash function which is considered better
than MD5 (Message Digest 5) and SHA1 [15]. The proposed
hash function is implemented using some widely used security
applications and protocols, including Transport Layer Security
(TLS), Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) and Internet Protocol
Security (IPsec).
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-927-0
DIGITAL 2021 : Advances on Societal Digital Transformation

Fig. 13: First User’s Interface.
Fig. 14: Second User’s Interface.
B. Performance Analysis
We use C# programming language to implement the pro-
posed solution and application. The proposed application is
composed of two (02) interfaces for exchanging messages (see
Figure 13 and Figure 14), and a third separate interface to
show the encryption process’s results (see Figure 15).
Fig. 15: Encrypted Exchanged Data Using the Proposed Sys-
tem.
1) Key Sensitivity: To evaluate the sensitivity to initial
conditions of the proposed system, we consider a changing
by 10−10 of the initial values related to the variables X(0),
Y (0), Z(0) and P(0). The sensitivity to the slightest changes
of the different variables is obtained by generating two tra-
jectories L1(X(0) ,Y (0) ,Z(0) ,P(0)) and L2(X(0)+10−10,
Y (0)+10−10, Z(0)+10−10, P(0)+10−10) keeping the same
control parameters. The results shown in the Figures 16 to 19
prove that, even with the weakest difference in initial values
attributed to X(0),Y (0),Z(0) and P(0), we observe signiﬁcant
changes after only around 50 iterations, which conﬁrms the
Fig. 16: Sensitivity of the Signal X(i).
Fig. 17: Sensitivity of the Signal Y(i).
sensitivity dependence on the initial conditions of the proposed
maps.
2) Key Space:
Usually, chaos-based cryptosystems are
made of Pseudo-Random Number Generators (PRNG) used
as key streams for ciphering. Among the required conditions
for an encryption scheme to be secure, we ﬁnd the large
key space condition to resist against brute-force attacks [16].
Thereby, the analysis of the key space parameter, which is
deﬁned by the number of the parameters and the size of the
Fig. 18: Sensitivity of the Signal Z(i).
Fig. 19: Sensitivity of the Signal P(i).
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-927-0
DIGITAL 2021 : Advances on Societal Digital Transformation

desired key, is used as a basis of comparison between the
proposed system and some existing systems. Therefore, by
supposing the generation of cipher keys on 32 bits, the key
space parameter is computed for each map and showed in
Table I.
TABLE I. KEY SPACE COMPARISON.
Cryptosystems
Key space value
The proposed (2-D)
2128
The proposed (3-D)
2192
The proposed (4-D)
2256
AES
2128
DES (Data Encryption Standard)
256
3-DES
2168
3) Security of Hash Encryption: In practice, there are
two common methods used to attack the hash encryption
algorithm.
The ﬁrst method is based on ﬁnding the collision by
introducing different characters, which would help to get
the same hash values when the collision occurs. Therefore,
the attacker could crack the SHA256 by obtaining the same
hash value with the one used during the encryption process.
However, in our case with 256 bits of SHA256 and 32 bits
of the generated chaotic sequence, the task of cracking our
algorithm becomes impossible.
The second method found in the literature for attacking
the hash encryption algorithm is called exhaustive method.
For some short and simple combination, this method is very
efﬁcient. Nevertheless, due to the adopted process of this
method based on single character scan, and the combination of
the words in the dictionary, the exhaustive method is difﬁcult
to work with the number of the characters included in the
output of the SHA256 hash encryption algorithm.
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
With the development of Internet and digital networking
applications, security has become a major concern in the
current era of Information Technology.
Unlike all the previous related works, we presented in this
paper a novel and dynamic chaos-based cryptosystem in order
to secure both the exchanged identity text and the image data.
First, we described and analyzed the different dimensional
chaotic systems (2-D, 3-D and 4-D). Then, we applied
the proposed chaotic systems inside a C# chat application
to secure the exchanged data. The encryption/decryption
processes are run using the 2-D system for exchanged
text data, the 3-D system for only image data and the
4-D system for both text and image data. Results showed
that the proposed chaotic maps are very sensitive to initial
conditions and provide larger key space to perform secure
communication.
As future work, the integration of digital FPGA (Field-
Programmable Gate Array) technology for data encryption
in an IP-communication with the proposed solution will be
investigated. Moreover, the evaluation of the proposed scheme
where several input data of different types and complexities
will be performed and compared against the results obtained
through existing schemes.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Singh, P. K. Sharma, S. Y. Moon, and J. H. Park, ”Advanced
lightweight encryption algorithms for IoT devices: survey, challenges
and solutions,” Journal of Ambient Intelligence and Humanized Com-
puting, pp. 1–18, 2017.
[2] R. R. Salavi, M. M. Math, and U. P. Kulkarni, ”A Survey of various
cryptographic techniques: from traditional cryptography to fully homo-
morphic encryption,” Innovations in Computer Science and Engineering,
pp. 295–305, 2019.
[3] K. R. Saraf, V. P. Jagtap, and A. K. Mishra, ”Text and image encryption
decryption using advanced encryption standard,” International Journal
of Emerging Trends and Technology in Computer Science (IJETTCS),
vol. 3, pp. 118–126, 2014.
[4] N. Mathur and R. Bansode, ”AES based text encryption using 12 rounds
with dynamic key selection,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 79, pp.
1036–1043, 2016.
[5] L. D. Singh and K. M. Singh, ”Implementation of text encryption using
elliptic curve cryptography,” Procedia Computer Science, vol. 54, pp.
73–82, 2015.
[6] U. Singh and U. Garg, ”An ASCII value based text data encryption
system,” International Journal of Scientiﬁc and Research Publications,
vol. 3, pp. 2250–3153, 2013.
[7] S. Chandra, B. Mandal, S. S. Alam, and S. Bhattacharyya, ”Content
based double encryption algorithm using symmetric key cryptography,”
Procedia Computer Science, vol. 57, pp. 1228–1234, 2015.
[8] S. C. Iyer, R. R. Sedamkar, and S. Gupta, ”A novel idea on multimedia
encryption using hybrid crypto approach,” Procedia Computer Science,
vol. 79, pp. 293–298, 2016.
[9] P. Dixit, A. K. Gupta, M. C. Trivedi, and V. K. Yadav, ”Traditional and
hybrid encryption techniques: a survey,” Networking communication and
data knowledge engineering, pp. 239–248, 2018.
[10] R. R. Al-Dahhan, Q. Shi, G. M. Lee, and K. Kifayat, ”Survey on
revocation in ciphertext-policy attribute-based encryption,” Sensors, vol.
19, p. 1695, 2019.
[11] V. H. Kalmani, D. Goyal, and S. Singla, ”An efﬁcient and secure solution
for attribute revocation problem utilizing CP-ABE scheme in mobile
cloud computing,” International Journal of Computer Applications, vol.
129, pp. 16–21, 2015.
[12] L. Pang, J. Yang, and Z. Jiang, ”A survey of research progress and
development tendency of attribute-based encryption,” The Scientiﬁc
World Journal, vol. 2014, 2014.
[13] M. Philip and A. Das, ”Survey: Image encryption using chaotic cryp-
tography schemes,” IJCA Special Issue on “Computational Science-New
Dimensions and Perspectives” NCCSE, pp. 1–4, 2011.
[14] M. Babaei, ”A novel text and image encryption method based on chaos
theory and DNA computing,” Natural computing, vol. 12, pp .101–107,
2013.
[15] D. Rachmawati, J. T. Tarigan, and A. B. C. Ginting, ”A comparative
study of message digest 5 (MD5) and SHA256 algorithm,” Journal of
Physics: Conference Series, vol. 978, p. 012116, 2018.
[16] G. Alvarez and S. Li, ”Some basic cryptographic requirements for chaos-
based cryptosystems,” International Journal of Bifurcation and Chaos,
vol. 16, pp. 2129–2151, 2006.
[17] B. Bouteghrine, C. Tanougast, and S. Sadoudi, ”Design and FPGA
implementation of new multidimensional chaotic map for secure com-
munication,” Journal of Circuits, Systems and Computers, p. 2150280,
2021.
[18] B. Bouteghrine, C. Tanougast, and S. Sadoudi, ”Novel image encryp-
tion algorithm based on new 3-d chaos map”, Multimedia Tools and
Applications, vol. 80, pp. 25583-–25605, 2021.
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-927-0
DIGITAL 2021 : Advances on Societal Digital Transformation

