Exploring Adolescents' Experiences with Personalized Content on Social Media:     
A Qualitative Study  
 
Ashley Rebecca Bell, Merete Kolberg Tennfjord, Miroslava Tokovska and Ragnhild Eg 
School of Health Sciences 
Kristiania University College 
Oslo, Norway 
E-mail: {Ashleyrebeccaholt.Bell, Meretekolberg.Tennfjord, Miroslava.Tokovska, Ragnhild.Eg}@kristiania.no
 
 
Abstract—This work-in-progress paper examines adolescents’ 
experiences with personalized content on social media and how 
it influences them. Through group interviews with Norwegian 
students aged 15 to 19 years, we investigated their awareness, 
comprehension, 
and 
emotions 
towards 
targeted 
and 
personalized content. The sample consisted of 48 participants 
(20 males and 28 females). The preliminary analysis uncovered 
three themes: 1) Encounters, awareness, and comprehension, 2) 
Emotions, and 3) Increasing use and appreciation. 
Keywords-social media; digital competence; influence; 
adolescent; personalized content. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Young people spend a lot of time online. In Norway, the 
average exceeds five hours a day for adolescents and young 
adults [1]. This age group is also very active on social media 
[2], which implies that they are exposed to social influence 
both in their physical and digital lives. The continuing 
increase in so-called screen time has caused alarm, among 
researchers 
and 
government 
agencies 
alike 
[3][4]. 
Adolescents’ use of social media has received particular 
focus, likely due to the time spent, but also because this age 
group might be less digitally competent than they believe 
themselves [5][6]. In fact, research has shown that adolescents 
are largely unaware of how personalization shapes their 
everyday life [7][8]. Moreover, social comparison and social 
influence is prominent in adolescents’ [9], this may make this 
age group particularly vulnerable to targeted and personalized 
online content. On the other hand, some claim that moral panic 
has biased the research in a negative direction, thus there is a 
need for more nuanced studies on the impact of social media, 
including potential positive effects of exposure to social media 
content [10][11]. 
The body of research on adolescents’ use of social media 
is substantial [12]. However, recent criticism stresses the 
methodological limitations of many of the quantitative 
studies, such as correlations between screen time and mental 
health measures [4]. A few recent studies have instead used 
qualitative methods to better understand how adolescents 
experience social media and their impact. Some look at 
targeted advertising [13][14], others look at curated news 
stories [7][15]. Others still attempt to uncover how people 
reason about the technology behind social media, particularly 
algorithms [8][16]-[19], but these do not focus on adolescents 
as a separate group. 
Following the sound direction of recent research, this 
qualitative study examines adolescents’ experiences with 
personalized content and how personalized content shape the 
digital world of youth, both positively and negatively. With 
this work, we wish to address the consequences of social 
media that remain unclear from the current body of research. 
This unclarity is partly due to methodological limitations [4], 
and partly due to contradictory research findings that point to 
small and large, positive and negative, and sometimes absent 
effects of screen time, on well-being [20]. 
Considering that media consumption is no longer a passive 
process, but a mutual and active exchange of information, we 
need more insight on this age group’s digital competence 
related to social media technologies, we also need to 
understand how potentially vulnerable adolescents navigate 
their personalized internet realities and how they are affected. 
This need underlines the aim of this study to assess 
adolescents’ experience with targeted and personalized 
content on social media.  
The article is structured into five sections. Following 
Section I, the introduction, Section II describes the method, 
including 
information 
about 
the 
sample, 
ethical 
considerations, material, data collection and analysis. In 
Section III, the preliminary results are presented and 
discussed; it is divided into three sub-sections, one for each 
theme. Section IV addresses the study’s strengths and 
limitations. Finally, Section V presents the conclusions. 
II. METHOD 
The study presented here is a work-in-progress built on a 
qualitative design with eight focus group interviews. These 
interviews represent participants’ varied experiences, to map 
out associations, variations, and different aspects of 
experiences on a selected topic [21]. Thus, the study aims for 
insight on subjective experiences with personalized content.  
A. 
Sample 
Prior to recruitment, principals from two different schools 
in the same region were contacted through e-mail. Thereafter, 
an employee at each school was assigned with the 
responsibility of recruiting students willing to participate, 
following our inclusion criteria. The students were recruited 
from different classes and the respective teachers informed the 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-927-0
DIGITAL 2021 : Advances on Societal Digital Transformation

 
students about the project. A random draw was done by the 
teacher in classes where more students than needed were 
willing to participate. A few participants were unable to attend 
the interview due to quarantine, in those situations we were 
able to recruit additional participants from a waiting list. 
The inclusion criteria were that the participants had to be 
students in secondary school, aged between 15 and 19 years 
old, and willing to participate in the study. The final sample 
included 48 participants (20 male and 28 female students). 
The youngest participants (12 males, 12 females) were 
recruited from the last year of lower secondary school (aged 
15-16). The remaining participants were recruited from three 
levels of upper secondary school, 12 (6 males, 6 females) from 
level one (aged 16-17), six (1 males, 5 females) from level two 
(aged 17-18) and six (1 male, 5 females) from level three 
(aged 18-19). Participants were interviewed with their peers 
in groups of six, making it a total of eight focus group 
interviews. One male participant was excluded in retrospect 
due to his considerably older age; he was judged to be 
unrepresentative of the sample’s general level of digital 
competence. Thus, there are 19 males included in the analysis.  
B. 
Ethics Statement 
After volunteering for the study, participants received and 
signed an informed consent form, which they later brought to 
the interview. Students aged 15 years also provided a parent’s 
consent. Each focus group interview started by introducing the 
purpose and content of the study, including information about 
their ethical and voluntary rights. The study protocol, data 
plan and related documents received approval by the 
Norwegian Centre for Research Data (reference 644850). 
Anonymization was ensured by transcribing the interviews 
and allocating fictitious aliases. All participants received a gift 
card for their time, valued equivalent to 35 USD / 30 EUR.  
C. 
Material 
The current study is part of a larger project with an overall 
aim to assess social media habits among adolescents. The 
larger project includes an ongoing longitudinal diary study 
where we aim to follow 24 adolescents through high school. 
For the purpose of this work-in-progress, only questions and 
findings on adolescents’ experiences with targeted and 
personalized content on social media are analyzed and 
reported. For each focus group, a timing of 90 minutes was 
scheduled, including an introduction for the study’s purpose. 
A semi-structured interview guide was prepared with open-
ended questions to ensure a coherent narrative of experiences 
with targeted and personalized content on social media.  
The interviews were recorded with a secure Dictaphone 
application running on three mobile devices simultaneously, 
each placed in a different location in the interview room.  
D. 
Data Collection and Analysis 
All interviews were conducted between April and June 
2021, in suitable rooms at the respective schools. Each 
interview lasted between 42 to 91 minutes, excluding the 
introduction and de-brief, and was recorded and transcribed 
verbatim. Two researchers were present throughout the 
interviews, the researcher leading the interview was always 
the same. The researcher who did not lead the interview used 
a spreadsheet to note down the time and order of speakers. 
The preliminary analysis is based on transcriptions of 
recorded interviews, aided by notes on speakers and times. 
Transcripts were reviewed to identify specific experiences, 
and the initial analysis of the transcripts resulted in temporary 
themes that originated from the interview guide and the 
study’s intent [22]. Thereafter, a theoretical interpretation 
was performed, so that the transcripts could be systematized 
to cover the various themes and sub themes meaningfully. 
The analysis was a joint effort that relied on Brinkmann 
and Kvale’s steps [23] for interpretation and conveyance of 
understanding; participants’ quotes represent understanding 
of self, interpretations of quotes correspond to critical 
understanding based on common sense, and implications are 
placed in a larger context of theoretical understanding. 
The selection of included quotes is the result of the 
researchers’ mutual agreement on how best to shed light on 
the relevant major themes that emerged through the data 
analysis. The quotations presented in this study have been 
translated from Norwegian to English, they have also been 
edited for better readability. Nonetheless, the quotations have 
been kept as close to the original statements as possible.  
III. PRELIMINARY RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
All participants had one or more social media profile 
which they had used from the age of 10 to 12. The main 
reasons provided for joining social media were fear of 
missing out and keeping in touch with friends and family. The 
high availability of having a phone and having a large amount 
of screen time in general, was mentioned. These findings 
correspond to the results from a Norwegian national survey 
on adolescents, where 75 – 79% of females and males 
between the ages of 15 to 19 reported having minimum 3 
hours of daily screen time. Furthermore, 36% of respondents 
between 13 and 19 years reported spending a minimum of 3 
hours on social media [2]. In the current study, the reported 
average time spent on social media platforms was 3 to 4 hours 
on normal weekdays. The most popular and most used social 
media platforms mentioned by our participants were TikTok, 
Snapchat and Instagram, across all ages. Although the large 
majority of participants stated that they ‘follow’ people on 
social media, meaning that they have taken action to receive 
content from friends, family, influencers and other 
celebrities, some of them modified this response later and 
clarified that they mostly followed friends and only a few 
celebrities.  
The pattern appears to be that most do not have a 
particular plan for what type of content they want to watch 
while on social media. Instead, they let the platform make the 
selection on their behalf, based on the accounts they follow 
and what they have liked before. As Rebecca (15-16) put it: 
“Like, I follow only what I find interesting and, um, my 
friends or people I know”. Ethan (15-16) from a different 
interview added: “I think most people tend to be on ‘For 
You’”, referring to the page on TikTok where random videos 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-927-0
DIGITAL 2021 : Advances on Societal Digital Transformation

 
pop up based on their previous actions. The overall 
observation that adolescents do not deliberately seek out and 
select specific content may indicate that they freely allow 
social media to influence them, be it a conscious or an 
unconscious decision.  
The reported experiences with targeted and personalized 
content on social media converged under three main themes: 
1) Encounters, awareness, and comprehension, 2) Emotions, 
and 3) Increasing use and appreciation. 
A. 
Encounters, Awareness and Comprension 
Awareness and comprehension about targeted and 
personalized content differed to some extent across gender 
and age groups. Participants in the age of 17 to 19 expressed 
broader understanding and greater awareness of personalized 
and targeted content throughout the interviews, compared to 
the youngest age groups. The same pattern of broader 
understanding and greater awareness was seen for the 
females as compared to the males. There is little research 
addressing age and sex differences in social media usage 
among the young, thus it is premature to extend the 
interpretation of these differences. However, on the age 
matter, a qualitative study has shown that students in the age 
19 to 22 did have an understanding of personalization [15].  
Most of the groups mentioned indirectly that they 
encountered targeted and personalized content on their most 
popular social media platforms (Instagram, TikTok, 
Snapchat, YouTube), before we asked questions related to 
personalization. TikTok was predominant, and many 
participants said that they quickly observed that they were 
receiving personalized content while on TikTok. “But like, 
the thing about TikTok is that they notice what you like, so 
they come up with suggestions on videos for you. If, for 
example, you like a football video, then a lot more football 
videos may show up”, explained Marcus (15-16). Meredith 
(17-18) also emphasized and showed a broad understanding 
of targeted and personalized content: «There are algorithms 
and such, aren’t there? That somehow find out what you look 
at, what you like and what you sort of bump into, or what you 
search for and such. That's what kind of makes my TikTok 
full of food and humor, while um others are full of other 
things.” As found by Swart [16], some of the algorithms that 
personalize content are easier to recognize than others. For 
instance, when labelled as ‘suggestions for you’ or ‘for you’, 
content can more easily be recognized as personalized 
compared to more subtle personalization [16]. This was also 
the case for the participants in our study. Several of the 
participants explicitly mentioned the ‘For You’ page on 
TikTok, revealing their reflections on the targeted and 
personalized content. They also pointed out that the content 
they encountered on their social media platforms was 
uniquely selected for them. For example, when we asked 
what they saw while on TikTok, Victoria (15-16) said: “It’s 
of course very different the content we get, because it 
[TikTok] tries to like show you videos that it thinks you will 
like. So, it’s kind of very different from person to person.”  
It emerged through the interviews that most participants 
had experiences where their engagement to specific content 
or items on social media and/or online browsing would lead 
to related advertisement. As Regina (18-19) put it: “Like, if I 
search for something on a regular website, it’s often that I see 
advertisement for that thing I searched for, when I enter 
Facebook.” Rebecca added: “They kind of want you to click 
on more things, because… Um, one time when I was on 
TikTok, it came up an advertising link for a product that I 
looked at. And then when I went on Instagram, the same thing 
showed up there too [as an advertisement].” Similar 
experiences with online actions resulting in targeted 
advertising across platforms, were reported in a qualitative 
study of Facebook’s newsfeed. Combined, these findings 
point to a blending of commercial and regular content that 
may be difficult for social media users to discern. Hence, it 
might be difficult for adolescents to distinguish whether they 
are being influenced through social media.   
B. 
Emotions  
A majority of the participants explained that they enjoyed 
receiving personalized content because it brought them 
relevant and interesting content, rather than irrelevant and 
uninteresting. This was prominent both for regular content 
and for commercial content and advertising. For example, 
when we asked participants how they felt when they received 
targeted and personalized content, Joanna (16-17) replied: 
“It’s nice, then only content you like to watch appears”, with 
some fellow classmates agreeing with her. Even though 
Joanna did not use the word ‘influence’, she indirectly 
conveyed that personalized content had a positive influence 
on her daily life and well-being. Other participants shared 
similar appreciations of social media’s positive influence. 
Enjoyment of targeted and personalized content has been 
reported earlier, for instance with young people emphasizing 
the benefits of recommended systems [16].  
Conversely, several of the participants expressed that they 
felt unease towards targeted and personalized content. “It’s 
like seeing my phone predict my next choice (…). Your 
phone or an app based on what you have pressed or which 
videos you have liked, somehow in a way can predict how 
you are as a person. It's a little, or it's not a little, it's very 
scary”, said Mia (15-16). Even though many agreed with her 
and shared her fear, several of the participants disagreed and 
held on to the positive sides of personalized content on social 
media. Nevertheless, a couple did express some fear when it 
came to how much the applications knew about them. Lucas 
(16-17 years) explained one of the reasons for why he thought 
of personalization as ‘scary’: “If one is on a website, they 
know exactly how fast I move the mouse to when I press on 
that thing [I’m looking at]. And they can take that data to 
different advertisers.” Not everyone felt unease, however, 
some simply felt annoyed. When Noah (16-17) shared his 
thoughts on targeted and personalized content, he said: 
“Well, it's good that they do it, but it can sometimes be a bit 
too much. For example, if I search for a hoodie I want, then 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-927-0
DIGITAL 2021 : Advances on Societal Digital Transformation

 
advertisements come up all the time for it, for a few months 
on all my social media channels.” His voice stressed the 
words ‘all’ and ‘all the time’. A mixture of negative emotions 
towards receiving targeted content have also been found in 
previous studies; Youn & Kim [13] found that some of the 
young adult participants voiced their experiences with 
personalized advertisement as scary and creepy, whereas 
others found it annoying and irritating. 
Receiving personalized advertisement without ever 
searching for the product was something many participants 
had experienced. Several expressed that they had a feeling 
that the phone could hear them, adding that this experience 
was the scariest when it came to personalization. Miranda 
(15-16) explained: “It has happened to me, that I have talked 
about one thing [verbally], and then a few days later a lot of 
advertisement has shown up for that thing [I talked about]. 
Then I’m like, was I kind of monitored now?” This feeling 
was shared by many participants across interviews. These 
experiences have also been shared by participants in other 
qualitative studies [17][19]. However, these statements 
represent personal theories, theories that have yet to be 
scientifically verified [25]. As Meredith added: ‘It might just 
be a conspiracy theory.”  
No clear age difference was found for the themes relating 
to emotions of enjoyment and unease concerning 
personalized content, although the participants from upper 
secondary school came across as the most reflected age 
group. Furthermore, there were participants across all groups 
who said they did not care that they received personalized 
content. Although the younger participants expressed little 
reflection on the reason, the participants from the two highest 
levels of upper secondary school hypothesized that the lack 
of concern was due to them becoming accustomed or 
acceptive of personalized content. The age group differences 
stand in accordance with the oldest showing better general 
comprehension and expressing more advanced reflections on 
targeted and personalized content. For example, Richard (15-
16) said: “I don’t think as much about it [personalized 
content], because clearly I like it.” On the other hand, the 
older Regina said: “Like, I know many people who thinks it’s 
[personalized content] kind of uncomfortable. But I notice 
that I don’t really care so much about it, because you do 
accept it.” A fellow female classmate Ashley (18-19) added: 
“I think many of us have gotten used to it, being tracked 
online. You are aware of it, but everyone gets tracked online 
anyways, so you can’t really do anything about it unless you 
just decide to not have social media anymore.” Considering 
that adolescents have previously been found to be less 
digitally competent than they themselves believe [5], [6], it 
follows that the lack of concern may be more than 
habituation. The acceptance of algorithmic intervention may 
be partly driven by superficial comprehension of how the 
technology accomplishes personalization, as well as a lack of 
understanding of how it influences them. On the other hand, 
it may also be motivated by benefits that in certain contexts 
are deemed to outweigh the cost of giving up personal data 
[26]. 
C. 
Increasing Use and Appreciation 
Where some participants were mostly uneasy, others were 
ambivalent on the topic of personalization, others again were 
positive. Across several interviews, participants expressed 
how the personalization improved their experiences with 
social media. These participants shared an appreciation 
towards the applications for making social media a nice and 
easy experience with their personalized strategy. For 
example, Maria (16-17) said: “I kind of think that if I only 
got content on my phone that wasn’t interesting to me, I 
probably would have used social media much less. So that’s 
probably the reason to why I use social media a lot, because 
I only receive content I find interesting”, with many of her 
fellow classmates agreeing with her. Her comment sheds 
light on how personalized content not only influences, but 
also increases social media usage. Relatedly, algorithmic 
awareness has previously been found to increase social media 
usage; one proposed explanation is that an adolescent’s 
knowledge of algorithmic selections leads to more control 
and acceptance [8].  
Among the participants in this study, some of the 
youngest males were impressed with the social media 
applications. A few talked about how the algorithm works, 
and even though it scared them to a small extent, it did not 
bother them as much. “It’s actually very impressive. They 
find out what I like very fast”, said David (16-17). This 
echoes the ambivalence expressed by others, possibly 
indicating that not all situations are controllable and not all 
content is acceptable. A few participants explained that they 
were aware of the option to unselect content they are not 
interested in; for example, Rebecca explained that by doing 
this “they [social media platforms] make sure that the content 
[you are not interested in] gets taken away from your feed.” 
At the same time, the participants who brought up this subject 
also had a tendency to add that they rarely made use of the 
option to unselect or block content; unless the content was 
especially disturbing, they would simply scroll on. The 
tendency to ignore rather than block content coincides with 
Swart’s results [16], findings from both studies point to 
acceptance and appreciation of personalized content among 
adolescents. It remains unclear whether the tendency to not 
act, but rather ignore, unwanted content is only due 
appreciation, or whether it also reflects a lack of critical 
reflection and digital competence.  
IV. STRENGTHS AND LIMITATIONS OF THE STUDY 
Our study adds to a research field built mainly on a large 
body of quantitative studies, using focus group interviews 
that contribute insight based on a qualitative approach. This 
is a first strength of the study. Second, internal validity was 
prioritized by including a researcher with experience in 
qualitative research to supervise the data analysis. Third, both 
mixed and same-sex focus groups were used to enable a 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-927-0
DIGITAL 2021 : Advances on Societal Digital Transformation

 
variety of opinions and interactions during the discussions. 
Fourth, our sample size is large considering the qualitative 
design. Throughout the interviews most themes and topics 
were repeated, supporting the assumption that topics relevant 
to personalized content on social media was sufficiently 
described and discussed. Fifth, most of the participants were 
unaware of the monetary compensation prior to volunteering, 
hence financial motivation was likely not present. 
There are some limitations to this study that are important 
to mention. First and foremost, although the study was 
designed to be explorative, we might have missed 
determinants due to selection bias. Moreover, a rather 
homogeneous sample was included, particularly in upper 
secondary school where female participants outnumbered the 
males. Additionally, this study is based on a cross section. 
Even though we did find differences across age and gender, 
we do have the grounds to predict individual development 
over time. Finally, it should be noted that the study was 
conducted in Norway where internet usage and social media 
are widely common [2]. This may cause a skew in our 
participants’ experiences on social media and their 
understanding of personalization; although their digital 
competence may have shortcomings, it may still be more 
advanced than what can be observed among adolescents in 
other countries in- and outside Europe. Consequently, our 
results may not be generalizable to populations where social 
media are less common and digital competence is lower. 
V. CONCLUSION 
Social media were actively used by all participants, with 
TikTok, Snapchat and Instagram being used the most. The 
majority of the participants revealed that they did not have a 
plan when using social media, many tended towards using 
different 
systems 
for 
recommendations. 
Most 
had 
encountered targeted content, but only the older participants 
delivered reflections on how their previous actions could 
facilitate this personalization. Personalized content improved 
experiences with social media for several participants, which 
also led to increased social media usage. Regarding their 
emotions towards targeted content, the participants typically 
enjoyed and appreciated personalized content. Some, 
however, shared sentiments of unease, this was predominant 
for targeted advertisement. Moreover, some of the 
participants did not care whether they received targeted 
content, instead they stated that they had chosen to ‘just 
accept it’. This may represent a lack of choice when it comes 
to receiving personalized content, particularly salient for 
adolescents who want to be on social media partly due to fear 
of missing out. Few participants used available options to 
block content, most would simply scroll on. Unexpectedly, 
several participants believed that their phone could hear 
them. Even though the participants themselves assumed that 
this was a conspiracy theory, it was a prominent finding and 
a sentiment shared by participants across interviews. This 
finding exemplifies that adolescents’ understanding of social 
media personalization does not always reflect advanced 
digital competence. Future research should aim for 
longitudinal studies that follow individuals’ development 
over time, to obtain more accurate predictions and a more 
comprehensive overview over adolescents’ experience with 
targeted and personalized content on social media. This work 
is currently ongoing by this project group. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This study received funding from Kristiania University 
College. The authors thank Ringerike municipality for their 
cooperation and help with recruitment, and all the adolescents 
that volunteered as participants in the study. 
REFERENCES  
[1] Statistisk sentralbyrå [Statistics Norway], “Bruk av ulike 
medier, etter kjønn og alder [Use of different media, by gender 
and age],” SSB.no, 2021. [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.ssb.no/statbank/table/12947/ 
[2] A. Bakken, “Ungdata 2021: Nasjonale resultater [Young data 
2021: National results],” NOVA, 2021. 
[3] Medietilsynet [The Norwegian Media Authority], “Barn og 
medier 2020: Om sosiale medier og skadelig innhold på nett 
[Children and media 2020: On social media and harmful 
content online],” Medietilsynet, 2020. 
[4] A. Orben, “Teenagers, screens and social media: a narrative 
review of reviews and key studies,” Soc. Psychiatry Psychiatr. 
Epidemiol., vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 407–414, 2020. 
[5] E. Porat, I. Blau, and A. Barak, “Measuring digital literacies: 
Junior high-school students’ perceived competencies versus 
actual performance,” Comput. Educ., vol. 126, no. June, pp. 
23–36, 2018. 
[6] F. Khan and E. Vuopala, “Digital competence assessment 
across generations: A Finnish sample using the digcomp 
framework,” Int. J. Digit. Lit. Digit. Competence, vol. 10, no. 
2, pp. 15–28, 2019. 
[7] E. Powers, “My News Feed is Filtered?: Awareness of news 
personalization among college students,” Digit. Journal., vol. 
5, no. 10, pp. 1315–1335, 2017. 
[8] M. Eslami et al., “I always assumed that I wasn’t really that 
close to [her]": Reasoning about invisible algorithms in news 
feeds,” in Proceedings of the Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (CHI), 2015, pp. 153–162. 
[9] L. A. Shapiro and G. Margolin, “Growing up wired: Social 
networking sites and adolescent psychosocial development,” 
Clin. Child Fam. Psychol. Rev., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 1–18, 2014. 
[10] V. Schønning, G. J. Hjetland, L. E. Aarø, and J. C. Skogen, 
“Social media use and mental health and well-being among 
adolescents – a scoping review,” Front. Psychol., vol. 11, p. 
1949, 2020. 
[11] S. Livingstone, G. Mascheroni, and E. Staksrud, “European 
research on children’s internet use: Assessing the past and 
anticipating the future,” New Media Soc., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 
1103–1122, 2018. 
[12] P. M. Valkenburg, A. Meier, and I. Beyens, “Social media use 
and its impact on adolescent mental health: An umbrella review 
of the evidence,” Curr. Opin. Psychol., vol. 44, pp. 58–68, 
2022. 
[13] S. Youn and S. Kim, “Newsfeed native advertising on 
Facebook: young millennials’ knowledge, pet peeves, 
reactance and ad avoidance,” Int. J. Advert., vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 
651–683, 2019. 
[14] E. Van den Broeck, K. Poels, and M. Walrave, “How do users 
evaluate personalized Facebook advertising? An analysis of 
consumer- and advertiser controlled factors,” Qual. Mark. Res., 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-927-0
DIGITAL 2021 : Advances on Societal Digital Transformation

 
vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 309–327, 2020. 
[15] A. Oeldorf-Hirsch and P. Srinivasan, “An unavoidable 
convenience: How post-millennials engage with the news that 
finds them on social and mobile media,” Journalism, 2021. 
[16] J. Swart, “Experiencing algorithms: How young people 
understand, feel about, and engage with algorithmic news 
selection on social media,” Soc. Media Soc., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 
1–11, 2021. 
[17] M. Eslami et al., “First I ‘like’ it, then I hide it: Folk theories 
of social feeds,” Conf. Hum. Factors Comput. Syst. - Proc., pp. 
2371–2382, 2016. 
[18] O. Alvarado and A. Waern, “Towards algorithmic experience: 
Initial efforts for social media contexts,” Conf. Hum. Factors 
Comput. Syst. - Proc., vol. 2018-April, pp. 1–9, 2018. 
[19] T. Bucher, “The algorithmic imaginary: exploring the ordinary 
affects of Facebook algorithms,” Inf. Commun. Soc., vol. 20, 
no. 1, pp. 30–44, 2017. 
[20] A. Orben, T. Dienlin, and A. K. Przybylski, “Social media’s 
enduring effect on adolescent life satisfaction,” Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. U. S. A., vol. 116, no. 21, pp. 10226–10228, 2019. 
[21] S. Wilkinson, “Analysing focus group data,” in Qualitative 
Research, D. Silverman, Ed. Sage, 2011, pp. 83–100. 
[22] R. A. Krueger and M. A. Casey, Focus Groups. A Practical 
Guide for Applied Research, 5th ed. Sage Publications, 2014. 
[23] S. Brinkmann and S. Kvale, Interviews: Learning the Craft of 
Qualitative Research Interviewing (vol. 3). Sage Publications, 
2015. 
[24] A. Dyrendal and D. Jolley, “Conspiracy theories in the 
classroom: Problems and potential solutions,” Religions, vol. 
11, no. 10, pp. 1–11, 2020. 
[25] E. Pan, J. Ren, M. Lindorfer, C. Wilson, and D. Choffnes, 
“Panoptispy: Characterizing audio and video exfiltration from 
Android applications,” Proc. Priv. Enhancing Technol., vol. 
2018, no. 4, pp. 33–50, 2018. 
[26] N. Bol et al., “Understanding the effects of personalization as 
a privacy calculus: Analyzing self-disclosure across health, 
news, and commerce contexts,” J. Comput. Commun., vol. 23, 
no. 6, pp. 370–388, 2018. 
 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-927-0
DIGITAL 2021 : Advances on Societal Digital Transformation

