Enhanced Stakeholder Socialization using Common Language in Agile BPM 
Living business processes models instead of rigid documentations 
 
Marco Mevius 
HTWG Konstanz 
Constance, Germany 
mmevius@htwg-konstanz.de 
Erich Ortner 
TECHNUM 
Constance, Germany 
e.ortner@technum.biz 
Peter Wiedmann 
AXON IVY AG 
Munich, Germany 
peter.wiedmann@axonivy.com 
 
 
Abstract- Business Process Management (BPM) and its 
supporting systems (BPMS) focus on business processes 
without sufficiently taking all stakeholders into account. 
Instead, the focus is put on the modeling and execution of 
business processes. Rigid business process documentations, 
long update cycles and insufficient understanding of business 
process models are the results. In this paper, we present how to 
use common language to simplify and further develop existing 
methods aiming at “living” business processes instead of rigid 
documentations. We enhance the innovative agile method 
BPM(N)Easy1.2, which includes a supporting mobile application 
called BPM Touch. This combination allows the powerful 
usage 
of 
common 
language with 
BPM 
and 
enables 
stakeholders to better “socialize” with one another in the 
context of business processes and their management. The 
application of the method is illustrated with the help of a 
public administration sample. The paper concludes with a 
summary and outlook on further research. 
 
Keywords-computational 
society 
architecture; 
business 
process; common languagey; agile bpm. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Business Process Management is becoming more and 
more an important discipline in organizations. High 
dependencies and fast moving changes of the business 
processes and general business conditions are reasons 
behind this trend [1]. Because of this importance, many 
BPM approaches and tools have been developed by 
different researchers and software companies. These BPM 
approaches can be categorized in traditional and agile 
approaches. Both categories deliver frameworks which 
describe how to handle current BPM challenges, e.g., 
[2][3][4][5]. In general, the approaches cover all phases of a 
business process lifecycle, starting with modeling business 
processes, analyzing and automating through monitoring 
and optimizing them. Besides the BPM approaches, a lot of 
BPM systems are available. Only on the German market, 
Fraunhofer [6] investigated over fifty different BPMSs 
which support BPM experts, e.g., in modeling or automating 
business processes. Nowadays, these approaches and tools 
are increasingly used to set up a successful technical BPM 
environment in companies. Aside from positive effects, 
such as measuring Key Performance Indicator (KPI), 
monitoring of the executed business processes [7], and 
efficient automated workflows [8], this setup also brings 
along several challenges. Failing BPM trainings [9] or 
outdated business process documentations [10] are well-
known examples. Furthermore, the interpretation of 
business process models is affected by the specific 
knowledge of each person [11]. These problems arise 
because of complex implementations and long update cycles 
or approaches, which are for technical BPM experts only. In 
the end, the involvement of all stakeholders breaks down. 
This leads to rigid models instead of “living” business 
processes within a successful socialized BPM philosophy. 
From the authors’ point of view, a promising option and 
solution out of this scenario is the application of agile 
methods and corresponding tools. Agility is defined as a 
successful balance between flexibility and robustness [12]. 
Given samples, e.g., out of the software engineering branch 
show how successful the usage of agile methods can be. 
Based on the Agile Manifest [13], which describes rules for 
interacting in an agile manner, methods such as Scrum [14] 
or Extreme Programming [15] are applied in a lot of 
software projects to implement new products successfully. 
The results of this application are, e.g., decreased costs and 
higher user acceptance. Also in the branch of BPM agile 
methods are applied more and more. BPM(N)Easy1.2 [4] is 
one example. BPM(N)Easy1.2 describes a combination 
between BPM and the business process modeling language 
BPMN 2.0 with the ambition of providing a method which 
makes the traditional phases of BPM [2] – modeling, 
analyzing, execution, optimization – more agile and easier.  
However, there are still challenges which are not solved 
in a satisfying way. For instance, synchronization and 
interaction between all stakeholders are fraught with 
misunderstandings 
[16]. 
Interaction 
describes 
the 
collaboration 
between 
the 
stakeholders 
in 
general, 
synchronization the explicit knowledge update of each other 
c.f. Mevius et al.[17]. Therefore, business processes are 
often inconsistent or give a biased view on the reality. 
Another problem is that the high amount of information and 
needs regarding a business process cannot be captured 
without expending a lot of time and effort [18]. But, as 
Mayr [19] mentioned, the aim should be to “more act, less 
plan” business processes. In addition, Hauser [20] speaks 
about “five social feelings”, which have to be included for 
successful business process management, e.g., the feeling of 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

anger can be a positive or negative driver of action within a 
business process activity. 
To enable agile BPM to counter these challenges, this 
paper introduces the application of common language as 
fundament of methods. Furthermore, this paper describes 
how existing approaches can be improved with the help of 
common language and enabled for Social Computing. 
Therefore, common language defines both, the language 
which is used for a “normal” conversation and the language 
which is used for an expert talk [21], e.g., discussion about a 
parking slot approval by the public administration. 
Furthermore, 
from 
the 
authors’ 
perspective, 
Social 
Computing describes the stakeholder (human) interactions, 
which are supported by different Information Technology 
(IT) systems. Referencing to [22], stakeholders use IT to 
generate new content together, e.g., new business processes. 
The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 describes 
the evolution towards Social Computing and introduces a 
Social Computing architecture. Section 3 applies this 
architecture and analyses related work regarding the usage 
of common language in BPM and other related disciplines. 
In Section 4, the application of common language in agile 
business process management is described by means of the 
project “Smart City Constance”. Section 5 introduces the 
existing BPM(N)Easy1.2 method and demonstrates where and 
how common language can be applied within an agile 
method. Furthermore, a tool support is illustrated. Section 6 
presents a conclusion and outlook. 
II. 
SOCIAL COMPUTING 
Social Computing empowers individual stakeholders 
independent of their IT skill level [22]. For instance, 
stakeholders are enabled to share their creativity or expertise 
with the help of (Web) applications.  Fig. 1 displays the 
different layers of a Computational Society Architecture.  
 
Figure 1. Computational Society Architecture 
 
Furthermore, social interaction and content sharing are 
becoming more and more important. Pure technique-
focused requirements lose in value. First approaches for this 
shift can already be found in [23]. Ortner [23] describes a 
matrix, which can be used to capture all requirements for an 
application system, e.g., business process applications. 
These requirements can be technical as well as economic or 
human-oriented. 
Based on initial events, IT (c.f. yellow layers in Fig. 1) 
provides supporting technologies. With the help of these 
technologies all stakeholders (humans) can interact and 
synchronize themselves regarding knowledge and the 
interaction context. Application systems, which are based 
on this architecture (Fig. 1) depicts how humans, technique 
and organization work together [24].  
The following sections focus on the ecosystem of agile 
business process management. 
III. 
RELATED WORK 
The direct linking of the (human) language with digital 
applications is a fundamental objective of language-based 
computer science [21]. If an application system, e.g., a 
complex workflow application or a customer relationship 
system, is introduced or developed individually, the 
requirements of the future end users must be collected and 
described as completely as possible from a technical point 
of view [25]. The aim should be the attainment of a mutual 
understanding of all stakeholders: end users, BPM, IT 
experts and management.  
This section links to existing work selected from BPM 
(-related) disciplines, in the context of enhancing 
communication between as well as understanding and 
involving all stakeholders.  
Moody 
[26] 
defined 
principles 
for 
designing 
cognitively effective visual notations, aiming for an 
optimized human communication and problem solving. For 
instance, the principle of “Perceptual Discriminability” 
describes that different symbols should be strictly 
distinguishable from each other. In [27], Evans introduces 
the approach of "Domain Driven Design" in which the goal 
of integrating the user directly in the conception and design 
phase is claimed. In addition to formulating software 
requirements, the end users are also involved in the design 
and modeling phase of the software. On one hand, this 
increases the understanding of the IT experts for the domain 
and its issues, on the other hand, end users are introduced in 
the process early on and are quickly able to detect design 
errors or misunderstandings. User stories, which are 
formulated by the end users, serve the purpose of describing 
the future software system. In general, a user story describes 
a requirement from the user’s perspective. To develop 
uniform user stories to different patterns, formulations such 
as "As a <user role>, I <want/need/can/etc.> <goal> 
<reason> " can be used. In this context, communication 
counts more [28] than the actual software requirement. 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Another 
approach 
is 
called 
Very 
Lightweight 
Modelling Language (VLML) [29]. This approach follows 
the idea of combining the expressive power and ease of 
natural language, rapid and easy sketching and functions to 
structure, analyze and validate models. Even these 
approaches [26][27][29] extend the possibilities, they do not 
provide an entire support of common language.  
Within quality management, a continuous improvement 
and involvement of stakeholders is required. For this 
purpose, different approaches, such as total cycle time, 
Kaizen and Lean Sigma have been developed [30]. For 
instance, Lean Sigma leads an improvement of the product 
and process quality, on one hand, and, on the other hand, it 
increases the performance of business processes. In order to 
involve stakeholders, audits, which are conducted internally 
or externally, are used to interview the user directly. As a 
result of these interviews, the quality management can 
interact to improve the quality of, e.g., an automated 
production process. Nevertheless, usually, the audits are too 
rarely held so that the involvement of the stakeholders are 
too less.    
Schnabel et al. [5] describe how stakeholders can define 
business process requirements effectively. Hereby, the 
approach suggests a modeling language (Language for 
Lightweight Process Modelling (LLPM)), which keeps 
away (technical) information from the participants, without 
losing the opportunity of business process automation. 
Concepts of representation and visual composition are used 
by Antunes et al. [31]. The approach focuses on the 
perspective of end users while the modeling of business 
processes. For instance, business process activities can be 
enriched by adding annotations in form of text or pictures to 
a business process element. This leads to an enhanced 
understanding of the models. Another method [33] suggests 
the connections of additional information as natural 
language artifacts to business processes elements. Within 
this artifact, the identifier label of a business process activity 
is mentioned and connected. By providing this “common 
understandable” information, a higher integration of 
employees, especially of the operative business (non-IT-
specialists) can be reached. Furthermore, Bruno et al. [34] 
introduce a method, which focuses on Social Media 
integration in BPM. Hereby, they use different aspects, such 
as real-time collaboration to support the activities of BPM. 
Rigid structures, which are identified in, e.g., models of 
business process or role models, can be relaxed. However, 
especially in agile environments even higher flexibility is 
required, e.g., not only the feedbacks of all stakeholders 
have to be collected frequently. Moreover, automated 
business processes need to be developed and adapted very 
flexible. 
Last, but not least, there are informal options for 
communicating with stakeholders defined and implemented 
by industry players [26]. Among these, for instance, existing 
notation standards as the modeling language Business 
Process Modeling and Notation (BPMN 2.0) [35] are 
modified for a specific goal. One approach comes with a 
BPM suite called Axon.ivy [36]. Within the tool, the BPMN 
2.0 standard elements can be enriched in different ways, 
e.g., by adding user interface drafts directly on an activity. 
Furthermore, Barker [37] has defined a natural-language-
based normative language which is used by Oracle 
modeling tools. 
All sketched approaches allow a far-reaching usage of 
BPM. However, there is still a critical gap between 
stakeholders e.g. end users and IT experts. Moreover, the 
stakeholder involvement in BPM projects and their success 
is still not satisfying, c.f. study to BPM projects [18]. 
During the next sections it will be illustrated how the 
interaction and synchronization of all stakeholders, 
especially involving end users, can be enhanced within 
existing methods by using common language. 
IV. 
SCENARIO 
A business process model has been chosen to 
demonstrate the active usage of common language with 
agile BPM. The business process is taken from a real 
business process model repository of the innovative project 
“Smart City Constance”. The project deals with Social 
Computing in the context of public administration. The 
business process model describes the sequence of activities 
which have to be executed to approve a request for reserved 
car parking. Furthermore, the involved stakeholders each 
bring along different knowledge and motivation, e.g., a 
citizen wants to have a parking space as soon as possible, 
but the public authority has to follow the predefined 
business process. The scenario describes two iterations of 
capturing, modeling the business process and involving all 
required stakeholders. The business process model is 
modeled with BPMNEasy1.2 and executed on the mobile 
application BPM Touch [38]. BPMNEasy1.2 is a business 
process modeling language which uses BPMN 2.0, but only 
with a specific element set. In addition, it is possible to add 
some media files, e.g., video sequence to the modeled 
concepts. Table I illustrates an extract of the first iteration of 
capturing information, which is required for an initial 
version of a business process model. 
TABLE I. EASY CAPTURE SHEET IN ITERATION 1 
 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

The “Easy Capture Sheet” lists all BPMNEasy1.2 elements 
(table I, column 1). For instance, the first activity “Entering 
request” describes how a stakeholder has to enter the 
required data for a car parking slot request. Instead of using 
textual business rules or complex model constructs, the 
BPMNEasy1.2 element is enriched with common language 
media files. The attached image (table I, X*1) and the 
connected video sequence (table I, X*2) are used to explain 
the activity in detail. In addition to the description of the 
specific activities, the executing roles are added directly as a 
property to each activity. Furthermore, the color of the 
activities presents directly which kind of activity the 
stakeholders have to execute: manual (green form), semi-
automated (blue form) and automated (red form). After 
finishing the “Easy Capture Sheet”, the modeled business 
process can already be executed (e.g. in a test run) by the 
responsible 
stakeholders. 
As 
stated 
in 
the 
agile 
methodology, following each iteration, a useable “product” 
must be available (although it is not completely finished). 
Before and after the execution, feedback was collected from 
the stakeholders. One feedback was that after entering the 
data, there are eight alternatives possible depending on the 
branch, location and type of the parking space request. The 
feedback is documented in the “Easy Capture Sheet” again. 
Table 2 shows an extract of the result of the second 
iteration.  
TABLE II. EASY CAPTURE SHEET IN ITERATION 2 
 
Distinguishing from the first iteration, a new element in 
form of an exclusive gateway (XOR) has been added (table 
II, row 3). A XOR defines that within a business process 
instance only one path can be taken [35]. Instead of 
modeling all possible alternative business processes paths 
graphically, the alternatives have been captured in common 
language. After this modification, the business process was 
executed again. 
The required information and data have been captured 
according to an agile method, e.g., to prove the correctness, 
stakeholders interacted and communicated with each other 
closely. In the following section, the usage of common 
language with an agile environment will be described in 
detail. 
V. 
ENHANCED STAKEHOLDER 
SOCIALIZATION USING COMMON 
LANGUAGE IN AGILE BPM 
 
According to Schienmann [37], three language types 
can be distinguished as follows: 
(1) The language of stakeholders (common language) as a 
problem-oriented 
language 
to 
communicate 
the 
requirements to an application system/business process, 
which has to be developed. 
(2) The language of BPM experts, e.g., diagrams languages 
such as BPMN 2.0, which are solution-oriented to model the 
requirements of the stakeholders with respect to the IT 
experts. 
(3) The language of IT experts, e.g., programming 
languages such as Java in order to realize, e.g., an 
automated business process. 
This paper focuses in particular on human orientation 
and the usage of common language. For instance, according 
to [38] the quality of the (graphical) representation of 
business process models depends on the modeling 
experience of the stakeholders. Differences lead to errors 
and misunderstandings if there is no enhanced way of 
communication and involvement. Corresponding to Ortners 
medial-real world model [39], this problem can be solved by 
improving the connection between the medial and real 
world. Within the medial world, requirements are defined 
which will be executed in the real world and monitored by 
the medial world again. The underlying architecture of 
Computational Society Architecture, in which stakeholders 
and IT systems are combined, has been depicted in Fig. 1. 
The following sections describe how common language can 
be used to improve the collaboration and involvement of all 
stakeholders in agile environments. 
A. 
Agile BPM 
Various methods introduce agile BPM, e.g., [4][5]. In 
the this section, the agile method BPM(N)Easy1.2 is used to 
present how and when during the methodology common 
language can be very helpfully applied. BPM(N)Easy1.2 
consists of a modeling language (BPMNEasy1.2), an approach 
(which explains, e.g., the interaction between different 
stakeholders) 
and 
of 
a 
tool 
called 
BPM 
Touch. 
BPM(N)Easy1.2 follows the method term definition of Ortner 
[41].  
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

This combination allows the usage in all steps of Business 
Process Management – from business process capturing and 
modeling through analyzing, automation/execution and 
monitoring without losing its focus on integrating all 
stakeholders. Furthermore, it is possible to cover all layers 
of the Computational Society Architecture (Fig. 1). 
 
Language BPMNEasy1.2 
The elements set (graphic elements which can be used 
for modeling) of BPMNEasy1.2 specifies the BPMN 2.0 
element set to a compact number of intuitive elements. 
BPMNEasy1.2 admits only elements which are generally 
known in common language – simple events (start, end, 
intermediate), 
simple 
gateways 
(AND, 
OR) 
and 
tasks/activities. For instance, there is an AND symbol which 
corresponds to the common understanding of “and”. In 
addition to each graphical element, media files can be 
added. For example, it is possible to add a video sequence to 
an activity to describe it in more detail. The compression at 
the level of modeling does not affect the XML Schema 
Definition (XSD) of BPMN 2.0. Every BPMNEasy1.2 model 
is stored in the form of BPMN 2.0. The BPMN 2.0 Data 
Object is used to keep a record of possible media files [4]. 
 
Approach 
Two connected cycles build the path of interaction and 
synchronization between all stakeholders. One cycle is used 
to capture or enhance business process models such as 
BPMNEasy1.2. At the beginning of an iteration, BPMNEasy1.2 
models are created. All stakeholders define the sequence of 
the captured activities, gateways and events. 
The 
BPMNEasy1.2 models are especially used to design the flow in 
general. If necessary, e.g., to describe an activity more in 
detail or to store a complex business rule, media files are 
used to add the additional information. All information is 
recorded 
in 
common 
language 
which 
makes 
it 
understandable for everybody. The modeled and formulated 
requirements can be the basis for modeling and 
implementation of enriched BPMN 2.0 business processes. 
This enrichment can lead to an automated workflow 
application. Therefore, the responsible stakeholders select a 
BPMNEasy1.2 model and a number of elements to work on. 
Parallel to the more technical work, stakeholders can 
directly start to create documentations or trainings. Within 
the flow path (within the iteration) quality gates are 
included. These quality gates are used to ensure that all 
stakeholders approve that the result, e.g., an automated 
business process, corresponds with the BPMNEasy1.2 models 
and captured media files (synchronization and acceptance). 
In addition, the second cycle describes the steps of 
analyzing/execution 
and 
optimizing. 
Predefined 
key 
performance indicators can be used for evaluating the 
stakeholders’ feedback, which have been collected within 
the business process execution. Immediately after the 
acceptance, new elements are captured or selected. 
 
 
BPM Touch tool 
The mobile application BPM Touch follows innovative 
usability concepts. The focus is on user friendly features and 
the usage of mobile potentials. The modeling and user 
interface supports a revolutionary option for modeling 
business processes on mobile devices. For instance, after a 
business process has been selected by a simple touch on the 
sidebar, the business process model appears and can be 
directly edited. The flexible navigation is completed by a 
menu bar on the top, which provides basic functions to, for 
instance, create or save a new business process and by a 
dynamic pie menu to model a process flow very rapidly. 
Furthermore, media files can be assigned to every element 
of BPMNEasy1.2. Audio files, which record, e.g., an oral 
description of an activity, video sequences, images and files, 
can be attached. Therefore, BPM Touch automatically loads 
the appropriate device, e.g., digital camera for video 
sequences. In addition, a “share”-button allows the direct 
distribution of BPMNEasy1.2 models to all stakeholders. For 
instance, the models can be exported to Microsoft 
PowerPoint for summarizing the complete documentation 
into 
a 
PowerPoint 
presentation. 
Summarizing 
the 
BPM(N)Easy1.2 method is based on the following foundations 
(c.f. [16]) : 
 
Common language, modeling languages, and 
programming languages 
The common language is used throughout the entire 
business process management to communicate with all 
involved stakeholders. For instance, it can be necessary to 
transfer a business process model into a programming 
language, for example, to implement an automated 
workflow application. This is done by using agile concepts 
and focusing on interaction and synchronization in common 
language. 
 
Medial and Real World 
Due to the iterative and incremental approach, in the 
context of BPM(N)Easy1.2 the medial/digital control level is 
closely linked to the level of doing (real world). Hereby, 
e.g., misinterpretations of stakeholders can be identified and 
corrected quickly. 
 
Terms and anchor 
Dealing with term defects, such as synonyms, 
homonyms or false identifiers is intuitively supported by the 
usage of common language modeling. For instance, a 
transfer to other modeling languages is considerably 
simplified due to the iterative increased understanding of all 
involved stakeholders. Three anchors are taken as the 
primary goals of common language modeling: interaction, 
synchronization and quality. For example, the anchor of 
synchronization builds the organizational basis for a 
structured and proper coordination of all stakeholders 
involved. 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

However, the higher interaction and synchronization 
within agile methods can only lead to an enhanced 
stakeholder involvement if the project content is to be 
understandable for everybody. Otherwise, it may lead to 
quality issues of business processes [42]. Indeed, for some 
reasons, there is not enough time or effort spent for the 
required stakeholders coordination and communication. 
Counteracting this gap, e.g., to guarantee the quality of 
business processes, the following section explains different 
options to enhance the involvement of stakeholders during 
the application of an agile method to reach an enhanced 
implementation of the Computational Society Architecture. 
B. 
Socialization of stakeholders 
Fig. 2 illustrates the BPM(N)Easy1.2 approach and marks 
the parts in which stakeholder involvement is specifically 
enhanced: 
 
Figure 2. Illustration of the BPM(N)Easy1.2 approach 
On one hand, stakeholders can be directly involved 
during the capturing and modeling of the business 
processes. On the other hand, BPM(N)Easy1.2 focuses on the 
increased involvement while executing or analyzing the 
documented business processes. The areas of optimizing 
and enriching the business processes models, e.g., towards 
BPMN 2.0, are omitted because of required expert 
knowledge which cannot be expected from all stakeholders. 
For instance, to automate business processes a higher 
technical skill is needed.  
The approach described in Fig. 2 has been applied to 
the scenario presented in Section IV. Several aspects of an 
enhanced stakeholder involvement were identified: 
 
Enhanced documentation and publication  
Within BPM(N)Easy1.2, common language is used to 
simplify the documentation and publication of business 
process models. In fact, there are stakeholders who are not 
able to understand a graphic modeling language completely. 
To counteract this, the business process models can be 
exported or published in views which are comprehensible 
intuitively. For instance, all required information can be 
displayed as shown in table 1 and table 2. In addition, the 
BPM Touch application provides a clear overview of the 
business process model elements. The following screenshot 
presents the user interface, which displays all information 
on the business process model element.  
 
Figure 3. Screenshot of BPM Touch media file overview 
As shown in Fig. 3, all collected common language media 
files are displayed at the bottom of the screen and can be 
opened by one touch easily. 
 
Enhanced capturing of information 
Concerning capturing of information, BPM(N)Easy1.2 
offers innovative ways. For instance, instead of modeling all 
paths of an OR gateway, BPMNEasy1.2 uses audio or video 
sequences, in which common language is used to explain 
the required behavior of the executing stakeholder. Fig.4 
illustrates the difference between a traditional notation and 
BPM(N)Easy1.2. 
 
Figure 4. Illustration of modeling a OR gateway 
 
As presented in Fig. 4, BPM(N)Easy1.2 models are highly 
compressed. Compared to traditional notations, in which 
already few alternatives can be confusing, the flow is still 
clear. In addition, the active recording of stakeholders leads 
to a higher involvement within the modeling phase. 
 
Enhanced quality  
Gebhart et al. describe how quality of business 
processes can be improved and assured [42]. According to 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

this, the scenario described two iterations. Already in the 
second iteration, the collected feedback was taken to 
optimize the business process model. The usage of common 
language requires no training and motivates stakeholders to 
integrate their feedback. Predefined quality attributes are 
taken to check the expected quality. Furthermore, the 
quality attributes can be formulated in common language.  
 
Enhanced interaction using BPM(N)Easy1.2 role 
concept 
The usage of concrete BPM roles improves the 
interaction and synchronization within a BPM project. The 
screenshot in Fig. 5 presents a view of modeling a business 
process model on BPM Touch. 
 
Fig. 5. Screenshot of BPM Touch modeling perspective 
BPM(N)Easy1.2 adapts (c.f. Scrum [14]) and introduces three 
roles: BPM expert, IT expert and (key) user. In Fig. 5, the 
BPM expert uses the BPMNEasy1.2 model to capture all 
information and synchronize all roles in predefined time 
slots. Furthermore, the BPM expert instructs the other 
stakeholders. Hereby, IT experts are in charge of required 
software implementations and (key) users coach each other 
or execute the business processes. For communication, all 
roles use common language so that everybody is able to be 
involved instead of excluded. Potential misunderstandings, 
e.g., different interpretations of a specific term will be 
caught and solved in the next iteration. The BPM expert 
accompanies and promotes the discussion between all 
stakeholders. With the help iterative adjustments, e.g., the 
business process models or the user interfaces of an 
application, the optimization will be done. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK 
In this paper, common language has been applied in an 
agile BPM environment to promote the involvement of all 
stakeholders by increasing the general access and 
understanding of modeled business processes. For this 
purpose, we exemplarily chose the agile BPM method 
BPM(N)Easy1.2 and applied it to a concrete scenario. 
BPM(N)Easy1.2 focuses on describing a method which 
delivers an approach, a language and a tool for business 
process management in an agile environment. The existing 
methods are enhanced by using common language for 
interaction, synchronization and quality assurance based on 
the perspective of the Computational Society Architecture. 
The scenario showed how to use techniques such as the 
“Easy Capture Sheet” and how to apply the innovative BPM 
Touch mobile application. BPM Touch can be used for 
capturing all required information for business process 
models. Furthermore, it has been shown that BPM Touch is 
also useful to increase stakeholder involvement, e.g., in the 
execution and publication phases of business processes. All 
these aspects lead to “living” business processes instead of 
creating rigid documentations. However, the investigation 
of more aspects using common language business process 
management has to be a subject of further research. 
Moreover, more projects such as the modeling project of 
“Smart City Constance” have to be initialized to validate the 
method and concept of common language and social 
stakeholder involvement. 
REFERENCES 
[1] T. M. Bekele and Z. Weihua, “Towards collaborative business 
process management development current and future approaches”, in 
Communication Software and Networks (ICCSN), 2011 IEEE 3rd 
International Conference, 2011, pp.458-462. 
[2] W. M. P. van der Aalst, A. H. M. ter Hofstede and M. Weske, 
“Business Process Management: A Survey”, In: van der Aalst, W. M. 
P; ter Hofstede, A. H. M.; Weske, M. (Hrsg.): Proc. Intl. Conf. on 
Business Process Management (BPM 2003), Lecture Notes in 
Computer Science, Vol. 2678, S. 1–12. Springer Verlag, Berlin, 2003. 
[3] M. Weske, 2007, “Business Process Management: Concepts, 
Languages, Architectures”, Potsdam : Springer Verlag Berlin 
Heidelberg, 2007. 
[4] M. 
Mevius 
and 
P. 
Wiedmann, 
„BPM(N)Easy1.2 
–
Gebrauchssprachliche Gestaltung IT-basierter Prozesse. BSOA 2013. 
8. Workshop „Bewertungsaspekte service- und cloudbasierter 
Achitekturen“ der GI Fachgruppe „Software-Messung und -
Bewertung“, Basel, 2013, pp. 31-46. 
[5] F. Schnabel, Y. Gorronogoitia, M. Radzimski, F. Lecue, N. 
Mehandjiev, G. Ripa, et al.“Empowering Business Users to Model 
and Execute Business Processes”, BPM 2010 Workshops, Springer, 
2011, pp. 433-448. 
[6] Fraunhofer 
IESE, 
“Marktanalyse 
zu 
BPM 
Suites”, 
http://www.iese.fraunhofer.de/content/dam/iese/de/dokumente/oeffen
tliche_studien/Fraunhofer_IESE_Studie_BPM-Suites2013.pdf, 
accessed on 05/21/2014. 
[7] A. Fleischmann and W. Schmidt, “ Business Process Monitoring with 
S-BPM”, S-BPM ONE - Running Processes Communications in 
Computer and Information Science Vol. 360, 2013, pp 274-291. 
[8] B. Weber and W. Wild, “An Agile Approach to Workflow 
Management”, Lecture Notes in Informatics, Modellierung 2004, 
ISBN 3-88579-374-1, pp. 187-202. 
[9] K. Bergener, J. vom Brocke, S. Hofmann, A. Stein and C. vom 
Brocke, „On the importance of agile communication skills in BPM 
education: Design principles for international seminars”, Knowledge 
Management & E-Learning: An International Journal (KM&EL), 
ISSN 2073-7904, EISSN 2073-7904, 2012. 
[10] S. Nurcan and R. Schmidt, “BPM and Social Software”, BPM 2008 
Workshops, LNBIP 17, 2009, pp. 625–634. 
[11] S. Bittmann and O. Thomas, “A theory of practice modelling – 
Elicitation of model pragmatics in dependence to human actions”, 
Lecture Notes in Informatics, Modellierung 2014, ISBN 978-388579-
619-0, p.33-48. 
[12] J. Highsmith, “Agile Software Development Ecosystems”, Pearson 
Education, 2002, pp. 26-34. 
[13] Agile Manifesto, http://agilemanifesto.org, accessed on 05/21/2014. 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

[14] K. Schwaber and J. Sutherland, “The Scrum Guide, The Definitive 
Guide 
to 
Scrum: 
The 
Rules 
of 
the 
Game”, 
2011, 
http://www.scrum.org/Portals/0/Documents/Scrum%20Guides/Scrum
_Guide.pdf, accessed on 05/21/2014. 
[15] K. Beck, “Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace Change”, 
Addison-Wesley Longman, 1999. 
[16] W.M.P. van der Aalst, “Business Process Management: A 
Comprehensive Survey”, Hindawi Publishing Corporation ISRN 
Software 
Engineering 
Vol. 
2013, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2013/507984. 
[17] M. Mevius, E. Ortner and P. Wiedmann, “Gebrauchssprachliche 
Modellierung 
als 
Grundlage 
für 
agiles 
Geschäftsprozessmanagement”, 
Lecture 
Notes 
in 
Informatics, 
Modellierung 2014, ISBN 978-388579-619-0, p.169-184. 
[18] A. Komus, „BPM Best Practice Die wichtigsten Erkenntnisse aus 
aktuellen Praxis Studien Auf dem Weg zu einem ganzheitlichen BPM 
2010, 
http://www.komus.de/fileadmin/downloads/public/2010-
DSAG-BPM.pdf, accessed on 05/21/2014. 
[19] R. C. Mayr, “Keynote to Modellierung 2014”, Vienna, 2014. 
[20] B. 
Hauser, 
“Optimierung 
von 
Prozessen 
in 
der 
internen 
Kommunikation”, Speech on 9th Process Solution Day, Cologne, 
2014. 
[21] E. Heinemann, „ Sprachlogische Aspekte rekonstruierten Denkens, 
Redens und Handelns – Aufbau einer Wissenschaftstheorie der 
Wirtschaftsinformatik“, Gabler Verlag, Wiesbaden, 2006. 
[22] M. Parameswaran and A. Whinston, „Social Computing: an 
overview“,Communications of the Association for Information 
Systems. 2007, Vol. 19, pp. 762-780. 
[23] H. Wedekind and E. Ortner, „Systematisches Konstruieren Von 
Datenbankanwendungen: Zur Methodologie Der Angewandten 
Informatik“, Herrn Prof. Dr. K. F. Bußmann Zum 65. Geburtstag. 
München [u.a.] : Hanser, 1980. 
[24] B. Eller, „Usability Engineering in Der Anwendungsentwicklung: 
Systematische Integration Zur Unterstützung Einer Nutzerorientierten 
Entwicklungsarbeit“, Springer, 2009. 
[25] E. Ortner and B. Schienmann, Normative language approach a 
framework for understanding. Conceptual Modeling — ER '96, 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science Vol. 1157, 1996, pp 261-276. 
[26] D. L. Moody, „The “Physics” of Notations: Toward a Scientific Basis 
for Constructing Visual Notations in Software Engineering“,Ieee 
transactions 
on 
Software 
Engineering, 
vol. 
35, 
no. 
6, 
November/December 2009, p.756-779. 
[27] E. Evans, “Domain-driven design: Tackling complexity in the heart 
of software”, Addison-Wesley. Boston and MA [etc.]. 2003. 
[28] M.Cohn,“UserStories“, 
http://daviding.wordpress.com/2013/07/27/mike-cohn-user-stories/, 
2012, accessed on 05/21/2014. 
[29] M. Glinz, "Very Lightweight Requirements Modeling, " presented at 
the Requirements Engineering Conference (RE), 2010 18th IEEE 
International, 2010, pp. 385-386. 
[30] H.  J.  Schmelzer and W. Sesselmann, „Geschäftsprozessmanagement 
in der Praxis“, Carl Hanser Verlag, München, 2008. 
[31] F. Schnabel, Y. Gorronogoitia, M. Radzimski, F. Lecue, N. 
Mehandjiev, and G. Ripa, “Empowering Business Users to Model and 
Execute Business Processes,” BPM 2010 Workshops, Springer, 2011, 
pp. 433-448. 
[32] P. Antunes, D. Simões, L. Carriço and J. A. Pino, “An end-user 
approach to business process modeling”, Journal of Network and 
Computer Applications 36 (2013), p. 1466 -1479, 2013. 
[33] S. Bittmann, D. Metzger, M. Fellmann and O. Thomas, „Additional 
Information in Business Processes: A Pattern-Based Integration of 
Natural Language Artifacts“, Lecture Notes in Informatics, 
Modellierung 2014, ISBN 978-388579-619-0, p.137-152. 
[34] G. Bruno et al., “Key challenges for enabling agile BPM with social 
software”, in Journal of Software Maintenance and Evolution: 
Research and Practice, 2011, 23; S. 297–326. 
[35] OMG, “Business process model and notation (BPMN)”, Version 2.0, 
2011. 
[36] Axon IVY AG, “BPM Suite Axon.ivy”, http://axonivy.com, accessed 
on 12/03/2014. 
[37] R. Barker, “Case Method: Entity Relationship Modelling” Addison-
Wesley Professional, 1990. 
[38] bamero 
AG, 
“BPM 
Touch® 
- 
The 
Revolution”, 
http://www.bamero.de., accessed on 05/21/2014. 
[39] B. 
Schienmann, 
„Objektorientierter 
Fachentwurf: 
ein 
terminologiebasierter 
Ansatz 
für 
die 
Konstruktion 
von 
Anwendungssystemen“, B.G. Teubner Verlag, Stuttgart, 1997. 
[40] L. 
Burmester, 
Adaptive 
Business-Intelligence-Systeme, 
DOI 
10.1007/978-3-8348-8118-2_3,Vieweg+Teubner 
Verlag 
Springer 
Fachmedien Wiesbaden GmbH, 2011. 
[41] E. Ortner, „Semantisch normierte Anwendungssysteme und die 
>>eingeschränkte Freiheit<< der IT-Nutzer“, in Mittelstraß, J.: Zur 
Philosophie Paul Lorenzens. mentis Verlag, Münster, 2012. 
[42] M. Gebhart, M. Mevius and P. Wiedmann, „ Application of Business 
Process Quality Models in Agile Business Process Management”, 
The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and 
Knowledge Management, ISBN: 978-1-61208-329-2. 
 
 
 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

