A Tool for Analyzing Business Rules Management Solution Implementations
 
Sam Leewis 
Digital Smart Services 
HU University of Applied Sciences Utrecht 
Utrecht, The Netherlands 
sam.leewis@hu.nl 
Koen Smit 
Digital Smart Services 
HU University of Applied Sciences Utrecht 
Utrecht, The Netherlands 
koen.smit@hu.nl
Martijn Zoet 
Optimizing Knowledge-Intensive Business Processes  
Zuyd University of Applied Sciences 
Sittard, The Netherlands 
martijn.zoet@zuyd.nl
Abstract— Evaluating an (implemented) Business Rules 
Management Solution (BRMS) is not a frequently conducted 
process within organizations. A tool is needed, which supports 
this process and supports future BRMS implementations. A 
literature study is conducted on the relevant building blocks of 
a BRMS. The results are validated through qualitative expert 
interviews. This resulted in the BRMS analysis tool that can be 
utilized to structure the analysis for one or multiple BRMS 
implementations. Next, the BRMS analysis tool is applied at 13 
organizations that implemented a BRMS. The BRMS analysis 
tool provides the BRMS implementation stakeholders with a 
tool that structures, in a systematic and controlled way, that is 
capable to analyze a BRMS implementation for one or multiple 
organizations. This research contributes to structured and 
managed information which is important for better business 
and IT alignment. Furthermore, structured and managed 
information contributes towards the easier creation of a 
business case. 
Keywords-Business Rules Management; Business Rules 
Management Solution; Implementation; Analysis tool 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The increasing number of business rules, the pace at which 
the business rules change, the different types of business 
rules, the necessity to execute business rules consistently and 
being transparent towards external stakeholders produce 
many challenges for organizations [1][2]. A business rule is 
defined as ‘’a statement that defines or constrains some 
aspect of the business. It is intended to assert business 
structure or to control or influence the behavior of the 
business.’’ [3]. A systematic and controlled approach is 
required to get a grip on these business rules, which is known 
as Business Rules Management (BRM) [4]–[6]. BRM is 
defined as “a systematic, and controlled approach to get a 
grip on business decisions and business logic to support the 
Elicitation, Design, Specification, Verification, Validation, 
Deployment, Execution, Governance, and Monitoring of both 
business decisions and business logic.”[7]. The solution 
supporting implementing this method in a practical context is 
known as a Business Rules Management Solution (BRMS). 
A BRMS is a configuration of capabilities which supports the 
Elicitation, Design, Specification, Verification, Validation, 
Deployment, Execution, Monitoring, and Governance of 
business rules. Both the BRM System and BRMS support 
Business Rules Management as a method. A distinction is 
needed between a BRM System and a BRMS. A BRM 
System is ‘’a set of software components for the Elicitation, 
Design, Specification, Verification, Validation, Deployment, 
Execution, Monitoring, and Governance of business 
rules’’[5]. The BRMS  contains the BRM System as a whole 
together with the utilization of the capabilities (e.g., the 
processes, data models).  
BRMS research is part of the IS research field. In the IS 
field it is not a habit to publish work on questionnaires or 
surveys, contrary to the alpha sciences where this is usually 
the case [8]–[10].  Publishing created and validated 
questionnaires shows a level of transparency and can thereby 
be utilized by other researchers for future research. 
Furthermore, the field of BRM lacks research focused on the 
organizational implementation of a BRMS and is more 
focused on the technical aspects of a BRMS implementation 
[1][11]. This research contributes to the knowledge on the 
organizational implementation of a BRMS by providing a 
tool that creates the possibility to structure, in a systematic 
and controlled way, the analysis of a BRMS implementation. 
The existing research focused on BRM maturity models is 
relatable towards BRMS implementations [11]–[13]. 
Therefore, it is not possible to structure data focused on 
analyzing a BRMS implementation. To utilize such data, it 
needs to be structured into information [14]. The BRMS 
analysis 
tool 
provides 
that 
structure. 
A 
BRMS 
implementation is more than only data and information; 
knowledge is an important element as well. Davenport and 
Prusak [15] state that: ‘’Knowledge can and should be 
evaluated by the decisions or actions to which it leads’’. This 
research provides organizations with a tool that structures the 
data collection process on how to have the most optimal 
configuration of a BRMS for an organization with different 
specifications. The business rules and the Business Rules 
Management definition define ‘’structure’’ as an important 
element when dealing with data and information, which is 
also supported by Davenport and Prusak’s work on data and 
information [14]. The BRMS analysis tool provides 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

‘’structure’’ in a ‘’systematic’’ and ‘’controlled’’ way when 
analyzing a BRMS implementation for one or multiple 
organizations. 
Furthermore, 
the 
BRMS 
analysis 
tool 
provides 
organizations with the option to get to know more about the 
current or completed BRMS implementation, which can lead 
to the improvement of the current or possible future 
implementations. 
Multiple problems exist in the BRM research field: 1) no 
structure in the data collection process on how to have the 
most optimal configuration of a BRM Solution for an 
organization given their characteristics, 2) no possibility 
exists to get to know more about the current or completed 
BRMS implementation, and 3) no tool exists which supports 
the gathering of cases used in situational artefact construction 
in the BRM field. The situational artifact construction 
technique requires an input of different situations for the 
creation of a situational artifact [16]. 
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: First, 
the research methods that were utilized to create the BRMS 
analysis tool are discussed. Second, this is followed by the 
construction of the BRMS analysis tool, which was the result 
of a literature study. Subsequently, the BRMS analysis tool 
is validated through expert interviews and by utilizing the 
BRMS analysis tool on 13 organizations, distributed over the 
Dutch public and Dutch financial sector. Lastly, the 
conclusions are provided that can be drawn from the results, 
together with a critical view towards the used research 
methods and the results of this study followed by possible 
future research directions. 
II. 
RESEARCH METHOD 
In this research, structured interviews are utilized to gather 
BRMS implementation cases, focused on the specific 
configuration of the BRMS elements (the what?) and specific 
problems that the implementation of BRMS should solve (the 
why?). The BRMS analysis tool is constructed with the use a 
literature review, containing relevant building blocks of a 
BRMS and its implementation (building blocks are elements 
of which a BRMS consists of). The questionnaire is validated 
through expert interviews with experts from the BRM 
community. The experts are chosen on their experience and 
knowledge in the field of BRM and BRMS. The experts 
consisted of a professor lecturing and performing research in 
the field of BRM and BRMS (expert 1), a lecturer and PhD 
with practical and research experience in the field of BRM 
and BRMS (expert 2), and a master-student with 3 years of 
practical and research experience on BRMS capabilities 
(expert 3). All the interviews were conducted in a controlled 
environment and each interview had a length of around 90 
minutes. 
III. 
THE BRMS ANALYSIS TOOL CONSTRUCTION 
The BRMS analysis tool [17] consists of the building 
blocks of a BRMS containing questions related to that 
specific building block. The following subsections contain 
literature supporting the construction BRMS building blocks. 
The upcoming subsections are referring to questions in the 
BRMS analysis tool by ‘’Q#’’.  
A. Organizational characteristics 
The organization information section retrieves specific 
organizational characteristics and are identified as situational 
factors. These questions are focused on retrieving the sector, 
the number of employees, and the scope of the BRMS 
implementation of the organization. Q2 retrieves the number 
of 
employees 
of 
the 
organization 
at 
which 
the 
implementation is conducted. These number of employees 
could influence different implementation setups. Example: 
Organization A with <50 employees possibly needs a 
different setup of BRMS capabilities than Organization B 
with >5000 employees. The employee numbers are adopted 
from previous questionnaires conducted in comparable 
studies in other research fields [6][16]. Q3 intends to retrieve 
the organizational scope at which the BRMS implementation 
is conducted. Three main organizations scopes can be 
identified, which are: Application focused, Line of Business 
focused and Organization-wide. This is supported by the 
work of Nelson et al. [11], which showed the scoping from 
narrow (single application focused) and expanded to Line of 
Business focused and eventually to Organization-wide. This 
question intends to retrieve data about what the scope was of 
the BRMS implementation conducted by the organization.  
B. Characterization of Business Rules Management 
The characterization of BRM section (Q4) defines how 
and why organizations are using BRM and a BRMS. In other 
words, the benefits or advantages of a BRMS [1]–[3], [18], 
[19]. Similar questionnaires in other research fields also 
propose a characterization section and therefore, for this tool, 
this is also adopted [6][16]. 
C.  Business Rules Management Solution Building Blocks 
This section will contain the building blocks of a BRMS. 
Each building block correlates with one of the nine BRM 
capabilities, which are addressed in detail in the work of Smit 
and Zoet [5], and Zoet and Versendaal [6]. Each building 
block has a specific set of questions which are unique to each 
building block and thereby creating possible different BRMS 
configurations. 
 
Elicitation 
The elicitation capability determines the knowledge, 
which realizes the value proposition of the business rules. 
This knowledge needs to be captured from various sources 
including, but not limited to, laws and regulations. The 
second goal of the elicitation capability is to conduct an 
impact analysis. This is only performed when a business rule 
architecture is already in place [5], [20].  
Q6 extracts what sources are used for the elicitation 
capability at a specific organization. For example, Subject-
Experts (people), existing organization regulations and 
guidelines (documents), existing database data, or a 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

combination of the previously mentioned examples. Besides 
extracting what sources are used during elicitation retrieving 
if these sources are actually stored for possible future use is 
covered in Q7. 
Q7 is focused on retrieving if this capability is actually 
used as it was intended to be used. The possibility exists that 
only data is extracted and nothing is done with the sources 
that are used for extracting data. Extra effort is needed when 
new business rules should be created because of the change 
in laws or regulations. The stored sources can be used for the 
type of analysis retrieved in Q8. 
Q8 measures which type of analysis (source analysis and 
scenario analysis) is applied in the elicitation capability. 
Source analysis compares sources (e.g., parliament 
documents versus organization regulations) with each other, 
determines where the source is from and whether the source 
is reliable or not [20]. Scenario analysis is the development 
and comparison of possible business scenarios [20], [21]. A 
combination of both source and scenario analysis is also a 
possibility, also known as a hybrid. 
Originally, impact analysis should be performed in the 
design capability. Nonetheless, the BRM experts state that, in 
practice, this is also performed in the elicitation capability 
(Q9). Impact analysis is conducted when there already is a 
business rule architecture in place [5], [20]. 
 
Design 
The output of the design capability is the business rule 
architecture and contains a combination of context designs 
and derivation structures [5], [20].  
Q10 is focused on retrieving if the 5 V’s (value, velocity, 
volume, variety, and veracity) are taken into account when 
implementing the design capability. The Big Data five V’s 
[22] are adopted and altered to the field of BRM. The BRM 
5 V’s depict the value, velocity, volume, variety, and veracity 
of a decision. Besides these five dimensions concerning 
decisions, good decision-making also depends on the 
assignment of specific and clear roles.  
Rogers and Blenko [23] created the RAPID model to 
clarify the decision-making process (Q11). RAPID stands for 
Recommend, 
Agree, 
Perform, 
Input 
and 
Decide. 
Recommend, people carrying this role are responsible for 
gathering input, and proving the correct data to ensure a 
sensible decision in a correct and timely order. Agree, people 
in this role have the responsibility to state if the 
recommendation is good or not, respond with yes or no or, in 
other words, the so-called right to veto the recommendation. 
Perform, someone or multiple people have the responsibility 
of executing the decision, once the decision is made. Input, 
the role of input is consulted on the decision. Decision, the 
person in the deciding role is the formal decision maker.  
Same as in the elicitation capability, Q12 is focused on 
retrieving if an impact analysis is conducted when there 
already is a business rule architecture in place. The impact 
analysis provides the organization with an overview of which 
artifacts within a business rules architecture are hit when a 
change or the addition of a new artifact occurs. 
 
Specification 
The specification capability specifies the content of each 
separate context design. [5], [20]. Specifying business rules 
in models is based on the idea that humans should not use a 
programming language to write code, but instead, should 
create models from which code is generated [24]. In this case 
(Q13), the business rules (and the underlying elements of the 
business rule) are specified with the use of models. An 
example of such a modeling language is the Decision Model 
and Notation (DMN) [25]. Specifying business rules in text 
is based on the premise that business rules are specified with 
the use of different types of languages. Any form of language 
ranges from programming code to natural language. In this 
case, the business rules are specified in any form of text. 
Examples of this are the Dutch language and Semantics of 
Business Vocabulary and Business Rules (SVBR) [26].  The 
language retrieved in Q13 is implemented in the rule engine. 
Q14 is focused on retrieving if the language used in the 
specification capability is implemented in the rules engine 
without any influence of a person, thereby ensuring that the 
language used in the capability only has one meaning. 
Therefore, being unambiguous. 
 
Verification 
The verification capability checks for semantic and syntax 
errors in the created business rule architecture [5], [27].  
Semantic and syntax errors need to be detected to prevent 
future problems in the business rule architecture. This is 
supported by the IT Controls Automation Strategy of 
Tarantino [28] which shows in what degree the control 
system is automated. The IT Controls Automation Strategy is 
adopted by Smit, Zoet, and Versendaal [27] for the BRM 
field and therefore used in Q15 and measures the degree of 
automation of the verification capability. The matrix consists 
of four archetypes 1) manual - detection, 2) automatic - 
detection, 3) manual - prevention, and 4) automatic - 
prevention of verification errors in business decisions and 
business logic. Manual - detection is the element where 
employees manually check for possible errors and report 
back to the author of the business logic if any errors were 
found. Automatic - detection is the element that is defined as 
a system that checks the business logic after its creation and 
reports back in the form of a list of identified errors. Manual 
- prevention is the element that employees are always 
authoring business logic together with the author and 
manually intervene when an error is made, enforcing the 
business logic author to correct the error. Automatic - 
prevention is the element which is applied by the system, 
suggesting or enforcing certain behavior regarding the 
authoring of business logic to prevent errors.  
 
 
 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Validation 
The validation capability checks the value proposition for 
possible errors in its intended behavior [5], [27].  
Q16 is focused on retrieving what type of validation (peer 
review, scenario validation, and source validation) is used in 
a certain BRMS configuration. Peer review is the validation 
of work by colleagues of similar expertise and competence to 
the authors of the work. In the case of peer review, a 
colleague (peer) checks if the artifacts are similar to its 
sources. When errors are identified that artifact is rejected 
and the capability cycle (elicitation, design, specification, and 
verification) starts from the beginning [27], the sequence 
depends on the identified error. Scenario validation is a 
validation method that uses hypothetical stories to support the 
tester through a test system or complex system. In the case of 
a BRMS, scenario validation makes use of all possible 
business scenarios. Source validation validates with the use 
of actual sources (laws and regulations) [27]. The types of 
validation are controlling on a specific set of quality 
attributes, different in each BRMS implementation, which 
are retrieved in Q17. 
Q17 is focused on retrieving whether the validation 
capability controls with the following quality attributes in 
mind [29]: traceability, completeness, accuracy, and 
usability. Traceability is the ability to provide an audit trail 
of access to the business rule and of any changes made to the 
business rule. Traceability provides organizations with the 
ability to verify history, location, or the application of a 
business rule by means of documented identification. 
Completeness indicates which data (element) need to be 
registered regarding the objects within the process. Accuracy 
indicates the degree to which the stored data reflects the 
reality concerning an object, thereby describing the closeness 
of a measurement to the true value. Usability indicates the 
ease of use and learnability of the business rule. These four 
quality attributes are selected because of the relevance in the 
BRM field [19]. 
 
Deployment 
The deployment capability transforms implementation-
independent business rules to implementation-dependent 
executable business rules. The stakeholders of this capability 
can be both human and a system [1]. During that data 
collection phase no specific questions where identified for the 
deployment capability.  
 
Execution 
The execution capability processes and executes the 
Implementation-dependent rules that were transformed in the 
deployment capability. The realization of the added value is 
conducted by executing the business rules by (a combination 
of) information system or human actors [1].  
Q18 is focused on retrieving if the principle of gaming is 
taken into consideration. Gaming gives the user of the system 
the possibility to generate any desired result by trial and error 
[30]. For example, a user working with a BRMS in the 
governmental sector needs a custom solution for a citizen, in 
this case, the result is more important than the way it is 
executed. Therefore, the user is ‘’gaming the system’’ to 
generate the desired result. Gaming also has a negative side 
because the possibility exists that the user of the system is 
doing this for all the wrong reasons. Besides the possibility 
of ‘’gaming the system’’ the execution capability can be 
configured to store input data, output data, and executed 
rules. 
Q19 retrieves what specific data is stored during the 
execution. Stored data can be categorized in input data, 
output data, and executed rules. Input data is the data that is 
required to execute the business rules. Output data is the 
stored data and the outcome of the executed business rules.  
 
Monitoring 
The monitoring capability monitors the execution of the 
value proposition and the full range of activities part of the 
BRM capabilities that realize the value proposition [1].  
Q20 is focused on retrieving what is being evaluated in the 
monitoring capability. The BRM Key Performance 
Indicators are adopted from the work of Smit and Zoet [5] to 
measure what is being evaluated in the monitoring capability. 
The unit of measurement used in the question is the frequency 
of the evaluation of the KPI’s. For example, evaluation of the 
KPI’s could be applied on a daily, monthly or yearly basis or 
a combination of such frequencies. The possibility exists that 
there are differences in the frequency of evaluation between 
sectors. The existing set of KPI’s is limited because of the 
small sample size and the industry where it was focused on 
(public). The authors of the earlier mentioned work state that 
the government institutions are representative towards 
organizations implementing BRMS [5]. 
 
Governance 
The governance capability contains three sub-capabilities: 
version management, validity management, and traceability 
management [3], [5].  
Q23 is focused on retrieving which sub-capabilities 
(version management, validity management, and traceability 
management) of the governance capability are implemented 
during the BRMS implementation. The purpose of the 
version management capability is capturing and keeping 
track of elements which are created or modified in the other 
eight capabilities. The purpose of validity management is to 
create the possibility to provide a specific version of a value 
proposition at any given moment of time. The purpose of the 
traceability capability is to ensure the possibility to trace 
created elements to their corresponding laws and regulations. 
Furthermore, the traceability capability creates a foundation 
for impact analysis when, for example, new laws are needed 
to be processed into value propositions. Alternatively, a 
combination of the options mentioned above. 
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

D. Leader of the capability 
The business rules task/service model from [11] identifies 
three areas within a firm relevant when dealing with the 
responsibility of working with a BRMS: IT, Business and a 
Central IT/Business group. Q24 focusses on retrieving which 
area has the responsibility of a specific capability. The model 
provides high-level services, and functions focused on a 
BRMS as a whole. Focusing more on the capabilities of a 
BRMS, different responsibilities of capabilities connect with 
different areas. Often the technical-oriented capabilities of a 
BRMS are more IT related and management-oriented 
capabilities are more related to the Business. 
E. Autonomy 
Coming into the era of computer automatization, the 
possibilities are growing where computers take over some 
tasks or whole processes from humans [31]. The same is 
possible with some of the capabilities of a BRMS. Therefore, 
the question is asked what the level of autonomy of the 
machine within the confines of the implemented capability 
runs. Measuring the degree of autonomy can be performed 
with ten degrees of autonomy [31]. Q25 is focused on 
retrieving on what degree of autonomy the machine within 
the confines of the capability runs. The degree of autonomy 
ranges from level 1, the computer does not help, and humans 
must do everything, to level 10, the computer takes a decision 
independently without any intervention from humans.  
IV. 
BRMS ANALYSIS TOOL VALIDATION 
Validation is required to ensure the correctness of the 
created BRMS analysis tool. A selection is made from 
experts from the BRM community. The group of experts 
existed of a professor conducting research focused on 
utilizing BRM, a Ph.D. student conducting research in the 
BRM domain, and a master student with research and 
practical experience in the BRM domain. The interviews 
were focused on the completeness and the relatability to 
practice of the concepts, themes, and questions. All the 
elements of the questionnaire were discussed and validated 
on completeness and relatability in practice. The experts gave 
examples of what should be included in a questionnaire on 
implementing BRMSs. This resulted in comparable structure 
and content as compared to the BRMS analysis tool created 
out of literature. Elements adopted from comparable 
questionnaires which handle the same problem in a different 
research field were not mentioned during the expert 
interview. Nonetheless, these elements were still included in 
the BRMS analysis tool for the sole reason that previous 
work, conducted in this field, has proven useful [16], [32].  
To further validate the BRMS analysis tool, a pilot test is 
conducted where the BRMS analysis tool is implemented at 
13 organizations. This BRMS analysis tool aims at experts 
with experience in implementing BRMS. The groups consist 
of members distributed over a wide range organizations, 
mostly from the public and finance sector. An interview 
approach is used for the implementation of the BRMS 
analysis tool [33]. The data is gathered from different 
organizations distributed over the financial (n=6) and public 
sector (n=7). Employee ranges included 251 – 500 (n=2), 501 
– 1000 (n=2), 2001 – 5000 (n=6), and >5000 (n=3). The 
implementation focus added an additional characterization of 
the BRMS implementation cases. The implementation 
focusses are divided into Application focus (n=3), Line of 
business-focused (n=4), and Organization-wide (n=6).  
V. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 
The goal of this research is to create a tool that structures, 
in a systematic and controlled way, the data collection 
process on how to have the most optimal configuration of a 
BRMS for an organization with different specifications. 
Furthermore, the BRMS analysis tool provides organizations 
with the option to get to know more about the current or 
completed BRMS implementation. This can lead to the 
improvement 
of 
the 
current 
or 
possible 
future 
implementations. The BRMS analysis tool included 
important BRMS building blocks gathered from literature 
and expert opinion. The BRMS analysis tool is validated 
through expert interviews and implemented using a sample 
of 13 organizations distributed over the Dutch public and 
financial sector.  
From a research point of view, this study provides a 
fundament for situational artifact construction in the BRM 
field and related fields. Gathering different implementations 
to eventually create a situational artifact is deemed as an 
important phase in situational artifact construction [16]. 
Furthermore, this study brings the building blocks of a BRMS 
implementation together in a BRMS analysis tool. From a 
practical perspective, this study provides organizations with 
a tool that structures, in a systematic and controlled way, the 
data collection process on different BRMS configurations an 
organization with different specifications.  
Several limitations may affect the results of this study. The 
first limitation is the sample of the validation of the BRMS 
analysis tool. This sample is limited to three experts and to 
state with confidence that the elements included in the BRMS 
analysis tool are the only needed elements in such a 
technique, more experts need to be included for the validation 
of the BRMS analysis tool. The second limitation is that of 
the implementation of the BRMS analysis tool. The 
implementation is limited to only 13 organizations 
distributed over the public and financial sector. We believe 
that the public and financial organizations are representable 
towards 
other 
organizations, 
although 
additional 
organizations from other industries are recommended to 
increase the representability of the sample. Furthermore, the 
addition of new possible technologies could affect the 
completeness of the BRMS analysis tool, and continuous 
research is needed on the validity and relevance of the 
elements of the BRMS analysis tool. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
J. Boyer and H. Mili, Agile business rule 
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

development. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, 2011. 
[2] 
I. Graham, Business rules management and service 
oriented architecture a pattern language, 1st ed. 
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2007. 
[3] 
T. Morgan, Business Rules and Information 
Systems : Aligning IT with Business Goals. Boston, 
MA: Addison-Wesley, 2002. 
[4] 
M. W. Blenko, M. C. Mankins, and P. Rogers, “The 
Decision-Driven Organization,” Harv. Bus. Rev., 
no. june, p. 10, 2010. 
[5] 
K. Smit and M. Zoet, “Management control system 
for business rules management,” Int. J. Adv. Syst. 
Meas., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 210–219, 2016. 
[6] 
M. Zoet and J. Versendaal, “Business Rules 
Management Solutions Problem Space: Situational 
Factors,” in Pacific Asia Conference on Information 
Systems 2013 (PACIS), 2013, p. 247. 
[7] 
K. Smit, M. Zoet, and M. Berkhout, “Functional 
Requirements for Business Rules Management 
Systems,” Twenty-third Am. Conf. Inf. Syst., pp. 1–
10, 2017. 
[8] 
P. J. Cooper, M. J. Taylor, Z. Cooper, and C. G. 
Fairburn, “The Development and Validation of the 
Body Shape Questionnaire The Development and 
Validation of the Body Shape Questionnaire,” Int. J. 
Eat. Disord., vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 485–494, 1987. 
[9] 
L. R. Derogatis, K. Rickels, and  a F. Rock, “The 
SCL-90 and the MMPI: a step in the validation of a 
new self-report scale.,” Br. J. Psychiatry, vol. 128, 
pp. 280–289, 1976. 
[10] 
T. J. Meyer, M. L. Miller, R. L. Metzger, and T. D. 
Borkovec, “Development and validation of the penn 
state worry questionnaire,” Behav. Res. Ther., vol. 
28, no. 6, pp. 487–495, 1990. 
[11] 
M. L. Nelson, J. Peterson, R. L. Rariden, and R. Sen, 
“Transitioning to a business rule management 
service model: Case studies from the property and 
casualty insurance industry,” Inf. Manag., vol. 47, 
no. 1, pp. 30–41, 2010. 
[12] 
B. Von Halle and L. Goldberg, The Business Rule 
Revolution. Silicon Valley: Happy About, 2006. 
[13] 
B. Von Halle and L. Goldberg, The Decision Model: 
A business logic framework linking business and 
technology. New York, NY: Taylor and Francis 
Group, LLC, 2009. 
[14] 
T. Davenport and L. Prusak, Working Knowledge, 
2nd ed. Brighton, MA: Harvard Business Review 
Press, 2000. 
[15] 
T. Davenport and L. Prusak, “Working Knowledge 
How Organization Manage What They Know,” 
Harvard Bus. Sch. Press, no. January 1998, p. 15, 
1998. 
[16] 
R. Winter, “Problem analysis for situational artefact 
construction in information systems,” in Emerging 
themes in information systems and organization 
studies, Berlin: Springer, 2011, pp. 97–113. 
[17] 
S. Leewis, K. Smit, M. Zoet, and M. Berkhout, 
“BRMS analysis tool,” 2017. [Online]. Available: 
https://goo.gl/f9ems3. 
[18] 
B. Von Halle, Business Rules Applied — Business 
Better Systems Using the Business Rules Approach. 
New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, 2002. 
[19] 
M. Zoet, Methods and Concepts for Business Rules 
Management. Utrecht: Hogeschool Utrecht, 2014. 
[20] 
K. Smit, M. Zoet, and J. Versendaal, “Identifying 
Challenges In BRM Implementations Regarding 
The 
Elicitation, 
Design 
And 
Specification 
Capabilities At Governmental Institutions,” in 
Twenty-Fifth European Conference on Information 
Systems (ECIS), 2017, p. 14. 
[21] 
D. A. Aaker, Strategic market management. 
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2008. 
[22] 
A. McAfee and E. Brynjolfsson, “Big Data. The 
management revolution,” Harvard Buiness Rev., 
vol. 90, no. 10, pp. 61–68, 2012. 
[23] 
P. Rogers and M. Blenko, “Who Has the D?,” Harv. 
Bus. Rev., vol. 84, no. 1, pp. 52–61, 2006. 
[24] 
L. Bass, P. Clements, and R. Kazman, Software 
architecture in practice, 3rd ed. Boston, MA: 
Addison-Wesley, 2012. 
[25] 
Object Management Group, “Decision Model and 
Notation,” 2014. 
[26] 
Object Management Group, “Semantics of Business 
Vocabulary and Business Rules,” 2013. 
[27] 
K. Smit, M. Zoet, and J. Versendaal, “Identifying 
challenges in BRM implementations regarding the 
verification and validation,” in Twenty First Pacific 
Asia Conference on Information Systems, 2017, p. 4. 
[28] 
A. Tarantino, Governance, risk, and compliance 
handbook: technology, finance, environmental, and 
international 
guidance 
and 
best 
practices. 
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2008. 
[29] 
A. Rula, A. Maurino, and C. Batini, Data and 
Information Quality: Dimensions, Principles and 
Techniques, 1st ed. New York, NY: Springer, 2016. 
[30] 
G. Bevan and C. Hood, “What’s measured is what 
matters: Targets and gaming in the English public 
health care system,” Public Adm., vol. 84, no. 3, pp. 
517–538, 2006. 
[31] 
R. Parasuraman, T. B. Sheridan, and C. D. Wickens, 
“A model for types and levels of human interaction 
with automation.,” IEEE Trans. Syst. Man. Cybern. 
A Syst. Hum., vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 286–297, 2000. 
[32] 
T. Bucher and R. Winter, “Taxonomy of business 
process management approaches,” in Handbook on 
Business Process Management, New York, NY: 
Springer, 2010, pp. 93–114. 
[33] 
P. R. Newsted, S. L. Huff, and M. C. Munro, 
“Survey Instruments in Information Systems,” MIS 
Q., vol. 22, no. 4, p. 553, 1998. 
 
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

