 
 
ARPPA: Mining Professional Profiles from LinkedIn Using Association Rules 
 
Paula R. C. Silva, Wladmir C. Brandão 
Department of Computer Science 
Pontifícia Universidade Católica de Minas Gerais 
Belo Horizonte, Brazil 
paula.raissa@sga.pucminas.br, wladmir@pucminas.br
 
 
Abstract—Human resources managers design and develop 
professional profiles to maximize the organization workforce. 
These organizations typically maintain extensive static resume 
databases from where managers extract and analyze 
professional data, discovering people with appropriate 
knowledge, skills and experience to fulfill organizational 
positions. Nowadays, online professional networks, such as 
LinkedIn, provide a rich, dynamic, and massive scale resume 
database useful for professional profile analyses. Considering 
such massive scale databases, while manual analysis is an 
exhaustive and often prohibitive task, the use of data mining 
techniques allows managers to effectively the huge volume of 
data with a lower cost. In particular, for educational 
institutions focused on the development of persons with 
knowledge and skills required by organizations, the use of data 
mining techniques over professional networks is paramount to 
plan, direct and implement academic activities and curricula. 
In this article, we introduce ARPPA, a novel approach to 
discover professional profile patterns from LinkedIn by using 
association rules mining. Particularly, our approach crawls 
resumes from LinkedIn uses a multidimensional data model 
suitable for professional profile analyses to create and load the 
crawled data to a data warehouse, and extracts relevant 
patterns from the data warehouse using an Apriori algorithm. 
Additionally, we evaluate our approach attesting its usefulness 
to plan, direct and implement academic activities and curricula 
in educational institutions. 
Keywords-Data-minin; association rules;  LinkedIn. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
There has recently been a proliferation of social networks 
addressing the information needs of different groups of users 
with multiple interests, such as relationship, jobs and 
business [1][2]. In particular, LinkedIn stands out as the 
largest and most popular professional social network in the 
world, with more than 250 thousand of users distributed in 
more than 200 countries [3]. LinkedIn provides a plethora of 
services, such as the storage of online versions of multi-
language users resume, publishing and searching job 
opportunities, 
career 
planning, 
and 
partnership 
recommendation [4]. 
This rich, dynamic, and massive scale source of 
professional information has replaced static resume 
databases being widely exploited by human resources 
managers to discover people with appropriate knowledge, 
skills and experience to fulfill organizational positions, and 
to design and develop professional profiles to maximize the 
organization 
workforce. 
Particularly, 
for 
educational 
organizations, the use of such source of professional 
information to discover professional profile patterns of their 
current and former students is paramount to plan, direct and 
implement academic activities and curricula in order to meet 
industry requirements. For instance, analyzing professional 
profile from LinkedIn can help universities to invest in new 
educational or research lines, such as the creation of new 
classes or research groups for specific subjects based on 
trend of the former students' career. However, due to the 
high cost of manual data crawling, many universities do not 
maintain 
a 
database 
with 
updated 
information 
on 
professional profiles, particularly for their former students. 
Therefore, mechanisms to automatically crawl professional 
information from LinkedIn is useful for organizations 
interested in low cost and effective solutions to build and 
maintain professional profiles databases. 
Crawling and mining professional profiles from LinkedIn 
are challenging problems. Particularly for crawling, there are 
duplicated data, spam, access restrictions and ambiguity 
issues that must be overcome. In addition, the massive scale 
nature of LinkedIn imposes limitations for data extraction, 
transformation and storage. Moreover, manual analysis is an 
exhaustive and prohibitive task often demanding the use of 
data mining techniques for fast, less expensive and more 
effective analytical processing. In this article, we introduce 
ARPPA, a novel approach to discover professional profile 
patterns from LinkedIn by using association rules mining. 
ARPPA is an acronym for “Association Rules for 
Professional Profile Analysis”. Our proposed approach 
addresses the professional profile mining problem by 
providing a multidimensional data model suitable for 
professional profile analysis and using an Apriori algorithm 
to recognize mutual implications among professional events, 
lastly retrieving relevant information on professional 
profiles.  Experiments on a professional dataset crawled from 
LinkedIn attest the simplicity and effectiveness of ARPPA, 
showing that it can be used to plan, direct and implement 
academic activities and curricula in educational institutions. 
The remainder of this article is organized as follows: In 
Section II, we review the related literature on data mining. In 
addition, we review different approaches for professional 
profile analysis reported in the literature. In Section III, we 
introduce the ARPPA approach by presenting its architecture 
and main components. In Section IV, we present the 
evaluation procedures that serve as the basis for the 
experiments, and we thoroughly validate our professional 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
 
profile analysis approach using a real professional dataset 
crawled from LinkedIn. Lastly, in Section V, we summarize 
our 
main 
contributions 
and 
conclusions, 
presenting 
directions for future research. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
In this section, we review data mining from the literature. 
Additionally, we review the literature on data crawling and 
mining from social networks for professional profile 
analysis. 
A. Data Mining 
Data mining is a set of techniques to discover knowledge 
in a large amount of data, enabling the extraction of relevant 
patterns, which cannot be easily detected only by navigation 
or searching [5]. Typically, data mining algorithms recognize 
relevant patterns in datasets organized by data models 
suitable for effective data processing and recovery. 
According to Inmon [6], the multidimensional data 
modeling promotes the organization of datasets using 
dimensions and facts to describe event occurrences, where 
facts are numerical measures related to events, and 
dimensions are properties that describe and classify the 
events. Multidimensional data models are used to structure 
and summarize datasets, presenting them in dimensional 
views to support online analysis. The multidimensional 
structure, created according to the event of interest, is 
commonly known as data cube. Data cubes structure data are 
to be viewed in multiple dimensions, in which each face of 
the cube represents a dimension, i.e., a perspective of an 
event of interest [7]. 
There are different approaches for multidimensional data 
modeling, each one based on the selection of relevant 
properties of the event of interest. The most used approach is 
the star schema that organizes event properties in facts and 
measures, linking a dimensional dataset to each fact [8]. In 
particular, the star schema is composed by one central fact 
table, which contains the numerical measures related to event 
occurrences, and a set of dimension tables [7]. A data 
warehouse (DW) is a n-dimensional data cube often 
structured using the star schema approach and used to 
support online analysis processing (OLAP) [6], creating 
perspective by extracting and crossing data [9]. Over DW, 
we can use scanning techniques to recognize data patterns 
and show relevant information [10]. 
A subset of data mining algorithms extracts relevant 
patterns by recognizing implication rules over data. While 
clustering and classification algorithms segment data into 
groups based on features, sequence algorithms identify 
frequent occurrences over the time, and association rules 
algorithms use unsupervised learning techniques to identity 
frequent occurrences in events. The Apriori algorithm is an 
example of an association rule algorithm which extracts 
relevant patterns by discovering frequent association rules in 
events [11]. 
B. Crawling and Mining Social Networks 
Crawling data from the Web consists in visit web servers 
using an automatic mechanism to collect public documents. 
According to Myllymaki [12], a crawler must request and 
store documents from web servers, extract links from the 
collected documents and schedule the next crawling step by 
using the extracted links. 
Despite the inherent difficulty of crawling public data, 
crawling data from social networks is an even more difficult 
task, since the social network servers are usually not freely 
available for crawling [13]. Social network data may be only 
available for search by using an application programming 
interface (API), which restricts the crawling scope. For 
instance, the LinkedIn social network of jobs opportunities 
and business presents its own “People Search API” to search 
people, where programmers must use keywords and 
predefined fields, such as name, company, and school, to 
submit queries and receive a restricted set of professional 
profiles in a standardized format [1]. 
According to Lops [2], the proliferation of social 
networks generates a massive volume of data useful to learn 
user interests and tastes. The authors propose an approach to 
model user interests based on professional profiles extracted 
from LinkedIn. The proposed approach uses the LinkedIn 
API to get professional profiles freely available by LinkedIn 
users and has been used to recommend scientific articles to 
researchers. 
In the same line, Hodigere [14] proposes an approach to 
predict employee careers using professional profiles 
extracted from a private social network. Data mining 
algorithms use multiple dimensions, such as positions, 
courses and schools, as features to rank employees by their 
potential of professional development. 
There are different approaches reported in literature that 
have been using  data mining techniques to discover 
knowledge from professional social network [15][16][17]. 
The Pizzato [18] applied data mining, machine learning and 
social network analysis on raw data extracted from LinkedIn 
to a people recommender system. The SimCareers 
framework [19] models member similarity over professional 
networks. The framework use raw data collected from 
LinkedIn and data mining algorithms to model and compare 
a sequence of work experiences finding similarities between 
the professional profiles. 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
 
 
Figure1.The ARPPA architecture and main components.
III. 
THE ARPPA APPROACH 
In this article, we introduce ARPPA, a novel and 
effective data mining approach to support professional 
profile analysis. Figure 1 presents the ARPPA architecture, 
including its main components. 
A. Crawling LinkedIn 
Step 1 in Figure 1 presents the Crawler component 
responsible to collect LinkedIn data. It is a Hypertext 
Preprocessor (PHP) component that uses the “People Search 
API” to retrieve professional profiles in JavaScript Object 
Notation (JSON) format.  The crawling process is divided in 
two phases. 
In the first phase, we use the “People Search API” to 
retrieve professional profiles, considering the predefined 
fields name and school, and particular keywords for each 
field.  In preliminary crawling process, we observe that 
LinkedIn users do not properly use the name field. 
Sometimes users provide the first and last name but not the 
middle name, other times user provides the first and middle 
name but not the last name, increasing ambiguity. Thus, we 
use different name combinations to improve matching 
performance. 
In the second phase, we collect professional profiles 
directly from the public LinkedIn profile pages to extract 
complementary data. Figure 2 presents the professional 
profile crawling flow used in the second phase. 
 
Figure 2. The professional profile crawling flow 
This open crawling process is primarily necessary 
because users frequently disallow the access of their 
professional profile by the “People Search API”. In addition, 
we need to validate collected data in the prior phase, 
ensuring that the professional profiles are really related to an 
educational 
institution. 
We 
particularly 
process 
the 
professional profile collected in the second phase to extract 
the course name and the school name, comparing them with 
data collected in the phase one. 
B. Processing Professional Profiles 
Step 2 in Figure 1 presents the Processor component 
responsible to extract, transform and load (ETL) raw data 
collected from LinkedIn to a data warehouse, considering 
our multidimensional data model. The ETL process includes 
name deduplication and dimensional resolution, i.e., break 
one transactional entity in multiple dimensions and grouping 
similar instances of a dimension in one single instance. For 
example, the transactional entity “location” is broken into 
“city” and “country” dimensions, the instances of the 
position dimension “IT Administrator” and “Information 
Technology Manager” is grouped into “IT Manager”, 
synonyms are reduced to a single form, and typos are 
removed. 
Figure 3 presents an excerpt of our multidimensional data 
model used by the Processor component to build the data 
warehouse. 
 
Figure 3. Multidimensional data model for mining professional profiles 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
 
From Figure 3, we observe the star schema used to 
organize professional profile data with eight dimension 
tables and one “Professional” fact table storing professional 
occurrences, suitable for online analysis processing. These 
multidimensional data model structures and summarizes the 
professional profile dataset, creating perspectives by crossing 
data. Table I describes each dimension from the 
multidimensional data model. 
TABLE I.  
MULDIMENSIONAL DATA MODEL - DIMENSIONS 
Dimension 
Description 
City 
The city where people work. 
Company 
The company where people work. 
Date 
Semester and year of graduation. 
Experience 
The level related to the position dimension. 
Industry 
The activity area business. 
Position 
Job title, role. 
Shift 
Shift in which people attended university. 
Specialization 
Technology in which people are specialized. 
C. Extracting Association Rules 
Step 3 in Figure 1 presents the Extractor component 
responsible to discover professional patterns from the 
multidimensional database. In particular, we use the Apriori 
algorithm implemented in Waikato Environment for 
Knowledge Analysis (WEKA) to extract association rules 
from the data warehouse. 
For each extracted rule, the Apriori algorithm computes 
metrics for analysis: confidence, conviction, leverage, and 
lift. The confidence measures the accuracy of the rule, i.e., 
the probability of occurrence of the association pattern [20]. 
The conviction is an alternative to confidence, also used to 
measure the accuracy of the rule. The leverage is a measure 
of divergence from the expected value [21]. Lastly, the lift, 
also known as interest, is used to access the standard 
deviation. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
To access the usefulness of the ARPPA approach for 
academic planning, we analyze professional patterns using a 
professional profile dataset collected from LinkedIn. This 
professional profile dataset is composed by professional data 
of 1,847 current and former students from the department of 
computer science of a major private university in Brazil. For 
privacy, the dataset were anonymised. 
Particularly, we use the dataset as a source of information 
for the ARPPA approach, which extracts, transforms and 
loads the raw data to the DW, considering the ARPPA 
multidimensional data model, and uses the Apriori algorithm 
to discover association rules from DW. The association rules 
discovered by ARPPA were used to characterize professional 
behavior. Despite the discovered association rules alone do 
not characterize professional behavior, they point to 
nontrivial professional patterns that motivate further 
investigation. 
A. Professional Characterization 
Figure 4 presents professionals per city, considering only 
the top 5 cities with more professionals. 
 
Figure 4. Professionals per city (top 5 cities) 
From Figure 4, we observe that the most part of the 
professionals are working in Belo Horizonte. This is an 
expected behavior since the IT students sample are from the 
metropolitan region of Minas Gerais. They have studied and 
continue working in this region. We also observe a short 
percentage, but not negligible, outside Brazil. This behavior 
can be caused by the Brazilian government's initiatives to do 
partnership with abroad universities and offer scholarships in 
these universities. The students have to come back to finish 
the course in Brazil, but if they found job opportunities 
abroad, they commonly return to work. 
Figure 5 presents the number of professional distributed 
by industry and shift, considering the top 5 industries. 
 
Figure 5. Number of professionals by industry and shift 
Starting from the five main industries where the most 
part of professionals are working, we cross data with the 
shift that the people studied. We observe that the night shift 
has more professionals than the morning shift, since most 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
 
universities campus offer IT courses at night. Only one 
campus offers IT courses at morning. In addition, we notice 
that there is no difference between the industries followed by 
these students. The main industry where the students have 
actuated is “Information Technology and Services”, as 
expected. Moreover, there is a greater participation of 
professionals from the morning shift in the retail industry. 
Figure 6 presents the distribution of professional 
distributed by positions and shift, considering the top 5 
positions. 
 
Figure 6. Number of professionals by position and shift 
From Figure 6, we can see that the main position that 
professionals work is “Systems Analyst”. But there is a 
tendency that professionals follow a technical career, except 
for those following an academic career. 
Figure 7 presents the distribution between the top five 
industries and the top five specializations. 
 
Figure 7. Relation between top 5 industries and top 5 specializations 
The specialization dimension represents the technology, 
which professionals are expert in. From Figure 7, we notice 
that the main technology is “Java”, but there is a little 
number of professionals that is specialized in this 
technology. It might be caused by the many kinds of 
technologies that the companies have adopted. Another 
explanation for these values is that the computations are 
based on the data provide by people in their public profile; 
they might not provide full information about their careers. 
There is a bigger concentration of technologies in industry 
“Information Technology and Services”. Its main cause may 
be the large demand for solutions to different problems; each 
solution is related to certain technology. The fourth and fifth 
industries are not related with any specialization.  These 
industries are more specific and they demand other 
technologies. 
Figure 8 presents the distribution of professionals by 
crossing between top five companies and top five positions. 
 
Figure 8. Relation between top 5 companies and top 5 positions 
The behavior presents the main industry where the 
students 
are 
working: 
“PUC 
Minas” 
(“Pontifícia 
Universidade Católica de Minas Gerais”), the university 
where they studied. The other companies are from the 
“Information Technology” industry. There is a little number 
of professionals’ concentration in each company and 
position. This behavior may be caused by the large 
distribution of the professional in many companies of 
different sizes. The forth company does not hire 
professionals from any top five positions. The necessity for 
positions like “Software Engineer” and “Test Analyst” can 
be the main cause of this fact. 
B. Professional Profile by Rules 
A set of association rules show, with a minimum 
confidence of 0.87, which professionals following the 
“Systems Analyst” career are working in the “Information 
Technology and Services”. This is an expected behavior 
because “Systems Analyst” is the main position and 
“Information Technology and Services” is the main industry. 
So, we can conclude that former students are following the 
“Systems Analyst” career in “Information Technology” 
industry. 
A set of association rules show, with a minimum 
confidence of 0.95, those students, who graduated in 2010, 
reached the senior level experience in Information 
Technology and Services industry. With this behavior we 
can infer that students graduated in 2010 are Senior in 
“Information Technology and Services” Industry. 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
 
With a minimum confidence of 1.0, an association rule 
shows that professional who are specialist in “SAP” 
technology are working in “Information Technology and 
Services” industry. In figure 7, we see the number of 
professionals who are working in each main specialization 
by industry, which proves the existence of this pattern of 
career behavior. 
An association rule, with a minimum confidence of 0.97, 
shows that students who are in “Information Technology and 
Services” industry are working and living in “Belo 
Horizonte”. This behavior could be caused by the large 
proliferation of companies from this industry in “Belo 
Horizonte”. There is a region named “San Pedro Valley”, 
which has a large number of “Startups”. The development of 
startups has been caused by the universities and governments 
projects to encourage the people to undertake in this region. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
In this article, we introduced ARPPA, a novel 
professional mining approach to discover professional 
patterns from LinkedIn by using association rules.  Our 
approach provides a multidimensional data model suitable 
for professional profile analysis and uses an Apriori 
algorithm 
to 
recognize 
mutual 
implications 
among 
professional occurrences, retrieving relevant information on 
professional behavior. Experiments using a professional 
dataset extracted from LinkedIn attest the effectiveness of 
ARPPA showing that it is useful for educational institutions 
interested in planning academic activities and upgrading 
curricula for development of people with knowledge, skills 
and experience required by organizations. 
Particularly, we 
have used ARPPA to analyze 
professional profiles of current and former students of the 
major private university in Brazil. The professional profile 
analyses presented in this article are samples of the possible 
analyses that can to be performed using ARPPA. Despite the 
discovered association rules alone do not characterize 
professional behavior, they point to nontrivial professional 
patterns that motivate further investigation. 
Lastly, considering possible directions for future research 
directly inspired by or stemming from the results of this 
article, we plan to investigate and make a comparison with 
other data mining algorithms to retrieve relevant information 
on professional behavior, such as supervised learning 
algorithms and neural networks. Moreover, we plan to enrich 
the multidimensional data model considering social data 
crawled from different social networks. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. A. Russell, “Mining the Social Web: Data Mining Facebook, 
Twitter,LinkedIn, Google+,GitHub, and More,” O’Reilly Media, Inc, 
2003. 
[2] P. Lops, M. de Gemmis, G. Semeraro, F. Narducci, and C. Musto, 
“Leveraging the linkedin social network data for extracting 
contentbased user profiles,” ACM, pp. 293–296, 2011. 
[3] LinkedIn, 
“About 
us,” 
Mar. 
2014. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.linkedin.com/about-us/ 
[4] D. Agarwal, “Computational advertising: the linkedin way,” ACM, 
pp.1585–1586, 2013. 
[5] R. Elmasri, Fundamentals of database systems. Pearson Education 
India, 2008. 
[6] W. H. Inmon, Building the data warehouse. John wiley & sons, 2005. 
[7] J. Han and M. Kamber, Data Mining, Southeast Asia Edition: 
Concepts and Techniques. Morgan kaufmann, 2006. 
[8] P. Vassiliadis and T. Sellis, “A survey of logical models for olap 
databases,” ACM Sigmod Record, vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 64–69, 1999. 
[9] S. Chaudhuri and U. Dayal, “An overview of data warehousing and 
olap technology,” ACM Sigmod record, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 65–74, 
1997. 
[10] I. H. Witten, E. Frank, and M. A. Hall, Data Mining: Practical 
Machine Learning Tools and Techniques: Practical Machine Learning 
Tools and Techniques, 3rd ed., ser. The Morgan Kaufmann Series in 
Data Management Systems. Elsevier Science, 2011. 
[11] R. Agrawal, T. Imieli´nski, and A. Swami, “Mining association rules 
between sets of items in large databases,” ACM, pp. 207–216, 1993. 
[12] J. Myllymaki, “Effective web data extraction with standard xml 
technologies,” Computer Networks, vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 635–644, 
2002. 
[13] S. Auer, C. Bizer, G. Kobilarov, J. Lehmann, R. Cyganiak, and Z. 
Ives, Dbpedia: A nucleus for a web of open data. Springer, 2007. 
[14] R. Hodigere and D. Bilimoria, “Constructing professional resource 
networks from career biographical data,” IEEE Computer Society 
Washington, DC, USA, pp. 1242–1247, 2012. 
[15] S. Cetintas, M. Rogati, L. Si, and Y. Fang, “Identifying similar people 
in professional social networks with discriminative probabilistic 
models,” in Proceedings of the 34th International ACM SIGIR 
Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, 
ser. SIGIR ’11. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2011, pp. 1209–1210. 
[16] A. C. d. S. G. d. Santos, T. d. P. Menezes, H. R. M. da Hora et al., 
“Students’ and alumni’s profiles analysis through the data mining 
technique: a case study in the federal institute in rio de janeiro state 
interior,” Research Gate, 2014. 
[17] J. Wang, Y. Zhang, C. Posse, and A. Bhasin, “Is it time for a career 
switch?” in Proceedings of the 22Nd International Conference on 
World Wide Web, ser. WWW ’13. International World Wide Web 
Conferences Steering Committee, 2013. 
[18] L. A. Pizzato and A. Bhasin, “Beyond friendship: the art, science and 
applications of recommending people to people in social networks,” 
in RecSys’13, pp. 495–496, 2013. 
[19] Y. Xu, Z. Li, A. Gupta, A. Bugdayci, and A. Bhasin, “Modeling 
professional similarity by mining professional career trajectories,” in 
Proceedings of the 20th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on 
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, ser. KDD ’14. New York, 
NY, USA: ACM, pp. 1945–1954, 2014. 
[20] P.-N. Tan, V. Kumar, and J. Srivastava, “Selecting the right objective 
measure for association analysis,” Information Systems, vol. 29, no. 
4, pp. 293–313, 2004. 
[21] G. Piateski and W. Frawley, Knowledge discovery in databases. MIT 
press, 1991. G. Piateski and W. Frawley, Knowledge discovery in 
databases. 
MIT 
press, 
1991.
 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-386-5
eKNOW 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

