Semantic-based Multilingual Islamic Finance Thesaurus 
 
Aziza Mamadolimova  
Knowledge Technology Department, 
 Artificial Intelligence Centre 
MIMOS Berhad 
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia 
e-mail: aziza@mimos.my 
Jasbeer Singh Atma Singh 
Knowledge Technology Department, 
 Artificial Intelligence Centre 
MIMOS Berhad 
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia 
e-mail: jasbeer@mimos.my 
Nurul Aida Osman 
Knowledge Technology Department, 
 Artificial Intelligence Centre 
MIMOS Berhad 
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia 
e-mail:  nurulaida.osman@mimos.my 
 
 
Nor Azlinayati Abdul Manaf 
Knowledge Technology Department, 
Artificial Intelligence Centre 
MIMOS Berhad 
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia 
e-mail: azlinayati.manaf@mimos.my 
Farouq Hatem Hamad 
Knowledge Technology Department, 
Artificial Intelligence Centre 
MIMOS Berhad 
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia 
e-mail: farouq.hamed@mimos.my 
Khalil Ben Mohamed 
Knowledge Technology Department, 
Artificial Intelligence Centre 
MIMOS Berhad 
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia 
e-mail: khalil.ben@mimos.my
 
Dickson Lukose 
Knowledge Technology Department, 
Artificial Intelligence Centre 
MIMOS Berhad 
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia 
e-mail: dickson.lukose@mimos.my 
 
 
Abstract— In this paper, we present an attempt to build a 
semantic-based multilingual Islamic Finance thesaurus, with 
the aim of globally standardizing the use of Islamic Finance 
concepts and providing a rich, semantically sound terminology. 
We describe a semantic model, which uses international 
standards such as Simple Knowledge Organization System, a 
World Wide Web Consortium recommendation designed 
among others for representation of thesauri, with the aim of 
enabling easy publication of the thesaurus as part of Linked 
Data and efficient future use. Finally, we present an Islamic 
Finance thesaurus collaborative authoring tool, which allows 
people around the world to contribute in improving the Islamic 
Finance thesaurus by adding, modifying or deleting concepts, 
relationships between the concepts or descriptions. 
Keywords-Islamic Finance; Thesaurus; Linked Data; SKOS; 
RDF  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Islamic finance and banking institutions worldwide have 
grown at a remarkable pace for the last three decades. 
According to a study by the International Monetary Fund 
(IMF), the number of Islamic finance and banking 
institutions rose from 75 in 1975 to over 300 in 2005, in 
more than 75 countries. Total assets worldwide are 
estimated at $250 billion, and growing at about 15% per 
annum [1]. Islamic banking and finance concept is also 
gaining popularity all over the world as highlighted by Ms. 
Christine Lagarde, director of IMF, who said: “to make 
(Islamic banking) activities as welcome in Paris as they are 
in London and elsewhere” [2]. 
This growth of interest in Islamic Finance and Banking is 
continuously attracting more stakeholders, but each one uses 
its own definitions or spellings for core Islamic Finance 
concepts, creating a lot of ambiguity and misunderstanding 
within the community. To the best of our knowledge, there 
exists no standard Islamic Finance thesaurus to refer to; 
thus, the major objective of this paper is to build such a 
thesaurus promoting standardization and interoperability in 
Islamic Finance domain.  
Existing 
financial 
terminologies 
are 
representing 
knowledge about conventional banking and finance, e.g., the 
Financial Industry Business Ontology (FIBO) [3]. FIBO 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

presents knowledge about financial instruments, business 
entities, market data and corporate actions in a technology 
neutral format along with formal definitions and defined 
business relationships. FIBO standardizes the language of 
conventional financial contracts and promotes unambiguous 
shared meaning among all participants in the conventional 
banking and finance world. In this paper, we aim to 
complement the existing banking and finance ontologies by 
considering all the terms specifically used in Islamic finance 
domain, which include Islam-related terms, Islamic 
contracts legacy, Islamic scholars, etc. 
In order to be widely used around the world, the 
thesaurus must conform to semantic web standards and 
would eventually be published as part of the Linked Data 
(LD) [4]. Linked Data provides a network of interlinked 
structured data from various sources; it contains as per 
September 2011 more than 31 billion interlinked pieces of 
information 
from 
different 
domains 
(e.g., 
Health, 
Economy). We built the Islamic Finance thesaurus using 
Simple Knowledge Organization System (SKOS) [5], a 
World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) [6] recommendation 
designed for representing thesauri, taxonomies, or any other 
type of structured controlled vocabulary. SKOS is part of 
the semantic web family of standards built upon Resource 
Description Framework (RDF) [13], and its main objective 
is to enable easy publication and use of such vocabularies as 
Linked Data.   
The viability of the thesaurus, i.e., its management and 
continuous enrichment over the years, is a core aspect [7]. 
Existing well-established thesauri, ontologies or knowledge 
bases (e.g., AGROVOC [8], Systematized Nomenclature of 
Medicine Clinical Terms [9], National Cancer Institute [10]) 
propose management tools in which the collaborative 
authoring section is primordial. It allows people around the 
world to contribute making the terminology a success, for 
example by adding new descriptions of concepts (e.g., 
translating a term in another language). An example of such 
a tool is “VocBench” [11], developed to manage and author 
AGROVOC knowledge base [12]. Thus, the terminology 
can continuously be refined, until it eventually caters to the 
needs of stakeholders from the domain. In this paper, we 
also propose an Islamic Finance thesaurus tool for browsing 
the thesaurus as well as collaboratively authoring its 
content, at first locally then worldwide through the LD. 
This work is the result of a broader collaboration started 
in 2011 with the Institute of Islamic Banking and Finance in 
Malaysia (IIBF). The collaboration includes the semantic 
representation of Islamic contracts [17], the semantic 
representation of Islamic finance terms and an application to 
automatically generate meaningful questions in different 
modalities. The modalities investigated are multiple choice 
questions as well as complex modalities using diagrams to 
represent the question and semantic similarity to assess free-
drawn answers. In this paper, we only focus on presenting 
the semantic representation of Islamic finance terms as well 
as the developed collaborative authoring tool.   
Section 2 recalls the basics of utilized semantic web 
standards such as RDF and SKOS. In Section 3, we present 
the semantic model for the Islamic Finance thesaurus and 
the 
followed 
methodology. 
Section 
4 
presents 
a 
collaborative authoring tool developed to facilitate the 
management and enrichment of the thesaurus. The prospects 
of this work are outlined in Section 5. 
 
II. 
RDF AND SKOS 
A. RDF 
RDF provides a common framework for expressing 
information in order to be processed by applications and 
exchanged between applications without loss of meaning. 
RDF can be used to assign attributes and values to 
resources and to express relationships between resources. It 
allows computers to know something about a subject and 
provides a general method to decompose information into 
pieces. RDF requires a subject (or resource), predicate (or 
relationship) and object (or value).  
B. SKOS 
SKOS provides a standard way to represent knowledge 
organization systems using RDF. SKOS is a model for 
expressing the basic structure and content of concept 
schemes such as thesauri, classification schemes, subject 
heading lists, taxonomies, folksonomies, and other similar 
types of controlled vocabularies. SKOS allows concepts to 
be composed and published on the World Wide Web, linked 
with data on the Web and integrated into other concept 
schemes.  
The main components of SKOS model are: Concepts, 
Labels, Semantic Relationships, Documentary Notes and 
Concept Schemes. Below, we present some extracts of the 
SKOS Primer [5] document explaining briefly the  
components we are using in the following. 
 
Concepts: Concepts are fundamental elements of the SKOS 
vocabulary. Concepts are the units of thought—ideas, 
meanings, or (categories of) objects and events, which 
underlie many knowledge organization systems [5]. The 
class skos:Concept allows implementers to assert that a 
given resource is a concept.  
 
Labels: Labels are expressions that are used to refer to the 
concepts in natural language. SKOS provides three 
properties to attach labels to conceptual resources: 
skos:prefLabel, skos:altLabel and skos:hiddenLabel. 
 
Semantic Relationships: In Knowledge Organization 
System (KOS)’s, semantic relations play a crucial role for 
defining concepts. The meaning of a concept is defined not 
just by the natural-language words in its labels but also by 
its links to other concepts in the vocabulary. Mirroring the 
fundamental categories of relations that are used in 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

vocabularies such as thesauri [14], SKOS supplies three 
standard properties:  
• 
skos:broader 
and 
skos:narrower 
enable 
the 
representation of hierarchical links, such as the 
relationship between one genre and its more specific 
species. 
• 
skos:related enables the representation of associative 
(non-hierarchical) links, such as the relationship 
between one type of event and a category of entities, 
which typically participate in it. 
 
Documentary Notes: Concepts sometimes can be  further 
defined using human-readable ("informal") documentation, 
such as scope notes or definitions. SKOS provides a 
skos:note property for general documentation purposes, 
which 
is 
further 
specialized 
into 
skos:scopeNote, 
skos:definition, skos:example, and skos:historyNote to fit 
more specific types of documentation.  
• 
skos:scopeNote 
supplies 
some, 
possibly 
partial, 
information about the intended meaning of a concept.  
• 
skos:definition supplies a complete explanation of the 
intended meaning of a concept.  
• 
skos:example supplies an example of the use of a 
concept.  
• 
skos:historyNote describes significant changes to the 
meaning or the form of a concept.  
 
Collections of concepts: SKOS allows the definition of 
meaningful groupings or "collections" of concepts. In 
thesaurus terminology these collections are known as 
"arrays", and the label that groups the terms in the collection 
is a "node label". To correctly model such concept 
collection structures, SKOS introduces a skos:Collection 
class. Instances of this class group specific concepts by 
means of the skos:member property.  
 
III. 
MODELLING OF ISLAMIC FINANCE THESAURUS 
The intention of engineering Islamic Finance using 
semantic technologies is to build a unique and well 
established thesaurus for all Islamic Finance users. To the 
best of our knowledge, there exists no similar work in 
Islamic Finance field. Another advantage of building a 
thesaurus for Islamic Finance is to enable users around the 
world not to start their ontology modelling from scratch. It 
also promotes interoperability between semantic-based 
applications using the thesaurus.   
Modelling of the Islamic Finance Thesaurus begins with 
the conceptualization of the Islamic Finance concepts and 
properties, which are represented as resources using 
RDF/SKOS formalisms. To model the thesaurus we 
implemented Spiral Modelling [15] technique, which is 
usually used for ontology modelling.  The requirements are 
provided by IIBF and the knowledge engineers from 
MIMOS work closely with the domain experts from IIBF to 
evaluate the facts. Figure 1 shows the iterative process of 
getting domain knowledge from experts, modelling this 
knowledge, verifying it with the help of domain expertise 
and finally engineering it. 
 
 
Figure 1. Knowledge Modelling - Spiral Model 
 
We used TopBraidComposer [16] tool for engineering 
the thesaurus. The SKOS data model of the thesaurus has 
three 
concepts 
at 
the 
top 
level 
skos:Collection, 
skos:Concept, skos:ConceptScheme, as shown in Figure 2. 
All Islamic Finance terms are defined as type of 
skos:Concept class. Islamic Finance concepts that have 
similar themes are grouped under several categories (e.g., 
Islamic Sale Contracts), which are defined as type of 
skos:Collection. Finally 
the 
whole Islamic Finance 
thesaurus is defined as type of skos:ConceptScheme. 
 
 
Figure 2. Islamic Finance Thesaurus Model 
 
Each concept is identified by a unique Universal 
Resource Identifier (URI). Throughout this paper, we will 
use the prefix “miIFT” to indicate the namespace for 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

“http://www.mimos.my/IFT#”. For example, the concept 
“http://www.mimos.my/IFT#Ajr” is shown as miIFT:Ajr.  
Within this thesaurus, there is a total of 1071 concepts 
and all the terms are related to Islamic Finance in one way 
or another. For example, there are different kinds of Islamic 
Finance contracts such as miIFT:Murabahah, miIFT:Ijarah, 
miIFT:Istisna, miIFT:Al-Mudharabah; different types of 
financial instruments such as miIFT:Cash, miIFT:Check; 
different Shariah scholars according to whose opinion 
certain transaction may or not take place such as 
miIFT:Abu_Hanifah, 
miIFT:Abu_Yusuf, 
miIFT:Ahmad_ 
ibn_ Hanbal, miIFT:Ibn_Hazm. 
Figure 3 shows the model of the concepts miIFT:Ajr and 
miIFT:Ajr-un-kareem in a graph representation.  
 
 
Figure 3. Model of the concepts “miIFT:Ajr” and “miIFT:Ajr-un-kareem” 
 
Figure 4 shows the modelling of the miIFT:Murabahah 
concept and its related properties. We can see that 
miIFT:Murabahah 
has 
broader 
concept 
miIFT:IslamicSaleContract 
and 
it 
is 
related 
to 
miIFT:Investment. All of them are SKOS concepts. It also 
has several labels (two preferred labels -English and Arabic, 
two alternate labels and one hidden label), a history note and 
a definition.  
 
 
Figure 4. Modelling of “miIFT:Murabahah” concept 
 
In the current modelling of the thesaurus, all the terms 
are in two languages: English and Arabic. But, the system 
described in the next section is catered to capture any 
language, because the primary goal of this system is to be 
able to provide collaborative authoring of its content for 
users all over the world. Thus one concept can have multiple 
labels 
-skos:prefLabel, 
skos:altLabel, 
skos:definition, 
skos:scopeNote, in different languages. For example, the 
word miIFT:Ajr has an English preferred label Wage{@en} 
and it has a preferred label in Arabic ىاب{@ar} and 
جیو{@ur} in Urdu. 
As mentioned before, SKOS data model allows to define 
other kind of spelling of particular term via the use of 
skos:altLabel (alternate label). The primary purpose for 
skos:altLabel is for synonyms, abbreviations, acronyms and 
different spellings in different languages. For example, for 
the organization miIFT:IslamicConferenceFiqhAcademy it 
is possible to have all the following alternate labels: 
 
 
OICFA (acronym); 
 
OIC Fiqh Academy (abbreviation); 
 
Organization of the Islamic Conference Fiqh 
Academy (official name in English); 
 ةمظنم رمتؤملا يملاسلإا عمجم هقفلا (official name in 
Arabic). 
This approach provides high flexibility at the lexical level.  
 
    Another part of our model uses SKOS ability to create 
various collections, which are designed to group concepts 
sharing common features together. For instance all Islamic 
Finance 
contracts 
are 
member 
of 
miIFT:IslamicFinanceContract collection; all financial 
instruments are member of miIFT:FinancialInstrument 
collection and all shariah scholars are member of 
miIFT:ShariahScholar collection. We use the property 
skos:member to create these links. 
Figure 5 shows that miIFT:Ijarah, miIFT:Salam and 
miIFT:Istisna are all type of SKOS concept and member of 
miIFT:IslamicFinanceContract collection. Similarly for 
miIFT:Cash and miIFT:Check, which are members of the 
collection miIFT:FinancialInstrument. 
 
The model has been reviewed by Islamic finance experts 
from IIBF and knowledge engineers from MIMOS. The 
process required three iterations/sprints from April 2013 to 
September 2013, and IFT model has finally been validated 
and baselined by IIBF on the 26th of September 2013. The 
content is still under construction and daily updated by 
research assistants from IIBF with the support of MIMOS. 
 
 
IV. 
COLLABORATIVE AUTHORING TOOL 
 
In this section, we present an Islamic Finance thesaurus 
collaborative authoring tool (called Islamic Finance 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Vocabulary –IFV), which allows people around the world to 
contribute in improving the Islamic Finance thesaurus by 
adding, modifying or deleting concepts, relationships 
between the concepts or descriptions. 
IFV is a web-based system, which consists of a set of 
features to assist users in managing the Islamic Finance 
Thesaurus. These features include navigation, search, 
authoring, validation, user management and ontology 
management, which are essential functionalities for 
knowledge management activities. IFV front-end was built 
using Adobe Flex/ActionScript 3 and its back-end was 
based on Java Spring framework on top of a MIMOS 
platform called the Semantic Technology Platform (STP).  
 
 
Figure 5. Example of collections in Islamic Finance Thesaurus 
 
Figure 6 shows the IFV overall system architecture. It 
depicts the web-service components running in the back-end 
and how they communicate with the Client Application 
(IFV) GUI. The Service Oriented Architecture (SOA) is 
adopted as the base technology to ensure scalability. The 
front-end application is communicating with the back-end 
components through the core STP web-service components 
(Delegator, Authenticator and Lookup service). The major 
function of the Delegator is to distribute all tasks requested 
by the user from the front-end application to the back-end 
components and return respective data to front-end 
application. The front-end application is mainly focused on 
user interaction and data displaying functionalities. 
 
 
 
Figure 6. System Architecture of IFV 
 
Apart from the core STP components, the system also 
includes other web-service components to enable the 
functional features of IFV, a database and a knowledge 
base. The features of the components and data sources are 
described below: 
 
1) IFT knowledge base (IFT KB): contains the Islamic 
Finance Thesaurus and associated metadata. 
 
2) User account database: contains information about the 
user details, such as user name, passwords, roles, status 
etc. 
 
3) Preference: 
this 
component 
is 
responsible 
for 
displaying/modifying the user’s profiles and accounts. 
4) Search: this component is responsible for receiving 
queries from IFV GUI and returning the results of the 
queries.  
 
5) Statistics: this component is responsible for displaying 
the most discussed, top visited concepts and the top 
contributors to IFT and their registered places.  
6) Navigate and Update: this component is designed for 
the users to navigate IFT and update its content. The 
navigation view consists of concepts hierarchy, 
instances list and details of triples.  
 
The IFV has been reviewed by IIBF on November 2013 and 
is presently in prototype mode. It is currently in testing 
phase after the addition of several functionalities such as a 
search based on Arabic root word.  
 
Figures 8 and 9 are snapshots of the IFV Graphical User 
Interface. Figure 8 illustrates the landing page.  
 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Figure 8: Home page of IFV system 
 
 
 
Figure 9: Navigation view of IFV system 
 
Figure 9 shows the navigation view allowing users to 
navigate through IFT by selecting specific collections, 
concepts and instances. 
 
The chart in Figure 7 illustrates the approval workflow 
when updating IFT. The workflow is as follows, where the 
validators are the Islamic finance experts from IIBF: 
 
i. 
The process starts with the user making a 
suggestion.  
ii. 
It will go to the validator who will check the 
suggestion. 
iii. 
If the validator needs more clarifications, the 
system prompts the user for more clarification and 
it goes back to Step i).  
iv. 
Else, if no clarification is needed, the process will 
continue to check if the validator agrees with the 
suggestion or not.  
v. 
If the validator agrees, then the suggestion is 
approved and committed to the IFT KB and the 
process ends. 
vi. 
Otherwise if the validator disagrees, the suggestion 
is rejected and purged, and the process ends. 
 
 
Figure 7: Approval workflow of editing/updating  
 
This workflow has been adopted locally by IIBF, where 
all the validators are Islamic finance experts from IIBF. We 
foresee this workflow to be hardly adopted at an 
international scale, especially if the validators are coming 
from different Islamic religious groups. A possibility would 
be to allow the representation of different viewpoints for a 
single concept, for example by modifying the notion of 
labels to cover the representation of different school of 
thoughts, and by categorizing the validators based on their 
school of thought. 
 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we presented our work on modelling 
semantic-based multilingual Islamic Finance Thesaurus. We 
aim to provide globally standardized use of Islamic Finance 
concepts as well as providing a rich, semantically sound 
terminology. To describe Islamic Finance concepts, 
relations between the concepts and categorization of 
concepts, we utilized the SKOS data model, a W3C 
Recommendation designed for representation of thesauri. 
We also described a web-based system, the Islamic 
Finance Vocabulary (IFV), which was developed as a 
platform to navigate, share and collaboratively author the 
content of our Islamic Finance Thesaurus among the 
communities of practice. It serves as a vital tool in the 
tremendous growth of interest in promoting standardization 
in Islamic Finance sector. 
In the current Islamic Finance thesaurus, most of the 
information is in the form of annotation. Thus, we plan to 
transform the representation into an ontology in order to be 
used for reasoning purpose. We also plan to enhance the 
multilingual feature of the Islamic Finance thesaurus content 
to include other languages such as Malay, Mandarin, etc. 
Finally, to exploit the benefits of the huge Linked Data 
resources, we want to map the Islamic Finance thesaurus 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

concepts to other related knowledge bases within the same 
domain such as Conventional Banking. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
The authors wish to thank the Institute of Islamic 
Banking and Finance and the Islamic finance experts Dr. 
Syed Musa Alhabshi, Dr. Hikmatullah Babu Sahib and Prof. 
Dr. Engku Rabiah Adawiah Engku Ali for their valuable 
support and advice. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] N. Raphaeli, “Islamic Finance – A Fast-Growing Industry”. 
retrieved 
March, 
2014, 
from: 
http://www.aclu.org/files/fbimappingfoia/20111110/ACLUR
M002789.pdf.  
[2] France to Promote Islamic Finance, retrieved March, 2014, 
from: 
http://www.expatica.com/fr/news/local_news/France-
to-promote-Islamic-finance.html. 
[3] D. Newman, “The Financial Industry Business Ontology 
(FIBO)”, Ontology Summit  (2013), retrieved March 2014, 
from: 
http://ontolog.cim3.net/file/work/OntologySummit2013/2013-
05-02_03_OntologySummit2013_Symposium/Keynote-
2_OntologySummit2013_Symposium_FIBO-Briefing--
DavidNewman_20130502.pdf 
[4] Linked 
Open 
Data, 
Retrieved 
March, 
2014, 
from: 
http://linkeddata.org/. 
[5] SKOS simple knowledge organization system reference. 
retrieved 
March, 
2014, 
from: 
http://www.w3.org/TR/2008/WD-skos-reference-20080125/. 
[6] W3C, retrieved March,  2014, from: http://www.w3.org/ 
[7] W. Schmitz-Esser. "Thesaurus and Beyond: An Advanced 
Formula for 
Linguistic 
Engineering 
and 
Information 
Retrieval", Knowledge Organization, 1999, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 
10-22. 
[8] AGROVOC, 
retrieved 
March, 
2014, 
from: 
http://aims.fao.org/standards/agrovoc 
[9] SNOMED-CT, 
retrieved 
March, 
2014, 
from: 
http://www.ihtsdo.org/snomed-ct/. 
[10] J. Golbeck, G. Fragoso, F. Hartel, J. Hendler, J. Oberthaler, 
and B. Parsia.  “The National Cancer Institute's Thesaurus and 
Ontology”. Journal of Web Semantics (2003), vol. 1, pp. 75-
80. 
[11] AGROVOC Workbench, retrieved March, 2014, from: 
http://agrovoc.mimos.my/vocbench/. 
[12] D. Soergel, B. Lauser, A. Liang, F. Fisseha, J. Keizer, and S. 
Katz, “Reengineering thesauri for new applications: The 
AGROVOC example” 2004, Journal of Digital Information 
4(4). 
[13] P. Hayes and B. McBride, “RDF Semantics” (2004), retrieved 
March, 2014, from: http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-mt/. 
[14] ISO 2788:1986 Documentation - Guidelines for the 
establishment and development of monolingual thesauri. 
Second edition. ISO TC 46/SC 9, 1986. 
[15] S. Mohamed, S. Mustaffa, and D. Lukose, “Using the Spiral 
Process Model to Develop a Medical Knowledge Base”, The 
2nd Semantic Technology and Knowledge Engineering 
Conference (STAKE 2010), July 2010, pp. 101-114. 
[16] Top Braid Composer, retrieved March, 2014, from : 
http://www.topquadrant.com/products/TB_composer.html. 
[17] A. Mamadolimova, N. Ambiah and D. Lukose. “Modeling 
Islamic finance knowledge for contract compliance in Islamic 
banking”,  Proc. 15th international conference on Knowledge-
based and intelligent information and engineering systems 
(KES 2011), Springer-Verlag, Volume Part III , pp. 346-355.  
 
 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

