Process Analysis and e-Business Adoption in Nigerian SBEs: A Report on Case 
Study Research 
Olakunle Olayinka, Martin George Wynn, Kamal Bechkoum 
School of Computing and Technology 
University of Gloucestershire 
Cheltenham, United Kingdom 
e-mail: kunle@kunleolayinka.com, MWynn@glos.ac.uk, KBechkoum@glos.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract— It is generally acknowledged that e-business 
technologies can provide internal value as well as opportunities 
to reach different local and international markets, for both 
large and small organisations. Although the use of web-based 
systems and technologies to improve business processes has 
increased steadily over the past decade, there remains a dearth 
of research in this field in developing countries such as Nigeria. 
This paper examines how e-business is being used in two 
Nigerian small businesses, using a process mapping technique, 
system profiling and two main models from the existing 
literature. The results indicate that these models provide a 
valid framework for the initial analysis of e-business in this 
environment, and that these companies are indeed benefitting 
from the deployment of e-business technologies, particularly in 
their customer facing processes and functions. 
Keywords- e-business; Nigeria; Small Business Enterprises; 
SBEs; process mapping; e-business models. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The adoption of electronic business (e-business) 
technologies and processes has increased significantly in 
recent years [1][2]. In developed countries, research has 
shown that both large enterprises and small businesses have 
successfully adopted e-business technologies and processes 
to gain competitive advantage[3], transform business models  
[4], and improve relationships with customers and suppliers 
[5][6]. Various researchers have pointed out that the 
motivation for e-business adoption varies from organisation 
to organisation, though it often encompasses reducing 
transaction costs [7], improved access to global markets [8], 
or increasing bottom-line profit performance [9]. 
In developing countries such as Nigeria, there is a dearth 
of research on the adoption of e-business in Small Business 
Enterprises (SBEs). This research investigates e-business in 
Nigerian SBEs by using a process mapping approach to 
analyse the current situation in two SBEs. For the purposes 
of this research, SBEs are defined as enterprises which 
employ fewer than 50 persons, while Small to Medium 
Enterprises (SMEs) are defined as enterprises which employ 
fewer than 250 persons [10][11]. 
Following this brief introduction, Section II reviews 
relevant literature on e-business, e-business models, process 
mapping and the challenges faced by SBEs in Nigeria. 
Section III then describes the methodology employed in this 
study and Section IV presents and discusses some of the 
initial findings. Section V provides an initial analysis of 
these findings, and the final concluding section suggests how 
further research will adapt and improve existing models for 
application in the Nigerian business context. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW  
The term e-business was used by IBM in 1997 to mean 
“the transformation of key business processes through the 
use of internet technologies” [12]. E-business can be viewed 
as the integration of web technologies with business 
processes and management practices to increase efficiency 
and lower costs [13][14]. Several recent studies have focused 
on the adoption of e-business technology and processes by 
SMEs in developed countries, including the UK [9][15], the 
USA [16], Australia [14] and in Canada [17]. However, there 
is still considerable debate in the existing literature on the 
value and productivity gain e-business has to offer to SBEs 
[9][18], who generally contribute significantly to a nation’s 
economic 
growth 
by 
offering 
flexible 
employment 
opportunities [8], poverty alleviation [19], and enhance 
supply chain flexibility, and thereby support the country’s 
overall  GDP growth [20]. 
After rebasing its GDP in 2014, Nigeria became the 
largest economy in Africa, and the 26th largest economy in 
the world with a GDP of $509 billion [21][22], overtaking 
South Africa whose GDP at the time was $384.3 billion [20]. 
SMEs contributed about 46.5% to Nigeria’s GDP with SBEs 
making up 99% of these SMEs in Nigeria.  However, as an 
indication of the problems that need confronting in the 
uptake of e-business, it is worth noting that Nigerian 
businesses experience power outages about 5 to 10 times 
weekly, with each one lasting an average of one hour [23]. 
As a result of the increased use of the internet [24][25], 
and mobile networks penetration in Nigeria [26], current and 
potential customers of SBEs are not only equipped with 
desktop computers and laptops, but also with mobile devices 
such as iPads, Smart phones and tablets. The demand for e-
business capabilities in Nigerian companies from customers 
is thus likely to increase, but very little research has explored 
the extent to which Nigerian SBEs are adopting e-business 
technologies and processes. 
To date, most studies on e-business in Nigerian small 
businesses have focused primarily on e-commerce i.e., the 
buying and selling of good and services online, neglecting 
the potential of e-business in transforming business 
processes and core operations in the more traditional “bricks 
and mortar” companies [8][19]. In 2011, Olatokun and 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Bankole [7] investigated the factors influencing e-business 
technology adoption by SMEs in Ibadan, a city in south 
western Nigeria. Data was collected by structured 
questionnaires administered to key personnel in 60 SMEs 
(30 adopters and 30 non adopters of e-business), and the 
results revealed that the age of SMEs was a significant 
influencing factor on whether e-business was used or not, 
while company size was of very little significance. It was the 
younger companies that constituted the majority of e-
business users. 
Process mapping has been applied as a tool to define and 
analyse processes in an organisation [27] and thereby to 
improve performance [28]. Researchers and systems analysts 
have applied this analytical tool in a number of different 
systems contexts. These range from the all-encompassing 
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) packages in large 
businesses [29][30] to e-business technology adoption in 
small businesses [9][31]. 
SMEs vary in structure, size and type of business, and the 
nature of e-business adoption will vary accordingly between 
businesses. The criteria and related models for assessing e-
business need to accommodate these variations. For 
example, a small manufacturing company with one main 
customer is likely to focus more on internal efficiency gains, 
whilst an SBE with products with global potential is likely to 
focus more on online sales and marketing activities[32]. 
Various frameworks and models have been designed to 
both measure e-business adoption as well as aid e-business 
implementation. The DTI Adoption Ladder is one of the 
early e-business frameworks. It breaks down e-business 
adoption into 5 stages and suggests that organisations move 
through these stages in a sequential order [9][33]. Levy and 
Powell [34] proposed the “transporter model” as an 
alternative non-linear e-business adoption model for SMEs. 
This model suggests that different types of SMEs will view 
e-business adoption in different ways and identifies four 
dimensions of e-business deployment in an SME - 
brochureware, business opportunity, business network and 
business support. 
In order to determine e-business adoption at individual 
process level – rather than at overall company level - the 
Connect, Publish, Interact, Transform (CPIT) model was 
developed by the UK Department of Trade and Industry 
[35]. This model offers a 2-dimensional matrix to evaluate 
the 
impact 
of 
e-business 
technologies 
across 
an 
organisation’s main business processes. When compared 
with the Adoption Ladder, the CPIT model offers a more in-
depth assessment of the impact of e-business on SME 
operations[9]. The Stages of Growth for e-business (SOG-e) 
model [36] is the combination of a six stage IT maturity 
model with a six stage Internet Commerce maturity model. 
However, somewhat akin to the CPIT model, the SOG-e 
model recognises that it is possible for an organisation to 
have different levels of e-business maturity in different areas 
of a business. A related model is that of Willcocks and Sauer   
[37] who identified 4 main stages through which 
organisations will pass as they develop and apply the skills 
needed 
for 
successful 
e-business 
deployment. 
The 
organization gains increased business value from e-business 
as it attains the new capabilities required to advance to the 
next stage. 
While previous studies in developed countries have 
applied some of these methods and frameworks to evaluate 
e-business technology and process adoption in SMEs; to 
date, no study has applied similar methods in the analysis of 
e-business adoption in Nigerian SBEs. This research will 
attempt to apply some of these models to various Nigerian 
SBEs, using, as a starting point, a simple top level process 
mapping technique that has been applied in similar studies 
[9][31][38]. More specifically, it will address the following 
research questions (RQs): 
RQ1. Can these mapping techniques and models of e-
business adoption be usefully applied to SBEs in a 
developing world context? 
RQ2. If so, what do they tell us about the use of e-
business in these small businesses in Nigeria? 
III. 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
Research projects usually adopt a particular philosophical 
stance based on a research paradigm, for example post-
positivism, pragmatism, interpretivism or constructivism 
[39]. This philosophical stance has a major influence on the 
choice of research methods and approaches to be used in 
order to obtain relevant findings [40]. For the purposes of 
this research, an interpretivist paradigm is adopted, and the 
research approach is qualitative, using multiple case studies. 
The case study method of research is well suited for 
observations where the researcher aims to probe deeply and 
analyse rigorously with a view to making generalisations 
about the wider population in which the unit being studied 
belongs [41][42]. Multiple case studies of Nigerian SBEs are 
investigated to assess and analyse e-business adoption in the 
country. The case studies were selected from a cross-section 
of SBE industry sectors in Lagos – Nigeria’s most populous 
city and its economic capital. The use of multiple case 
studies adds greater weight to the research and makes 
research findings more convincing [43]. Qualitative data was 
gathered 
through 
questionnaires 
and 
semi-structured 
interviews with key personnel in the company case studies. 
The case studies were identified through the researcher’s 
existing contacts with company owners and IT managers and 
all organisations selected for the study have already 
attempted to apply e-business within their organisations. This 
paper reports on the findings from just the first two case 
studies. 
While this research is qualitative, exploratory and 
inductive in nature, some quantitative assessment of 
company turnover, number of staff and period of e-business 
usage was done. Necessary approval and consent from 
participatory organisations were sought and aliases have 
been used for company and individuals’ names. Empirical 
evidence gathered from these organisations was developed 
and assessment made against selected models. 
IV. 
FINDINGS 
    ABC Laundries is a family business founded in 2010. 
It originated as a home based operation, but has now 
expanded to become a budget laundry and dry cleaning 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

service for people living in Lagos. The company provides a 
wide range of laundry and dry cleaning services to people 
living in the Lagos Metropolis from its locations in Yaba and 
Surulere (urban areas within Lagos). With its main 
operations office in Surulere strategically located within the 
Lagos University Teaching Hospital, ABC Laundries is able 
to offer its laundry services to students and staff at the 
hospital, as well as pickup and delivery services to 
companies, corporate services, and guest houses across 
Lagos State. Currently, the company turns over circa 6 
million Naira (£24,000) per annum, and employs 7 staff. 
(Staff wages are very low in comparison with developed 
world norms, averaging less than £1000 a year for these 
staff). The current business plan is to further increase 
revenue by expanding the company’s customer base and 
increasing market share. 
The management of ABC Laundries view e-business as a 
key enabler of corporate growth and, to this end, invested in 
a bespoke web-based system in 2013, to handle its key sales 
and marketing and financial management processes. Prior to 
this, most business processes were handled by a combination 
of paper based receipts, Excel spreadsheets and open source 
accounting tools. However, this became difficult to manage 
with the opening of a new branch in 2012, and this was the 
catalyst for investment in a new web portal. The key 
objectives of this investment were: 
1. 
To provide a system where orders can be captured 
in real time at both locations. 
2. 
To provide a mechanism to allow staff and 
customers to track the status of a laundry order 
from pickup to delivery. 
3. 
To enable top-level financial reporting in real-time. 
4. 
To maintain a database of customers and contact 
details. 
 
The web portal was implemented in phases, adding new 
functionality as the old support systems were phased out. 
The key objectives have been met, with the addition of a few 
functionality enhancements. The web portal was built using 
PHP and the MYSQL database. Integration with email 
servers as well as SMS gateways has enabled emails and 
SMS notifications to be sent to customers. 
GPY properties is a property development and marketing 
company founded in 2012. In the context of Nigeria’s 
housing deficit and the acute absence of quality housing in 
the country, the company aims to help redress this imbalance 
through the provision of innovative, high quality and 
affordable homes. 
The company originated as the property sales division of 
a larger consulting company called PYI Consulting Limited. 
However, as sales of developed properties increased, the 
owner decided to hive off the division into a separate 
corporate entity to focus on property development sales and 
marketing as its core business. In 2014, the company turned 
over about 20 million Naira (£80,000) and the forecast for 
2015 is double this figure, due in part to the imminent 
completion a new state of the art private residential estate in 
Ogun State, Nigeria. 
GPY Properties maintains a website mainly for 
marketing properties and showcasing its ongoing projects to 
customers and potential customers. The company also 
maintains a cloud based Customer Relationship Management 
(CRM) system for maintaining and analysing customer 
contact details. 
From time to time, the company also advertises on 
Facebook and various other property aggregator websites. 
Invoice generation and other accounting activities are 
currently managed by Excel spreadsheets, but plans are in 
place to subscribe to a cloud based accounting solution; the 
Wave Accounting and Xero Accounting packages are 
possible solutions. 
With three full time staff and twenty contract staff, the 
company has been able to automate most of its daily 
business activities concerning customer engagement, internal 
communication and product marketing. 
V. 
INITIAL ANALYSIS 
Initial analysis of e-business deployment in the case 
study companies was undertaken through the combination of 
four models - process mapping, systems profiling, CPIT (a 
process based e-business model) and the Willcocks and 
Sauer e-business staged model. Previous research [8][34] 
indicates that the use of simple stage based models alone to 
determine the level of e-business use in an organisation is not 
sufficient, as different processes may be at different levels. 
However, even with models that examine technology 
deployment at process level, such as the CPIT model, there is 
still the need to adapt these to a small business environment, 
as the process definitions may not be appropriate to new 
SBEs [31]. This combination of pre-existing models, derived 
and adapted from previous research [9], is used as the 
conceptual framework for analysis of the case studies. 
The web based system implemented at ABC Laundries 
now enables it to generate receipts and invoices at its sales 
desk on the fly, as well as manage the status of each laundry 
order throughout its lifecycle (i.e., from pickup/drop off to 
delivery/pickup). The company’s business plan now entails 
the opening up of multiple locations across the State, and this 
will involve leveraging of further benefit from its web based 
system. 
Using data from the questionnaire responses and semi 
structured interviews, seven core processes were identified in 
ABC Laundries (Fig. 1) - Laundry Operations, Financial 
Management, Sales & Marketing, Collection & Delivery 
Management, Stock & Procurement Management, Payroll & 
HR Management and Customer Services. At PGY 
properties, there were six core processes (Fig. 2) that the 
organisation performs – Financial Management, Constructor 
Liaison & Management, Customer Services, Property Sales 
and Marketing, Logistics & Procurement and Payroll & HR 
Management. 
Systems profiling was applied to identify e-business 
systems currently in place in each process area. By 
employing a simple Red-Amber-Green assessment (Fig. 3 
and Fig. 4), systems were assessed to indicate those in need 
of replacement, those that could possibly be retained and 
those that were deemed strategically and/or operationally 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

sound. This procedure initiated the analysis of e-business 
systems at individual process level as well as indicating 
which processes are automated, semi-automated or non- 
automated. 
 
 
Figure 1. Main business processes at ABC Laundries 
 
A CPIT analysis of ABC Laundries (Fig. 5) then 
provided a more detailed view of the impact of e-business 
systems at process level. This revealed that e-business 
systems have made significant impact in the financial 
management and customer facing processes. Decision 
makers within the organisation are easily able to keep track 
of daily, weekly and monthly revenue from any of the two 
premises, or remotely, thus helping the organisation to plan 
effectively and take appropriate action when needed. 
The sales and marketing process has also been made more 
efficient with the ability to automate and notify selected 
groups of customer via SMS or emails. There remain further 
benefits to be gained by automating the communication of 
marketing information to customers and by making relevant 
information available across processes. This may allow, for 
example, special offers to be made to customers in specific 
geographic locations, with high frequency of delivery, with 
a mind to keep delivery cost constant and increase orders to 
be delivered. This type of further development, which is 
akin to what, in a larger organization, would be termed 
Business Intelligence, would arguably move the company 
into the transformation stage on the CPIT model. 
 
 
Figure 2. Main business processes at GPY properties 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Main business processes, sub-processes and systems profiling at 
ABC Laundries 
 
GPY Properties has been able to adopt e-business 
technologies without the need to use in-house IT staff, as it 
has been able to utilise a cloud based CRM tool. The CPIT 
Model for GPY Properties shows that its sales and marketing 
processes are well supported by e-business technology. 
According to the company’s managing director, the strategy 
to advertise online has helped the company gather new leads 
- often people with very busy schedules, who would not 
normally have time to visit the company’s office - as well as 
reach 
different 
geographical 
locations 
with 
its 
advertisements. This year, without doing any advert 
campaign specifically targeted at the northern part of 
Nigeria, the company has been able to make two property 
sales to individuals who live in this location, and a number of 
further sales are currently in the final stages of completion in 
this part of the country. One of the current subscribers to its 
flagship residential estate is a Nigerian who resides in 
Canada and who saw the advert on the company’s Facebook 
page. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Main business processes and systems profiling at GPY Properties 
 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
 
Figure 5. CPIT model applied to ABC Laundries 
 
Nevertheless, Fig. 6 shows us that as of now, the 
deployment of e-business technologies at GPY Properties is 
restricted to the sales, marketing and customer service 
processes. The managing director has affirmed that the 
volume of data generated by the various departments in the 
other process areas does not justify further investment in e-
business systems at present, although this may change as the 
organisation expands and takes up more construction 
projects. 
 
Figure 6. CPIT model applied to GPY Properties 
 
Further, if we now look at these two companies against 
Willcocks and Sauer’s model [37], the analysis suggests they 
are between stages 2 and 3 (Fig. 7), whereas other authors 
[44] have suggested that many small companies do not 
progress past stage 1 because they often do not see the 
benefit in investing in capital intensive e-business projects. 
This apparent contradiction is partly explained by the 
reduction in cost of e-business infrastructure in recent years, 
and, partly because of this, it has become a de facto norm to 
use e-business in the sales and marketing processes in many 
organisations, including SBEs. Moreover, in the two case 
study companies investigated here, the management sees e-
business as a key enabler to growth. In ABC Laundries, in 
particular, their success with e-business to date can be 
attributed to the phased introduction of new e-business 
features which has helped the organisation derive value from 
relatively small scale, staged, expenditure. This has also 
allowed a phased upgrade in technology, accompanied by 
appropriate process improvement and staff training, before 
moving on to focus on another process. Similarly, at GPY 
Properties, the company has used cloud based systems that 
offer very low entry costs. 
 
Figure 7. The Two Nigerian SBEs on the E-business Stage Model 
 
Stage 1- Web Presence 
 
Develop presence 
 
Develop technology capability 
Stage 2- Access Information and Transact Business 
 
Re-orientate business/technology thinking skills 
 
Build integrated approach with the web and business systems 
Stage 3- Further Integration of Skills, Processes, Technologies 
 
Reorganise people/structures 
 
Reengineer processes 
 
Remodel technology infrastructure 
Stage 4- Capability, Leveraging, Experience and Know-How to 
Maximise Value 
 
Customer-focused organisation 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
The analysis of the two case studies indicates that e-
business technologies and processes are being adopted by 
Nigerian SBEs, and that existing e-business models can be 
usefully applied to assess e-business operations in these 
companies.  So, in answer to the RQs noted earlier in this 
paper, this research suggests that the e-business adoption 
models, developed to gauge the impact of e-business in the 
developed world over a decade ago, are of value today in a 
developing world context. Although the definition of e-
business has evolved, the process mapping technique and the 
application of models like CPIT can give a clear framework 
and point of departure for the assessment of e-business in 
countries like Nigeria; and they clearly show that e-business 
technologies are bringing value to the studied SBEs, 
particularly in the customer facing processes, which mirrors 
the early deployment of e-business in the developed world. 
Future research will now focus on how these models can 
be advanced and refined to provide an enhanced analytical 
framework for understanding and progressing e-business 
deployment in Nigeria. In particular, the three dimensions of 
change discussed above in relation to ABC Laundries – 
technology deployment, process improvement, and people 
skills enhancement – will be incorporated into a new 
combined model of e-business implementation. These 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

dimensions of change have been identified by other authors 
[45] [46] with regard to information systems projects in 
developing world contexts, and this provides a theoretical 
platform for further investigation of these concepts in current 
and future case studies of  e-business in Nigerian SBEs.  
REFERENCES 
[1] E. M. Agwu, “An investigative analysis of factors influencing 
E-business adoption and maintenance of commercial websites 
in Nigeria,” Basic Res. J. Bus. Manag. Accounts ISSN 2315-
6899 Vol. 3, 2014, pp. 5–16. 
[2] A. Yee-Loong Chong, K.-B. Ooi, H. Bao, and B. Lin, “Can e-
business adoption be influenced by knowledge management? 
An empirical analysis of Malaysian SMEs,” J. Knowl. 
Manag., vol. 18, no. 1, 2014, pp. 121–136. 
[3] B. A. Wagner, I. Fillis, and U. Johansson, “E-business and e-
supply strategy in small and medium sized businesses 
(SMEs),” Supply Chain Manag. An Int. J., vol. 8, no. 4, 2003, 
pp. 343–354. 
[4] T. Oliveira and M. F. Martins, “Understanding e-business 
adoption across industries in European countries,” Ind. 
Manag. Data Syst., vol. 110, no. 9, 2010, pp. 1337–1354. 
[5] T. Oliveira and M. F. Martins, “Firms Patterns of e-Business 
Adoption: Evidence for the European Union-27,” Electron. J. 
Inf. Syst., vol. 13, no. 1, 2010, pp. 47–56. 
[6] D. Sharma and M. Ranga, “Mobile customer relationship 
management-A competitive tool,” Excel Int. J. Multidiscip. 
Manag. Stud., vol. 4, no. 7, 2014, pp. 37–42. 
[7] W. Olatokun and B. Bankole, “Factors Influencing Electronic 
Business Technologies Adoption and Use by Small and 
Medium 
Scale 
Enterprises 
(SMES) 
in 
a 
Nigerian 
Municipality,” J. Internet Bank. Commer., vol. 16, no. 3, 
2011, pp. 1–26. 
[8] M. Taylor and A. Murphy, “SMEs and e-business,” J. small 
Bus. Enterp. Dev., vol. 11, no. 3, 2004, pp. 280–289. 
[9] M. G. Wynn, P. Turner, and E. Lau, “E-business and process 
change: 
two 
case 
studies 
(towards 
an 
assessment 
framework),” J. Small Bus. Enterp. Dev., vol. 20, no. 4, 2013, 
pp. 913–933. 
[10] European Commission, The new SME definition: user guide 
and model declaration. Office for Official Publications of the 
European Communities, 2005. 
[11] Small and Medium Enterprises Development Agency of 
Nigeria, “National Policy on Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises,” 2014. 
[12] D. Chaffey, E-business and E-commerce Management: 
Strategy, Implementation and Practice. Financial Times 
Prentice Hall, 2007. 
[13] V. Bordonaba-Juste, L. Lucia-Palacios, and Y. Polo-Redondo, 
“Antecedents and consequences of e-business adoption for 
European retailers,” Internet Res., vol. 22, no. 5, 2012, pp. 
532–550. 
[14] A. Prananto, J. McKay, and P. Marshall, “Lessons learned 
from analysing e-business progression using a stage model in 
Australian Small Medium Enterprises (SMEs),” ACIS 2004 
Proc. , 2004, p. 75. 
[15] C. Parker and T. Castleman, “New directions for research on 
SME-eBusiness: insights from an analysis of journal articles 
from 2003-2006,” J. Inf. Syst. Small Bus., vol. 1, no. 1, 2007, 
pp. 21–40. 
[16] H. D. Kim, I. Lee, and C. K. Lee, “Building Web 2.0 
enterprises: A study of small and medium enterprises in the 
United States,” Int. Small Bus. J., vol. 31, no. 2, 2013, pp. 
156–174. 
[17] P. Ifinedo, “Internet/e-business technologies acceptance in 
Canada’s SMEs: an exploratory investigation,” Internet Res., 
vol. 21, no. 3, 2011, pp. 255–281. 
[18] A. Basu and S. Muylle, “Assessing and enhancing e-business 
processes,” Electron. Commer. Res. Appl., vol. 10, no. 4, 
2011, pp. 437–499. 
[19] D. O. Faloye, “The adoption of e-commerce in small 
businesses: an empirical evidence from retail sector in 
Nigeria.,” J. Bus. Retail Manag. Res., vol. 8, no. 2, 2014, pp. 
54–64. 
[20] Bloomberg Business, “Nigerian Economy Overtakes South 
Africa’s on Rebased GDP,” Bloomberg Business, 2014. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2014-04-
06/nigerian-economy-overtakes-south-africa-s-on-rebased-
gdp. [Accessed: 18-March-2016]. 
[21] The Economist, “Nigeria: Africa’s new Number One | The 
Economist,” 2014. 
[22] World Bank, “Nigeria Economic Report: Improved Economic 
Outlook in 2014, and Prospects for Continued Growth Look 
Good,” 
2014. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.worldbank.org/en/country/nigeria/publication/nig
eria-economic-report-improved-economic-outlook-in-2014-
and-prospects-for-continued-growth-look-good. 
[Accessed: 
18-March-2016]. 
[23] E. I. Ohimain, “Can Nigeria Generate 30% of her Electricity 
from Coal by 2015,” Int. J. Energy Power Eng., vol. 3, no. 1, 
2014, p. 28. 
[24] Internet Live Stats, “Internet Users by Country,” 2014. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.internetlivestats.com/internet-users-by-country/. 
[Accessed: 18-March-2016]. 
[25] Vanguard Nigeria, “Nigeria has 48m active internet users – 
NITDA,” 
2014. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.vanguardngr.com/2014/10/nigeria-48m-active-
internet-users-nitda/. [Accessed: 18-March-2016]. 
[26] Paul Budde Communication Pty Ltd, “Nigeria - Mobile 
Market - Insights, Statistics and Forecasts,” Paul Budde 
Commun. Pty Ltd, 2015. 
[27] J. M. Jacka and P. J. Keller, Business Process Mapping: 
Improving Customer Satisfaction. Wiley, 2009. 
[28] S. Biazzo, “Process mapping techniques and organisational 
analysis: Lessons from sociotechnical system theory,” Bus. 
Process Manag. J., vol. 8, no. 1, 2002, pp. 42–52. 
[29] H. Akeel and M. G. Wynn, “ERP Implementation in a 
Developing World Context: a Case Study of the Waha Oil 
Company, Libya,” in eKnow 2015 7th International 
Conference 
on 
Information, 
Process 
and 
Knowledge 
Management, 2015, no. A, pp. 126–131. 
[30] M. G. Wynn and M. Rezaeian, “ERP implementation in 
manufacturing SMEs: Lessons from the Knowledge Transfer 
Partnership scheme,” InImpact J. Innov. Impact, vol. 8, no. 1, 
2015, pp. 75–92. 
[31] M. Wynn and E. Tipton, “The Deployment of Service 
Management Systems in SMEs--Three Case Studies,” in 
SERVICE COMPUTATION 2011 : The Third International 
Conferences on Advanced Service Computing, 2011, pp. 149-
156. 
[32] P. 
Taylor, 
“The 
Importance 
of 
Information 
and 
Communication Technologies (ICTs): An Integration of the 
Extant Literature on ICT Adoption in Small and Medium 
Enterprises,” Int. J. Econ. Commer. Manag., vol. 3, no. 5,  
2015, pp. 274-295. 
[33] A. Gunasekaran, Modelling and Analysis of Enterprise 
Information Systems. IGI Pub., 2007. 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

[34] M. Levy and P. Powell, “Exploring SME internet adoption: 
towards a contingent model,” Electron. Mark., vol. 13, no. 2, 
2003, pp. 173–181. 
[35] Department of Trade and Industry, Business in the 
Information Age: International Benchmarking Study 2003. 
Booz Allen Hamilton, London, 2003. 
[36] J. McKay, A. Prananto, and P. Marshall, “E-business 
maturity: The SOG-e model,” in Proceedings of the 11th 
Australasian Conference on Information Systems (ACIS), 
2000, pp. 6–8. 
[37] L. P. Willcocks and C. Sauer, Moving to e-business. Random 
House Business Books, 2000. 
[38] M. Wynn and O. Olubanjo, “Demand-supply chain 
management: systems implications in an SME packaging 
business in the UK,” Int. J. Manuf. Res., vol. 7, no. 2, 2012, 
pp. 198–212. 
[39] J. W. Creswell, Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative, 
and Mixed Methods Approaches, Fourth edi. SAGE 
Publications, 2013. 
[40] M. B. Davies, Doing a Successful Research Project: Using 
Qualitative or Quantitative Methods. Palgrave Macmillan, 
2007. 
[41] R. B. Burns, Introduction to Research Methods. SAGE 
Publications, 2000. 
[42] D. 
Silverman, 
Interpreting 
Qualitative 
Data. 
SAGE 
Publications, 2015. 
[43] R. K. Yin, Case Study Research: Design and Methods. SAGE 
Publications, 2003. 
[44] M. Levy, P. Powell, and P. Yetton, “SMEs: aligning IS and 
the strategic context,” J. Inf. Technol., vol. 16, no. 3, 2001, 
pp. 133–144. 
[45] R. Heeks, "Information Systems and Developing Countries: 
Failure, Success, and Local Improvisations”, Journal of 
Information Society, Vol.18 (2), 2002, pp. 101-112. 
[46] A. Bakeer and M. Wynn, “E-Business In The University 
Sector: A Case Study From Libya”, The Marketing Review, 
Vol 15, No 4, 2015, pp. 465-481. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

