 
 
Semantically Standardized and Transparent Process Model Collections via Process 
Building Blocks 
 
Jörg Becker, Nico Clever, Justus Holler, Johannes Püster, Maria Shitkova 
University of Muenster – ERCIS 
Münster, Germany 
firstname.lastname@ercis.uni-muenster.de 
 
 
Abstract—Process model repositories management is a complex 
endeavor including modeling and publishing challenges. 
Existing modeling notations like BPMN or EPC are not able to 
cover the requirements induced by the volumes of such process 
model collections (PMC). The modeling technique proposed in 
this 
work 
addresses 
these 
requirements 
and 
enables 
organizations to efficiently manage their respective PMC. In 
fact, the proposed notation based on process building blocks 
allows for the efficient handling of PMC of any size. Its 
integrated structure of building block based process models 
combined with the concepts of layers, attributes, glossaries, 
reference models, and variants makes it a universal yet 
semantically standardized process modeling technique. The 
conceptual definition of the modeling technique and a 
prototypical instantiation and implementation are introduced. 
The practical applicability of the technique is justified through 
an evaluation in practice. 
Business Process Management, Process Modeling, Process 
Model Collections 
I. 
 MOTIVATION 
Business process modeling (BPM) is a fundamental 
requirement in most management and IS projects [14]. A lot 
of companies have undertaken such an initiative for the 
purpose of business reorganization, certification, human 
resource planning or traditional software engineering [6]. 
The more complex the environment is, the more business 
processes models it contains [12]. In addition to process 
models, organizational charts, and a multitude of various 
additional documents related to the process models are 
created during BPM projects. All these artifacts form so-
called process model collections (PMC), which according to 
[8] are being of great attention among researchers nowadays. 
The most common modeling notations that are used for 
the task of process modeling are Flow Chart Diagrams, 
PetriNets, Integrated Definition for Function Modeling 
(IDEF0), Event-driven process chains (EPC), Unified 
Modeling Language, (UML), Business Process Model and 
Notation (BPMN). These existing modeling notations are 
subject to limitations, which have been criticized for 
different reasons by practitioners and researches in the field 
of BPM [3], [22], [1]. These limitations include a lack of 
standardization [24], which again imposes challenges on 
reusability, collection organization and variant management. 
The difficulties of managing PMC are therefore partly 
accounted for by the modeling language used to create the 
process models. 
Besides the research endeavor conducted there are still 
open issues to be addressed [8], such as querying, mining, 
refactoring, re-use, similarity search, merging, variant 
management and collection organization. In the following, 
we will focus on the areas of reusability, because it is a 
fundamental idea of all modeling efforts, and follow up on 
ideas of collection organization as well as variant 
management. We will further discuss these areas from the 
perspective of a proposed process modeling technique, 
which is to be understood as a combination of a modeling 
notation including syntactical rules and a complementing 
modeling tool facilitating the application. 
Therefore, the goal of this paper is to address the above-
mentioned problems by answering the following research 
questions: 
 
RQ1: How can the problem of organizing process 
model collections, including such aspects as variant 
management and storage of supporting model 
information, be resolved with the help of a modeling 
technique? 
 
RQ2: How can a modeling technique support the re-
use of process models within a process model 
collection by semantic model standardization? 
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In 
the second section a literature review on the existing 
problems in two areas of BPM and PMC is carried out and 
their interrelations are highlighted. Our research method is 
presented in section three. In section four the conceptual 
model of the proposed modeling technique is introduced. 
Section five is devoted to the presentation of a prototypical 
implementation and evaluation of the modeling method. The 
paper is concluded within section six with the discussion of 
the findings and outline of open issues. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The problems of BPM can be classified into 3 groups in 
terms of their occurrence before, during and after the 
conduction of process modeling projects [24] as follows: 
 
Before process modeling: as most of the existing 
modeling methods are not intuitive, process 
modelers as well as process model users have to 
learn and understand the selected process modeling 
language before starting a BPM project [24]. 
172
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
 
 
During process modeling: The most common 
techniques like Flow Charts, PetriNets, IDEF0, EPC, 
UML or BPMN allow for a high degree of freedom 
during modeling. They do not provide naming 
conventions, or standardized levels of modeling 
abstraction. As a result the created models differ 
greatly if several specialists are involved in the 
modeling process [3]. 
 
After process modeling: Because of the high degree 
of freedom, the resulting process models are 
complex and their semantic is not standardized. 
They are therefore hard to analyze and re-use. In 
most cases, proceeding activities are a tedious 
manual task, in which expensive consultants have to 
be involved. [4] 
In addition to this classification, a global Delphi study 
conducted by Indulska et al. (2011) identified the most 
influential current issues and future challenges in BPM. The 
following issues are among the most significant ones 
according to the opinion of practitioners and researchers 
[14]: 
 
lack of standardization of modeling notations, tools 
and methodologies; 
 
model management problems, i.e. publication, 
version, variant, or release management; 
 
absence of clear definition of modeling level of 
detail; 
 
lack of identification of abstraction levels; 
 
need for establishing process modeling expertise and 
collaborative modeling. 
Other issues are related to the complexity management of 
process models as processes with a high number of elements 
can cause comprehension problems in such activities as 
model validation, maintenance and utilization [16], [17]. 
Regarding PMC, there are several more tasks to be 
considered such as querying of process models, similarity 
search, variant management, merging, mining, refactoring, 
re-use, collection organization, and repository technology 
[8]. Due to the BPM issues identified above, in particular 
huge number of process elements, high degree of freedom 
for modelers and absence of standardized semantics, most of 
these tasks and especially the model re-use and process 
model collection management are problematic.  
III. 
RESEARCH METHOD 
For developing a modeling technique as presented in this 
paper, design science research methodology (DSRM) is 
applied. In the area of design science (DS) research, there is 
a variety of concepts of how to conduct a DS endeavor. They 
mainly differ in the role, design theories take over in the 
understanding and definition of DS. On the one hand, there 
are notions in which design theory plays minor or even no 
role at all. For example, March & Smith [19], Hevner et al. 
[11] and Benbasat & Zmud [5] consider the IT artifact as the 
core research object of information systems research. On the 
other hand, there are notions in which the theory of how to 
design the IT artifact is considered as the main research 
objective along with the IT artifact itself. For example, Walls 
et al. [23], Gregor & Jones [9] and Iivari [13] propose a 
differentiation between the theoretical design of an IT 
artifact and its concrete implementation, as well as the 
relationship between these two aspects. Other authors like 
Kuechler & Vaishnavi [15] identify a mutual relationship 
between kernel theories and design theories saying that 
kernel theories can influence DS as well as they can be re-
influenced by DS results. 
For the purpose of this work, an overemphasizing of the 
role of theories is deemed not beneficial. Therefore, the 
notion of DS proposed by March & Smith [19] which is 
taken up and refined by Hevner et al. [11] is chosen as a 
research method in this work. According to Hevner et al. 
[11] the design science research process can be presented as 
a cycle with five main steps (Fig. 1). In order to specify the 
problem domain we have conducted a literature review, 
which revealed a number of deficiencies in the area of PMC 
and served as a basis for solution objectives definition. The 
design phase of DSRM was fulfilled by concept creation, 
presented 
in 
the 
following 
section 
of 
the 
paper. 
Demonstration of the result is achieved through prototypical 
implementation of the modeling tool. Evaluation is 
performed by applying the created artifact in two business 
modeling projects. Finally, as design is inherently iterative 
according to DSRM, new requirements were identified for 
the artifact improvement after the evaluation phase. 
 
Specify the 
problem 
domain
Define 
objective of 
the solution
Design
Demonstrate
Evaluate
Redesign
Literature 
analysis
(section II)
Argumentation
(section II)
Concept 
creation 
(section IV)
Implemen-
tation 
(section V.A)
Evaluation 
(section V.B)
Outlook (section VI) 
DSRM
phase
Research
method
 
Figure 1.  Research methodology 
IV. 
CONCEPT OF THE MODELING TECHNIQUE 
The main research artifact is a conceptual model based 
on several rationales, which are depicted in the following 
subsections. 
A. Layers 
In order to address the challenge of process complexity it 
is common practice to define layers of abstraction. The 
emerging question is how many layers are reasonable to 
support an adequate fit between necessary detailing of the 
process steps and constraining the amount of process 
information in one model with respect to usability and 
readability.  
The most adequate amount of layers varies with respect 
to the modeling purpose of the modeling project. A 
workflow management system preparation project demands 
a higher level of (technical) detail in comparison to a 
management-oriented process modeling project. Hence, the 
challenge is to conceptualize a layer architecture which is 
able to meet the requirements for, e. g., both of the 
aforementioned scenarios. 
173
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
 
B. Attributes 
Despite the possibility to use the layers of abstraction, the 
here conceptualized technique proposes attribution as a mean 
to complement the process models with in-depth information 
on all process layers where applicable. By extending the 
process models with attributes, the challenge of complexity 
can be overcome more easily. Attribution reduces the need 
for sophisticated branching concepts for the control flow of 
the processes. Via the possibility to use different attributes 
on the distinct layers of abstraction, the aforementioned 
modeling purpose can be supported more easily. Hence, the 
concept of attribution fosters readability due to complexity 
reduction and expands the area of application due to the 
possibility to append attributes on any level.  
Furthermore, manageable process attributes are a 
prerequisite 
for 
process 
analysis 
and 
reporting 
functionalities. 
C. Glossary 
Existing modeling techniques allow for a high degree of 
freedom in both syntax and semantics. These degrees of 
freedom also allow the modelers to arbitrarily label process 
elements, such as events and functions in EPC or BPMN. 
Empirical studies verified that the terms used in 
modeling can vary heavily, especially, when developed 
timely, personally and regionally distributed [10]. On a 
word-based view, these problems are mainly caused by 
synonyms. As process element labels are normally composed 
of multiple words, the phrase structure of these words may 
also cause naming conflicts. It has been shown, that even 
when limiting the number of words to two, there are more 
than 20 different phrase structures being used by process 
modelers [7]. 
These issues, both on word and phrase structure base are 
called naming conflicts [2]. The re-use of models flawed in 
such a way is problematic, as they increase the complexity of 
the model and are thereby much harder to understand by the 
model users. Moreover, automated processing and analysis 
of the models is complicated or even impossible. 
The key to prevent naming conflicts is standardizing the 
choice of words and the phrase structures to use before 
modeling and enforcing these standards during modeling [7]. 
Similar to the simple syntax our modeling technique strives 
for the simplest structures available to foster semantic 
standardization. Therefore, only a simple verb-object label is 
allowed for the phrase structures. These have proven to be 
understood better than all other phrase structures. [20] 
Within the process modeling context the verbs and objects 
can be interpreted as activities and business objects. 
Standardization before modeling is achieved through a 
glossary, which is composed of several business objects. 
These business objects are again related to all activities, 
which results in a specific instantiation of the verb-noun 
phrase structure. The free definition of business objects and 
activities allows the modeling technique to be customized for 
any modeling scenario. This procedure is therefore chosen 
over the use of existing catalogues such as the MIT process 
handbook, although it requires more initial work [18]. 
The standardization is enforced during modeling, since 
all modeling processes have to be related to at least one 
glossary. Every process element is then labeled by linking 
the process element to one activity-business object 
combination specified in the glossary. 
D. Reference Models 
Besides the incorporation of the before mentioned 
rationales into the modeling technique, reference models are 
proposed to further enhance model creation. They allow 
simple and efficient model creation, since their reference 
character enables the modeler to easily adapt the model to his 
or her needs. Moreover, reference models foster models of 
high quality w. r. t. their best or common practice character. 
Furthermore, reference models facilitate storing, relating and 
finding the models by providing a frame which structures the 
process model collection in an enterprise. 
E. Variants 
There are several scenarios where one outcome of a 
process is achieved by different process activities. This often 
leads to complex process models, since they take a range of 
possible circumstances into account in the sense of additional 
model components. A smart way to bypass this driver of 
complexity is to define several variants of one process. By 
this mean, the process model itself often remains simple with 
respect to branching and model elements but therefore the 
amount of simple model variants is increasing. It is a trade-
off between complex models and several variants of one 
process model. Within the proposed concept, a new model 
variant is created, whenever the incoming and outgoing 
information of the process is the same, but at least one main 
process activity is different from the standard procedure. 
V. 
PROTOTYPICAL IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION 
In this section, the prototypical implementation of the 
modeling technique proposed in the preceding section, is 
described. Moreover, an evaluation of the resulting tool in 
two medium sized enterprises is presented. 
A. Implementation 
Based on the conceptual model proposed in the preceding 
section, we have implemented a modeling tool prototype 
(Fig. 2) which fulfills all the aforementioned requirements. It 
is a web application based on the programming framework 
Ruby on Rails which follows the model-view-controller 
paradigm [21]. Therefore, it provides an elegant solution to 
separate the underlying data storage, the business logic and 
the presentation of the data. As the underlying database 
structure is easily exchangeable, the tool is able to be utilized 
in most scenarios and organizational IT infrastructures. 
Moreover, to facilitate an efficient and effective creation as 
well as utilization of the process models, the user interface 
for modeling as well as presentation of the models is 
designed to be highly intuitive also for non-process modeling 
experts. This is even enhanced by the use of JavaScript 
which is a client-side programming language fostering 
asynchronous handling of user input. Thus, irritating reloads 
of 
web 
pages 
are 
contained 
in 
the 
prototype.
174
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
 
 
Figure 2.  Main process view in the prototype. 
Within the conceptual model, a layer-architecture is 
described as a cornerstone for the modeling technique to be 
implemented. Within the prototype, this layer-architecture is 
realized as four-layer architecture. It consists of the layers 
process framework, main processes, detail processes and 
process building blocks (PBB) (Fig. 3). On the first layer, a 
process framework provides the modelers and model users 
alike with a process overview respectively process landscape 
comprising all relevant main processes within the depicted 
organization ordered by e. g. functional areas. The elements 
of the process framework are further specified on a more 
detailed level in the main process layer. Here, the main 
process steps are described in order to give a rough overview 
about the activities usually carried out during this process in 
the respective business area. As an example the main process 
“Check Bill” is shown in figure 2. To handle parallel steps, 
branching methods are supported by design on this layer. 
Each of the main process steps is further refined by a detail 
process on the detail process layer. Like in the superordinate 
layer, branching methods are provided on this layer to handle 
parallel activities. Every modeled element on this layer is 
represented by a so called process building block. These 
PBB are defined in detail on the fourth and most detailed 
layer. Here, the information about the atomic activities of the 
depicted processes can be provided. For example, 
attachments like videos, documents, hyperlinks, wiki pages, 
etc. are supported.  
According to the description in the conceptual model, the 
prototype features attribution on each of the four model 
layers. Here, process-enhancing and additional information 
can be provided for each of the model elements on each 
layer. The attributes can be specified by the administrators of 
the tool and by providing administrators with the possibility 
to specify the concrete attributes themselves, the tool allows 
for utilization in any organization and business area. In the 
example in figure 2 two attributes were defined for “Read 
bill” activity of the main process: weaknesses and 
improvement potentials. 
Corresponding to the utilization of a semantic modeling 
approach postulated in the conceptual model, a glossary is 
implemented in the prototype. With it, the aforementioned 
naming conflicts are contained. The concrete implementation 
in the tool allows for the creation of glossaries in which 
business objects and activities can be maintained. Moreover, 
an assignment of activities to business objects assures that 
only correct combinations can be assigned to process 
elements. The usage of the glossary and the abovementioned 
four layer architecture of the prototype are aligned as well. 
On the process framework layer, the elements – which are 
the main processes – can be assigned to a business object. On 
the subordinate layers – main processes and detail processes 
– the elements – detail processes respectively PBB – can be 
assigned a predefined phrase structure of a business object 
along with an activity. By this, modeling conventions are 
adhered and costly refinements or corrections are avoided. 
Eventually, the usage of variants is facilitated within the 
prototype. On the main process and detail process layers 
different variants can be created whenever necessary. In 
figure 2 there were defined two variants of “Check Bill” 
main process: manual audit and automatic audit. The last 
three activities in the exemplary main process are the same 
for both variants and therefore are modeled only once in the 
standard variant (“Manual Audit”) and afterwards inserted as 
references in “Automatic Audit” variant. 
 
Figure 3.  Layer concept of conceptual model.  
B. Evaluation 
The prototype has been evaluated in two process 
modeling projects. The characteristics of the companies, 
whose processes were modeled, are shown in Table 1. 
Although their characteristics differ, both companies are 
archetypical medium sized companies without a documented 
process landscape. As small and medium sized companies 
constitute the majority of all companies worldwide, the cases 
at hand are good examples for many process modeling 
projects to be conducted with the prototype in the future. 
The first case is a business process reorganization 
project, which was conducted as the preparation for a 
consecutive ERP selection procedure. The project was 
175
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
 
structured in three steps, namely as-is process modeling to 
document the process landscape of the company, and two 
interrelated phases of to-be modeling and ERP selection to 
align both IT and infrastructure. All steps were conducted by 
a consulting company with the help of the prototype.  
During the as-is modeling process, the consultants 
created the process models on the base of interviews with 
employees of the target company. As the company had not 
undertaken any modeling activities before the project, the 
processes were designed on the base of a reference model for 
processes in retail. Subsequently, the to-be processes were 
created in collaboration with all stakeholders. To support the 
to-be modeling phase, the prototype was customized with the 
attributes for detailed process element description, leading IT 
system, process owner, process executive, process relevance 
and importance of the process. Furthermore, examples of 
process related business documents like Excel files or scans 
of paper based documents were added to the processes. 
When engaging the as-is modeling phase, attributes for 
weaknesses, suggestions for improvement and optimization 
potential were added. In the last phase, the process models 
were annotated with attributes to document requirements for 
the new ERP software. The glossary for the process element 
labels was initially created before the to-be modeling phase 
and consecutively enhanced through the interviews. Re-use 
of the process models turned out to be simple, as small 
changes to the attributes were sufficient to re-use models 
created during different project phases.  
TABLE I.  
OVERVIEW ON THE EVALUATION CASES 
 
Case 1 
Case 2 
Domain 
Retail 
Warehousing 
Articles 
~20.000, 
sports 
and 
fashion 
~2.500, 
promotion 
material 
Employees 
>1.600 
~250 worldwide 
Customers 
B2C 
~6000, B2B 
Modeling 
purpose 
Process 
reorganization, 
ERP selection 
Process 
documentation, 
preparation of software 
tests, knowledge base 
The second case is a process documentation project that 
consists of an as-is process modeling phase. The project 
models will be used as a knowledge base for the company’s 
employees and support the creation of test cases for an 
update of the ERP software. Like in case one no processes 
were documented by the company in advance and the 
processes were developed on the base of retail reference 
processes and interviews. The prototype was customized 
with the attributes for detailed process element description, 
process owner, process executive, SAP transaction codes for 
the test cases and links to the company-Wiki for knowledge 
management purposes. Analogue to case one, the glossary 
was enhanced consecutively during the interviews. 
Although the two companies and the reasons behind the 
modeling projects differ significantly, the prototype and the 
proposed modeling technique could adapt well to both 
scenarios. The process modelers deemed the four layer 
modeling architecture well suited for the task at hand. They 
especially favored the simple syntax of the modeling 
notation and the alignment of modeling purpose and 
modeling technique through attributes. Glossary creation, in 
contrast, was carried out with reservations. The reservations 
were however dissolved for the most part during later stages 
of the project, when major renaming could be executed 
centrally in the glossary. 
The results of the evaluation cases are promising, as they 
attest the modeling technique to be applicable in practice. All 
project stakeholders directly involved with the process 
models judged the collection organization support of the tool 
to be sufficient. Re-use of the process models turned out to 
be simple, as the tool could be adapted to different modeling 
purposes by small changes to attributes and glossary. The 
two aims of supporting collection organization and re-use of 
process models have therefore been reached. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK 
A solution to the above stated research questions is 
presented in this work in form of a modeling technique 
which is based on a multi-layered process structure and the 
idea of semantic process building blocks. The proposed 
technique is generic with respect to the management of 
arbitrary PMC by allowing the technique to be tailored to the 
specific modeling purpose via attribution. On the one hand, 
the multi-layered structure allows modeling of business 
processes for companies of any size and from any business 
area. It enables efficient management of the resulting process 
model collection and includes features for variant 
management. On the other hand, the semantic building 
blocks in combination with a glossary allow the technique to 
create strongly standardized models. By adding extensive 
attribute support, flexibility regarding the modeling purpose 
is preserved. 
With regard to an outlook, two aspects are in the focus of 
future research concerning the proposed modeling technique. 
On the one hand, further utilization of the attribution 
incorporated by the modeling technique is desirable. Here, 
especially 
the 
conceptual 
development 
and 
later 
implementation of elaborate analysis techniques and 
functionality is on the agenda. On the other hand, an in-depth 
evaluation of the prototype has to be carried out. While the 
two exemplary case studies have initially shown that the 
rationales seem to be valid, further validation will have to 
prove that to an even higher extent. 
All in all, the concept of the modeling technique 
proposed in this paper and its prototypical instantiation have 
been validated by the evaluation of the prototype in two 
modeling undertakings. Thus, the requirements and research 
questions imposed by the challenges addressed in this work 
are met. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Aguilar-Saven, R.S.: Business process modeling: Review and 
framework. International Journal of Production Economics 
90, 129-149 (2004) 
[2] Batini, C., Lenzerini, M., Navathe, S.B.: A Comparative 
Analysis of Methodologies for Database Schema Integration. 
ACM Computing Surveys 18, 323-364 (1986) 
176
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
 
[3] Becker, J., Algermissen, L., Pfeiffer, D., Räckers, M.: 
Bausteinbasierte Modellierung von Prozesslandschaften mit 
der 
PICTURE-Methode 
am 
Beispiel 
der 
Universitätsverwaltung Münster. Wirtschaftsinformatik 49, 
267-279 (2007) 
[4] Becker, J., Breuker, D., Pfeiffer, D., Räckers, M.: 
Constructing comparable business process models with 
domain specific languages - An empirical evaluation. 
Information Systems Journal, 1-13 (2009) 
[5] Benbasat, I., Zmud, R.W.: The Identity Crisis within the Is 
Discipline: Defining and Communicating the Discipline’s 
Core Properties. MIS Quaterly 27(2), 183-194 (2003) 
[6] Becker, J., Rosemann, M., Uthmann, C. V.: Guidelines of 
Business Process Modeling. Business Process Management 
1806, 30-49 (2000) 
[7] Delfmann, P., Herwig, S., Lis, L.: Unified Enterprise 
Knowledge Representation with Conceptual Models - 
Capturing Corporate Language in Naming Conventions. In: 
Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on 
Information Systems (ICIS 2009). Phoenix, Arizona, USA 
(2009) 
[8] Dijkman, R., La Rosa, M., and Reijers, H. A.: Managing large 
collections of business process models - Current techniques 
and challenges. Computers in Industry 63(2), 91-97 (2012) 
[9] Gregor, S., Jones, D.: The Anatomy of a Design Theory. 
Journal of the Association for Information Systems 8(5), 312-
335 (2007) 
[10] Hadar, I., Soffer, P.: Variations in conceptual modeling: 
classification and ontological analysis. Journal of the AIS 7,  
568-592 (2006) 
[11] Hevner, A. R., March, S. T., Park, J., Ram, S.: Design Science 
in Information Systems Research. Management Information 
Systems, 28(1), 75-105 (2004) 
[12] Hipp, M., Mutschler, B., Reichert, M.: Navigating in Process 
Model Collections: A new Approach Inspired by Google 
Earth. In: Aalst, W.M.P., Mylopoulos, J., Rosemann, M., 
Shaw, M.J., Szyperski, C. (eds.) BPM Workshops 2011. 
LNBIP, vol. 100, pp. 87-98. Springer, Heidelberg (2012) 
[13] Iivari, J.: A Paradigmatic Analysis of Information Systems As 
a Design Science. Scandinavian Journal of Information 
Systems 19(2), 39-64 (2007) 
[14] Indulska, M., Recker, J., Rosemann, M., Green, P.: Business 
Process Modeling : Current Issues and Future Challenges. In: 
van Eck, P., Gordijn, J., Wieringa, R. (eds.) Advanced 
Information Systems Engineering 2009. LNCS, vol. 5565, pp. 
501-514. Springer, Heidelberg (2009) 
[15] Kuechler, B., Vaishnavi, V.: On theory development in design 
science research: anatomy of a research project. European 
Journal of Information Systems 17(5), 489-504 (2008) 
[16] La Rosa, M., Wohed, P., Mendling, J., Ter Hofstede, A. H. 
M., Reijers, H. A., van der Aalst, W. M. P.: Managing 
Process 
Model 
Complexity 
Via 
Abstract 
Syntax 
Modifications. IEEE Transactions On Industrial Informatics 
7, 614-629 (2011) 
[17] La Rosa, M., Hofstede, A.H.M.T., Wohed, P., Reijers, H.A., 
Mendling, J., Aalst, W.M.P.V.D.: Managing Process Model 
Complexity via Concrete Syntax Modifications. IEEE 
Transactions On Industrial Informatics 7, 255-265 (2011) 
[18] Malone, T.W., Crowston, K., Herman, G.A. (eds.) Organizing 
Business Knowledge: The MIT Process Handbook. The MIT 
Press, 2003. 
[19] March, S. T., Smith, G. F.: Design and natural science 
research on information technology. Decision Support 
Systems 15(4), 251-266 (1995) 
[20] Mendling J., Reijers, H.A., Recker, J.: Activity labeling in 
process modeling: Empirical insights and recommendations. 
Information Systems (IS). Special Issue on Vocabularies, 
Ontologies and Rules for Enterprise and Business Process 
Modeling and Management 35(4), 467-482 (2010) 
[21] Morsy, H., Otto, T.: Ruby on Rails 3.1. 2nd, Updated and 
Extended Edition, Galileo Press, Bonn (2012) 
[22] Vergidis, K., Turner, C.J., Tiwari, A.: Business Process 
Perspectives: Theoretical Development vs. Real-World 
Practice. International Journal of Production Economics 
114(1), 91-104 (2008) 
[23] Walls, J.G., Widmeyer, G.R., El Sawy, O.A.: Building an 
Information System Design Theory for Vigilant EIS. 
Information Systems Research 3(1), 36-59 (1992) 
[24] Weiß, B. Process Modeling and Analysis in Banks: 
Leveraging Business Process Optimisation in the Financial 
Sector, Doctoral Thesis, University of Münster, Münster 
(Germany), (2011) 
 
177
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

