 
Shape Feature Extraction for On-line Signature 
Evaluation
Jungpil Shin 
School of Computer Science and Engineering  
The University of Aizu  
Fukushima, Japan 
e-mail: jpshin@u-aizu.ac.jp 
Weichen Lin 
School of Computer Science and Engineering  
The University of Aizu  
Fukushima, Japan 
 
 
Abstract—In the past few years, banks and companies have 
increased security by switching from simple static passwords to 
more dynamic security measures that offer greater protection 
for users of mobile and web commerce. The most personal 
method for authentication is analysis of handwritten signatures. 
Signature evaluation determines whether an individual’s 
signature is considered “good” or “bad.” A good signature is 
more complex and difficult to impersonate, whereas a bad 
signature is simple and easy to impersonate. A signature 
typically contains many angles, whether big or small. A 
signature with a higher number of angles is more complex and 
is considered “good”; therefore, the number of internal angles 
was calculated to determine the quality of the signature. In this 
paper, geometry was used to decide the kinds of angles to 
analyze. After the evaluation, verification was performed to 
analyze the EER (Equal Error Rate), and it has been 
concluded that it is best to use the Neighbor method to create 
the best signature evaluation system. 
Keywords-shape feature; signature verification; human–
computer interaction 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Handwriting is the most natural way to enter text, and it 
allows users to replace the keyboard or mouse for input. 
Many kinds of input devices are available for handwriting, 
including the TouchPad, the pressure-sensitive tablet, the 
PDA touch panel, or other input panels. Online handwriting 
verification systems analyze the signature as a series of 
coordinate points, which are based on the writing 
movements made with a pen, in relation to the trajectory of 
the coordinates on the XY axis, including where the nib 
started to write, as well as the number of writing strokes [1]. 
The series of coordinates will first undergo pre-processing 
to remove noise in the handwriting and to reduce the 
variability of handwriting, including repetition of the 
coordinates of the point, smoothness, and size. Then, 
features are extracted around the contours of characters to 
identify illegible ligatures, with allowances for different 
strokes due to different writing habits of different users. 
Offline handwriting recognition systems allow users to 
write on paper, from which the image is scanned using a 
scanner or a camera. However, offline systems are unable to 
obtain any dynamic feature; therefore, it is more difficult to 
recognize the signature. The typical flow of the signature 
evaluation system includes image input, image recognition, 
and result output. Using images from devices such as digital 
cameras and digital scanners, image processing is performed 
in three steps: image pre-processing, feature extraction, and 
recognition. The available methods for offline signature 
recognition are based on a wide range of concepts. The 
research can be categorized according to the way that it 
handles the problem, as methods based on holistic, regional, 
and local properties. 
Character feature extraction is the basis of character 
recognition. It is one of the most popular research topics in 
pattern recognition and is widely used in many areas, such 
as edge extraction, character learning, automatic letter 
sorting, and automatic license plate recognition. In license 
plate 
character 
recognition, 
some 
character 
feature 
extraction methods are used, including outline feature 
extraction and coarse grid feature extraction. 
Signature verification is categorized into two main types: 
static and dynamic [2]. The static type, which is also known 
as offline verification, uses a scanner or a digital camera to 
obtain the image of the signature to be verified. The 
dynamic type, which is also known as online verification, 
verifies a signature that is entered using a digital pen and a 
tablet PC. The difficulty in signature recognition is that 
handwriting is affected by complex personal factors; 
therefore, the same character could have slightly different 
shapes.  
Signature evaluation systems are used to analyze human 
signatures whether they are categorized as good or bad. If a 
signature is too simple or easy to replicate, it is considered a 
bad signature. A good signature must contain several angles 
or many strokes. In this paper, an evaluation system was 
used to determine if a signature is good or bad.  
Online signature system can extract additional human-
writing parametrics based on a time function (e.g., position 
trajectory, velocity, acceleration, pressure, direction of pen 
movement and azimuth); whereas, offline systems evaluate 
signatures using only scanned images. For this reason, 
online signature systems are much better than offline 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

signature systems.  
Most of previous research on signature evaluation 
focused on the development and the implementation of new 
algorithms. This paper discusses the analysis and evaluation 
of Chinese kanji from the “One Hundred Family Names” 
(百家姓), a collection of characters that are often used in 
Chinese family names.  
If internal angles are used when evaluating good and bad 
signatures, a character could contain too many angles 
between 0° and 180°. In order to define the optimal angles, 
a method was used to determine how many angles usually 
appear in a character; therefore, 100 characters were 
selected and all of the angles that typically appeared in them 
were calculated. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Each person has a different signature, which could be 
slightly different in shape in different situations. To process 
these signatures, they need to be standardized based on 
some method.  
Previous 
research 
usually 
focused 
on 
signature 
verification by using matching techniques based on dynamic 
time warping (DTW) [3], hidden Markov model (HMM) [4], 
and support vector machine (SVM) [5]. These techniques 
are useful for static signature verification, as well as 
dynamic verification when the signature image is combined 
with several features based on average speed XY, signature 
width, signature height, pen direction, number of strokes, 
pen azimuth [6], etc. 
 
 
Figure 1. Eight principles of Yong 
 
 
III. SIGNATURE EVALUATION 
METHODOLOGY 
 
A. Eight Principles of Yong 
The proposed kanji signature evaluation process is used to 
recognize an individual’s handwritten signature whether it is 
considered good or bad, by applying the method only to 
internal angles. Twenty characters from the “One Hundred 
Family Names” collection were selected to calculate the 
averages on which to base the evaluations. Each character 
contains various angles, which were documented and 
compared. In the past, all characters were created with eight 
strokes; for example, this kanji contains eight strokes“永”: 
點, 橫, 豎, 勾, 彎, 提, 撇, and 捺, where each stroke has 
different characteristics. Statistics on every stroke’s angle 
can be obtained, as well as statistics on the angles between 
the lines (Figure 1). 
B. “One Hundred Family Names” (百家姓) 
The “One Hundred Family Names” (Chinese: 百家姓; 
pinyin: Bai jia xing) [7] is a classic Chinese book composed 
of common surnames in ancient China. Based on these 
family names, the average angles of the characters could be 
calculated. 
 
 
Figure 2. Internal angle 
 
C. Internal Angle 
An interior angle (or internal angle) of a kanji character is 
an angle formed by two connected lines [8] of a polygon 
stroke (Figure 3). Some people have a habit of writing kanji 
where the closed polygon is less than 180°; in that case, the 
polygon is called “convex.” More complex signatures have 
more varied angles that were used for the calculations. The 
following are the different types of internal angles typically 
found in kanji: 
 Equiangular: All angles are equal. 
 Cyclic: All corners lie in a circular format. 
 Vertex-transitive: All corners lie within the same 
symmetry orbit. The polygon is also cyclic and 
equiangular.  
 Edge-transitive: All sides lie within the same symmetry 
orbit. The polygon is also equilateral.  
 Tangential: All sides are tangential to an inscribed 
circle. 
 Regular: The polygon is both cyclic and equilateral. 
 
Figure 3. Internal angles in kanji 
 
With simple characters and signatures, angles that were 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

deemed important were manually searched for and selected. 
With complex signatures, a polygon algorithm was used to 
calculate the complex angles (Figure 2). 
 
 
Figure 4. Example of signatures of twenty people  
 
 
 
Figure 5. Analysis of internal angles occurring in twenty Chinese 
characters from “One Hundred Family Names” 
 
D. Geometry 
Geometric features [9][10] are based on multi-stroke 
recognizer techniques and are extracted to collect the 
internal features of the characters. Angles whose sum is a 
right 
angle 
(90°) 
are 
called 
“complementary.” 
Complementary angles are formed when one or more rays 
share the same vertex and are pointed in a direction between 
the two original rays that form the right angle. The number 
of rays between the two original rays is infinite. 
Angles whose sum is a straight angle (180°) are called 
“supplementary.” Supplementary angles are formed when 
one or more rays share the same vertex and are pointed in a 
direction between the two original rays that form the straight 
angle. The number of rays between two original rays is also 
infinite. 
Although the geometry method is a useful algorithm, the 
computer is unable to find some of the angles in a kanji 
character. In the end, all useful angles were manually 
collected.  
 
E. Measuring Angle 
 
The following data were used in the analysis: 
1) Eight Principles of Yong: This basic character set was 
used as a reference to obtain statistics on all the angles that 
usually appear in kanji characters. 
2) “One Hundred Family Names” ( 百 家 姓 ): Twenty 
characters were randomly selected, and statistics were 
generated on the most common angles found in them. 
3) Own Individual Signatures: Twenty test subjects wrote 
their own signatures, and statistics were also generated on 
the most common angles found in them. In addition, the 
analyses on handwritten and printed characters were 
compared. 
4) Unfamiliar Signatures: The same twenty test subjects 
were asked to handwrite newly designed signatures that 
were unfamiliar to them and to handprint other characters. 
This set of experimental data was used to determine whether 
copying an unfamiliar signature would create different 
internal angles. 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 6. (a) Handwritten samples of test subjects’ own signatures with 
simple patterns (b) The analysis of internal angles occurring in those 
signatures 
 
III. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
Figure 4 shows an example from our database of 
signatures of people who handwrote their own names.  
 
A. Analysis of Twenty Printed Chinese Characters 
Twenty Chinese characters obtained from the “One 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Hundred Family Names” collection were analyzed, as 
shown in Figure 5.  
 
B. Analysis of Own Handwritten Signatures 
The analysis of the handwritten signatures occurred in 
two steps. First, twenty people handwrote their own 
signatures and those were analyzed (Figure 6). Then the 
results were compared with the analysis of the computer-
printed signatures (Figure 7). 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 7. (a) Computer-printed samples of test subjects’ own signatures 
with simple patterns (b) The analysis of internal angles occurring in those 
signatures 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 8. (a) Hand-copied samples of unfamiliar signatures (b) The analysis 
of internal angles occurring in those signatures 
 
C. Analysis of Unfamiliar Signatures 
 
Analyzing people’s own signatures is not enough; 
therefore, in order to collect additional data about character 
angles, the research included an analysis of signatures that 
were unfamiliar to people who were writing them (Figures 8 
and 9). 
 
D. Chinese and English Character Angles 
 
For this research to be more complete, the same 
analysis was performed not only on Chinese character 
signatures, but also on English characters from A to Z and 
English signatures, as shown in Tables 1 and 2. 
 
 
(a) 
 
 
Figure 9. (a) Computer-printed samples of unfamiliar signature with simple 
patterns (b) The analysis of internal angles occurring in those signatures 
 
 
TABLE I. ANALYSIS OF ALL ANGLES FOUND IN COMMON 
CHINESE CHARACTERS 
 
  
40°
50°
60° 
70° 
80° 
90°
100°
Handwritten 
Sig. 
52 
12 
32 
12 
46 
166
40 
Twenty 
Chinese 
16 
10 
16 
18 
4 
160
2 
Print of Sig.
50 
50 
8 
18 
56 
266
14 
Unfamiliar 
Sig. 
36 
34 
8 
16 
32 
194
36 
Print of 
Unfamiliar
2 
5 
0 
0 
1 
12 
0 
Total 
156
111
64 
64 
139 
792
92 
 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

TABLE II. ANALYSIS OF ALL ANGLES FOUND IN COMMON 
ENGLISH CHARACTERS  
 
  
10° 
20° 
30°
40° 
50° 
90°
120°
English A–Z 
80 
46 
12
54 
80 
120
50
English Sig. 
30 
43 
50
20 
18 
200
20
Total 
110 
89 
62
74 
98 
320
70
 
 
 
 
Figure 10. An example of a good signature 
 
 
 
Figure 11. An example of a bad signature 
 
V. EVALUATION SYSTEM 
 
In the proposed evaluation system, the signature could be 
considered good and bad, as shown in Figures 10 and 11. 
 
A. Comparison with Nearest Neighbor method and BPN 
 
The analysis of the signatures was performed using the 
Neighbor method and the Neural Network BPN method. 
Although either of these methods would be effective, the 
two methods were still compared to find the best method. 
The results of the comparison are shown in Figure 12, 
Figure 13, and Table 3. We compared the Neighbor method 
and the Neural Network BPN method by analyzing Chinese 
basic characters, handwritten Chinese signatures, computer–
printed signatures, unfamiliar Chinese signatures, and 
English signatures for analysis. 
 
 
Figure 12. Angle of Neighbor method 
 
 
 
Figure 13. Angle of neural network BPN method 
Table 3 illustrates that the Neighbor method can find 
more angles than the Neural Network BPN method, because 
the Neighbor method scans all pixels; therefore, it can be 
more accurate in extracting angles. 
On the other hand, the Neural Network BPN method uses 
pattern recognition. In this research, the neural network was 
taught a total of 20 pattern designs, covering all angles (40°, 
60°, 70°, and 90°). Because of the limited number of learned 
patterns, the neural network is unable to find all angles in an 
image. However, given additional patterns to learn, the 
Neural Network BPN system would require more 
processing time. 
In a set of twenty randomly selected characters from 
“One Hundred Family Names,” the most common angles 
are 40°, 60°, 70°, and 90°, as shown in Figure 5. In a set of 
twenty handwritten signatures, the most common angles are 
40°, 60°, 80°, 90°, and 100°, as shown in Figure 6 (b). This 
set was also compared with the computer–printed versions 
of these characters to check whether these two categories 
would have similar analyses, as shown in Figure 7 (b). 
 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

TABLE III. COMPARISON RESULTS OF NUMBER OF ANGLES 
WITH NEIGHBOR AND BPN METHOD (A) CHINESE SIGNATURE 
(B) CHINESE CHAR. (C) COMPUTER PRINT (D) UNFAMILIAR AND 
(E) ENGLISH SIGNATURE 
 
  
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
Total 
Neighbor 
80 
56 
103 
74 
35 
348 
BPN 
45 
53 
60 
95 
37 
290 
 
In order to increase the accuracy of the system, the same 
twenty people handwrote unfamiliar signatures that were not 
their own. Then those signatures were analyzed, as well as 
the computer-printed versions of the same characters, as 
shown in Figure 8 (b) and Figure 9 (b). In handwritten 
characters, the most common angles are 40°, 50°, 80°, 90°, 
and 100°. 
To reduce the number of angles between 0° and 180° 
that the system would have to analyze, the analysis was 
focused on the five most common angles in Table 1: 40°, 
50°, 80°, 90°, and 100°. In future work, the automatic 
signature verification system could use this research data to 
decide the best angles to analyze.  
In addition to collecting and analyzing Chinese 
characters, computer-printed English characters (uppercase 
A to Z and lowercase a to z) and twenty handwritten English 
signatures were selected, and the most common angles in 
those samples are 10°, 20°, 30°, 40°, 50°, 90°, and 120°. 
Based on this result, the evaluation system could be 
designed to be more accurate, based on these angles and on 
the kind of characters that need to be evaluated. 
 
TABLE IV. FRR AND FAR FOR RANDOMLY CHOSEN 
SIGNATURES  
 
Total/Signature 
Good Signature 
Bad Signature 
60 
Angles 
FAR 
2/20      10% 
8/20        40% 
FRR 
2/20      10% 
6/20        30% 
80 
Angles 
FAR 
1/15        6% 
3/25        12% 
FRR 
 2/15      13.3% 
5/25        20% 
100 
Angles 
FAR 
0/8       0% 
2/32        6.25% 
FRR 
0/8       0% 
2/32        6.25% 
Average total FAR 
5.33% 
19.4% 
Average total FRR 
7.76% 
18.75% 
 
 
B. Calculate FRR and FAR from Nearest Neighbor 
 
To determine whether the system was optimal, random 
signatures were evaluated and categorized as good or bad.  
In Table 4, we determined the false acceptance rate 
(FAR) and false rejection rate (FRR) values for randomly 
selected signatures. FRR is affected when users write their 
own individual signature, and FAR is affected when people 
forge someone else’s signature. With bad signatures, FAR 
and FRR are expected to be high. If the verification of a 
good signature reduces FRR and increases FAR, it means 
that the system performs good evaluations. If the 
verification of a bad signature raises the FAR higher than 
the FRR, the bad signature is easy to forge. However, a low 
FRR value with a bad signature is not sufficient for 
evaluation. In this system, the research focused on 
evaluating good signatures, whether they are easy to forge 
or not. Sometimes, signatures can be successfully copied; 
therefore, this system is not foolproof. 
 
VI. CONCLUSION 
 
This paper focused on Chinese characters and signatures 
for evaluation and discussed the analysis of the handwriting 
of twenty people who wrote familiar characters and 
unfamiliar characters. These two categories of samples were 
compared with characters that appear in family names to 
calculate which characters appear more often. After the 
evaluation, a verification system analyzed the EER, and it is 
concluded that the Neighbor method creates the best 
signature evaluation system.  
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Y. Yeung, H. Chang, Y. Xiong, S. George, R. Kashi, T. 
Matsumoto, and G. Rigoll, “SVC2004: First international 
signature verification competition,” in: Proceedings of the 
International Conference on Biometric Authentication (ICBA), 
vol. 3072, Springer LNCS, China, pp. 16-22, 2004. 
[2] D. S. Guru and H. N. Prakash, “Online signature verification 
and 
recognition: 
An 
approach 
based 
on 
symbolic 
representation,” IEEE Transaction on Pattern Analysis and 
Intelligence, vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 1059–1073. 
[3] M. I. Khalil, M. N. Moustafa, and H. Abbas, “Enhanced 
DTW-based on-line signature verification,” in: Proceedings of 
ICIP 2009, 2009, pp. 2713–2716.  
[4] S. M. A. Ahmad, A. Shakil, and R. M. Anwar, “Stability and 
repeatability of HMM based probability outputs across 
dynamic handwritten signature features,” IEEE 2008 
International Symposium on ITSim Information Technology,  
[5] N. Abbas, “Combination of off-line and on-line signature 
verification systems based on SVM and DST,” IEEE 
International Conference on Intelligent Systems Design and 
Applications, 2011, pp. 855–860. 
[6] G. Taherzadeh, “Evaluation of online signature verification 
features,” International Conference on 2011 Advanced 
Communication Technology (ICACT), pp. 772–777. 
[7] Y. Nakamura and M. Kidoe, “Extraction of individual 
handwriting 
characteristics 
from 
handwritten 
Chinese 
characters based on knowledge of handwriting analysis,” 
Technical Report of IEICE PRMU2004-23,MI2004-23,WIT-
23 (2005405). 
[8] S. Huang, L. Jin, and J. Lv, “A novel approach for rotation 
free online handwritten Chinese character recognition,” 
International Conference on Document Analysis and 
Recognition, 2009. ICDAR, pp. 1136–1140. 
[9] K. Franke, “Analysis of Authentic Signature and Forgeries,” 
in: Proc. IWCF, 2009, pp. 150–164. 
[10] B. Fang, C. H. Leung, Y. Y. Tang, K. W. Tse, P. C. K. Kwok, 
and Y. K. Wong, “Off-line signature verification by the 
tracking of feature and stroke positions,” Pattern Recognition, 
2003, pp. 91–101. 
 
 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

