Defend the Template –  Supporting the Standardisation and Harmonisation of 
Process Change Programmes with SAP templates 
Markus Grube 
 
VOQUZ IT Solutions GmbH 
Hamburg, Germany 
email: markus.grube@voquz.com 
 
Abstract – Many companies are aware of the benefits of using a 
template in SAP implementation. This research paper deals 
with the question of how a company uses a template in a business 
process management environment and, above all, what happens 
when there are requests for changes to the template. Based on a 
literature review and personal interviews, this article describes 
the promises that manufacturing companies make about the 
template implementation within SAP 
business process 
management and why an overarching goal could be: ‘Defend the 
template’.  
Keywords – SAP;  ERP; BPM; Business Process Management; 
Template; Process change. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
During this research on the relationships between 
Business Process Management (BPM), maturity models and 
the utilisation in the environment of SAP Enterprise Resource 
Planning (ERP) systems, one of the interviewees provided the 
following slogan regarding the introduction of SAP business 
processes and the usage of templates: "Defend the template". 
The application of this slogan was described by the 
interviewed expert as a fundamental principle for process 
standardisation and process implementation in his company. 
In general, templates are used when implementing SAP 
business processes. There are numerous examples in the 
literature, and the author is also aware of this from practical 
experience in SAP projects. 
Foth [1] defines a template as a unified set-up containing 
the 
necessary 
documentation 
and 
programmes 
for 
construction of a new system. The use of a template offers 
numerous advantages, for example: 
 
reduction in costs of system development [2] 
 
re-use of processes among various enterprises  
 
reduction of required manpower [3] 
 
increased level 
of 
conformity 
and 
data 
consistency [4] 
 
greater stability of business processes 
 
quicker worldwide process improvements [1]. 
The given slogan of "Defend the template" raised the 
question of how the defence of a template can support the use 
of process templates in business processes. This paper 
considers the slogan and examines how templates are used by 
the interviewed experts in standardising and harmonising 
business processes. 
Following this introductory section, Section 2 discusses 
the relevant literature and develops the research question for 
this paper. Section 3 describes the research methodology. 
Section 4 provides a summary of the findings. Section 5 
contains an analysis for the research question, and finally, 
Section 6 presents the conclusion and suggestions for possible 
future research. 
 
II. LITERATURE REVIEW 
With the globalisation of business activities, there is a 
growing need to structure and shape business across an 
enterprise. For example, when setting up an overall process, 
binding corporate rules should be integrated [5].  
In general, ‘the main goal of process standardisation is the 
development of one standard or best-practice process to be 
used as a template for all instances of the process’ [2].  Gavidia 
[4] illustrates that it is common practice to develop a template 
as the base configuration for all areas and locations of a 
company to increase compliance and data consistency. This 
new template will then have a consistent set of reports and will 
be adapted to the existing business processes within the 
company. 
Systems like SAP ERP offer a variety of "best-practice" 
processes that exist for different industries and business 
processes. However, for various reasons, the suggested best 
practice does not work for most companies: thus many 
companies define their own BPM templates to meet their 
specific needs [6]. In addition, it may be necessary to 
distinguish between a global template and local requirements, 
and to define mechanisms that solve the problems resulting 
from these differences [7]. 
From an Information Technology (IT) perspective, it 
makes sense to standardise business processes and their 
configurations and transactions. Costs are reduced if IT 
processes do not have to be changed and if the business can 
adapt to the IT, rather than vice versa [8]. However, this 
approach is criticized in the literature. For example, Gavidia 
[4] reports that blanket implementation of a uniform template 
reflects at the failure of management and does not ensure that 
the process fits with existing customer relationships. A 
process template can only be effective if it takes into account 
the knowledge and requirements of all areas of a company. It 
is not sufficient for the template development to only consider 
a basic IT process or system from the parent company. 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-690-3
eKNOW 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

For successful template implementation, all employees 
and groupings must be included. Only then can productive 
implementation be carried out successfully, with employees 
understanding the benefits and accepting the changes. A 
company should also consider that a template rollout requires 
a long-term implementation phase, which can take 2–5 years, 
and may require a budget of $10 million or more [7]. 
The enforcement of a template is a practical difficulty in 
the process rollout. Often, this causes problems for a company 
gets stuck and business goals are affected. A global template 
must be approved and accepted by all companies and 
employees. This requires discipline from all employees 
involved in the implementation of the template, because 
things may be repeated during the rollout or there may be 
resistance against the implementation [5].  
The literature describes what a template is and how it can 
be defined. Additionally, statements in the existing literature 
show that the implementation of a template can be quite 
difficult. We must consider:  what instructions should be given 
to a team introducing a template? What different personal 
recommendations can respondents give in addition to the 
literature? The literature recommends the use of templates: 
however, can a slogan like "Defend the template" support the 
introduction of a process template? Based on these issue, the 
research question (RQ) of this paper can be defined as: 
RQ: How and why can the slogan "Defend the template" 
support the use of process templates? 
III. 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
The research philosophy for this paper adopts a post-
positivist position and is based on the perspectives of Ryan [9] 
and Guba [10]. The goal of research from the post-positivist 
perspective is to generate new knowledge that other people 
can learn from and on which they can base their own decisions 
[11].  
For this research, semi-structured and in-depth interviews 
are used to gather practical experience of companies that use 
SAP templates and BPM. These interviews are followed by an 
analysis of the best explanation regarding the collected facts, 
and this is done within an abductive approach [12]. 
As an explanatory study, described by Collis and Hussey 
[13], this research uses interviews with experts who have 
already gained practical experience in the areas of BPM in 
ERP projects and the use of SAP templates. It is quite possible 
that the inclusion of other experts would have led to a different 
result, but from the post-positivist position, this research 
understands that the world is much more complex than the 
opinions of some experts suggest. 
To address the research question, this research combines 
two research methods. Semi-structured interviews are 
conducted with experts in their field. In addition, a brief 
literature search is carried out. The goal of this combination is 
to achieve greater depth within the research and the complex 
environment being studied [14]. The following Figure 1 
illustrates the research strategy and the different sources used 
for this research: 
 
Figure 1. Method of data collection and analysis 
The time horizon for this research is a cross-sectional 
snapshot study [15]. The research analyses the current 
practical situation and evaluates the state of affairs at the time 
of the study [16]. 
For the interviews, an expert is defined as a person who 
has experience in the areas of SAP and BPM. As a prerequisite 
to be an expert in this context, practical experience of 
approximately ten years or more in the mentioned areas is 
expected. Due to the small number of interviews, this research 
does not differentiate between which module of SAP these 
experts use or within which industrial sector they currently 
work. This research paper has the general objective of 
analysing the slogan "defend the template" in term of the 
general standardisation and harmonisation of process change 
programs within SAP environments.  
Respondents were selected with the aim of gaining as 
much expert knowledge as possible from practice. Using 
semi-structured interviews provided flexibility to scrutinise 
the understanding and explanation of the experts’ opinions 
[17]. 
The qualitative data analysis and the comparison of the 
transcribed interviews were supported by using the software 
tool MAXQDA. The coding functionality of the MAXQDA 
tool was used to analyse the experts’ answers. The software 
was used to manually encode the qualitative data within the 
interviews and to obtain an overview of all the experts’ 
answers based on the encodings. 
Due to the small number of interviews, the aim is not to 
reach an overall and general conclusion for all industries, 
organisations or SAP modules. However, the results of this 
research paper could be used as part of the theoretical 
grounding for further research projects.  
IV. FINDINGS 
The search for potential interviewees was conducted 
within the author’s personal network of business and personal 
contacts in Germany, Austria, and Switzerland. A total of 64 
people were identified as potential experts in the business 
process and SAP environment. These people were then invited 
for an interview. From this initial pool, 11 people confirmed 
that they were willing to be interviewed. The personal, face-
to-face interviews revealed the following findings, which the 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-690-3
eKNOW 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

experts have identified in their day-to-day business when 
using SAP and business process templates. All statements and 
insights described here are the personal opinions of the 
experts. Due to the total duration of the interviews being over 
14 hours combined, only excerpts can be presented here. 
The experts explained within the interviews that the SAP 
ERP system offers a variety of "out-of-the-box" business 
processes for the general SAP system, as well as for special 
sectors, such as real estate or the pharmaceutical industry. 
With these basic processes, a company can cover almost all 
of its standard process cases and can set up a solid basis for 
its daily business processes. Such SAP processes support a 
company in standardising its processes and implementing 
them relatively quickly. For example, sales processes are 
similar in different companies and across different industries. 
It is helpful to use a standard SAP template for the best-
practice approach as starting point, and to show all the steps 
that belong to a process sequence. In this standard SAP 
process template, there is a lot of industry expertise that has 
been accumulated from various industries and many projects. 
However, this does not mean that this template has been 
optimised for a particular company, nor that the company’s 
own process steps have that have been developed and 
implemented in-house, cannot deviate from the SAP process 
specifications. The experts pointed out that such an approach 
with given SAP processes is usually only used if a company 
has no existing processes or IT infrastructure.  
Normally, a company has already gained its own 
experience and has established its own process flows. 
Therefore, it would not fully use the SAP "best-practice" 
standard template, instead developing its own process 
template. This template must then have a certain degree of 
flexibility. A tax-paying process in Germany is different from 
on in, say, Brazil or India. Therefore, process templates must 
be generated that can be applied globally across all countries. 
These processes must have a certain amount of local variation 
because of the different rules. Local adaptation must only be 
set up where a process, or a process step, is genuinely local 
and cannot be supported by a global SAP template. However, 
this means that the development of a company’s own solution 
has nothing to do with the global template, and thus a shadow 
process is created, which is only used for local requirements. 
The disadvantage is that process adaptation then becomes 
more difficult because the adaptation is known only locally, 
on the level of one company or business unit. 
A process template should be as flexible as possible from 
the beginning of the set-up. It should be scalable and 
applicable to specific local needs. In the interviews, the 
experts mentioned this as the biggest challenge for a process 
template. It must be considered whether new requirements 
that emerge can still be incorporated into the applied process 
template, and how quickly changes can be implemented 
company-wide. Therefore, a process template must allow for 
a certain amount of agility. 
Regarding the use of standard processes, one expert 
mentioned the practical problem that business consultancies 
frequently use standard SAP templates without examining the 
individual processes within a company. This means that 
templates are established without optimising the existing 
processes to suit into the special behaviours of each company.  
The experts also want to achieve harmonisation and 
standardisation of the process world through the introduction 
of a process template. This means that not every local 
manufacturing facility conduct its business according to a 
business process it wants and likes, but that a company-wide 
standard is set up and must be followed. The more complex 
and individualised the established processes are, the harder it 
is to run the business on one new company-wide process 
template. Uniform processes can create synergies and clarity, 
and a process template should help to minimise fragmentation 
and process variations in the company.  
One expert explains that, when the processes are described 
in much more detail, it is no longer a template description, but 
more like a localisation. Localisation of processes is a 
challenge because it can only be developed in collaboration 
with the local business departments. One expert highlighted 
that the business must then maintain the processes, because 
only the local team knows how they really work. Another 
expert declared that the aim is to provide a standardised 
process template that is not a localisation and could be 
protected against further splitting and any diversification 
within the organisation. 
Based on the previously discussed findings, one 
interviewee mentioned the slogan "Defend the template". The 
goal of the slogan is that a business should no longer be able 
to make decisions on process changes. Another expert also 
declared that a template should be a leader for all processes, 
with functional processes introduced via a company-wide, 
valid template. The question is then no longer how the 
individual divisions or areas carry out task; instead, one valid 
process is established throughout the whole company. A 
process in the enterprise can then only be arranged based on 
these template specifications; however, there exist a number 
of different variations, which are offered by a catalogue 
structure within the template. By minimising process 
diversity, companies expect enormous savings potential. 
The goal of a process template must be to offer stable and 
mature process solutions for a company. These processes are 
then rolled out company-wide, and it is ideal to undertake a 
process without local on-site adaptation, because these local 
adaptations cost in term of time, money, and manpower. 
One difficulty is to avoid being too detailed in process 
description for a template. The more detailed the description 
of a process, the more likely it is to be a description of 
localised or specific particularities. The goal must be to 
develop an enterprise-wide process template that works 
equally well in a five-person facility as for a business unit with 
800 employees in another country. 
It is important that a business should learn that not every 
process has to be individualised, and that specific and 
individualised processes are rarely the best solution for a 
company. Using fewer individualised solutions and more 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-690-3
eKNOW 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

standard process templates means that process changes can be 
implemented more quickly. Every process change, every 
system transport, and every release change could collapse and 
thus carries a significant risk, which is reduced if there are 
fewer variations in the template catalogue that need to be 
taken into account. 
The slogan "Defend the template" aims to encourage the 
optimal use of process templates. With this harmonisation, 
businesses should and can be convinced that the use of 
standard processes is not a negative approach.  
Even if a template is to be defended, it must be possible to 
change it; however, such a change should never be decided by 
a business entity itself. The sovereignty over processes must 
be located with a superordinate process organisation, which 
consists of, for example, process owners and process 
managers. Only this process organisation can decide whether 
and to what extent processes can be changed or whether a 
business unit may use a local adaptation. 
V. ANALYSIS 
The defined research question for this document is: How 
and why can the slogan "Defend the template" support the use 
of process templates? From both the literature review and the 
expert interviews, a generalised answer to this research 
question can be proposed as follows: 
Both research methods have shown that there is a risk of a 
lack of standardisation and harmonisation of process 
templates leading to too much diversification. A company 
must be careful to avoid this. Applying the slogan "Defend the 
template" can encourage companies to realise that a new 
deviation in the standard process template can lead to 
difficulties with future system changes. 
Companies need to be aware that harmonising and 
optimising global business processes in an SAP landscape is 
an extensive project that can last for years. If a template has 
more variations, it will be more difficult and time-consuming 
to maintain this template, and to manage every future 
changing process within it. Companies should search for the 
lowest common denominator and defend the existing template 
as far as they can. 
If there is a great need within a company to capture and 
document processes, then the company should set up business 
process management. Within the change process, the 
company can visualise, sort and structure its BPM. During this 
reorganisation, it can often be identified that processes in 
different business units are similar. A process template must 
be built from these documented and structured processes, 
including all recognised process flows, and, if appropriate, 
excluding certain process features and declaring them invalid. 
In the practical implementation and introduction of the newly 
developed processes, the process team then has the task of 
establishing and defending these process templates and 
processes, even if they encounter resistance. Just because a 
process has been carried out in a company for years in a 
particular way does not mean that this approach was the 
optimal solution for the business. However, when such a 
traditional and established process is changed, it is important 
to clarify why the new solution is a more effective approach, 
and to present it benefits to all parties involved. Especially in 
such a case, the new process template must be defended, even 
if there may be strong resistance to it.  
The slogan "Defend the template" is only one essential 
step in a procedure for investigating process change requests. 
The difficulty is estimating the extent to which a template 
should be defended, as there can be legitimate doubts that a 
particular process template is the optimal solution for a 
company. In this case, a process owner or a process 
organisation must decide either to change the process, or to 
apply a local adaptation. Decisions in such exceptional cases 
should not be made by a business unit itself, but by a superior 
process organisation, which is responsible for the process and 
thus has to approve a change or local adaptation. 
After analysing the literature and the expert interviews, 
this research developed a procedure for changing a process 
template. The goal was to develop an easy-to-handle business 
process model to defend possible process changes. Such a 
procedure could consist of the steps shown in Figure 2. This 
figure contains two important gateways for a process change. 
First, the process organisation must be informed about a 
desired process change. If the process organisation already 
knows about the desired process change and has opted for 
another solution, then this alternative solution must be 
defended. The same applies to the second gateway. If the 
central process organisation does not accept a new change 
request, this decision must be defended by the process 
organisation against any resistance that may arise.   
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-690-3
eKNOW 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

    
 
Figure 2. Business process model 
for process change 
The process steps described in Figure 2 demonstrate that a 
template can be defended in several different locations within 
a process change. The advantage of this rigorous approach is 
that an escalation in local adaptions and shadow processes can 
be avoided. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The results of the literature review and the expert 
interviews suggest that a suitable compromise must be found 
between standardisation, (i.e., the usage of templates) and 
flexibility to adapt to local requirements (by coordinating with 
the organisation). The practical experience of the experts 
interviewed in this research demonstrates that the slogan 
"Defend 
the 
template" 
can 
also 
be 
useful. 
The 
recommendations of the literature and the respondents should 
be followed, and the processes of all units within a business 
should be considered before a process template is created. 
Despite this preliminary work, a process template may have 
to be adapted later, but this adaptation must be coordinated by 
the process organisation and must not be decided locally by a 
single business unit. As long as an adaptation is not supported 
by the process organisation, the slogan "Defend the template" 
applies, as exemplified in Figure 2. 
This investigation has only interviewed a small numbers 
of experts. It is quite possible that the inclusion of other 
experts 
or 
diversification 
into 
different 
industries, 
organisations, or SAP modules would have led to different or 
additional results. Future research should closely examine the 
argument of this paper and also consider diversification across 
different areas and industries. In addition, further research 
with more participants could significantly increase responses 
and lead to more diverse outcomes and analysis. 
Future work could confirm the results of this research 
paper by conducting an online survey to check whether the 
illustrated process steps are acceptable to the participants in 
the business practice. An online questionnaire would, allow 
the collection of a larger amount of data from more 
participants in a shorter time and a more flexible manner than 
personal face to face interviews [15]. Participants should 
include a variety of people, such as users, process managers, 
researchers, and consultants for SAP and/or process 
management. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
E. Foth, "Excellent business processes with SAP: Practice of 
use in business groups", (Exzellente Geschäftsprozesse mit 
SAP: Praxis des Einsatzes in Unternehmensgruppen), Springer 
Verlag, Berlin, Germany, 2010. 
[2] 
H. Romero, R. Dijkman, P. Grefen, and A. van Weele, "A 
literature review in process harmonization: a conceptual 
framework", Beta Working Paper series 379, Eindhoven, 2012. 
[3] 
T. Kobayashi, M. Tamakia, and N. Komoda, "Business process 
integration as a solution to the implementation of supply chain 
management systems", Information & Management, vol. 40, 
pp. 769-780, 2003. 
[4] 
J. V. Gavidia, "Impact of parent-subsidiary conflict on ERP 
implementation", 
Journal 
of 
Enterprise 
Information 
Management, vol. 29 no. 1, pp. 97-117, 2016  
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-690-3
eKNOW 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

[5] 
E-3 Magazin, "Template-based SAP rollouts", Vol. September, 
Available 
from: 
https://www.cbs-
consulting.com/files/pdf/information/Templatebasierte-SAP-
Rollouts_E3_092011.pdf, September 2011, [retrieved: Jan. 
2019]. 
[6] 
T. Kobayashi, S. Onoda, and N. Komoda, "Workflow Business 
Template for Application Processes in Administration 
Department", Information Technology and Management, vol. 
3, no. 43, doi: 10.1023/A:1013160725421, 2002, [Retrieved: 
Jan. 2019]. 
[7] 
SAP Blogs, "Overview of Global SAP Template Rollout 
Programs", 
Available 
from: 
https://blogs.sap.com/2011/12/11/overview-of-global-sap-
template-rollout-programs/, 2011, [Retrieved: Jan. 2019]. 
[8] 
A. 
Richen, 
and 
A. 
Steinhorst, 
"Standardization 
or 
Harmonization? 
You 
need 
Both", 
available 
from:  
https://www.bptrends.com/publicationfiles/11-05-ART-
StandardizationorHarmonizationv-RickenSteinhorst.pdf, 
2005. [Retrieved: Jan. 2019]. 
 [9] A. B. Ryan, "Post-Positivist Approaches to Research 
Researching and Writing your thesis: a guide for postgraduate 
students"; MACE, Maynooth Adult and Community 
Education, pp. 12-26, 2006. 
 [10] E. G. Guba, "The Paradigm Dialog"; Newbury Park, CA, Sage 
Publications, 1990. 
[11] Z. O'Leary, "The Social Science Jargon Buster", London, UK, 
SAGE Publications Ltd, 2007. 
[12] G. Thomas, "How to Do Your Case Study: A Guide for 
Students and Researchers", London, UK SAGE Publications, 
2011. 
[13] J. Collis and R. Hussey, "Business research: A practical guide 
for undergraduate & postgraduate students"; Basingstoke, UK, 
Palgrave Macmillan, 2009. 
[14] R. K. Yin, "Case Study Research: Design and Methods", 
London, UK, SAGE Publications, 2009. 
[15] M. Saunders, P. Lewis, and A. Thornhill, "Research methods 
for business students", New York NY, Prentice Hall, 2009. 
[16] R. Kumar, "Research Methodology: A Step-by-Step Guide for 
Beginners", London, UK, SAGE Publications, 2011. 
[17] A. Bryman, and E. Bell, "Business research methods", Oxford, 
UK, Oxford University Press, 2007. 
 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-690-3
eKNOW 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

