Variation in Job Titles within the Hospitality Workforce 
 A computation grounded theory approach 
Amy Kitchiner, Mădălina Ursache, Evelien Vlijm 
Hotel Management School Maastricht,  
Zuyd University of Applied Sciences 
Maastricht, The Netherlands 
 jp.hr.analytics@gmail.com 
Martijn Zoet  
 Future Proof Financial  
Zuyd University of Applied Sciences 
Maastricht, The Netherlands 
martijn.zoet@zuyd.
 
 
Abstract— The wide spectrum of job titles worldwide has 
become the main cause of confusion amongst the general 
public, organizations, and practitioners of services. 
Diversity and inconsistency in job titles have implications 
for the wider perception of the workforce and their career 
paths. This study aims to understand the variation in job 
titles in the hospitality industry for management jobs and 
propose standardization as a means to combat disparity. 
A dataset of 1.000 job titles has been collected. This has 
been analyzed by means of grounded theory and 
computational grounded theory. The results show a 
number of 210 standardized job titles. Secondly, 
computational grounded theory can achieve similar 
results to grounded theory. 
 
Keywords-grounded theory; job titles; hospitality. 
I.  INTRODUCTION  
It has become apparent that Human Resource (HR) 
departments in companies worldwide are dealing with 
challenges concerning human capital, for example, the war on 
talent. Therefore, the focus of these departments should be on 
developing data analytics strategies for training, recruiting, 
and retaining employees. Moreover, acquiring suitable 
candidates can be difficult as many success factors, such as 
skills, international experience, achievements, and education, 
are considered. Additionally, the challenges concerning the 
HR department: the lack of digitalization of HR processes, 
innovation within HR departments, the war on talent, and 
other challenges, make it all difficult for human resource 
practitioners to excel in their work. 
The term ‘HR analytics’ has been growing at a fast-
paced scale amongst human resource practitioners and 
consultants in the past years [1]. Furthermore, their research 
describes the desire of HR professionals to access the "magic 
numbers" that will support them in combating challenges, 
such as attrition, talent acquisition, and success predictions. 
The term "HR analytics" has not been given a precise 
definition, as there are various opinions on its actual meaning 
[2]. Van Den Heuvel and Bondarouk (2017) define it as "the 
systematic identification and quantification of the people 
drivers of business outcomes, with the purpose to make better 
decisions" [3]. They focus on analyzing human resource data 
in a systematic way that could benefit decision-making [4].   
To reach the goal of analyzing the career paths of 
management employees, there is a need for standardization. 
Standardized job titles, departments, and organizational 
structures, such as a corporate hierarchy tend to differentiate 
per business, and therefore it is hard to compare [5], [6]. This 
complexity shows when viewing the websites of hotel 
chains, such as Marriot, Hilton, and Accor. These chains 
provide information about people that fill positions within the 
board of directors and executive management, how these 
positions are named and distributed, and differentiate per 
chain. For example, Marriott has separate presidents for both 
Canada and the US and a group president for these regions 
together [7]. Hilton, on the other hand, has one president of 
the Americas, including North, Central, and South America 
[8]. Moreover, Accor has a "CEO Lifestyle" function [9], 
whereas Marriot and Hilton do not have this function. Adding 
to the complexity is that the websites of these chains do not 
show a structure concerning the job positions. The same goes 
for department distribution, as big hotel chains categorize 
them differently than smaller independent hotels. For 
example, a smaller hotel may have strictly a finance 
department, whereas a large chain hotel might have separate 
departments for accounts payable, accounts receivable, 
budgeting and forecasting, and so on. Likewise, some 
companies work with a wide variation of job titles that are 
created just to make an employee happier with their position 
and title within the company. This forms a large web of titles 
that are similar and often mean the same thing; therefore, 
standardized 
versions 
of 
these 
company 
structural 
components are necessary to facilitate the Human Resource 
process in recruiting and managing talent. If given the means, 
an HR recruiter would be more effective in analyzing career 
paths and recruiting the right candidates.  
In order to create the pattern libraries, the following 
research question has been formulated: “How to build pattern 
libraries that support the open and axial coding of 
computational grounded theory?” In our research, several 
products will be built which are defined by the type of coding 
involved. More specifically, a pattern library for standardizing 
job titles will be created using open coding, whilst axial 
coding will define pattern libraries at a department’s and 
hierarchical level.  
Section II of this paper describes the research 
methodology, followed by Section III which will go more in-
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

depth about the data collection and analysis. In Section IV the 
results of the open and axial coding are written. To continue, 
limitations can be found in Section V Ending with Section VI 
where it mentions further research and lastly the 
Acknowledgements are mentioned. 
II. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
The goal of this research is twofold. The first goal is 
to identify similarities and dissimilarities in job titles across 
different lodging enterprises with the objective to formulate a 
set of standardized job titles. In addition to the goal of the 
research, also, the maturity of the research field is a factor in 
determining the appropriate research method and technique. 
With regards to job titles, this research field is mature. An 
appropriate focus of research in mature research fields is 
formal 
hypothesis 
testing 
or 
reevaluating 
existing 
methods[10]. Summarized, to accomplish our research goal, a 
research approach is needed in which job titles are identified 
and compared. To accomplish this goal, grounded theory is 
applied. In total, three cycles of coding were followed: 1) open 
coding, 2) axial coding and 3) selective coding [11].  
Figure 1.  Computational Grounded Theory Model. 
The goal of open coding is to create the first level of 
abstraction from analyzed data. This is realized by analyzing 
data and merging found instantiations to high-level categories. 
Identifying more precise categories and relationships among 
the high-level categories is the goal of axial coding. In our 
study, axial coding focused on identifying the standardized 
job titles. Selective coding was conducted to select the core 
category, relating categories and filling in categories that need 
further refinement[11]. In our research, this means that 
standardized job titles are appointed to departments and 
hierarchy levels. Then, to increase the generalizability 72 
round of automated coding through computational grounded 
theory have been applied [12]. In Figure 1, the process is 
visualized with the first step resulting in the creation of the 
pattern library for job titles. This step involves the exploration 
of text using unsupervised methods and manual coding. 
Following a chronological order, step 2 will result in the 
development of the departments and hierarchy which are in 
essence a cumulus of categories for the job titles. In this phase, 
guided deep reading facilitates the interpretation of patterns. 
This is because the researchers can evaluate their analysis of 
the patterns determined quantitatively in step 1. They can 
detect whether the patterns are interpreted in a meaningful 
way and either confirm or reconsider initial patterns [12]. 
These are also thoroughly analyzed through the means of 
inter-rater reliability analysis and later translated into text 
which can be understood by the computer. Inter-rater 
reliability is a process in which coders/raters consistently 
distinguish between different items on a measurement scale, 
with the purpose of analyzing variations between ratings [13]. 
After both steps have been completed, the testing phase has 
started which creates rigorous and fully reproducible pattern 
libraries, measured by an F1 score. The process and results for 
each stage of coding are discussed in the following section. 
III. DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS 
Grounded theory states that the first selection of 
respondents and documentation is based on the phenomenon 
studied at a group of individuals, organizations, information 
technology, or community that best represents this 
phenomenon [14]. For the goal of this study, this means the 
job titles managers use to describe their current job. 
Therefore, for this study, one real-life data set has been 
collected from Hospitality.net, between the 1st of June and 
the 15th of January 2021. The preprocessing of the data 
involved scraping the raw text descriptions into a .csv file. In 
this file, the information was sorted by date, job titles and 
gender, which supported creating the pattern libraries. No 
further alterations were made, as the goal was to have the data 
as raw as possible. The method of data collection involves a 
partially random stratified sampling for the entire population 
of job postings of management employees, during the period 
mentioned previously. This population, in the first phase of 
our data collection, has been divided into different strata 
depending on job title, level, company, and geographical 
location. For every strata, several job postings have been 
scraped and analyzed, totalling 1652 job titles by open 
coding. Starting from “date emails”, the sampling method has 
been changed. The following phase involved letting the 
system scrape data and showing the results by means of an 
automated generated email. The system would scrape newly 
identified job titles and mention the standardized version. The 
role of the researchers was to check the accuracy of the 
system and to standardize new job titles if they were not yet 
in the system. 
First, the patterns with the largest N were added, 
with N being the number of words in a pattern. For example, 
the job title pattern “Finance and Accounting Director” has 
an N of four with the label “Director of Finance”. At all times, 
there is at least one pattern guarantee to match a newly 
identified job title. If there is no match with a pattern, the job 
title will be classified as a 999, which is always diverted to 
the researchers who will either create or assign a label to it. 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

A. 
Open Coding 
The pattern library for the job titles was created first 
as it served as a basis for the other two pattern libraries. 
Hereby the first layer in coding, open coding, was used. In 
practice, open coding is used to “organize similar words and 
phrases, concept-indicators, in broad initial thematic 
domains” [15]. The coding scheme used was designed a priori 
which was then translated into a code-book/business rules 
that were then used to hermeneutically categorize the text. 
Three primary researchers first manually coded the text, 
whereafter a fourth secondary researcher assessed the coding. 
The background of the primary researchers encompasses four 
years of a Bachelor's in Hospitality Industry, with the fourth 
researcher having more than 10 years of experience in the 
industry and a PhD in Business Informatics. After, an inter-
coder reliability score was measured. An example of one of 
the standardized job titles is ‘CEO', 'New company CEO,' and 
‘Chief executive Officer' which will be standardized into 
'Chief Executive Officer' as a job title. Once this score was 
satisfactory, the coding of the job titles is translated into 
patterns that are added into a named entity recognition 
whereafter the retrieved job titles are automatically coded. If 
a job title couldn’t be coded the system would notify the three 
coders so that they could add coding to them. In addition, the 
coders checked the automated codes to see if the system 
coded the proper elements. 
B. 
Axial coding 
 
Going forward with the axial coding, the pattern 
library job title is being used as the basis of the other two 
pattern libraries: 1) Department and 2) Hierarchy. For the 
axial coding, it has followed the same structure as the open 
coding by first categorizing the standard job titles by 
hermeneutic skills and expert opinion, checking this by inter-
rater analysis, and by coding it separately. For example, 
'Chief Executive Officer' is part of the administrative 
department; ‘Finance Director’ is part of the finance 
department, and ‘Director of Human Resource’ is part of the 
human resource department. After completing this process, 
the axial coding has been automatized by creating the pattern 
libraries. 
IV. RESULTS 
The application of the Computational Grounded 
theory model has resulted in the creation of three pattern 
libraries. The precision and recall of these products are 
measured based on a calculated F1 score. Furthermore, the 
gradual development process is described in the following 
section.  
 
A. 
Pattern library for job titles 
 
The results of categorizing the job titles into a 
pattern library are 210 standardized job titles. Moreover, 
inter-rater reliability has been applied to ensure rigorous 
research. This resulted in an inter-rater reliability score of 
83,0%. Furthermore, of the percentage of faulty coding, 
84.4% were incorrect due to variation in writing; for example, 
to label the job title ‘board of directors, one coder may write 
‘member of the board of directors’, while another writes 
‘board of directors. On the other hand, 15,6% were more 
significant faults where titles were labeled entirely 
differently. An example of this would be labeling the pattern 
‘pastry chef’. Whereas one would label it as ‘chef de cuisine’, 
making it more general, another would keep it specific and 
label it as ‘pastry chef. After this process, more business rules 
were added, finalizing with 14 rules. Following this, an F1 
score was calculated to measure the precision and recall of 
the pattern library. The pattern library for job titles attained a 
perfect score of 100% after having been observed over 72 
times throughout the research.  
TABLE I. PRECISION MATRIX 
 
Positive 
Negative 
Positive 
188 (TP) 
47 (FP) 
Negative 
3 (FN) 
48 (TN) 
Figure 2.  Precision matrix line graph 
Whilst the patterns and corresponding labels were in 
the server, daily e-mails were received, which contained 
about zero to ten newly identified job titles per day and stated 
what label had been given to this title. The e-mail shows job 
titles that have been coded and job titles that have not been 
coded. For those that had not been coded, new patterns were 
created. The job titles that were coded were checked against 
the classification of labeling. In Figure 2, the relative amount 
of job titles and the outcome of the classification of the 
labeling is pictured on a timeline, followed by Table 1 which 
shows the total of newly identified job titles after the pattern 
library has been created. As seen in the graph, the largest 
amount was true positives, followed by true negatives, false 
positives, and finally false negatives. 
B. 
Pattern library for departments 
The results of the job title pattern library served as an 
input for the creation of the department’s pattern library and 
therefore, followed step 2 of Figure 1. During this phase, all 
the standardized job titles have been categorized per 
department. This resulted in a count of 17 departments for 210 
job titles. To define these departments, inter-rater reliability 
has been applied by a total of 5 coders starting with 
conceptualizing a draft version of departments and developing 
a set of 9 business rules. These business rules have helped the 
coders define mutually exclusive, qualitative, and complete 
categories which range from Administrative to Wellness and 
Recreation. The total number of categorized job titles into 
departments during inter-rater reliability is 100, representing 
10% of the data set at hand. For example, 'Chief Executive 
Officer' is part of the administrative department. 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

After the manual process has been finalized, the 
pattern library has been tested through the means of 
computation. From the 15th of October until the 15th of 
January, the pattern library is tested daily to validate the 
completeness and usefulness against newly identified job 
titles. If the pattern library cannot recognize what department 
to classify a standardized job title, the title will be added to the 
library. This way, the pattern libraries will continuously be 
developed. For this pattern library, the daily calculated F1 
score of the pattern libraries was 100%, meaning that the 
precision and recall of the pattern library for standardized 
departments is perfect. Like the job titles, the pattern and label 
file for the departments was updated when new patterns were 
discovered. As this pattern library is based on the pattern 
library for job titles, the outcome of the positives/negatives 
was the same. 
TABLE II. JOB TITLES OVERVIEW BY DEPARTMENTS 
 
Department 
Count of Job Title 
Administrative 
23 
Asset Management 
3 
Business Development Strategy 
30 
Corporate Affairs 
13 
Customer Experience 
5 
Engineering 
2 
Engineering  
2 
Events 
6 
Finance and Accounting 
9 
Food and Beverage 
21 
Human Resources 
10 
Information technology 
7 
Operations 
13 
Revenue Management 
8 
Rooms Division 
5 
Sales and marketing 
29 
Wellness and Recreation 
3 
Other 
21 
Grand Total 
210 
C. 
Pattern Libraries for hierarchy 
The creation of the pattern library hierarchy resulted 
in three base hierarchy levels. As an organization can be 
divided into head office (HQ), regional office (RO), and 
property-based (PB) job levels. Within the HQ level, 26 
patterns have been categorized. In RO there are 88 patterns 
and PB 97 patterns. This resulted in an organizational 
standardized structure, where “X” refers to the specific job 
title or department, as for example “Director of Finance”. See 
Figures 3, 4 and 5. 
The hierarchy starts with Head Quarters and ends 
with Property-Based. As every organization is different it was 
needed to create more detailed levels to place job titles with 
a similar name in the same hierarchical level. The number 
shows the level in the hierarchy, where one is the highest, and 
anything that follows is lower in ranking. The Chief Financial 
Officer, Chief Human Resource Officer, and Chief 
Sustainability Officer all come on the same level: HQ1. 
Followed with HQ2 the President and will go to HQ7. This 
example explains the details of the standardized hierarchical 
levels of the Head Quarters, there are also detailed levels for 
the Regional Office: RO1 being the Group Directors, 
followed by the Area/Regional Executive Vice Presidents. 
This goes on till RO8. And Property-Based: PB1: General 
Manager, followed by the Assistant General Manager on 
PB2, Going on to the managerial level PB8.  
Figure 3.  Property-Based Hierarchy Levels 
Figure 4.  Regional Office Hierarchy Levels 
Figure 5.  Headquarters Hierarchy Level 
 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

For this result, the researchers interviewed four 
international experienced professors of Hotel Management 
School Maastricht to validate the hierarchical structure 
created. The insights given as a response were evaluated 
based on inter-rater reliability. The result was a score of 82%, 
meaning that 18% of the answers given amongst the 
professionals were different. For the 18% of the answers that 
were different a total of 7 business rules were created. The 
result of the F1 score of this pattern library also equaled 
100%, meaning that this Axial coding recognizes all the 
existing patterns of the open coding. 
V. LIMITATIONS 
As this paper has a global scope of analyzing job 
titles worldwide, it was more difficult to execute during this 
time period, therefore there were time constraints. Other than 
that, this research was executed as a cross-sectional study, 
meaning that longitudinal research is needed to find changes 
over time to identify trends and adjust this within the patterns. 
The third limitation is the human bias, due to cultural 
backgrounds or other interpersonal factors of the researchers 
that affect the study’s validity. This has been reduced because 
of the inter-rater results. The fourth and last limitation is the 
sampling technique used in this research. Hospitality.net has 
been used as sample data that has to be representable for the 
entire population. 
VI. CONCLUSION AND FURTHER WORK 
The application of data analytics, measures and, 
tools has facilitated the process of creating the pattern 
libraries and, it proves that digitalization in the hospitality 
industry can be a key tool for solving business problems.  
These findings provide a potential mechanism for 
further development in creating standardization for job titles 
in the Hospitality industry, in order to combat disparity. 
Moreover, this paper draws attention to the gaps in the 
industry, such as the lack of digitalization and innovation in 
the Human Resources department. The next recommended 
step would be to compare the findings with similar initiatives 
in the industry, such as Esco. This enterprise classifies skills, 
competencies and occupations within the European Union’s 
labour market, which serves a similar scope to the research 
proposed in his paper [16]. Furthermore, additional resources 
could be devoted to analyzing the impact certain variables 
have on job title disparity, such as gender, education, skills 
and background. On a practical level, the hospitality industry 
could use all these findings to create a digital platform for 
businesses worldwide which can compare job titles by 
department, hierarchy and additional variables as per user 
preference.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
We thank Armand Odekerken and Dennis Trotta for 
their supervision during this project. We thank Victor Houben 
and Jannick Hendriks for their assistance during the project. 
We would also like to thank Eric Mantelaers for sharing his 
expertise and his guidance. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. H. Marler and J. W. Boudreau, “An evidence-based 
review of HR Analytics,” The International Journal 
of Human Resource Management, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 
3–26, 2017, doi: 10.1080/09585192.2016.1244699. 
[2] L. Bassi, “Raging Debates in HR Analytics,” Human 
Resource Management International Digest, vol. 20, 
no. 2, pp. 74–80, 2012. 
[3] S. van den Heuvel and T. Bondarouk, “‘The Rise (and 
Fall?) of HR Analytics: The Future Application, 
Value, 
Structure, 
and 
System 
Support,’” 
https://doi.org/10.5465/ambpp.2016.10908abstract, 
vol. 
2016, 
no. 
1, 
Nov. 
2017, 
doi: 
10.5465/AMBPP.2016.10908ABSTRACT. 
[4] D. Ø. Madsen and K. Slåtten, “The Rise of HR Analytics: 
A Preliminary Exploration by Dag Øivind Madsen, 
Kåre Slåtten :: SSRN,” Global Conference on 
Business and Finance Proceedings, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 
148–159, Jan. 2017, Accessed: Nov. 29, 2021. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id
=2896602 
[5] C. v Barrett, S. John, and L. ii, “Job Titles and Education 
Requirements of Registered Nurses in Primary Care: 
A Research Practicum,” Apr. 2021. 
[6] C. Barrett et al., “Job titles and education requirements of 
registered nurses in primary care: An international 
document analysis,” International Journal of 
Nursing Studies Advances, vol. 3, p. 100044, Nov. 
2021, doi: 10.1016/J.IJNSA.2021.100044. 
[7] Marriott, “Board of Directors | Marriott International.” 
https://marriott.gcs-web.com/board-of-directors 
(accessed Oct. 02, 2021). 
[8] 
Hilton, 
“Hilton 
– 
Management.” 
https://ir.hilton.com/corporate-
governance/management (accessed Oct. 02, 2021). 
[9] 
Accor, 
“Accor 
- 
Executive 
Comittee.” 
https://group.accor.com/en/group/our-
governance/executive-comittee (accessed Oct. 02, 
2021). 
[10] A. C. Edmondson and S. E. Mcmanus, “Methodological 
Fit in Management Field Research Monitor 
Executive Development,” Academy of Management 
Review, vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 1155–1179, 2007. 
[11] J. M. Corbin and A. Strauss, “Grounded theory research: 
Procedures, 
canons, 
and 
evaluative 
criteria,” 
Qualitative Sociology 1990 13:1, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 
3–21, Mar. 1990, doi: 10.1007/BF00988593. 
[12] L. K. Nelson, “Computational Grounded Theory: A 
Methodological 
Framework:,” 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0049124117729703, vol. 49, 
no. 
1, 
pp. 
3–42, 
Nov. 
2017, 
doi: 
10.1177/0049124117729703. 
[13] N. Gisev, J. S. Bell, and T. F. Chen, “Interrater 
agreement and interrater reliability: Key concepts, 
approaches, and applications,” Research in Social 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

and Administrative Pharmacy, vol. 9, no. 3. pp. 330–
338, May 2013. doi: 10.1016/j.sapharm.2012.04.004. 
[14] B. Glaser, Theoretical sensitivity : advances in the 
methodology of grounded theory. 1978. 
[15] M. Williams and T. Moser, “The Art of Coding and 
Thematic Exploration in Qualitative Research,” 
International Management Review, vol. 15, no. 1, 
2019. 
[16] 
ESCO, 
“Homepage.” 
https://esco.ec.europa.eu/en 
(accessed Jun. 06, 2022). 
 
 
 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

