Towards a Going Concern Assessment Pipeline 
Lotte Verhoeven, Eric Mantelaers, Martijn Zoet 
Research Group: Future-proof Financial & Auditor 
Zuyd University of Applied Sciences 
Sittard, the Netherlands 
lotte.verhoeven@zuyd.nl 
eric.mantelaers@zuyd.nl 
martijn.zoet@zuyd.nl 
 
Abstract—The assessment of the going concern analysis in 
the audit process is based on the professional judgment of 
the auditor. To support this individual and personal 
judgment of the auditor, a more direct source of 
information in the form of an automated going concern 
analysis could provide a solution. In this paper a method 
to automate the going concern analysis was set up, using 
a combination of 16 forecasting algorithms. To build and 
validate the forecasting algorithms, 225 administrations 
have been divided in a train and test set. The results show 
a confidence percentage of 97.45% for the Gradient 
Boosting Regressor model, 96.79% for the Decision Tree 
Regressor model and 77.72% for the AdaBoost Regressor 
model on the basis of the condition current liabilities for 
Administration 1. 
Keywords-Forecasting algorithms; Continuity; Going 
Concern; Forecasting; PyCaret. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Research shows that the going concern assessment is one 
of the most important challenges within the decision-making 
process of organizations [1]. The law stipulates that 
management of organizations should value her assets and 
liabilities  based on  the principle of the going concern 
assumption, unless serious doubts concerning the continuity 
of the organization exists (2:284 paragraph 3 of the Dutch 
Civil Code). When drawing up financial statements, the 
going concern assumption is therefore leading, as stated in 
ISA 2400, ISA 4410 and Title 9, Book 2 of the Dutch Civil 
Code (Financial Statements and the Management Report) 
[2][3][4]. The auditor assesses this going concern assumption 
in both statutory and voluntary audit engagements, but also 
in review engagements and compilation engagements [5].  
Audit quality and the going concern assessment is 
currently heavily debated worldwide. Past experience shows 
that, despite the fact that an unqualified audit opinion has 
been issued, organizations can still go bankrupt in the 
foreseeable future. An example of this within the Dutch 
context is the inadequately evaluated going concern 
assessment of Imtech in 2012. According to the Dutch court 
[6], some assumptions regarding the going concern 
assessment did not correspond to the actual figures. Another 
example are the unseen irregularities within Steinhoff, which 
eventually led to bankruptcy. In this case, the auditor was 
accused by the Dutch Authority for Financial Markets (AFM) 
of not obtaining sufficient and appropriate audit evidence to 
identify the fraud [7]. In addition, the auditor's unconscious 
biases, caused by among other things client relations and 
confidentiality, do not contribute to an independent going 
concern assessment [8]. With the help of data-driven control, 
the AFM wants to make the supervision of audit firms more 
efficient and effective. The Royal Netherlands Institute of 
Chartered Accountants (NBA) also emphasizes continuity 
because of the  increased social interest. The NBA wants to 
provide auditors with more tools that the auditor can use in 
the assessment. In fact, for 2021, the NBA board has set 
continuity as a mandatory subject for continuing professional 
education for all auditors (except government auditors). As 
of the reporting periods starting on or after December 15, 
2021 (2020 for public interest entities), the NBA also 
mandates the inclusion of a separate section "Audit Approach 
to Going Concern" in the audit report [9]. Regarding the 
United Kingdom, Brydon's report suggests that the reporting 
requirements of the current going concern analysis are not 
sufficiently fit for purpose. Brydon recommended that the 
current going concern assessment should be expanded in the 
short term in a transparent manner, which includes material 
uncertainties without already taking into account mitigating 
measures [10]. 
This research focuses on the approach and possible 
improvements to the going concern assessment. The going 
concern assessment is still largely dependent on the 
professional judgment of the auditor, who must assess 
whether management has made proper considerations. 
Research shows that technology can contribute to an 
improvement of audit quality [11]. By automating the going 
concern assessment, more time and resources can be 
allocated to the interpretation of the going concern analysis. 
This maximizes the dual aspects of audit quality: 
independence and expertise [11][12]. To support the 
individual and personal professional judgment of the auditor, 
an additional automated going concern assessment, a more 
direct source of information with possibly higher reliability, 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

could provide a solution. Automated forecasting of figures 
and numbers is possible with the use of forecasting 
algorithms. An algorithm is “a finite, abstract, effective, 
compound 
control 
structure, 
imperatively 
given, 
accomplishing a given purpose under given provisions.”[13] 
An algorithm can be an instruction in the form of code that 
can be used, among other things, for forecasting time series 
[14]. This research also focuses on the question of how 
sufficient and appropriate audit information can be collected 
using these forecasting algorithms, to analyze the going 
concern assessment in the (statutory) audit and compilation 
or review engagements. This can be done with the forecasting 
algorithms of PyCaret [14]. The use of PyCaret leads to an 
automated going concern analysis that is less dependent on 
the individual and personal professional judgment of the 
auditor, thus a possible improvement of uniformity can be 
realized. The goal of this research is to achieve an automated 
going concern analysis and a uniform creation of a more 
reliable and valid prediction for the going concern analysis. 
To achieve this, this paper answers the following main 
question: How can machine learning be used to assess the 
organizational going concern assessment?  Similar to 
previous research we apply PyCaret to test multiple 
algorithms in concurrence [15][16]. 
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: 
Section II describes the relevant literature regarding the 
auditor’s evaluation of the going concern analysis and  
models which give an indication of the going concern. In 
Section II the method and structure of the algorithms is 
described, followed by the results in Section IV. The 
conclusion and future work are presented in Section V.  
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
The auditor's evaluation of the going concern analysis 
consists out of the following four main activities: 1) The 
auditor concludes whether there is a material uncertainty that 
could cast doubt on the ability of the company to continue as 
a going concern. 2) For the purpose of the foregoing analysis, 
the auditor also performs risk assessment activities and 
assesses whether the financial, operational, and other events 
and circumstances cast reasonable doubt on the ability to 
continue as a going concern. In doing so, the auditor looks at, 
among other things, the current liabilities position, negative 
operating cash flows or intentions to liquidate the company. 
3) In addition, the auditor assesses other events and 
circumstances for, for example, changes in relevant laws and 
regulations and non-compliance with capital or other 
regulatory requirements. Other examples are included in 
ISA-570, paragraph A3 [4]. 4) Finally, the auditor should 
inquire about events after the balance sheet date that may 
have an effect on the going concern. This is included in ISA-
570, paragraph 15 [4].   
There are several models available that give an indication 
about the going concern of a company. A well-known model 
is the Altman Z-score, which was developed by Altman in 
1968 [17]. The model was then designed and tested based on 
data from manufacturing companies, but further adapted for 
private Limited Liability Companies (LLCs) and non-
manufacturing companies combined with emerging markets. 
Respectively, the Altman Z'-score Model and the Altman Z"-
score Model. The Altman Z-score Model consists of the 
weighted average of five financial ratios, with each ratio 
consisting of two conditions. The Altman Z-score provides 
an indication of the probability of bankruptcy for the 
company in question. In this, Altman distinguishes three 
categories: 'Safe Zone', 'Grey Zone' and 'Red Zone'. A score 
of 3.0 or more leads to the category 'Safe Zone'. A score 
between 1.8 and 3.0 leads to the 'Grey Zone' and a score 
below 1.8 to the 'Red Zone'. In which the 'Safe Zone' does not 
indicate bankruptcy and the 'Red Zone' does indicate 
bankruptcy [17]. 
In addition to the Altman Z-score Model, there are several 
models available for going concern assessment. Using a 
structured literature review from 238 papers, Mantelaers and 
Zoet [18] identified 835 conditions that contribute to 
predicting the going concern. These elements were then 
analyzed based on the type of element, required information 
sources and organization type. From this, a top ten of the most 
commonly used elements for predicting the going concern 
was formulated. This top ten is shown in Figure 1.   
  
 
Figure 1. Top ten criteria assessing going concern 
The ratios indicated with an asterisk are used in the 
Altman Z-score Model. The fifth element of the Altman Z-
score, the market value of equity divided by total liabilities, 
comes in thirteenth place. This indicates that the elements of 
the Altman Z- score Model are frequently used. Despite its 
popularity, the Altman Z-score Model is only suitable for 
listed companies. Research shows that predicting going 
concern for mid-sized companies, requires models and 
procedures that are  aimed at the mid-sized segment instead 
of the general Altman Z-score Model [19]. However, there 
are only a few going concern models available for predicting 
the going concern of mid-sized organizations. In this study, 
the adapted Altman Z-score Model by Altman and Sabato 
[19] is used.  
In this model, the most successful financial ratios to 
predict the going concern were chosen for each category, 
namely: liquidity, profitability, leverage, coverage and 
activity. These financial ratios were incrementally assessed. 
After which, the financial ratios were logarithmically 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

transformed to reduce the impact of the outliers resulting in 
an accuracy level of the model of 87% [19].  
The Altman and Sabato study also compared the accuracy 
of the above model with a standard model, in this case a 
derivative of the Altman Z-score Model, the Z"-score Model 
was created. Comparing the Z”-score model to the Altman Z-
score resulted in a higher prediction accuracy of almost 20% 
[19]. The conditions derived from the Altman Z-score model 
[17], the modified Altman Z-score models [19][20], and the 
top ten criteria from Mantelaers and Zoet's research [18] will 
be used within this research as input data for the forecasting 
algorithms. In which the word conditions refer to the various 
data points that can be used to assess the going concern of an 
organization. Examples include assets, liabilities, operating 
income before interest and tax (EBIT) and turnover.  
The purpose of this research is to generate an automated 
going concern analysis. In order to do so the forecasting 
algorithms of PyCaret are used within this research. PyCaret 
uses 
different 
mathematical 
models 
translated 
into 
eponymous forecasting algorithms, namely: 1) Extreme 
Gradient Boosting, 2) CatBoost Classifier, 3) Light Gradient 
Boosting Machine, 4) K Neighbors Classifier, 5) Random 
Forest Classifier, 6) Extra Trees Classifier, 7) Gradient 
Boosting Classifier, 8) Logistic Regression, 9) Linear 
Discriminant Analysis, 10) AdaBoost Classifier, 11) Ridge 
Classifier, 12) Decision Tree Classifier, 13) Quadratic 
Discriminant Analysis, 14) SVM - Linear Kernel, 15) Naive 
Bayes and 16) Dummy Classifier.  Each forecasting 
algorithm is tailored to specific situations, such as 
seasonality. In addition, each forecasting algorithm works 
with its own assumptions and interpretations, resulting in 
different forecasts [14]. For a detailed explanation we refer to 
the PyCaret website. By comparing the predictions of each 
model with each other  and the actual realized figures, a 
ranking can be made with regards to the best performing 
algorithm. In this way, the most suitable forecasting 
algorithm can be chosen for each type of input data.   
III. 
METHOD 
This paper uses the predictive models of PyCaret, 
combined with the predefined conditions as input data. In this 
section, the process from input data to results is explained step 
by step using the short-term debt condition of Administration 
1. The overall process of the system is visually shown in 
Figure 2. For illustration purposes, the structure of the system 
is explained for only one administration and condition. 
However, this process will be repeated for all conditions 
separately to achieve a complete picture of the organizations’ 
performance regarding the going concern analysis. 
To obtain the source data, the existing period balances 
were exported from Exact Online for eight to thirteen years, 
depending on the administration and availability. The 
exported cumulative monthly balance sheets were checked 
for empty cells. An empty cell can occur if there are, for 
example, no current liabilities in a period. To avoid errors, 
the empty cells have been replaced by the amount €0.00. 
Moreover, the cumulative monthly balance sheets were 
transposed to obtain the correct input for the algorithm. The 
beginning and ending balances correspond to months one and 
twelve of the respective year. To avoid double counting in the 
dataset, the beginning and ending balances were removed in 
the transposed file. After cleaning the individual cumulative 
monthly balance sheets per year, the years were merged into 
one file. Then, based on the merged cumulative monthly 
balance sheets per administration, the individual conditions 
(e.g., current liabilities, equity, sales, etc.) were filtered. This 
led to a dataset per administration per condition per month.   
 
 
Figure 2. Structure system 
The dataset per administration per condition per month 
for the years present is then presented to PyCaret's regression 
module (v 2.3.2). The regression module is a supervised 
machine learning module used for estimating the relationship 
between a dependent variable and independent variables. 
PyCaret uses different mathematical models translated into 
similarly named forecasting algorithms to see which model 
makes the best predictions.    
In doing so, each forecasting algorithm works with its own 
assumptions and interpretations, resulting in different 
forecasts. The model that best fits the administration is shown 
at the top and the model with the least fit is shown at the 
bottom.  The predictions and the true value of each are then 
stored in one file and compared. To assess the accuracy of the 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

predictions, the (percentage) deviations per month and at the 
total level were calculated from these real figures.   
IV. 
RESULTS 
For the current liabilities condition from Administration 
1, the results are explained below. Using PyCaret's regression 
module, the Gradient Boosting Regressor, Decision Tree 
Regressor and the AdaBoost Regressor models emerge as the 
most accurate. The actual current liabilities figures from 
Administration 1 are visually represented in Figure 3. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Actual figures current liabilities, Administration 1 
The results of the top three models are then added in 
Figure 4, where the blue line represents the actual short-term 
debt figures, and the other colored lines represent the 
predictions. The forecasts within PyCaret consist of two parts 
per model: Past and Future. Past predicts back into the past 
based on an adaptive training set consisting out of several 
years after the predicted year. Future predicts a 
predetermined time period (in this case six months) based on 
actual historical figures.  
 
Figure 4.  Forecasted figures current liabilities, Administration 1 
In addition, the results of the different forecasting algorithms 
for the current liabilities of Administration 1 were then 
merged into one CSV file. In addition, the (percentage) 
deviations were calculated based on the actual figures. In this 
way, the forecasts are compared with the actual figures. For 
example, for the period 2010-12-11, the deviation between 
the AdaBoost Regressor model and the actual value of the 
current liabilities is €911.00, which represents a deviation of 
3.5%. The results for the current liabilities of Administration 
1 are visually shown in Table 1.  
TABLE 1. 
RESULTS TOP 3 MODELS CURRENT LIABILITIES, 
ADMINISTRATION 1 
 
 
On average, a deviation percentage of 2.55% for Gradient 
Boosting Regressor, 3.21% for Decision Tree Regressor and 
22.28% for AdaBoost Regressor was achieved for short-term 
debt. This leads to a confidence percentage of 97.45%, 
96.79% and 77.72%, respectively.  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Going concern assessment is currently heavily debated all 
over the world. This within the larger context of the current 
societal debate on audit quality. With cases such as Imtech and 
Steinhoff [1][5] proving that going concern assessments needs 
to be a viable part of the audit. In this article we aim to answer 
the main question: “How can machine learning be used to 
assess the organizational going concern assessment?” This 
research presents a first step towards an automated process of 
going concern assessment. The goal of this research was to 
predict the different individual variables that affect the going 
concern assessment of the auditor. A confidence percentage 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

of 97.45% for the Gradient Boosting Regressor model, 
96.79% for the Decision Tree Regressor model and 77.72% 
for the AdaBoost Regressor model was measured on the basis 
of the current liabilities for Administration 1. This means that 
the predictions of the algorithms are reliable with 97.45% for 
the Gradient Boosting Regressor model. The results therefore 
show that individual variables can be predicted with the 
various algorithms of the PyCaret Library. This means that the 
machine learning used in this paper, particularly PyCaret, can 
be used to assess the organizational going concern assessment. 
The insights derived from our study provide a better 
understanding of the ability to predict numbers based on the 
general ledger of organizations. This means that the Altman 
Z-score as a whole can be predicted, resulting in a predictive 
continuity. Future research should focus on creating an 
indicator of the going concern assessment. In our study, we 
draw our conclusions based upon data collected solely from 
the Dutch context, which limits, in terms of sampling, a 
broader generalization towards non-Dutch organizations. 
Future research should focus on further generalization 
towards other countries. In addition, the sample only consisted 
of small and medium sized organizations, future research 
should focus on further generalization towards other 
industries (non-governmental). Related to the previous 
limitation is the sample size, which is limited to 221 
organizations. Although this is a rather large sample size, the 
total number of organizations in the Netherlands is much 
larger. In addition, the predictions are now based on a single 
variable. For future research, multivariable predictions can be 
applied to see if this will increase the predictive value. Future 
research should also focus on comparing the forecast with the 
going concern paragraphs (used or not) in the financial 
statements concerned. In this way, it can be determined 
whether or not there is uncertainty about continuity, or in the 
accounting policies or events after the balance sheet date, and 
whether this matches the results of the algorithms.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
D. E. O’Leary and R. M. O’Keefe, “The Impact of Artificial 
Intelligence in Accounting Work: Expert Systems Use in 
Auditing and Tax,” AI Soc., vol. 11, no. 1–2, pp. 36–47, 1997, 
doi: 10.1007/BF02812437. 
[2] 
Dutch government, Title 9. Financial Statements and the 
Managing Report; Book 2. 2022. 
[3] 
IAASB, Handbook of International Quality Control, 
Auditing, Review, Other Assurance, and Related Services 
Pronouncements. INTL FEDERATION OF ACCOUN, 2021. 
[4] 
International Auditing and Assurance Standards Board, 
Handbook of International Quality Control, Auditing, Review, 
Other Assurance and Related Services Pronouncements, vol. 
I. 2020. 
[5] 
E. van der Velden, “Going Concern and Compilation 
Engagements,” Account., no. 7/8, pp. 34–35, 2012. 
[6] 
M. J. G. Princen and M. P. J. Peters, “Ruling of the court dated 
January 15, 2021 pursuant to Section 38 of the Accountants 
Disciplinary Act (Wtra) in the complaints received on July 17, 
2018 with numbers 18/1193 and 18/1194 Wtra AK,” Jan. 15, 
2021. 
https://repository.overheid.nl/frbr/tuchtrecht/2021/ECLI:NL:
TACAKN:2021:2/1/pdf/ECLI_NL_TACAKN_2021_2.pdf 
(accessed Jun. 06, 2022). 
[7] 
Bloomberg, “Ex-deloitte Auditor Faces Disciplinary Action 
over 
Steinhoff,” 
2021. 
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-04-22/ex-
deloitte-auditor-faces-disciplinary-action-over-
steinhoff#xj4y7vzkg (accessed Jun. 06, 2022). 
[8] 
D. Bazerman, M.H.; Loewenstein, G.; Moore, “Why Good 
Accountants Do Bad Audits,” Harvard Business Review, vol. 
97. 2002. 
[9] 
NBA, 
“Standard 
700,” 
in 
Regulations 
Manual 
Accountancy(HRA), 2021. 
[10] D. Brydon, “Assess, Assure and Inform: Improving Audit 
Quality and Efectiveness.” APS Group, 2019. 
[11] E. Mantelaers, “An Evaluation of Technologies to Improve 
Auditing,” Open Universiteit, 2021. 
[12] L. E. DeAngelo, “Auditor Size and Audit Quality,” J. 
Account. Econ., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 183–199, 1981, doi: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/0165-4101(81)90002-1. 
[13] R. K. Hill, “What an Algorithm is,” Philos. Technol., vol. 29, 
pp. 35–39, 2016, doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/s13347-014-
0184-5. 
[14] PyCaret, “PyCaret,” 2021. https://pycaret.gitbook.io/docs/ 
(accessed Jun. 06, 2022). 
[15] R. Abdullah, Iqbal, F.B.; Biswas, S.; Urba, “Performance 
Analysis of Intrusion Detection Systems Using the PyCaret 
Machine Learning Library on the UNSW-NB15 Dataset,” 
Brac University, 2021. 
[16] D. T. U. Pol, Dr. U.R.; Sawant, “Automl: Building An 
Classification Model With PyCaret,” YMER, vol. 20, no. 11, 
pp. 547–552, 2021. 
[17] E. I. Altman, “The Prediction of Corporate Bankruptcy: a 
Discriminant Analysis,” J. Finance, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 193–
194, 1968, doi: 10.1111/j.1540-6261.1968.tb00843.x/pdf. 
[18] E. Mantelaers and M. Zoet, “A New Explorative Model to 
Assess the Financial Credit Risk Assessment,” eKNOW, vol. 
The Tenth, pp. 101–106, 2018. 
[19] E. I. Altman and G. Sabato, “Modelling credit risk for SMEs: 
Evidence from the U.S. market,” Abacus, vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 
332–357, Sep. 2007, doi: 10.1111/j.1467-6281.2007.00234.x. 
[20] E. I. Altman and E. Hotchkiss, “Defining Corporate Financial 
Distress and Bankruptcy,” in Corporate Financial Distress; A 
Study of the Italian Manufacuturing Industry, 2017, pp. 3–10. 
doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-67355-4_2.
 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

