The Perceived Usage Scenario’s of Continuous Monitoring, Continuous Auditing 
and Continuous Assurance: an Explorative Study
Martijn Zoet 
Zuyd University of Applied Sciences 
Sittard, the Netherlands 
e-mail: Martijn.zoet@zuyd.nl 
Koen Smit 
HU University of Applied Sciences Utrecht 
Utrecht, the Netherlands 
e-mail: Koen.smit@hu.nl
Eric Mantelaers 
Zuyd University of Applied Sciences 
Sittard, the Netherlands 
e-mail: Eric.mantelaers@zuyd.nl 
 
 
Abstract—Continuous monitoring, continuous auditing and 
continuous assurance are three methods that utilize a high 
degree of business intelligence and analytics. The increased 
interest in the three methods has led to multiple studies that 
analyze each method or a combination of methods from a 
micro-level. However, limited studies have focused on the 
perceived usage scenarios of the three methods from a macro 
level through the eyes of the end-user. In this study, we bridge 
the gap by identifying the different usage scenarios for each of 
the methods according to the end-users, the accountants. Data 
has been collected through a survey, which is analyzed by 
applying a nominal analysis and a process mining algorithm. 
Results show that respondents indicated 13 unique usage 
scenarios, while not one of the three methods is included in all 
of the 13 scenarios, which illustrates the diversity of opinions in 
accountancy practice in the Netherlands. 
 
Keywords-usage 
scenarios; 
continuous 
monitoring; 
continuous auditing; continuous assurance. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
     The growth of business intelligence and analytics 
technology has increased in the last decades. It has helped 
organizations to get better insights into their operations, 
make better decisions and allow for evidence-based 
management. Still, it has been estimated that more than 50% 
of business intelligence and analytics implementations do 
not deliver the intended value [1]. Reasons for value 
dilution are not attributed to the technical perspective, but to 
the organizational alignment of business intelligence. For 
example, Hackathorn [2] identified the following three 
failures: 1) lack of relevance, 2) lack of actionable decision 
support technologies and 3) lack of alignment with the 
business. In a literature study by Trieu  [3], a decade later, 
five themes emerged, also focusing on organizational 
alignment, namely 1) context/environmental factors, 2) 
business intelligence-conversion processes, 3) business 
intelligence-use 
processes, 
4) 
business 
intelligence 
competitive process, and 5) latency effects. In this work, 
Trieu concludes that gaps are existing concerning how to 
focus on business intelligence development from an 
operational and competitive advantage and how do 
configurations and organizational routines impact business 
intelligence operational effectiveness [4]. 
     A sector that depends highly on business intelligence and 
analytics technology is the accountancy sector. However, in 
current research, accountants hardly apply these specific 
terms. Accountants rather use the term Computer Assisted 
Audit Techniques (CAATs) [5]. CAATs is an umbrella term 
for software such as generalized audit software, utility 
software, test data, application software tracking and 
mapping, and audit expert systems, that help internal 
auditors directly test controls built into computerized 
information systems and data contained in computer files 
[4]. From a business intelligence and analytics perspective, 
the previously mentioned CAATs techniques can be seen as 
narrow business intelligence tools, which is because these 
tools have predefined data analysis that is defined and built 
in to support the accountants' tasks. Since recent years, the 
need for ongoing time assurance has increased [4], so has 
the need for real-time business intelligence and analytics. 
Accountants have formulated three different methods of 
real-time business intelligence namely, 1) continuous 
monitoring, 2) continuous auditing, and 3) continuous 
assurance (which will be further detailed in the following 
section). Research on continuous monitoring, continuous 
auditing and continuous assurance focuses mainly on 
technology usage in general [6], the application of business 
intelligence in specific environments [7], and taxonomy of 
technology 
and 
maturity 
models 
[8]. 
Despite 
the 
accumulation of literature, there is a surprisingly scarce 
amount of research that examines the manner in which the 
technology is applied, and in addition, whether accountants 
think that continuous monitoring, continuous auditing and 
continuous assurance are practically feasible. This presents 
a gap in current research since accountants are the actual 
end-users of the methods and underlying information 
technology. Taking previous statements into account, the 
following research question arose, which will be tackled in 
this paper: “What are the usage scenarios of continuous 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-765-8
eKNOW 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

monitoring, continuous auditing and continuous assurance 
according to accountants?” 
    The current study extends previous research by 
researching from a macro level the usage scenarios of the 
three methods applied by accounting. It thereby adds to 
previous studies that have taken a micro-analysis approach.   
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In 
Section 2, a discussion on the theoretical foundations of the 
background and related work is provided, being foundations 
on CAATs and accounting. This is followed by the 
elaboration of the research method in Section 3. In Section 
4, the data collection and analysis is presented. Then, in 
Section 5, the results are presented. This is followed by the 
conclusions that can be drawn from our data collection and 
analysis in Section 6, the discussion with a critical view on 
this study and its results in Section 7, and lastly, a definition 
of future research directions in Section 8.     
II. 
BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK 
     Information technology is applied in most, if not all, 
occupations to support the execution of tasks. From an 
activity theory viewpoint, see Figure 1, three elements are 
applied to reason about this task [9]. These three elements 
are: 1) the tool applied, 2) the subject that performs the 
tasks, 3) and the object on which the task is performed. Each 
of the activities must be seen within the context that they are 
performed. From an auditing perspective, the subject that 
performs the activity are accountants.  
 
 
 
Figure 1. Human activity and context: activity theory and activity-
centric view [9]. 
 
      Accountants perform their tasks on various objects, for 
example, balance sheet items (e.g., inventory, cash, accounts 
payable, and accounts receivable), as well as all items from 
the income statement (e.g., cost of goods sold and sales). If 
an accountant is responsible for capitals other than purely 
financial capitals, CO2 statements are also examined. The 
goal of performing these tasks on various objects is to 
provide reasonable assurance that all items are both accurate 
and complete. To provide reasonable assurance, multiple 
tools are applied by accountants. Examples of such tools are 
comprehensive relationship tests. An example of a 
relationship test is: “Beginning Accounts Payables + 
Acquisition (Inventory) - Disbursements = Ending Accounts 
Payables” [10]. In addition to generic tools, different 
information technology is applied by accountants. For 
example, generalized audit software, spreadsheet software, 
scripts developed using audit-specific software, specialized 
audit utilities, CAATs, commercially packaged solutions, 
and custom-developed production systems. Although 
information technology is applied, each of the activities 
executed by the accountant is done retrospectively [11]. 
From an information systems perspective, many of the tasks 
performed by accountants can be translated into three steps: 
1) collect input data, 2) analyze input data, and 3) report 
results. 
     However, as stated in the previous section, accountants 
still rely heavily on spreadsheet software and only sparsely 
apply additional techniques. This is because the context 
variables in which an accountant performs his tasks allowed 
him or her to do so. Two trends have realized that the 
accountant has been looking to change from a retrospective 
to a more proactive approach. On the one hand, the pace of 
change of organizations and the fact that they have to 
respond more rapidly to change and emerging risk [12]. On 
the other hand, the advancements in information technology 
have made it possible to perform ongoing risk and control 
assessments [12]. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Three lines of defense [13]. 
 
     From 
an 
information 
technology/data 
science 
perspective, this change can be categorized as a change 
from stand-alone analytics to infused analytics [14]. 
Standalone analytics is defined as analytics that is 
performed outside the production system on the data 
extracted from the production system, the current way of 
working within accountancy practice. Infused analytics are 
performed ongoing and real-time. This is where multiple 
forms of data analyses are applied, such as process mining 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-765-8
eKNOW 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

and decision mining. Within the audit community, three 
forms of ongoing assessment are recognized, namely: 1) 
continuous monitoring, 2) continuous auditing and 3) 
continuous assurance. 
 
      Continuous Monitoring (CM) is a method that monitors, 
on an ongoing basis, whether internal controls are operating 
effectively [13]. During this monitoring, they assess 
business risks, financial and operational results and to re-
prioritize and rank audit trigger events and risks to control 
intervals (daily, weekly, monthly, quarterly). Responsible 
for CM are the operational management, risk management 
and compliance business functions. When continuous 
monitoring has been realized the next phase is continuous 
auditing [13]. Continuous Auditing (CA) is a method that 
combines technology-enabled ongoing risk assessment and 
ongoing control assessments. CA enhances the ability of 
accountants to identify risk indicators, evaluate risk 
parameters by analyzing systems for changes, security 
incidents, outliers, and transactions. The goal of CA is 
issuing audit reports simultaneously with, or a short period 
after, the data that is entered into the information system or 
evaluation of the current system. To realize continuous 
auditing, multi-information systems are applied, for 
example, generalized audit software, spreadsheet software 
or 
scripts 
developed 
using 
audit-specific 
software, 
specialized audit utilities, CAATs, commercially packaged 
solutions, and custom-developed production systems. CA 
has been broadly researched by multiple researchers 
[10][15][16]. For example, Kogan et al. [17] researched the 
continuous monitoring of transactions with a hospital supply 
chain, utilizing patterns within the business processes to 
supply information to internal auditing. In addition to 
research, multiple guidance reports by regulatory bodies 
also have been published, for example, GTAG 3 Continuous 
Auditing: Implications for Assurance [13], Monitoring, and 
Risk Assessment [13] and Information Systems Audit and 
Control Association (ISACA) its IT Audit and Assurance 
Guidelines [18]. In 2010, the Australian Institute of 
Chartered Accountants also published its Continuous 
Assurance for the Now Economy [19]. Still, multiple studies 
show that the adoption has been lacking [17][20][21]. 
Continuous Auditing is the responsibility of both internal 
auditing and external auditing business functions. When an 
organization has realized CM and CA, the next phase is 
Continuous Assurance (CAS). CAS is performed by internal 
or external audit and is a combination of CA and testing of 
first and second lines of defense CM. It does so, using 
technology, by processing information immediately to 
produce audit results simultaneously or within a short period 
after the occurrence of relevant events [12]. The CM, CA, 
and CAS processes are integrally visualized in Figure 2. 
III. 
RESEARCH METHOD 
      The goal of this study is twofold: firstly, to identify the 
perceived use of different methods by accountants and 
secondly to study if accountants are able to make a 
distinction between different methods. As stated in the 
introduction of this paper, the utilization of continuous 
monitoring, continuous auditing, and continuous assurance 
is mostly studied from the perspective of various data 
engineering-related roles, lacking the view of the end-user, 
the accountant. Because the context of the subject under 
research is widely researched, a quantitative approach is 
appropriate, which allows us to, on a relatively large scale, 
research the accountants’ perspective with regards to the 
three techniques. To do so, a survey is selected as a modus 
operandi for this study. The survey enables, in an empirical 
manner, to translate the views of accountants into the 
analysis and development of narrative scenarios [22], [23]. 
    The survey will be conducted among members of the 
Dutch national accountant’s association, spread over several 
accountancy agencies in the Netherlands. To increase the 
validity of the results a combination of two accountant-types 
were included in this study. The first type of accountant 
included concerns the accounting consultants/auditors (AA 
in Dutch), which are responsible for, e.g., compilation 
engagements, advisory regarding tax consultancy, and 
bookkeeping. The second type of accountant included 
concerns the chartered auditor (RA in Dutch), which are 
responsible for, e.g., statutory audits and other assurance 
engagements. 
    In total, the survey comprises seven elements, represented 
by one question each. The first question focuses on deriving 
the workplace and is used to ensure a proper spread of 
respondents is achieved amongst our total sample. The 
second question focuses on the responsibilities of the 
accountant, concretely, whether the accountant has decision 
rights (e.g., by mandate) or is a member of the board of 
directors of the workplace in question. Then, the following 
three questions focus on the utilization of the three methods, 
being continuous monitoring, continuous auditing, and 
continuous assurance. Additionally, the respondents were 
asked to elaborate on the timeframe they think the methods, 
for each method, are used or will be used. For this question, 
the following four answers were possible; 1) I don’t know, 
2) currently applying the method, 3) will apply the method 
in one to five years, or 4) it will take more than five years to 
apply the method. Lastly, two questions were posed that 
focus on the respondents view of the application of the 
methods in the accountant’s practice in general as well as 
how the respondent rank themselves against the application 
of the methods by the accountant’s practice in general. 
IV. 
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS 
     The survey was distributed to a sample of 8,393 
respondents in total, of which 727 responded, which is a 
response rate of 8.66%. The respondents could return the 
survey starting from July 11, 2019, until October 16, 2019.  
     To establish the narrative scenarios from the data 
collected, a process mining algorithm is applied in 
Microsoft Power BI. To do so, three input variables were 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-765-8
eKNOW 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

utilized; 1) the case ID, represented by the respondent ID, 
e.g., 004, 452, 2) the activity ID, represented by the 
application of the method, i.e., continuous monitoring, 
continuous auditing, continuous assurance, and 3) the 
timestamp, represented by the timeframe the respondent 
thinks the method will be applied, e.g., currently applying 
the method and one to five years. 
V. 
RESULTS 
      Regarding the data analysed in an overall sense, thirteen 
scenarios were discovered, see Figure 4. The majority of 
respondents (n=466, 64%) indicated that either continuous 
monitoring, 
continuous 
auditing 
and/or 
continuous 
assurance is going to be applied within the accountancy 
practice. The remainder of the respondents (n=261, 36%) 
indicate that they either do not know if one of the techniques 
is going to be implemented or state it is not relevant. 
Looking at the distribution of the scenarios amongst the 
respondents, 86.1% indicated their preference for either 
scenario one, two or three. We argue that the collection of 
the first three scenarios significantly represent our sample. 
Therefore, only the first three scenarios are reported in this 
section. 
A. Board of directors vs. non-board of directors 
     As described earlier in this paper, one of the questions in 
the survey focused on the decision rights of the respondents. 
In Figure 3, the largest scenarios are depicted, further drilled 
down to the number of respondents that have decision rights 
versus respondents that do not have decision rights.  
 
 
 
Figure 3. Board of directors versus non-board of directors. 
 
     Although the number of respondents with both roles 
entered all three scenarios similarly, 35 respondents without 
decision rights more than respondents with decision rights 
entered the first scenario. The differences between both 
groups are smaller for the second and third scenario. 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Overview of the discovered usage scenarios. 
B. Type of accountancy practice 
     As it can be observed from Figure 5, a large portion of 
the sample operates either from the public practice or 
commercial practice.  
 
 
 
Figure 5. Scenarios per type of accountancy practice. 
 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-765-8
eKNOW 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

    Across all groups, most indicated the first scenario. 
Furthermore, although the IT audit practice type of 
accountants are represented by a relatively small amount of 
respondents in this study, the distribution of the scenarios 
seems more skewed towards the first scenario compared to 
the other types of accountants. 
C. Perceived usage of IT by accountancy practice in 
general 
     The survey also considered the view of respondents with 
regards to accountancy practice in general. As described 
earlier in this paper, this was operationalized by a question 
that focuses on the perceived usage of IT in accountancy 
practice.  
 
 
 
Figure 6. Perceived usage if IT by accountancy practice in general. 
 
    As it can be observed from Figure 6, a relatively small 
number of respondents indicate that the accountancy 
practice, in general, are not progressive in their IT usage. A 
similar number of respondents indicated both reluctant and 
average/normal IT usage.  
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
    Like all research studies, this study has several limitations 
that should be considered when interpreting the results and 
conclusions. The first limitation concerns the percentage of 
respondents that filled in the survey. Out of the 8.393 
surveys sent, 727 respondents completed the survey, which 
results in a response rate of 8.66%. Considering the fact that 
a third party database with email-addresses was used to send 
out the questionnaire, we consider 8.66% percent as a 
respectable return rate [26]. In addition to the number of 
respondents, another limitation is the population to which 
the survey was distributed. This population exists out of 
registered accountants, of both types described, in the 
Netherlands. Previous research has shown that accountants 
in the western world have a likewise adoption of 
information technology. However, this research can 
therefore only be generalized towards the Dutch population 
of accountants. Lastly, one could argue that the results 
presented in this paper offer a view into what accountants 
‘think about’ the use of CM, CA and CAS in combination 
with technology, therefore producing a possible difference 
between ‘empirical’ experience, opinions and perception. 
This does not compromise the findings of this preliminary 
empirical research that should be utilized to further research 
the actual usage (hard figures) of technology to perform 
CM, CA and CAS by accountants. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
    In this paper, an answer is provided to the following 
research question: ‘What are the usage scenarios of 
continuous monitoring, continuous auditing, and continuous 
assurance according to accountants?’ To answer this 
question, a survey is distributed amongst a large sample of 
Dutch accountants. In this study, because of the nascent 
nature of the perspective of the accountant in a mature 
research domain, no inferential analysis was utilized. To 
ground the conclusions, it is important to note that, from a 
literature point of view, the scenario of 1) continuous 
monitoring, 2) continuous auditing, and 3) continuous 
assurance is the most fundamentally researched and proven 
approach, e.g., see [13][24][25]. The same holds for the 
practical application of IT in accountancy, where it is, from 
a technical point-of-view, impossible to first establish 
continuous assurance before continuous monitoring is 
implemented. This also validates the decision to only 
include the first three scenarios in the analysis as some 
combinations of scenarios four to thirteen are impossible to 
implement in practice. An explanation for combinations that 
seem impossible to implement in practice could lie in the 
fact that respondents believe that only part of the methods of 
1) continuous monitoring, 2) continuous auditing, and 3) 
continuous assurance lies within their responsibility. For 
example, an accountant might think that continuous 
monitoring and continuous auditing should be conducted by 
a client so that the accountant him or herself can provide 
continuous assurance. Although this explanation validates 
scenarios in which only one or two of the three methods are 
indicated, it does not explain practically impossible 
scenarios in which the sequence is scrambled.  
    Based on the descriptive statistics of the board of 
directors versus the non-board of directors, differences are 
observed between the number of respondents that indicated 
the first scenario, although they do not insinuate 
significance. The same holds for the scenarios indicated per 
type of accountancy practice. Taking a closer look at the 
differences in scenarios indicated by types of accountancy 
practice, the IT audit practice seems to suggest a stronger 
preference for scenario one compared to the other types of 
accountancy practice. This is interesting as it could suggest 
that more technology-savvy accountants understand the 
sequence and dependencies between the three methods. 
Lastly, the results regarding the perceived usage of IT by 
accountancy practice, in general, seems to depict a negative 
attitude towards IT adoption by accountancy practice in 
general. This could be part of the explanation for the 
impossible scenarios because many accountants could lack 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-765-8
eKNOW 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

awareness of the possibilities that technology brings for 
them to support the methods of continuous monitoring, 
continuous auditing and continuous assurance. 
VIII. FUTURE RESEARCH 
    The first direction for future research concerns the 
addition of accountants registered in other countries, 
whereby western as non-western countries should be 
included in the sample, as practices can differ. The second 
direction for further research is triggered by the scenario’s 
that only apply continuous auditing and/or continuous 
assurance. One possible explanation for these scenarios can 
be that the accountants believe that continuous monitoring 
and/or continuous auditing should be implemented by their 
clients. To investigate this possible explanation further, 
future research should include the expected usage of the 
previously mentioned methods by audit clients. Since this 
research is characterized as explorative, additional research 
should be performed. Future research should focus on an 
analysis of the situational factors to assess the minimal 
number of situational factors necessary to classify the 
continuous auditing, continuous monitoring and continuous 
assurance problem space, which in term can be used to 
define specific implementation scenarios. Lastly, the 
relationship between combined assurance (see e.g., [27]) 
and the results of this study could be further investigated in 
future research. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
I. S. Ko and S. R. Abdullaev, “A Study on the Aspects of 
Successful Business Intelligence System Development,” 
in Proceedings of the Int. Conf. on Computational 
Science, 2007, pp. 729–732. 
[2] 
R. 
Hackathorn, 
“Making 
business 
intelligence 
actionable,” DM Rev., p. 32, 2002. 
[3] 
V. H. Trieu, “Getting value from Business Intelligence 
systems: A review and research agenda,” Decis. Support 
Syst., vol. 93, pp. 111–124, 2017. 
[4] 
M. A. Vasarhelyi, M. Alles, S. Kuenkaikaew, and J. 
Littley, “The acceptance and adoption of continuous 
auditing by internal auditors: A micro analysis,” Int. J. 
Account. Inf. Syst., vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 267–281, 2012. 
[5] 
S. A. Sayana and C. CISA, “Using CAATs to support IS 
audit,” Inf. Syst. Control J., vol. 1, pp. 21–23, 2003. 
[6] 
H. Abou‐El‐Sood, A. Kotb, and A. Allam, “Exploring 
auditors’ perceptions of the usage and importance of audit 
information technology,” Int. J. Audit., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 
252–266, 2015. 
[7] 
J. R. Kuhn Jr and S. G. Sutton, “Continuous auditing in 
ERP system environments: The current state and future 
directions,” J. Inf. Syst., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 91–112, 2010. 
[8] 
E. Mantelaers and M. Zoet, “Continuous Auditing: A 
Practical Maturity Model,” in MCIS 2018 Proceedings, 
2018, pp. 1–12. 
[9] 
J. Kim, Y. Chang, A. Y. L. Chong, and M.-C. Park, “Do 
perceived use contexts influence usage behavior? An 
instrument development of perceived use context,” Inf. 
Manag., vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 103–155, Nov. 2019. 
[10] 
E. Mantelaers, M. Zoet, and K. Smit, “The Impact of 
Blockchain on the Auditor’s Audit Approach,” J. Adv. 
Manag. Sci., vol. 8, no. 1, p. IN PRESS, 2020. 
[11] 
Z. Rezaee, R. Elam, and A. Sharbatoghlie, “Continuous 
auditing: the audit of the future,” Manag. Audit. J., vol. 
16, no. 3, pp. 150–158, 2001. 
[12] 
R. A. Teeter and M. A. Vasarhelyi, Audit Analytics and 
Continuous Audit: Looking Toward the Future. New 
York, USA: AICPA, 2015. 
[13] 
B. Ames, R. D’Cunha, P. Geugelin-Dannegger, P. B. 
Millar, S. Rai, and A. Robertson, “Global Technology 
Audit Guide (GTAG) 3: Continuous Auditing: Cordinate 
Continuous 
Auditing 
and 
Monitoring 
to 
Provide 
Continuous Assurance,” 2015. 
[14] 
M. Goul, T. S. Raghu, and R. D. St Louis, “Governing the 
Wild West of Predictive Analytics and Business 
Intelligence,” MIS Q. Exec., vol. 17, no. 2, 2018. 
[15] 
A. Kogan, M. G. Alles, M. A. Vasarhelyi, and J. Wu, 
“Design and evaluation of a continuous data level auditing 
system,” Audit. A J. Pract. Theory, vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 
221–245, 2014. 
[16] 
S. Flowerday, A. W. Blundell, and R. Von Solms, 
“Continuous auditing technologies and models: A 
discussion,” Comput. Secur., vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 325–331, 
2006. 
[17] 
A. Kogan, E. F. Sudit, and M. A. Vasarhelyi, “Continuous 
online auditing: A program of research,” J. Inf. Syst., vol. 
13, no. 2, pp. 87–103, 1999. 
[18] 
ISACA, “G42 Continuous Assurance,” 2010. 
[19] 
M. A. Vasarhelyi, M. Alles, and K. T. Williams, 
“Continuous assurance for the now economy,” 2010. 
[20] 
M. Alles, G. Brennan, A. Kogan, and M. Vasarhelyi, 
“Continous monitoring of business process controls: A 
pilot implementation of a continuous auditing system at 
Siemens,” J. Account. Inf. Syst., pp. 137–161, 2006. 
[21] 
M. G. Alles, A. Kogan, and M. A. Vasarhelyi, “Feasibility 
and economics of continuous assurance,” Audit. A J. 
Pract. Theory, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 125–138, 2002. 
[22] 
E. G. Mishler, “Models of narrative analysis: A 
typology,” J. Narrat. life Hist., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 87–123, 
1995. 
[23] 
J. Mahoney, “Nominal, ordinal, and narrative appraisal in 
macrocausal analysis,” Am. J. Sociol., vol. 104, no. 4, pp. 
1154–1196, 1999. 
[24] 
R. van Hillo and H. Weigand, “Continuous auditing & 
continuous monitoring: Continuous value?,” in IEEE 
Tenth International Conference on Research Challenges 
in Information Science (RCIS), 2016, pp. 1–11. 
[25] 
Z. Rezaee, A. Sharbatoghlie, R. Elam, and P. L. 
McMickle, “Continuous auditing: Building automated 
auditing capability,” Audit. A J. Pract. Theory, vol. 21, 
no. 1, pp. 147–163, 2002. 
[26] 
R. I. Radics, S. Dasmohapatra, and S. S. Kelley, “Public 
perception 
of 
bioenergy 
in 
North 
Carolina 
and 
Tennessee,” Energy. Sustain. Soc., vol. 6, no. 1, p. paper 
17, 2016. 
[27] 
K. Barac and J. Forte, “Combined assurance: a systematic 
process,” South. African J. Account. Audit. Res., vol. 17, 
no. 2, pp. 71–83, 2015. 
 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-765-8
eKNOW 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

