Merging Capabilities of the Social Web and the Semantic Web to Support 
Knowledge Management in Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises 
 
Raitis Sevelis, Alla Anohina-Naumeca 
Department of Systems Theory and Design 
Riga Technical University 
Riga, Latvia 
e-mail: raitis.sevelis@gmail.com, alla.anohina-naumeca@rtu.lv  
 
 
Abstract—The research focuses on finding an interlinking 
solution for integration of the Social Web and the Semantic 
Web for knowledge management needs of small and medium-
sized enterprises in respect to preserving their knowledge 
assets.  The solution proposed includes a conceptual level 
framework for describing metadata of knowledge assets and a 
process for its usage. The framework can be used for 
introduction of a semi-structured knowledge repository which 
role is to act as a middleware between Social Web and 
Semantic Web tools used by small and medium-sized 
enterprises. Moreover, analysis of data acquired through 
online questionnaire and reveling trends in usage of Social 
Web environments and knowledge management activities 
within small and medium-sized enterprises is presented in the 
paper. 
Keywords-Semantic 
Web; 
Social 
Web; 
knowledge 
management; DBpedia; small and medium-sized enterprise 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) are a 
significant subject in the European agenda, because they 
play a decisive role in the competitiveness and dynamic of 
the European economy [1]. Their central role is recognized 
by the Small Business Act for Europe [2] adopted in June of 
2008. It puts into place a comprehensive SME policy 
framework for the EU and the Member States [3]. At the 
same time, since adoption of the Lisbon Strategy [4] the 
Europe is moving towards development of a knowledge-
based economy that even more emphasizes significance of 
SMEs as providers of employment opportunities and key 
players for the well-being of local and regional communities 
[2]. It is logical that with the transition to a knowledge-
based economy knowledge has became an important 
competitive factor and the most substantial value in all 
aspects of social and professional life. Therefore, today, 
staying competitive means relying upon knowledge of 
human resources and performing effective knowledge 
management with aim do not lose business-vital knowledge 
assets because usually know-how of enterprises is closely 
associated to tacit knowledge of their employees. In the 
paper, a knowledge asset is understood as any kind of 
knowledge 
like 
enterprise’s 
know-how, 
employees’ 
experience and competence, etc. used or held by a SME. In 
[5], two approaches to knowledge management are 
distinguished: 1) a product-oriented approach focusing on 
creating, storing, and re-using documents and 2) a process-
oriented approach in which knowledge is tied to the person 
and is shared with other employees through communication. 
The paper focuses on the last approach. 
Rapidly growing information and communication 
technology (ICT) provides a lot of solutions for effective 
knowledge management, but in the process-oriented 
approach the purpose of ICT is to help employees to 
communicate knowledge. However, typically SMEs use 
different environments, platforms, and collaborative tools 
(very often with different formats and structures of 
information stored), usually freely available in the Web, for 
support 
of 
knowledge 
management. 
This 
restricts 
collaborative use and sharing of knowledge assets in order 
to provide employees with knowledge needed in a particular 
time span. There is no mechanism in place which allows 
retrieving and transforming of knowledge assets from and 
between different environments without losing contextual 
meaning of these assets. One of the solutions for solving 
this issue could be introduction of technological capabilities 
offered by Web 3.0 (the Semantic Web). Web 3.0 allows 
describing and structuring of different knowledge assets 
using ontology which adds meaningful metadata to 
knowledge assets. Regardless that Web 3.0 technology 
suffers from drawbacks related to high-cost development 
and maintenance, as well as technological capabilities, it can 
be successfully used together with the already widely 
popular Social Web. Both technologies – the Semantic Web 
and the Social Web – are able to supplement each other in 
order to achieve knowledge integrity and ubiquity. 
The current research was initially motivated by personal 
experience of one of the authors who is a CEO of a SME. 
Therefore, it seeks to answer the main research question: 
how both mentioned technologies can be integrated in an 
applicable way to support knowledge management activities 
within SMEs? The paper offers a conceptual level solution 
that can be adopted by SMEs on the top of their existing 
ICT infrastructure. It includes a framework for describing 
metadata of knowledge assets and a process for its usage.  
The framework can be used to introduce a semi-structured 
knowledge repository the role of which is to act as a 
middleware between Social Web and Semantic Web tools 
used by SMEs.   
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

The paper is structured as follows. Section II considers 
related work in the field of usage the Semantic Web for 
needs of SMEs. General information on the Social Web and 
the Semantic Web is provided in Section III. Section IV 
presents the research methodology. Results of the analysis 
of data acquired through the online survey and revealing 
trends in usage of Social Web environments and knowledge 
management activities within SMEs are given in Section V. 
Then the solution for merging capabilities of the Social Web 
and the Semantic Web is described together with its testing 
results. Conclusions and directions of future work are given 
at the end of the paper. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Breslin et al. [6] point out that the Semantic Web has 
became very popular last years and many large companies 
have started to experiment with it in order to understand the 
value of this technology for their business. The authors 
consider theoretical fundamentals of the Semantic Web and 
its usage in different application areas, inter alia the paper 
includes a quite comprehensive section on the Semantic Web 
and knowledge management. Rezgui et al. [7] concentrate on 
construction industry where SMEs are dominating and 
develop ontology for integration of disparate web-enabled 
applications and management of interactions between 
individuals and teams. The system which is based on the 
Semantic Web and supports knowledge workers in learning 
at workplace is presented in [8]. The authors report a case of 
deployment of the mentioned system in a network of SMEs 
and discuss issues which a company has to face, when it 
wants to deploy a modern learning environment relying on 
the Semantic Web technology. Goy and Magro [9] consider 
the problem of integration of the capabilities of knowledge 
based systems using ontologies (the Semantic Web) and 
possibilities of the Social Web and provide a design of a 
social web-based repository of software solutions offered by 
ICT companies for SMEs. It is necessary to note that 
regardless that there is a huge amount of publications and 
books on the Semantic Web itself, there are a few researches 
on potential of this technology for SMEs. The main reason 
could be related to drawbacks of this technology, especially 
high development and maintenance costs which could not be 
acceptable for SMEs usually operating within tight financial 
limits. At the same time, integration of the Semantic Web 
with the already widely distributed Social Web could 
provide significant advantages for SMEs without necessity to 
spend additional financial resources. 
III. 
THE SOCIAL WEB AND THE SEMANTIC WEB 
The Social Web, also referred as Web 2.0, assumes that 
content is created and managed by users populating a single 
environment (usually a social network). Users in this 
environment are related by the set of social relations which 
allow communication and content sharing. According to 
Rohani and Hock [10], social networking services offer 
users a space where they can maintain their relationships, 
chat with each other, share information, and build new 
relationships through existing ones. Kim et al. [11] define 
social websites as those websites that give people possibility 
to form online communities and share user-created contents. 
Therefore, the more users share their knowledge in a social 
network, the bigger knowledge base is created within this 
environment. 
The Semantic Web, also referred as Web 3.0, introduces 
intelligence in the Web through representation of 
information in machine readable and understandable way 
leading to more adaptable and personalized environments. 
According to Bonilla-Morales, Medianero-Pasco, and 
Vargas-Lombardo [12], the Semantic Web is composed of a 
set of Web and knowledge representation technologies 
constituting what is known as a web of data where some 
human intelligence is integrated into the Web, making the 
search easier and more productive.  
The architecture of the Semantic Web consists of the 
following layers [12][13]: 
• 
Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) [14] used for 
location and identification of resources in the Web 
through giving them unique names; 
• 
XML together with XML Schema [15] allowing 
transfer 
of 
different 
data 
between 
different 
environments; 
• 
Resource Description Framework (RDF) together 
with RDF Schema [16] used to describe semantics 
of information; SPARQL query language allows 
expressing of queries for data that are stored in RDF 
format; 
• 
Web Ontology Language (OWL) [17] allowing 
definition of a common vocabulary or, in other 
words, a common library of meanings which can be 
used between different environments. 
The Semantic Web provides a number of benefits like 
possibility to describe all information in a semantic way, 
more consistent search queries, ability to transfer 
information between environments without losing its 
meaning, 
shifting 
tasks 
from 
humans 
to 
artificial 
intelligence, and improved decision making processes. 
However, regardless that the concept of the Semantic Web 
is very promising, it faces many issues such as high 
development costs due to necessity to rebuild ICT structure 
to get value from introduction of semantics, time consuming 
ontology building for a particular domain of interest, high 
maintenance costs due to changes, ageing, and appearance 
of knowledge in a dynamic way, etc.  
At the current point of technological development and of 
users’ overall ICT skill level, it is hard to maintain a 
computable Semantic Web-based environment alone, 
without introduction of any other already existing (or new) 
technologies. The research presented by Jovanović, Gašević, 
Torniai, Batemand, and Hatala [18] suggests combining the 
already popular and well adopted Social Web with the 
technological capabilities offered by the Semantic Web. In 
this case, it is possible to avoid drawbacks of the Semantic 
Web and also to improve the current Web infrastructure, 
which lacks interoperability from the perspective of 
knowledge transfer. Combination of these technologies does 
not mean “blind” merging of the capabilities as such, but 
taking the best independent components and/or concepts to 
bind them together. The same research also mentions that 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

the Semantic Web cannot work alone in an available Web 
environment as it requires collaborative applications based 
on the Social Web that allow operating with shared 
knowledge. On the other side, the Social Web can benefit 
from structured and easily transferable knowledge because it 
can be used by multiple applications without special 
adoptions.  
IV. 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
The research presented in the paper followed the 
following main steps: 
1) 
Identification of trends in usage of the Social Web 
within SMEs and issues related to preserving knowledge 
assets within an enterprise; 
2) 
Examination of capabilities of the Social Web and 
the Semantic Web in relation to the results of Step 1; 
3) 
Finding an integration solution. 
Step 1 was based on a questionnaire which development 
proceeded in two stages: 
1) 
First of all, an initial questionnaire was developed 
and then used in the interview process with several 
management representatives of SMEs; 
2) 
After 
the 
interview 
process, 
the 
initial 
questionnaire was modified to acquire a meaningful set of 
questions and then an online questionnaire was developed 
using services of the website [19]. 
The final questionnaire included 16 questions distributed 
between the following categories: 2 questions – information 
about the enterprise; 3 questions – usage of Social Web 
environments and tools within the enterprise; 3 questions – 
knowledge management tools used by the enterprise; 3 
questions – enterprise’s opinion about usage of the Social 
Web for knowledge management; 5 questions – trends in 
having employees with a unique knowledge set and 
existence of a scenario for preserving knowledge assets. 
The final questionnaire was distributed to 90 managers 
of different SMEs in Latvia using personal contacts of the 
authors. 
V. 
USAGE OF THE SOCIAL WEB AND KNOWLEDGE 
MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES WITHIN SMALL AND MEDIUM-
SIZED ENTERPRISES 
The survey was organized with the following hypothesis 
in mind: despite active use of Social Web tools in SMEs, 
enterprises do not have a scenario in place for managing and 
preserving their knowledge assets. 
During March of 2012, 50 respondents (from 90 to whom 
the questionnaire was sent) from different business areas 
took part in the survey. They included managers and CEOs 
of SMEs in the Republic of Latvia. The majority of the data 
were collected from enterprises in ICT field - 22,22% (11), 
followed by Production - 18,18% (9) and companies which 
provide B2C services 12,12% (6). The whole set of 
enterprises participated in the survey was distributed as 
follows: ICT – 22%; Other – 22%; Production – 18%; 
Services – 12%; Finance – 8%; Construction/Real estate – 
6%; Wholesale – 4%; Retail – 4%; Media – 2%; 
Transport/Logistics – 2%. 
The usage of Social Web environments and tools within 
an enterprise is very closely related to behaviour of 
employees and their willing to use such tools not only in 
their primary duties at work, but also in everyday life. Figure 
1 presents data about usage of Social Web environments and 
tools 
among 
employees 
from 
the 
perspective 
of 
management. It is possible to note that 50% (25) of all 
enterprises assume that at least 60% of their employees use 
Social Web environments in their everyday life to perform 
different activities, such as communication, knowledge 
sharing, and learning. However, it is important to take into 
account that this data can be biased, because of the fact that 
they are provided by the management, not by employees 
themselves and can differ from the real situation, as some 
employees may hide their behaviour of using the Social 
Web. 
Further analysis of the data shows that 74% (37) of all 
respondents use the Social Web in their enterprises, 
nevertheless only 58% (29) answered that they know what is 
knowledge management and its associated activities. 
Moreover, 50% (25) of respondents were able to choose 
specific Social Web tools they find beneficial for knowledge 
management within their enterprises. The managers chose 
the following tools: Messenger – 20%; File transfer – 18%; 
Multimedia – 12%; Chat – 11%; Forums – 8%; Wiki – 8%; 
Blogs – 7%; Bookmarks – 7%; Feedback forms – 6%; Other 
– 3%. 
The data show that the most popular are Messenger with 
included electronic mail, File transfer, Multimedia, and Chat. 
The least popular are tools that require much more efforts in 
relation to content creation and its management. They are 
Forums, Wiki, Feedback forms, Bookmarks, and Blogs. 
Among other tools beneficial for knowledge management, 
the managers mentioned Twitter which has got enormous 
growth in recent years due to easy and simple interaction and 
user interface. 
The whole spectrum of the tools chosen by the 
management allows making a conclusion that two main 
aspects of knowledge management are equally important for 
enterprises: a) communication and b) knowledge sharing. 
The managers who participated in the survey explained that 
they consider these tools as a mechanism which supports 
knowledge sharing in a more efficient manner and allows 
faster 
interexchanging 
(communication) 
of 
different 
knowledge assets between employees. 
Analysis of the data concerning knowledge holders 
within enterprises reveals that 80% (39) of enterprises have 
key employees who own a unique knowledge set from the 
perspective of a particular enterprise. This is a common 
situation for small companies and startups in their early 
development stage, when there is a group of key employees 
who perform several crucial tasks and monitor main business 
processes. Regardless that having such employees is a big 
risk for any enterprise, the answers showed that the managers 
pay no effort in solving such a situation, as 74% (37) 
answered that they do not have a scenario developed for 
preserving knowledge in case if an employee leaves the 
enterprise. The reason for such a behaviour can be explained 
in  two  ways.  The  first  one  is  that  usually SMEs delegate 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
Figure 1. Usage of Social Web environments among employees from the 
perspective of enterprises’ management. 
several fields of competence to the same employee to save 
financial resources. This is a pure management problem 
which does not have relationship with technological issues. 
However, still effective business process optimization with 
the help of ICT can improve the situation. The second reason 
is that the most of the management are not aware or do not 
have a mechanism available to capture key knowledge and 
preserve them. Regardless that tools built on the concept of 
the Social Web allow collecting of knowledge, there is still a 
problem of developing efficient exchange of this knowledge 
across different applications in necessary context and 
provision of them to employees in the same manner as a 
unite knowledge asset. Variety of tools and data formats 
preferred and used by enterprises hinders efficient 
knowledge sharing across the enterprise, resulting in a huge 
risk for organizations to suffer from loss of key knowledge 
assets. 
VI. 
INTEGRATION OF THE SEMANTIC WEB AND THE 
SOCIAL WEB FOR PURPOSES OF KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT 
The analysis of the questionnaire presented in Section V 
revealed that the most part of SMEs use Social Web tools to 
ensure communication and sharing of knowledge assets. 
Therefore, to support both of the mentioned aspects in 
efficient way, it is necessary to integrate metadata of the 
Semantic Web into a Social Web environment to provide 
semantic meaning for knowledge assets of the enterprise. 
A. The Proposed Solution 
Taking into account that different types of tools and 
environments use different methods for representation of 
knowledge, it is necessary to find common patterns in order 
to introduce a standardized knowledge representation 
structure. For this purpose examination of Social Web tools 
for communication, knowledge sharing and management 
was made paying attention to their data sets. The results 
allowed assuming that it is possible to use a common 
metadata description framework which relies on the 
following attributes: 
• 
title of a knowledge asset; 
• 
abstract of the knowledge asset; 
• 
description of the knowledge asset; 
• 
data about the author; 
• 
link to a knowledge source. 
The title of a knowledge asset is a common and 
mandatory description for any type of knowledge provided 
and used within a SME. The abstract of the knowledge asset 
provides a short introduction into knowledge contained in 
the asset. The description of the knowledge asset includes 
content of the knowledge asset from a communication tool 
and it should not be mandatory because file transfer and 
multimedia solutions in most cases do not provide this kind 
of information. To ensure reliability of knowledge and to 
increase responsibility of employees within SMEs, it is 
necessary to store information about the author of the 
provided knowledge asset. Such information could also be 
useful in case of necessity to add additional knowledge to 
the asset. In case of using a knowledge sharing and 
management tool for storing or transforming non-textual 
knowledge assets, links to the original knowledge source 
show the exact location of the knowledge asset. This 
attribute should not be mandatory, as textual information 
does not require a link to a knowledge source because of its 
integration into the description area of the knowledge asset. 
Taking into account different formats of knowledge assets 
used within SMEs, it is recommended to use links to 
original knowledge sources. A knowledge asset itself is still 
kept within the storage repository of the Social Web 
environment. Following such a guideline allows bypassing 
implementation process of a complex and costless 
mechanism for managing different knowledge assets within 
ICT environment of SMEs. 
The next step is to discover common patterns within the 
Semantic Web to create a linkage between Web 2.0 and 
Web 3.0 technologies. In order to define the research scope, 
it was decided to focus on technological capabilities and 
structure of the Semantic Web portal DBpedia [20], which 
is the biggest publicly available free semantic knowledge 
repository, containing more than 3.6 million descriptions of 
knowledge assets and over 1 billion of RDF triples. 
DBpedia structures and describes knowledge assets in a 
semantic way from Wikipedia which is a typical Social Web 
environment. DBpedia’s centrality and cross-domain nature 
makes it one of the most important and most referred 
knowledge bases on the Web of Data, generally used as a 
reference for data interlinking [21]. Its knowledge assets 
contain information about persons, places, music, films, 
games, organisations, species, diseases, and many other 
subjects of interest that can be used to support knowledge 
management in SMEs by enriching their knowledge 
repositories with additional knowledge interlinked using an 
ontological description.   
In order to access the knowledge repository of DBpedia, 
it is possible to use SPARQL endpoint offered by DBpedia 
for direct implementation of complex queries to retrieve 
description of a specific entity displayed within infobox. 
Depending on the type of an entity, DBpedia uses different 
infoboxes to display its content to the user; nevertheless 
there are still common properties for all knowledge assets. 
Examination of different types of content revealed the 
following set of properties: 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

• 
title of a knowledge asset; 
• 
rdf:type – a type defined in DBpedia and assigned 
to each knowledge asset with aim to group 
knowledge assets and make their hierarchy; 
• 
dbpedia-owl:abstract – abstract of each knowledge 
asset of DBpedia; 
• 
dbpedia-owl:wikiPageExternalLink – a link to a 
description of a knowledge asset in Wikipedia; 
• 
is dbpedia-owl:wikiPageRedirects – a link to 
synonyms of a knowledge asset. 
Structure of the properties described above can be 
considered as similar to some degree with the metadata 
description proposed by the authors of the paper. Such 
similarity allows introduction of interlinking between 
unstructured knowledge assets of Social Web tools and the 
knowledge repository of DBpedia in order to add additional 
meaning to unstructured knowledge assets. Knowledge 
assets retrieved from the Social Web can benefit from such 
interlinking by acquiring additional knowledge and 
imposing structure through different assets of DBpedia.  By 
introduction of the structuring mechanism for knowledge 
assets of the Social Web, it is possible to get semi-structured 
knowledge, which can be used to support knowledge 
management within SMEs, and to increase reliability and 
accessibility of particular knowledge. Moreover, it allows an 
enterprise to use additional knowledge available in 
DBpedia. 
In order to introduce interlinking between knowledge 
assets of the Social Web and DBpedia, it is necessary to 
develop a middleware that will serve as a metadata 
description repository of knowledge assets within an 
environment. The purpose of the middleware is to tie 
knowledge assets from different Social Web tools with 
knowledge instances from the knowledge repository of 
DBpedia. Figure 2 illustrates interlinking of Social Web 
environments and DBpedia. 
Taking into consideration the structure of properties in 
DBpedia and the one within the Social Web, it is possible to 
define a list of properties that should be introduced within 
the middleware for description of knowledge assets: 
• 
rdf:title – title of a knowledge asset; 
• 
rdf:category – a category of the knowledge asset 
allowing to group knowledge assets; categories can 
be freely defined by an enterprise; 
 
 
Figure 2. User interaction with the middleware and Social Web 
environments. 
 
Figure 3. The process for interlinking a knowledge asset and its instance. 
• 
owl:abstract – abstract of the knowledge asset; 
• 
owl:description – description of the knowledge 
asset; 
• 
owl:wikiPageExternalLink – a link to a Social Web 
tool, where the knowledge asset is located; 
• 
owl:DBpedia – a link to a description of the 
knowledge asset in DBpedia; 
• 
owl:author – data about the author (employee); 
• 
owl:date – date when the knowledge asset was 
added; introduced with aim to fix when the last 
modifications were made and how actual is the 
knowledge asset. 
In order to achieve better linking between the 
middleware and DBpedia, it is necessary to describe all 
properties and values using the RDF descriptive language. 
Such an approach is able to provide additional benefits in 
future by moving an enterprise’s knowledge repository even 
closer to semantic structure. In order to perform interlinking 
of a Social Web environment and DBpedia, the middleware 
should be able to support a process proposed by the authors 
of the paper and illustrated in Figure 3. First of all, it is 
necessary to allocate a knowledge asset within a particular 
Social Web environment. This task is not mandatory for the 
middleware as it can be performed manually by an 
employee of the enterprise. This allows to lower 
development costs of the middleware. After the allocation 
process, it is necessary to describe the knowledge asset 
using the RDF descriptive language according to the 
property structure described previously. In order to interlink 
the knowledge asset with DBpedia, the employee must 
perform search procedure to allocate a corresponding 
knowledge instance within DBpedia. After retrieving 
information about the knowledge instance, the employee 
must add value to owl:DBpedia property to establish a link 
between the asset and the instance. After implementation of 
the described process, employees of the enterprise will be 
able to access the interlinked knowledge asset for 
performing learning or decision-making processes.  
Following the process described above, it is possible to 
define any type of knowledge assets from the Social Web 
and interlink them with knowledge instances of DBpedia in 
order to provide additional meaning to a particular 
knowledge set and to introduce a semi-structured knowledge 
repository within SMEs without rebuilding their ICT 
infrastructure. The interlinking solution (see Figure 3) 
allows still relying on capabilities offered by the Social 
Web; nevertheless it allows using of concepts of Web 3.0 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

within an enterprise to improve knowledge management 
activities.  
B. Testing the Solution 
In order to prove feasibility of the solution developed and 
presented in this paper, it was decided to perform an 
experiment within a SME by linking its existing knowledge 
assets from a Social Web environment with external 
knowledge assets from the Semantic Web Portal DBpedia. 
The SME is using Wiki platform for knowledge management 
purposes by describing key knowledge used in its business 
processes. Regardless that Wiki allows grouping of 
knowledge 
assets 
using 
criteria 
developed 
by 
an 
organization, it lacks semantic structure which makes it 
difficult to structure knowledge in a meaningful way. The 
Wiki of the SME contains knowledge assets related to user 
interface and web design. Taking into account two 
mentioned groups of knowledge assets, it was decided to 
group knowledge assets presented in Wiki by linking them to 
two different instances of DBpedia about web design and 
user interface issues. Table I illustrates a description schema 
for interlinking knowledge assets of the SME with 
knowledge instances from DBpedia taking into account 
category of a particular knowledge asset. 
After that, the following experiment was performed. A 
knowledge asset was chosen from the Social Web portal 
Behance Network (http://www.behance.net/) which serves 
as a creative community for communication between 
designers and storing of different data formats for building 
creative portfolio. Portfolio assets within Behance Network 
in most cases consist of graphic and textual materials 
presented using a common template for all sets of data. The 
chosen knowledge asset contains portfolio information 
about design of user interface for Latvian fashion designer 
Davids’ Internet resource and can be located through the 
following [22]. Table 2 lists properties and values of the 
description of the knowledge asset. 
In order to test the description of the knowledge asset and 
integration results of DBpedia, it was decided to share the 
knowledge asset with two employees of the enterprise. One 
of the employees received the knowledge asset with the 
attached description. The second partner received just the 
knowledge asset without the description. After that to test 
results, the meeting with all three parties (the manager and 2 
employees) was arranged to discuss the project from the 
perspective of web design. Results of the meeting revealed 
that both employees were informed about the project and had 
no problems with involvement into discussion about the 
particular subject. Nevertheless when the topic of the 
meeting was changed in a favour of web design area itself, 
the employee who had received the knowledge asset with the 
additional description showed better understanding about the 
problem area and was taking more active part in the 
discussion process. Moreover, he had also acquired 
knowledge about graphic design as it was linked with the 
web design instance of DBpedia. 
The experiment showed that usage of the interlinking 
solution within SME allows, first of all, introduction of a 
semi-structured  knowledge  repository by adding  additional 
TABLE I.  
PROPERTIES AND VALUES FOR THE DESCRIPTION OF THE 
KNOWLEDGE ASSETS 
Properties 
Interlinking with 
‘Web Design’ 
Interlinking with 
‘User Interface’ 
rdf:title 
[Knowledge asset 
title] 
[Knowledge asset 
title] 
rdf:category 
Web design 
User interface 
owl:abstract 
[Abstract] 
[Abstract] 
owl:description 
[Description] 
[Description] 
owl:wikiPageExtern
alLink 
[link to original 
knowledge source 
within Wiki] 
[link to original 
knowledge source 
within Wiki] 
owl:DBpedia 
http://dbpedia.org/pa
ge/Web_design 
http://dbpedia.org/pa
ge/User_interface 
owl:author 
[Data about author] 
[Data about author] 
owl:date 
[DD-MM-YYYY 
HH:MM] 
[DD-MM-YYYY 
HH:MM] 
TABLE II.  
DESCRIPTION OF THE KNOWLEDGE ASSET USED IN THE 
EXPERIMENT 
Properties 
Values 
rdf:title 
David’s user interface 
rdf:category 
User interface 
owl:abstract 
User interface design for Latvian 
fashion designer David’s Internet 
resource 
owl:description 
User interface layouts for Latvian 
fashion designer David’s Internet 
resource. User interface set 
includes layouts for introduction, 
homepage, and 
inner pages of web design project 
owl:wikiPageExternalLink 
http://www.behance.net/gallery/D-
Fashion/149987 
owl:DBpedia 
http://dbpedia.org/page/Web_design 
owl:author 
Raitis Sevelis 
owl:date 
16-05-2012 13:38 
 
knowledge grouping criteria based on the Semantic Web 
Portal DBpedia. Moreover, the proposed solution enlarges 
the knowledge repository of the SME by adding free 
available knowledge from DBpedia by linking it with the 
already existing and used knowledge assets and can be 
considered as a first step towards the Social Semantic Web. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The research presented in the paper included analysis of 
data acquired through the survey aimed to uncover trends 
regarding usage of Web 2.0 environments and knowledge 
management tools within SMEs. As a result, the main 
conclusion made was related to the fact that SMEs actively 
use Social Web environments for knowledge communication 
and sharing. At the same time, the most of enterprises do not 
have a scenario for preserving their knowledge assets. 
Taking into account the findings mentioned above, the 
solution for interlinking the knowledge repository of the 
Semantic 
Web 
portal 
DBpedia 
with 
Social 
Web 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

environments was proposed and tested. Integration of 
DBpedia, as a resource of Web 3.0, can help SMEs to 
structure their unstructured knowledge assets from different 
Social Web environments by introducing the semi-structured 
knowledge repository through adding contextual meaning to 
existing knowledge assets The proposed solution allows 
interlinking of different Social Web based knowledge 
communication and sharing tools and does not restrict 
enterprises in adding metadata descriptions to existing 
knowledge assets. Nevertheless, it requires introduction of 
the middleware between DBpedia and a Social Web 
environment, which serves as a bridge between the Social 
Web and the Semantic Web. Future work is related to 
practical implementation of the proposed solution. It is 
planned to introduce the mentioned repository in several 
SMEs in Latvia and to perform pilot testing with further 
identification of its usability, advantages, and drawbacks 
through a questionnaire offered to staff and managers of the 
SMEs. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] European Commission, EU SME policy, European Small 
Business Portal, http://ec.europa.eu/small-business/policy-
statistics/policy/index_en.htm 19.12.2012. 
[2] “Think small first: a “Small Business Act” for Europe”, 
Communication from the Commission to the Council, the 
European Parliament, the European Economic and Social 
Committee and the Committee of the Regions, COM(2008) 
394, Brussels, 25.06.2008. 
[3] European Commission, “Small and medium-sized enterprises 
(SMEs): Small Business Act for Europe, Enterprise and 
Industry”, 
http://ec.europa.eu/enterprise/policies/sme/small-
business-act/ 19.12.2012. 
[4] Presidency Conclusions, Lisbon European Council, March 
23-24 
2000,  http://www.consilium.europa.eu/uedocs/cms_data/docs
/pressdata/en/ec/00100-r1.en0.htm 19.12.2012. 
[5] D. Apostolou, G. Mentzas, R. Young, A. Abecker, 
“Consolidating the product versus process approaches in 
knowledge 
management: 
the 
know-net 
approach,” http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi
=10.1.1.21.5816 19.12.2012. 
[6] J. G. Breslin, D. O’Sullivan, A. Passant, and L. Vasiliu, 
“Semantic Web computing in industry,” Computers in 
Industry, no. 61, 2010, pp. 729–741. 
[7] Y. Rezgui, S. Boddyb, M. Wetherill, and G. Cooperc, “Past, 
present and future of information and knowledge sharing in 
the construction industry: towards semantic service-based e-
construction?,” Computer-Aided Design, no. 43, 2011, pp. 
502–515. 
[8] C. Christl, C. Ghidini, J. Guss, S. Lindstaedt, V. Pammer, P. 
Scheir, 
and 
L. 
Serafini, 
“Deploying 
semantic 
web 
technologies for work integrated learning in industry. A 
comparison: SME vs. large sized company,” Proc. 7th 
International Semantic Web Conference (ISWC 2008), 
Springer, Oct. 2008, pp. 709-722. 
[9] A. Goy and D. Magro, “Exploiting folksonomies and 
ontologies 
in 
an 
e-business 
application,” http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?do
i=10.1.1.154.9487 19.12.2012. 
[10] V. Rohani and O. S. Hock, On Social network Web sites: 
definition, features, architectures and analysis tools,” Journal 
of Advances in Computer Research, no. 2, 2010, pp. 41–53. 
[11] W. Kim, O.-R. Jeong, and S.-W. Lee, “On social Web sites,” 
Information Systems, no. 35, 2010, pp. 215–236. 
[12] B. Bonilla-Morales, X. Medianero-Pasco, M. Vargas-
Lombardo, “Survey: grid computing and Semantic Web,” 
International Journal of Computer Science Issues, vol. 7, 
2010, pp. 1-6. 
[13] M. M. Taye, “Understanding Semantic Web and Ontologies: 
Theory and Applications,” Journal of Computing, vol. 2, iss. 
6, 2010, pp. 182-193. 
[14] Semanticweb.org, 
"Uniform 
Resource 
Identifier", http://semanticweb.org/wiki/Uniform_Resource_I
dentifier 19.12.2012. 
[15] W3C, "XML Schema", http://www.w3.org/XML/Schema 
19.12.2012. 
[16] W3C, "RDF Vocabulary Description Language 1.0: RDF 
Schema", http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-schema/ 19.12.2012. 
[17] W3C, 
"OWL 
2 
Web 
Ontology 
Language", 
http://www.w3.org/TR/owl2-overview/ 
19.12.2012. 
[18] J. Jovanović, D. Gašević, C. Torniai, S. Batemand, and M. 
Hatala, “The Social Semantic Web in intelligent learning 
environments: state of the art and future challenges,” 
Interactive Learning Environments, vol. 17, iss. 4, 2009,  pp. 
273-309. 
[19] Webanketa, "Free creation of questionnaires,surveys, tests 
and polls!", http://webanketa.com/ 03.02.2012. 
[20] DBpedia.org, 
"About 
DBpedia", http://wiki.dbpedia.org/About 13.04.2012. 
[21] F. Orlandi and A. Passant, “Modelling provenance of 
DBpedia resources using Wikipedia contributions,” Web 
Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide 
Web, vol. 9, iss. 2, 2011, pp. 149-164. 
[22] Behance, Inc., "D-Fashion", http://www.behance.net/gallery/ 
D-Fashion/149987 16.04.2012. 
 
 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

