A Model for Recommending Specialization Courses 
Based on the Professional Profile of Candidates 
 
Antônio Eduardo Rodrigues de Souza 
Electrical Engineering Post-graduation Program 
Universidade Presbiteriana Mackenzie, UPM 
São Paulo, Brazil 
e-mail: aersouza@gmail.com 
Sandra Maria Dotto Stump 
Electrical Engineering Post-graduation Program 
Universidade Presbiteriana Mackenzie, UPM 
São Paulo, Brazil 
e-mail: sstump@mackenzie.br
 
 
Abstract— The paper studies the candidates’ professional 
profile on choosing a specialization course. A methodology 
based on the processes Knowledge Discovery in Databases 
(KDD) and CRoss-Industry Standard Process for Data Mining 
(CRISP-DM) 
is 
applied, 
and 
proposed 
a 
course 
recommendation model, using a technique of data mining 
based on decision trees for the discovery of relevant knowledge 
from database,  which will identify the most suitable course to 
a candidate's profile. In this study, it is expected to be detected 
the specialization courses which best suits each candidate 
profile, giving support to academic institution to satisfy 
candidates needs and reduce the number of dropouts or 
changes. 
Keywords-recommender systems; data mining; data filtering 
techniques; academic counselling 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The last decade of the XX century was characterized by 
intense economic globalization, by the need for continuous 
and quick modernization of production systems, and by the 
extreme competitiveness in goods and services markets, 
requiring a better qualification of manpower. However, in 
the field of education there was the offer of courses strictly 
academic, which motivated the need of a more specific 
qualification for the exercise of certain professions, starting 
to be required master's degrees or doctorates, creating a 
growing demand by professionals with highly specialized 
skills profile and not focused on pure research. Such 
professionals could not be certainly formed as byproducts of 
courses targeted to the academic and scientific qualifications, 
but with a technical and scientific nature [1]. 
The need, by the companies, of increasingly well 
qualified professionals to meet the demands required, brings 
consequences as the imposition of education, specific 
training and qualifications. Moreover, the search for better 
job opportunities and salaries, have generated a strong 
influence on the demand for training programs. The 
professional has transited, increasingly, between the 
profession and the acquisition of knowledge. It is known that 
an undergraduate degree cannot over assure a successful 
career. Currently, professionals are obliged to seek more and 
more knowledge to achieve specific abilities and skills, 
meeting the existing shortage in the labor market. As the 
labor market dynamics change quickly, there is a demand for 
even more specialized professionals. 
Specialization courses are sought after by professional 
options as a way to acquire and update knowledge [2]. 
Offered by institutions in various areas, targeted audiences 
with specific interests or general, diversification of courses 
or 
the 
lack 
of 
objective 
information, 
hinder 
the 
understanding of the purpose, the necessary prerequisites and 
other important factors in the decision to be made. Thus, a 
poorly chosen option may incur dissatisfaction, frustration 
and expectations need to change or even chosen option or 
even cancellation of the course. 
In Brazil, the specialization is a post-graduation course. 
From Latin, lato sensu is an expression whose meaning is 
"broad sense." 
Designed to be attended by persons performing other 
activities simultaneously, specialization consists of a course 
of professional qualification with a minimum duration of 360 
hours. These courses are not evaluated by the Ministry of 
Education (MEC) and the Coordination of Improvement of 
Higher Education Personnel (CAPES), but have significant 
value to the labor market, especially those courses offered by 
renowned institutions [3]. 
It is considered that the topic is up to date and relevant to 
Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) that offer specialized 
courses, and presenting various types of courses, in order to 
give opportunity to continue the training of the candidate. It 
also shows the IES, the importance of offering specialized 
courses that are aligned both to the skills of the educational 
institution, as the interests of training and retraining of 
skilled manpower for the labor market. 
In this context, concerns about the quality of information 
provided to prospective academic specialization courses at 
university, is an important aspect that should be considered 
and, moreover, contribute to the proper choice to meet the 
needs and profile. 
The study becomes relevant since options of courses are 
offered to meet the expectations of candidates. 
This paper is organized as follows: the first section 
presents the problem that is being studied. The background is 
presented in Section 2. Section 3 presents the proposed 
model. 
155
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
Figure 2. KDD process steps [5]. 
 
Figure 1. CRISP-DM process steps [4]. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
Advances in science and technology have caused major 
changes 
in 
the 
global 
job 
market, 
making 
many 
professionals, in different areas, hoping to stay in or re-
entering the job market, look for continuing education 
through specialization courses. 
Nowadays, the new needs of qualified professionals have 
shown that the percentage of courses offered has increased to 
meet market demands. It also shows that quality is searched 
in the offered courses, which are mainly targeted at preparing 
more qualified professionals for the job market. 
The present study proposes, from historical information 
of candidates for specialization courses at a private 
university in the city of São Paulo, to analyze and define 
behaviour profiles. The research is delimited to candidates 
who sought specialization courses during the last two 
semesters. 
The database used on this study will serve as a source for 
data mining, from which will be extracted, in an accurate 
manner, information that will make courses suggestions for a 
future candidate. Thus, the objective is to develop a model 
based on candidate profiles, using artificial intelligence, 
filtering techniques and data mining, to customize offers of 
specialization courses. To achieve the objective of this 
research is intended to perform the following steps: a) 
Describe by means of literature the main techniques used in 
Recommender Systems and Data Mining; b) Show how Data 
Mining can help to identify knowledge in large data 
volumes; c) Produce an output interface for displaying 
candidates’ data profiles and courses recommendations. 
For the evaluation of recommendation model, tests will 
be performed with the database of candidates provided by 
the university. These candidates answered a questionnaire 
about goals and interests with respect to the desired course, 
the time in which they were enrolled. 
III. 
MODELING THE PROFESSIONAL PROFILE OF 
CANDIDATES 
Will be held, initially, a documentary research, through a 
literature review, which aims to know the state of the art 
recommender systems, evaluate the filtering techniques and 
data mining available, and adapt them to the proposed 
model. 
The work will be developed from the data collection of 
an exploratory, qualitative approach between those who were 
candidates for specialization courses at a private university, 
located in the city of São Paulo, between the years 2006 and 
2011. 
The university in study conducts semiannual selection of 
candidates for specialization courses. An amount of 
approximately three thousand candidates takes part of the 
process each term. The selection process consists of an 
electronic form, available on the website of the university, 
with questions which, besides personal information, allows 
depth 
knowledge 
of 
academic 
courses, 
objective, 
expectations regarding the content and reasons for choosing 
the course, for example, professional development, job 
promotion, etc. The responses of each candidate are recorded 
in Oracle database. With such information, the coordinator of 
each course verifies the information stored for each 
candidate and evaluates whether the chosen course is really 
best suited to the profile posted. Only at the time of 
publication of the results of the successful candidates who 
have knowledge of the course where it will be registered, 
since the electronic form allows the applicant to select three 
course options. Classes are formed with maximum students 
per classroom. If they are not offered various classes of the 
same course, the successful candidate will be relocated to 
one of the options selected by him, where there is still vague. 
For the identification of knowledge it will be studied 
CRISP-DM [4], shown in Figure 1, and the KDD process 
[5], shown in Figure 2. Will be considered an approach 
based on collaboration, to best suit and adhere the needs of 
candidates from different areas. 
A. CRISP-DM Process Steps 
The first step comprehends the business understanding. 
All the understanding of the requirements of the candidate is 
elicited during this step during meetings with the responsible 
for the process of selections of candidates. The next step 
comprehends the data understanding, which involves 
exploratory analysis on the received data. After data 
comprehension, the next step is the data modelling, which 
means to create models based on algorithms, to find the 
156
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

technique with greater effectiveness. Once the data 
modelling is finished, performance and gain with the 
proposed model are evaluated. The last step, installation, 
comprehends implementation of business rules validated by 
the pedagogical coordinator of each course in the database to 
be worked. 
B. KDD Process Steps 
First there will be the understanding and definition of a 
domain. Then will be selected within the domain established, 
the data on which the discovery is performed. Among the 
acquired data will be selected for analysis the factors that can 
be identified as potential influencers in choosing a course, 
such as interests and professional goals: Applicants may 
direct the choice in their training or opt for a more 
diversified; chance continuity of learning: candidates may 
tend to choose courses that enable continuous learning, 
knowledge and difficulty: where the complexity of the 
content and the selection criteria may influence the choice; 
Lack of information: applicants may not be aware of the 
content and target audience of the course; Location: a 
campus closest to the address of residence or work can 
contribute positively or negatively to choice. Besides these 
factors, the information will be considered professional 
profiles of the candidates listed on the registration form. The 
professional profile is a set of characteristics that need to be 
found in a candidate so that it can occupy a certain position, 
and can be divided into technical knowledge (education, 
training area, languages, work experience, computer) and 
behavioural 
profile 
(communication, 
interpersonal 
relationships, judgment, attitude, ethics) [6]. Due to the 
subjectivity and difficulty encountered in measuring values 
that express the behavioural profile will be considered in this 
work only the technical knowledge, as shown in the table 
below: 
 
TABLE 1. ALL VARIABLES (ATTRIBUTES) USED ON THE STUDY 
Variable 
Description 
Example 
Graduation 
Graduation course 
name 
Administration, Architecture 
and Urban Planning, Computer 
Science 
Degree 
Received degree 
title 
Bachelor, technologist, doctor 
Post-
graduation 
Post-graduation 
course name 
Administration, Architecture 
and Urban Planning, Computer 
Science 
Professional 
activity 
Activity name 
Systems Analyst, Support 
Analyst, Architect, Controller, 
Journalist, Secretary 
Position 
Position name 
Advisor, Analyst, Assistant 
Supervisor, Coordinator, 
Manager 
Experience 
(years) 
Experience time on 
the position 
Less than 1 year, 1 to 3 years, 
over 3 years 
English 
idiom 
Knowledge level of 
English language 
None, basic, intermediate, 
advanced, fluent 
 
As a way of preparing for the next step, these data must 
be cleaned and processed. This cleanup includes removing 
noises, which are data errors or outliers, the adequacy of 
values that are out of context, the inclusion of missing 
values, selection and summary of variables to be used (see 
Table 2 and Table 3). Missing values, that is the absence of 
information contained in the records, are entered using a 
global constant, such as the average of each attribute or the 
average of all the variables of the same class. In case of 
nominal attributes a dominant subset will be used, whereas 
in case of non-nominal attributes will be used the mode of 
each class, which is the value which most frequently occurs 
in a data set. It will be selected the variables and eliminated 
some unnecessary variables after checking the information 
gain of each variable. Courses no longer offered by the 
university, and courses whose identification codes have 
changed, will be replaced by courses or equivalent codes in 
addition to eliminating redundant data, generating greater 
reliability. 
 
TABLE 2. DATA CLEANSING SAMPLE 
Received data 
Cleaned and processed data 
AdministraA?A?o 
Administração 
AutA?nomo 
Autônomo 
CiA?ncias 
Ciências 
SupervisA?o 
Supervisão 
TecnA?logo 
Tecnólogo 
 
TABLE 3. DATA TRANSFORMATION SAMPLE 
Professional activities 
(Non transformed data) 
Professional activities 
(Transformed data) 
ADM, administrador de empresas, 
administração, administrador de empresas, 
administradora de empresas 
Administração de 
Empresas 
Adm./Financeiro, administrativo e 
financeiro, administrativo financeiro 
Administração e 
Finanças 
Advogada, advogado, advogada autônoma, 
advogado júnior, jurídico, jurídica, jurista 
Advocacia 
Analista de sistemas junior, analista de 
sistema, analista de sistemas informática, 
analista de sistemas, analista sistema, 
analista sistemas 
Análise de Sistemas 
 
Still in this step, it will be defined the techniques and 
data mining algorithms to be used, the domain selected to be 
then processed according to the technical characteristics of 
the algorithms. After this step, the data will be submitted to 
data mining itself. 
To ensure a satisfactory number of elements of analysis 
it will be evaluated data from several previous semesters. 
The data will be received in Microsoft Excel spreadsheets, 
because of its easiness of being transformed into one of the 
formats accepted by the tool used in this step. 
This stage also includes the use of classification rules. 
The classification will be used to identify candidate profiles, 
157
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
Figure 3. Output report prototype. 
 
 
which also represent the choice of courses. The main mining 
technique and algorithm used in this step are: Decision Tree 
- hierarchical data, based on stages of decision (nodes) and 
the separation of classes and subsets. Major current 
algorithms: CART, CHAID, C5.0. For the proposal, it is 
intended to use association rules to classify data due to its 
better accuracy in recommending courses [7]. 
Will take part of the model the 56 courses offered semi-
annually by the university, but the main focus of the 
analysis will be the courses that generate a greater number 
of dropouts or substitutions, and therefore, in addition to 
modification of various administrative procedures, can be 
the cause for discouragement, frustration and dissatisfaction 
from candidates. 
For the information related to occupational profiles can 
be tested, it will be used professional profiles among exact, 
humanities 
and 
social 
areas, 
such 
as 
Business 
Administrator, 
Controller, 
Tax 
Attorney, 
Educator, 
Financial Analyst, Journalist, Human Resources Analyst, 
Psychologist, Analyst Systems, Advertising, Support 
Analyst, Secretary. 
With the prepared database, it will be held the mining 
and machine learning steps. The tool that will be used is 
WEKA (Waikato Environment for Knowledge Analysis), 
developed by the University of Waikato, New Zealand. This 
tool was chosen because of its public domain, have been 
developed in the Java language, and working with various 
data mining techniques such as association rules, clustering, 
classification, and different algorithms. 
As a result generated, the knowledge gained will be 
examined by a specialist, such as the educational 
coordinator of each course, to improve understanding of the 
knowledge discovered by the mining algorithm. If mining 
results are not satisfactory, several process steps can be 
carried back. 
The aim is to analyze comparatively the number of 
changes in previous years and those requested by 
implementing them in the proposed model. In sequence will 
be evaluated, by the number of candidates who changed 
course or dropout, the assertiveness of the recommendation 
by the proposed model, in comparison to data collected by 
the enrolment system. 
The last phase includes the development of an online 
report, for easy viewing of results, where it intends to use 
the Java language to implement it, due to its high 
performance in a web environment. This information will 
allow the university staff to identify which professional 
profiles are best suited to specific courses, considering, also, 
possible relocations. 
Based on different candidates’ profile, Figure 3 shows 
part of the report that will be used to support the courses 
coordinators on course recommendation. It also shows which 
courses best suits to each candidate profile, according to the 
discovered model.  
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
This ongoing study has introduced another approach for 
recommending courses based on candidates’ profile, taking 
into consideration the career that a candidate is following. 
The use of professional profiles for recommending 
specialization courses can provide a better qualitative 
recommendation, matching the professional career and 
academic objectives. 
This paper reports, based on groups of courses that have 
a high number of dropouts or changes, that it is possible to 
extract relevant knowledge from the professional data of 
applicants for specialization courses in any educational 
institution, and use this knowledge for better planning of 
course offerings and classes’ sizes, as well as provide 
support to academic advising. 
With the contribution of artificial intelligence by means 
of algorithms and techniques of data mining, the studies 
developed on this work provided a better understanding of 
the techniques and concepts used in knowledge discovery, 
relevant to a selection process of candidates for specialized 
courses. With the knowledge gained was possible to develop 
a model of professional activities, with their specialization 
courses recommended by the applied algorithm. This model 
allowed us to identify the most relevant courses to 
professional profiles participants in the selection process. 
The suggested model can help to define the table of 
courses, leading the university to rethink whether a 
particular course deserves to be offered in subsequent 
semesters. Still, the presented result, besides providing 
support to the coordinators of courses in the selection of 
candidates, also serves to alert the institution about the lack 
of understanding, from candidate point of view, about the 
contents presented by the offered course, so that the 
university could take action to improve disclosure of their 
courses. 
The generated model can support decision-making of 
any academic institution which intends to improve their 
academic counselling and reduce the number of students 
dissatisfied with the course, avoiding dropouts or course 
changes. 
 
158
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors of this paper thanks Mackenzie Research 
Funding (MackPesquisa) for sponsoring this research. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. C. Giuliani, A. F. N. Netto, M. C. Ponchio, M. S. Neto, 
and C. M. Batista, “MBAs, mestrados acadêmicos, mestrados 
profissionais 
e 
doutorados 
em 
administração: 
suas 
contribuições para o ensino e a pesquisa,” Revista de 
Administração da UNIMEP, vol. 5, Jan. 2007, pp. 52-73. 
[2] S. M. C. Silva, “A pós-graduação no contexto atual: uma 
exigência 
do 
mercado 
de 
trabalho,” 
http://artigos.netsaber.com.br/resumo_artigo_23229/artigo_so
bre_a_pos-
graduacao_no_contexto_atual:_uma_exigencia_do_mercado_
de_trabalho, [retrieved: 7 February, 2013]. 
[3] Brasil, Diário Oficial da União, Resolução CNE/CEN 1/2001,  
Apr. 9, 2001. 
[4] P. Chapman et al., “CRISP-DM 1.0 - Step-by-step data 
mining guide,” The CRISP-DM Consortium, 2000. 
[5] U. M. Fayyad, G. Piatetsky-Shapiro, P. Smyth, and R. 
Uthurusamy, “From data mining to knowledge discovery: an 
overview,” AAAI Press, 1996, pp. 1-34. 
[6] S. A. Araújo, D. Santos, and M. A. Bonaldo, “Redes neurais 
artificiais aplicadas em análise de perfis profissionais,” Proc. 
CBComp, Oct. 2004, pp. 280-284. 
[7]  N. Bendakir and E. Aïmeur. “Using association rules for 
course recommendation,” Proc. AAAI 
Workshop on 
Educational Data Mining, Jul. 2006. 
159
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

