The Impact of SAP on the Utilisation of Business Process Management (BPM)
Maturity Models in ERP projects
Markus Grube
University of Gloucestershire
Hamburg, Germany
email: markus.grube@voquz.com
Martin Wynn
The Business School
University of Gloucestershire
Cheltenham, UK
email: mwynn@glos.ac.uk
Abstract – The SAP Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP)
system is a leading software solution for corporate business
functions and processes. Business Process Management (BPM)
is a management approach designed to create and manage
organizations’
business
processes.
Both
promise
an
improvement of business processes in companies and can be
used together in organizations. In conjunction with the SAP
ERP system and BPM approach, BPM maturity models can be
used as diagnostic tools that allow an organization to assess
and monitor the maturity of its business processes. This
research analyses the complex relationships between SAP,
BPM and BPM maturity models. The aim is to investigate and
analyse the interaction between the use of the SAP ERP
software package and the deployment of BPM maturity
models. The research adopts a multiple case study approach,
based on semi-structured expert interviews, and provides an
in-depth insight into how a small number of organizations use
SAP, BPM and BPM maturity models.
Keywords – SAP; ERP; BPM; Business Process Management;
Maturity Models; BPM Maturity Models.
I.
INTRODUCTION
SAP
(Systeme,
Anwendungen
und
Produkte)
is a
German company created in 1972 and the world's largest
provider of enterprise software that, in 2017, had more than
345,000 customers in over 190 countries [1]. The SAP ERP
package provides software solutions for the full range of
business functions in companies – from the processing of a
leave
request
for
employees
in
the
human
resource
management function, to materials requirements planning in
production and support for the full sales order processing
cycle and commodity management [2]. SAP ERP is usually
installed on a database platform that handles several different
business functions within their respective modules, such as
manufacturing, sales, finance and human resources. The
implementation of an ERP system can often be seen as a
form of technology innovation, and contributes to the
technology maturity of a company. The capabilities of a
company can often be improved by the implementation of an
ERP system [3].
BPM is an approach to defining and operating company
business processes, and can be used without any information
technology (IT) systems or infrastructure [4]. In practice,
companies often use IT software tools to administer the BPM
of an organisation. Additionally, software such as SAP ERP
can assist a company in standardizing and automating
processes to make them as efficient as possible [5]. The basic
idea of BPM is to think in terms of processes and to deal
with the questions: “who does what, when, how and
whereby?” [5]. BPM will usually start with a process
analysis of the actual business processes [6] by the
application of specific methods, techniques and tools [7].
A maturity model is described by Saco [8] as a diagnostic
tool for an organization, which provides a framework to test,
analyse and improve business quality [9]. For example, a
maturity model analyses the quality of processes and
classifies them as being at different levels of maturity. There
are different maturity models for specific purposes – for
example,
for
software
development,
for
product
manufacturing or for the business process management of a
company [10] [11]. This latter type of maturity model offers
a step-by-step guide, with goals and best practices, to support
a more advanced use of BPM [12].
Figure 1 illustrates the various concepts that are shared
by the SAP ERP system, BPM and BPM maturity models.
On the one hand, the SAP ERP system includes its own
business process models; on the other hand, BPM has the
objective of improving business processes in an organisation;
both have the same aim of optimizing an organisation’s
processes.
Figure 1. SAP ERP, BPM and BPM maturity models: overview
Then, there are BPM maturity models which have diagnostic
tools
to
measure
the
effectiveness
of
processes
in
organisations. These tools can be used alongside SAP ERP
and BPM. Van Looy [13] states that most BPM maturity
models favour the use of an IT system (such as SAP ERP) to
improve the BPM approach
of an organisation [14].
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Generally, a BPM maturity model analyses, through a set of
tools and methods, the growth of BPM in an organisation.
This study considers the relationship of these concepts and
how these are used in practice.
Following this introductory section, Section 2 discusses
relevant literature and puts forward three research questions.
In Section 3, the research methodology is outlined, and this
is followed in Section 4 by a summary of findings, in which
the three research questions are addressed. Section 5 presents
a further analysis of findings leading to the development of a
number of principles to support the use of BPM maturity
models within an SAP systems environment. Finally, in
Section 6, the main themes of the paper are drawn together to
provide overall conclusions regarding the research project.
II.
LITERATURE REVIEW
BPM and process integration have been discussed for
over 25 years [15], but existing literature is largely confined
to general findings about the relationship between IT and the
use of business processes, or about the relationship between
ERP systems and business processes. For example, vom
Brocke et al. [16] explain that the selection, acceptance and
use of IT are a fundamental part of BPM. Business and IT
need to connect with each other in order to realize better
business value. Neubauer [17] also notes that ERP systems
generally influence a company’s business processes.
Saco [8] explains that a maturity model is a diagnostic
tool for an organisation to improve its processes. This
measuring tool can be used in conjunction with SAP ERP
and BPM. Most authors view the use of an ERP system as a
means of integrating business processes within one system
which is used company-wide [17]. For example, an ERP
system can hold all documents in relation to an invoice
number or purchase order, and can show the document flow
or action log for data changes that directly belong to a
business transaction. Through the use of ERP systems,
companies are expected to reduce costs by improving
efficiencies and widening the availability of accurate and up
to date business information, thereby enhancing overall
company performance [18]. Antonucci et al. [19] indicate
that ERP systems produce the data and information that are
the basis for business decisions and strategies.
Overall the extant literature demonstrates that an IT
application like SAP ERP can enable higher process maturity
[13]. But these kinds of studies focus more on the general
company level and IT systems as a whole, and do not
address the question of which business process maturity
model could be used if SAP is the central IT business system
in the company. Van Looy et al. [20] suggest that further
research could investigate the question of whether maturity
models could be selected on the basis of IT business system
alignment, or investigate the relationship between BPM
maturity models and IT business systems on strategic,
tactical and operational levels. The SAP company has its
own BPM maturity model, this being a specific tool to model
the business processes that underpin the design of the SAP
package. One aim of this research is to explore this SAP
maturity model in more detail, and assess its relationship
with the SAP ERP software system.
There is nothing in the existing literature that addresses
the question of whether SAP impacts on the utilisation of
BPM maturity models. The best analogy is provided by Van
Looy [13] regarding IT deployment for business process
maturity. She outlines in her conclusion that most maturity
models recommend IT to improve process modelling and
optimization. She emphasises that, in general, IT usage
enables higher process maturity. This research explores the
dependencies between the use of SAP and BPM maturity
models and addresses the following research questions
(RQs):
RQ1. How are BPM maturity models used in the
planning and implementation of ERP software projects?
RQ2. How does SAP impact upon the use of specific
maturity models?
RQ3. To what extent (and how) is it possible to develop a
comprehensive mapping of different maturity models to the
SAP
software
system,
indicating
the
implications
for
maturity model utilisation?
III.
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
Figure 2 presents the main elements of the research
methodology used in this project, selected from a body of
methods that can be used to gather and process data [21]
[22].
Figure 2. Research Methodology Layers [21] [22]
The research philosophy adopted here is post-positivist,
based on the perspectives of Ryan [23] and Guba [24]. The
goal of post-positivist research is the generation of “new
knowledge that other people can learn from and even base
decisions on” [25], which is relevant to this field of study
where new maturity models in different specialized fields are
generated with some regularity [26]. The post-positivist
position supports the understanding that the world is much
more complex than when the project was embarked upon,
and that it is quite possible that the inclusion of other experts
in the interview process would have led to different results.
This research starts with a case study on organisations which
use BPM maturity models, and concludes with a generalised
theory regarding the behaviour in practice of different BPM
maturity models in SAP ERP projects. As described by
Thomas [27], this exploration uses the abductive approach in
the form of a case study to collect facts from the examined
cases, followed by a judgment about the best explanation of
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

these facts. For this purpose, four different BPM maturity
models are studied as separate cases with interviews relating
to each case, before a generalised output is generated.
As an explanatory study [28], this research investigates
the relationship between SAP and BPM maturity models in
ERP projects. With a multiple case study approach, and
based on semi-structured expert interviews, a small number
of organisations are examined in depth. In line with the use
of documentation of BPM maturity models, a qualitative
research approach is pursued. According to Saunders et al.
[22], the use of a case study strategy in combination with
secondary data collection techniques allows a form of
triangulation to confirm the obtained data from the case
study. The aim of this work is to evaluate, in multiple cases
with expert interviews, whether SAP can affect BPM
maturity models.
Through the use of semi-structured interviews with
experts in their field, and the analysis of secondary literature
such as user manuals of BPM maturity models, this research
uses mixed-methods to address the research questions,
thereby providing greater depth in a complex environment
[29]. The RQs were developed into a range of secondary
questions for the first semi-structured expert interviews. The
time horizon for this research is a cross-sectional snapshot
study [22]. The research analyses the current SAP impact on
BPM maturity models in practice, and evaluates the picture
at the time of the study [30].
The interviewees were selected with the objective of
gleaning the greatest amount of expert knowledge possible
from practice. The semi-structured interviews allowed a
degree of flexibility that engendered an understanding and
explanation of the experts’ opinions regarding important
issues, events and patterns in the complex interaction of SAP
and BPM maturity models in ERP projects [31]. The
software tool MAXQDA was used for the qualitative data
analysis and comparison of the interviews, and in arranging,
organising and analysing all transcribed interviews, and also
for analysing secondary literature sources. This allowed a
special type of methodological triangulation through the use
of more than one method to collect and analyse the data. A
thematic analysis was used for the identification of topics.
For this purpose, statements from the interviews were coded
in order to recognize and interpret connections [31].
The
amount and intensity with which a subject is mentioned and
treated generally reflects the importance of the subject [32].
IV.
FINDINGS
The search for potential interview partners was a difficult
process and resulted in many rejections. The search utilised
existing
networks
of
business
and
personal
contacts,
resulting in 64 people in Germany, Austria and Switzerland
being identified as potential experts, who were then invited
for an interview. From this initial pool of 64 people, eleven
people confirmed that they were willing to be interviewed
for this research project. Most refusals were based on the fact
that the experts did not have the necessary practical
experience
of
the
use
of
a
BPM
maturity
model.
Nevertheless, three of the experts interviewed are currently
using no BPM maturity model, but perform some form of
quality process assessment already at their company, or
would like to apply a BPM maturity model in the future.
Baker and Edwards [33] explain that, within qualitative
research, the attainment of a sufficient quantity of interviews
cannot be set at a certain number. It is crucial to achieve
saturation and try to gain new knowledge through additional
interviews. In this research, there appeared to be a degree of
saturation with the tenth interview, as no new knowledge
surfaced.
The interviews revealed that the experts were familiar
with four different BPM maturity models. These four models
were already being used by the experts, and were described
in more detail within the interviews. Each of these BPM
maturity models was considered as a separate case. The
accompanying documentation of the models was also
analysed.
The models considered were:
-The
eden
maturity
model.
This
model
was
developed by a working party called “Business
Process Excellence” and has been updated and
presented by the “BPM maturity model eden e.V.
Association” [34] since 2009.
- Capability Maturity Model Integration (CMMI).
CMMI was originally developed by the Carnegie
Mellon
University
more
than
20
years
ago.
Nowadays,
the
model
is
maintained
and
administered by the CMMI Institute [35].
-The Business Process Maturity Model (BPMM).
This
model
was
developed
by
the
Object
Management Group (OMG). Version 1.0 of the
maturity model was released in June 2008 [36].
-The
SAP
maturity
model.
This
model
was
developed directly by the SAP company. It was
derived from the Process Enterprise Maturity Model
(PEMM) developed by Michael Hammer and the
CMMI [37].
Each expert was able to provide some key points for the
implementation of BPM maturity models, when an SAP ERP
system is used as the central IT system. The statements of the
interviewees and the results of the documentation analysis
were considered for each individual case, and then all
statements were considered and reviewed as a whole. From
this, generalised answers to the three research questions were
developed.
A)
RQ1: How are BPM maturity models used in the
planning
and
implementation
of
ERP
software
projects?
In general, there are almost no prerequisites for the use of
BPM maturity models. The BPM approach and BPM
maturity models are usually introduced after the introduction
of an ERP system. Only two experts reported an example
when BPM maturity models were established before the
BPM approach was introduced in the company. All experts
reported that a typical approach is that an ERP system
already exists, and only afterwards is a BPM approach and
the application of a BPM maturity model required. An
existing ERP system usually has to adapt to the requirements
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

arising from the BPM environment and the application of a
BPM maturity model.
All sources strongly indicate that the decision to
implement a BPM maturity model should be carried out by
the senior management with a top-down approach. A
company gets the necessary support only if the management
recommends the use of BPM maturity models. A bottom-up
approach is also conceivable but much more difficult to
accomplish
successfully.
The
same
applies
to
the
introduction and use of ERP systems. For many companies,
the use of a certain ERP system is a strategic decision taken
by senior management. According to the experts, the ERP
system is then often the most important and most valuable
system within the company.
Both the practical experience of the interviewees, as well
as the documentation, show that usually an ERP system
already exists in a company before a BPM approach is
adopted. In most cases, a BPM maturity model is only
introduced once the practice of BPM is already established
within the company. For most companies, the application of
a BPM maturity model is only an add-on that does not have
to be applied, and is the final step for the use of BPM in the
organisation.
B)
RQ2: How does SAP impact upon the use of specific
maturity models?
For most companies, the use of SAP is a strategic
decision. Senior management expect a stable and long term
partnership if they use the SAP ERP system, which
inevitably becomes the core IT system within the company.
Some experts suggested that only a very few companies in
their experience do not use SAP. There are industries where
no one would consider not using SAP, reported one expert,
because SAP is the market leader and the de facto standard.
The SAP system is usually implemented company-wide,
and therefore has many touch points within a company.
Theoretically, process definition can be done without any
kind of IT system, but at a certain point in its growth, a
company becomes of a size that requires an IT system for its
effective operation and support. The SAP system provides
some standard processes and some companies use these
default SAP processes. A good maturity model should also
draw attention to such standard processes, but not all BPM
maturity models analyse processes which are provided by a
standard system. Every company should critically question
how much of a standard process is appropriate and
necessary, in order to avoid a disproportionate amount of
effort to achieve full module deployment and operation.
Some companies do not have the goal of achieving the
highest possible maturity level. If the highest maturity level
can only be achieved by adapting the SAP system, then a
company must recognize that this can lead to a larger
adaptation requirement in the future, as successive upgrades
of the SAP product are released. A modified standard system
means that the changed processes have to be fully tested and
analysed every time the SAP system is changed, even if it is
a standard system update or a simple system enhancement.
There are some other impacts and constraints that arise
when an SAP ERP system is used within a BPM maturity
model. The SAP system may not have the capability to
display processes as a process map and how they are
currently running within the SAP system. The continuous
development
of
SAP
functionalities,
and
the
further
development of a BPM approach in the company, create the
risk that both will be further developed independently. The
risk is that two independent process models will be
developed for the same set of processes. Some experts
pointed out that the application of SAP does not generally
create an improved maturity level. SAP can be used without
any business process orientation. If a process orientation is
wanted,
then
a
company
must
use
its
SAP
system
accordingly. Some experts reported that the intensive use of
the SAP system will most likely lead to a higher maturity
level if the system adheres to standard specifications and its
underpinning process model.
A significant advantage when using the SAP system is
that it has the functionality to determine key performance
indicators (KPIs) for purposes of control and monitoring of
business performance. Many SAP
transactions already
contain data like throughput times that can be used as KPIs
for a more precise process analysis. These indicators can be
determined directly from the financial transactions stored in
the ERP database.
C)
RQ 3: To what extent (and how) is it possible to
develop a comprehensive mapping of different maturity
models to the SAP software system, indicating the
implications for maturity model utilisation?
All experts and available documentation suggested that
the BPM models have no limitations and can be used in all
companies. A link between the SAP modules used and the
application of specific BPM maturity models was not
evidenced by the experts’ experiences. No correlation could
be found which shows that certain SAP modules work more
effectively with the investigated BPM maturity models.
However, the four BPM models considered here demonstrate
that quite different types of maturity model exist. Every
company has to be clear regarding what it wants to achieve
through the use of a maturity model and what is important,
and what is not. For example, the eden maturity model with
pre-defined questions behaves quite differently from the SAP
maturity model which tries to establish as many standard
SAP processes as possible. All of the four investigated
maturity models can be used within an SAP environment,
but there exist differences, and a company needs to know
whether the model aligns with the company's goals, and if
the
analysis
provided
by
the
model
matches
their
perceptions. The models can be broadly divided into three
different categories:

Fixed models
The eden model belongs to this category, and contains a
questionnaire that is already fixed and does not require any
adjustments to specific industry issues or interview partners.
All questions are always the same. The application is
relatively simple, because anyone who applies the model
answers only these questionnaires.
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management


Individual models
The application of the CMMI or BPMM models is
considerably more complex. Both are similar and require
much more effort. The user has to think about what is
important and what is not important for an organisation. For
this
purpose,
individual
topics
and
possible
process
objectives are defined by the models as a framework, and a
user has to decide what he wants to use and how. The
guidelines of the model should not be viewed as a pure best
practice procedure, but must be adapted accordingly to
individual circumstances.

Special interest models
The SAP maturity model is also based on the CMMI
model, but has significant differences and therefore can be
classified in a third category. In contrast to the other models,
the focus of this model is the use of best practices or standard
SAP processes which originate from the SAP system. Within
the maturity models examined here, it is the only one that
deals with SAP-specific issues and characteristics, because
other models view IT much more generally.
V.
ANALYSIS
Many BPM maturity models currently consider only a
small range of IT applications, and do not analyse any kind
of ERP system. But in many companies SAP is the dominant
system, and for this reason a BPM maturity model should
also consider relevant dependencies. Maturity models, such
as BPMM or CMMI, are already very complex, but
companies are often interested in guidelines that are less
complex and require a smaller budget. Therefore, some
principles have been developed in this research project to
analyse the operation of the SAP ERP within a BPM
application. The goal is not to develop a more complex and
comprehensive maturity model; indeed the success of eden is
due to the fact that the model has, in contrast to other
models, less criteria and is easy to handle. The experts
explained within the interviews that many companies prefer
a checklist instead of a complex maturity model. For these
reasons, it is not necessary to develop a separate and totally
new BPM maturity model to understand and show possible
dependencies.
On the basis of the three research questions, the
following SAP specific principles have been developed to
enable company management and all relevant stakeholders to
determine and understand possible connections between an
SAP system and a BPM approach. The principles can be
employed to support the successful use of BPM maturity
models
within
an
SAP
systems
environment.
These
principles are not evident in any of the examined BPM
maturity models in such detail.

Ensure that management fully support the use of
SAP in the organisation to its full extent.
The use of SAP ERP as the central IT software system
within a company is usually a strategic decision. In this case,
the company should decide how to integrate the system with
the adopted BPM approach of the company. What does the
SAP specification imply? Does that mean that only key
figures have to be generated from the SAP system? Could
there be other systems besides the SAP system? Should a
company use as many standard SAP processes as possible?
The company must determine who decides possible solutions
or any adaptations of the SAP system. The successful
implementation of an SAP system is only possible if the
senior management are aware of and confront these issues.

Establish as many SAP ERP standard processes as
possible at the company in order to minimize the
complexity of system upgrades or enhancements.
If the company wants to use SAP, and the management
supports this, then companies should also decide whether,
and to what extent, standard SAP processes should be used.
The use of standard SAP processes reduces the time, cost,
resources and other operational constraints, and supports the
introduction of new SAP enhancement packages or release
changes. Each change makes it necessary to test customised
solutions and adjust the customer-specific programming to
the upgraded SAP system. But it is important to prioritize
when the standard SAP processes should be used, and when
it is better to use self-defined solutions. A BPM team should
not accept processes as given and must analyse which
approach is best suited to a specific company environment.
Not all standard processes are the optimal solutions for every
company, and a company should not necessarily submit to
the dictates of a rule-based IT system. But the use of
standard process solutions could also be very helpful and
reduce the budget required to operate an IT system. Regular
consideration should be given to whether IT innovations in
the system could lead to process improvements. For
example, mobile device applications can now operate in
conjunction with SAP modules, and thus such mobile
functionality is now integrated into the standard SAP system.

Ensure that all processes have been documented,
analysed and understood, even if they are pre-
defined by the SAP system.
The use of SAP standard processes does not absolve a
company from the duty to document, analyse and understand
each process. It can be the case that standard processes
which run in a single system like SAP run with an optimised
composition, and are better coordinated than other processes;
but
nevertheless,
each
process
should
be
analysed.
Unfortunately, it is not always obvious which data is being
stored and used within an SAP process. Technically, it is
currently not possible to get a fast and actual process
flowchart from an existing SAP system, and see how
customizing settings within an SAP system may change a
process flow. Therefore it is very important to understand
and analyse these SAP processes in detail. This is the only
way to avoid incorrect or error-prone process operations. A
company should know exactly how its processes are running,
and therefore a company should not be dictated to by an IT
system or by the opinion of an ERP system provider. An
analysis of the pre-defined process should enable a company
to decide whether the standard process is usable, or whether
an individual process should be developed for their specific
company environment.
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management


Establish a procedure that ensures that all interfaces
are analysed for their BPM relevance, regardless of
whether they are used between different systems or
from and to the SAP system.
Interfaces
between
different
systems
often
offer
opportunities
for
systems
optimization
and
process
improvement. Many experts recommend considering the
processes from an end-to-end perspective. They have learned
from their practical experience that, especially in the case of
system breaks and interface connections, data is often
transmitted in a format that is different to that which is
required. It is important to analyse the standard interfaces
provided by the software provider, which may not be the best
and optimal for the user organisation.

Ensure that all teams within a company, especially
the BPM team and the SAP team, contribute to the
development of the same processes and process
maps, and that only one process map exists within
the organisation.
SAP is a very powerful tool that communicates with
many different sub-modules and other systems. The early
versions of SAP had a functional structure but with the
application of BPM, the package is now more process-
oriented in design. It is important to avoid different teams
working in isolation and developing different process
configurations within a company. The BPM team should
consist of a variety of different stakeholders, to represent
different requirements and knowledge inputs.

Ensure that all necessary key figures are generated
directly from the SAP system.
SAP provides many instruments for the generation and
monitoring of KPIs and most BPM maturity models
encompass the analysis of KPIs. For many experts in this
study, the SAP system was often the leading financial system
in their company contexts. This offers many advantages for
the analysis of KPIs. Much financial information is already
stored in the SAP system, which can be used to support the
BPM approach. Some companies, when trying to implement
quick solutions or consultancy generated analysis, may turn
to creating Excel spreadsheets rather than using the “one
view of the truth” available in the SAP system. SAP provides
many predefined reports, and can also employ business
intelligence tools to provide customised reports from the
SAP database. It may take longer to determine the required
fields for an analysis within the SAP system, but for frequent
use it is much faster to retrieve the numbers directly from the
SAP system.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
One view evident in the existing literature is that no
specific IT system should determine the use of a BPM
approach,
but
should
simply
support
the
business
transactions of a company [38]. However, the practical
experience of the experts interviewed in this research
provides a different perspective. Neubauer [17] asserts that
ERP systems can influence a company’s business processes
and this is confirmed by this research as regards the SAP
ERP system. All the interviews, which involved many
practitioners, have confirmed that the SAP and BPM
concepts are closely related. Theoretically, there is often no
such link found in the documentation, but in practice the
SAP system is the leading ERP system in many companies,
and therefore there is a practical connection. An IT system
such as SAP ERP can influence a company and its processes.
In many companies, SAP is the dominant system, and a
BPM maturity model needs to accommodate this reality.
Unfortunately, many BPM maturity models currently
consider only a small range of IT applications, and do not
analyse any kind of ERP system. To this end, this research
has developed some principles, which can be used as
management guidelines for practising managers and other
relevant stakeholders. They provide practical guidance for
companies using SAP, BPM and BPM maturity models, and
can lead to an improvement in business performance to the
benefit of many stakeholders. It is evident that many
maturity models do not consider any link between an SAP
system and the BPM approach. The application of the
principles discussed here can help develop interrelations
between these topics. Further research could also examine
whether such links also exist in other ERP systems or in
other standalone software packages.
REFERENCES
[1]
SAP, “SAP: The World’s Largest Provider of Enterprise
Application
Software,”
SAP
Global
Corporate
Affairs
[retrieved:
Feb.
2017].
[Online].
Available
from:
http://www.sap.com/documents/2016/07/0a4e1b8c-7e7c-
0010-82c7-eda71af511fa.html
[2]
SAP, “ERP System | Enterprise Resource Planning | SAP,”
[retrieved:
Jan.
2018].
[Online].
Available
from:
https://www.sap.com/products/enterprise-management-
erp.html
[3]
D. E. O'Leary, “The Impact of Gartner's Maturity Curve,
Adoption Curve, Strategic Technologies on Information
Systems
Research,
with
Applications
to
Artificial
Intelligence, ERP, BPM, and RFID,” Journal of Emerging
Technologies in Accounting, vol. 6, pp. 45-66, 2009, doi:
10.2308/jeta.2009.6.1.45.
[4]
H. Tscherwitschke, “What you need to know about business
process management,” Computerwoche. from FAQ zu BPM:
Was Sie über Business-Process-Management wissen müssen.
[retrieved:
Jan.
2018].
[Online].
Available
from:
http://www.computerwoche.de/software/soa-bpm/1906638/,
2011.
[5]
B. Heilig and M. Möller, “Business Process Management
with SAP NetWeaver BPM,” Bonn: SAP PRESS, 2014.
[6]
P. Busch and P. Fettke, “Business Process Management under
the Microscope: The Potential of Social Network Analysis,”
44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences
(HICSS), 2011.
[7]
T. M. Bekele and Z. Weihua, “Towards collaborative
business process management development current and future
approaches,”
IEEE
3rd
International
Conference
on
Communication Software and Networks (ICCSN), 2011.
[8]
R. M. Saco, “Maturity Models,” Industrial Management, vol.
50, no. 4, pp. 11-15, 2008.
[9]
E. Ericsson, P. Gustafsson, D. Höök, L. Marcks von
Würtemberg, and W. Rocha Flores, “Process improvement
framework
evaluation,”
International
Conference
on
Management Science and Engineering (ICMSE), 2010.
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

[10] T. De Bruin, R. Freeze, U. Kaulkarni, and M. Rosemann,
“Understanding the Main Phases of Developing a Maturity
Assessment
Model,”
16th
Australasian
Conference
on
Information Systems (ACIS), Sydney. [retrieved: Jan. 2018].
[Online]. Available from: http://eprints.qut.edu.au/25152/,
2005.
[11] C. Von Wangenheim et al., “Creating Software Process
Capability/Maturity Models,” IEEE Software, vol. 27, no.4,
pp. 92-94, 2010.
[12] A. Van Looy, “Which business process maturity model best
fits your organization?,” Business Process Trends, vol. 2013,
no. July, pp. 1-6., 2013.
[13] A. Van Looy, “Does IT matter for business process maturity?
A comparative study on business process maturity models,”
Proceedings of the 2010 international conference On the
move to meaningful internet systems, Hersonissos, Crete,
Greece, 2010.
[14] S. Aeppli, “When SAP BPM calculates,“ Computerwoche.
from Selbsttest für CW-Leser: Wann sich SAP BPM rechnet.
[retrieved: Jan. 2018]. [Online]. Available from: http://
www.computerwoche.de/2503123, Jan 2012.
[15] A. Corallo, A. Margherita, M. Scalvenzi, and D. Storelli,
“Building a process-based organization: The design roadmap
at
Superjet,”
International.
Knowledge
&
Process
Management,
vol.
17,
no.
2,
pp.
49-61,
2010,
doi:
10.1002/kpm.340,
[16] J. vom Brocke et al., “Ten principles of good business process
management,” Business Process Management Journal, vol.
20, no. 4, pp. 530-548, 2014, doi: 10.1108/bpmj-06-2013-
0074.
[17] T. Neubauer, “An empirical study about the status of business
process
management,”
Business
Process
Management
Journal,
vol.
15,
no.
2,
pp.
166
– 183,
2009,
doi:
10.1108/14637150910949434.
[18] R. Poston and S. Grabski, “Financial impacts of enterprise
resource planning implementations,” International Journal of
Accounting Information Systems, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 271-294,
2001, doi: 10.1016/S1467-0895(01)00024-0.
[19] Y. L. Antonucci, G. Corbitt, G. Stewart, and A. L. Harris,
“Enterprise Systems Education: Where Are We? Where Are
We Going?” Journal of Information Systems Education, vol.
15, no. 3, pp. 227-234, 2004.
[20] A. Van Looy, M. De Backer, G. Poels, and M. Snoeck,
“Choosing the right business process maturity model,”
Information & Management, vol. 50, no. 7, pp. 466-488,
2013, doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.im.2013.06.002.
[21] P. Cryer, “The research student's guide to success,” 3rd ed.,
Maidenhead: Open University Press, 2006.
[22] M. Saunders, P. Lewis, and A. Thornhill, “Research methods
for business students,” New York: Prentice Hall, 2009.
[23] A.
B.
Ryan,
“Post-Positivist
Approaches
to
Research
Researching and Writing your thesis: a guide for postgraduate
students,”
pp.
12-26,
MACE:
Maynooth
Adult
and
Community Education, 2006.
[24] E. G. Guba, “The Paradigm dialog,” Newbury Park, Calif.:
Sage Publications, 1990.
[25] Z. O'Leary, “The Social Science Jargon Buster,” London,
UK: SAGE Publications Ltd, 2007.
[26] J. Becker, R. Knackstedt, and J. Pöppelbuß, “Documentation
quality of maturity model developments,” vol. 123, [retrieved:
Jan. 2018]. [Online]. Available from: https://www.wi.uni-
muenster.de/sites/wi/files/public/research/arbeitsberichte/ab12
3.pdf, 2009.
[27] G. Thomas, “How to Do Your Case Study: A Guide for
Students and Researchers,” SAGE Publications, 2011.
[28] J. Collis and R. Hussey, “Business research: a practical guide
for undergraduate & postgraduate students,” Basingstoke:
Palgrave Macmillan, 2009.
[29] R. K. Yin, “Case Study Research: Design and Methods,”
SAGE Publications, 2009.
[30] R. Kumar, “Research Methodology: A Step-by-Step Guide
for Beginners,” SAGE Publications, 2011.
[31] A. Bryman, and E. Bell, “Business research methods,” Oxford
University Press, 2007.
[32] G. Guest, K. M. MacQueen, and E. E. Namey, “Applied
Thematic Analysis,” SAGE Publications, 2011.
[33] S. E. Baker, and R. Edwards, “How many qualitative
interviews is enough? Expert voices and
early career
reflections on sampling and cases in qualitative research,”
Southampton: ESRC National Centre for Research Methods,
University of Southampton, 2012, [retrieved: Jan. 2018].
[Online].
Available
from:
http://eprints.ncrm.ac.uk/2273/4/how_many_interviews.pdf
[34] BPM Maturity Model EDEN e.V., “Who develop eden,”
[retrieved:
Jan,
2018],
[Online].
Available
from:
http://www.bpm-
maturitymodel.com/eden/opencms/en/Who_do_eden/
[35] CMMI Institute, “About CMMI Institute,”
[retrieved: Jan,
2018],
[Online].
Available
from:
http://cmmiinstitute.com/about-cmmi-institute
[36] Object Management Group Inc., “BPMM 1.0,”
[retrieved:
Jan,
2018],
[Online].
Available
from:
http://www.omg.org/spec/BPMM/1.0/
[37] DSAG-Arbeitskreis BPM, “DSAG-Guide - Business Process
Management,”
vol.
112,
2013,
[retrieved:
Jan,
2018],
[Online].
Available
from:
https://www.dsag.de/fileadmin/
media/Leitfaeden/Leitfaden_Business-Process-
Management/files/assets/downloads/publication.pdf
[38] C. Li, “Improving Business - IT Alignment through Business
Architecture,” (Doctorate Doctoral Dissertations), Lawrence
Technological University, Southfield, MI, 2010, [retrieved:
Jan,
2018],
[Online].
Available
from:
https://search.proquest.com/docview/858204513
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

