Abstraction of Informed Virtual Geographic Environments for the Modeling of
Large-Scale and Complex Geographic Environments
Mehdi Mekni
Department of Computer Science
Sherbrooke University
Sherbrooke, Canada
mmekni@gmail.com
Abstract—In this paper, we propose a semantically-informed
and geometrically-accurate virtual geographic environment
method which allows to use Geographic Information System
(GIS) data to automatically built an Informed Virtual Geo-
graphic Environment (IVGE). Besides, we propose an abstrac-
tion process which uses geometric, toplogic, and semantic char-
acteristics of geographic features in order to build a knowledge-
based description of the IVGE relying on a hierarchical graph-
based structure. Our IVGE model enables the support of
large-scale and complex geographic environments modeling for
Situated Multi-Agent Systems (SMAS) in which agents are
situated and with which they interact.
Keywords-Informed Virtual Geographic Environments; En-
vironmental Abstraction; Knowledge Representation.
I. INTRODUCTION
During the last decade, the Multi-Agent Geo-Simulation
(MAGS) approach has attracted a growing interest from
researchers and practitioners to simulate phenomena in
a variety of domains including trafﬁc simulation, crowd
simulation, urban dynamics, and changes of land use and
cover, to name a few [1]. Such approaches are used to
study phenomena (i.e., car trafﬁc, mobile robots, sensor
deployment, crowd behaviors, etc.) involving a large number
of simulated actors (implemented as software agents) of
various kinds evolving in, and interacting with, an explicit
description of the geographic environment called Virtual
Geographic Environment (VGE).
A critical step towards the development of a MAGS is the
creation of a VGE, using appropriate representations of the
geographic space and of the objects contained in it, in order
to efﬁciently support the agents’ situated reasoning. Since
a geographic environment may be complex and large scale,
the creation of a VGE is difﬁcult and needs large quantities
of geometrical data originating from the environment char-
acteristics (terrain elevation, location of objects and agents,
etc.) as well as semantic information that qualiﬁes space
(building, road, park, etc.).
In order to yield realistic MAGSs, a VGE must precisely
represent the geometrical information which corresponds
to geographic features. It must also integrate several se-
mantic notions about various geographic features. To this
end, we propose to enrich the VGE data structure with
semantic information that is associated with the geographic
features. Moreover, we propose to abstract this semantically-
enriched and geometrically-precise VGE description in order
to enable large-scale and complex geographic environments
modeling.
In this paper, we present a novel approach that addresses
these challenges toward the creation of such a semantically-
enriched and geometrically-accurate VGE, which we call
an Informed VGE (IVGE). We also detail our abstraction
technique to support large-scale and complex geographic
environments. The rest of the paper is organized as follows:
Section II provides an overview of related works. Section
III introduces our IVGE computation model. Section IV
presents the proposed abstraction approach which is com-
posed of the three processes; (1) geometric abstraction; (2)
topologic abstraction; and (3) semantic abstraction. Section
V discusses the proposed abstraction approach. Finally,
Section VI concludes and presents the future perspectives
of this work.
II. RELATED WORKS
Virtual environments and spatial representations have
been used in several application domains. For example,
Thalmann et al. proposed a virtual scene for virtual hu-
mans representing a part of a city for graphic animation
purposes [3]. Donikian et al. proposed a modelling system
which is able to produce a multi-level data-base of virtual
urban environments devoted to driving simulations [15].
More recently, Shao et al. proposed a virtual environment
representing the New York City’s Pennsylvania Train Station
populated by autonomous virtual pedestrians in order to sim-
ulate the movement of people [13]. Paris et al. also proposed
a virtual environment representing a train station populated
by autonomous virtual passengers, in order to characterize
the levels of services inside exchange areas [12]. However,
since the focus of these approaches is computer animation
1
eKNOW 2011 : The Third International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-121-2

and virtual reality, the virtual environment usually plays the
role of a simple background scene in which agents mainly
deal with geometric characteristics. Indeed, the description
of the virtual environment is often limited to the geometric
level, though it should also contain topological and semantic
information for other types of applications using advanced
agent-based simulations. Current virtual environment models
do not support large-scale and complex geographic environ-
ments and fail to capture real world physical environments’
characteristics. When dealing with large-scale and complex
geographic environments, the spatial subdivision which can
be either exact or approximate produces a large number
of cells [7]. The topologic approach allows representation
of such a spatial subdivision using a graph structure and
to take advantage of efﬁcient algorithms provided by the
graph theory [12]. However, the graph size may still remain
large when dealing with geographic environments with dense
geographic features [7]. Moreover, geographic features with
curved geometries (Figure 1) produce a large number of
triangles since they are initially represented by a large
number of segments.
An environment abstraction is a process used to better
organize the information obtained at the time of spatial
subdivision of the geographic environment. The uniﬁcation
process is addressed principally in two ways: (1) a pure topo-
logical [8] uniﬁcation which associates the subdivision cells
according to their number of connexions; (2) a more con-
ceptual uniﬁcation which introduces a semantical deﬁnition
of the environment, like with the IHT-graph structure [15].
Lamarche and Donikian proposed a topologic abstraction
approach which assigns to each node of the graph resulting
from the space decomposition a topological qualiﬁcation
according to the number of connected edges given by
its arity [8]. The topologic abstraction algorithm aims to
generate an abstraction tree by merging interconnected cells
while trying to preserve topological properties [8]. When
merging several cells into a single one, the composition
of cells is stored in a graph structure in order to generate
the abstraction tree. The topologic abstraction proposed by
Lamarche and Donikian relies on the topological properties
of the cells and reduces the size of the graph that represents
the space subdivision [8]. However, the topological charac-
teristics are not sufﬁcient to abstract a virtual environment
when dealing with a large-scale and complex environment
involving areas with various qualiﬁcations (buildings, roads,
parks, sidewalks, etc.).
Not much research has been done on semantic integration
in the description of a virtual environment. The Computer
Animation and Behavioral Animation research ﬁelds provide
a few attempts to integrate the semantic information in
order to assist agents interacting with their environments.
Semantic information has been used for different purposes,
including the simulation of inhabited cities [3], computer
(a) Curved geometries.
(b) Alignment anomalies.
Figure 1: Cells resulting from curved geometries (a)
and alignment anomalies (b) [12].
animation [6], and simulation of virtual humans [4]. Farenc
has ﬁrst used the notion of Informed Environments [3].
She deﬁned informed environments as a database which
represents urban environments with semantic information
representing urban knowledge [3]. An informed environment
is thus characterized as a place where information (semantic
and geometrical) is dense, and can be structured and orga-
nized using rules [3]. Building an informed environment as
presented by Farenc consists of adding a semantic layer onto
a core corresponding to a classical scene (a set of graphical
objects) modeled using graphical software for computer
animations purposes [3].
Despite the multiple designs and implementations of
virtual environments frameworks and systems, the creation
of geometrically-accurate and semantically-enriched geo-
graphic content is still an open issue. Indeed, research has
focused almost exclusively on the geometric and topologic
characteristics of the virtual geographic environment. How-
ever, the structure of the virtual environment description,
the optimization of this description to support large-scale
and complex geographic environments, the meaning of the
geographic features contained in the environment as well as
the ways to interact with them have received less attention.
III. COMPUTATION OF IVGE
In this section, we brieﬂy present our automated approach
to compute the IVGE data using vector GIS data. This ap-
proach is based on four stages: input data selection, spatial
decomposition, maps uniﬁcation, and ﬁnally the generation
of the informed topologic graph [10].
GIS Input Data Selection: The ﬁrst step of our approach
consists of selecting the different vector data sets which are
used to build the IVGE. The input data can be organized into
two categories. First, elevation layers contain geographical
marks indicating absolute terrain elevations. Second, seman-
tic layers are used to qualify various types of data in space.
Each layer indicates the physical or virtual limits of a given
set of features with identical semantics in the geographic
environment, such as roads or buildings.
Spatial Decomposition: The second step consists of ob-
taining an exact spatial decomposition of the input data
into cells. First, an elevation map is computed using the
2
eKNOW 2011 : The Third International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-121-2

Constrained Delaunay Triangulation (CDT) technique. All
the elevation points of the layers are injected into a 2D
triangulation, the elevation being considered as an attribute
of each node. Second, a merged semantics map is computed,
corresponding to a constrained triangulation of the semantic
layers. Indeed, each segment of a semantic layer is injected
as a constraint which keeps track of the original semantic
data by using an additional attribute for each semantic layer.
Map Uniﬁcation: The third step to obtain our IVGE consists
of unifying the two maps previously obtained. This phase
can be depicted as mapping the 2D merged semantic map
onto the 2.5D elevation map in order to obtain the ﬁnal
2.5D elevated merged semantics map. First, preprocessing
is carried out on the merged semantics map in order to
preserve the elevation precision inside the uniﬁed map.
Indeed, all the points of the elevation map are injected into
the merged semantics triangulation, creating new triangles.
Then, a second process elevates the merged semantics map.
Informed Topologic Graph: The resulting uniﬁed map now
contains all the semantic information of the input layers,
along with the elevation information. This map can be used
as an Informed Topologic Graph (ITG), where each node
corresponds to the map’s triangles, and each arc corresponds
to the adjacency relations between these triangles. Then,
common graph algorithms can be applied to this topological
graph, and graph traversal algorithms in particular.
IV. ABSTRACTION OF IVGE
In this Section, we describe the abstraction process which
optimizes the description of the IVGE. Sub-section IV-A
presents the ﬁrst enhancement which is related to the
qualiﬁcation of terrain. We propose a novel approach of
information extrapolation using a one-time spatial reasoning
process based on a geometric abstraction. This approach can
be used to ﬁx input elevation errors, as well as to create
new qualitative data relative to elevation variations. These
data are stored as additional semantics bound to the graph
nodes, which can subsequently be used for spatial reasoning.
Sub-section IV-B introduces the second enhancement which
optimizes the size of the informed graph structure using
a topological abstraction process. This process aims at
building an hierarchical topologic graph structure in order
to deal with large-scale virtual geographic environments.
Sub-section IV-C details the third enhancement technique
which propagates qualitative input information from the
arcs of the graph to the nodes, which allows deduction of
the internal parts of features such as buildings or roads in
addition to their boundaries. Moreover, this technique uses
Conceptual Graphs (CG) [14], a standard formalism for the
representation of semantic information. Figure 2 illustrates
the abstracted IVGE generation model.
Figure 2: The IVGE global architecture of IVGE gen-
eration including the environment abstraction process.
A. Geometric abstraction
Spatial decomposition subdivides the environment into
convex cells. Such cells encapsulate various quantitative
geometric data which are suitable for precise computa-
tions. Since geographic environments are seldom ﬂat, it
is important to consider the terrain’s elevation and shape.
While elevation data are stored in a quantitative way which
is suitable for exact calculations, spatial reasoning often
needs to manipulate qualitative information. Indeed, when
considering a slope, it is obviously simpler and faster to
qualify it using an attribute with ordinal values such as gentle
and steep rather than using numerical values. However, when
dealing with large scale geographic environments, handling
the terrain’s elevation, including its light variations, may be a
complex task. To this end, we propose an abstraction process
that uses geometric data to extract the average terrain’s ele-
vation information from spatial areas. The objectives of this
Geometric Abstraction are threefold. First, it aims to reduce
the amount of data used to describe the environment. Sec-
ond, it helps for the detection of anomalies, deviations, and
aberrations in elevation data. Third, the geometric abstrac-
tion enhances the environment description by integrating
qualitative information characterizing the terrain shape. In
this section, we ﬁrst present the algorithm which computes
the geometric abstraction. Then, we describe two processes
which use the geometric abstraction, namely Filtering ele-
vation anomalies and Extracting elevation semantics.
3
eKNOW 2011 : The Third International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-121-2

1) Geometric Abstraction Algorithm: As presented in the
previous chapter, the geographic environment is subdivided
into cells of different shapes and sizes. The algorithm takes
advantage of the graph structure obtained from the IVGE
extraction process. A cell corresponds to a node in the
topological graph. A node represents a triangle generated
by the CDT spatial decomposition technique. A cell is
characterized by its boundaries, its neighboring cells, its
surface as well as its normal vector which is a vector
perpendicular to its plane.
Now we introduce the notion of a group, which is a col-
lection of adjacent cells. The grouping strategy is based on
a coplanarity criterion which is assessed by computing the
difference between the normal vectors of two neighboring
cells or groups of cells. Since a group is basically composed
of adjacent cells it is obvious to characterize a group by its
boundaries, its neighboring groups, its surface, as well as
its normal vector. However, the normal vector of a group
must rely on an interpretation of the normal vectors of its
composing cells. In order to compute the normal vector of
a group, we adopt the area-weight normal vector [2], which
takes into account the unit normal vectors of its composing
cells as well as their respective surfaces. Let Sc denote the
surface area of a cell c and −→
Nc be its unit normal vector. The
area-weight normal vector −→
NG of a group G is computed as
follows:
−→
NG = ∑
c∈G

areas of the surrounded and surrounding groups, and 2)
the difference between the area-weighted normal vectors
of the surrounded and surrounding groups. Second, these
isolated groups are adjusted to the average level of elevation
of the surrounding ones (Figure 3(b)). The lowest and the
highest elevations (low_elev, high_elev) of the surrounding
group (surrounding_grp) are computed. Then, the elevation
of all the vertices of the isolated group (isolated_grp)
are adjusted using the average between lowest_elevation
and highest_elevation. As a consequence, we obtain more
coherent groups in which anomalies of elevation data are
corrected.
3) Qualiﬁcation of terrain shape: The geometric ab-
straction algorithm computes quantitative geometric data
which precisely describe the terrain However, handling and
exploiting quantitative data is a complex task as the range of
values may be too large and calculations or analysis methods
may be too costly. Therefore, we propose to interpret the
quantitative data representing the terrain shape by qualifying
the terrain characteristics. Semantic labels, which are called
the shape semantics, are associated to quantitative intervals
of values that represent the terrain’s shape. In order to obtain
the shape’s semantics we propose a two-step process taking
advantage of the geometric abstraction: 1) calculation of the
inclination, or the angle α between the weighted normal
vector
→
Ng of a group grp and the horizontal plane; and 2)
assigning to each discrete value a semantic category which
qualiﬁes it. The discretisation process can be done in two
ways: a customised and an automated approach.
The customised approach requires that the user provides
a complete speciﬁcation of the discretisation to qualify the
range of slopes. Indeed, the user needs to specify a list
of inclination intervals as well as their associated semantic
labels. The algorithm iterates over the groups obtained by
the geometric abstraction. For each group grp, it calculates
the inclination value I. Then, this process checks the interval
bounds and determines in which one the inclination value
I falls. Finally, the customised discretisation extracts the
semantic shape label from the selected slope interval and
assigns it to the group grp. For example, let us consider the
following inclination interval and the associated semantic
label : {([10, 20], gentle slope),([20, 25], steep slope)}.
Such a customised speciﬁcation associates the semantic label
“gentle slope” to inclination values included in the interval
[10, 20] and the semantic label “steep slope” to inclination
values included in the interval [20, 25].
The automated approach only relies on a list of se-
mantic shape labels representing the slope qualiﬁcations.
Let N be the number of elements of this list, and T
be the total number of groups obtained by the geometric
abstraction algorithm. First, the automated discretisation
orders groups based on their terrain inclination. Then, it
iterates over the ordered groups and associates a uniform
number of groups, T/N, to each semantic label from
the semantic set, each T/N processed groups. For exam-
ple, let us consider the following semantic slope labels:
{gentle,medium,steep}, and an ordered set S of groups
denoted as follows: S = {gri|i ∈ {1,2,..,6}} with the fol-
lowing respective slope values: {5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30}.
For every 2 groups (as T = 6 and N = 3,
T
N = 2), the
automated discretisation assigns a new semantic slope label:
{gentle,gentle,medium,medium,steep,steep}.
Let us compare these two discretisation approaches. On
the one hand, the custumized discretisation process allows
one to freely specify the qualiﬁcation of the slopes, choosing
ranges that match the problem domain. However, qualiﬁca-
tions resulting from such a ﬂexible approach deeply rely
on the correctness of the interval bounds’ values. Therefore,
the customised discretisation method requires to have a good
knowledge of the terrain characteristics in order to guarantee
a valid speciﬁcation of inclination intervals. On the other
hand, the automated discretisation process is also able to
qualify slopes without the need to specify interval bounds.
This method also guarantees that all the speciﬁed semantic
attributes will be assigned to the groups without a prior
knowledge of the environment characteristics. However, the
resulting intervals may have no relation to the problem
domain.
4) Improving the geometric abstraction: Thanks to the
extraction of slope semantics, terrain shape is qualiﬁed using
semantic attributes and associated with groups and with their
cells. Because of the nature of the classiﬁcation intervals,
adjacent groups with different area-weighted normal vectors
may obtain the same semantic slope label. In order to im-
prove the results provided by the geometric abstraction, we
propose a process that merges adjacent groups which share
the same semantic slope. This process starts by iterating
over groups. Every time it ﬁnds a set of adjacent groups
sharing an identical semantic slope, it creates a new group.
Next, cells composing the adjacent groups are registered
as members of the new group. Finally, the area-weighted
normal vector is computed for the new group. Hence, this
process guarantees that every group is only surrounded by
groups which have different semantic slopes.
B. Topological abstraction
In Section III, we presented our work on the genera-
tion of informed virtual geographic environments using an
exact spatial decomposition scheme which subdivides the
environment into convex cells organized in a topological
graph structure. However, inside large scale and complex
geographic environments (such as a city for example),
such topological graphs can become very large. The size
of such a topological graph has a direct effect on paths’
5
eKNOW 2011 : The Third International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-121-2

(a) Identifying elevation anomalies. Two isolated groups (in
red) and angles (α1 and α2) resulting from the difference
between the area-weighted normal vectors
(b) Fixing elevation anomalies. Nodes in isolated groups are
adjusted to the average elevation level.
Figure 3: Proﬁle section of anomalous Isolated Groups (red colour) adjusted to the average elevation of the surrounding
ones (yellow colour).
computation time for path-ﬁnding. In order to optimise the
performance of path computation, we need to reduce the
size of the topological graph representing the IVGE. The
aim of the topological abstraction is to provide a compact
representation of the topological graph that is suitable for
situated reasoning and enables fast path planning. However,
in contrast to the geometric abstraction which only enhances
the description of the IVGE with terrain semantics, the
topological abstraction extends the topological graph with
new layers. In each layer (except for the initial layer which
is called level 0), a node corresponds to a single or a
group of nodes in the immediate lower level (Figure 4).
The topological abstraction simpliﬁes the IVGE description
by combining cells (triangles) in order to obtain convex
groups of cells. Such a hierarchical structure evolves the
concept of Hierarchical Topologic Graph in which cells are
fused into groups and edges are abstracted in boundaries.
To do so, convex hulls are computed for every node of the
topological graph. Then, the coverage ratio of the convex
hull is evaluated as the surface of the hull divided by the
actual surface of the node. The topological abstraction ﬁnally
performs groupings of a set of connected nodes if and only
if the group ratio is equal or close to one depending on the
problem domain. Let C be the convexity rate and CH(gr)
be the convex hull of the polygon corresponding to gr. C is
computed as follows:
C(gr) =
Sur face(gr)
Sur face(CH(gr))
and 0 < C(gr) ≤ 1
(2)
The convex property of each group’s hull needs to be
preserved after the topological abstraction. This ensures that
an entity can move freely inside a given cell (or group of
cells), and that there exists a straight path linking edges
belonging to the same cell (or group of cells).
Figure 5 illustrates an example of the topological abstrac-
tion process and the way it reduces the number of cells
representing the environment. In Figure 5(a), we present
the initial vector format GIS data of a complex building.
Figure 4: The topological graph extraction from space
decomposition and extension into different levels us-
ing the topological abstraction.
Figure 5(b) depicts the initial exact spatial decomposition
which yields 63 triangular cells. Figure 5(c) presents 28
convex polygons generated by the topological abstraction
algorithm. The abstraction rate of the number of cells
representing the environment is around 55%. This rate is
computed using the ratio of initial number of cells produced
by the space decomposition techniques (63) by the num-
ber of convex polygons (28) obtained using the topologic
abstraction technique with a convexity rate equal to 1
To conclude, we described in this section a topologic
abstraction process in order to enhance the performance of
the exploration of the IVGE’s description. This process aims
to simplify large informed graphs corresponding to large-
scale and complex geographic environments. Our topologic
abstraction approach reduces the number of convex cells
by overlaying the informed graph with a topologically
abstracted graph. The resulting IVGE is hence based on
6
eKNOW 2011 : The Third International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-121-2

a hierarchical graph whose lowest level corresponds to the
informed graph initially produced by the spatial decomposi-
tion. In the following section, we show how we use a well-
known knowledge representation formalism to represent the
semantic information in order to further enhance the IVGE
description with respect to agents’ and the environment’s
characteristics.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 5: Illustration of the topological abstraction
process with a strict convex property (C(gr) = 1);
(a) the GIS data of a complex building; (b) the
exact space decomposition using CDT techniques (63
triangular cells) ; (c) the topological abstraction (28
convex polygons)
C. Semantic Abstraction
Two kinds of information can be stored in the description
of an IVGE. Quantitative data are stored as numerical values
which are generally used to depict geometric properties (like
a path’s width of 2 meters) or statistical values (like a
density of 2.5 persons per square meter). Qualitative data
are introduced as identiﬁers which can range from a word
with a given semantics, called a label, to a reference to an
external database or to a speciﬁc knowledge representation.
Such semantic information can be used to qualify an area
(like a road or a building) or to interpret a quantitative
value (like a narrow passage or a crowded place). An
advantage of interpreting quantitative data is to reduce a
potentially inﬁnite set of inputs to a discrete set of val-
ues, which is particularly useful to condense information
in successive abstraction levels to be used for reasoning
purposes. Furthermore, the semantic information enhances
the description of the IVGE, which in turn extends the
agents’ knowledge about their environment. However, the
integration of the semantic information raises the issue of its
representation. Therefore, we need a standard formalism that
allows for precisely representing the semantic information
which qualiﬁes space and which is computationally tractable
in order to be used by spatial reasoning algorithms used by
agents.
Several knowledge representation techniques can be used
to structure semantic information and to represent knowl-
edge in general such as frames [11], rules [9] (also called
If-Then rules), tagging [16], and semantic networks [14],
which have originated from theories of human information
processing. Since knowledge is used to achieve intelligent
behavior, the fundamental goal of knowledge representation
is to represent knowledge in a manner that facilitates in-
ferencing (i.e., drawing conclusions) from knowledge. In
order to select a knowledge representation (and a knowledge
representation system to logically interpret sentences in
order to derive inferences from them), we have to con-
sider the expressivity of the knowledge representation. The
more expressive a knowledge representation technique is,
the easier (and more compact) we can describe and qual-
ify geographic features which characterise IVGE. Various
artiﬁcial languages and notations have been proposed to
represent knowledge. They are typically based on logic
and mathematics, and can be easily parsed for machine
processing. However, Sowas’s Conceptual Graphs [14] are
widely considered an advanced standard logical notation
for logic based on existential graphs proposed by Charles
Sanders Peirce and on semantic networks.
Syntactically, a conceptual graph is a network of concept
nodes linked by relation nodes. Concept nodes are repre-
sented by the notation [Concept Type: Concept instance] and
relation nodes by (Relationship-Name). A concept instance
can be either a value, a set of values or even a CG.
The formalism can be represented in either graphical or
character-based notations. In the graphical notation, concepts
are represented by rectangles, relations by circles and the
links between concept nodes and relation nodes by arrows.
The most abstract concept type is called the universal type
(or simply Universal) denoted by the symbol ⊥.
A MAGS usually involves a large number of situated
agents of different types (human, animal, static, mobile,
etc.) performing various actions (moving, perceiving, etc.)
in virtual geographic spaces of various extents. Using CGs
greatly simpliﬁes the representation of complex situated
interactions occurring at different locations and involving
various agents of different types. In order to create models
for MAGS we consider three fundamental abstract concepts:
1) agents; 2) actions; and 3) locations.
Figure 6: Illustration of the action, agent and location
concepts using a concept type lattice.
Taking advantage of the abstraction capabilities of the
CGs formalism (through the Concept Type Lattice (CTL))
instead of representing different situated interactions of
various agents in distinct locations, we are able to represent
7
eKNOW 2011 : The Third International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-121-2

abstract actions performed by agent archetypes in abstract
locations. Moreover, we ﬁrst need to specify and characterise
each of the abstract concepts. The concept type lattice
enables us to specialise each abstract concept in order
to represent situated behaviours such as path planning of
agents in space. Figure 6 presents the ﬁrst level of the
concept type lattice reﬁning the agent, action, and location
concepts. Figures 7(a),7(b), and 7(c) present the expansion
of the concept type lattice presented in Figure 6. Figure 7(a)
illustrates some situated actions that can be performed by
agents in the IVGE such as sailing for maritime vehicles,
rolling for terrestrial vehicles, walking for humans, and
accessing for humans to enter or exit buildings (we as-
sume that buildings are not navigable locations from the
perspective of outdoor navigation). 7(b) depicts how the
location concept may be specialized into Navigable and
Not Navigable concepts. The Navigable concept may also
be specialised into Terrestrial Vehicle Navigable, Pedestrian
Navigable, Marine Vehicle Navigable, and Bike Navigable
which are dedicated navigable areas with respect to agent
archetypes and environmental characteristics as speciﬁed by
the elementary semantics. Figure 7(c) illustrates a few agent
archetypes that are relevant to our geo-simulation including
pedestrians, cars, trucks, and bikes.
In order to show how powerful such a representation may
be, let us consider the following example. We want to build
a MAGS simulating the navigation of three human agents
(a man, a woman, and a child), two bike riders (a man and
a woman), and three vehicles (a car, a bus, and a boat) in
a coastal city. The navigation behaviours of these different
agent archetypes must respect the following constraints (or
rules): 1) pedestrian agents can only move on sidewalks, on
pedestrian streets, and eventually on crosswalks if needed;
2) vehicles can move on roads and highways; 3) boats sail
on the river and stop at the harbour port; and 4) bikes move
on bikeways, roads, and streets but not on pedestrian streets.
Using standard programming languages, it might be difﬁcult
to represent or develop the functions related to such simple
navigation rules which take into account both the agents’ and
the locations’ characteristics. However, the representation of
these navigation rules becomes an easy task when using
CGs and our deﬁned concept type lattice. Here are their
expressions in CGs:
[PEDESTRIAN:*p]<-(agnt)<-[WALK:*w1]->(loc)-
>[PEDESTRIAN NAVIGABLE:*pn]
[VEHICLE:*v]<-(agnt)<-[ROLL:*r1]->(loc)-
>[TERRESTRIAL NAVIGABLE:tn]
The arrows indicate the expected direction for reading the
graph. For instance, the ﬁrst example may be read: an agent
*p which is a “pedestrian” walks on a location *pn which
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 7: An example of a conceptual description
of agents archetypes (a), actions performed (b), and
locations situated in a geographic environment (c).
is “pedestrian navigable”. Since this expression involves
the concepts Pedestrian, Walk and Pedestrian Navigable,
this rule remains valid for every sub-type of these concepts.
Therefore, thanks to CGs and the concept type lattice, there
is no need to specify the navigation rules for men, women,
and children if they act as pedestrians in locations such
as pedestrian streets, sidewalks, or crosswalk. Indeed, these
agent archetypes are subtypes of the Pedestrian concept and
pedestrian streets, sidewalks, and crosswalks are subtypes of
the Pedestrian Navigable concept. To conclude, CGs offer
a powerful formalism to easily describe different concepts
involved in MAGS including agents, actions, and environ-
ments.
V. DISCUSSION
Thomas and Donikian proposed an Informed Hierarchical
Topologic (IHT) [15] graph representing a part of the city
of Renne (France) for human behavior animation purposes.
8
eKNOW 2011 : The Third International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-121-2

This graph is composed of three layers: (1) the Basic Topo-
logical layer which contains real urban objects modelled as
simple spaces such as buildings and road sections; (2) the
Composite Space layer which is composed of simple spaces
or composite spaces of lesser importance; (3) the Local
Area layer which is the highest level of the IHT-graph and
which is composed of composite spaces. This hierarchical
urban model allows manual abstraction of buildings into
blocks and road-sections and crossings into roads. The
abstraction process is done by the user which constrains and
considerably limits its application to real world large-scale
and complex geographic environments. Thomas’s approach
relies on a pre-deﬁned decomposition of the virtual environ-
ment which is dedicated to urban environments. This decom-
position is application-dependent (urban environments) and
does not take into account the topologic and the geometric
characteristics of the environment.
In contrast with Thomas [15] and Lamarche [8] ap-
proaches, our abstraction technique optimizes the representa-
tion of the geographic environment while taking into account
the geometric, topologic and semantic characteristics of the
geographic environment. This abstraction approach relies
on an exact space decomposition technique (Constrained
Delaunay Triangulation) in order to preserve the geometric
and topologic characteristics of the geographic environment
rather than on a pre-diﬁned space decomposition. It also
integrates semantic information associated with GIS data in
order to enrich the description of the IVGE.
Embedding the information directly in the environment
allows the support of agents’ spatial reasoning capabilities.
However, the preparation of the fully augmented geometric
model is very time consuming and difﬁcult due to the sheer
amount of data. For example, a typical model of a city
quarter as used by Farenc can contain several thousands
of primitives of many types (such as polygons modeling
sidewalk pieces, benches, trees, bus stops, etc.). Moreover,
Farenc built the urban environment using data provided
by Computer Assisted Graphic Design systems since the
purpose of the simulation is computer animation. However,
when building virtual geographic environments representing
large-scale and complex geographic environments based
on reliable GIS data, Farenc’s approach can not be used
since it is dedicated to exclusively represent urban environ-
ments. Indeed, the manual hierarchical space partitioning
as proposed by Farenc is not feasible when dealing with
geometrically complex environments. Moreover, the data
structure of the urban environment’s description as proposed
by Farenc needs to be enhanced in order to manage a
large amount of geometric and topologic data. Finally, the
hierarchical structure should be built using the geographic
environments’s characteristics rather than being deﬁned a
priori as Farenc proposed.
The work done towards representation of semantic infor-
mation in virtual environments has been mostly carried out at
a geometric level [4]. Gutiuerez proposed a semantic model
which aims to represent the meaning, and functionality of
objects in a virtual scene [5]. However, since the purpose of
Gutiuerez’s approach is computer animations, the semantic
information integration is located at the object description
level rather than enriching the description the geographic
environments. Virtual environments are usually created as
computer graphics applications, with minimal consideration
given to the semantic information [5]. Moreover, semantic
information has been used in an ad hoc way without any
standard formalism. There is a gap between geometry and
semantic information in current virtual geographic environ-
ment models. Since we believe that semantic information in-
tegration into a VGE’s description is by nature a knowledge
representation problem, a suitable and standard knowledge
representation formalism has been proposed to integrate
semantic information in the VGE’s description.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
In this paper, we introduced our IVGE model which au-
tomatically buids semantically-enriched and geometrically-
accurate description of informed virtual geographic envi-
ronments. We also proposed an abstraction approach of
the IVGE’s description in order to support large-scale and
complex geographic environments. First, we described a
geometric abstraction process which enriches the IVGE
description with terrain semantics. Moreover, the geomet-
ric abstraction process helps to detect and ﬁlter elevation
anomalies and qualiﬁes the terrain shape, speciﬁcally slope.
Second, we detailed a topologic abstraction which builds an
hierarchical topologic graph in order to deal with large-scale
virtual geographic environments. This hierarchical structure
reduces the size of the topological graph representing the
IVGE. Third, we showed how the semantic abstraction
process enhances the hierarchical topological graph using
the concept type lattice in order to build different views of
the IVGE. We are currently working on the leverage of our
enhanced IVGE model to support hierarchical path planning
algorithms which take into account both the abstracted
description of the IVGE and the agent type’s characteristics.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
M. Mekni beneﬁted from a PDF scholarship granted by
FQRNT (Fonds Québécois de la Recherche sur la Nature et
les Technologies). The author thank Dr Froduald Kabanza,
Univ. Sherbrooke, Qc for his advice during this research.
REFERENCES
[1] I. Benenson and P. Torrens. Geosimulation: Automata-Based
Modeling of Urban Phenomena. John Wiley and Sons Inc.,
2004.
9
eKNOW 2011 : The Third International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-121-2

[2] S.-G. Chen and J.-Y. Wu.
A geometric interpretation of
weighted normal vectors and its improvements. In Proceed-
ings of the International Conference on Computer Graphics,
Imaging and Vision: New Trends, pages 422–425, Beijing,
China, 26-29 July 2005.
[3] N. Farenc, R. Boulic, and D. Thalmann.
An informed
environment dedicated to the simulation of virtual humans
in urban context.
In P. Brunet and R. Scopigno, editors,
Computer Graphics Forum (Eurographics ’99), volume 18(3),
pages 309–318. The Eurographics Association and Blackwell
Publishers, 1999.
[4] A. Garcia Rojas Martinez.
Semantics for Virtual Humans.
PhD thesis, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, 2009.
[5] M. Gutérrez Alonso. Semantic Virtual Environments. PhD
thesis, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne,Swisse,
2005.
[6] M. Kallmann. Object Interaction in Real-Time Virtual En-
vironments.
PhD thesis, École Polytechnique Fédérale de
Lausanne, 2001.
[7] M. F. Klügl and M. Neumann. Landscape abstractions for
agent-based biodiversity simulation. In Fourth International
Joint Conference on Autonomous Agents & Multiagent Sys-
tems, Utrecht University, The Netherlands, July 2005.
[8] F. Lamarche and S. Donikian.
Crowds of virtual humans:
a new approach for real time navigation in complex and
structured environments. Computer Graphics Forum, Euro-
graphics’04, 2004.
[9] J. Lewis, P. Skarek, and L. Varga. A rule-based consultant for
accelerator beam scheduling used in the CERNPS complex.
In ICALEPCS’95: International Conference on Accelerator
and Large Experimental Physics Control Systems, Chicago,
Illinois USA, October 30-November 3 1995.
[10] M. Mekni and B. Moulin. Holonic modelling of large scale
geographic environments.
In HOLOMAS’09: 4th Interna-
tional Conference on Industrial Applications of Holonic and
Multi-Agent Systems, Linz, Austria, September 2007.
[11] M. Minsky. A Framework for Representing Knowledge. MIT-
AI Laboratory, 1974.
[12] S. Paris, S. Donikian, and N. Bonvalet.
Environmental
abstraction and path planning techniques for realistic crowd
simulation. Computer Animation and Virtual Worlds, 17:325–
335, 2006.
[13] W. Shao and D. Terzopoulos. Environmental modeling for
autonomous virtual pedestrians. Digital Human Modeling for
Design and Engineering Symposium, 2005.
[14] J. Sowa. Knowledge Representation: Logical, Philosophical,
and Computational Foundations. Course Technology, August
1999.
[15] R. Thomas and S. Donikian.
A model of hierarchical
cognitive map and human memory designed for reactive and
planned navigation. In Proceedings of the 4th International
Space Syntax Symposium, volume 1, pages 72–100, Londres,
2003.
[16] S. E. Varlan. Knowledge representation in the context of e-
business applications. BRAND. Broad Research in Account-
ing, Negotiation, and Distribution, 1(1):1–4, September 2010.
10
eKNOW 2011 : The Third International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-121-2

