Support System for Creating Pathfinder Using Reference Examples 
Yasuro Nakao 
Morioka University, Faculty of Literature, Japan 
Morioka, Japan 
E-mail: yas@kyudai.jp 
 
 
Abstract—A library pathfinder is a guide that gathers basic 
information resources on a specific subject. However, the 
library pathfinder is developed using a manual method based 
on a librarian's experience and present knowledge. Therefore, 
there is an issue of whether a pathfinder contains suitable 
resources. In this study, a pathfinder support system has been 
developed to produce a pathfinder draft using past library 
reference example data. As a result, it was discovered that the 
suggestion method developed here could possibly search 
relevant resources that are not accessible using the Online 
Public Access Catalog (OPAC) base method. 
Keywords-reference service; library pathfinder; reference 
example; reference tool; Reference Collaborative Database. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
A library reference service mediates between a user and 
the information that the user needs. In a conventional library 
reference service, reference research is conducted after 
receiving a question from a user, thus making it a passive 
service. 
In contrast, a more active library reference service has 
been offered in recent years. This service, called 
transmission-type information service, anticipates users’ 
needs in advance and offers the appropriate information. It 
has expanded the conventional library reference service. 
A. Library Pathfinder  
A transmission-type information service includes various 
services. One of the most characteristic services is a library 
pathfinder, hereafter referred to as “pathfinder”. Pathfinder 
has been created at the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology library in 1969 [1]. Pathfinder is also called an 
information guide for users. Pathfinders are generally 
comprised of leaflets. 
Pathfinder comprises basic knowledge and selected 
resources for learners. These resources are restricted to those 
that the library holds and a user can access. A pathfinder is 
different from a comprehensive resource list or web link, as 
it contains the information that summarizes related basic 
resources and retrieval methods on a specific subject. 
However, the standard of the pathfinder does not exist. 
The style of the pathfinder varies by library type and target 
user. Libraries devise the form of a pathfinder specifically 
for the needs of that library. In many libraries, a pathfinder 
consists of the following elements: 
 
A. Theme 
B. Key word and classification number (NDC: Nippon 
Decimal Classification) 
C. Explanation on a theme 
D. Basic printed material and network resource 
  * Reference book, secondary resource, database 
  * Related book, magazine, newspaper, audio-visual data, 
web site etc. 
 
There is also not a fixed procedure for making a 
pathfinder. The following is the process that is generally 
used: 
 
1. Plan of a theme 
2. The decision of keywords or classification number 
3. Making of explanation sentence on the theme 
4. Searching the following resources using the keywords 
etc., and making a candidate list for pathfinder.  
• Books, journals or audio-visual materials etc. are 
searched using Online Public Access Catalog (OPAC). 
• Articles of journal or newspaper are searched using 
index database. 
• Reference books or web resource are searched using 
reference information site such as NDL Research Navi. 
5. Checking each resource and creating a fixed pathfinder 
list. 
6. Making of bibliography information on each resource 
7. The design and edit work 
 
Some libraries generate and offer a pathfinder 
dynamically using a database. However, many libraries 
provide a pathfinder statically. A pathfinder is often created 
by librarian using Office software like Microsoft Word 
manually. Resources are selected using the librarian's 
experience and knowledge as a professional. The problem is 
judging whether the pathfinder is appropriate for the 
situation. There might be useful resources that the librarian 
cannot find on account of manual searching based on 
librarian’s experience and knowledge. This suggestion is to 
support or to complement that with reference service data. 
B. Related Work  
Research work on library pathfinders includes the 
following: Kashima et al. introduced the pathfinder to 
Japanese libraries and considered the importance of subject 
analysis when making a pathfinder [2]. Ito et al. surveyed the 
current situation of pathfinder use in Japan [3]. Sakajiri and 
Ito et al. introduced information about actual pathfinder 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-542-5
eKNOW 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

making, maintaining and managing in the National Diet 
Library [4][5]. 
Nakashima studied the system of support for a learner 
making a pathfinder by himself for active learning [6]. Sakai 
et al. studied the development of the system for users 
associated with Wikipedia [7]. In this study a support system 
to generate pathfinder information for librarians was built 
and its validity was clarified to contribute to pathfinder 
construction. To our knowledge there are no studies on 
support for librarians, not for users when they make a 
pathfinder in Japanese. And we utilize the information of the 
reference example that was only recorded, more positively to 
make a pathfinder. This study aims to support the process (2) 
and (4) in making pathfinder. 
II. 
METHODOLOGY 
This study focuses on the use of reference example data 
to make a pathfinder. Reference examples are information 
recorded based on past library reference services. 
More than one site exhibits reference example data in 
Japan. Reference example data are available from the 
Collaborative Reference Database [8] in the National Diet 
Library, the largest database in Japan. Reference examples 
are registered with this database by public, school, university, 
special and national libraries. This database is the de facto 
standard database in Japan.  
A total of 154,127 records were registered as of the end 
of March 2016. 89,244 records are open to the public. The 
number of records in the Collaborative Reference Database 
is increased every year. 
The following are the main components of these records. 
 
Question / Answer / Reference materials / Answering 
process / Preliminary research / Keywords / NDC / 
Type of search / Type of subject / Category of 
questioner / Resolved/Unresolved / Access level / 
Creation date of case data. There are other elements for 
data 
management 
like 
Registration 
number, 
Registration date and Last update, etc. 
 
It is not possible to directly use a reference example as a 
pathfinder, as each reference example is individual or 
personal record. However, the elements included in this 
example can be used to make one. In particular, resources 
recorded in the categories of “Answer”, “Reference 
materials”, “Keywords”, and “NDC” are useful for 
pathfinder creation. 
A total of 82,823 examples were used in this research. 
These records are open to the public, and were acquired as of 
August 12, 2015 through Collaborative Reference Database 
API.  
All reference tools were extracted from the 82,823 
examples. Reference tool is the information resource used in 
reference search, such as reference books, network database 
or web site and so on. Reference examples have two types of 
tool, printed resources and network resources. The fields 
used for extraction were “Answer” and “Reference 
materials”. Reference tools also existed in other fields such 
as “Answering process”. However, there is the possibility 
that irrelevant or inaccurate resources may have been 
included in these fields, as “Answering process” is the search 
memo before final answering. 
Printed resources, such as reference books are often 
described using the Japanese character kagi (square bracket; 
Japanese-style quotation marks) in reference example 
sentences	 (Fig. 1, Fig. 2 is translation of Fig. 1). Printed 
resources were extracted using kagi. Network resources, 
such as databases or websites were extracted using an 
associated Uniform Resource Locator (URL). 
Printed resources have been grouped with the first 
wakachigaki chunk. Wakachigaki is the practice of 
separating words in Japanese with spaces. For example, 
"NihonKokugoDaijiten" and "NihonKokugoDaijiten ver.4" 
are treated as the same group. Network resources were 
grouped by domain name. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Reference example sentence image. (Japanese) 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Reference example sentence image (translated into English). 
 
TABLE 1. EXTRACTION DATA. 
 
 
 
Total 
number 
Type 
number 
Number of reference 
example included (ratio) 
Reference 
tools 
246,610 
180,826 
58,351 (70.5%) 
Keywords 
195,203 
94,259 
58,433 (70.6%) 
NDC 
100,189 
848 
(section) 
59,316 (70.8%) 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Search screen (Japanese). 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Search screen (translated into English). 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-542-5
eKNOW 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
 
 
 
 
 
Keywords were extracted from Keyword fields. NDCs 
were extracted from NDC fields. Table 1 shows the total 
data results. A database and prototype search system was 
built using the extracted data. 
The search screen is Japanese as seen in Fig. 3. Fig. 4 is 
translation of Fig. 3. After submitting search keyword, 
candidates of related pathfinder resource, keyword and NDC 
are generated. It is also possible to limit category if 
necessary using select menu. 
The prototype search system is an exact matching system 
based on keywords. The target fields for searching in this 
system are “Question”, “Answer”, “Reference materials” 
and “Keywords”. When entering multiple keywords 
separated by space, this system searches records including 
all keywords (AND search). 
The search results screen appears as in Fig. 5. Fig. 6 is 
translation of Fig. 5. The prototype system offers the 
following functions. 
 
1) Presentation of information resource candidates for the 
pathfinder. 
 
The set of the reference examples that include search 
keywords is extracted and the reference tools included in 
this set are shown as a search result. Search results are 
divided into printed material and network resource groups. 
Tools that begin with Hiragana or Katakana are represented 
in Japanese syllabary order; those beginning with Chinese 
characters are represented in Chinese-style reading order; 
and tools that begin with Roman characters are listed in 
alphabetical order. 
 
2) Presentation of keyword candidates for the pathfinder.  
 
3) Presentation of NDC candidates for the pathfinder. 
 
Keywords and NDCs included in the search results are 
aggregated and represented.  
 
 
        …… 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             …… 
 
Figure 5. Search results (Japanese). 
 
Figure 6. Search results (translated into English). 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-542-5
eKNOW 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

4) Presentation of questions the reference tool processed and 
genres the reference tool covered. 
 
When the link “tool check” in Fig. 5 is clicked, Fig. 7 is 
showed. Fig. 7 is Tool check results window. Fig. 8 is 
translation of Fig. 7. Tool check results window represents 
questions that the reference tool processed and genres that 
the reference tool covered. It is able to confirm reference 
tool characteristics, all reference examples that the tool used 
and the genre coverage of NDC class level and division 
level. 
 
5) Links to the following outside resources: 
• 
Collaborative Reference Database 
• 
Local library OPAC, NDL-OPAC [9] 
• 
NDL Research Navi [10] 
• 
Dictionary or encyclopedia website 
 
When the link “Ref. Example” in Fig. 5 is clicked, the 
Collaborative Reference Database record that the resource 
was used is presented. When the link “confirm OPAC” in 
Fig. 5 is clicked, local OPAC search result is presented. It is 
able to confirm the holding information of the printed 
resource. When the each result link in Fig. 5 is clicked, 
NDL-OPAC search result is presented in the case of printed 
resource and NDL Research Navi information is presented 
in the case of network resource. NDL Research Navi is the 
reference information portal site in Japan. It is able to 
confirm the bibliographic information of the printed 
resource, and to confirm the information of the network 
resource. Dictionary or encyclopedia website, Wikipedia 
[11] and Kotobank [12] are also linked to confirm further 
information about the search term. It is able to gather 
information seamlessly and effectively. 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Tool check results (Japanese). 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Tool check results (translated into English). 
 
III. 
EVALUATION 
A library pathfinder is a list of resources selected by the 
librarian. A pathfinder that includes a wide variety of 
appropriate resources is useful to users. However it is 
difficult for even a librarian to pick out the proper resources 
that the library holds. The prototype system evaluation, 
therefore, has been performed from the angle of resource 
discovery. We evaluated how long this system could present 
the resource that librarian cannot find. 
The National Diet Library is exhibiting a pathfinder link 
between prefectural libraries and government designated city 
libraries in Japan [13]. First, we investigated the pathfinders 
exhibited by these libraries and chose 5 themes other than 
those with specific subjects such as “how to use a database” 
or subjects limited to the library’s local theme. Next, we 
compared the resources in the result by searching Morioka 
University Library OPAC [14] that the author belongs to, 
with keywords matching those provided by the prototype 
system. Table 2 shows the result. 
ROPAC (KW) is the set of resources in the result by 
searching OPAC with the search keyword KW. RSYSTEM 
(KW) is the set of resources that the prototype system brings 
up in the case of using the search keyword KW. R'SYSTEM 
(KW) is the set of resources that are included in RSYSTEM 
(KW) and the library holds. ROPAC (KW) ∩ R'SYSTEM 
(KW) is the set intersection of ROPAC (KW) and 
R'SYSTEM (KW). R'SYSTEM (KW) – ROPAC (KW) is 
the set of resources that are included in R'SYSTEM (KW) 
and are not included in ROPAC (KW). The number of 
resources in each set is shown in Table 2 under each set 
name. 
The proposed support system retrieves resources that we 
cannot find by searching OPAC. These include printed 
resources that are related to the theme of the intended 
pathfinder. The proposed system, therefore, has the potential 
to increase appropriate resources for creating a pathfinder. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
A reference example has been recorded to accumulate 
data present in Japanese libraries. Based on previous 
research, we can assume that by using reference examples, it 
is possible to find related resources that are difficult to 
access using an OPAC-based search. Suggestion system 
using reference examples can expect to complement 
candidates of resource for the pathfinder. It is possible to 
increase the reusability of a reference example. 
However, we could not judge how useful resources are 
included from a librarian at this time on account of lacking 
enough time. It is future's problem to evaluate that. A test at 
a public library should be conducted next. In particular, the 
validity of the constructed pathfinder has to be inspected. It 
is also necessary to validate the function of checking a 
reference tool and suggesting keywords or NDCs for the 
pathfinder. 
 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-542-5
eKNOW 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
TABLE 2. RESOURCES DISCOVERED USING THE PROTOTYPE. 
	 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. M Canfield, “Instructional Materials: Design and 
Development. Library Pathfinders,” Drexel Library Quarterly, 
vol. 8, pp. 287-300, 1972 
[2] M. Kashima and S. Yamaguchi, “Electronic pathfinders: a 
window to a new generation library service,” The Journal of 
Information Science and Technology Association, vol. 52, no. 
10, pp. 526–537, 2002. http://ci.nii.ac.jp/naid/110002826712/ 
(accessed 2016-07-07) 
[3] M. Ito and K. Ozawa, “A research on the existing condition 
of online library pathfinders in Japan,” The Journal of 
Information Science and Technology Association, vol. 58, no. 
7, pp. 361-366, 2008. http://ci.nii.ac.jp/naid/110006793619/ 
(accessed 2016-07-07) 
[4] K. Sakajiri, “RESEARCH NAVI by the National Diet 
Library: outline of structuring tasks and contents,” The 
Library Journal, vol. 106, no.4, pp. 248–251, 2012. 
http://ci.nii.ac.jp/naid/40019215521/ (accessed 2016-07-07) 
[5] M. Ito and K. Ozawa, “Reference work: Compiling and 
providing online pathfinders using reference examples: 
efforts by business, science and technology division, the 
National Diet Library to provide subject information, and 
results,” Reference service and bibliography, vol. 68, pp. 50-
68, 2008. http://ci.nii.ac.jp/naid/40015976209/ (accessed 
2016-07-07) 
[6] M. 
Nakashima, 
“Creating 
Web-pathfinders 
Providing 
Reliability and Convenience in the Format According to the 
Information-seeking 
Behavior 
Model,” 
2011, 
https://kaken.nii.ac.jp/en/report/KAKENHI-PROJECT-
21500238/RECORD-21500238seika/ (accessed 2016-07-07) 
[7] T. Sakai, H. Masuda, Y. Kiyota and Y. Nakagawa, “An 
Automated Pathfinder System Using Wikipedia and Library 
Information Resources,” Proceedings of the Information 
Processing Society of Japan Annual Convention, vol. 72, 
pp.65 – 66, 
2010. 
http://ci.nii.ac.jp/naid/110008139017/ 
(accessed 2016-07-07) 
[8] 
http://crd.ndl.go.jp/reference/ (accessed 2016-07-07) 
[9] https://ndlopac.ndl.go.jp/ (accessed 2016-07-07) 
[10] http://rnavi.ndl.go.jp/rnavi/ (accessed 2016-07-07) 
[11] https://ja.wikipedia.org/ (accessed 2016-07-07) 
[12] https://kotobank.jp/ (accessed 2016-07-07) 
[13] http://rnavi.ndl.go.jp/research_guide/pubpath.php 
(accessed 
2016-07-07) 
[14] https://morioka-
opac.limedio.ricoh.co.jp/mylimedio/search/search-
input.do?mode=comp&nqid=1&lang=en (accessed 2016-07-
07) 
 
 
 
Pathfinder	 
KW 
(Search Keyword) 
ROPAC (KW) 
RSYSTEM (KW) 
R’SYSTEM (KW) 
ROPAC (KW) ∩R’SYSTEM (KW) 
R’SYSTEM (KW) - ROPAC (KW) 
“How to search about 
fermented food” 
Fermented food 
24 
115 
35 
2 
33 
“How to search about 
developmental 
disability” 
Developmental 
disability 
208 
163 
30 
20 
10 
“How to search about 
influenza” 
Influenza 
21 
99 
12 
1 
11 
“How to search about 
the game of Igo” 
The game of Igo 
9 
98 
23 
2 
21 
“How to search about 
The legends of Tono” 
The legends of Tono 
51 
71 
30 
2 
28 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-542-5
eKNOW 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

