An Overview of Norwegian Linked Open Data 
~ Applications in Regional Development and Environmentally Friendly Behavior ~ 
 
Dumitru Roman 
SINTEF 
Oslo, Norway 
Dumitru.Roman@sintef.no 
David Norheim 
Computas AS 
Lysaker, Norway 
David.Norheim@computas.com
 
 
Abstract— With Norway being one of the few countries outside of 
the English speaking world with a clear governmental strategy 
and commitment to open data, combined with one of the highest 
Internet penetration and mobile access in Europe, it offers 
interesting opportunities for becoming a great testbed for 
consuming Linked Open Data (LOD). With this paper we aim at 
presenting potential applications consuming Norwegian LOD and 
showing practical benefits of aggregating open data in highly 
sensitive domains for governments and the general public such as 
regional development and environmentally friendly behaviour. 
At the same time, this paper will serve as an overview of the 
Norwegian LOD as of mid 2011. The proposed applications will 
not only aim at demonstrating the benefits of the current 
Norwegian LOD, but will also make contributions to the 
improvement and extension of the existing data sets. 
Keywords-Norwegian LOD, data sets, applications  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Norway is one of a handful of countries outside of the 
English speaking world with a clear commitment to open data.  
Being one of the first countries to implement the PSI-directive 
as a law in January 2009 [1], each new governmental project is 
today required to address publication of the data it creates or 
processes. Simultaneously the community focusing on linked 
open data is ever increasing, and major governmental agencies 
are involved in making their data available as Linked Open 
Data (LOD). However, as we write 2011, few if any, 
applications are using LOD as their data source. We expect this 
to change soon. 
We believe that the interest in LOD, combined with the 
highest Internet penetration in Europe after Iceland,  and 
second only to Sweden on mobile internet access in Europe, 
Norway offers interesting opportunities for becoming a great 
testbed for consuming LOD data. With this paper we aim at 
giving an overview of the current status of the Norwegian 
LOD, and propose applications consuming Norwegian LOD in 
highly sensitive domains for governments and the general 
public such as regional development and environmentally 
friendly behaviour. The proposed applications will not only 
aim at demonstrating the benefits of the current Norwegian 
LOD, but will also make contributions to the improvement and 
extension of the existing data sets. 
In the following we provide an overview of two potential 
applications consuming Norwegian LOD (Section II), and then 
present the current LOD in Norway, with a focus on its 
relevance to the proposed applications (Section III).  Section III 
summarizes this paper. 
II. 
APPLICATIONS FOR NORWGIAN LOD 
A. Regional development with LOD 
Why? Regions are often faced with challenges such as lack of 
competitiveness and need for regeneration to various political 
challenges. The long-term trends and effects of development 
schemas are however often not well understood and readily 
available to the public. Local news agencies and the general 
public are often served numbers without being able to look 
behind the scene. There is a clear need in this domain for 
support in creating visualization tools over statistical data or 
aggregated data to follow the long term effects of regional 
development. 
Who are the stakeholders? Data-journalists in Norway, both 
from the broadcasters and news agencies, have requested a tool 
allowing ad-hoc combinations of datasets in their regional foot 
print. A tool based on linked data will increase its value as new 
datasets become available. Data visualization and investigation 
support should also be available for public use, allowing 
citizens to drill into public data. 
What and how? Inspired by Hans Roslings famous 
presentation tool Gapminder [2], we propose to build an 
application focusing on innovations and development in 
various sectors in regions and municipalities. Central 
Norwegian public sector data owners have opened their data as 
linked open data during 2010. The Brønnøysund Registry 
Center 1  has opened the national organization registry, 
Enhetsregisteret [3]. Others, notably the Norwegian Research 
Council, 2  have already used the dereferencable URIs from 
Enhetsregisteret while publishing their own data sets. This case 
study will require the need to improve the existing company 
registry service (exporting also NACE codes), and to include 
geographical information (linking to Kommuneregisteret,3 the 
details of municipalities and counties). In addition it requires 
the use of visualization tools. The successful implementation of 
                                                           
1 http://www.brreg.no/english  
2 http://www.forskningsradet.no/en  
3 http://www.kommunenokkelen.no/adresse/side2.do?side=kommuneregisteret  
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

this application is dependent on the quality of the data and links 
in the existing Norwegian LOD, and on useful and flexible 
analytics and visualization of the linked data which will be 
developed as part of this case study. 
B. Assisting Environmentally Friendly Behaviour with LOD 
Why? The current Norwegian government has made a point 
that environmentally friendly behaviour should pay off. 
However, behaving environmentally friendly is not an easy 
task even if financial incentives are in place. For example, 
often the information about public transportation and 
availability of city bikes is not as easily available when a trip 
decision needs to be taken. In such situations, there is a need 
for applications that combine linked open data in the 
environmental domain as a decision making tool. 
Who are the stakeholders? Citizens interested in 
applications assisting them in environmentally friendly 
behaviour.  
What and how? In the private sector a number of 
applications and mobile apps have been created as a result of 
open data initiatives. In Norway this includes applications 
ranging from real-time public transportation information [4], 
snow and ski conditions [5], the presence of electric cars 
charging stations [6], real time status for city bike stands [7], 
weather forecasts [8], and many more. Common to all this is 
that they use only one source of open information. The 
proposed application in the environmental domain will 
combine the use of transportation (e.g. public transportation, 
electric cars parking lots, bikes stands) to events (e.g. concerts, 
art galleries) while including other decision relevant real-time 
information (e.g. forecast, traffic messages). The application 
will be made as a mobile app. The overall goal here is to 
invoke the citizen’s own interest in environmentally friendly 
behaviour. The successful implementation of this application is 
dependent on extending the existing Norwegian LOD with new 
data sets and ensuring the quality of the new data sets and their 
proper linking to the existing Norwegian LOD, as well as on 
the usability of such an environmentally friendly behaviour 
application which will be developed as part of this case study. 
III. 
NORWEGIAN LOD 
On January 1st 2009 the EU PSI Directive was implemented 
in Norwegian law. As a direct consequence of this, the Ministry 
of Governmental Reform and Administration in 2010 
announced the development of data.norge.no (currently in 
alpha mode), the equivalent of data.gov and data.gov.uk, to be 
launched during spring 2011. While the portal will be filled 
with PSI data sets, other data sets will be included such as 
those provided two central Norwegian LOD projects, Sesam44 
and Semicolon II5, which opened data sets and converted them 
to RDF with links in-between and to other sources. Of special 
interest was the national registry for company information, 
Enhetsregisteret, and the archive for research funding, 
Prosjektdatabasen, from the Norwegian Research Council. 
                                                           
4 http://sesam4.net/ 
5 http://www.semicolon.no/  
Figure 1 provides an overview of the existing data sets in 
the Norwegian LOD and their relationships. The blue-coloured 
data sets are related to the regional development case study and 
the green-coloured data sets are related to the environmentally 
friendly behaviour. The solid arrows between the data sets 
represent the already existing links between the data sets, 
whereas the dotted arrows represent the logical connections for 
which we plan to create the necessary links in the project (as 
far as the relevant data sets are concerned). 
A brief description of the relevant data sets we are 
considering for the two applications is given below: 
• 
All legal entities are registered in the Central 
Coordinating 
Register 
for 
Legal 
Entities 
(Enhetsregisteret) at Brønnøysund Registry Centre. 
URIs and a RESTful service returning RDF has been 
created to look up based on organizational number. 
The service needs to be made searchable by including 
a RESTful service based lookups on NACE codes 
and regional codes. 
• 
The Norwegian Association of Local and Regional 
Authorities (KS) and Statistics Norway maintain a 
registry 
of 
municipalities 
and 
counties 
(Kommunekatalogen). The information translated to 
RDF as a proof of concepts by the research project 
Semicolon II, but URIs haven't been made RESTful 
and outgoing links to e.g. dbPedia has not yet been 
created. 
• 
The Norwegian Research Council maintains a 
catalog of funded projects (Prosjektarkiv). This 
relates instruments and projects to organisations. This 
catalog has been translated to RDF and outgoing 
URIs have been created to the Enhetsregisteret. The 
catalog is hosted on a triplestore supplied by 
Computas through the SESAM4 research project. 
• 
All the parties are, according to the Political Parties 
Act, obliged to report their income to a central 
register. The Ministry of Government Administration, 
Reform and Church Affairs, maintains a central 
register 
of 
parties 
and 
their 
income 
(Partifinansiering.no). This data is available in RDF 
/ SPARQL, on Computas triple store and have been 
assigned URIs, but has not yet been linked to the 
Kommunekatalogen.  
• 
The Ministry of Local Government and Regional 
Development have made election results from 
elections available in structured form. These data 
should easily be translated to RDF with outgoing 
links to the party register mentioned above and then 
made available in a triple store (SPARQL). 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
Figure 1. Norwegian LOD.
• 
Norsk Tipping is a wholly state-owned company 
under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Culture with 
a special role in regulating gaming in Norway. 
Gaming funds benefit sporting and cultural activities 
as well as voluntary humanitarian organisations all 
over the country through the Grassrootshare 
(Grasrotandelen). Grasrotandelen is a registry 
showing organisations that receive funding. The 
registry has been transalated to RDF but without the 
links 
to 
the 
organisations 
involved 
(in 
Enhetsregisteret). 
• 
Trafikanten’s main purpose is to provide the public 
with up to date travel information for the public 
transportation system in and around the counties 
Oslo and Akershus. The data is about all public 
transportation, the current location and delays of 
route. Currently the data is not available to the public 
as raw data (only through their own app), but there 
are currently work going on in Oslo Municipality to 
make it available as RDF.  
• 
Yr.no is the joint online weather service from the 
Norwegian Meteorological Institute (met.no) and the 
Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation (NRK). They 
have a XML service available for 7 million places in 
Norway for free. Work is going on in the Semicolon 
II project to make this available as RDF RESTful 
services. 
• 
Markadatabasen is maintained by the Norwegian Ski 
Association. It's a public source that provides routes 
and real time status of preparation of ski slopes. 
The data is available in XML. It is also linked to 
Open Street Map. The data needs to be translated to 
RDF and made available as a RESTful and SPARQL 
endpoint. The data will also be linked to public 
transport routes from Trafikanten.  
• 
Oslo is equipped with around 3000 city-bikes 
available for the public. A real-time status of the 
bike stands (where bike stands are and how many are 
available) is developed. ClearChannel is maintaining 
this on behalf of Oslo Kommune. The data is made 
available as a XML service. The service needs to be 
wrapped as RDF and interlinked with bike tracks and 
tour tracks.  
• 
Bike tracks and touring tracks in Oslo is a dataset 
that is made available from Oslo Kommune. This 
should be connected to the city-bike stands and made 
available as a SPARQL/RDF endpoint. 
• 
All national electric cars charging stations for 
electric-cars are made publicly available as a dataset 
and translated to RDF, and made available by the 
research project SESAM4 on a triple store. It is now 
being extended to include real-time availability. This 
real-time service will have to be interfaced to the 
charing station locations. 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

• 
Snow ploughing real-time status is another service 
that is made available by the Oslo Kommune in near 
future. This data set could relate to traffic information 
making it more sensible to take public transportation. 
The dataset should therefore link to public 
transportation and made available in RDF, and also 
connected to the weather information. 
• 
Tellus is a national dataset of accommodations, 
attractions and events produced by the same 
organisation. It has been made available as a 
SPARQL endpoint with RESTful RDF lookup by the 
Sesam4 project. It should be linked to Open Street 
map and possibly to public transportation.  
• 
The Ministry of Culture maintains a dataset of all 
sports arenas in Norway. This dataset has been 
converted to RDF and made available as SPARQL 
endpoint with RESTful lookup in RDF by the 
Sesam4 project. This should be connected to the 
organisation in the Enhetsregisteret. 
Table 1 below provides information of the above mentioned 
data sets regarding the owners, the current formats they are 
available in, where they are made available, the estimated size, 
the quality of data, and the case study where they will be 
applied. 
 
Table 1. Relevant Norwegian LOD data sets for the proposed applications. 
Name 
Owner 
Format 
Hosting 
Estimated # of 
triples 
Quality 
(stars) 
Application 
Enhetregisteret 
Brønnnøysundreg
isterene 
Restful RDF Web 
service 
Brønnøysundregisterene 
> 4.500.000 
5 
App #1 
Kommunekatalogen 
KS 
XML 
Univ of Oslo / Semicolon II 
Ca 2.000 
3 
App #1 
NFR prosjektarkiv 
Norwegian 
Research Council 
RDF 
Computas/ Sesam4 
Ca 200.000 
5 
App #1 
Valgresultat 2005 
Government 
RDF 
Computas/ Semicolon II 
Ca 100.000 
4 
App #1 
Partifinansiering 2009 
Government 
RDF 
Computas/ Semicolon II 
Ca 100.000 
4 
App #1 
Grasrotandelen 
Norsk Tipping 
RDF 
Computas/ Semicolon II 
Ca 70.000 
4 
App #1 
Trafikkanten sanntid 
Oslo Kommune 
XML, JSON 
Oslo Kommune or Computas 
Ca 50.000 
3 
App #2 
Yr.no 
Met. Inst. 
XML 
Univ of Oslo / Semicolon II 
Ca 700.000.000 
3 
App #2 
Markadatabasen 
sanntid 
Skiforeningen 
XML 
Oslo Kommune or Computas 
Ca 100.000 
3 
App #2 
Offentlige sykler 
sanntid 
ClearChannel 
XML 
Oslo Kommune or Computas 
Ca 10.000 
3 
App #2 
Sykkelveier, turveier 
Oslo Kommune 
XML 
Oslo Kommune or Computas 
Ca 10.000 
3 
App #2 
Ladestasjoner (Sanntid) 
Ladestasjoner.no 
RDF 
Computas/ Semicolon II 
Ca 1.100  
3 
App #2 
Brøytebiler Sanntid 
Oslo Kommune 
XML 
Oslo Kommune or Computas 
Ca 10.000 
3 
App #2 
Tellus 
Tellus 
RDF 
Computas/Sesam4 
Ca 600.000 
3 
App #2 
Idrettsanlegg 
Ministry of Culture 
RDF 
Computas/Sesam4 
Ca 1.000.000 
3 
App #2 
IV. 
SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK 
This paper gave an overview of the Norwegian LOD as of 
mid 2011, and proposed two applications consuming the 
Norwegian LOD. The aim of the two applications is to enhance 
transparency in making factual information available to the 
public when it comes to regional development, and help 
individuals to act more environmentally friendly. We outlined 
the data sources available for building these two applications. 
The two applications rely on local and national data sets, but 
are highly generic and could be applicable for other countries 
as well. 
Whereas the data is available, improving its quality is of 
crucial importance for a successful realization of the proposed 
applications. In particular, the quality of links between the 
relevant data sets needs to be ensured. The links should be 
created with quality information based on the method being 
used, e.g. lookups in other registries, ontology reasoning, etc, 
and be put into a separate graph holding this provenance 
information. In addition, especially for the second application, 
available open data sets need to be published as RDF in a triple 
store and an infrastructure for the triple store and RESTful 
services needs to be available. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is partially funded by the nationally funded 
Semicolon II project, and the EU funded projects PlanetData 
and ENVISION. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Implementation of the PSI-directive: http://www.lovdata.no/all/hl-
20060519-016.html#9 (In Norwegian). 
[2] 
Gapminder: http://www.gapminder.org. 
[3] 
Enhetsregisteret: http://www.brreg.no/registrene/enhet. 
[4] 
Trafikanten 
sanntid: 
http://itunes.apple.com/no/app/trafikanten-
sanntid/id299318111?mt=8. 
[5] 
iMarka: http://itunes.apple.com/no/app/imarka/id344496606?mt=8. 
[6] 
LadeNå!:  http://itunes.apple.com/no/app/id329169428?mt=8. 
[7] 
 Oslo Bysykkel:  http://www.oslobysykkel.no/, Accessed April 2011. 
[8] 
Yr.no: http://itunes.apple.com/us/app/yr-no/id300709016?mt=8. 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

