Predicting the Approval or Disapproval of each Faction in a Local Assembly Using 
a Rule-based Approach 
 
Ryo Kato 
Major in Computer and Information Sciences 
Graduate School of Science and Engineering,  
Ibaraki University 
Hitachi, Ibaraki, Japan 
21nm718s@vc.ibaraki.ac.jp 
Minoru Sasaki 
Dept. of Computer and Information Sciences 
Faculty of Engineering,  
Ibaraki University 
Hitachi, Ibaraki, Japan 
minoru.sasaki.01@vc.ibaraki.ac.jp  
 
Abstract—This paper uses the meeting minutes of the Tokyo 
Metropolitan Assembly and the Ibaraki Prefectural Assembly 
to create a rule base for predicting the approval or disapproval 
of each faction, and to examine the effectiveness of methods for 
extracting opinions from the meeting minutes and methods for 
estimating when opinions cannot be obtained. In recent years, 
the voter turnout in Japan has been on a downward trend. In 
order to solve this problem, we conducted this research 
because we believe that it is necessary to present materials to 
judge the credibility of politicians' statements by clearly 
indicating in an easy-to-understand manner what kind of 
opinion each faction has on each proposition and the direction 
of its argument. In the Tokyo Metropolitan Assembly, we used 
the meeting minutes of the plenary sessions, and from the 
statements made during the meetings, we assumed that the 
opinion of the faction to which the speaker belonged was the 
opinion of "for" or "against" the proposal. As a method of 
estimating opinions, we created and verified several methods 
of estimating opinions when they could not be read. In 
addition to the method used in the Tokyo Metropolitan 
Assembly, the Ibaraki Prefectural Assembly implemented an 
estimation method that applied the opinions of the Assembly 
Steering Committee and an estimation method that used 
machine learning. As a result, in the Tokyo Metropolitan 
Assembly, the method that applied the opinions of the minority 
group obtained the highest value. For the Ibaraki Prefectural 
Assembly, the method that applied the members of the 
Assembly Steering Committee obtained the highest value. For 
the estimation of the Tokyo Metropolitan Assembly's opinion, 
there are similar studies that have recorded higher values, and 
further improvement in accuracy can be expected by using 
machine learning.  
Keywords- stance classification, Approval or disapproval 
forecast. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In this paper, we develop a system that allows each 
party to decide whether to support or oppose each proposal  
in a local assembly. 
In recent years, the voter turnout in Japan has been on a 
downward trend, with 51.28% in the last Tokyo 
Metropolitan Assembly election and only about 40% in the 
lowest years. The low voter turnout rate among people in 
their twenties is particularly noticeable, and in the Tokyo 
Metropolitan Assembly election of 2009, the turnout rate 
was 26.44%, the lowest of any generation. One possible 
reason for this is that it is difficult for young people to judge 
what kind of agenda, what kind of opinions, and what kind 
of discussions are going on in politics itself. It is not easy to 
watch all the meetings of the Diet or to read through the 
minutes, and we think this is the reason why people are not 
interested in politics. For this reason, we think that clearly 
indicating in an easy-to-understand manner what kind of 
opinion each faction has on each agenda item and showing 
the direction of their arguments would be a material for 
judging the credibility of politicians' statements. Looking at 
the minutes of a given meeting, it is not difficult to estimate 
the approval or disapproval of the major political parties, but 
it is difficult to estimate the opinions of the factions with a 
small number of seats, since they rarely make statements 
themselves. The goal of this research is to estimate the 
opinions of the political parties to which the politicians 
belong from their statements, and to calculate the approval 
or disapproval of each proposal.  
In section Ⅱ, we describe the implementation method of 
each experiment we conduct. Section Ⅲ  describes the 
experiments conducted in this paper, and the conclusion of 
this study is given in section Ⅳ. 
II. RULE BASED FOR STANCE CLASSIFICATION 
We talk about the rule based we used in the stance 
classification in this section 
A. Whole picture 
We scan the minutes of each meeting and detect whether 
the speaker agrees or disagrees with the proposal. If we are 
able to detect the approval or disapproval of a proposition, 
we take it as the opinion of the party to which the speaker 
belongs. If we are unable to obtain the approval or 
disapproval of the proposal being discussed, we assign an 
opinion to each group according to the rule base described 
below. We will take the approval or disapproval thus 
obtained as our response. 
B. How to process text and classify agree and disagree 
We input the plenary session minutes data and extract 
the remarks containing the bill number and their speakers. 
We use the minutes of the last day of each plenary session. 
We classify the minutes by speaker and content. We use 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-874-7
eKNOW 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

MeCab(Ver.0.996.2) to morphologically analyze these 
statements and get a list of strings. We scan this list and 
investigate whether there is a word "agree" or "disagree". If 
we find one or the other, we divide the list into two parts 
based on the location of the word. If we find “○○bill” and 
the bill number in the first sentence, we judge the 
proposition to be the opinion of the found phrase. We then 
repeat the same action in the following sentence. 
C. How to judge whether to agree or disagree of a 
proposal in the Tokyo Metropolitan Assembly 
1) Batch processing of bills 
There are some cases where a bill is described as " 
outside 〇〇 bill ".In this case, we convert the Chinese 
numerals in "〇〇" into alphanumeric characters. After that, 
we determine that the number plus one of the bills from the 
beginning of the bills whose Speaker is null in the minutes 
is an objection. For those proposals for which no opinion in 
favor or against was obtained by this method, we give the 
opinion of opposition to the Communist Party, which is 
often the opposition party, and the opinion of approval to 
the other parties provisionally. 
2) Judgment of approval or disapproval by ruling party 
or opposition faction 
In 1), we assigned affirmative opinions to the proposals 
on which no opinion was obtained. We now assign the 
labels of the ruling and opposition parties to the minority 
caucus and assign opinions accordingly. The minority group 
has very little to say during the assembly and it is difficult 
to extract approval or disapproval from the text of the 
meeting. For this reason, we collect the tendency of each 
minority group to agree or disagree with the opinion of the 
ruling party or the opposition party in advance, and assign 
opinions for or against each minority group accordingly. 
We estimated this tendency from Wikipedia's Tokyo 
Metropolitan Assembly page [9] and training data, and then 
we used the following data , a dictionary was created. We 
grant approval or disapproval if no approval or disapproval 
is obtained. For minority parties, we refer to the dictionary 
we created. A faction that is presumed to have "oppositional 
tendencies" is assigned the same opinion as the Communist 
Party, which is often the largest opposition party, as the 
opinion of that faction. This assigns an opinion to the 
minority party. 
3) Decisions for and against by the ruling and opposition 
factions 
We consider, as in 2), the manner in which opinion is 
presumed for the minority group. At the first meeting of 
each year of the meeting minutes, there is a discussion of 
the proposed budget. This budget proposal includes the 
"General Fund" and "Water Utility Account" and often the 
same budget proposal is discussed each year. We also 
estimate that all political parties often have a same opinion 
on this budget proposal every year. We gather from the 
Training data which budget proposals the various factions 
disagree with each year and create a dictionary. Using this 
dictionary, we determine whether the parties in question 
have ever held opposing views on the budget proposal, and 
if so, we assign opposing views to it as well. 
D. How to judge whether to agree or disagree of a 
proposal in  Ibaraki Prefectural Assembly 
1) Judgment of approval or disapproval by ruling party 
or opposition faction 
We use the same method as in 2) to estimate agree or 
disagree. We use the training data to estimate whether the 
various factions tend toward the ruling party or the 
opposition party. We assign the same approval or 
disapproval to parties that are estimated to be "opposition 
leaning" as to the Communist Party, which is often the 
largest opposition party. We thus assign an opinion to the 
minority party. 
2) Judgment using the minutes of the Parliamentary 
Steering Committee 
At the Steering Committee meeting, each faction 
expresses its opinion in favor of or against the proposal. The 
attitude of each faction is described in order to ask the 
faction in favor to raise their hands when the vote is taken in 
the plenary session. We infer approval or disapproval from 
the confirmation of attitudes after the phrase "the vote will 
be taken by division" in the meeting minutes. We first 
extract each part of the agenda that is being voted on.  There 
are cases where many bills are voted on at once, and cases 
where only a few are voted on. When we see the notation 
"Bills No.○○or ○○.", we handle the whole series of 
propositions from the first to the last one. We assign an 
opinion to each of these proposals. If there is the word 
"abstaining from voting" we label the group in that sentence 
as having no opinion. If it contains the phrase " A summary 
of the decision " we will label all factions in favor. If the 
wording is "rejection " the Communist Party will be labeled 
as in favor, and all other parties will be labeled as against. If 
there is a " showdown vote " we give the label of "remove" 
to the party described before the "except" language, if any, 
and the label of "for" to the other parties. If there is no 
"Remove" language, we give the label "agree" to the faction 
described before the " raising one's hand " and the label 
"disagree" to all others. 
3) Rule base for Predicting Pros and Cons Using BERT 
In this section, we use  Bidirectional Encoder 
Representations from Transformers (BERT) to find the cos 
similarity of the opposing proposals and predict the 
approval or disapproval based on it. BERT(Bidirectional 
Encoder Representations from Transformers))\ is a model 
announced by Google in 2018, in which a learning model 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-874-7
eKNOW 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

pre-trains a large amount of text data and can be applied to 
various tasks such as text understanding and sentiment 
analysis. There are two types of pre-training: one is to use 
the representation vector obtained from the pre-training as 
one of the features, and the other is to use the parameters 
obtained from the pre-training as initial values for the 
weights. In this experiment, we use the BERT(Bidirectional 
Encoder Representations from Transformers) pre-trained 
model [cl-tohoku/bert-base-japanese-whole-word-masking]. 
We first collect the bills that are opposed by each faction. 
We then compare them with the names of the bills in the 
currently estimated assembly. Using a pre-trained model, 
we extract the features of each proposition name. We 
calculate the cos similarity of the extracted features. If the 
similarity is 0.98 and 0.99, we also label the proposition as 
opposed. We collect the opposing bills from the first 
meeting in 2019 to the second meeting in 2020 after the 
election in 2008. We compare the names of the bills by 
deleting the parts of the bills that are not related to the 
contents of the bills, such as "HEISEI ○○ Fiscal year". We 
will compare the opposing bills with the bills submitted by 
the legislative bodies that we are judging. 
4) Rule base for Predicting pros and cons using machine 
learning for BERT with training data. 
In this section, we will build a machine learning/deep 
learning model to train the tendency of dissenting opinions 
of the Communist Party, and estimate it using the training 
results. We first create training data, in order to grasp the 
tendency of opposition to a particular proposition when the 
opposition to that proposition is also opposition to a 
particular proposition. For each opposing proposition, we 
collect related opposing propositions and label them as 
correct, and for unrelated propositions, we label them as 
incorrect. This training data is then used for learning. We 
use BERT(Bidirectional Encoder Representations from 
Transformers) to do the training. We apply this learning 
result to output the probability value of the target 
proposition. We set a threshold value of 0.5, and label the 
proposals whose probability value exceeds this value as the 
opposite. 
III. EXPERIMENTS 
In this section, we describe the experiments we 
performed and their results. 
E. Date 
1) Tokyo Metropolitan Assembly 
The data to be used are the Tokyo Metropolitan Assembly 
meeting minutes (from the fourth regular session in 1999 to 
the first regular session in 2019), the Test data question file 
(4551 questions), and the Training data question file (23321 
questions), as given in the Stance classification task in 
NTCIR15. The question file of Training data (23321 
questions) is used. In this question file, the information of 
the meeting and the name of the agenda are described. 
2) Ibaraki Prefectural Assembly 
The data to be input will be the minutes of the last day of 
each session of the Ibaraki Prefectural Assembly (the 4th 
session of 2011 to the 2nd session of 2020) and the 
Assembly Steering Committee (the 1st session of 2016 to 
the 2nd session of 2020). The training data will be created 
from the period from the 4th session in 2011 to the 2nd 
session in 2020. In addition, a dictionary of opposing bills 
of each group (the 1st session of 2019 to the 2nd session of 
2020) will be used. 
F. Result 
1) Tokyo Metropolitan Assembly 
Four experiments will be conducted. ① When no one 
votes for or against a proposal submitted by the governor, 
the Communist Party is given an opposition opinion and the 
other factions are given an affirmative opinion. ②In the 
case where the opinion of approval or disapproval is not 
obtained for a proposal submitted by the governor, the 
opinion of approval is given to all the factions. ③  In 
addition to ② above, if the process of " outside 〇〇 bill " 
is given. ④ In addition to ③ above, when the minority 
party is given information on the tendency of the ruling and 
opposition parties. ⑤ In addition to ③ above, when the 
minority party is given information on the proposed budget. 
The experimental results are summarized in Table 1. 
 
TABLE I. TOKYO METROPOLITAN ASSEMBLY EXPERIMENT 
accuary
total
match
miss
①
0.9457
4307
4073
234
②
0.8870
4541
4028
513
③
0.9604
4541
4361
180
④
0.9639
4541
4377
164
⑤
0.9604
4541
4361
180  
The method in ① predicted that the Communist Party 
would often take the position of the opposition party and 
oppose proposals submitted by the governor. Comparing the 
results of ① with those of ②, there was an improvement in 
accuracy of 6.15%. This is a result of the fact that the 
Communist Party also often gives its opinion in favor of the 
proposals submitted by the governor. In method ③, there 
was an improvement of 1.19% in accuracy. In method ④, 
we predicted the tendency of minority groups that could not 
speak and assigned an opinion. As a result, the highest 
performance was obtained, with an improvement of 0.35% 
over ③. The accuracy of ⑤ was the same as the accuracy 
of ③. The combined accuracy of the functions of ④ and ⑤ 
was 96.39%. This result confirms that the performance of 
④ and⑤ overlap or the usefulness of the method in ⑤ is 
low. 
2) Ibaraki Prefectural Assembly 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-874-7
eKNOW 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Seven experiments will be conducted.(1) When the label 
of agree is given when agree or disagree is not obtained. (2) 
When the opinion of the minority group is given. (3) When 
the minutes of the Assembly Steering Committee are used. 
(4) (5) Using BERT (Bidirectional Encoder Representations 
from Transformers), with a threshold of 0.98 and 0.99 to 
predict approval or disapproval. (6) (7) In the case of 
predicting approval or disapproval with the results of 
machine learning with 20 and 100 EPOCs of BERT 
(Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers) 
using training data.The experimental results are summarized 
in Table 2. 
 
TABLE II.  RESULTS OF THE IBARAKI PREFECTURAL ASSEMBLY 
BERTEXPERIMENT 
 
The highest accuracy and precision was obtained in 
experiment 2. It was found that the Parliamentary Steering 
Committee of the Ibaraki Prefectural Assembly could obtain 
the approval or disapproval of a proposal with a high 
probability. Among the methods used to estimate the 
approval or disapproval, the highest accuracy was obtained 
with the method set to 0.99 in (5). Compared to the 
formulation of 0.98, which used the same cos similarity, the 
number of wrong answers decreased by about 21. Since the 
number of correct objections has decreased, but the number 
of wrong objections has also decreased, we believe that 
99% is an effective setting for the decision threshold. 
IV. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we proposed a method for estimating the 
approval or disapproval of a faction for an agenda item from 
its statements, based on the minutes of the Tokyo 
Metropolitan Assembly and the Ibaraki Prefectural 
Assembly. In the Tokyo Metropolitan Assembly, we tested 
three techniques as estimation methods and compared their 
performance. One was to examine the way opinions were 
given when they were not obtained. The second was the 
estimation of opinions using a dictionary of the ruling and 
opposition parties to the minority party. Finally, we created 
a dictionary of budget proposals for the minority party and 
estimated opinions based on it. We examined the accuracy- 
of each method and investigated which method would result 
in the highest accuracy. As a result, the model with the 
highest accuracy was the one that used the ruling and 
opposition party dictionaries for the minority faction, which 
provided the highest performance with a correct answer rate 
of 96.39%. 
For the Ibaraki Prefectural Assembly, we tested the 
method using our own rules and the method using BERT 
(Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers). 
The method that collects opposing proposals in advance and 
directly asks for similarity to the proposals was effective. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Y. Kimura, K. Takamaru, T. Tanaka, A. Kobayashi, H. Sakaji, 
Y. Uchida, H. Ototake and S. Masuyama,  Creating Japanese 
Political Corpus from Local Assembly Minutes of 47 
Prefectures, “Proceedings of the 12th Workshop on Asian 
Language Resources (ALR12)”, pp.78-85. 
 
[2] S. Andler, Predicate path expressions. In “Proceedings of the 
6th. ACM SIGACT-SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles of 
Programming Languages (POPL '79)”.ACM Press, New 
York, 
NY,pp.226-236, 
Available 
from: 
https://doi.org/10.1145/567752.567774, 1979. 
 
[3] I. Editor (Ed.), “The title of book one (1st. ed.)”, The name of 
the series one, Vol. 9. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 
Available from: https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-09237-4, 2007. 
 
[4] D. Kosiur. “Understanding Policy-Based Networking (2nd. 
ed.)”. Wiley, New York, NY, 2001.  
 
[5] Y. Kimura, H. Shibuki, H. Ototake, Y. Uchida, K.  Takamaru, 
M. Ishioroshi, T. Mitamura, M. Yoshioka, T. Akiba, Y. Ogawa, 
M. Sasaki, K. Yokote, T. Mori, K. Araki, S. Sekine, and N. 
Kando. Overview of the NTCIR-15 QA Lab-PoliInfo Task, 
Proceedings of  The 15th NTCIR Conference. 
 
[6]  T. Kudo, K. Yamamoto, and Y. Matsumoto, Applying 
Conditional Random Fields to Japanese Morphological 
Analysis, In “Proceedings of the 2004 Conference on 
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing”. pp.230–
237, 2004 
 
[7] MeCab: Yet Another Part-of-Speech and Morphological -
Analyzer, Available from:  https://taku910.github.io/mecab/ 
 
[8] 
NTCIR-15 
QA 
Lab 
poliInfo, 
Available 
from:  
https://poliinfo2.net/stance-classification-task 
 
[9] Assembly page (https://ja.wikipedia.org/wiki/東京都議会) 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-874-7
eKNOW 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-874-7
eKNOW 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

