A Framework for Designing Knowledge Management Systems: Aggregating the 
Existing Approaches   
Gaga Ali Thomas, Farhi Marir, Romas Mikusauskas, Preeti Patel  
Knowledge Management Research Centre, 
Department of Computing 
London Metropolitan University, UK 
gaga642001@yahoo.com, f.marir@londonmet.ac.uk, r.mikusauskas@londonmet.ac.uk, p.patel@londonmet.ac.uk  
 
 
Abstract—To effectively manage organizational knowledge to 
promote innovative practice and gain sustainable competitive 
advantage, there is a need for a system called Knowledge 
Management System (KMS). This system helps to enhance the 
organizational process of knowledge creation, storage, 
retrieval, transfer and application. With the explosive growth 
of interest in knowledge management, different KMS 
frameworks have been produced by various researchers for 
successful implementation of knowledge initiatives. However, it 
was observed that, the existing frameworks do not provide a 
complete and generalized framework for designing of 
knowledge 
management 
system 
by 
defining 
the 
key 
fundamental attributes of KMS and their inter-relationships. 
This paper reviews the existing frameworks for designing KMS 
with the view to improving them by developing a more 
comprehensive 
integrated 
framework 
from 
a 
multi-
dimensional approach by incorporating, extending and 
aggregating attributes that are already available either from 
academic, theoretical approaches as well as from applied 
practitioner–like approaches in knowledge management 
efforts.  The development of this framework is based on the 
analysis of five selected KMS frameworks on which an initial 
integrated framework for designing KMS is proposed. 
Keywords-Framework; knowledge management system.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Today’s economy is generally referred to as a knowledge 
–based economy, where the  economy and the wealth has 
changed from a world where capital is seen to be a physical 
thing such as plant, machinery and land to a world where the 
real capital for creating wealth is less tangible.   
Knowledge is a multifaceted concept with multilayered 
meanings, however, knowledge can be defined as “justified 
true belief“ [1]. According to Alavi and Leidner [2], 
knowledge is information possessed in the mind of 
individuals. It is personalized information related to facts, 
procedures, concepts, interpretations, ideas, observations and 
judgment. 
Organizations need to manage knowledge for enabling 
their employees to learn and develop their competencies 
efficiently. Knowledge helps employees to be more creative 
and innovative and managing it efficiently enables 
individuals, teams and entire organizations to collectively 
and systematically create, share and apply knowledge to 
achieve their objectives. 
To effectively manage organizational knowledge to 
promote innovative practice and competitive advantage, 
there is a need for a system called Knowledge Management 
System (KMS). This system helps to enhance the 
organizational processes of knowledge creation, storage, 
retrieval, transfer and application [1],[2],[4].  
Organizational KMSs, usually, require profound cultural 
renovations, because, traditionally, organizations norms 
promote knowledge hoarding rather than knowledge sharing. 
Hence, a major cultural shift is requiring in changing 
employees’ attitudes and behavior so that they willingly and 
consistently share their knowledge and insights. These 
attitude and behavior challenges need to be adequately 
addressed, so as to ensure successful implementation of 
KMS in an organization. The challenges can be resolved 
through the development of a comprehensive KMS 
framework. 
A  KMS framework is a conceptual model that provides a 
broad guideline that facilitates effective and efficient 
implementation of a KM initiative. KMS is not a technology 
or a set of methodologies; rather, it is a practice or discipline 
that involves people, processes and technology [1],[2],[3]. 
This paper is divided into six sections. Sections 1 and 2 
are devoted to the introduction and motivation for 
development of a framework. Section 3 is devoted to 
presenting previous work, Section 4 analyses a selected 
number of existing frameworks and Section 5 presents the 
proposed framework. Sections 6 and 7 are devoted to 
conclusion and future work. 
 
 
II. 
MOTIVATION 
With the explosive growth of interest in knowledge 
management, various Knowledge management system 
frameworks have been developed by different researchers 
based on their background and area of interest for successful 
implementation of a knowledge management initiative. 
However, it was observed that most of the existing 
frameworks do not adequately fulfill the KMS needs of 
organizations [3]. That is, the existing frameworks do not 
provide a complete and generalized framework for designing 
of the knowledge management system by defining the key 
fundamental attributes of KMS and their inter-relationship.  
Hence, there is a need to improve on the existing KMS 
frameworks 
so 
as 
to 
ensure 
that 
the 
framework 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

comprehensively consists of key fundamental attributes, in 
order to reduce the level of failure of Knowledge 
management (KM) projects and loss in revenue incurred by 
organizations in implementing KM projects. 
Therefore, the purpose of this research is to examine the 
existing frameworks for designing KMS and to improve 
upon them by developing a more comprehensive integrated 
KMS framework from a multi-dimensional approach by 
incorporating, extending and aggregating attributes that are 
already available from academic, theoretical approaches as 
well as from applied practitioners, like approaches in 
knowledge management efforts.   
III. 
PREVIOUS WORK 
In order to implement KMS successfully, a KMS 
framework is needed [3]. Rusli et al. [4] define the 
framework of KMS as the guidelines and directions to set up 
KMS. In this section, we will review the proposed 
framework and identify limitations on a number of issues 
related to KMS such as collaboration, cultural issues, 
knowledge sharing, methodology for implementing the 
framework, generalization, leadership, communities of 
practices, information context, learning elements, usability of 
KMS, copyright and costs of implementing the framework.  
Sajeva [5] acknowledges that the changing business 
environment, characterized by dynamically discontinuous 
changing, requires a re-conceptualization of Knowledge 
Management Systems as they have been understood in 
information system practice and research. It emphasises that 
in a dynamically and discontinuously changing business 
environment, there is a need for a paradigm shift from an 
information processing view to a sense-making view of 
Knowledge Management. 
Malhotra and Galletta [6] explicitly recognized that 
knowledge resides in the user and not in the collection of 
information. It states that, the human aspect of knowledge 
creation and knowledge renewal cannot be replaced by 
knowledge management technologies especially in the 
following areas:  imagination and creativity latent in human 
minds, untapped tacit dimensions of knowledge creation, 
subjective and meaning making basis of knowledge and 
constructive aspects of knowledge creation and renewal. The 
proposed framework offers a combination of flexibility and 
agility while ensuring efficiencies of the current technology 
architecture. It allows for continuous re-examination of the 
assumptions under lying best practices, reinterpretation of 
this information and efficiencies based on propagation and 
dissemination of the best practices. Despite the fact that the 
proposed framework acknowledged the human factor, need 
for sense-making knowledge in a dynamic business 
environment, the framework fail to address cultural issues 
that need to be considered when migrating from the 
traditional to sense-making approach. 
Rusli et al. [7] present a Knowledge Management system 
framework called Active Design Support (ADS). The 
frameworks is aimed at providing product designers with 
critical design knowledge and guide them toward rational 
design decisions based upon relevant design errors and 
successful design decisions in the past during product 
development processes. They considered the design 
knowledge obtained by individual designers and experts as a 
valuable asset to an organization for enhancing the 
competitiveness of products a company’s designs can 
produce. They stated that insufficient flow of information 
and shared knowledge in an organization can result in delays,  
sub-standard product quality and costly errors, due to 
disregard of previous experiences. Although, the ADS 
framework enhances and promotes knowledge sharing 
amongst designers, it is clear that the framework does not 
stress the importance of collaboration and it undermines the 
issue of copyright law. 
According to Rusli et al. [3], within the general 
frameworks of KMS, even though accepted, there are some 
unidentified features that have not been discovered and that 
the addition of these unidentified features will make the 
existing framework of KMS more effective. Rusli et al. [7] 
adopted an earlier KMS framework as a base-line for their 
research work in investigating the general perception and 
acceptance 
of 
people 
toward 
the 
current 
KMS 
implementation in six selected PHLI in Klang Village, 
Malaysia. From their research, six elements were identified 
as causes for not successfully implementing KMS in the 
selected institutions. These elements are:  lack of awareness 
of KMS implementation, unutilized technical component, 
application and systems, ignorance of advance technology, 
cost of KMS implementation, lack of incentives and rewards 
and unaware of KMS audit. Therefore, the KMS framework 
of Rusli et al. [7] was modified; KMS awareness was defined 
as individual components for the KMS framework, rather 
than a part of a component as presented by the earlier work 
[7] which considered awareness as part of the KMS 
Psychological component. In addition, the research indicated 
that 
KMS 
Audit 
gained 
less 
attention 
in 
KMS 
implementation. The authors suggested that there should be 
clear interaction between KMS Awareness and KMS Audit; 
this will be achieved by implementing the Audit Mechanism 
as well as feedback mechanism. They also stated that in 
implementing the KMS framework, the issue of incentives 
and rewards must be considered, while they neglect the issue 
of culture as it relates to the individual and the organization. 
Roberta [8] presented a new approach to KMSs called 
Distributed Knowledge Management (DKM) and applied it 
in a case study with Impres a Pizzarotti & C.S.P.A., a 
complex Italian building industry. The paper views that the 
common outcome of the traditional KMS is the creation of 
Enterprise Knowledge Portal (EKP), a web-based interface 
which provides a common access point to corporate 
knowledge. Even if users have different profiling systems, 
the underlying representation of EKP is typically unique, and 
is 
meant 
to 
represent 
a 
common 
and 
shared 
conceptualization of corporate knowledge that enables 
communication and knowledge sharing across the entire 
organization. This approach to KMS is incompatible with the 
very nature of what is to be managed and consequently are 
often deserted by users. The author based the concept of 
DKM on two principles: the principle of autonomy, which 
grants organizational units a high degree of semantic 
autonomy in managing their local knowledge and the 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

principle of coordination, which allows each organizational 
unit to exchange knowledge with other units through 
processes of double loop learning. According to this 
approach, complex knowledge-based organizations can be 
seen as “Constellations” of local organizational units which 
exhibit some degree of semantic autonomy, with the ability 
to manage local knowledge and to develop a personal 
perspective on the world. The resulting KMS aimed at 
sustaining the creation and management of different 
conceptual schemes which coexist within a DKM system.  
The author further explained that within a DKM system, 
each organizational unit, either formal or informal must be 
represented and verified by a Knowledge Node (KN), and 
that each KN should consist of a knowledge owner, a system 
of artifact and a context. This approach attempts to address 
why people are led to desert KMS by focusing on the lack of 
coherence between a privileged, unique and supposedly 
shared conceptualization of knowledge within KMS and the 
different ways of thinking of workers, communities, teams 
and officers that participated in the firm’s activity. While the 
framework recognized the importance of knowledge nodes in 
designing KMS, the authors fail to explain the effective way 
to manage inter KN in knowledge sharing. 
Roberta [8] also noted that numerous researchers have 
proposed several KMS frameworks, many of these 
frameworks are prescriptive and providing direction on the 
type of KM procedure without providing specific details on 
how these procedures should be accomplished. Based on 
their research work on HLI, they revealed that people mostly 
concentrate on KMS infrastructure and technology and 
neglect other very important issues of KMS such as human 
aspects. Therefore, they proposed a KMS framework that 
consists of five components. These include: functionality and 
system architecture as the backbone to support the KMS, 
psychological and cultural aspects as well as the knowledge 
strategies and measurement or system auditing. The 
proposed KMS framework covered both the technological 
and human aspect of KMS, however key issues like 
leadership, communities of practices are missing in the 
framework design, which are very fundamental elements in 
the success of KMS. 
Rusli et al. [9] state that a Learning Organization (LO) 
still has difficulties in identifying the appropriate KMS 
architectural framework and KMS technologies for their 
organizations and that, there is no clear mechanism on how 
to motivate and encourage a Community of Practice (COP) 
to share and reuse knowledge, as well as to generate new 
knowledge in a collaborative environment. The authors 
proposed a KMS model and architecture for LO that consists 
of six main components in order to serve a community 
within a collaborative environment to work together to 
achieve the desired objectives of an organization. This KMS 
framework is found to be good for people to share their 
knowledge in a learning organization, however, it fails to 
consider the dynamism of the learning environment, 
information flow and the issue of context of information 
shared between users of the KMS. 
According to Mohd et al. [10], there exist gaps between 
theory and practice in the current knowledge management 
framework. The authors used Shell IT International (SITI) 
Knowledge Management framework as a case study. The 
authors identified eight activities that are critical in the 
knowledge management of an organization. The activities 
are as follows: initiation, production, modelling, repository, 
distribution 
and 
transfer, 
technology 
infrastructure, 
application and retrospect. The authors presented an 
alternative framework that addresses the entire processes 
needed for SITI’s internal and external Knowledge 
Management usage and development. The framework is 
cyclic in nature, with multiple feedback loops and iteration 
which means it can provide queries and receive feedbacks 
from various departments in the organization. The features of 
the proposed framework are: strategic, model, use, review, 
and transfer and technology infrastructure. The framework 
did not provide methodology for implementing the 
framework, and the research is based on a single entity and 
cannot be generalized. 
Mostafa et al. [11] observed that early KMS concentrated 
too much on technical issues and hence fails to produce the 
desired outcome of KMS.  The authors presented an 
integrated KMS framework, which consists of three main 
layers. The interior layer is the knowledge architecture, 
which it is considered as the KM backbone. They defined 
knowledge architecture as a logical set of principles and 
standards which guide the engineering (high level) design, 
selection, 
construction, 
implementation, 
support 
and 
management of an organization’s Knowledge   Management 
System Infrastructure. 
Others factors considered in the interior layer are: 
Knowledge Strategy, Knowledge Capturing, Knowledge 
Storage and Knowledge Sharing. The middle layer consists 
of factors considered as necessary for the successful 
implementation of a KMS; these factors are business process 
reengineering, 
reward 
and 
promotion 
system, 
pilot, 
technology, training and education programs. The outer layer 
includes factors that are classified as general in comparison 
with the outer factors. These factors are organizational 
culture, transparency, CEO support and commitment, and 
trust. The authors explained the methodologies for the 
adoption of this KMS framework, which takes into account 
both the technological and human aspects.  The framework 
presents a holistic approach to KMS, but does not mention 
anything regarding data management and cost effectiveness 
of the KMS framework.  
Chong and Choi [12] reviewed early studies on KMS and 
noted that many KMS research has taken a narrow view, 
overlooking important foundations such as law (Knowledge 
Privacy and Protection), Politics (Knowledge Control and 
dominance) and marketing (persuasion and knowledge 
asymmetries). Also that KMS research seldom considered 
the “dark side” and how it could be used to suppress or 
distort knowledge to serve a specific agenda. The authors 
came up with seventeen most desirable capabilities of KMS. 
The seventeen capabilities were sorted in order of 
importance as follows: adaptability, cost effectives, first 
access, ease to use, search and retrieval, security, knowledge 
creation, 
content 
management, 
quality 
assurance, 
collaboration, 
multimedia, 
report 
generation, 
central 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

repository, push strategy, customizability, metrics and 
incentive. Their studies focused on the recent changes in the 
way that organizations view KM and suggested that there 
should be stronger integration of KMS with the overall 
technology in organization. More focus should be given to 
place KM Support in context and integrating KMS with 
existing technologies, creating integrated knowledge support 
systems-business 
technologies 
enhanced 
with 
KM 
capabilities. The KMS framework presented an approach 
from 
a 
multidimensional 
perspective; 
however, 
the 
framework fails to consider learning as a key element of 
KMS. 
Weber [13] observed that among the widely discussed 
categories of KMS are repository-based and expert locations. 
Repository-based KMS are typically adopted in support of 
knowledge sharing and leveraging, based on well-maintained 
databases that store explicit knowledge. Expert locater KMS 
are systems that link users with experts on the basis of stored 
experts’ skills and competencies. They noted that despite the 
fact that both the repository-based and expert locator are 
important to organizations, they are implemented separately 
by different systems. They proposed a multifunction 
framework with a single architecture that performs the role 
of both systems. That is, a multifunctional framework for 
designing KMS which adopts a single architecture and 
performs KM functions that originally required multiple 
architectures. The architecture lies on two databases: 
structured knowledge artifacts and the experts, where each 
artifact is associated with the experts. The principles 
guarding the framework are highlighted as collaboration, 
transparency, justification, absorbency, technology and 
verification. The framework focuses more on technical 
aspects of designing KMS; it does not mention anything 
regarding easy to use and user friendliness of application. 
Also, the proposed framework was not subjected to thorough 
evaluation of the different functionalities. 
Hanlie et al. [14] proposed an enhanced framework and 
methodology for KM system implementation. In developing 
the proposed framework and methodology, the authors take 
into 
consideration 
recommendations 
regarding 
the 
development of a KM framework presented in Rubenstein-
Montano et al. [15]. The proposed framework consists of 
five phases namely: choosing a strategy, evaluation, 
development, validation and implementation. Each phase of 
the framework consists of sub-phases describing the 
methodology applicable to each phase. The proposed 
methodology describes the procedure and steps to be 
followed and is aligned with the proposed framework. The 
authors claimed that the outcome of the proposed framework 
was successful. As the proof of concept was carried out on a 
single organization, hence the generalization and validation 
of the framework across multiple organizations and sectors 
of 
the 
economy 
is 
desirable 
to 
ascertain 
the 
comprehensiveness of the framework and methodology. 
According to Alavi and Leidner [2], many of the past 
frameworks do not take into account the importance of 
human aspects in knowledge management. The author 
suggested a new framework; the emphasis is on the provision 
of training to the employees, providing incentives and 
rewards to employees to share tacit knowledge and the 
importance 
of 
information 
technology. 
The 
major 
constituents of the framework are rewards, technology, 
culture, training, learning, strategy, structure, system, 
leadership, personality and attitude. The author claimed that 
the proposed framework provides a holistic view for KM 
implementation which earlier frameworks have ignored. 
Even though, the proposed KMS framework was developed 
based on practical survey in an Indian organization, there is 
no evidence of validation of this model in different 
environments or through case study. 
Parag [16] acknowledged that today’s  global managers 
are 
facing 
unprecedented 
challenges 
outside 
their 
organizations  fueled  by environmental forces of changes 
such as globalization, emerging technologies, emerging best 
business practices, government regulations, competitive  
global financial markets, limited knowledge workers and 
higher worker turnover rates. Also the rapid increases in the 
development of emerging technologies have forced many 
managers and executives to reinvent their decision-making 
methodologies. The author noted that the current KMS may 
have outlined their usefulness due to the rapid rate of change 
of technological and economic forces occurring in the global 
economy. The author suggested that emerging Knowledge 
Management System will include encryption tools, existing 
client/server applications, new ultra high speed internet, 
emerging 
technologies, 
mobile 
devices, 
government 
regulations and guidelines, financial information system, 
accounting information system, best business practices, 
ethical practices and legal guidelines. The proposed KMS 
framework will allow the knowledge workers to collaborate 
remotely on projects via high speed Internet bandwidth and 
web-based tools and applications. However, the author fails 
to take into consideration the cost implication of 
implementing such KMS framework, and the reliability of 
networks especially in the developing countries.   
 
IV. 
ANALYSIS OF SLECTED KMS FRAMEWORK 
Since the objective of this research is to develop a 
comprehensive 
integrated 
KMS 
framework 
from 
a 
multidimensional approach, taking into consideration the key 
fundamental attributes of KM initiatives, two approaches 
were adopted: (1) a critical literature review of the existing 
literature on KMS frameworks. Based on the review, five 
KMS frameworks (form a social-technical perspective) were 
selected, as a benchmark for the research; (2) a comparative 
study of the five selected KMS frameworks was conducted.  
In a comparative study like most other studies, there are two 
different approaches: Descriptive and Normative approach.  
Since the research is concerned with developing an 
improved framework, a normative approach was adopted for 
the study. This is because the normative approach aims at 
studying, evaluating and improving the present stage of the 
object of study. Since the normative approach combines 
empirical observation with normative assessment, it is 
particularly useful for the analysis of concepts that have both 
descriptive and evaluation dimension that cannot be 
disentangled [18].  
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Based on this study, a more comprehensive integrated 
KMS framework from a multidimensional approach was 
developed by aggregating the critical success attributes from 
the selected framework.  The proposed framework was 
evaluated through a questionnaire to obtain scientific 
feedback from Developers, Practitioners and Academics in 
the domain. The aim of the evaluation was to investigate the 
acceptability of the proposed framework. The analysis of the 
five selected frameworks is presented in Table 1 and Table 2. 
 
TABLE I.  
FIVE SELECTED KMS FRAMEWORKS 
 
 
However, none of the selected frameworks presented the 
whole spectrum of element as depicted in Table 3. Also, 
each of the KMS framework focused more on one or two sub 
system(s) than the other, that is some have emphasis on the 
Human-Social context and Knowledge context than in 
Technology context [19]. In order to create an effective 
KMS in an organization, there is need to ensure that all 
relevant elements are considered in designing and 
developing the KMS framework. That is relevant elements 
from the Human-Social, Technology and Knowledge context 
need to be integrated and harmonized. 
 
 
TABLE II.  
ATTRIBUTES OF SELECTED KMS FRAMEWORKS 
 
V. 
PROPOSED FRAMEWORK FOR DEVELOPING KMS 
Rubenstein-Montano et al. [15] make the following 
recommendations as regard to the development of KMS 
framework: 
 
A KMS framework should be both prescriptive and 
descriptive. 
 
KMS must be directed by learning as feedback 
loops both single and double. 
 
The Cultural aspects of the organization must be 
acknowledged and the practices must be compatible 
with the culture. 
 
Planning should take place before any KM 
activities are conducted. 
 
The organizational goals and strategies must be 
linked to KM. 
 
A KM framework should be consistent with system 
thinking. 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

TABLE III.  
ANALYSIS OF SELECTED KMS FRAMEWORKS 
 
 
Following the analyses of the selected KMS frameworks 
and considering what constitutes a KMS framework as 
described by Rubenstein-Montano et al. [15], a proposed 
Integrated KMS framework is presented as shown in Table 
4. 
The proposed framework consists of three layers namely:  
foundation layer, core layer and outcome layer. The 
foundation layer is considering being a strategy sustainable 
layer which consists of two components: the organizational 
philosophy and learning. Organizational philosophy contains 
the following attributes: vision, plan, policies, procedures, 
processes and culture while learning components have 
system 
thinking, 
human 
creativity 
and 
actionable 
information as attributes. Each of these attributes is 
considered as necessary critical factors for the successful 
implementation of knowledge management system. 
The 
core 
layer 
consists 
of 
three 
components: 
technological system, social-human system and knowledge 
system. The technological system has sixteen attributes 
namely: Infrastructure, Data Management, Inter-operability, 
Cost 
Effectiveness, 
Technological 
Solution, 
System 
Functionality, System Integration, Scalability, User Friendly, 
Information Flow, Architecture, Accessibility, Security, 
Multi-media, Web-based solution and Agent-based system. 
TABLE IV.  
PROPOSED FRAMEWORK 
 
 
The social-human system has eighteen attributes namely:  
Psychology, 
Environmental 
Analysis, 
Collaboration, 
Communication, 
Re-engineering, 
Experimentation,  
Adaptability, Self-Leadership, Education and training, 
Network of Experts, Alignment, Diversity, Content and 
Context, Change management,  Stakeholder forum,  and 
Government policy . 
The knowledge system has also eighteen attributes 
namely:  Mission, Functionality, Strategy, Integration, 
Institutionalization, Sponsorship, Motivation, Organizational 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Structure, 
Trust, 
leadership, 
Budget, 
Documentation, 
Knowledge 
template, 
Data 
protection 
and 
privacy, 
Measurement and Awareness. 
The outcome layer has three attributes namely: efficiency 
and effectiveness, innovative practice and competitive 
advantage. The presence of the outcome layer in the 
framework is to ensure that organization really identify the 
benefits that they intend to derive from implementing KMS. 
Without a clear understanding of the benefits of 
implementing a KMS, it will be difficult to measure the 
success of KMS. 
When an organization has a clear mind set of what they 
want to achieve from implementing KMS, then Human, 
cultural and organizational issues need to be addressed to 
ensure that they support, promote and encourage knowledge 
management practice. These issues will be addressed in the 
sustainable layer.  
The last phase for implementing KMS is the core layer; 
here the issue of technological, knowledge and Human-
Social system are addressed. 
As for implementing this proposed KMS framework, a 
methodology is proposed in table 5 below. It describes the 
procedures and steps to be followed in implementing this 
framework in which detail attributes and activities are 
contained. 
TABLE V.  
 DESCRIPTION OF PROPOSED KMS FRAMEWORK 
METHODOLOGY 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
As earlier stated, KMS is not a technology or a set of 
methodologies; rather, it is a practice or discipline that 
involves people, processes and technology [1],[2],[3]. Every 
organization needs a KMS framework to enable it derive the 
desired benefits of implementing KM initiative. The 
proposed framework attempts to build a framework that is 
comprehensive, integrated and multidimensional in approach 
into a single framework. Initial analyis of questionnaires and 
surveys responses on the proposed framework has been very 
encouraging. The results has showen that most of the issues 
raised during surevys have been addressed in this proposed 
framework in particular: 
(1) Integration of learning and knowledge management: 
The need for organizations to become learning 
organizations requires knowledge management, 
which 
in 
turn 
is 
dependent 
on 
learning 
organizations.  However, these concepts are 
addressed separately in most KMS framework. 
From the research, it is clear that the two concepts 
are interrelated and dependent.  Hence, to enhance 
organizational creativeness and innovation, the two 
concepts need to be integrated into a single 
framework. 
(2) Systematic approach to KMS implementation: An 
Integrated framework that is holistic needs to adopt 
a 
number 
of 
guiding 
principles 
for 
KM 
implementation. These principles should include; 
organizational 
policies, 
plan, 
procedures, 
philosophy, structure and methods.   These 
principles should present the organizational KM 
vision and link it to the overall organizational 
business goals. All these guiding principles are 
integral of a KMS framework and should be the 
foundation layer of KM initiative as presented in the 
proposed KMS framework. 
(3) Framework comprehensiveness: The proposed 
framework presents a fully integrated framework 
from 
a 
multi- 
dimensional 
approach 
by 
incorporating and aggregating the KMS attributes 
that are already available from academic, theoretical 
approaches and as well as from applied practitioner 
–like approaches in KM efforts. 
(4) Human-centric approach in designing KMS: The 
research work revealed that KM success highly 
depends on human-social system of KM efforts. 
That is, Human-centric is the best approach to KM 
initiative since people are considered as the most 
critical element in KMS implementation. Hence, 
frameworks should focus on the importance of 
people in relation to KMS, and the need to put in 
place appropriate cultural value that will encourage 
KMS practice.   
(5) Integrating the outcome layer in the KMS 
framework: A clear understanding of the expected 
result of implementing KMS by an organization is 
very critical to the success of the project. Hence 
organizations need to identify what they want to 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

achieve in implementing KMS before commencing 
the implementation. 
So, the next stage of this research work will be to get a 
scientific feedback from the experts and the perceptions on 
the components, attributes, approach and design of the 
proposed KMS framework from stakeholders. Practitioners, 
Academics and Developers are the main stakeholders in the 
knowledge management domain which could be usefully 
surveyed with an Internet-based questionnaire.  
More questionnaires and surevys will be administered to 
a breadth of industrial sectors to consolidate the initial 
results. The findings of the investigation will be interpreted 
and used to review the proposed KMS framework. This 
enhanced framework will then be practically tried and 
tested in a large public-sector organisation like Nigerian 
Post Office.  
REFERENCES 
[1] I. Nonaka, “A Dynamic Theory of organizational knowledge 
creation” Oganization Science (5:1),  pp. 14 – 37, 1994. 
[2] M. Alavi and Leidner D. E., “Knowledge Management and 
Knowledge Management Systems: Conceptual Foundations 
and research issues” Management Information Systems  
Quarterly,  pp. 107 – 136, 2001. 
[3] A. Rusli, I. Hamidah, A. Rodziah, N. Suhaimi, H.S Mohd, 
H.V. Nurul, and H.H. Sifi “The Development of Bio 
informatics 
Knowledge 
Management 
System 
with 
collaboration Environment” International formal of computer 
science and Network Security, Vol. 8, No. 2, pp. 309 – 318, 
February 2008. 
[4] S. Svetlana “The analysis of key element of Socio-technical 
knowledge 
management 
system”. 
Economics 
and 
Management, ISBN 1822-6515,  pp. 765 – 744, 2010. 
[5] P. P. Gandong, H. Sundgo, and P. Sehyung,“A design 
knowledge management framework for active design support” 
Proceedings of DETC’ 99: 1999 ASME Design Engineering 
Technical Conference September 12–15,  pp. 22-29, 1999 Las 
Vages Nevade. 
[6] Y. Malhotra and D.F. Galletta, “Role of commitment and 
motivation 
in 
knowledge 
management 
system 
implementation: theory, conceptualization and measurement 
of antecedents of success”. Proceeding of the 36th Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences, pp. 1 – 10, 6-9 
January, Hawai, 2003. 
[7] H.A. Rusli, H.S. Mohd, S. Shamsul, and A.A. Rose “A 
framework 
for 
Knowledge 
Management 
System 
Implementation in Collaborative Environment for Higher 
Learning 
Institution.” 
Online 
Journal 
of 
Knowledge 
Management Practice,  March 2005. (Retrieved from 
http://www.tlainc.com/articl90.htm on January 2013) 
[8] R. Cuel “A New methodology for Distributor Knowledge 
Management Analysis”. 3rd International Conference on 
Knowledge Management: Proceedings of I-KNOW '03, 2003. 
Proceedings of: Know-Center, Graz, Austria, pp. 531 – 537, 
2nd-4th July 2003. 
[9] H.A. Rusli, S. Shamsul, A. A. Rose, and H.S. Mohd 
“Knowledge 
Management 
System 
Architecture 
for 
organization learning with collaboration environment”. 
International Journal of Computer Science and Network 
Security, Vol. 6. No: 3A, pp. 237-246,  March 2006. 
[10] H.S. Mohd, H.A. Rusli, and J.P. Christi “Knowledge 
Management framework in technology support environment” 
International Journal of Computer Science and Network 
Security. Vol. 6, No. 8, pp. 101 – 109,  SA  August 2006. 
[11] J. Mostafa, N. Mehdi, and A. Penman A. “Establishing an 
Integrated KM System in Iran Aerospace Industries 
Organization Journal of Knowledge Management, Vol.II, No. 
1, 2007,  pp. 127-142.  
[12] C.S. Chong and Y. S. Choi ”Critical factor in the Successful 
implementation of knowledge Management” Online Journal 
of Knowledge Management Practice, June 2005. (Retrieved 
from http://www.tlainc.com/articl90.htm on January 2013) 
[13] R. Weber “Knowledge Management in call Centres”. The 
Electronic Journal of Knowledge Management Volume 5, 
Issue 3, 2007,  pp. 333 – 346. Available outline at www.ejkm 
.com (Retrieved Januray 2013) 
[14] S. Hanlie, V.D.M Alta, L. Marianne, and K. Paula “ A 
framework and methodology for knowledge management 
system implementation”  Proceedings of the Conference of 
the South Africa Institution of Computer Scientists and 
Information Technologists. ISBN 978-1-60358-6431-4. pp. 
70-79, 2009. 
[15] N. Rubenstein-Montano, J. Liebowitz, J. Buchwalter,  D. 
McCaw, B.B. Newman, and K. Rebeck “A systems thinking 
framework for knowledge management”. Decision Support 
Systems, 2001 a 31 (1): pp. 5 – 16. 
[16] S. Parag “Knowledge Management Implementation Holistic 
Framework based on Indian Study”. Proceedings of Pacific 
Asia Conference on Information Systems (PACIS), 2009, July 
10-12, pp. 60 – 69,  India . 
[17] S. Hanlie, V.D.M Alta, L. Marianne, and K. Paula “A 
framework and Methodology for knowledge Management 
System Implementation” Proceeding of the Conference of the 
South Africa Institute of Computer Scientist and Information 
Technologist, pp. 70-77, 11-14th October, 2009, South Africa. 
[18] H. Tzyh-Lih, A. Li-min, A. Jen-Her, and A. H. Jang “A 
framework for Designing Nursing Knowledge Management 
Systems”. Interdisciplinary journal of Information, knowledge 
and Management Volume 1, pp. 14 – 22, 2006. 
[19] H. Smut, V.D.M Alta, L. Marianne, and K. Paula “A 
framework and Methodology for knowledge Management 
Systems Implementation” Proceeding of the Conference of 
the South Africa Institute of Computer Scientist and 
information Technologist, pp. 70-77, ISBN 978-1-60558-643-
4, 2009, South Africa.  
 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

