Intranet 2.0 Based Knowledge Production  
An Exploratory Case Study on Barriers for Social Software 
 
Doris Riedl, Fritz Betz 
Dept. Information Technology and Information Studies 
University of Applied Sciences Burgenland  
Eisenstadt, Austria 
e-mail: doris.riedl@fh-burgenland.at, fritz.betz@fh-burgenland.at 
 
 
Abstract— The evolution of static intranets to dynamic web 2.0 
based information systems is one way to provide space for the 
collaborative production of knowledge within an enterprise. 
Despite the fact that social software is now commonly provided 
for intra-company usage, this usage is below expectations in 
many cases. This paper, based on an exploratory case study in 
an international bank, shows the drawbacks as well as the 
drivers for the participative generation of knowledge using 
web 2.0 tools within an intranet. The findings, against the 
background of recent technology-oriented research, are three 
groups of possible barriers which are intertwined and 
therefore influence each other, namely organisational, cultural 
and technological barriers. Above all, the results of the case 
study suggest it is less meaningful to discuss if and how social 
software may or may not change organisations but to interpret 
the findings in a social science-based framework by taking the 
work of Boltanski & Chiapello and their understanding of the 
new forms of work organisation into consideration. This 
interpretation, while preliminary, suggests that employees 
using Web 2.0 software for knowledge production struggle 
with the ambiguity between the demands of these new forms of 
work and the existing, traditional organisational structures. 
Keywords 
- 
Intranet 
2.0; 
Collaboration; 
Knowledge 
Production; Barriers; Enterprise 2.0  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Implementing interactive Web 2.0 based software for 
organisation internal usage is often accompanied by diffuse 
expectations, such as better knowledge management or 
increased productivity. However, current data shows that 
investment in collaboration software in many cases does not 
fulfill these intentions, as the usage of the tools is below 
expectations [1]. Nevertheless, social software based on web 
2.0 principles [2] [3] is widespread in enterprises [4] [5] [6] 
[7] [8]. Placing the focus on the internal usage of web 2.0 
based software, enterprises are now leaving the 1.0 era of 
intranets and turning to social intranets, providing blogs, 
wikis and features for social networking, such as user 
profiles, activity streams and microblogging [9]. Such 
intranet 2.0 platforms [10] are to be used by employees for 
information 
exchange, 
communication, 
networking, 
coordination and the collaborative production of knowledge. 
Driven by an IT industry hype, these projects focus on 
currently discussed Enterprise 2.0 concepts such as open 
communication, open information access, enhanced cross-
departmental collaboration and open innovation. However, 
the realisation of these aspects is below expectations [8]. 
Intranet 2.0 in the above sense is a subset of Enterprise 2.0 
aiming at the organisation´s internal communication and 
collaboration. Therefore findings of the current Enterprise 
2.0 discussion are highly relevant for intranet 2.0 projects.   
The term Enterprise 2.0 was proposed by McAfee [11] as 
“the use of emergent social software platforms within 
companies, or between companies and their partners and 
customers“. This marked the beginning of a lively and still 
ongoing 
discussion 
among 
researchers 
as 
well 
as 
practitioners about how enterprises may benefit from the 
usage of social media. The current discussion concerning 
“the deep impact on organisational and cultural changes“ of 
Enterprise 2.0 projects [12] considers the possible changes in 
the ways people communicate, share information, contribute 
and make decisions, due to the new active role of the users.  
But unfortunately these discussions are characterised by a 
lack of specific results and diffuseness. To date, there is little 
research into the interplay between the success rate of 
implementing Enterprise 2.0 initiatives, the organisation of 
work that manifests itself in the form of organograms, 
business 
process 
descriptions 
and 
standards 
within 
companies, and finally, norms and values which are rooted in 
a company’s corporate culture.  
The present paper, therefore, aims to fill part of this gap 
by presenting a case study on an intranet 2.0 project in an 
international bank: We analyse what the potential barriers as 
well as the potential drivers for the collaborative production 
of knowledge using social software are. Against the 
background of technology and business oriented research, 
we chose a more human-centred approach considering soft 
factors 
such 
as 
norms 
and 
values, 
attitudes 
and 
organisational paradigms that are all reflected in the rules 
and standards of the organisation. 
The paper is divided into five parts. In the introduction, 
the context is established and the problem as a gap is 
addressed. Section two begins by outlining the theory 
underpinning the research, and discusses how the term 
collaboration is embedded in the Enterprise 2.0 discussion. 
This part then reviews the literature concerning the 
organisational and cultural aspects of collaboration using 
social software and also considers a social science 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

perspective on work organisation in general. Since a 
substantial part of Enterprise 2.0 empirical research is 
documented in cases studies [13], we chose a case study 
approach, too. Our case study design and our research 
method in detail are described in section three. Section four 
focuses on the specific drivers and barriers as a result of the 
case study followed by a discussion of the results. The fifth 
and last section, the conclusion, discusses the consequences 
for future intranet 2.0 projects and includes an outlook for 
further research. 
II. 
COLLABORATIVE KNOWLEDGE PRODUCTION WITHIN 
THE INTRANET 2.0 
The amount of related literature that has been published 
on collaborative knowledge production within intranet 2.0 is 
very limited. For this reason, the more general question 
about whether the use of social software is adequate for 
knowledge workers to generate new knowledge was used as 
a starting point for the literature search: Levy [3] 
investigated how knowledge management could and should 
be enhanced in light of the Web 2.0 and states that the 
principles of Web 2.0 and Knowledge Management are very 
similar. Finally, she recommends adopting the participative 
nature of Web 2.0 for production and sharing of knowledge 
in organisations and suggests starting with wikis and blogs. 
Studies at Fraunhofer ISST [14] show that the use of Web 
2.0 in enterprises has its biggest impact on knowledge work, 
innovation and cooperation, although its potential is hardly 
exploited. Paroutis and Al Saleh [15] likewise state that 
blogs, wikis and other social software have distinct technical 
features that foster knowledge sharing. Stocker [16] as well 
shows in an empirical study that knowledge transfer within 
enterprises profits from wikis and blogs. Also current data on 
usage of Web 2.0 software in enterprises has shown benefits 
for knowledge management such as increasing speed of 
access to knowledge [4] and more efficient usage of explicit 
and tacit knowledge [6]. 
Looking closer at the development of “collaboration” as 
a term for people working together to reach a common goal, 
we find a close connection to the SLATES-concept of 
McAfee [11] that was extended to FLATNESSES by 
Hinchcliffe [17]. SLATES is an acronym for Search, Links, 
Authorship, Tags, Extensions, Signals and was created to 
provide a basic concept for Enterprise 2.0 software. The 
extensions added by Hinchcliffe [17] include Freeform, 
Network-oriented, 
Social, 
and 
Emergence. 
Software 
providing these features and characteristics empowers users 
to participate in and contribute actively to the information 
flow inside an enterprise and also across organisational 
borders, in the same way as they are used by social software 
platforms in the public web. By these means, Web 2.0 
principles 
such 
as 
transparency, 
accessibility 
and 
personalisation can find a way into an organisation. To sum 
up, electronic collaboration (E-Collaboration) can be seen as 
a special case of IT-supported cooperation to achieve a 
common goal with shared responsibility for the results [18] 
using software with its nucleus in Enterprise 2.0 strategies: 
Authoring (access to platforms to produce one’s own 
content), Social (not hierarchical, transparent) and Network-
oriented (Web-based, addressable  and reusable content). 
Enterprise 2.0 software enables freeform collaborative 
production of content without an imposed structure such as 
predefined business processes or hierarchical access rights 
[19]. According to Schachner and Tochtermann [20], the 
internal use of Web 2.0 software requires and/or leads to 
changes in the way people work together: self organisation 
instead of top down coordination in terms of spontaneous, 
mostly voluntary cooperation; open information flow instead 
of secretly working task forces; trust and openness to 
criticism instead of sanctioning mechanisms; and individual 
responsibility for “pulling” the necessary information. This 
goes hand in hand with a change in the mindset of the users, 
namely thinking in business models and solutions instead of 
concentrating on the technology. 
How Social Software Will Change the Future of Work is 
not only the subtitle of Cook´s book on Enterprise 2.0 [21] 
but also one of the central questions discussed in the 
Enterprise 2.0 community. On the one hand, the discourse is 
dominated by business consultants and analysts such as Don 
Tapscott [22], Dion Hinchcliffe [9] [17], Andrew McAfee 
[11] [19] and Niall Cook [21], many of who argue that social 
software is a driver of organisational and cultural changes. 
They believe that giving employees the technical possibility 
to collaborate eventually initiates the transformation of 
enterprises into, to some degree, non-hierarchical, self-
organised networked organisations with an open culture. On 
the other hand, authors with a knowledge management 
perspective suggest that an appropriate organisation and 
culture is a prerequisite for E-Collaboration rather than a 
consequence: Davenport [23] states in his blog that “the 
absence of participative technologies in the past is not the 
only 
reason 
that 
organisations 
and 
expertise 
are 
hierarchical”. 
Schneckenberg 
[24] 
also 
argues 
that 
organisational factors, such as adequate decision-making 
policies, corporate governance and value systems ingrained 
in the corporate culture, are preconditions for the acceptance 
and sustainable use of Web 2.0 technologies in companies. 
These findings suggest that flat hierarchies and transparency, 
either as a prerequisite or a consequence, are closely 
connected with successful E-Collaboration using social 
software as internal tools. 
For this reason, it seems useful to look closer at the aims 
and objectives behind fostering collaborative work and to 
also take the impact of the work organisation into 
consideration. In their major work “The New Spirit of 
Capitalism” [25], Boltanski and Chiapello reviewed 
management literature that influenced the thinking of 
executives and employees of companies over the last 
decades. They argue that the hierarchical Fordist work 
structure was abandoned from the middle of the 1970s 
onwards and a new network-based form of organisation 
came into existence. This new form of work organisation is 
founded on employee initiative and work autonomy.  
According to Boltanski and Chiapello [25], the “new 
spirit of capitalism” means self-fulfillment as a strategy to 
mobilise labour. The new highly flexible work force does not 
separate social life into a private and a professional part, but 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

lives and acts in a networked world with multitudinous 
contacts in projects as the main organisational unit. 
Everything can be a project – the construction or the 
closedown of a plant, the reorganisation of a company or a 
play in a theater [25]. 
The new work force is characterised by intrinsic 
motivation, 
self-organised 
effort, 
autonomy, 
self-
management, spontaneity, and communicative competence 
using social media. People are either self-employed (micro-
enterprises) or work as an employee competing in internal 
markets, with teamwork being highly important due to the 
rising numbers of projects and project like-tasks. These new 
work structures demand high flexibility and mobility 
together with permanent reachability.  
In this new form of work organisation activity is the new 
norm to measure the value of people and objects. Activity 
means starting projects and contributing actively to projects 
while using networks for contacting and getting information 
to eventually initiate new projects [25]. Consequently, the 
traditional norms efficiency and properly executed actions 
have been replaced. 
III. 
CASE STUDY 
In knowledge management research, the case study 
method is often applied since it has broad applicability. 
Hence, there are different kinds of case studies depending on 
the underlying research design [26] [27]. 
A. Case Study Design 
As mentioned before, little research has been done into 
how work organisation, a company’s corporate culture and 
the success rate of implementing Enterprise 2.0 initiatives 
interact with each other. In this early stage of research, when 
“…”how” questions are posed, the investigator has little 
control over events and the focus is on a contemporary 
phenomenon within a real-life context” [26], case studies are 
the preferred method. Yin [26] differentiates between three 
basic types: exploratory, explanatory, and descriptive case 
studies. Each of these approaches can either be single or 
multiple case studies.  
Our case was a single case study examined using an 
exploratory design, as data was first collected and then 
patterns in the data were identified. To achieve a more 
abstract view, the identified patterns were put in a theory 
based frame and a more general model was derived. 
B. The Case 
In May 2009, an international financial services provider 
based in Austria decided to build up a new intranet. The aim 
was to provide up-to-date information for the employees as 
well as to enhance collaborative work. In the following year, 
a pilot project using Microsoft® SharePoint® Server 2007 as 
a platform was implemented and more social software 
applications for rating, commenting, communicating in 
forums and wikis were added. One major task of the intranet 
2.0 project was the implementation of so-called “topic areas” 
on the SharePoint® Server. These areas were intended to be 
managed and used by specific employees, called “topic 
coordinators”. These were highly skilled specialists, e.g., 
software development specialists, who were responsible for 
the production and the enterprise-wide distribution of topic-
specific knowledge. The new topic areas were designed as 
future places for participative production and allocation of 
topic knowledge under the lead of the coordinators. The 
whole intranet 2.0 initiative was seen as a first step to 
becoming an Enterprise 2.0. 
In the pilot phase, about 200 intranet users were invited 
to participate. Although there were plenty of internal 
marketing activities for the new intranet, the usage of the 
new platform, measured by key performance indicators 
produced by the SharePoint® Server, e.g., usage statistics, 
fell short of expectations. In particular, the project leader was 
not satisfied with the low activity of users participating in the 
topic areas. The idea of providing a well-designed platform 
to enable employees to participate and give their input and 
comments on various topics simply did not work as intended. 
At this point of time, the authors of this paper were 
invited to analyse the situation, identify what was causing the 
unsatisfying key performance indicators and propose 
improvement measures based on the findings.  
C. Research Method 
First, the project leader of the bank was interviewed 
using a problem-centred interview technique to give 
orientation and facilitate generation of first assumptions. 
Based on the received data, a focus group consisting of 
selected topic coordinators was established, who also 
represented the users of the platform. A set of workshops 
with this group was designed to undertake an in-depth 
analysis of the situation. Finally, three workshop sessions 
moderated by the authors of this paper took place. Each 
workshop was followed by discussions within the research 
team and first assumptions about the roots of the identified 
barriers were generated. These assumptions were subject to a 
deeper, theory-based analysis and were again reflected on 
with the members of the focus group in the next workshop 
session.  
IV. 
 FINDINGS  
The researchers placed their main focus on identifying 
the barriers or drawbacks for the unsatisfying usage of the 
topic areas. However, the drivers for the collaborative 
knowledge production were also discussed: The members of 
the focus group identified the topic areas used as a central 
knowledge repository with a well structured file sharing and 
good search function as helpful. This knowledge repository 
was a storage for longer existing documents that had already 
passed a quality assurance process. Therefore, all employees 
who had access to this repository could be sure to get 
information that was up-to-date and confirmed by 
management. As a consequence, employees had less need to 
call the topic coordinators by phone in case of a specific 
question or to send them an email that induced a time relief 
for the specialists. Another factor influencing the usage of 
the new topic areas positively was the possibility to get 
automatic 
alerts 
when 
a 
document 
was 
changed. 
Nevertheless, the documents in the repositories were mostly 
static files with no need to update frequently.  
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

A significant part of the analysis of the drawbacks was 
discussing the underlying causes. Consequently, three types 
of barriers were identified, each characterized by being 
embedded in the same context: 
• 
barriers rooted in the organisational culture (in the 
values and behavioural norms of the organisation) 
• 
barriers rooted in the organisation itself (in the 
organisational structure and the business processes) 
• 
barriers rooted  in the technology (in the 
implementation of applications). 
The following paragraphs explain the three barrier types 
as identified in the case study in detail followed by a 
discussion of the findings. 
A. Barriers rooted in the organisational culture 
Each organisation has its own internal values and often 
unspoken behavioral norms that may be contrary to 
Enterprise 2.0 paradigms such as open communication, self 
organisation or decentralized decisions. In the explored case 
study, the norm “valid knowledge has to pass a certain 
quality assurance process” was dominant due to compliance 
requirements 
of 
a 
financial 
service 
provider. 
Not 
surprisingly, this was one of the underlying reasons for the 
unsatisfying usage of the topic areas in the intranet 2.0. 
Furthermore, the identified attitudes regarding a “no blame 
organisation” were different among employees of the bank: 
some believed in the participation of many to produce 
knowledge of high quality (wisdom of crowds concept) 
whereas some adhered to the traditional belief in the 
expertise of a few, highly-skilled specialists. As part of the 
organisational culture, knowledge was seen as something 
owned by the organization that should be distributed within 
the organisation only carefully (similar to a company secret). 
Even IT knowledge that was found on the public web was 
affected by this approach. 
Furthermore, E-Collaboration and participation in 
knowledge production need an organisational culture, where 
self-organisation and sharing is desirable. The traditional 
hierarchical culture of the financial service provider in our 
case study, based on divisions and command and order, 
allowed only little room for acting autonomously and 
collaborating beyond the daily routine. In particular, the 
understanding and expectations of E-Collaboration varied 
between management, project management and the users. 
B. Barriers rooted in the organisation itself 
Among other things, an organisation is manifested in the 
structure or hierarchy of an enterprise. In the analysed case, 
the hierarchy of the organisation, represented in divisions, 
departments and sub-departments, was mapped in the 
intranet 2.0 applications and the corresponding access rights, 
thus restricting E-Collaboration and participatory production 
of content. But, what was most important, there was no 
organisational link between the daily work in the business 
processes and the content generation in the topic areas. In 
addition, employees lacked time to work on the topic areas 
besides their daily routine. The job descriptions of 
employees were not updated to accommodate the new tasks 
and responsibilities resulting from the usage of the new 
intranet. The internal organisational rules left marginal space 
for knowledge production besides the highly standardised 
quality assurance processes; there was nearly no possibility 
for open, dynamic and up-to-date ad-hoc generation and 
usage of content. It was also still unclear and under 
discussion who the potential users were and what usage the 
content stored in the topic areas was intended for. 
The former role of the topic coordinators before starting 
the intranet 2.0 project was that of a specialist collecting 
information, generating and distributing knowledge within 
the organisation (one-to-many communication). In the 
discussion with the coordinators, we found different attitudes 
about if and how this role had to be changed to foster 
participation of the other employees in knowledge 
production (many-to-many communication). One of the topic 
coordinators made the following point: he called the new 
role “E-Collaboration animator” expressing the feeling that 
in future his expertise may not been seen as his valuable skill 
but will be replaced by the need to be an experienced 
moderator of online communities. This statement suggests 
that the new role of the “proactive knowledge provider” was 
unclear and not defined in an organisational context. 
C. Barriers rooted in the technology 
The technology itself, in our case the SharePoint® Server 
plus the implemented add-on applications such as a wiki, a 
search function and a forum software, worked quite well. 
The identified technical barriers were some constraints such 
as a cumbersome document upload function with many 
compulsory tags for classification, and the search function 
lacking a document preview. Low usability due to extensive 
menu structures and slow performance were also commented 
on by the members of the focus group. As most content was 
stored in documents, users could not make quick ad-hoc 
updates of the information, i.e. the documents had to be 
down and uploaded to be changed. The members of the focus 
group also stated that in some knowledge areas on the 
SharePoint® Server there were either too many documents or 
too few. To summarise, the intranet 2.0 was not seen as the 
primary source of knowledge; the users still preferred to 
search on the internet. 
D. Discussion 
It is interesting to note that in our case barriers rooted in 
the organisation itself and in the culture seemed to have a 
greater impact on the collaborative production of knowledge 
in the topic areas than the ones caused by low usability or 
low functionality of the software. Consequently, initiatives to 
facilitate adoption of social software, such as training, 
project marketing, working with key users, getting 
management to use the tools actively by themselves, are not 
sufficient. In interpreting these findings, we have to consider 
the previous research of Pan and Scarbrough [28] that was 
undertaken already two decades ago. They developed a 
theoretical model with three major layers that were required 
for technological innovations (in their case, a knowledge 
management system) to be successful: Infrastructure (the 
hardware/software 
that 
enables 
the 
physical/ 
communicational contact between network members), 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Infostructure (the formal rules, that govern the exchange 
between the participants in the network) and Infoculture (the 
stock of background knowledge that actors take for granted 
and that is embedded in the social relations surrounding 
work group processes). Pan and Scarborough called the latter 
also the cultural knowledge that defines constraints on 
knowledge and information sharing. Most importantly, their 
conclusion 
is 
that 
knowledge 
management 
systems 
“…involve more than technology but rather a culture in 
which new roles and constructs are created. It changes the 
communication patterns between individuals and teams, and 
also alters the design of the organisation by fostering new 
processes and structures” [28]. Interestingly, the three types 
of possible barriers we found in our case study seem to 
match in some way the three layers of Pan and 
Scarborough´s model. However, in our case (a social 
software based intranet) the effects of a technological 
innovation as stated by Pan and Scarborough could not be 
observed and there were no signs for alterations in the 
organisation. Consequently, it appears that the identified 
barriers rooted in the (knowledge) culture turned out to be 
the major constraints. 
In addition, our findings support the view that all three 
types of barriers are intertwined and therefore influence each 
other. In particular, the organisation itself - in a sense the 
actual business processes and the organisational structure - is 
mirrored in the IT applications and the corresponding access 
rights. On the other hand, the organisation itself is effected 
by the norms, values and paradigms of an enterprise, thus 
reflecting the organisational culture. For example, in our case 
the most important single barrier was the lack of alignment 
of the intranet 2.0 applications to the business process 
requirements. The business processes were implemented in 
the form of internal rules and standards. Furthermore, the 
organisational culture of the financial service provider in our 
case study may be characterised as being traditional and 
hierarchical and dominated by compliance requirements. 
Therefore, the internal standards defined an accurate quality 
assurance process for documents, with several confirmation 
steps on management level built-in. Despite this, the topic 
coordinators 
were 
asked 
to 
generate 
knowledge 
collaboratively which indicated the requirement to publish 
not-confirmed content as well. This is a clear example of 
how the organisational culture determined by a traditional 
hierarchical work organisation (division of work, control and 
command) may influence adoption of E-Collaboration 
software via business process regulations.  
These findings are also in accordance with our previous 
discussion about the “new spirit” in work organisations 
according to Boltanski and Chiapello [25]. As mentioned 
before, the new form of work organisation is replacing 
efficiency, the traditional measurement for employees and 
processes, with activity. From our perspective, activity in 
connection to knowledge production may be seen as an 
autonomous behavior of users, who act on their own 
initiative 
participating 
voluntarily 
and 
contributing 
interactively, as known from the production of user provided 
content on the public web. Hence, we presume that 
employees suffer from the ambiguity between the 
measurement of the quality of work in the “new spirit” [25] 
and the measurements in traditional structures. For instance, 
in our case study we observed the conflict situation of the 
topic coordinators: On the one hand, they were part of a 
hierarchical organisation, had to work efficiently (which was 
also implemented in the Management-by-Objectives), and 
were obliged to stick to the internal standards and rules. On 
the other hand, they were requested by the intranet 2.0 
project to collaborate autonomously, initiatively and 
spontaneously. Above all, we tend to believe that the 
ambiguity between the new norm activity and the traditional 
value efficiency is the unspoken but nevertheless underlying 
cause of the unsatisfying usage of the intranet 2.0 platform in 
our case. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Research 
into 
participative 
knowledge 
generation 
utilizing social software, especially with a focus on the 
organisation and its people is in the early stages. The case 
study presented in this paper has pinpointed some specific 
drivers 
and 
drawbacks 
for intranet 2.0 based 
E-
Collaboration. The latter have been grouped into three types 
of possible barriers, each type characterized by being 
embedded in the same context. More empirical data will 
need to be gathered to justify these types.  
For practitioners, the quintessence of the present paper is 
that activities aiming to support intranet 2.0 initiatives, 
especially those with focus on the collaborative production 
of knowledge, have to consider all three types of possible 
barriers. Only optimizing the underlying (information) 
technology is not enough - the probability of failure of the 
whole initiative will still prevail. For instance, the 
organisation itself must be prepared to empower employees 
to use social software appropriately, e.g., by allocating 
sufficient time resources or adjusting the job descriptions. 
Daily routine activities, i.e. those to do with the business 
processes must be linked to the intranet 2.0 software to 
ensure the intended usage. All this must be considered 
against the background of the internal norms and values. An 
organisation holding on to a strictly hierarchal culture may 
be a limiting factor for any intranet 2.0 initiative. 
On the whole we believe it is less meaningful to discuss 
if and how social software may or may not change 
organisations but to interpret the findings in a broader social 
science-based framework. Taking the work of Boltanski and 
Chiapello and their understanding of the new forms of work 
organisation into consideration, namely projects and 
networks, we believe that employees using social software 
for knowledge production struggle with the ambiguity 
between the demands of these new forms of work and the 
existing, traditional organisational structures. More research 
is needed to better understand the consequences of this 
development, especially how the discrepancy between 
traditional “tayloristic” organisations and the expected 
participation of the employees in the “Enterprise 2.0” may be 
bridged. 
 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work was funded by FFG / Österreichische 
Forschungsförderungsgesellschaft mbH in grant No. 821111 
"eCollaboration 2.0: Collaboration Tools und Social Media 
für Teamarbeit in KMUs". We are grateful to Michael Zeiller 
for challenging discussions and helpful comments and to 
Veronica Dal Bianco for proofreading this paper. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Stiehler, “IT Reality Check. Collaboration zwischen 
Anspruch und Wirklichkeit”, PA/Berlecon Report  by order of 
Beck 
et 
al. 
Services, 
May 
2011, 
retrieved 
from 
http://www.bea-services.de/index.php?/ger/Knowledge-
Center/IT-Reality-Check on June 17, 2011.  
[2] T. O´Reilly, “What Is Web 2.0? Design Patterns and Business 
Models for the Next Generation of Software”, Tim O´Reilly´s 
Blog, September 30, 2005, retrieved from http://oreilly.com/ 
pub/a/web2/archive/what-is-web-20.html?page=1 on August 
5, 2011. 
[3] M. 
Levy, 
“WEB 
2.0 
implications 
on 
knowledge 
management”, Journal of Knowledge Management, Vol. 13 
NO. 1, 2009, pp. 120-134. 
[4] J. Bughin and M. Chui, “The rise of the networked enterprise: 
Web 2.0 finds its payday”, McKinsey Quarterly, December 
2010, retrieved from http://www.mckinseyquarterly.com/ 
The_rise_of_the_networked_enterprise_Web_20_finds_its_pa
yday_2716, on August 24, 2011. 
[5] ZEW, “Interaktiv, mobil, international – Unternehmen im 
Zeitalter 
von 
Web 
2.0“, 
Zentrum 
für 
Europäische 
Wirtschaftsforschung GmbH,  IKT-Report September 2010, 
retrieved from http://ftp.zew.de/pub/zew-docs/div/IKTRep 
/IKT_Report_2010.pdf, on March 2, 2011. 
[6] J. Leibhammer and M. Weber, “Enterprise 2.0. Analyse zu 
Stand und Perspektiven in der deutschen Wirtschaft“, 
BITKOM-Studie 2008, retrieved from http://www.bitkom. 
org/e/publikationen/38338_60082.aspx, on March 7, 2011.  
[7] N. Scheidegger, D. Vimalassrey, Ph. Surber, and J. Richard, 
“Enterprise 
2.0 
– 
die 
kollektive 
Intelligenz 
als 
Wettbewerbsvorteil”, 
study 
of 
sieber&partners 
2009, 
retrieved from http://shop.pascal-sieber.ch/shop/de/produkt 
detail.asp?ProduktID=48202 on March 7, 2011. 
[8] T. Petry, F. Schreckenbach, and T. Nienaber, “Wenn wir 
wüssten, was wir wissen”, Personalwirtschaft 12/2010, pp. 
50-52. 
[9] D. Hinchcliffe, “Social Intranets: Enterprises grapple with 
internal change“, Dion Hinchcliffe´s Blog -  Enterprise Web 
2.0, 
ZDNet, 
2010, 
retrieved 
from 
http://www.zdnet. 
com/blog/hinchcliffe/social-intranets-enterprises-grapple-
with-internal-change/1410, on April 18, 2011. 
[10] H-G. Herrmann, “Internet und Intranet 2.0. Chancen und 
Risiken 
für 
Großkonzerne“, 
2007, 
retrieved 
from 
http://www.oscar.de/archiv/2007_02/magazin/Evolution_Web
_02_01_Internet_Intranet_2.0_DAX30-Studie.pdf 
on 
February 24, 2011. 
[11] A. McAfee, “Enterprise 2.0: The Dawn of Emergent 
Collaboration”, MIT Sloan Management Review 47(3), 2006, 
pp. 21–28. 
[12] A. Auinger, A. Hochmeier, and D. Nedbal, “Organization-
driven Approach for Enterprise 2.0 Projects”, Tagungsband 5. 
Forschungsforum der österreichischen Fachhochschulen, 
2011, pp.136-139. 
[13] M. Zeiller and B. Schauer, “Adoption, Motivation and 
Success Factors of Social Media for Team Collaboration in 
SMEs“, Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on 
Knowledge Management and Knowledge Technologies, 
2011, not yet published. 
[14] F. Fuchs-Kittowski, N. Klassen,  D. Faust, and J. Einhaus, “A 
Comparative Study on the Use of Web 2.0 in Enterprises“, 
Proceedings of I-KNOW ´09 and I-SEMANTICS ´09, 
September 2009. 
[15] S. Paroutis and A. Al Saleh, “Determinants of knowledge 
sharing using Web 2.0 technologies”, Journal of Knowledge 
Management, Vol. 13 NO. 4, 2009, pp. 52-63. 
[16] A. Stocker, “Wikis and Weblogs im Wissensmanagement: 
Nutzenklassen und Erfolgsfaktoren“, Proceedings of 6th 
Conference 
on 
Professional 
Knowledge 
Management, 
February 2011, retrieved from http://iwi.uibk.ac.at/download/ 
downloads/Publikationen/wm2011_tot.pdf, on November 17, 
2011. 
[17] D. Hinchcliffe, “The state of Enterprise 2.0”, Dion 
Hinchcliffe´s Blog -  Enterprise Web 2.0, ZDNet, 2007, 
retrieved from http://www.zdnet.com/blog/hinchcliffe/the-
state-of-enterprise-20/143 on March 24, 2011. 
[18] K. Riemer, “eCollaboration: Systeme, Anwendungen und 
Entwicklungen”, eCollaboration. Praxis der Wirtschafts-
informatik, vol. 267, K. Riemer, and S. Strahringer, Eds., 
2009, pp. 7-17. 
[19] A. McAfee, “Enterprise 2.0: new collaborative tools for your 
organization's 
toughest 
challenges”, 
Boston: 
Harvard 
Business Press, 2009. 
[20] W. Schachner and K. Tochtermann, “Corporate Web 2.0. 
Band II. Web 2.0 und Unternehmen - Das passt zusammen!” 
Aachen: Shaker, 2008. 
[21] N. Cook, “Enterprise 2.0 - How Social Software Will Change 
the Future of Work”, Aldershot: Gower, 2008. 
[22] D. Tapscott and A. Williams, “Wikinomics - how mass 
collaboration changes everything”, New York: Portfolio, 
2006. 
[23] T. Davenport, “Why Enterprise 2.0 Won't Transform 
Organizations” , Harvard Business Review Blog,  March  21, 
2007, retrieved from  http://blogs.hbr.org/davenport /2007/ 
03/why_enterprise_20_wont_transfo.html on March 27, 2011. 
[24] D. Schneckenberg, “Web 2.0 and the shift in corporate 
governance from control to democracy”, Knowledge 
Management Research & Practise 7, 2009, pp. 234-248. 
[25] L. Boltanski and E. Chiapello, “The New Spirit of 
Capitalism”, London: Verso (french: 1999), 2007. 
[26] R.K. Yin, “Case Study Research. Design and Methods”, 
fourth Edition, Applied Social Research Methods Series 
Volume 5, Thousand Oaks: Sage, 2009. 
[27] Eisenhardt, K., “Building Theories from Case Study 
Research.” The Academy of Management Review 14 4, Oct. 
1989, pp. 532-550. 
[28] S.L. Pan and H. Scarbrough, “Knowledge Management in 
Practise: An Exploratory Case Study”, Technology Analysis 
& Strategic Management Sep 1999 11 3, 1999, pp. 359-374. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-181-6
eKNOW 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

