Information Model Integration for Service-oriented Manufacturing Operation 
Management Systems  
Hartmut Schweizer 
Institute for Applied Computer Science  
TU Dresden 
01062 Dresden 
email: hartmut.schweizer@tu-dresden.de 
Martin Wollschlaeger 
Institute for Applied Computer Science 
TU Dresden 
01062 Dresden 
email: martin.wollschlaeger@tu-dresden.de
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents a concept for the combined ap-
plication of information models in automation as a basis for a 
service-oriented, component-based architecture of Manu-
facturing Operation Management Systems (MOM). It will be 
shown how the information models of the Automation Markup 
Language (AutomationML) and the OPC Unified Architecture 
(OPC UA) can be integrated into the Business To Manu-
facturing Markup Language (B2MML). This allows achieving 
an improved transparency and availability of process data and 
knowledge data within automated manufacturing processes. 
Here, the extension functionalities and the transaction 
specifications of B2MML are used. Finally, an application 
example is shown and is discussed. 
Keywords – Automation; Model integration; B2MML; 
AutomationML; OPC UA. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In automated production, the organizational architecture, 
driven by increasingly powerful hardware, higher network-
ing, and developments, such as the Industrial Internet of 
Things (IIoT) or Cyber-Physical Production Systems 
(CPPS), is changing from the classical pyramid structure to 
component-based architectures (Fig. 1). This applies both to 
the hardware, i.e., Personal Computers (PCs), Programmable 
Logic Controllers (PLCs), and field devices, and to the 
software used for tasks in the different company levels, e.g., 
Manufacturing execution System (MES) or Enterprise 
Resource Planning (ERP) [1].  
This also results in new requirements for the form and 
availability of data and information within these distributed 
structures, e.g., addressing decentralization, interoperability 
and virtualization. The same applies to an information mod-
el, which needs to meet these requirements [2]. In the follow-
ing, a concept for such a heterogeneous information system, 
consisting of OPC UA, B2MML, and AutomationML, is 
presented for a component-based organizational structure 
with a service-oriented architecture. The main advantage of 
this approach is given by the integration of existing infor-
mation models into a harmonized information system. 
II. 
INFORMATION MODELS IN AUTOMATION 
In the automated manufacturing, numerous different in-
formation models are used. Due to their different focus and 
degree of detail as well as other characteristics, such as 
service suitability and legibility, however, they are not all 
equally suitable for all aspects at every (company) level [11]. 
Among other things OPC UA [3], AutomationML [3], and 
the IEC 62264 implementation B2MML are three models 
that cover the required information spectrum for a MOM 
[11]. These are briefly presented below. Especially the 
elements of B2MML, which are used in the application 
example in section V, will be explained detailed.    
 
Figure 1.   Development of the automation pyramid 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-690-3
eKNOW 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

A. OPC UA 
The standard OPC UA (IEC 62541) defines an object-
oriented, flexible industrial information model with a defined 
communication protocol. The OPC UA architecture follows 
a Service-Oriented Approach (SOA). Its structure consists of 
several layers. All basic services (base services) defined by 
OPC UA are abstract method descriptions. Thus, they are 
protocol-independent and provide the basis for the entire 
OPC UA functionality. The communication layer provides 
access to these methods using a protocol that serializes and 
deserializes the data and sends it over the network (in binary 
or XML format) [4]. 
The OPC information model is a so-called full mesh net-
work of nodes. A node resembles an object from object-
oriented programming and can have attributes. It is also pos-
sible to define and call methods [4]. Furthermore, events are 
supported that can be sent to exchange certain information 
between devices. Further information models, e.g., for 
specific application domains, can be based on this base layer 
[4].  
B. CAEX and AutomationML 
AutomationML is a neutral, XML-based data format for 
the storage and exchange of plant design and engineering 
data. It is based on the Computer Aided Engineering 
Exchange (CAEX) data format defined in IEC 624242. The 
primary goal of AutomationML is the exchange of 
engineering data in a heterogeneous tool landscape of 
modern engineering tools, covering various disciplines such 
as mechanical design, electrical design, HMI development, 
PLC programming or robot control. AutomationML is 
standardized in IEC 62714. It supports the integration of 
other file formats. In particular, the integration of PLCopen 
XML [5] is provided for embedding PLC programs and 
logic, while COLLADA format [6] is intended for geometry 
information [7]. 
C. IEC 62264 and B2MML 
The international standard IEC 62264 defines models, ac-
tivities, and data exchange for Manufacturing Operations 
Management 
systems. 
B2MML 
[8] 
is 
an 
XML 
implementation of the IEC 62264 specifications in the form 
of XML schemata, which is designed as a link between ERP 
and materials management (supply chain) and to the 
production level [9]. Part 2 of IEC 62264 defines objects and 
attributes for the integration of enterprise management and 
control systems. This includes the resource types Personnel, 
Equipment, Material, and Physical Asset as well as the 
production process type ProcessSegment. In the following, 
the equipment model (Fig. 2) and the process segment model 
for the resources are explained in more detail. 
1) The role-based equipment model of IEC 62264 
Each Equipment resource can be composed of other 
Equipment resources and aggregates Equipment Properties. 
It can also be defined using one or more Equipment Classes, 
which can have any number of their own class properties. 
Test specifications can also be defined for Equipment and 
Equipment Classes and their properties (Fig. 2). 
Equivalent models are defined for the other resource 
classes Personnel, PhysicalAsset, and Material [10]. 
2) The process model of IEC 62264 
Process segments in IEC 62224 are defined as the small-
est elements of manufacturing activities that are visible to 
business processes. The process model is hierarchically 
 
Figure 2.  Equipment model IEC 62264 [10] and B2MML – Implementation of EquipmentType [8] 
 
 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-690-3
eKNOW 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

structured, i.e., each process segment can contain further 
subordinate process segments. The interdependencies 
between the process segments are realized by references in 
the form of ProcessSegmentDependencies. All resources can 
be 
aggregated 
from 
process 
segments 
as resource 
specifications via references. The processes in turn can 
correspond with operation or product definition segments 
[10]. 
3) The transaction model of IEC 62264 
Part 5 of IEC 62264 defines transactions for the exchange 
of information between applications of business processes 
and applications of manufacturing processes. The extensive 
transaction specifications are one of the main reasons for 
using B2MML as a data model in this concept. The 
GET/SHOW transaction mechanism is briefly explained 
above (Fig. 3). The transaction model for GET and SHOW is 
the PULL transaction model. It is used when a user submits 
a data request to an information provider. A GET request can 
be issued for a specific object via its ID, or by means of a so-
called "wildcard" (*) for several objects (Fig. 3) [15]. 
III. 
HETEROGENEOUS INFORMATION MODEL FOR MOM 
AS A DISTRIBUTED SERVICE-ORIENTED SYSTEM  
As already explained above, there are mechanisms in 
both OPC UA and AutomationML to integrate and use other 
information models. In OPC UA and AutomationML, 
Companion specifications exist, for example for ISA-95 
(B2MML) [12] [13]. In addition to COLLADA and 
PLCopen XML, other information models – such as 
B2MML – can also be integrated and referenced in 
AutomationML [14]. From the point of view of the 
enterprise level, 
these 
two 
variants 
are bottom-up 
approaches. Thus, information from or for the enterprise 
management level (ERP) is represented in information 
models of the plant and process control level (OPC UA, 
AutomationML). If this information was not already created 
in the modelling using companion specifications, it must be 
integrated into the respective model by transformation. This 
is  
 
costly 
 
error-prone 
 
complex and difficult to read 
To solve this problem, this paper presents an approach in 
which the information models of OPC UA and Automa-
tionML are integrated into B2MML (Fig. 4 and Fig. 5). This 
allows using information from all three models in 
combination without having to modify the information 
 
Figure 3. Transaction in IEC 62264 [15] 
 
Figure 4. Integration of OPC UA and CAEX schema elements in the B2MML model schemata 
 
Figure 5. Enhancement of the Equipment Schema of B2MML [8] with OPC UA and AutomationML elements  
 
 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-690-3
eKNOW 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

structure of the individual information blocks, or to adapt 
them. This paper does not deal with the interoperability and 
transformation of the treated information models; these 
mechanisms remain unaffected by this concept. Never-
theless, their necessity can be reduced, because in the 
presented concept every stakeholder normally gets the 
needed data in the suitable format (Fig. 6). 
IV. 
INTEGRATION OF INFORMATION MODELS FROM 
AUTOMATIONML AND OPC UA INTO B2MML 
B2MML provides so-called extension points for the 
extension of all main classes such as process segments or 
resources 
(Equipment, 
PhysicalAsset, 
Personnel, 
and 
Material). These are used to include additional information 
structures in the model or in the corresponding submodels.  
The following demonstrates how this mechanism is used 
to extend B2MML with the information models of OPC UA 
and AutomationML. The first step is to import the basic 
information models, i.e., the XML schemata of Automa-
tionML (CAEX) and OPC UA, into the B2MML schema 
(Fig. 4). Then the partial models, into which corresponding 
data are to be inserted, can be extended accordingly. Figure 5 
shows the extension of the B2MML equipment model by an 
AutomationML information and an OPC UA configuration. 
It should be noted that, in the case of AutomationML, 
external references can be used to link the contents of other 
(XML) files. If this option is used, the schemas of these 
models and the referenced files must also be included. In the 
case of the PLCopen XML and COLLADA, these are the 
corresponding schemas found in [5] and [6]. 
There are two requirements for enabling communication 
for this extended B2MML schema: Both communication 
partners must have implemented (i) the transaction function-
alities defined in [15] and (ii) the B2MML XML-schema 
extensions as described above. In case of AutomationML the 
ChangeMode attribute of AutomationML [16] and the 
transaction concept of B2MML have to be combined and 
synchronized. Table I shows the resulting affiliation. 
For each transaction of a B2MML element including 
CAEX code, the appropriate AutomationML ChangeMode 
parameter has to be set. The following example illustrates 
how this extension can be used in practice, and which 
advantages result from it. 
V. 
APPLICATION EXAMPLE: INFORMATION ON PLANNING, 
SIMULATING, AND EXECUTING A PRODUCTION PROCESS 
RESTRUCTURING WITH EQUIPMENT REPLACEMENT 
The described application case deals with a process re-
structuring in a process chain. The process shall be changed 
from injection molding to 3D printing within an automated 
production process for the manufacturing of an element 
made from plastic. During the restructuring, as little interfer-
ence as possible shall be made in the production flow of the 
other processes running. For this purpose, following ques-
tions must be answered and work steps carried out.  
 
What is the actual status of the plant (Monitoring: 
OPC UA)? 
 
Which operations and processes as well as 
interrelated processes are affected (ERP: B2MML)? 
 
Which resources are affected, deleted, or required 
(ERP: B2MML)? 
 
Estimation of the effort required for the necessary 
modifications (plant engineering data: Automati-
onML) 
 
Execution (plant data: AutomationML, personnel 
planning: B2MML) 
 
Commissioning, monitoring, quality control (Moni-
toring: OPC UA, Quality criteria: B2MML) 
It can be recognized that production process restructuring 
affects all levels of automation. By means of the extensions 
of B2MML by OPC UA and AutomationML elements, the 
required data can be communicated directly in the required 
form. This can be performed between the necessary func-
tional components at the various levels using a service-based 
approach on top of the transaction mechanisms of B2MML 
(Fig. 3) [15].  
Figure 6 shows a simplified representation of the produc-
tion process restructuring as described above. In particular, 
the organizational sequence of the action, in combination 
with the data required in the respective work steps is ex-
plained. On a customer request ("Customer Order"), a feasi-
bility check is carried out with regard to the product and the 
production line. This leads to a review of the processes in-
volved, which include references to the required equipment.  
Figure 6, Listing 1 shows this ShowProcessSegment 
information. The equipment can now be called up via the 
references in the EquipmentSegmentSpecifications.  
Figure 6, Listing 2 shows the content of the ShowEquip-
ment transaction response for injection molding machine 
with its plant planning data in AutomationML, the OPC UA 
configuration data, and its test specification properties. A 
GET call [15] to the EquipmentcapabilityTestSpecif-
icationIDs allows the corresponding properties of the 
injection molding machine to be queried.  
Figure 6, Listing 3 shows the content of the ShowEquip-
ment transaction response for the 3D printer with its plant 
design data in AutomationML, the OPC UA configuration 
data, and its test specification properties. By a GET call [15] 
of the EquipmentcapabilityTestSpecificationIDs, the corre-
sponding properties of the 3D printer can be queried and 
compared with those of the injection molding machine. 
TABLE I.  
AFFILIATION OF B2MML AND AUTOMATIONML 
COMMUNICATION CONCEPTS 
B2MML 
AutomationML  
Sync (Change) 
Change 
PUBLISH 
Sync (Delete) 
Delete 
PUBLISH 
Sync (Add) 
Create 
PUBLISH 
Get 
State 
PULL 
Show 
State 
PULL 
Confirm, Cancel, Acknowledge, Process, 
Respond, Change 
 
PUSH 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-690-3
eKNOW 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
 
Figure 6. Application Example 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-690-3
eKNOW 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Since the printer meets the required property, the process 
can be restructured. With this information, the process can 
now be updated with new EquipmentSegmentSpecification 
using the ChangeProcessSegment transaction [15] by 
entering the ID of the 3D printer for the required equipment. 
This 
means 
that 
the 
new 
equipment 
including 
communication functionalities (OPC UA configurations and 
hardware plans (AutomationML)) are technically updated for 
the restructured process (Fig. 6, Listing 4). 
Furthermore, the required connection and installation in-
formation (AutomationML and OPC UA) are available sim-
ultaneously with the EquipmentSegmentSpecifications of the 
3D printer (Fig. 6, Listing 3). In addition, the corresponding 
personnel with required capabilities was assigned to the pro-
cess segment in the PersonnelSegmentSpecification at the 
same time. 
When using the OPC UA-Companion specifications for 
ISA-95, the corresponding elements would have to be trans-
formed to B2MML in order to make them readable for a 
B2MML-based ERP system. Equivalent to this, the B2MML 
information would have to be transformed into Automati-
onML for an AutomationML-based system or into B2MML 
for a B2MML-based system. Manual activities would be 
necessary to complete the allocation of the resources [14], if 
the Companion specifications were not used. 
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
As explained in the previous sections, AutomationML, 
OPC UA, and B2MML provide mechanisms for extending 
or integrating and using other information models. For the 
concept presented, the variant of using the extension of 
B2MML with AutomationML and OPC UA via the 
appropriate extension points was chosen. This has the 
advantage that, on the one hand (usually), no data 
transformation is necessary. All data is contained in the data 
package in the required information model. On the other 
hand, the transaction specifications of B2MML for 
AutomationML information [1] and OPC UA information 
can also be used for the enterprise level. Finally, the 
communication specifications of OPC UA for the MES and 
production level are also available. The Companion specifi-
cations of OPC UA and AutomationML remain unaffected 
and can be used without restrictions [17]. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
It was shown how the information models OPC UA and 
AutomationML can be integrated by means of the extension 
mechanisms of B2MML and how they can be used together 
as data formats in a service-oriented MOM implementation. 
The transaction mechanisms of IEC 62264 are used here. At 
the same time, the scope of information provided by OPC 
UA and AutomationML is available without restriction. A 
limitation in the application of the concept results from the 
fact that B2MML transactions only allow queries via IDs. 
For an application between companies or independent com-
pany structures, these would have to be extended by mecha-
nisms, which access other parameters by semantic means, 
e.g., the description elements (Fig. 2) [8]. 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Brandl, New integration architectures for federated 
systems, ISA Publications, InTech Magazine, April 2016, 
https://www.isa.org/intech/20160403/, retrieved: November 
2018. 
[2] B. Vogel-Heuser, Guest Editorial Industry 4.0 – Prerequisites 
and Visions, IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and 
Engineering, Vol. 13, No. 2, April 2016, pp. 411-413. 
[3] M. Schleipen, Syed-Shiraz Gilani, Tino Bischoff and Julius 
Pfrommer, OPC UA & Industrie 4.0 - enabling technology 
with high diversity and variability, 49th CIRP Conference on 
Manufacturing Systems (CIRP-CMS 2016), December 2016, 
pp. 315-320. 
[4] OPC Foundation: OPC-UA,  
https://opcfoundation.org/about/opc-technologies/opc-ua/, 
retrieved: November 2018. 
[5] PLCopen, TC6–XML Schemes 
http://www.plcopen.org/pages/tc6_xml/, retrieved: November 
2018. 
[6] KHRONOS GROUP, COLLADA,  
https://www.khronos.org/collada/, retrieved: November 2018.  
[7] IEC 62714 - Engineering data exchange format for use in 
industrial automation systems engineering - AutomationML, 
www.iec.ch, International Electrotechnical Commission, 
2014. 
[8] MESA International, Business To Manufacturing Markup 
Language 
(B2MML), 
http://www.mesa.org/en/B2MML.asp, 
retrieved: November 2018. 
[9] IEC. IEC 62264-1:2013 Enterprise-control system integration 
– 
Part 
1: 
Models 
and 
terminology. 
International 
Electrotechnical Commission, Geneva, 2013. 
[10] International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), Enterprise-
control system integration-Part 2: Objects and attributes for 
enterprisecontrol system integration, International Standard, 
Rev. 2.0, IEC 62264-2:2013, June 2013. 
[11] R. Silva Peres et al., “Selection of a data exchange format for 
industry 4.0 manufacturing systems”, IECON 2016 - 42nd 
Annual Conference of the IEEE Industrial Electronics 
Society, October 2016, pp. 5723–5728. 
[12] OPC Foundation: ISA-95 for OPC UA. 
https://opcfoundation.org/markets-collaboration/isa-95/, 
retrieved: November 2018. 
[13] B. Wally, Application Recommendation Provisioning for 
MES and ERP – Support for IEC 62264 and B2MML, 
November 2018. 
[14] B. Wally, C. Huemer and A. Mazak, “Entwining Plant 
Engineering Data and ERP Information: Vertical Integration 
with AutomationML and ISA-95”, 2017 3rd International 
Conference on Control, Automation and Robotics, April 
2017, pp. 356 - 364. 
[15] IEC. IEC 62264-5:2016 Enterprise-control system integration 
– Part 5: Business to manufacturing transactions. International 
Electrotechnical Commission, Geneva, 2016. 
[16] J. Prinz and L. Hundt, “AutomationML − Engineering 
Workflow”, SPS-Magazin, November 2013, pp. 60-62. 
[17] B. Wally, C. Huemer and A. Mazak, “AutomationML, ISA-
95 and Others: Rendezvous in the OPC UA Universe”, 14th 
International Conference on Automation Science and 
Engineering (CASE 2018) August 2018, pp. 1381-1387. 
 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-690-3
eKNOW 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

