The Strategic Alignment of Supply Chain and IT Resources
Philippe Marchildon and Pierre Hadaya 
Department of Management and Technology 
ESG-UQAM 
Montréal, Canada 
e-mail: marchildon.philippe@courrier.uqam.ca 
hadaya.pierre@uqam.ca 
 
Abstract—In reaction to recent findings, which suggest that 
when acting alone supply chain and IT resources cannot yield 
a competitive advantage to organizations, the present study, 
posits that it’s by combining these resources together that 
organizations will gain a competitive advantage from them. 
Rooted in the resource-based-view and the relational view of 
the firm, this research presents a conceptual model that will 
permit the uncovering of the dominant configurations of 
supply chain and IT resources alignment. This study also 
presents three expected alignment configurations (i.e., cost 
driven 
organizations, 
value 
driven 
organizations 
and 
innovation driven organizations) which represent the primary 
form of alignment between these resources and their respective 
impact on organizational performance. Using the gestalt 
approach, we plan to verify our research model by collecting 
data from at least 200 Canadian prime manufacturers. 
Findings tied to this initiative will provide important 
contributions to both research and practice.  
Keywords- 
information 
management; 
supply 
chain 
resources; IT resources; alignment 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Organizations 
confronted 
with 
always 
increasing 
consumer demands [1] are now forced to realize tasks 
difficult to accomplish alone. Firms are thus relying more 
and more on their partners to successfully fulfill market 
demands [2]. This new dynamic is modifying the links 
bounding a firm to its partners [3] and brings the firm to 
outsource activities in which it is less competent [4]. 
Consequently, organizations are still relying on their own 
resources but also, and increasingly, on those accessed via 
their business relationships [5]. In turn, an important part of 
the competition among firms now occurs through their 
supply chain and not between individual organizations as it 
used to [6]. Another key factor of today’s reality is that 
information technologies (IT) can provide competitive 
advantages to organizations [7]. This is particularly true in 
the context of a supply chain where information systems 
allow information to flow quickly and transparently across 
multiple interorganizational boundaries making it visible to 
all supply chain partners and in turn improving the 
performance of business relationships [7].  
However, recent findings from IS studies question the 
value of these systems, arguing that they have become easily 
imitable necessities [8, 9]. As stated by the “resources based 
view of the firm (RBV)” [10] and the “relational view of the 
firm (RV)” [2], a firm’s resources, whether housed by the 
firm or embedded in its relationship with its partners, cannot 
provide a competitive advantage if they are commonly 
available [11]. According to these theories, a firm will be 
able to obtain a sustainable competitive advantage over their 
competitors by combining its resources in unique and 
inimitable ways [12]. Furthermore, contingency theory 
stipulates that firm resources are ideally combined when the 
formers are aligned along their respective needs, demands, 
goals, objectives and structures. Such considerations bring 
managers to judiciously choose two types of key resources 
when establishing their business strategy: (1) those 
pertaining to their supply chain relationships [13] and (2) the 
IT resources supporting these relationships [14].  
However, despite calls from several authors for firms to 
choose coordination mechanisms that best fit their supply 
chain relationship and capitalize on IT to improve their 
performance [15], little information is available in the 
literature for firms to address such alignment concerns. 
Indeed, even though the literature on information technology 
alignment at the organizational level is abundant [16], little is 
known at the interorganizational level. In fact, to the best of 
our knowledge, only four studies [17, 18, 19, 20] have 
attempted to investigate alignment at the interorganizational 
level and none of them have specifically focus on the 
alignment between supply chain and IT resources. It is 
crucial to study such alignment practices as information 
technologies are becoming more and more ubiquitous and 
easy to access due to the emergence of common 
communication 
protocol 
and 
web-based 
approaches. 
Therefore, information technologies are unlikely to provide 
competitive advantages by themselves and it is only trough 
their combination with other resources that organizations 
will derive benefits from them [8, 9]. Also, since competition 
in today’s economy is now at the supply chain level it is 
essential to extend our knowledge on IT resource 
combination to the network level.  
To partially address this gap in the literature, the 
following research aims to answer the following research 
question: According to the type of resources exchanged via 
their 
supply 
chain 
relationships, 
which 
information 
technologies will make it possible for companies to improve 
their performance and gain a competitive advantage? To do 
so, this study will develop a typology based on the dominant 
supply chain and IT resource alignment configurations.  
The paper proceeds as follow: First, we present the 
literature on organizational resources (i.e., the RBV and its 
complement the RV). Second, we expose the underlying 
assumptions of the research after which the conceptual 
model and related propositions are presented. Third, our 
55
eKNOW 2011 : The Third International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-121-2

intended methodological actions are described. Finally, our 
anticipated contributions both theoretical and practical are 
discussed. 
II. 
THEORETICAL DEVELOPMENT 
A. Two Theories on Organizational Resources: the 
Resource Based View and the Relational View of the 
firm 
Two theoretical perspectives that convincingly address 
the complementarities between supply chain and IT 
resources are the RBV and its complement the RV. 
According to the RBV, firms can be conceptualized as 
“resource bundles” [21] which may earn greater profits then 
their rival if they are able to identify and acquire resources 
that are crucial in the development of demanded product or 
services [2]. Barney[10], in his articulation of the RBV 
theory, formulates two fundamental assumptions: (1) that 
resources and capabilities are heterogeneously distributed 
among firms and (2) and are imperfectly mobile. Taken 
together, these assumptions allow for differences in firm 
resource endowments to both exist and persist over time, 
thereby allowing for a resource-based competitive advantage 
[10]. The RBV also posits that it is not all resources that can 
provide a sustainable competitive advantage. In order to play 
such a role resources must meet five criteria or possess five 
key characteristics [10, 22]. As explained by [22, p. 1087] 
“First, the resource must be valuable in that it improves firm 
efficiency and/or effectiveness. Second, the resource must be 
rare so that by exercising control over it, the firm can exploit 
it to the disadvantage of its competitors. Third, the resource 
must be imperfectly imitable to prevent competitors from 
being able to easily develop the resource in-house. Fourth, 
the resource must be imperfectly mobile to discourage the 
ex-post competition for the resource that would offset the 
advantages of maintaining control of the resource. Fifth and 
last, the resource must not be substitutable; otherwise, 
competitors would be able to identify different, but 
strategically equivalent, resources to be used for the same 
purpose”  
In addition, it has been argued that even if a resource 
does not meet the RBV criteria when acting alone, 
organizations can still achieve sustainable competitive 
advantages by combining this resource to others [12]. To do 
so, organizations must combine resources in a way that is 
valuable to the firm, scarce, difficult to imitate and not 
substitutable [12]. Such combination has for effect to protect 
combined resources from competitive imitation by path 
dependencies, embeddedness, casual ambiguity about the 
source of competitive advantage, and time diseconomies of 
imitation [10] and thus making them a potent source of 
sustainable competitive advantage. Therefore, combining 
resources becomes particularly important when organizations 
rely on resources, which have relatively low barriers of 
imitation and acquisition [8]. 
Extending the RBV, the RV posits that an organization’s 
critical resources not only include those housed within its 
limits but also those imbedded it their business relationships 
[23]. Similarly to housed resources, those exceeding firm 
boundaries must also meet resource-based-view’s criteria to 
provide a sustained competitive advantage. Furthermore, 
firms can also choose to combine these resources if they do 
not meet these criteria alone [2]. Consequently, organizations 
can combine resources not only at the intra-firm level but 
also at the interorganizational level. More precisely, [2] 
argue that by developing partnerships ranging from 
transactional to collaborative partnering organizations can 
combine their respective resources to create synergies 
between them which in turn increase barriers to imitation and 
allow 
firms 
to 
benefit 
from 
sustained 
competitive 
advantages. 
Synergy 
creation 
mechanisms 
include: 
(1) information/knowledge 
exchange, 
(2) 
presence 
of 
complementary strategic and combination of organizational 
resources or capability, (3) investments in relation-specific 
asset, and (4) effective relational governance [2]. These 
mechanisms preserve sustained competitive advantages 
derived from these combined resources by increasing causal 
ambiguity, 
time 
compression 
diseconomies, 
interorganizational asset interconnectedness, and by the 
scarcity of potential partner, resource indivisibility, and 
institutional environments [24]. 
III. 
CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK  
A. Underlying Assumption: The Need to Bundle Together 
Supply Chain and IT Resources 
Despite the acknowledged importance of supply chain 
and IT resources, either housed or embedded in business 
relationships, for organizational success [25], recent studies 
show that each of these types of resources alone cannot yield 
sustained competitive advantages to organizations [22]. First, 
the supply chain literature indicates that supply chain 
relationships, and in turn the various resources associated 
with them, tend to provide only temporary competitive 
advantages to organizations since they are becoming more 
and more easily imitable due to technological evolutions 
which diminish transaction cost and encourage organizations 
to establish relationships with their external partners [22]. As 
such, organizations not only need to identify the critical 
resources embedded in its business relationship but also how 
to protect them from the mimetic behaviour of their 
competitor [22]. Insights from recent studies suggest that 
combining supply chain resources with other resources could 
be an adequate mean to alleviate their imitability [7, 24]. 
Indeed, findings from [24], in accordance to the premises of 
the RBV and RV, indicate that firms which invest in 
complementary resources to support supply chain resources 
can increase imitation barriers associated with them and in 
turn yield competitive advantages from what were at the start 
easy to imitate resources. Furthermore, findings from [7] also 
show that, by being combined with other organizational 
resources such as supply chain management information 
systems, the performance impact of relationship resources 
can be increased.  
Second, research findings from the IS literature also 
indicate that IT resources may not meet the RBV criteria 
56
eKNOW 2011 : The Third International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-121-2

when acting alone [26]. More precisely, these resources, as 
demonstrated by [8], present relatively low barriers to 
imitation and acquisition by other firms making IT-based 
advantages to diminish rather quickly over time [26]. 
Consequently, having recognised the limits of IT resources, 
authors from the IS field investigated various ways by which 
organizations could derive a sustainable competitive 
advantage from IT resources [26]. Following this endeavour, 
some authors have argued that one approach to palliate to IT 
resources shortcomings consist of judiciously combining 
them with other organizational resources [11] such as supply 
chain resources [7]. Indeed, by combining their IT resources 
with other organizational resources, firms could be able to 
insulate these resources from competitive imitation. Key 
findings from [11] corroborate this claim by indicating that 
the value of IT can be augmented only when it is embedded 
in an organization through resource complementarities and 
co-specialization. 
Taken together, these streams of research argue that each 
type of resources would gain from an appropriate 
combination 
with 
other 
resources. 
Furthermore, 
organizations should seek to combine both types of resources 
together in order to minimize their respective shortcomings 
trough complementarities [26]. Indeed, the literature in 
supply chain management recognizes that information 
technologies represent a critical driver of supply chain 
success [27] while the IS literature recognizes that the full 
potential of IT resources can only be obtained through their 
adequate combination with other organization resources such 
as supply chain resources [7, 24, 26]. Hence, the main 
assumption of this research is that, to achieve a sustainable 
competitive advantage, organizations should align their 
supply chain and IT resources. 
B. Research model:Uncovering the Dominant 
Configurations of Supply Chain and IT Resources 
Alignment 
In accordance with our underlying assumption, Fig 1 
exposes our research model, which will be used to uncover 
the dominant configurations of supply chain and IT 
resources alignment. The model comprises three facets 
(supply chain resources, IT resources and organizational 
performance.), which are detailed in the next sub-sections. 
1) Supply chain resources: 
From a RBV perspective, a supply chain relationship or 
supply chain linkage – defined as an “explicit and/or implicit 
connections that a firm creates with critical entities of its 
supply chain in order to manage the flow and/or quality of 
inputs from suppliers into the firm and of outputs from the 
firm to customers [22, p. 1084]” – can be seen as a resource 
per see or as a capability that allows a firm to acquire 
resources which in turn can yield benefits [22]. Although 
both viewpoints recognize the importance of supply chain 
linkage and are congruent with the RBV, they differ 
considerably on how and why they may provide sustainable 
competitive advantages to firms [22]. The former presumes 
that simply having a critical link with one supply chain 
partner guaranties some sort of abnormal rent while the later 
posits that even if an organization is linked to its partner, the 
firm still needs to exploit this relationship by acquiring or 
sharing resources with its partner to obtain a sustained 
competitive advantage.  
As mentioned previously, firms are changing the nature 
of their relationship with their supplier; customers and other 
external partners forming new interorganizational coalitions, 
such as virtual enterprises and integrated supply chains [3]. 
Such changes stem from organizations’ desire to move away 
from arms-length relationships to more collaborative 
partnerships [3] and harness benefits from closer and 
stronger partnerships [28]. In order words, organizations 
recognize that the simple fact of establishing a partnership 
(arm’s length relationship) is not a guaranty for success, and 
that relationship should be viewed as a mean to efficiently 
manage forward flow of material and backward flow of 
information. 
The 
underlying 
aim 
of 
this 
observed 
organizational behaviour to encourage supply chain linkage 
forces us to consider supply chain relationships as 
capabilities, which allow organizations to acquire or share 
resources, and not as a resource per see.  
Insights from case studies indicate that organizations, 
which establish supply chains relationships, do so in order to 
efficiently manage or acquire three different types of 
resources (1) materials, financial and information [7]. 
However, of these three resources, information and its 
effective management across supply chain partners is the one 
that exerts the greater impact on firm performance [7]. As 
such, the present research only focuses on this particular 
supply chain resource. Information sharing between supply 
chain partners has been examined by scholars from diverse 
background including, among others, information systems, 
operation management and marketing [24]. Following an 
extensive literature review on the subject, [29] concluded 
that information flows or information was a multi-
dimensional resource encompassing three different sub-set of 
information: (1) operational, (2) tactical and (3) strategic 
each affecting organizational benefits differently and 
positively when shared efficiently and effectively [24]. 
Drawing from the work of [29], the present research adopts a 
three level classification framework for information and 
differentiates between operational, tactical and strategic 
information levels. More precisely, operational information 
refers to information tied to the production of product and 
services, such as information about resources conditions and 
plans such as inventory/capacity plans and production 
schedules [24]. When shared efficiently, this information 
allows partnering organizations to optimize input resources 
globally by streamlining buffers and synchronizing resource 
allocations [24]. As such, organizations sharing this type of 
information can achieve operational economies-of scale and 
reduce inventory and ordering cost [30]. 
57
eKNOW 2011 : The Third International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-121-2

 
Figure 1.  Poposed research model  
Tactical information relates to financial metrics on margin 
structures and costs [24]. When shared adequately, this 
information enables parties to collaborate on ways to 
improve economic outcomes and to leverage both parties’ 
resources [24]. As such, organizations sharing this type of 
information are usually able to improve their response to 
customer demands trough adequate delivery practices (i.e., 
continuous replenishment and quick response systems), 
making the flow of material in the supply chain to be “pull” 
by consumer demands rather than “pushed” by producers 
[30]. Finally, strategic information is defined as information 
that affects a firm competitive positioning and planned 
actions in the market [24]. When shared efficiently, this 
information allows business partners to obtain or increase 
their benefits by coordinating sales and marketing activities 
with operational requirements [24]. Therefore, allowing 
organizations sharing this type of information to move into 
new markets or develop new product [7]. 
2) IT Resources 
Despite the fact that the RBV provides a helpful 
theoretical lens from which to assess the role of IT resources 
and their business value [31], the existing literature in the IS 
field is rather ambiguous on their definition and 
conceptualization [32]. For example, many different 
classification schemes have been proposed [9, 11, 31, 33, 34, 
35]. From these proposed classification, two general 
conclusions can be drawn. First, IT resources are not 
monolithic and thus encompass different dimensions. Second 
each framework usually distinguishes between two types of 
complementary IT resources: physical IT resources and 
human IT resources, which are also consistent with Grant’s 
classification scheme for resources [31, 33]. Both types of IT 
resources, physical and human, are considered essential and 
each complementarily enhances the success of a firm [32].  
Physical resources usually refer to infrastructure and 
related deployment resources [31]. They are considered to be 
multi-dimensional and can include different types of IT 
investment: innovative vs. non-innovative, strategic vs. 
nonstrategic, and internally focused vs. externally focused 
investments [36] each reflecting a firm’s strategy and 
affecting its performance accordingly [32]. The classification 
that most convincingly addresses this multi-faced role of IT 
physical resources is the one proposed by [32] which 
distinguishes between four different types of IT physical 
resources or IT investments: infrastructure, transactional, 
information, and strategic investments.  
Infrastructure investments relate to shared IT services 
such as servers, networks, laptops, shared customer 
databases, help desk and application development used by 
multiple IT application. This type of IT resources provides 
the groundwork for present business initiatives as well as a 
flexible base for future business initiatives [32]. They require 
high up-front costs, which are in turn outbalanced by long-
term 
performance 
improvements 
[32]. 
Transactional 
investments refer to investment made with the aim of 
automating repetitive business transactions and processes 
such as order processing, point of sale processing, bank cash 
withdrawal, billing statement production and other repetitive 
transactions [32]. As such, this type of investment is likely to 
cut organizational costs and/or increase the volume of 
business a firm can conduct per unit cost [32]. Information 
investment provides information to firm’s managers 
communicating internally and externally with their supply 
chain partners. These investments can take the form of 
decision support systems that enable more effective decision 
making by allowing sale analysis and data mining. These 
types of investment influence a firm performance on the 
following indicator: control, reliability, delivery and 
adaptability of firms [32]. Strategic investment refers to IT 
resources which help repositioning the firm into the 
marketplace whether by supporting a firm’s entry into new 
markets or by enabling the development of new products, 
services or business processes [32]. Consequently, these 
investments are likely to increase the flexibility of an 
organization in regards to customer demands.  
Human IT resources, similar to physical resources, are 
multi-facet and are recognized to include technical and 
managerial IT skills [35]. Technical skills refer “to the know-
how needed to build IT applications using the available 
technology and to operate them to make products or provide 
services” [9, p. 498]. These skills allow employees to be 
more productive which in turn decrease costs and improve 
other 
operational 
performance 
indicators 
[9, 
35]. 
Furthermore, technical skills also enable firms to efficiently 
manage the technical risk associated with infrastructure 
investment [9], which in turn also diminish organizational 
costs. On the other hand, managerial skills refer to the 
“management's ability to conceive of, develop, and exploit 
IT applications to support and enhance other business 
functions” [9, p. 498]. These skills, compared to technical 
skills, relate more to employee’s communication and 
analysis abilities. More precisely, they allow employees: (1) 
to better understand and appreciate the business needs of 
their counterparts, both internal and external, (2) to work 
with them in developing appropriate IT applications, (3) to 
coordinate IT activities in ways to support each other, and 
(4) to anticipate the future IT needs for all partners [9]. 
Consequently, managerial IT skills help organizations to reap 
58
eKNOW 2011 : The Third International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-121-2

the full potential of IT by increasing the adaptability of its 
employee, which in turn improve the flexibility of the 
organization and its level of customer service [9, 33].  
3) Organizational performance 
By establishing relationships with their trading partners, 
organizations aim to successfully answer final customers’ 
demands [37]. Such demands from consumers are usually 
formulated along four evaluation criteria: price, quality, 
delivery and availability [1]. Accordingly, supply chain 
performance 
has 
usually 
been 
assessed 
along 
the 
corresponding criteria of cost, quality, delivery and 
flexibility [37, 38]. Cost relates to production cost, 
productivity, capacity utilization and inventory reduction 
while delivery criteria include: on-time delivery, short-time 
delivery, production lifecycle, lead-time and delivery on due 
date [39]. On the other hand, customers usually assess 
quality along eight dimensions: performance, features, 
reliability, conformance, durability, serviceability, aesthetic 
and perceived quality, from which the last two are inherently 
complex and the most difficult to measure [39]. Flexibility 
refers to a supply chain’s agility, adaptability, and 
responsiveness to the needs of its users [40] and can be 
assessed along three dimensions: product mix, volume 
change over and modification [ward]. 
C. Research Propositions :Primary Forms of Supply Chain 
and IT Recources Alignment 
In the context of this conceptual paper, we present, in this 
section, three expected alignment configurations that 
represent the simplest form of successful alignment between 
these resources to improve the various dimensions of 
organizational performance. 
1) Configuration 1: Cost driven organizations 
The first basic configuration proposed is anchored around 
operational information and its efficient management 
through its combination with key IT resources. As mentioned 
previously, operational information refers to information tied 
to the production of product and services and includes 
information about resources conditions and plans [24]. This 
type of information is, by nature, rather repetitive and 
requires limited interpretation, thereby making transactional 
investments a perfect match since they allow organization to 
automate repetitive business transaction [32]. However, other 
IT resources will also be needed as transactional investments 
also require infrastructure investments and technical IT skills 
to be efficient. Indeed, infrastructure investments provide the 
backbone from which every other IT investment is anchored 
[32] while technical IT skills allow users to efficiently use 
these transactional investments [9]. The combination of these 
four distinct resources is likely to yield a sustained 
competitive advantage to organization based on costs 
differentiation. Indeed, (1) sharing operational information 
allows economies-of scale, while reducing inventory and 
ordering costs [30], (2) transactional investments automate 
the sharing of operational information driving costs further 
down, (3) technical IT skills increase productivity which in 
turn also decrease costs [9, 35], and (4) infrastructure 
investments, when combined with technical IT skills which 
diminish implement costs, are also tied to cost reduction 
[32].  
 
P1: When an organization mainly exchanges operational 
information with its supply chain partner and the 
operational 
information 
is 
combined 
with 
IT 
infrastructure investments, transactional investments and 
technical skills, the cost performance of the organization 
will improve. 
 
2) Configuration 2: Value driven organizations 
The second configuration presented here relates to the 
effective management of tactical information. Tactical 
information focuses on financial metrics, margin structures 
and costs [24]. This type of information is meant to help 
partners to collaborate and leverage their respective 
resources [24]. In turn, IT information investments are well 
suited to support the collaboration between partners by 
enabling internal and external communication between 
partners [24]. As such, we expect organizations to combine 
these two complementary resources together. Organizations 
relying on this combination will also need to add three other 
IT resources: infrastructure investments, technical skills and 
managerial skills. Again infrastructure investments are 
necessary to procure the adequate hardware required by 
information investments and technical skills will allow 
efficient use of these investments [9, 32]. Managerial IT 
skills are also essential since they represent communication 
and analysis abilities which are key when collaborating or 
when customizing decision support systems [9]. Taken 
together, tactical information, information investments, 
infrastructure investments, technical skills and managerial 
skills allow better decisions and in turn improve organization 
response to customer demands [30, 33] These improvements 
can take the form of demand driven supply chains or 
increase customer service [30, 33]. Thereby, the alignment of 
these resources should yield a sustained competitive 
advantage to organization based on quality and delivery 
differentiation.  
 
P2: When an organization mainly exchanges tactical 
information with its supply chain partner and the tactical 
information is combined with infrastructure investment, 
information 
investment, 
technical 
IT 
skills 
and 
managerial 
IT 
skills, 
the 
quality 
and 
delivery 
performances of the organization will improve.  
 
3) Configuration 3: Innovation driven organizations 
The last configuration proposed focuses on strategic 
information 
sharing. 
Organizations 
share 
strategic 
information to position themselves in the market and 
coordinate related actions [24]. Such actions can take the 
form of new product development and entry into new 
markets [7]. Strategic investments also have the same 
59
eKNOW 2011 : The Third International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-121-2

objective as they are destined to support similar actions [32] 
making them an ideal support to strategic information. As 
such, we expect organizations to match these resources 
together. 
This 
combination 
will 
also 
require 
three 
complementary IT resources: infrastructure investments, 
technical IT skills and managerial IT skills. Infrastructure 
investments and technical IT skills will play the same roles 
as previously described in configuration two. Managerial IT 
skills will permit managers to easily adapt to and anticipate 
future IT needs [9, 33] and thus enhance the value of 
organizational positioning actions. These resources, by being 
combined together, will allow organizations to anticipate and 
effectively reply to changes in customer demands by 
facilitating new product development and entry into new 
markets [9, 24, 32, 33], As such, we expect organizations 
pertaining to this configuration to gain a sustained 
competitive advantage based on flexibility differentiation. 
 
P3: When an organization mainly exchanges strategic 
information with its supply chain partner and the strategic 
information is combined with infrastructure investment, 
strategic investment, technical IT skills and managerial 
IT skills, the flexibility performance of the organization 
will improve.  
IV. 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
A. Data Collection 
We plan on validating our research model with a 
stratified sample of 200 critical prime manufacturer-supplier 
relationships, where prime manufacturers are located in 
Canada and active in the four following industrial sectors: 
(1) machinery manufacturing, (2) computer and electronic 
product manufacturing, (3) electrical equipment, appliance 
and component manufacturing and (4) transportation 
equipment manufacturing. Top executive responsible of the 
supply chain activities of each manufacturer will be the 
selected respondent. For each respondent, we will collect 
information on a single buyer-supplier relationship, but the 
name of the chosen supplier need not be provided. 
B. Reasearch Construct and Measures 
Some constructs of the conceptual model have been 
previously used by researchers in the field of IS or supply 
chain (i.e., IT infrastructure resources [32], IT transactional 
resources [32], IT informational resources [32], IT strategic 
resources 
[32], 
cost 
performance 
[39, 
40], 
quality 
performance [39, 40], delivery performance [39, 40] and 
flexibility performance [39, 40]) while others (i.e., 
operational information, tactical information, strategic 
information, IT skills, and Managerial IT skills) will be 
developed  using [41] paradigm for measure development. 
C. Satistical Analyses 
For the purpose of this the study the gestalt perspective 
will be employed as it allows the uncovering of typologies 
(configurations) which is the major aims of this research. 
More precisely, this study will follow [17] six steps 
analytical process to find the configurations of supply chain 
resources and IT resources alignment. One-way analysis of 
mean (ANOVA) will also be used to identify the best 
performing configurations. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Rooted in the RBV and the RV, this research proposes a 
model that will permit the uncovering of supply chain and IT 
resources alignment configurations. Findings tied to this 
initiative will provide important contributions to both 
research and practice.  
Alignment studies have traditionally been concerned with 
the extent of fit rather than the form of fit associated with IT 
resources. The present research significantly depart from 
these previous research endeavor and makes a significant 
contribution to research by being one of the few to 
investigate both the level and the form of alignment between 
supply chain and IT resources. Furthermore, contrary to most 
studies in the IS field, which have empirically assessed the 
role of IT resources at an aggregate level, this research 
proposes to empirically assess a set of physical and human 
IT resources. This will not only extend our understanding of 
IT resource alignment but will also increase our knowledge 
tied to organizational resources by revealing the distinct 
nature of IT resources and their respective role and impact. 
From a methodological perspective, this research makes 
a significant contribution to research by validating a rigorous 
approach to cluster analysis, which extends our knowledge 
on alignment assessment and validation. This research will 
also develop important scales necessary to the measure 
supply chain and IT resources thereby making another 
important contribution to research.  
From a practical viewpoint, this study will allow 
organizations to better manage their resources by identifying 
(1) their respective strengths and weaknesses, (2) their 
respective impact on various performance dimensions and 
(3) interaction effects that can entail sustainable competitive 
advantages. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
J. Griffiths, R. James and J. Kempson, “Focusing customer demand 
through manufacturing supply chains by the use of customer focused 
cells: An appraisal,” International Journal of Porduction Economics, 
vol. 65, 2000, pp. 111-120. 
[2] 
J.H. Dyer and H. Singh, “The Relational View: Cooperative Strategy 
and Sources of  Interorganizational Competitive Advantage,” 
Academy of Management Review, vol. 23, 4, 1998, pp. 660-679. 
[3] 
M. Bensaou, “Interorganizational Cooperation: The role of 
Information Technology an Empirical Comparison of U.S. and 
Japanese Supplier Relations,” Information Systems Research, vol. 8, 
2, 1997, pp. 107-124. 
[4] 
M. Sobrero and E.B. Roberts, “Strategic Management of Supplier-
Manufacturers Relations in New Product Development,” Research 
Policy, vol. 31, 2002, pp. 159-182. 
[5] 
D. Tapscott, D. Ticoll and A. Lowy, “Digital Capital: Harnessing the 
Power of Business Webs,” Boston, MA, Harvard Business School 
Press, 2000. 
[6] 
M. Christopher and D. Towill, “An Integrated Model for the Design 
of Agile Supply Chains,” International Journal of Physical 
Distribution & Logistics Management, vol. 31, 2001, pp. 235-246. 
60
eKNOW 2011 : The Third International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-121-2

[7] 
A. Rai, R. Patnayakuni and N. Seth “Firm Performance Impacts of 
Digitally Enable Supply Chain Integration Capabilities,” MIS 
Quarterly, vol. 30, 2, 2006, pp.225-246. 
[8] 
E.K. Clemons and M.C. Row, “Sustaining IT advantage: the role of 
structural differences,” MIS Quarterly, vol. 15, 3, 1991, pp. 275-292. 
[9] 
F.J. Mata, W.L. Fuerst and J.B. Barney, “Information technology and 
sustained competitive advantage: A resource-based analysis,” MIS 
Quarterly, vol. 19, 4, 1995, pp. 487–505. 
[10] J. Barney, “Firm Resources and Sustained Competitive Advantage,” 
Journal of Management, vol. 17, 1991, pp. 99-120. 
[11] T.C. Powell, and A. Dent-Micallef, “Information Technology as 
Competitive Advantage: The Role of Human, Business, and 
Technology Resources,” Strategic Management Journal, vol. 18, 5, 
1997, pp. 375-405. 
[12] R. Grant, “Prospering in Dynamically-Competitive Environments: 
Organizational Capability as Knowledge Integration,” Organization 
Science, vol. 7, 4, 1996, pp. 375-387. 
[13] A. Agarwal, R. Shankar, and M.K. Tiwari, “Modeling the Metrics of 
Lean, Agile and Leagile Supply Chain: An ANP-Based Approach,” 
European Journal of Operational Research, vol. 173, 2006, pp. 211 
225. 
[14] K. Kemppainen and A. Vepsäläinen, “Trends in Industrial Supply 
Chains and Networks,” International Journal of Physical Distribution 
& Logistics Management, vol. 33, 8, 2003, pp. 709-719. 
[15] R. Bunduchi,.”Trust, power and transaction costs in B2B exchanges 
— A socio-economic approach,” Industrial Marketing Mangement, 
37, 2008, pp. 610-622. 
[16] F. Bergeron, L. Raymond and S. Rivard, “Ideal Patterns of Strategic 
Alignment and Business Performance,” Information Management, 
vol. 41, 8, 2004, 1003-1020. 
[17] M. 
Bensaou 
and 
N. 
Venkatraman, 
“Configurations 
of 
Interorganizational Relationships: A comparison Between U.S. and 
Japanese Automakers,” Management Science, vol. 41, 9, 1995, pp. 
1471-1492. 
[18] H-L, Chang, K. Wan and I. Chiu, “Business–IT fit in e-procurement 
systems: evidence from high-technology firms in China,” Information 
Systems Journal, vol. 18, 2008, pp. 381-404. 
[19] P.W. Forster and A.C. Regan, “Electronic Integration in the Air 
Cargo Industry: An Information Processing Model of On-Time 
Performance,” Transportation Journal, vol. 40, 4, 2001, pp. 46-61. 
[20] G. Premkumar, K. Ramamurthy. and C.S. Saunders, “Information 
Processing View of Organizations: An Exploratory Examination of 
Fit in the Context of Interorganizational Relationships,” Journal of 
Management Information Systems, vol. 22, 1, 2005, pp. 257-294. 
[21] E. Penrose, “The Growth of the Firm,” Wiley, New York, 1959. 
[22] M. Rungtusanatham, F. Salvador, C. Forza and T.Y. Choi, “Supply-
chain linkages and operational performance: A resource-based-view 
perspective,” International Journal of Operation and Production 
Management, vol. 23, 9, 2003, pp. 2084-1099. 
[23] W.W. Powell, K.W. Koput and L. Smith-Doerr, “Interorganizational 
collaboration and the locus of innovation: networks of learning in 
biotechnology,” Administrative Science Quarterly, vol. 41, 1996, pp. 
116-145. 
[24] R. Klein and A. Rai, “Interfirm Strategic Information Flows in 
Logistics Supply Chain Relationship,” MIS Quarterly, vol. 33, 4, 
2009, pp. 735-762. 
[25] V. Sambamurthy, A. Bharadwaj and V. Grover, “Shaping Agility 
Trought Digital Options :Reconceptualizing the Role of Information 
Technology in Organization,” MIS Quarterly, vol. 27, 2,2003, pp. 
237-263. 
[26] F. Wu, S. Yeniyurt, D. Kim and S.T. Cavusgil, “The impact of 
information technology on supply chain capabilities and firm 
performance: 
A 
resource-based 
view,” 
Industrial 
Marketing 
Management, vol. 35, 2006, pp. 493-504. 
[27] S. Raghunathan, “Interorganizational Collaborative Forecasting and 
Replenishment Systems and Supply Chain Implications,” Decision 
Sciences, vol. 30, 4, 1999, pp. 1053-1071 
[28] B.A. Weitz and S.D. Jap, “Relationship Marketing and distribution 
channels,” Journal of Academy of Marketing Science, vol. 23, 4, 
1995, pp. 305-320. 
[29] R. Patnayakuni, A. Rai and N. Seth, “Relational Antecedents of 
Information Flow Integration for Supply Chain Coordination,” 
Journal of Management Information Systems, vol. 23, 1, 2006, pp. 
13-49. 
[30] A. Seidmann and A. Sundararajan, “The Effects of Task and 
Information 
Asymmetry 
on 
Business 
Process 
Redesign,” 
International Journal of Production Economics, vol. 50, 2,1997, pp. 
117-128. 
[31] C. Zhang and J. Dhaliwal, “An investigation of resource-based and 
institutional theoretic factors in technology adoption for operations 
and supply chain management,” International Journal of Production 
Economics, vol. 120, 2009, pp. 252-269. 
[32] S. Aral and P. Weil, “IT Assets, Organizational Capabilities, and 
Firm Performance: How Resource Allocations and Organizational 
Differences Explain Performance Variation,” Organization Science, 
vol. 18, 5, 2008, pp. 763–780. 
[33] A.S. Bharadwaj, “A resource-based perspective on information 
technology 
capability 
and 
firm 
performance: 
An 
empirical 
investigation,”. MIS Quarterly, vol. 24, 1, 2000, pp. 169-196. 
[34] A.S. Bharadwaj, V. Sambamurthy and R.W. Zmud, “IT capabilities: 
Theoretical perspectives and empirical operationalization,” In: 
Hirschheim, R., Newman, M., Degross, J.I., Eds, Proceedings of the 
19th International Conference on Information Systems, Helsinki, 
Finland,1998,  pp.378–385. 
[35] N. Melville, K. Kraemer and V. Gurbaxani, “Review: Information 
technology and organizational performance: An integrative model of 
IT business value,” MIS Quarterly, vol. 28, 2, 2004, pp. 283–322. 
[36] A.S. Bharadwaj, S.G. Bharadwaj and B. Konsynski,. “Information 
technology effects on firm performance as measured by Tobin’s ,” 
Management Science, vol. 45, 7, 1999, pp. 1008–1024. 
[37] S.K. Vickery, J. Jayaram, C. Droge and R. Calantone, “The effects of 
an integrative supply chain strategy on customer service and financial 
performance: an analysis of direct versus indirect relationships,” 
Journal of Operations Management, vol. 21, 2003, pp. 523-539. 
[38] S. Devaraj, L. Krajewski and J.C. Wei, “Impact of eBusiness 
Technologies on Operational Performance: The Role of Production 
Information Integration in the Supply Chain,” Journal of Operation 
Management, vol. 25, 6, 2007, pp. 1199-1216. 
[39] P.T. Ward, J.K. McCreery, L.P. Ritzman and D. Sharma, 
“Competitive priorities in operations management,” Decision 
Sciences, vol. 29, 4,1998, pp. 1035-1046. 
[40] G.T.M. Hult, D.J. Ketchen Jr, S.T. Cavusgil and R. Calantone, 
“Knowledge as a strategic resource in supply chains,” Journal of 
Operation Management, vol. 24, 2006, pp. 458-475. 
[41] G. A. Churchill Jr. “A paradigm for developing better measures of 
marketing constructs,” Journal of Marketing Research, vol. 16, Feb 
1979; pp. 64-74, doi: 000001; ABI/INFORM Global 
 
61
eKNOW 2011 : The Third International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-121-2

