Creating a Minimal Information Vocabulary for a Reproducible Method Description
A Case in Column Chromatography
Dena Tahvildari
Computer Science Department
VU Amsterdam
The Netherlands
Email: d.tahvildari@vu.nl
Anne Vissers
Laboratory of Food Chemistry
Wageningen University
The Netherlands
Email: anne.vissers@wur.nl
Guus Schreiber
Computer Science Department
VU Amsterdam
The Netherlands
Email : guus.schreiber@vu.nl
Jan Top
Food & Biobased Research
Wageningen UR
and VU Amsterdam
The Netherlands
Email : jan.top@wur.nl
Abstract—Descriptions of experimental methods in scientiﬁc pub-
lications are often incomplete or inadequate. In these cases,
the experimental work cannot be reproduced or veriﬁed due
to lack of information. To facilitate the documentation of lab
methods, in some domains minimum information guidelines have
been developed. If implemented, these guidelines ensure that the
information about the method can be easily veriﬁed, analysed and
clearly interpreted by a wider scientiﬁc community. However,
there is an evident lack of automated documentation tools to
create and edit laboratory reports that follow these guidelines
and at the same time do not impose a too rigid framework on
the scientist. This paper describes the very ﬁrst step towards
the development of semantically rich but free-text editor for
creating descriptions of experimental methods. We created and
evaluated the vocabulary for reporting a column chromatography
experiment, which is developed using the MIAPE guidelines. Our
goal is to check if we can use the MIAPE guidelines in the
food chemistry domain.The ultimate use of the vocabulary is in
semantically enriched editorial software. An editor should give
knowledge-based guidance to the author and semi-automatically
add meta-data. The ﬁrst step in designing such editor is to
construct supporting vocabularies and evaluate their use in the
domain of interest. Our initial application domain is laboratory
of food chemistry.
Keywords–MIAPE; vocabulary; material and method sections;
HPLC; reproducibility; laboratory experiments.
I.
INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVE
Transparency and reproducibility are recognized as essen-
tial features of science [1][2]. The quality of methodology
descriptions are important factors for transparency and repro-
ducibility. Therefore, providing adequate research documenta-
tion is an important task of a scientist.
In this paper, we discuss the very ﬁrst step towards cre-
ating a semantic support for writing a reproducible method
description, which intends to allow researchers to perform
this task effectively and efﬁciently. The notion of research
reproducibility has different interpretations, varying between
different research ﬁelds. Research reproducibility commonly
implies that, as an ultimate product of scientiﬁc investigation,
research papers must be accompanied by a detailed description
of the computational or experimental environment that are used
to produce the result. According to Clarebout’s principle [3]
“An article [...] in a as a means for scholarly communication
is not the scholarship itself; it is merely advertising of the
scholarship. The actual scholarship is the complete software
development environment and the complete set of instructions
that generates the results”. This idea promotes that research
data, algorithms, codes and protocols are not simply ancillary
information, but ﬁrst class scholarly products as important
as the paper itself. We deﬁne the term reproducibility as
“the ability to investigate a phenomenon using the similar
conditions as in the original experiment”. We emphasize that
the conditions do not need to be identical, but only similar,
since slight variations are essential for scientiﬁc understanding
of a phenomenon.
We focus on reproducibility in the context of laboratory
research. There can be two reasons for an experiment not to
reproduce the same phenomenon:
1)
the hypothesized mechanism does not manifest itself,
even having all conditions right (falsiﬁcation)
2)
the conditions under which the hypothesized effect
can manifest itself have not been adequately fulﬁlled
The second condition can result from a poor description of
the experimental conditions. This is why the scientiﬁc method
requires explicit records of “all” experimental conditions.
Having a report of the precise experimental process, and data
is necessary to explain why some result has been found, why
results could be different or be same as the results found in a
different condition. For repeating a mechanism, it is important
to know which assumptions and conditions must hold for the
mechanism to manifest itself. In addition to serving scientiﬁc
integrity, another reason for having details of an experiment
is to make the transition to applications. For example, a
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP), is intended as a step-by-
step instruction to achieve a predictable, standardized, desired
result, often within the context of a longer overall process.
Although a full account of the experimental conditions
would be ideal, this cannot be achieved in practice. It is not
possible to describe literally all details that possibly might be
of inﬂuence; what’s worse, scientists are usually not inclined to
allocate time and effort to the “administrative” task of creating
extensive documentation. Transparency in documentation is
costly for scientists – in terms of time and effort. Taking
into account that only the “essential” conditions need to be
registered, the question is how researchers can be supported
to realize which are these essential conditions that are suf-
ﬁcient to perform a “similar” experiment. When asked for,
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

most scientists embrace transparency and reproducibility as
disciplinary norms and values of science [4]. Therefore, one
might expect that providing full documentation of methods
and data is routine in daily practice. Yet, a growing body of
evidence suggests that this is not the case [5][6]. It is becoming
increasingly clear that the current publication model falls short
in promoting transparency and reproducibility. A recent Nature
report from researchers at the Amgen corporation showed that
only 11% of the academic research in the literature are repro-
ducible. Individual motivation and personal efﬁciency gain are
other variables in promoting reproducibility and transparency
of scientiﬁc methods [7][8].
In the present publication model, the conditions under
which an experiment is performed are described in the “ma-
terial and method” section of a scientiﬁc article. This section
should provide information about the materials, procedures and
critical steps that are used in the course of an experiment, such
that the procedure can potentially be reproduced as faithfully
as possible [9].
Minimum information guidelines (MIAPE) have been de-
veloped in various research domains to facilitate documen-
tation [10]. Although they provide valuable guidance for
reporting the necessary information about the method, they
are rather high level, and do not give the detailed and context-
speciﬁc support that is needed at the time of writing a
method description. We think that a semi-automated use of
minimum information guidelines in editorial applications could
improve the quality of laboratory reports and method sections
of publications, while limiting the time and effort needed to
produce these.
Our approach to solve the quality problem of laboratory
method reports and (potentially) lab protocols – in terms of
transparency and reproducibility – relies on the use of the
Semantic Web technologies and formal methods. We believe
that in order to provide support for scientiﬁc authors, the ﬁrst
step would be to create a formal model of the underlying
domain knowledge. A structured vocabulary or ontology can
help to provide context-dependent suggestions to authors. We
emphasize that we do not address the quality of the argumen-
tation followed, nor the soundness of the research method.
In this study, we start off by exploring the minimum
information guidelines for reporting a column chromatography
technique in the food chemistry domain. Our hypothesis is
that terms occurring in the guidelines should be present in the
method sections of published papers. In the second section
of this paper, we present relevant literature regarding the
problem, and current approaches. In the third section of the
paper, we brieﬂy familiarise our readers with high performance
liquid chromatography techniques as the ﬁrst case study. Our
approach to create the ﬁrst draft of the vocabulary is presented
in section 4. Section 5 is dedicated to results of the term
frequency measurements. Finally, we discuss the results and
provide some hypotheses for further testing in section 6.
II.
RELATED WORK
Several initiatives have identiﬁed the problem of inadequate
reporting and have proposed solutions. The National Centre
for the Replacement, Reﬁnement and Reduction of Animals
in Research (NC3R) assessed methodological reports in the
literature for in-vivo research. They evaluated 271 publications
and showed that only 60% of the articles included information
about the number and characteristics of the animals (strain,
sex, age, weight) and approximately 30% of the articles lacked
detailed descriptions of the statistical analyses used. Built upon
this study, the ARRIVE [11] [12] guidelines were developed
for reporting in-vivo experiments, pertaining to animal re-
search.
To promote scientiﬁc reproducibility, the FORCE11 com-
munity has published a set of recommendations for minimal
data standards for biomedical research and published a man-
ifesto to improve research communication. The BioSharing
initiative contains a large registry of community standards
for structuring and curating data sets. It has made signiﬁcant
strides towards the standardization of data via its multiple
partnerships with journals and other organizations [13].
The most relevant work to our research is an initiative in
the Proteomic community. The problem of accurate method-
ological reporting is addressed by developing the minimum
information documentation guidelines (MIAPE guidelines) as
a standard, along with the development of MIAPE-supported
software tools. For example, the ProteRed MIAPE Web toolkit
was developed to fulﬁll the lack of bio-informatics tools to
create and edit standard ﬁle formats and reports. It allows
these to be embedded in proteomics research work ﬂows. This
system is able to verify if the report fulﬁlls the minimum in-
formation requirements of the corresponding MIAPE modules
while highlighting missing information and inconsistencies in
a report. In other words, this system works as a MIAPE
compliance checker and has been designed to support the
validation of experimental meta-data [14].
Our approach is similar to the ProteRed compliance
checker in terms of using semantics. However, we intend to
develop MIAPE-CC vocabularies and use it in editorial appli-
cations that are frequently used by scientists, such as Microsoft
Word. We believe that in order to enable researchers to provide
a reproducible method description with low cost, we need to
develop a knowledge base of reporting requirements and apply
them in the most frequently used scholarly communication
tools [15].
III.
CASE DESCRIPTION
This section describes high-performance liquid chromatog-
raphy (HPLC). We have selected this technique as a use case
to build a vocabulary and select reference articles. HPLC is a
chromatographic method that is used to separate a mixture of
compounds in analytical chemistry and biochemistry so as to
identify, quantify or purify the individual components of the
mixture. HPLC can be used in the following applications, on
small scale (analytical) and large scale (preparative):
1)
Mixture characterization (analytical)
2)
Water puriﬁcation (preparative)
3)
Pre-concentration of trace components (preparative)
Examples of HPLC chromatography types are:
1)
Ion-exchange chromatography of proteins
2)
Ligand-exchange chromatography
3)
Reversed phase chromatography
4)
Size exclusion chromatography
The sample mixture to be separated and tested is sent
into a stream in the mobile phase percolating through the
column. There are different types of columns available with
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

sorbents of varying particle sizes and materials. For most
types of chromatography, the mixture has interaction with the
sorbent, also known as the stationary phase. The separation
depends on the balance between compound afﬁnities for the
sorbent (As) and for the mobile phase (Amp). To separate
compounds, a constant ﬂow of mobile phase over the column
is applied, which changes in composition gradually. When
“As” is less than “Amp”, the compound detaches from the
sorbent and travels in the mobile phase stream towards the
detector. The time that the compound needs to emerge at
the detector is referred to as the retention time. For each
component in the mixture, this depends on its chemical nature,
the characteristics of the column and the composition of the
mobile phase. Changes in these conditions yield different
retention times. The retention time is measured under speciﬁc
conditions and together with data from speciﬁc detectors
used, is considered as the identifying characteristic of a given
analyte.
Figure 1. Components of a chromatographic process
The preparation of the mobile phase affects the quality
of separation. The mobile phase might contain acids like
formic, phosphoric or triﬂuoroacetic acid or salts to force
components into their non-charged states and increase column
retention. A pump is used to generate a speciﬁed ﬂow of
the mobile phase. Although manual injection of samples is
still possible, most HPLC systems are now fully automated
and controlled by computer software (e.g., XCalibur). The
injector, or auto sampler, introduces the solvent into a phase
stream that carries the sample into the column, which is
under high pressure and contains speciﬁc packing material
needed to affect separation. The packing material is referred
to as the stationary phase because it is held in place by the
column hardware. A detector is used in these experiments to
see the separated compound bands width as they elute from
the column. The information is sent from the detector to a
computer software which generates the chromatogram. The
mobile phase exits the detector and is either discarded as
waste in analytical chromatography, or collected in case of
preparative chromatography. Figure 1 schematically presents
a the fundamental components of a chromatographic process.
In an HPLC experiment, data about cleaning the column,
system calibration, retention time, sample components, and
graphs that are generated by the HPLC system and the detector
are analysed and documented in XCalibur. This software
enables scientists to gather, analyse, visualize the information
about the chromatogram. Although XCalibur has features for
creating metadata about the experiment, we have observed that
it’s added value for documenting the experiments, has not been
fully realized by the scientists. The reason is not known to us;
however, we are interested to understand the functionality and
usability of this software for the future use.
IV.
METHOD
This section describes how we extracted terms from the
guidelines and how the resulting vocabulary was evaluated
in the food chemistry domain. We should indicate that the
“quality” of the vocabulary is determined by the degree to
which it assists scientists in the considered domain to cre-
ate reproducible method descriptions in an efﬁcient manner.
However, the ﬁrst measure for the quality is the extent to
which the terms contained in the vocabulary occur and convey
the intended meaning in published method descriptions. We
explicitly do not use the “method sections” as sources for
the creation of vocabulary, but only for the evaluation of
our vocabulary in the domain of Food Chemistry. This is to
guarantee the independence of our method from the speciﬁc
set of method sections we selected. The MIAPE-CC is our
starting point for creating a vocabulary in the considered
domain [16]. Table I presents the seven categories, each rep-
resenting an essential part of an experimental setup. It covers
a column chromatography experiment from the selection and
conﬁguration of a column, through the selection of a suitable
mobile phase and veriﬁcation of the relevant performance
characteristics, to the collection of fractions and associated
detector readings. We manually extracted the main concepts
TABLE I. The MIAPE-CC CLASSIFICATION
MIAPE-CC CLASSIFICATION
Class
Description
global descriptors
All the general information about the experiment, such as
the date on which the work described was initiated and etc
sample
Description of the source, such as means of collection,
volume, concentration or previous step of processing.
equipment
Description about the type of column and the chromatogra-
phy system that are being used.
mobile phase
The mobile phase is the phase that moves in a deﬁnite
direction. It may be a liquid, or a gas (GC), or a super
critical ﬂuid.
column run process
The total time of the column run with appropriate units.
pre
and
post
run
process
a description of the purpose of the process, such as equilibra-
tion, calibration or washing (this may be part of the column
run, as one step or as preconditioning of the column prior
to use).
column output
a description about the output that is selected for detection
and/or fraction.
from the guideline. In total, 83 terms were extracted. Table II
provides an example of the main categories and the associated
terms. In the next step we measured the occurrence of the
TABLE II. EXAMPLE TERMS EXTRACTED FROM MIAPE-CC
general description
equipment
sample
mobile phase
date stamp
column
name
name
responsible person
type
volume
constituent
contact
manufacturer
concentration
concentration
afﬁliation
dimension
molecular mass
pH
extracted terms in the material and method sections. The
library of Wageningen University (The Netherlands) kindly
provided us a list of articles from laboratory of food chemistry
that cover ﬁve predeﬁned criteria.
•
the journal that cover topics related to food chemistry,
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

•
the journal that do not have MIAPE-CC module as
reporting guidelines requirement,
•
articles submitted by researchers from Wageningen
University,
•
articles that are published in the time range from 2000
to 2014,
•
articles that use column chromatography as a puriﬁ-
cation technique.
We deliberately excluded journals that explicitly require the
compliance to the MIAPE-CC, since they might give a too
positive impression of the use of terms from the guideline. We
selected authors from Wageningen University as participants of
the test group in our study. From 28 journals in total, special-
ized in food chemistry, 62 articles were retrieved. From these
articles, we extracted the “Material and Method” sections –
sometimes entitled “Experimental Method”. Since the articles
were retrieved in PDF format, we used Apache PDFBox [17] to
parse and extract the method segments and stored them in plain
text format. We created a CSV ﬁle including the title and the
articles’ DOIs. The collected method descriptions were marked
as relevant by an expert from food chemistry domain. This set
of method sections forms our corpus to evaluate the use of
MIAPE-CC vocabulary. By counting how frequent each term
occurs in the corpus, we can see how well the terminology
required by MIAPE-CC is used by scientists. We used two
packages from the RStudio toolbox for this experiment. The
“tm” package was used to create the corpus and to pre-process
the textual corpus. To have a more accurate mapping we
transformed all tokens to the lower case. To prevent getting
wrong mappings to commonly used words, we removed all
stop words from our corpus [18]. The “qdap” package designed
for quantitative discourse analysis was used to create a function
– “termco” – to conduct the string mapping from our terms
to the tokens [19]. The data and code are accessible through
the Github (https://github.com/denatahvildari/MIAPE.git). The
folder contains ﬁles related to the MIAPE-CC guideline, the
developed vocabulary, the selected publications, and the R code
used for the term occurrence experiment.
V.
RESULT
The word occurrence measurement showed that from 83
terms in the vocabulary, 40 terms never occurred in any of
the method description sections (48%). The 43 remaining
terms occurred at least in one method section (51%). Table III
provides the detailed results of the term occurrence experiment.
The concept equipment contains 24 terms and it represents
information about the product details for column, physical
characteristics of column, and the chromatography system used
for separation. From this class, 91% of the terms are not
identiﬁable. Another interesting result is related to the concept
’column output’. Outputs of a run process are ’fraction’ and
’detection’. Consider ’fraction’ as an example. Descriptions
about the start time and end time of fractionating process, and
the size of fraction are essential information in this category.
We observed that 55% of terms representing this concepts are
not detected by our method. In the next section we discuss our
observations and possible explanations for this result.
VI.
DISCUSSION
To gain some insight about this result, we consulted a
domain expert and qualitatively analysed the data by inspect-
TABLE III. TERM OCCURRENCE PER CATEGORY
Class
Never occurred terms Occurred terms
General descriptor
4
1
Sample
9
8
Equipment
22
2
Mobile Phase
0
2
Column Run
0
5
Pre and Post Run processes
2
6
Column output
13
9
ing the selected method sections. Our goal was not to ﬁnd
additional terms, but to identify generic patterns that explain
the above results. We provide some explanations for these
results. Only one term related to the MIAPE-CC category
“general descriptors” occurred. The reason is that information
about the name, contact, the date that the experiment was
conducted, and the institutional role of the experimenter are
not usually included in the “material and method” sections of
publications. Information about the date is mostly documented
in the scientists’ laboratory notebooks. In the present model
for publishing an article, this information can be found in the
header along with the title of the paper. Authors do not see the
necessity to report it in the method sections. This is common
practice. The present underlying assumption is that this type
of information is not assumed to be part of the experimental
conditions needed for reproducibility.
General information about samples and equipment such
as name, manufacturer, model, and type is not detected by
our method. The reason is that authors do not use the top
level class terminology such as “manufacturer” to report the
provenance of their experimental materials or equipment.
They simply mention the name of the manufacturer. For
example, consider the following sentence:
“Branched sugar arabinon was obtained from British
Sugar – Mcleary.”
With our method, we searched for the term “manufacturer”
and did not notice the fact that the British Sugar is an instance
of the class ‘manufacturer’.
Information about the mobile and stationary phases is
crucial for describing a column chromatography experiment.
However, the occurrence of these terms was not frequent in
the selected 62 publications. As it is observed, the authors
use synonyms when referring to the mobile phase, such as
“solution”, “eluent” and “solvent”. For the same reason as
described in the second observation, authors only mention the
name of the mobile phase; for example, “solution (A): Water
and solution (B): (ACN) Acetonitrile, Methyl cyanide”. The
term stationary phase was not frequently used. The stationary
phase is the substance ﬁxed in place for the chromatography
procedure. In HPLC chromatography, the stationary phase is
the same as the column and packing materials.
Terms representing the physical characteristics of the col-
umn were mentioned using abbreviations. For example, the
inner diameter of the column is presented as “ID”.
Information about the run processes are mostly mentioned
along with information related to the column. In the MIAPE-
CC model these concepts are categorised in separated classes.
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

The MIAPE-CC model indicates that for describing the
column output, authors should mention the description about
the detector that is used and how the fractionating procedure
was done, if the experiment has gone through iterations. We
could identify the detection equipment and some of the related
terms such as the “wavelength”. However, the term “trace”
never occurred. The reason is that a ’trace’ is being used for
a speciﬁc type of a detector which is called “PDA”. In our
selected publications this type of detector was never used.
VII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we argue that the reproducibility of an
experimental method description is indebted to the existence
of minimum information about that experiment. The minimum
information guidelines specify all the details of an experiment
such as materials, instruments, units of measure, characteristics
of the column run processes and the possible deviations
from the protocol. However, they are not highly adopted by
researchers. This is partly because of the natural language
nature of these guidelines, which does not allow for any
computational support. This means that for reporting an HPLC
experiment, a researcher still needs to follow extensive instruc-
tions and check too many lines to know which information
is essential for describing a column run process. We believe
that the existence of formal representations of these guidelines
could improve their usage. We envision that if the vocabulary
is applied in a software tool that scientists use on a daily basis,
the transparency of the laboratory reports and consequently the
reproducibility of the method can improve.
We investigated the MIAPE-CC guideline for reporting a
column chromatography experiment and identiﬁed the main
concepts and the associated terms. We evaluated its use in
our domain of interest, which is food chemistry. Through an
experiment we measured the occurrence of 83 terms from 7
categories in 62 method sections of published papers. The
results indicate that half of the terms occurred at least in
one of the descriptions. We mention that these results are
not self-descriptive – meaning that the occurrence of terms
does not guarantee the correct use of them, and also the
absence of terms does not necessarily manifest the quality
of the report. We realized this through a qualitative analysis
and by consulting the domain experts.
We learned that
the our present method does not recognize the synonyms,
abbreviations, instances and the existing relations. This is
caused by the limitations in the model. Our analysis give a
clear indication how to extend the vocabulary. With respect
to its ultimate use, the present vocabulary is also limited
in the sense that it does not present any semantic relations.
These relations are needed when providing suggestions on
missing information to authors when creating method sections
or laboratory reports. We conclude that MIAPE is a good
starting point for creating the required vocabulary, but it
needs to be further elaborated. We should also mention that
the sample size of the method description sections seems
small (N=62), as some of the reviewers kindly pointed out,
therefore results might not be conclusive. We take this remark
into consideration for the next measurements. Nevertheless
we see that even this small sample provided useful insight.
The next step is to extend the vocabulary. For this, we use
the Rapid Ontology Creation (ROC+) method. This tool is
designed to be used by the domain experts, who do not have
expertise in knowledge engineering. The method consists of
two sessions, in which domain experts come together and
jointly discuss, document and agree upon relevant terms and
relations in their domain [20]. Moreover, we are looking into
additional statistical methods to evaluate the mapping between
the vocabulary and the method sections.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to acknowledge the help of Prof.
dr. Harry Gruppen and his team at Wageningen University.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. McNutt, “Reproducibility,” Science, vol. 343, no. 6168, 2014, pp.
229–229.
[2]
E. Miguel, C. Camerer, K. Casey, J. Cohen, K. M. Esterling, A. Gerber
et al., “Promoting transparency in social science research,” Science
(New York, NY), vol. 343, no. 6166, 2014, p. 30.
[3]
J. B. Buckheit and D. L. Donoho, Wavelab and reproducible research.
Springer, 1995.
[4]
M. S. Anderson, B. C. Martinson, and R. De Vries, “Normative
dissonance in science: Results from a national survey of us scientists,”
Journal of Empirical Research on Human Research Ethics, vol. 2, no. 4,
2007, pp. 3–14.
[5]
J. P. Ioannidis, M. R. Munafo, P. Fusar-Poli, B. A. Nosek, and S. P.
David, “Publication and other reporting biases in cognitive sciences:
detection, prevalence, and prevention,” Trends in cognitive sciences,
vol. 18, no. 5, 2014, pp. 235–241.
[6]
L. K. John, G. Loewenstein, and D. Prelec, “Measuring the prevalence
of questionable research practices with incentives for truth telling,”
Psychological science, 2012, p. 0956797611430953.
[7]
A. Cabrera, W. C. Collins, and J. F. Salgado, “Determinants of indi-
vidual engagement in knowledge sharing,” The International Journal of
Human Resource Management, vol. 17, no. 2, 2006, pp. 245–264.
[8]
C. Drummond, “Replicability is not reproducibility: nor is it good
science,” 2009.
[9]
A. De Waard, “The future of the journal? integrating research data with
scientiﬁc discourse,” 2010.
[10]
“The Minimum Information About a Proteomics Experiment (MIAPE),”
2010, URL: http://www.psidev.info/node/91 [accessed: 2016-04-13].
[11]
“ARRIVE guidelines,” 2010, URL: https://www.nc3rs.org.uk/arrive-
guidelines [accessed: 2016-04-13].
[12]
C. Kilkenny, W. J. Browne, I. C. Cuthill, M. Emerson, and D. G.
Altman, “Improving bioscience research reporting: the arrive guidelines
for reporting animal research,” Animals, vol. 4, no. 1, 2014, pp. 35–44.
[13]
N. A. Vasilevsky, M. H. Brush, H. Paddock, L. Ponting, S. J. Tripathy,
G. M. LaRocca et al., “On the reproducibility of science: unique
identiﬁcation of research resources in the biomedical literature,” PeerJ,
vol. 1, 2013, p. e148.
[14]
J. A. Medina-Aunon, S. Mart´ınez-Bartolom´e, M. A. L´opez-Garc´ıa,
E. Salazar, R. Navajas, A. R. Jones et al., “The proteored miape web
toolkit: a user-friendly framework to connect and share proteomics
standards,” Molecular & Cellular Proteomics, vol. 10, no. 10, 2011,
pp. M111–008 334.
[15]
P. E. Bourne, T. W. Clark, R. Dale, A. de Waard, I. Herman,
E. H. Hovy, and D. Shotton, “Improving The Future of Research
Communications and e-Scholarship (Dagstuhl Perspectives Workshop
11331),” Dagstuhl Manifestos, vol. 1, no. 1, 2012, pp. 41–60.
[Online]. Available: http://drops.dagstuhl.de/opus/volltexte/2012/3445 -
Retrieved on 16.03.2016
[16]
C. F. Taylor, N. W. Paton, K. S. Lilley, P.-A. Binz, R. K. Julian, A. R.
Jones, W. Zhu, R. Apweiler, R. Aebersold, E. W. Deutsch et al., “The
minimum information about a proteomics experiment (miape),” Nature
biotechnology, vol. 25, no. 8, 2007, pp. 887–893.
[17]
“Apache PDF Box,” 2010, URL: https://pdfbox.apache.org/ [accessed:
2016-04-13].
[18]
I. Feinerer, “Introduction to the tm package text mining in r,” 2015.
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

[19]
“Search
For
and
Count
Terms,”
2010,
URL:
http://ﬁnzi.psych.upenn.edu/library/qdap/html/termco.html
[accessed:
2016-04-13].
[20]
D. J. Willems, N. J. Koenderink, and J. L. Top, “From science to
practice: Bringing innovations to agronomy and forestry,” Journal of
Agricultural Informatics, vol. 6, no. 4, 2015, pp. 85–95.
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

