Negative Discourse and Emergence of Game Genres 
A social networks exploration 
 
Emanuela Marchetti 
Centre for Design Learning and Innovation 
Department of Learning and Philosophy 
Aalborg University 
Esbjerg, Denmark 
ema@create.aau.dk 
Andrea Valente 
Centre for Design Learning and Innovation 
Department of Architecture, Design and Media 
Technology  
Aalborg University 
Esbjerg, Denmark 
av@create.aau.dk
 
 
Abstract— The fluidity of game genres can be considered 
an issue to be solved; however, we propose to look at it as a 
social value, from a positive and creative perspective. In this 
study, we analyze emergence of game genres, experimenting 
with a constructive use of negative discourse from online 
communities, about the controversial genre of mono-
dimensional games (i.e., 1D). Analyzing online conversations, 
1D games can be defined as a non-genre, since posts about 
them are almost exclusively negative, referring to it as 
synonymous of an impossible or meaningless effort. We 
decided to challenge this attitude towards 1D games, iteratively 
designing and coding a few 1D games, and then post about 
them on selected online communities. This exploration of the 
1D games-design space was conducted through user centred 
design and netnography. Our results suggest that 1D games 
can be recognized as fun and challenging, from the perspective 
of both players and game designers.  
 
Keywords- netnography; game genre exploration; game 
design. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Users of online forums sometimes start a conversation, 
for 
fun, 
about 
a 
particular 
concept 
or 
topic, 
as 
quintessentially meaningless. In some game development 
forums and online articles the idea of a 1 dimensional game 
has often been discussed as evidently silly, possibly useless 
or just clearly impossible. However, a few 1D games exist 
and have received positive reviews. Therefore, it was decided 
to conduct an investigation on 1D games, as example of 
emergent games genre, through the method of netnography, a 
form of ethnography applied to online communities, 
combined with user centred design (UCD) [1] [2] [16]. 
The initial survey that we conducted, involving online 
game development communities and online magazines, 
convinced us that 1D games might be more than just an 
evident impossibility, and that we might instead be 
witnessing the early stages of gestation of a game genre: the 
moment before a non-genre becomes an actual socially 
recognized class of games. 
In order to discuss 1D games we have to investigate more 
closely what could a mono-dimensional game be like. 
Moreover, we need to find out whether a 1D game would 
actually be playable, engaging and if the 1D game space (i.e., 
the design space defined by all the possible 1D games) 
allows enough room for game developers to be creative.  
In the next sub-sections, the motivation and related work 
are presented (A and B). In Section II the notion of negative 
discourse and non-genre are introduced, and then in Section 
III the method followed to conduct the study is presented. 
Section IV presents the 1D games we designed and in V data 
from the netnographic fieldwork. Finally in Section VI the 
outcome from the study is discussed and in VII discussion 
and future work. 
 
A. 
Motivation 
In order to explore how game genres emerge, intended as 
fluid social values, this study focuses on 1D games, 
approximately defined as a game that uses a single line of 
pixels (vertical or horizontal) as visualization. Working with 
such a limitation is a challenge, but there is a purity and 
simplicity in it that we find fascinating. 
The emergence of one button games [4] as genre, might 
represent a similar case to 1D games. It was defined less 
than a decade ago [4], and perhaps the idea of a game with a 
single button, as its user interface, must have sounded 
useless and silly at first. The emergence of one button games 
seems to have started out as a technical challenge, but 
nowadays these games are acknowledged as a proper genre 
by many game developers (especially occasional and indie 
ones). Particular interest has been expressed by the disabled 
online community, that quickly adopted one button games 
and even encouraged developers to create more of this kind 
of games, to empower disabled players [17]. The recent 
diffusion of touch-sensitive devices gives even more 
relevance to the single-button concept, as exemplified by the 
many tapping-games in the android and iPhone market. 
There might have been single button games before the [4] 
article formalized them, but making the idea explicit, and 
discussing technical issues and aesthetic potentials, 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

generated 
discussion 
and 
game 
designs, 
ultimately 
establishing one button games as a proper game genre.  
This need of technical artefacts as well as social (online) 
discussion is central also in our attempt to assess the 
potential of 1D games: we decided in fact to poke at the 
online communities, and challenge their negative attitude 
towards the 1D non-genre. For that, we developed simple 
online games, using free and easy-to-use technologies such 
as javascript and HTML5 canvas, while keeping a discourse 
open with players, other developers and game designers. To 
explore the 1D games design space, we started by re-
designing classic 2D games so they could be playable and 
recognizably related to the original game, even with only a 
1D visualization. We call this redesign process flattening. 
Keeping a game recognizable after flattening it, requires to 
find out what is the spirit or the identity of that game; this 
identity should have to do with how the players feel, think 
and interact with the game itself. Flattening a game like 
Tetris [18] for instance, should result in a 1D game that, 
when players play it, brings to mind the classic 2D Tetris. 
Our exploration is therefore centered on the player's 
perception of games, and on the artistic expressivity that 1D 
games might offer as a medium for game design. 
 
B. 
Related work-The social dimension of game genre 
 
In this paper, we investigate the emergence of game 
genre, in relation to online communities, composed by 
players and designers. The social essence of ontology and 
the role of social networks have been discussed in relation to 
different fields, such as recommendation for academic 
conferences [5] and a web-based social bookmarking tool 
called del.icio.us [6]. 
According to Mika [6], the notion of ontology as an 
engineering artefact, is too simplistic, as it ignores the social 
aspect of ontology. Hence the traditional bipartite model for 
ontologies, based on concepts and instances, has been 
expanded with the third dimension of actors. The goal of 
this model is to discuss the emergence of ontologies, 
intended as folksonomies, which demand for social presence 
to be created and maintained [6]. 
Looking into current literature in the field of game 
genres, it seems that a debate has emerged in relation to the 
value of clustering games into genres and also to the 
emergence of game genres [7]. Games can be analyzed as 
both design objects and emergent culture [7][8], tokens in 
public conversations of broader societal issues within 
contemporary offline society [7]. In this sense, studying 
games through the lens of online communities can 
contribute 
to 
achieve 
a 
deeper 
understanding 
of 
contemporary culture and related social dynamics. However, 
when it comes to game genres, there seems to be a tendency 
to categorize games in relation to the dichotomy of ludology, 
the study of games as a system of rules [7] and narratology, 
the study of games as texts [7][9]. On the other hand, the 
tendency to classify games into market-based categories is 
seen as hiding the essence and meaning of games, as a new 
medium. In fact it seems that the many existing game 
categories are not based on the essence of games per se, but 
are based on previous media, as a consequence, a cohesive 
discussion of games as a new media, seems to be missing 
[9]. This situation seems to be originated, by the tendency to 
classify games in an uncritical way, based on their different 
representational strategies and not on other common 
features. Apperly [9] focuses his analysis on four genres:  
• 
Simulation, games that simulate activities 
such as sports, flying and driving, or social 
dynamics in relation to towns or other small 
communities. 
• 
Strategy, divided into real time or turn 
based, they have a similar aesthetics, with a god’s 
eye view over the scene and photorealistic 
visualization. 
• 
Action, divided into 1st person shooter, in 
which the screen represents the player’s own view, 
and 3rd person, in which the player interacts 
through an avatar. 
• 
Role-Play or Adventure, games inspired 
by the literary genre of fantasy. 
All these genres are based upon visualizations, 
preexisting media and other leisure activities, leading to a 
fragmented analysis of games. On the other hand, 
interactivity, intended as the way a game should be played, 
is a common non-representative characteristic, which 
determines players’ experience, is seen as a more promising 
framework [9].  
A similar view is shared by Schell [8], who claims that 
games are designed experience, characterized by different 
forms of interaction. However, in [8] game genres are seen 
as a fluid, continually changing phenomenon, while the 
basic principles of game design are based upon human 
psychology, which is regarded as stable and more reliable 
set of knowledge, enabling designers to master all the 
different genres and even invent new ones. 
This ever-changing character of game genre is also 
acknowledged by Arseneault [10], in his study about the 
emergence and evolution of game genres. Game genres are 
discussed here as a complex and incoherent notion, as they 
can be constructed based on different characteristics of 
games, and in some cases what is considered a genre by 
someone, is seen as a sub-genre, or “flavor”, or even another 
medium [10]. This difficulty in creating coherent genres is 
an issue not only in relation to games, but with the very 
concept of genre itself. Interestingly, Arsenault quotes 
Apperly [9] in saying that he agrees on the genre issue, but 
he would conclude that there is no suitable solution. He then 
proposes the concept of the Great Genre Illusion, according 
to which genre is an umbrella word, grouping together 
disparate things with little relations to each other [10]. 
Connecting emerging perspectives on the relation 
between ontology and social networks, this study aims at 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

analyzing the emergence of new game genres, intended as 
social values determined by a community. Moreover, the 
fluidity of genres is seen as an opportunity for innovation, 
providing new design inspirations and adapting to emerging 
needs. 
II. NEGATIVE DISCOURSE AND NON-GENRE 
According to our study, the genre of 1D games is 
emerging as a meaningless and ludicrous concept, as a 
consequence there are very few 1D games and most of them 
are a mockery of the concept itself. Ironically, the negative 
discourse about 1D games is based on reviews of existing 
1D games. Examples could be Tetris 1D [19], where the 
player always wins, since the only Tetris piece always falls 
at the right place and gives points. The author seems to be 
making fun of the fact that in 1D no 2D rotations are 
possible, leaving no room for the kind of gameplay typical 
of the classic 2D Tetris. 
Another 1D game is Wolfenstein 1D [20], meant mostly 
as a tribute to the Wolfenstein 3D game (developed by id 
Software and published by Apogee Software in 1992). 
Players who know the original game should be able to move 
around in the 1D version, and enjoy trying to understand 
what happens in the over-simplified rendering of the original 
3D game. Interestingly, having 3 dimensions is a very 
central element for Wolfenstein 3D, which is usually 
considered the game that started 3D first-person gaming on 
PCs, back in the early 1990s. In this sense, the re-design of 
this game is a meaningful experiment, especially for players 
of the original game, and provides a sense of nostalgia as 
well as fun. To reconnect the 1D game to its 3D original, 
sounds and color theme from the original game are kept.  
There are, however, a few actual 1D games, which are 
often not even explicitly presented as mono-dimensional. 
Among the most interesting: Z-rox [20], Line [21] and 
Gauge [22] for iPhone. Z-rox is a game in only 1 dimension, 
in the sense described by Flatland [11], where a bi-
dimensional shape (a character in this game) crosses a line, 
and the player has to guess which character it was, just by 
observing its 1D projection. The authors of the game Line 
talk about exploring the possibility of a one-dimensional 
shooter game; they decided to develop their game as a 
collection of mini-games, with minimalistic graphics and 
using mostly grays. The comments on the forum that 
followed the post about line are generally positive. Finally, 
Gauge is a commercial game for iPhone where the player 
tap on a single button (i.e., the entire screen) to control a 
horizontal gauge that changes size. The closer the gauge gets 
to the edge of the screen, the more points the player gets, but 
if the gauge exceeds the screen the player loses. While this 
game is clearly mono-dimensional, nothing about its 1D 
essence is explicitly written in its description. In this sense, 
the existence of such games confirm that a 1D genre is in the 
process of its definition and still in need to be acknowledged 
by the developer community. 
 
III. METHOD 
Based on our first encounter with the concept of 1D 
games, it was decided to conduct our investigation, through 
the method of netnography (form of ethnography applied to 
online communities [1] [2]) in combination with user 
centred design. Netnography is broadly applied within the 
marketing field, as it allows to conduct exploratory studies 
in an unobtrusive way [1], getting in touch with a large 
number of users. The procedure of applying netnography to 
a particular study has been formalized according to 
traditional ethnography. Hence according to Kozinets [1], 
netnography requires four essential steps, which can be 
reconducted to common ethnographic practice: 1. cultural 
entrée, 2. gathering and analysing data, 3. ensuring 
trustworthy interpretation, 4. conuducting ethical research 
[1] [2]. 
The first step requires to identify particular online 
forums, based upon the product or service to be investigated 
and the "specific research questions" [1]. Moreover, in order 
to gain rich data, the communities of interest should have 
exchanges on a focused segment or topic, high rate of 
posting, with detailed and descriptive messages [1]. The 
researchers can also choose if engaging in pure observations 
or in participant observations, joining the selected 
communities as active members [2]. Our study started in the 
opposite way, since we identified 1D games as an intriguing 
domain of investigation, after we read comments reported in 
online forums. Hence, we decided to follow six 
communities, including Facebook, through which it was 
possible to expand the basis of our participants, also 
addressing to people in our network. Hence the author of the 
games joined two communities of game design, which seem 
particularly 
focused 
on 
the 
topic, 
for 
participant 
observations, directly asking feedback on the games.  
The second step required by netnography is to copy the 
conversation exchanges from the Internet and write 
annotations, regarding observations on a community and its 
members' interaction and meanings [1]. This step responds 
to transcriptions of verbal exchanges, in structured methods 
such as conversation analysis and grounded theory. 
Regarding achieving trustworthy interpretations (step 3), 
netnography is based upon textual discourse, which on the 
Internet expresses the identity of their authors. In this sense, 
texts posted online probably represent a "controlled self-
image" [1] of the community members, so that it may be 
more difficult to reason upon their motives. However, this is 
a risk also in ethnography, in which the focus is to study the 
behavior expressed by a group of people, and not to analyze 
the individuals expressing it [1]. Moreover, to provide a 
solid ground to netnographic data, Kozinets [1] and Seraj [2] 
suggest to combine other methods, such as in person 
interviews. In the present study, netnography is combined 
with user centred design, an approach to design that has 
become popular in different research communities. UCD is 
an iterative design method, which prescribes to involve 
users as informants, since the beginning of the design 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

process, so to formulate design requirements based on the 
users' needs [16]. Hence a few prototypes are created and 
iteratively tested, so to fine tune design requirements and 
create better prototypes. This approach may include 
different methods, such as ethnography and interviews, 
supported by video and conversation analysis. In the present 
study, we engaged in designing 1D games, based upon the 
conversations we spotted on the net, the resulting games 
were then posted on the more focused communities, on 
Facebook and showed to a group of players from our 
University. We approached data collection with a 
"purposive sampling of material" [9], an approach to 
netnography used in marketing research, according to which 
noteworthy messages and conversation are selected and 
interpreted "in terms of a particular sample," [9], hence it is 
not necessary that the sample is representative of other 
populations. Our focus was on people interested in games 
and in exploring their essence, in terms of visualization and 
experience. Analysis of row data was inspired by grounded 
theory, as suggested by Seraj [2], so that we went through 
the conversations, copied on a separated file, and coded 
them. The aim of this analysis was to identify emerging 
themes, in relation to how people perceive 1D games and 
possible design inspirations. Recurring and interesting 
utterances were transcribed on post its, which were pasted 
on large sheets of papers, so to represent emergent themes 
into tangible and visual clusters, as it is common practice in 
design research [16]. Since the conversations we analyzed 
were concise and straight to the point, and we did not know 
exactly what to expect, this method revealed to be effective 
and well suited for the study. In this way, we were able to 
gather comments about the playability of our games, on their 
similarity with the original games, suggestions to improve 
them and create new ones. 
Finally, as there is the possibility of psychological arm in 
inadequately reporting messages and utterances from online 
conversations, a researcher is supposed to act correctly with 
respect to privacy, and informed consent [1]. In respect of 
the 
rights 
of 
online 
communities 
members, 
it 
is 
recommended that researchers reveal their identities and 
purposes to the communities they follow. They should also 
be careful when reporting literal quotes, which online 
represent the individual identity of the members. Taking 
these recommendations into account, the communities that 
were followed through participant observations, were 
informed of this study and affiliation of the researchers. 
Moreover, in respect of the privacy of the communities, we 
decided not to report literal quotes from individual 
members. The data are reported in a descriptive way, in 
relation to emerging themes, which were identified from the 
observed conversations and used for the design of our 
games.  
Application of netnography is supposed to require a long 
time commitment [1] [2], at this point our study is being 
running for five months, starting from May 2012, when we 
occasionally encountered conversations regarding 1D 
games. Most of our games were developed during the month 
of July, after the games were shared within the three 
communities, a systematic netnographic analysis was 
undertaken. Currently the study is still ongoing, focusing on 
a deeper reflection about non-genre of 1D games and the 
creation of new original games. 
IV. GAMES 
 
The games were created following a user centred and 
iterative 
development 
approach, 
inspired 
by 
agile 
development. The main goal with these games was to 
transpose classical 2D games in 1D, possibly in various 
different ways, and keep in contact with players, to validate 
the design as quickly as possible. 
All the games are written in javascript, they all use 
HTML5 canvas for their graphics, and the code is willingly 
simple and portable, so that the games can run on most 
browsers and on most WIFI enabled mobile devices. 
Dropbox was used to distribute our 1D games. In line with 
the principles of agile development, we had daily code 
releases, in most of the cases few hours apart, to show and 
discuss online our games with the players and other 
developers.  
The famous games we decided to flatten in 1D are: 
Tetris, pinball, Bloxorz [23], Sokoban [24] and Rogue [25]. 
For each of these games we designed different flattenings, 
so that different 1D games have been derived from the same 
original 2D game, and for each 1D game prototype many 
version have been developed, usually between 3 and 5. All 
our games are freely available [26]. 
 
 
Figure 1 - 1Dminos, our transposition of Tetris onto 1D. As in the 
classic Tetris, a piece is falling (from left to right) and will join the pile of 
fallen pieces. The game also shows the next piece that will fall, to help the 
player better plan a strategy. 
 
Figure 1 shows the game 1Dminos, our 1D remake of 
Tetris. To decide how to reduce Tetris pieces and operations 
from 2D onto 1D, we followed a structuralist approach [3]. 
First we considered all Tetris pieces (as in figure 2) and the 
operations available to the user: horizontal translation, and 
clockwise and counter-clockwise 90 degrees rotation.  
Moreover, according to our analysis, the key factors of 
2D Tetris are: 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

• 
shape, i.e., distribution of squares in 2D to form 
connected figures, 
• 
horizontal, vertical position and orientation of 
shapes. 
 
 
Figure 2 - On the left the basic 2D Tetris pieces. On the right the 
rotation group defined by the 'T' shape. 
 
The goal of a game can then be expressed in relation to 
pieces and operations: in Tetris, connecting shapes in 
particular ways, a kind of fitting. Rotation and horizontal 
translation affect shapes, their fitting might change. The 
player has to find strategies to control the rotation and 
position of the one falling shape with respect to the shapes 
that already fell. 
This structuralist analysis helps when defining a 
flattening of Tetris. We proceeded considering: 
• how shapes would be in 1D 
• which operations can be defined on the 1D pieces, 
that "remind of" the original operations; for example 1D 
operations that define symmetries similar to the rotation 
groups of the 2D game 
Shape is a key factor in Tetris, we decided to represent 
them as color patterns, in 1D. A 1D shape is therefore a 
sequence of a few squares, each with a specific color; 
another way to consider a 1D shape is to see it as a string: 
the falling piece in figure 1, for example, is a red square 
followed by a green one, so it can be represented by 
"RedGreen" or simply "RG". As operations we choose 
reverse (reverse of "RGB" is "BGR") and swap of the right-
most square of the falling piece and the top square on the top 
of the pile (see figure 1). Now we can rephrase Tetris’ main 
goal in 1D, as string concatenation in particular ways, i.e., a 
kind of color fitting. 
Figure 1 also shows the user interface of the 1Dminos 
game, composed of 3 buttons. The player can also press 
keys instead of use buttons, but the presence of buttons 
allows the game to be played on mobile devices that usually 
don't have a physical keyboard (and a software keyboard is 
not always available while running javascript applications). 
 
V. CONVERSATION WITH DEVELOPERS AND PLAYERS 
Four main themes emerged, from our analysis of online 
conversation about 1D games: 
• 
non-genre 
• 
essence of what is a 1D game 
• 
experience 
• 
design 
These themes were identified analyzing general 
conversations, which focused around existing games like 
Super Mario Bros, but also newly developed 1D games. 
Afterwards the same themes were used as a framework to 
analyze the feedback we received for our games.  
The first theme, non-genre, emerged from comments 
stating that a 1D game is impossible, this kind of comments 
inspired us to take the challenge to explore our own 1D 
games. These comments are of three kinds: either direct 
critics of the concept of 1D games, or ironic celebrations of 
a 1D game, which was found dull by the community, and its 
author, and finally through positive comments in relation to 
a new game that was found engaging to play. These last kind 
of comments, express surprise from the part of an 
individual, who started with a negative utterance about 1D 
games being nonsensical, but then change her mind, after 
playing a particular mono-dimensional game. 
Other exchanges deal with the essence of what is a 1D 
game. In this regard two main points of view emerged, and 
we have coded them into two sub-themes: geometry and 
view. The comments clustered in the geometry sub-theme 
tend to claim that 1D games should respect the basic 
geometrical principle that a 1D space should be mapped on a 
computer screen, on a line of pixels. Hence the game should 
be represented only on one axis, vertical or horizontal, in 
general there should not be any change in the other axis, 
otherwise the game is 2D. On the other end, some comments 
reflect a different understanding of the essence of 1D games, 
more related to the visual rendering and movement of the 
character. Hence Super Mario Bros could be seen as a 1D 
game, as the character moves towards the same line, 
although he can jump and go underground. Moreover, some 
individuals commented that a 1D game could be the 1D 
view of a 2D world, some even recalled the book Flatland 
[11], a satirical novel that criticizes Victorian society 
mapping its hierarchical structure into a 2D world. Others 
accept that a designer can take the freedom to scale a line of 
pixels to a larger size, for usability purposes, such as 
facilitating 
view 
and 
understanding 
of 
the 
game. 
Furthermore, some comments are placed in between the 
geometry and view themes, a game was said to be 1D, in 
relation to the feeling provided by the game play, however, 
they felt the need to specify that the visual rendering of the 
game is, technically speaking, 2D. This metaphorical 
understanding of 1D, related to game play and the user 
experience, was applied to the design of our games. 
Regarding the theme of experience, two main sub-
themes emerged, which are called appreciation and critics, 
as the members of the communities we analyzed, expressed 
positive and negative judgments. On the positive side, these 
comments overlap with the absurd theme, as they express 
surprised, praising the game for being interesting and 
challenging, despite being 1D. Moreover, other comments 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

praise the authors for being a creative and original thinker, 
in some cases the authors of such comments said that they 
would have liked to design a 1D game or that they have tried 
by themselves before. Similar comments were posted also 
regarding our games. These comments are particularly 
interesting as they show that 1D games can be engaging not 
only from a players' perspective, but also from a developer's 
one. However, there were several negative comments, 
stating that these games are “not so fun” or that the game 
play is vague and not very engaging. A sub-theme, called 
understanding, seemed to emerge within the category of 
experience, as several comments stated that these games are 
too difficult to understand, so that it takes a while before 
being able to enjoy the game or that it is too easy to die. The 
same comments appeared also in a positive light, as some 
individuals enjoyed the fact that they had to find out how to 
play by themselves, as it was part of the game play.  
Finally some members of the forums were able to push 
further their critics or appreciation, providing interesting 
design guidelines to the designers. Most of these guidelines 
are aimed at supporting the player in understanding the 
game, so that tutorials or menus, explaining the function of 
the game features, were suggested. In other cases, given the 
difficulty of the game play, it was suggested to implement a 
button that allowed the player to start from the beginning of 
the level they were playing and not from the first level. 
Since these games occupy a little portion of the screen, some 
members suggested that they could be interesting apps for 
mobile platforms, such as smart phones and Nintendo DS. 
Other purists instead advised the authors, to make their 
metaphorical 1D game into a real 1D game, redesigning it 
with 1 line of pixels. 
All these comments were carefully analyzed, as they 
provided inspiration in exploring what a 1D game can be, 
hence the same themes were applied as a framework to 
analyze the feedback we received for our games. 
 
VI. A PROMISING NON-GENRE 
 
We posted about our games in two online communities 
and we used Facebook to discuss them with friends, our 
students, colleagues and acquaintances. The same 4 themes 
(mentioned in V) also emerged in relation to our own 1D 
games. 
Regarding the non-genre theme, our games elicited 
surprise. Some comments pointed at the fact that the 1D 
genre was unknown. Some people in our network, in the 
University and on Facebook commented that “only we” 
could have thought of them, in a teasing fashion. Other 
comments claimed that 1D games are interesting and that 
designing them does not seem an easy task. 
Moreover, 
some 
community 
members 
expressed 
perplexity in relation to our definition of 1D; these 
comments are in between the non-genre and essence themes. 
From a purely geometrical point of view (and according to 
some posts) our games do not use only 1 dimension, i.e., a 
line of colored points. As visible for instance in figure 1, we 
have text and buttons in a 2D arrangement, and our points 
are scaled up to look like colored squares. According to this 
interpretation it is perhaps impossible to create an actual 1D 
game since screens are bi-dimensional. Interestingly, other 
community members answered for us that a 1D game could 
also be the 1D visualization of a 2D space or that designers 
are entitled to violate the geometrical definition. Regarding 
our games, people seem to be divides between a purist 
geometrical stand and a visualization one. Among the 
comments, we also got signaled games that could be 
classified as 1D, such as Gauge. Some comments even 
pushed the discussion further, questioning if text-based 
games could be considered 0D, since no pixels are used to 
visualize the state of the game. Finally, the domain of 1D 
games was said to be interesting and that it is surprising how 
many games could be flattened into a 1D visualization and 
still be playable. In a community in particular, we got in 
touch with a member, who after getting acquainted with the 
idea of 1D games, proposed to consider 1D a game he 
created years ago, during his studies. Other members 
claimed that after having realized of the existence of this 
genre, they will try to design new 1D games. 
Under the theme of experience, we received many 
critical and positive comments. For instance, a few members 
of the same online community claimed that they tried all the 
games seem “nice”. However, they cannot see many 
possibilities for 1D games from a commercial point of view, 
since nowadays we are used to high quality graphics. 
Another comment was instead positive regarding the 
experience of playing a 1D game, but concluded that it 
seems to require too much effort to design a similar game, or 
that 1D might be too constrictive in terms of ideas and 
inspirations. Finally a few negative comments reported 
confusion and difficulty in the game play. Positive 
comments instead pointed out how inspiring it can be to 
design a 1D game, as the space limitation may push to think 
out-of-the-box. On the players’ side we received some 
enthusiastic reviews of our 1Dminos; the comments stated 
that our game looked more like a puzzle than the original 
Tetris, therefore it was more engaging. Another interesting 
post said that our games emphasize how the quality of the 
graphics is secondary to the game experience, supporting the 
idea that engaging games do not necessarily need glamorous 
graphics if the concept behind them is sound. Furthermore, 
some players enjoyed the difficulty of playing our 1D 
prototypes, saying that they liked to have to figure out what 
to do. 
More directly usable and interesting comments were 
design suggestions, which we often took as requirements for 
the next versions of the prototypes. For instance, we were 
suggested to try to flatten a Pinball game and see what the 
outcome could be. Most comments focused instead in 
suggesting improvements; regarding our 1Dminos for 
example, different individuals provided interesting ideas, 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

such as to make two blocks fall at the same time, to have a 
button to rotate colors in the falling piece, to allow for easier 
matches, or to alter the color palette because some colors 
were confusingly similar. Following a player suggestion, in 
one version of 1Dminos a randomizing function was added, 
with the effect of scrambling the colors of the falling piece. 
Later this randomization was criticized for making the game 
too easy, and we removed it from one line of prototypes. 
Finally it was mentioned that 1D games could work well for 
devices with small screens, such as tablets and smart 
phones. Hence, a few of our games have been rewritten with 
Android and IPhone in mind (e.g., changing the resolution 
required to see the whole game canvas, or rotating the 
graphics from horizontal to vertical), and tested by players 
in our network. In these cases, comments focused mainly on 
the usability, so that our 1Dminos for instance was said to 
work fine, but to be difficult, as there was some issues with 
the size of the buttons. It is clear that the user interface of 
our 1D games should work with gestures as well as buttons, 
to better integrate in tablets and mobiles. 
VII. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
 
From the online discussions we had with players and 
developers, 2 views emerged circa the definition of 1D 
games: 
a 
purist 
geometrical 
interpretation 
and 
a 
visualization one. This lack of a clear and accepted 
definition might be an integral part of a non-genre, and 
perhaps the main reason why a new genre will never become 
established. But it might be also considered an opportunity 
to innovate by challenging apparently contradictory 
concepts, as in single-button games. For this reason we 
decided to develop an inclusive and socially acceptable 
definition for 1D games, and then use it to create games of 
this genre. We believe the reactions to our approach show 
that the game genres are not simply a way to classify 
existing games, but a tool to stimulate discussion and 
creative thinking.  
Our revised definition of a 1D game is: a game that can 
be rendered and played, at least in principle, with a single 
line of pixels, either vertical or horizontal. 
In our exploration of 1D games, we worked with 4 
rendering styles for 1D games, from simple to complex, and 
also from literally 1 dimensional towards more artistically 
free renderings: black and white, colors, rich and artistic 
rendering. With black and white the state of the game can 
only be presented to the player by a line (vertical or 
horizontal) of black or white pixels, i.e., the result of 
rendering the game can be seen as a binary string. The color 
rendering is the same, but the pixels can be colored. The rich 
rendering is done using a finite set of icons, all of the same 
size; when rendering, a number of icons (eventually 
repeated) are arranged in a vertical (or horizontal) strip. The 
last rendering style is the artistic one, where freedom is 
allowed: icons, possibly animated, and of different size and 
shape can be used, still in a predominantly vertical or 
horizontal alignment. Special effects as rotation or wiggling 
in 2D are allowed, to draw the player's attention or highlight 
particular situations. The rendering should still result in a 
linear arrangement, but the line could be twisted in 2D, e.g., 
icons could be drawn along a sinusoidal line, instead of a 
straight line as in rich rendering. 
According to our definition, even when a 1D game is 
developed with an artistic rendering, it must be possible to 
play the game with only a black and white (or color) 
rendering; it might be necessary to use 2 or more pixels in 
the color rendering, to properly represent an artistic one, but 
if it not possible at all or if it makes the game so hard to play 
to be meaningless, then the game should not be considered 
1D. 
So far we have flattened adventure and puzzle games, 
and 2 reusable techniques emerged to map 2D game in 1D, 
i.e., spatial and temporal mapping. A 2D space can be sliced 
in horizontal strips, with a single strip perceived while 
playing (i.e., time acts as extra spatial dimension) or all 
strips can be visible, in a long line, on the screen (i.e., more 
space to cope with the loss in dimensionality). The player 
can stay within a strip by moving left/right, and moving 
up/down she can jump from strip to strip.  
Another general technique, that worked for us, is to 
perform a structural analysis before designing a flattening of 
a 2D game. The results of the analysis suggest, but do not 
dictate, what the flattening should focus on, still leaving 
plenty of artistic freedom to the 1D game designer. 
 
In conclusion, our artistic and social exploration of the 
non-genre of 1D games provided us with a working 
definition of what a 1D game should be. We have also 
shown that different genres can be flattened (re-
conceptualized so to be visualized and played in 1D), and 
that some games leave room for creative level design (e.g., 
our Sokoban in 1D). 
A typical reaction in developers, who play our 1D games 
is starting to suggest improvements or new directions to 
explore. Hence it seems that 1D games, even when fully 
functional and with refined graphics, are perceived as being 
at a prototypical stage, usually associated with low-fidelity 
prototypes [16]. Therefore, these games might be useful as 
designerly tools to think out-of-the-box when exploring new 
types of games.  
Results from this study suggested also new research 
directions, such as to study how the presence of constraints 
forces designers and players to analyze the identity of a 
game, in relation to "central" elements, operations and 
dynamics 
as 
game 
identity. 
Moreover, 
design 
of 
minimalistic games could be used as a challenging task, to 
support students in learning of game design and 
development, focusing on the aspects characterizing the 
essence of a game. 
Following an approach similar to [12], we are currently 
planning to involve a group of students in the co-design a 
1D Super Mario game, as part of a participatory game 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

design event; the flattening of a platform-type game could 
offer the opportunity to reflect in depth upon typical genre 
mechanics, game play and visualizations. In this sense, we 
believe that challenging a non-genre (or an emergent game 
genre) in participatory design workshops can become a 
viable tool when teaching game design and game 
programming.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Kozinets, Robert V. "The field behind the Screen: Using 
Netnography for Marketing Research Online Communities." 
Journal of Marketing Research, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 61-72, 
February 2002. 
[2] Seraj, Mina, "We Create, We Connect, We Respect, 
Therefore We Are: Intellectual, Social, and Cultural Value in 
Online Communities." Journal of Interactive Marketing, vol. 
26, pp. 209-222, 2012. 
[3] Piaget, Jean, “Structuralism.” Harper & Row, 1971 
[4] Gamasutra’s 
article 
about 
one 
button 
games. 
www.gamasutra.com/view/feature/2316/one_button_games.p
hp  last visited 20/10/2012. 
[5] Hamasaki 
Masahiro, 
Matsuo, 
Yutaka, 
Nishimura, 
Takuichi, Takeda, Hideaki. “Ontology Extraction using Social 
Network.” SWeCKa 2007 Workshop on Semantic Web for 
Collaborative 
Knowledge 
Acquisition, 
The 
Twentieth 
International Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp. 32-38, 
Hyderabad, India, 6-8 January 2007. 
[6] Mika, Peter. “Ontologies are us: A unified model of 
social networks and semantics.” Proceedings of ISWC2005, 
pp. 522-536, 2005. 
[7] Steinkuehler, Constance A. “Why Game (Culture) 
Studies Now?” Games and Culture, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 97-102, 
Sage Publications, January 2006 
[8] Schell, Jesse. “Art of Game Design. A book of lenses.” 
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 2008. 
[9] Apperly, Thomas H. “Genre and Game studies: Toward 
a critical approach to video game genres.” Simulation and 
Gaming, vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 6-23, Sage Publications, March 
2006. 
[10] Arsenault, Dominic. “Video Game Genre, Evolution and 
Innovation.” Eludamos. Journal for Computer Game Culture, 
vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 149-176, 2009. 
[11] Abbott, Edwin. “Flatland, a Romance of Many 
Dimensions.” 1884, freely available at: 
http://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Flatland_(first_edition) 
last 
visited 20/10/2012. 
[12] Valente Andrea, Marchetti Emanuela, "Programming 
Turing Machines as a Game for Technology Sense-Making." 
Proceedings of the 11th IEEE International Conference on 
Advanced Learning Technologies (ICALT 2011), pp. 428-
430, 2011. 
[13] GameDev.Net, 
topic 
“exploration-of-1d-games” 
http://www.gamedev.net last visited 20/10/2012 last visited 
20/10/2012. 
[14] Gameprog.it, topic “Esplorazione di giochi ad 1 
dimensione” http://gameprog.it last visited 20/10/2012. 
[15] Brown, Stephen, Kozinets, Robert V. and Sherry, John F. 
Jr., "Teaching Old Brands New Tricks: Retro branding and 
the Revival of Brand Meaning." Journal of Marketing, vol. 67, 
no. 3, pp. 19-23, July 2003. 
[16] Sharp Helen, Rogers Yvonne, and Preece Jenny. 
“Interaction Design: Beyond Human-Computer Interaction.” 
Wiley, 2 edition, March 2007. 
[17] Oneswitch: http://www.oneswitch.org.uk/ last visited 
20/10/2012. 
[18] Tetris: http://www.tetris.com/ last visited 20/10/2012 
[19] Tetris 
1D: 
http://www.tetris1d.org/ 
last 
visited 
20/10/2012. 
[20] Wolfstein 
1D: 
http://www.kongregate.com/games/EvilDog/z-rox last visited 
20/10/2012. 
[21] Line: 
http://forums.tigsource.com/index.php?topic=17734.0 
last 
visited 20/10/2012. 
[22] Gauge: http://www.148apps.com/reviews/gauge-review/ 
last visited 20/10/2012 
[23] Bloxorz: 
http://www.bloxorzgame.com/ 
last 
visited 
20/10/2012. 
[24] Sokoban: http://www.sokoban.jp/ last visited 20/10/2012 
[25] Gamasutra’s article. “The History of Rogue: Have @ 
You, You Deadly Zs” at http://www.gamasutra.com last 
visited 20/10/2012. 
[26] 1D 
games 
https://dl.dropbox.com/u/1518199/1D%20games/index.html 
last visited 20/10/2012. 
 
 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

