Knowledge Discovery from Social Media Data:
A Case of Public Twitter Data for SMEs
Christopher Adetunji, Leslie Carr
Web Science Institute
School of Electronics and Computer Science
University of Southampton
Southampton, England
Email: {ca6g14, lac}@soton.ac.uk
Abstract—Making sense of social media data is increasingly
becoming a subject of concern to corporate organisations. It is
therefore, no coincidence that the subject of Knowledge Iden-
tiﬁcation and Discovery is currently receiving a huge attention
within industry and academia. Research has shown that there
is an enormous wealth of actionable knowledge to be gained
from social media data for organisations’ strategic competitive
advantage. However, this opportunity is not being harnessed by
Small and Medium-sized Enterprises (SMEs) as much as it is
by larger enterprises. This is due, in part, to a misconception
that social media is not that relevant to SMEs as much as
it is to larger corporations. This paper presents a qualitative
exploratory study, which attempts to show that social media can
be mined for organisational knowledge that is relevant to the
strategic competitive advantage of SMEs. A case of a medium-
sized enterprise, which is previously without a signiﬁcant social
media presence, is explored with regards to how public Twitter
data is exploited to discover actionable knowledge that propels
the enterprise’s strategic competitive advantage.
Keywords—social-media; data; twitter; SME; knowledge.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Beyond their use for building relationships, connections,
and/or marketing leads, social media present an opportunity
for Small and Medium-sized Enterprises (SMEs) — just as
they do for large corporate enterprises — to exploit the wealth
of intrinsic insights embedded in the mass of social data
publicly available, for their strategic competitive advantage.
Yet, due to a perceived lack of relevance of social media to
certain types of industry/sector, SMEs are often disinclined
to adopting social media [1]. This work presents a case of a
medium-sized enterprise for which social media is perceived
as not relevant. Since the organisation is without a huge social
media presence, this work utilises public Twitter data, which
are mined for relevant insights, and the knowledge gained
are actioned for strategic competitive advantage. The pieces
of knowledge extracted are explored with a discussion on
their actionability as well as other valuable insights potentially
embedded in such public social data.
Background
Social media has been adopted by organisations to support
both the individual and corporate Knowledge Management
processes [2]. It forms a social machine that facilitates hu-
man interactions on the Web [3], enabling people to create
new knowledge by sharing and synthesising knowledge from
various sources. This is aided by the technological platforms
upon which social media tools are built, which facilitate the
cognitive processes previously performed by people [4][5].
Essentially, social media includes tools and software platforms
that enable humans to participate in the social process of
content and knowledge generation, collaboration and knowl-
edge sharing. Social media trends began with the rise of so-
called Web 2.0 [6], in which sites became sophisticated apps
and content-management platforms designed to facilitate the
creation and sharing of user-generated data and content [7].
These platforms include social sharing and networking tools
like Facebook, Twitter, blogs, wikis and forums [8][9][10].
In addition, [3, p.2] identiﬁes mySpace, Ushahidi, Galaxy
Zoo, reCaptcha and Wikipedia as social software exemplars
of social machines.
With their support for contributions and knowledge sharing
from across a wide range of avenues (e.g., tweeting via Short
Messaging Services (SMS) or smart phone apps), social media
tools enhance knowledge sharing within the organisation in
their capacity for fostering discussions over documents and
thereby enabling organisations to build social environment or
communities of practice necessary for facilitating the sharing
of tacit knowledge [11][12, p.26]. This has impacted the
strictly-controlled world of corporate Information Technology
(IT) services, creating an agenda of Enterprise Mobility that is
implemented by employee-owned devices adapted for com-
pany use, a concept commonly referred to as Bring Your
Own Device (BYOD); and/or company-owned devices that
support personal use, also commonly referred to as Company-
Owned Personally-Enabled (COPE). Consequently, an enor-
mous amount of rapid and varied data is being produced
by social applications embedded in the workplace, potentially
available for organisations’ insight using techniques of big data
analytics such as text analysis of unstructured data sources
and massively parallel processing (MPP) to analyse streaming
data for informed decision and better results [13][12]. This
work utilises text analysis techniques to make sense of the
unstructured social media data harvested through Twitter’s
Streaming API.
As a social micro-blogging utility, Twitter creates increased
interest in organisations with regards to growth, features and
potential beneﬁts to the organisation [14]. For example, apart
from its signiﬁcant role in the US Elections of 2008 [15],
[6] also alluded to Dell’s claim that its use of Twitter has
generated $1 million in incremental revenue due to sales alerts.
Meanwhile, [16] describes Twitter as ‘a gloriﬁed piece of
valuable infrastructure that enables rapid and easy commu-
nication’ and, unlike Facebook or LinkedIn, its asymmetric
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

relationship model of ‘following’ allows one to keep up with
the tweets of any other user without the need for the other user
to reciprocate. This facilitates a lateral ﬂow of knowledge that
is powered by the intrinsic motivation of individual employees
within the organisation. Moreover, the consumerisation and
proliferation of mobile devices like smart phones has driven
the popularity of social media and enabled the adoption of Web
2.0 affordances, especially the deployment of micro-blogging,
to the business environment. This offers powerful opportunities
to distribute ‘tacit knowledge’ and ‘best practices’ within an
enterprise [15].
An increasing number of large enterprises have already
been able to tap into the beneﬁts of Twitter as a micro-
blogging platform. According to a Gartner report referenced
in [15], leading-edge companies are investigating the potential
of micro-blogging to enhance other social media and channels,
and, as mentioned above, Dell recounts its use of Twitter as a
leverage for increased revenue gains while the electoral success
of Barack Obama as president in the US General elections of
2008 is largely credited to the use of Twitter by the Democratic
Party [15]. Also, Ford Motors and Zappos [17] are a few
examples of large enterprises already exploiting social media.
How could this trend be beneﬁcial to Small and Medium
sized enterprises even where the social applications may not
be hugely embedded in the work place? This work presents
how a medium-sized enterprise was able to tap into the wealth
of Twitter data for its operational and strategic insights.
II.
CASE STUDY METHODOLOGY
The role of Small and Medium-sized Enterprises within an
Economy is so crucial that the World Bank commits hugely
to the development of the sector as a signiﬁcant part of its
efforts in promoting employment and economic growth [18].
Liaise Loddon is a medium-sized enterprise with about 220
employees, providing residential social care for adults with
autism and learning disabilities in Hampshire, United King-
dom. As typical in this sector, operational procedures result
in an enormous amount of documentation arising from daily
diaries, incident/activity reports and several other reporting in
compliance with regulatory requirements, analytical purposes
and decision making. Although the company has recently
deployed an enterprise mobility suite of mobile devices and
applications to replace the existing paper-based documentation
system, this experiment explores how this enterprise mobil-
ity agenda could be hardened with knowledge sharing and
knowledge extraction from the mass of social data freely
available on Twitter, for example, in such a way as it supports
the organisation at the second level of organisational change,
which highlights the people dimension of a socio-technical
system [19, p.35-38]. This work utilises simple textual analysis
techniques to make sense of the unstructured social media data
harvested through Twitter’s Streaming API. This is a practical
approach that is replicable with a cost of next to nothing.
Ordinarily, Liaise Loddon’s operations do not require social
media marketing, neither does it appear like the company
could beneﬁt from its employees’ conversations and knowledge
sharing over social blogging platform like Twitter. As such,
this organisation, just like many other small and medium-
sized enterprises (SMEs), does not have a huge following
on Twitter, neither does it have any such enterprise micro-
blogging platform that generates sufﬁcient data from which
employees’ conversations could be mined for insights. Yet, in
a bid to stay abreast of — and respond quickly to — issues
surrounding its area of specialism, this work harvested, from
global public tweets, for Autism, and its variants like ‘ASD’
and ‘disability’, which are categorical keywords that tend to
deﬁne aspects of its business domain.
III.
DATA GATHERING AND FILTERING
For the experiment, a week’s worth of tweets are harvested
(from 30th April to 6th May, 2015) with a toital of 149,501
from the Twitter streaming API and, using textual analysis
technique, extraneous elements are ﬁltered out in order to
reduce the data. In data mining, one solution to the challenges
of handling vast volumes of data is to reduce the data for
mining [20].
TABLE I: 3.5% OF TWEETS WITH LOCATION ENABLED
Percentage (%)
No. of Tweets without Country Value
144246
96.5
No. Tweets with Country Value
5255
3.5
Total No. of Tweets
149501
100
This dataset is a microcosm of the global public tweets
that feature the categorical keywords of interest as mentioned
above. In reducing the data, we also need to remove tweets
that are not in English language. For example, the French
word ‘autisme’, which is the same as ‘autism’ in English,
may have had the letter ‘e’ mistakenly omitted by a person
tweeting in French and this would have resulted in the French
tweet being harvested. As a way of delimiting the scope of
the study, tweets that are not in English language are ﬁltered
out. Also, the abbreviation, ‘ASD’, would not always represent
our intended use neither would it always represent Autistic
Syndrome Disorder even in the English language.
Figure. 1: The Top 5 Languages of Tweets Polled
In essence, those tweets containing the polled keywords
are ﬁltered out where they are deemed to be out of context.
Moreover, we could only determine the country for about 3.5%
of tweets in the harvested Twitter data, as indicated in Table
I. This is due to Twitter users not updating their proﬁle with
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Figure. 2: The Top 5 Countries of Tweets Polled
their locations as well as some imperfection with Twitter’s
geolocation algorithm [21].
Therefore, to begin making sense of this data, we concen-
trate on the top 5 languages and top 5 countries as presented in
Figures 1 and 2 respectively, out of which the experiment was
narrowed to tweets in English language and from the United
Kingdom. (Please note the following expanded abbreviations
as used in Figure 1: en, English; und, Undecided; tr, Tradi-
tional Chinese; es, Spain; ja, Japan.)
TABLE II: CONTENT CLASSIFICATION OF TWEET DATA
Contents
No. of Tweets
(Including RTs)
Impact of Technology on Disability
15
Information Gathering
10
Political Opinions (#votecameronout)
132
Social Welfare Beneﬁts
327
Living with Autism
989
Total Tweets
1473
As indicated in Figure 2, there are 1,473 tweets emanating
from the United Kingdom. Using regular expressions, the
tweets are classiﬁed according to the contents as indicated in
Table II.
IV.
FINDINGS AND KNOWLEDGE EXTRACTED FROM THE
DATA
Despite the data collection being based on domain-speciﬁc
keywords of interest to this paper’s case study, the research is
an exploratory study in which there was not a preconceived
idea of the insights/knowledge inherent in the data. Out of
an enormous amount of data, only a handful may contain
the valuable and actionable knowledge that propels an
organisation towards strategic competitive advantage [20,
p.5]. As such, the bulk of the contents as seen in Table II, are
largely re-tweets (RT) of the original messages and so, may
be regarded as extraneous ampliﬁcation of the original tweets.
Therefore, this section describes the categories observed in
the data and the next section follows with a discussion on the
value and actionability of the knowledge so discovered:
1)
Impact of Technology on Disability
“RT @BILD tweets: Helping to unlock the secrets
of autism - a project using innovative technology
aims to change how we address autism http:...”
The above tweet provides an insight into a project
using innovative technology to change how we ad-
dress autism. As this paper’s case study organisation
is in the business of autism support and also currently
implementing mobile technologies to enhance its
operational performance, it is worth exploring this
piece of insight further.
Figure. 3: Original Tweet with Link to Project on Innovative Tech-
nology
Although the link to the actual URL of the story
about the project is missing from the tweet, we can
easily follow up with the original source of the tweet,
as the above is a RT (Re-Tweet) of @BILD tweets,
which is the Twitter handle for BILD (British
Institute of Learning Disabilities). BILD actually
tweeted that piece of content on the 29th of April,
which is a day before our data capture began, as can
be seen in Figure 3. This explains why the original
tweet was not captured in our twitter streaming data
capture of 30th April to 6th May. From this original
tweet, we have been able to extract the URL link
(bit.ly/1JRNhV0) to the story about the project on
innovative technology. This is about the National
Autism Project, which “aims to create a more
strategic approach to addressing the challenges of
the condition”. This project highlights the impact of
iPads, picture dictionaries and interactive schedules
on
the
improvements
of
communication
and
vocabulary of autistic people. Strategic competitive
advantage requires an alignment/tagging along with
this project. Below are samples of other tweets
related to this content of Technology’s impact
on disability while its pertinence, as an actionable
piece of knowledge, is discussed further in Section V:
“tech reducing the impact of disability - or are the
latest gadgets too pricey? Watch @SkyNewsSwipe at
2130 http://t.co/iHtX1spOqQ”
“Technology
limits
impact
of
disability
but
is
it
affordable?
@TwitterUser GT
http://t.co/Az3nJejO32”
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

2)
Information Gathering
“@TwitterUser @BBCNewsUS @BBCWorld Please
direct me to this research, the thing about vaccines
causing autism was admitted to be a fraud.”
The ﬁrst tweet about vaccines causing autism in
this category is a request for information. Just as an
enterprise micro-blogging tool could be used within
the organisational social network, public micro-
blogging tools like Twitter provide the platform
to
quickly
seek
information,
knowledge
and/or
ideas from a heterogeneous audience defying the
constraints of space, time and location. Thus, the
above tweet was almost instantly replied to by the
one below:
“@TwitterUser
Here’s
the
original
study
that
said that vaccines cause autism, from a respected,
peer-reviewed journal: http://t.co/cmVVKpLQgh”
Even though the original study is from a ‘respected,
peer-reviewed journal’, as claimed by the sender of
the above tweet, we know from the link provided that
the publication of the research has been retracted as
shown in Figure 6. The ability for anyone to search,
gather and distribute information seamlessly in this
manner provides an interesting dimension of social
media as “relatively inexpensive and widely accessi-
ble electronic tools that enable anyone to publish and
access information...”[22].
Meanwhile, the following two tweets provide link to
further information that could help drive home the
knowledge that the research study in question has
actually been rebuffed:
“RT @TwitterUser: @SB277FF vaccines do not
cause autism. They don’t. But if they did, what would
you prefer? Autism or incurable smallpox/po”
“”RT @BILD tweets: There is ‘no link between
MMR
and
autism’,
major
study
concludes.
http://t.co/Re9L8fPfGV via the @guardian #autism””
In
as
much
as
Twitter
allows
for
an
almost
spontaneous expression of opinions by anyone, it
offers a good platform for healthy debate on topical
issues from which knowledge could be mined, as
exempliﬁed by the question of preference between
autism and incurable smallpox posed by one of the
tweets above.
Moreover, the following tweet with a URL link
to Learning Disability Census is an example in
knowledge discovery (of an ofﬁcial census and
regional data on Learning Disabilities), which when
actioned in conjunction with the enterprise resource
planning, could have an impact on the company’s
strategic planning:
“RT @dmarsden49: Learning disability census with
regional stats is out. Check http://t.co/Ja3tk7ZRDZ”
Figure. 4: The Proliferated Re-tweets of Political Opinion
3)
Political Opinions (#votecameronout)
The role of public opinion cannot be over-emphasised
insofar as it shapes and is shaped by government
policies. A recent and relevant example is the UK
tax credits row [23], which has seen the planned
tax credit cuts, at the time of writing this report,
suspended by government because the scheme proved
unpopular to the public and thus defeated in the
House of Commons. Social media, especially Twitter,
provides a means of capturing and measuring the
sentiments and opinions of the electorate.
It is therefore, no coincidence that political opinions
that have been expressed, are included in the Twitter
data gathered over autism and disability keywords:
“#votecameronout Because he wants to get rid
of Human Rights Act which will affect: Maternity
Rights; Workers rights; Disability Rights”
“For the harassment of people struggling on sick &
disability beneﬁts... #VoteCameronOut”
“5 more years of the Tories we will lose Social
Care, NHS, Human Rights, Workers Rights, Unions,
Disability support. #VoteCameronOut”
Using the hashtag #votecameronout in the run up
to the UK General Elections of 2015, the above
tweets represent an active campaign against the then
incumbent Tory-led government in which David
Cameron is Prime Minister. It is interesting to note
that the bulk (129) of the political tweets in this
experiment’s Twitter data are a proliferated re-tweets
(RT) of the above 3 original tweets as exempliﬁed in
Figure 4. The correlation between public sentiments
on social media and elections results and/or on
government
policies,
is
another
growing
area
of interest in social media research. In politics
meanwhile, it is not uncommon for opponents to
whip up public sentiments by whatever means
possible. Social Welfare issues are quintessentially
core, and often politicised, concerns in the UK. A
parallel category of tweets in this work is that of
social welfare beneﬁts, which is described in the next
section. Although this research’s data-set is based, as
stated earlier, on categorical keywords that deﬁne the
business of the case study organisation, the inﬁltrated
political opinions cannot be ignored in as much as
these are public opinions that shape political trends
which potentially impacts on businesses in terms of
government policies. Akin to this is the category on
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

Figure. 5: Public Spending on Beneﬁts in the UK
social welfare beneﬁts, described in the next section.
4)
Social Welfare Beneﬁts
Social Welfare simply implies the “Well being of
the entire society” [24], which promotes inclusivity
for the disabled, the sick, the elderly/pensioner, the
unemployed and even the low income earners. As
this is the hallmark of an egalitarian society, the
UK government renders ﬁnancial assistance to these
categories of people in form of a range of Social
Welfare Beneﬁt payments. Figure 5 provides an in-
sight into public spending on social welfare beneﬁts
in the UK. [25]. As indicated in the preceding section,
social welfare issues affect the fabrics of the society
and any proposed signiﬁcant cut in social welfare
beneﬁts is a natural invitation for public dissent.
This category of tweets from this work represents
genuine sentiments and opinion of those expressing
them, without political motivations like the preceding
category:
“Uproar at thought of @Conservatives cutting child
beneﬁts if elected - I wish there was same media
outrage over disability cuts #GE2015”
“@George Osborne If only I could live until
pensionable age. You‘ve reduced my disability beneﬁt
well below living standards!”
“39 yo woman killed herself after Department Work
and Pensions threats to cut off disability beneﬁts
http://t.co/TkVQF2UYki...”
Again, the above are a few samples of sentiments
and opinions about Child Beneﬁts and Disability
Beneﬁts, which provide an initial understanding to
the unassuming, that social welfare beneﬁts are not a
one-size-ﬁts-all affair but are multifarious (see Figure
5), with some being exclusively non- means tested
(e.g, Child Beneﬁt). These tweets provide some
insights into public sentiments towards government
policies. Since any of such social welfare beneﬁt
cuts would directly and/or indirectly impact the
service users and providers of social care, it can be
inferred that the case study organisation would also
share these public sentiments.
5)
Living with Autism
Autism is deﬁned as a life-long neurodevelopmental
condition interfering with the person’s ability to
communicate and relate to others [26]. How can
this deﬁnition be juxtaposed with one of the myths
surrounding autism [27, item 8] that autistic people
do not interact? This myth is however, dispelled by
the tweet below, which is a re-tweet of an original
tweet by an actual autistic blogger who attempts to
use his blog posts to connect with the general public:
“@matt diangelo RT? It would be truly amaz-
ing if u could view my blog about living
with Autism&amp;OCD. Would mean a lot-
http://t.co/JCGBBZz8fJ”
This category constitutes the bulk of the Twitter data
for this work as it contains multiple unique re-tweet
of the same tweet over 900 times (see Table II. This
is an indication of the public interest/curiosity and
positive sentiment towards the subject of autism in
general, and towards the autistic blogger in particular.
Despite the National Health Service (NHS)’s attempts
at educating the general public by diffusing some
of the myth surrounding the subject of Autism [28],
among several Autism Awareness initiatives, the story
of autism as told by an autistic person appears to
garner more public support and understanding .
Measuring public opinion and sentiments through
social media impact, reach and networks is another
interesting research area in social media research
towards which this work can potentially be extended.
V.
ACTIONABILITY OF KNOWLEDGE EXTRACTED
The real essence of knowledge is its actionability, espe-
cially when it contributes to the advancement of a proposed
undertaking [29]. Each of the knowledge items discovered
from the tweet data, as highlighted above, is capable of pro-
viding signiﬁcant insights that would inform decision making,
which impacts company’s proposed undertakings at one point
or the other. However, the ﬁrst item, Impact of Technology on
Disability, (No.1) is more pertinent to the enterprise mobility
agenda by which the company deploys mobile application and
devices to its operations. For example, one of the shortened
URL above (http://t.co/Az3nJejO32) leads us to a Sky News
supplement on ‘How Tech is Helping with Struggle of Disabil-
ity’. To aspire to a leadership position in the health and social
care sector, the case study organisation cannot afford to be
oblivious to such reports as this, which could potentially shape
the industry trends and direction. This knowledge, coupled
with the insights gained from the use of iPads and pictorial
dictionary mentioned in the ‘Project on Innovative Technology’
resulted in an ofﬁcial resolution by the company to extend the
use of mobile devices to its service users as well, and not only
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

to help staff in operational performances. It is worth noting
that, although the piece of actionable knowledge regarding the
impact of technology on disability was on the news prior to
the extraction of data for this work, it was neither known nor
acted upon by the company until the above decision was driven
through a presentation made by the authors of this paper.
Meanwhile, without a preconceived agenda, this work has
been able to discover actionable knowledge and strategic
insights from Twitter. As discussed, these are, that the use
of technology being embarked upon by the organisation is
not misguided; that the widespread belief that MMR vaccines
cause autism has been debunked; and the regional distribu-
tion of autism through the Learning Disability Census about
autism; among others.
Apart from the above insights, there are more valuable
insights that an organisation could derive from these kinds of
public social data. These include:
1)
Expertise location:
The micro-blogging, hash-tagging and re-tweeting
affordances of Twitter places its contents in the
public space, as opposed to emails or local ﬁles,
which are prone to privacy concerns. According to
[10], “the diversity of both the content type and the
user associations with contents is an indication that
expertise information derived from social media data
can be of great value”. [10] further assert that social
media that reside behind a ﬁrewall (e.g., Yammer
— a corporate Twitter clone [30]), is typically used
by employees to discuss internal topics, and hence
reﬂects the organisation’s unique vocabulary and
areas of interest. This enables the organisation to
ﬁnd people (or employees) who are knowledgeable
in a given topic.
2)
Public Opinion and Sentiments:
Public opinion about the organisation’s image, prod-
uct or services can make the difference between
success and failure for the organisation. Knowing the
sentiments of the public would help the organisation
in responding in such a way that would ginger or
maintain favourable public opinion. Businesses have
made efforts to ﬁnd out customers’ sentiments and
opinions, often expressed in free text, towards com-
pany’s products and services [31]. Twitter enables
expressions in free text, which is why the bulk
of Twitter data is textual. [12] cited a real world
example of a client who introduced a different kind
of environmentally friendly packaging for one of
its staple brands. Customer sentiment was somewhat
negative to the new packaging, and some months
later, after tracking customer’s feedback and com-
ments, the company discovered an unnerving amount
of discontent around the change and therefore moved
to a different kind of eco-friendly packaging. They
therefore, hypothesise that, “if you dont have some
kind of micro-blog oriented customer sentiment pulse-
taking going on at your company, you’re likely losing
customers to another company that does.”
Figure. 6: Retracted Study Linking Vaccine to Autism
VI.
CONCLUSION
This paper has attempted to explore the viability of social
media as rich data sources from which SMEs — like large
enterprises — can discover knowledge and insights for their
strategic competitive advantage. The paper presented Twitter
as a proliﬁc data source of all social media and examined the
case of a medium-sized enterprise for which public Twitter
data was explored and exploited for valuable insights without
a preconceived idea of the insights/knowledge inherent in
the data. The paper further examined the contents of the
social data with regards to the actionability of the pieces
of knowledge so discovered, which helped in demonstrating
that out of an enormous amount of data, only a handful may
contain the valuable and actionable knowledge that propels
an organisation towards strategic competitive advantage. In
view of this, this paper posits that small and medium sized
enterprises are not precluded from using social media data to
augment their corporate knowledge assets through knowledge
discovery, whether or not they have a huge presence or
following on social media. The paper concludes therefore, that
any enterprise of any size can explore and exploit public social
data to its organisational advantage whether or not they are
players in the social media sphere. Meanwhile, the structure of
the connections and relationships within a social network like
Twitter can be visualised to provide further depth and insights
to the pieces of knowledge discovered from the network. This
work can be extended to cover these terrains in future studies.
REFERENCES
[1] N. Michaelidou, N. T. Siamagka, and G. Christodoulides, “Usage,
barriers and measurement of social media marketing: An exploratory
investigation
of
small
and
medium
B2B
brands,”
Industrial
Marketing
Management,
vol.
40,
no.
7,
Oct.
2011,
pp.
1153–
1159. [Online]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0019850111001374 [Last Accessed 01 March 2016].
[2] L. Razmerita, K. Kirchner, and T. Nabeth, “Social Media in Orga-
nizations: Leveraging Personal and Collective Knowledge Processes,”
Journal of Organizational Computing and Electronic Commerce, vol. 24,
no. 1, Jan. 2014, pp. 74–93.
[3] P. R. Smart and N. R. Shadbolt, “Social Machines,” in Encyclopedia of
Information Science and Technology, M. Khosrow-Pour, Ed.
Pennsyl-
vania: IGI Global, Aug. 2014.
[4] M. Sigala and K. Chalkiti, “Knowledge management, social media and
employee creativity,” International Journal of Hospitality Management,
vol. 45, 2015, pp. 44–58. [Online]. Available: http://linkinghub.elsevier.
com/retrieve/pii/S027843191400173X [Last Accessed 02 March 2016].
[5] L.
Carr
and
S.
Harnad,
“Ofﬂoading
cognition
onto
the
Web,”
IEEE
Intelligent
Systems,
Jan
2011.
[Online].
Available:
http:
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

//eprints.soton.ac.uk/271030/1/lesdoc2.pdf [Last Accessed 02 March
2016].
[6] A. M. Kaplan and M. Haenlein, “Users of the world, unite! The chal-
lenges and opportunities of Social Media,” Business Horizons, vol. 53,
no. 1, 2010, pp. 59–68.
[7] M. Kleek and K. O’Hara, “The Future of Social is Personal: The
Potential of the Personal Data Store,” 2014. [Online]. Available:
http://eprints.soton.ac.uk/363518/1/pds.pdf [Last Accessed 02 March
2016].
[8] D. P. Ford and R. M. Mason, “A Multilevel Perspective of Tensions
Between Knowledge Management and Social Media,” Journal of Orga-
nizational Computing and Electronic Commerce, vol. 23, no. 1-2, Jan.
2013, pp. 7–33.
[9] A. P. McAfee, “Enterprise 2 . 0 : The Dawn of Emergent Collaboration,”
MIT Sloan Management Review, vol. 47, no. 3, 2006, pp. 21–28.
[10] I. Guy, U. Avraham, D. Carmel, S. Ur, M. Jacovi, and I. Ronen, “Mining
expertise and interests from social media,” Proceedings of the 22nd
international conference on World Wide Web, 2013, pp. 515–526.
[11] T. H. Davenport and L. Prusak, Working Knowledge: How Organizations
Manage what They Know, Part 247.
Boston: Harvard Business Press,
1998.
[12] P. Zikopoulos, C. Eaton, D. DeRoos, T. Deutsch, and G. Lapis, Un-
derstanding Big Data: Analytics for Enterprise Class Hadoop and
Streaming Data, S. Sit, Ed.
New York: McGraw Hill, 2012.
[13] J.
Lamont,
“Big
data
has
big
implications
for
knowledge
management,”
KMWorld,
vol.
21,
no.
4,
2012.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.kmworld.com/Articles/Editorial/Features/
Big-data-has-big-implications-for-knowledge-\\management-81440.
aspx [Last Accessed 02 March 2016].
[14] M. Bulearca and S. Bulearca, “Twitter: a Viable Marketing Tool for
SMEs?” Global Business and Management Research: An International
Journal, vol. 2, no. 4, 2010. [Online]. Available: http://www.gbmr.
ioksp.com/pdf/BulearcaandBulearca,2010.pdf [Last Accessed 02 March
2016].
[15] M.
B¨ohringer
and
A.
Richter,
“Adopting
social
software
to
the
intranet:
a
case
study
on
enterprise
microblogging,”
in
Proceedings
of
the
9th
Mensch
&
... ,
2009,
pp.
1–
10. [Online]. Available: http://www.kooperationssysteme.de/docs/pubs/
BoehringerRichter2009-M&C-Enterprise%20Microblogging.pdf
[Last
Accessed 02 March 2016].
[16] M. A. Russell, Mining the Social Web, 2nd Edition - O’Reilly Media.
O’Reilly Media, 2013.
[17] A.
Porterﬁeld,
“9
Companies
Doing
Social
Media
Right
and
Why,” 2011. [Online]. Available: http://www.socialmediaexaminer.com/
9-companies-doing-social-media-right-and-why/
[Last
Accessed
02
March 2016].
[18] M. Ayyagari, T. Beck, and A. Demirguc-Kunt, “Small and Medium
Enterprises Across the Globe,” Small Business Economics, vol. 29, no. 4,
2007, pp. 415–434.
[19] G. Piccoli, Information Systems for Managers: Texts & Cases. Hoboken:
John Wiley & Sons, 2008.
[20] T. W. Liao and E. Triantaphyllou, Recent Advances in Data Mining
of Enterprise Data: Algorithms and Applications.
World Scientiﬁc
Publishing Company Pte Limited, 2008.
[21] M. Graham, S. A. Hale, and D. Gaffney, “Where in the World Are You?
Geolocation and Language Identiﬁcation in Twitter,” The Professional
Geographer, vol. 66, no. 4, May 2014, pp. 568–578.
[22] D. Murthy, Twitter: Social Communication in the Twitter Age.
Cam-
bridge: Polity Press, 2013.
[23] “Tax
Credits
Row
What
Will
Happen
Now
After
Govern-
ment
Defeat?”
2015.
[Online].
Available:
https://uk.news.yahoo.
com/tax-credits-row-happen-now-100031983.html [Last Accessed 29
February 2016].
[24] “What is social welfare? deﬁnition and meaning.” [Online]. Available:
http://www.businessdictionary.com/deﬁnition/social-welfare.html
[Last
Accessed 03 March 2016].
[25] S. Rogers, “UK welfare spending: how much does each beneﬁt
really cost?” 2013. [Online]. Available: http://www.theguardian.com/
news/datablog/2013/jan/08/uk-beneﬁt-welfare-spending [Last Accessed
30 April 2016].
[26] M. Elsabbagh et al., “Global prevalence of autism and other pervasive
developmental disorders.” Autism research : ofﬁcial journal of the
International Society for Autism Research, vol. 5, no. 3, Jun. 2012, pp.
160–79.
[27] J. Baldock, “World Autism Awareness Day 2015: 16 autism myths
debunked,” Apr. 2015. [Online]. Available: http://metro.co.uk/2015/04/
02/autism-sixteen-myths-debunked-5123051/ [Last Accessed 03 March
2016].
[28] N. Choices, “Autism spectrum disorder - NHS Choices.” [Online]. Avail-
able:
http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/Autistic-spectrum-disorder/Pages/
Introduction.aspx [Last Accessed 03 March 2016].
[29] R. Cross and L. Sproull, “More Than an Answer: Information Relation-
ships for Actionable Knowledge,” Organization Science, vol. 15, no. 4,
Aug. 2004, pp. 446–462.
[30] J. Zhang, Y. Qu, J. Cody, and Y. Wu, “A case study of micro-blogging
in the enterprise,” in Proceedings of the 28th international conference
on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’10.
New York, USA:
ACM Press, apr 2010, p. 123.
[31] C. Lin and Y. He, “Joint sentiment/topic model for sentiment analysis,” in
Proceeding of the 18th ACM conference on Information and knowledge
management - CIKM ’09.
New York, USA: ACM Press, Nov. 2009, p.
375.
125
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-472-5
eKNOW 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

