 
Figure 1. Different data sources and document types available to 
enterprise members 
About an Architecture for Integrated Content-Based Enterprise Search
Manfred Grauer, Ulf Müller, Daniel Metz, Sachin S. Karadgi, Walter Schäfer 
Information Systems Institute, University of Siegen, Germany 
Email: {grauer, mueller, metz, karadgi, jonas}@fb5.uni-siegen.de 
 
Abstract – The main goal of knowledge management is to 
improve the management of information and knowledge within 
and across enterprises. Enterprise knowledge is embedded in 
enterprise’s data managed in a wide range of information 
systems (e.g., product data management, enterprise resource 
planning systems). These enterprise data can correspond to 
textual, numerical or multimedia. In the past, several search 
systems have been developed to provide access to primarily 
text-based enterprise content like web pages, data stored in 
database systems or emails. Similarly, dedicated search 
systems exist for searching information from multimedia data. 
As these search systems focus on particular enterprise content 
(e.g., textual data), they lack in providing a holistic view on 
available enterprise’s knowledge. Therefore in the current 
contribution, 
architecture 
for 
integrated 
content-based 
enterprise search encompassing various enterprise data 
sources is elaborated. This architecture supports the 
exploitation of embedded enterprise knowledge. Further, the 
architecture is validated in an industrial scenario. 
Keywords – enterprise search; knowledge management; 
information retrieval; shape matching; image-based retrieval. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Alaavi and Leidner define “data as raw numbers and 
facts, information as processed data, and knowledge as 
authenticated information” [1]. Knowledge is embedded into 
enterprise processes by enterprise members and described 
through various data types as illustrated in Fig. 1 (e.g., 
documents, 3D models, emails). This knowledge is enriched 
and enlarged as the enterprise process moves from upstream 
to downstream processes. Hence, necessitates for organizing 
and managing enterprise data in a manner that it can be 
identified quickly and assimilated by enterprise members for 
design and execution of enterprise processes. 
In engineering, 3D computer-aided design (CAD) 
models, 2D drawings and design patterns have to be created 
during product development process [2]. Information and 
library sciences are managing text-based documents like 
books, journals and magazines. Order information and its 
corresponding offer documents, bill of material (BOM), 
email interaction and minutes of meeting have to be 
managed by sales department. Patient records have to be 
managed by hospitals. Due to the aforementioned diversity 
of applications, specialized IT-systems have been developed 
to manage different types of enterprise data (e.g., enterprise 
resource planning (ERP), customer relationship management 
(CRM), product data management (PDM) or clinical 
information systems (CIS)). Each of these IT-systems 
contains a large amount of enterprise data related to different 
enterprise entity types (e.g., products, customers, patients). 
Many of the enterprises utilize aforesaid IT-systems in 
various combinations. Therefore, the IT landscape of an 
enterprise is often scattered and inadequately integrated i.e., 
enterprises often need to address data interoperability issues. 
As a consequence, enterprise members have to perform 
multiple searches for information and corresponding 
knowledge related to an enterprise entity in various IT-
systems. In majority of the research, search system 
functionality is achieved by means of organising and 
retrieving structured and unstructured textual data from a 
certain IT-system [3]. Also, multimedia data (e.g., images, 
videos, sounds) is rarely considered, and only special 
research areas deal with organizing and retrieving of 
multimedia objects [4][5]. 
Overall, lack of integrated data from different IT-systems 
hinders establishing holistic view about the requested 
enterprise entity. To overcome these restrictions and 
drawbacks, enterprise search (ES) has emerged as a 
promising research area. ES is the practice of making 
enterprise content from numerous IT-systems, such as 
databases and intranets, searchable to certain stakeholders 
[3][6]. The vision is that an enterprise member is capable to 
request all necessary information and associated knowledge 
with minimum effort from various IT-systems, which is 
required to effectively design and execute enterprise 
processes. Therefore, an ES engine has to be provided to 
enterprise member incorporating enterprise data from 
different IT-systems. 
48
eKNOW 2011 : The Third International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-121-2

To address the aforementioned requirements of ES, 
architecture for integrated content-based enterprise search 
(CBES) is presented. The contribution is structured as 
follows. An overview of current research trends in ES and 
content-based retrieval is presented in section II. Section III 
motivates CBES, and defines challenges and requirements 
associated with CBES. The envisaged architecture and its 
components are elaborated in section IV. To validate the 
envisaged architecture, Section V describes an industrial case 
study. Finally, conclusion is presented in Section VI. 
II. RELATED WORK 
The main task of ES is to improve information and 
knowledge management, and facilitate information access 
within and across enterprises [7]. ES allows enterprise 
members to search through documents, emails and other data 
sources available in an enterprise to identify information and 
associated knowledge [7]. Enterprise members spend one 
third of their work time searching for information necessary 
for designing and executing enterprise processes [8]. 
Therefore, it is not surprising that the investment in 
development of comprehensive ES during the last years has 
increased and major companies like Google, Microsoft, IBM 
or SAP have developed specific and proprietary ES-systems 
[9][10].  
Data in an enterprise is primarily textual, in the form of 
(intranet) web pages, emails, orders details, bills, reports, and 
so forth (s. Fig. 1). Hence, majority of the ES 
implementations are focused on textual data [3][4][8]. An 
early approach of ES has been named as an enterprise 
intelligent system [11]. This system tries to integrate data 
from intranet servers, web servers and web search services. 
The usage of different search techniques (e.g., keyword 
search, semantic search) were analysed, and utilized in 
search of information from integrated vehicle health 
management data [12]. Similarly, ontologies were used to 
overcome the limitations of textual retrieval [13]. Further, an 
engineering information retrieval system has been elaborated 
which attempts to integrate data from various engineering 
data sources into a centralized dataset and make it accessible 
via ontology-based retrieval [14]. 
A search system for identifying information from huge 
collection of documents from digital libraries was presented 
[15]. The effectiveness of this search system was increased 
by exploiting techniques like full text search, collaborative 
filtering and multifaceted browsing. A search architecture 
was elaborated which employed the search functionalities of 
the source systems to locate relevant information [16]. 
Retrieved results are combined together in a global result list 
using case-based reasoning (CBR). Further, CBR was used 
for ranking the results in a result list. 
Apart from textual data, nowadays multimedia data is 
widely used in enterprises. Multimedia data include images, 
photos, videos and sound recordings, among other. For 
instance, meeting involving enterprise members from 
multiple sites are recorded. Most of the available search 
systems have not integrated multimedia data along with the 
textual data. However, research has been carried out in 
isolation to search various multimedia data. 
A survey of image retrieval techniques and systems were 
presented [17]. Image retrieval techniques were classified 
into two groups: text-based and content-based retrieval. Both 
groups deal with the same issue to overcome the gap 
between what is really experienced by the enterprise member 
when viewing the content on screen and what is really stored 
(e.g., in a database). This challenge is not only relevant for 
image retrieval but also for other kinds of multimedia data 
retrieval. 
Several IT-systems have been developed for 3D model 
retrieval based on textual annotations, content, features and 
ontologies, and so forth [14][18][19]. All the presented 
approaches show that it is possible to search 3D content in 
large repositories. Another field in the context of multimedia 
data retrieval is face recognition. This field is relevant for 
identification of faces displayed on an image or in a video, 
and it has become more important from (public) security 
point of view. The state-of-the-art of face recognition 
techniques was carried out [20]. Besides images and photos, 
retrieval for other multimedia data is available (e.g., video, 
sound). Retrieval systems for these kinds of data have been 
developed and encouraging results have been achieved. A 
summary of video retrieval techniques can be found in [21] 
and survey of sound retrieval techniques is presented in [22]. 
The review of the related work has shown that effective 
techniques for content-based retrieval exist and dedicated 
systems for specific scenarios have been developed. 
However, an architecture which allows the incorporation of 
all aforementioned enterprise data types from different data 
sources could not be identified. 
III. CHALLENGES AND REQUIREMENTS FOR AN 
ARCHITECTURE FOR INTEGRATED CBES 
As already mentioned, most data in an enterprise is text-
based like reports, emails, order details, and bills (s. Fig. 1). 
This obviously raises the question: why is it necessary to 
consider multimedia data and integrate it into an ES-
strategy? The main reason is the increasing relevance for 
utilizing multimedia data during enterprise process design 
and execution. For example, design engineers and architects 
use 3D models to store information about design and 
construction of products or buildings. Respectively, images 
and drawings are used to identify and describe products, and 
voice recordings and videos are used to protocol meetings. 
In current search environments, collections of multimedia 
data are managed by assigning textual annotations (i.e., 
textual metadata) which can be employed for retrieval [4]. 
Usually, enterprise members from different departments 
contribute during design and execution of enterprise 
processes. Different annotations are assigned to the same 
multimedia data depending on the executed process step and 
enterprise members’ background. Therefore, knowledge 
managed using aforementioned metadata-based techniques 
places limitations during ES. In contrary to this metadata 
approach and to ensure that relevant product-related 
information and knowledge (e.g., embedded in a bill or 3D 
models) can be retrieved from different departments of an 
enterprise, it is mandatory to integrate different annotations, 
attributes from various IT-systems as well as content from 
49
eKNOW 2011 : The Third International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-121-2

 
Figure 2. Architecture of integrated content-based enterprise search (CBES) 
multimedia data. The overall goal is to create an integrated  
descriptor for retrieving relevant enterprise process entities 
(e.g., orders, bills, 3D models). In addition, the envisaged ES 
has to fulfill certain requirements which can be classified 
into four groups: (i) coverage, (ii) security, (iii) query 
support, and (iv) presentation of results. 
Coverage in the context of a holistic ES means that all 
relevant IT-systems and data sources are included into the 
enterprise search. The challenge is to integrate information 
and knowledge which is scattered across an enterprise. 
Besides information in IT-systems like CRM or ERP 
systems, information and knowledge can also be available in 
emails, text documents, 3D models and images, and so forth. 
Security has gained considerable attention in the context 
of ES due to tightened legal requirements and enterprise’s 
policies related to data privacy and confidentiality. 
Obviously, only privileged enterprise members should have 
access to enterprise data. An enterprise member should have 
access grants to relevant data, information and knowledge 
depending upon his position within a department and the 
activities he/she has to fulfill. 
Apart from the scope of the ES and its security concepts, 
user-friendly and convenient search interfaces have to be 
provided to the enterprise members. The search interfaces 
have to respect an enterprise member’s roles and privileges. 
For instance, an engineer will demand a dedicated search 
interface to search for 3D models where as sales department 
personnel will have a graphical user interface (GUI) to 
explore previous offers and orders. In either case, a search 
interface assists an enterprise member to input suitable 
number of search attributes. Based on these search attributes, 
appropriate similarity search techniques will be employed to 
construct the result list (e.g., containing 3D models or 
orders). In case of multimedia data, this can mean that 
functionality need to be provided where user can submit a 
template (e.g., 2D drawing of a product) to the search engine 
for requesting product related information and knowledge. 
Last but not least, adequate presentation of the search 
result plays a prominent role. The retrieval system has to 
provide appropriate interfaces to display the result list, 
especially in case of multimedia data. For example, the ES-
system provides a preview window for visualizing a 3D 
model of a selected result item. In addition, access to 
information and knowledge associated with the selected 
result item has to be implemented. Hence, the ES-system 
establishes links to the original data managed in one of the 
enterprise IT-systems. 
IV. ARCHITECTURE FOR INTEGRATED CBES 
As mentioned before, enterprise data is stored in different 
IT-systems (e.g., PDM system, ERP system). In addition, 
each data source has its own specialized data structures. For 
instance, a PDM system is used to manage product-related 
data created or modified along a product’s life cycle [2]. The 
proposed process model for an integrated ES is composed of 
the following steps: (i) analysis of enterprise processes 
concerning their status and requirements regarding ES, (ii) 
create a centralized search index database with attributes and 
content-based descriptors revealed from enterprise data, (iii) 
engage search index to retrieve enterprise members’ 
requested information, and (iv) evaluate, update and 
optimize the integrated ES system (i.e., especially the search 
index database). 
Before implementing an ES system, it is mandatory to 
identify enterprise knowledge required by the enterprise 
50
eKNOW 2011 : The Third International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-121-2

 
Figure 3. Illustration of image-based descriptor creation process for 3D models 
 
members. Enterprise knowledge is used and shared by 
enterprise members along enterprise process execution. The 
knowledge flows within a certain enterprise process can be 
(re-)designed and analyzed employing the modeling and 
description 
language 
(KMDL) 
[23]. 
The 
identified 
characteristics of knowledge creation and assimilation assist 
the establishment of an appropriate search index database. In 
addition, the data sources required to execute enterprise 
processes have to be documented (e.g., with unified 
modeling language (UML)). 
Based on the aforementioned (process) analysis, an 
appropriate index database has to be defined. This index 
database contains attributes and content-based descriptors 
related to enterprise process entities (e.g., orders, offers). 
Data mining techniques and structured interviews can be 
employed to determine relevant attributes and required 
content-based descriptors. The attributes and descriptors are 
derived from enterprise data which is managed in different 
enterprise IT-systems. Each entry in the index database 
points to the data sources.  
Analysis of enterprise processes and setup of index 
database guides in definition of GUI and implementation of 
ES engine. GUI is utilized to submit search request to ES 
engine and display the search result list. Today’s enterprise 
processes are agile which requires periodical evaluation, 
refinement and optimization of index database and the 
corresponding ES-system. Therefore, enterprise process 
analysis has to be performed systematically to reflect the 
actual situation of an enterprise. Based on the envisaged 
process model for an integrated ES, architecture is elaborated 
in the following sub-sections. 
The architectural overview of integrated CBES is 
illustrated in Fig. 2. The architecture is composed of four 
components: (i) data aggregation interfaces for indexing data 
sources and file types available in an enterprise, (ii) index 
database for textual and numerical attributes from the IT-
systems and extract descriptors from multimedia data, (iii) 
ES engine to support integrated CBES, and (iv) GUI to the 
enterprise members based on their roles and privileges. 
A. Data Aggregation 
The data aggregation component provides functionalities 
to index and map enterprise data from different IT-systems, 
as depicted in Fig. 2. This component consists of two sub-
components: (i) mapping and indexing of attributes from 
different IT-systems like ERP-, PDM- or CRM- systems to 
the columns of the predefined index database, and (ii) 
services 
for 
deriving 
content-based 
descriptors 
for 
multimedia data (e.g., images, 3D CAD models). 
Mapping is used to establish a link between data fields of 
a source system (e.g., managed in a database or XML-
structured files) to corresponding columns of the index 
database. Depending upon the data type of a source field 
(e.g., 
numerical, 
alphanumerical) 
dedicated 
indexing 
methods are employed to optimize the efficiency of the 
subsequent retrieval process. For instance, a text analysis and 
text aggregation component is available to extract the content 
from text documents. If a new value gets stored or an 
existing value gets updated in a certain source IT-system, the 
mapping functionality transfers this value to the appropriate 
column in the index database. 
In the case of multimedia data, services are provided to 
extract relevant metadata from the corresponding file. The 
retrieved metadata or the calculated content-based descriptor 
is also stored in the index database. For each file type, a 
dedicated service is available which extracts the metadata 
and / or creates a content-based descriptor. For instance, a 
3D model of a product is represented as a triangulated 
surface and stored as a stereolithography (STL) file. This file 
can be transformed into a content-based descriptor that 
describes the shape and dimensions of the product. This 
transformation process can be delineated in three steps (s. 
Fig. 3): (i) normalisation of the 3D shape essential to avoid 
problems resulting from translation, rotation and scaling 
invariance, (ii) creation of images from different perspectives 
of the normalized 3D model, and (iii) employ various 
algorithms on the taken images to create image-based 
descriptors (e.g., edge histogram). 
B.  Index Database 
The index database contains an entry for each enterprise 
process entity of interest (e.g., order). The entries in the 
index database represent the enterprise process entities with a 
number of (alpha-) numerical attributes and if required, 
geometrical descriptors (s. Fig. 3). These attributes and 
descriptors are generated by the data aggregation component.  
The stored data in the index database has to be indexed 
for efficient retrieval of enterprise process entities. 
Therefore, simple numerical and alphanumerical data types 
are indexed using the available indexing capabilities of 
relational databases. However, these indexing capabilities are 
not applicable for complex shape descriptors. Hence, feature 
space indexing structures (e.g., R*-tree) or metric indexing 
structures (e.g., M-tree) are available for indexing 
geometrical (shape-based) descriptors [24][25][26]. These 
indexing structures have been successfully used for retrieval 
of complex sheet metal components [27]. 
Obviously, index database and the available data sources 
51
eKNOW 2011 : The Third International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-121-2

 
Figure 4. Illustration of an search interface for sales personnel 
searching for products using metadata and 3D model 
 
Figure 5. Result page for sales personnel showing similar products 
corresponding to search request submitted as shown in Fig. 4 
of the enterprise’s IT-systems (e.g., PDM system) have to be 
synchronised. Different methodologies are applicable to 
guarantee that data sources and index database are in 
synchronous state. Based on the enterprise’s IT strategy, 
these methodologies can be classified as following: (i) 
update the index database just-in-time, i.e., when the original 
data in an enterprise’s IT-system has been modified, (ii) 
employ a batch process to update the index database (e.g., 
update every night), and (iii) combination of (i) and (ii). 
C. Search Engine 
The search engine of integrated CBES implements core 
functionality to compare and retrieve stored enterprise 
process entities from the index database. Hence, an 
enterprise member specifies a request by defining necessary 
(alpha-) numerical attributes. In addition to these attributes, 
the enterprise member might provide template objects like 
3D models or 2D sketches to describe the desired enterprise 
process entity (e.g., product). In short, the enterprise member 
submits the aforementioned information to the search engine 
for retrieving most similar enterprise process entities. 
 For retrieving most similar enterprise process entities, 
different similarity and distance metrics for various data 
types and content-based descriptors have been developed. 
Levenshtein 
distance and 
Smith-Waterman 
similarity 
measures are used for comparing alphanumerical data [28]. 
Minkowski distance or its special form i.e., Euclidean 
distance are used to evaluate the distance between numerical 
data. In addition, Hamming distance can be used to estimate 
the distance between two input values of equal length for 
numerical, binary, or string. To assess structural similarities 
(e.g., BOM), a graph-based distance measure has been 
applied [29]. To retrieve multimedia items like 3D shapes or 
2D drawings, special techniques are employed. For instance, 
to measure shape similarity various techniques are available 
which can be classified into feature-based, graph-based and 
geometry-/image-based [18]. For content-based image 
retrieval, techniques from the MPEG-7 standard are utilized 
to detect color; texture and 2D shape similarities [30]. 
Enterprise process entities in the index database are 
added to the search result list if their calculated similarity or 
distance fulfills a predefined similarity threshold. The 
threshold value is defined by the enterprise member. This 
threshold value specifies the accuracy of the retrieval 
process. The search result list is ordered by the similarity 
values and returned to the enterprise member. To improve 
the performance of the retrieval process, the search process 
starts with simple attributes and descriptors, and proceeds 
with complex ones. For example, a user searches for a 
product by providing product name, 3D model and product 
BOM. Initially, product name and 3D model are utilized to 
determine a relevant subset of the data available in index 
database. Next, the subset of the data is revised with the 
structure based (e.g., BOM) search.  
D. Graphical User Interfaces 
The graphical user interfaces (GUI) functionality is 
twofold: (i) provide necessary forms for specification and 
submission of search requests (s. Fig. 4) and (ii) visualization 
of search results (s. Fig. 5). The aforementioned functionality 
of the GUI has to consider the roles and privileges of the 
enterprise members. Overall, this ensures the adherence of 
enterprise’s IT policies and the filtering of the information 
and knowledge according to the enterprise members’ needs. 
 
V. CASE STUDY – INTEGRATED CBES FOR COST 
ESTIMATION IN AUTOMOTIVE SUPPLIER INDUSTRY 
The proposed architecture has been validated in industrial 
scenarios with emphasis on cost estimation processes of 
automotive suppliers [31][32]. Usually, cost estimation 
process starts with a request by the customer for information 
from the supplier about cost, manufacturing techniques and 
delivery date of the requested component as illustrated in 
Fig. 6. At supplier’s side, experts have to check the 
component 
feasibility 
and 
determine 
the 
requested 
information (e.g., production cost). Hence, knowledge about 
52
eKNOW 2011 : The Third International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-121-2

 
Figure 6. Typical customer supplier interaction in automotive industry  
manufacturing techniques, materials and logistics are 
essential to perform the aforesaid tasks. Traditionally, 
experts from different departments support to determine the 
information. The data generated and used during the cost 
estimation process is not only textual but also multimedia-
based. For example, a customer request often contains 2D 
drawings and / or 3D models of the requested component to 
be manufactured. 
In the aforementioned scenario, it was determined that 
the existing search capabilities provided by the enterprises’ 
IT-systems are insufficient to fulfill the requirements of an 
expert to identify information relevant to the cost estimation 
process (e.g., previously stored orders, process plans). To 
overcome these shortcomings, integrated CBES was 
developed which incorporates data from various IT-systems 
for previously executed offers, orders, 2D drawings and 3D 
models. Textual and numerical information along with 
multimedia information extracted from 3D models and 2D 
drawings were stored in the index database of the integrated 
CES. This provides access to a search space containing 
data from various enterprise’s IT-systems. To support 
different phases of the cost estimation process, several search 
interfaces have been designed. According to an enterprise 
member’s roles and privileges, the interfaces grant access to 
different areas of the search space. 
VI. CONCLUSIONS 
In this contribution, architecture has been elaborated to 
provide access to enterprise’s data sources through an 
integrated content-based enterprise search (CBES). The 
envisaged architecture bridges the gap between standard ES 
technology which is mostly focused on textual data and 
dedicated retrieval systems for multimedia data. The 
architecture consists of four components: (i) data aggregation 
contains techniques for indexing and descriptor creation, (ii) 
index database stores previously predefined descriptors, (iii) 
search engine implements numerous retrieval techniques, 
and (iv) GUI exists to submit search requests and view result 
lists. The developed architecture has been used in several 
enterprises. These enterprises are operating in different 
domains like automotive supplier industries and industrial 
chain manufacturers. The integrated CBES supports domain 
experts during design and execution of enterprise processes.  
The effort to create an index database, implement 
required interfaces and integrate the required techniques for 
integrated CBES induces efforts (e.g., time, cost). However, 
the benefits of a quick and reliable access to information and 
associated knowledge contained in enterprises data are 
essential to retain an enterprise’s competitive advantages. 
Overall, the integrated CBES improves the design and 
execution of enterprise processes. The throughput of 
enterprise processes can be increased significantly and at the 
same time, the quality of the enterprise processes’ output can 
be strengthened. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank their industrial partners 
LINDE + WIEMANN GmbH KG, Germany, Fischer & 
Kaufmann GmbH & Co. KG, Germany and KettenWulf 
Betriebs GmbH, Germany for the opportunity to implement 
and evaluate the elaborated architecture. 
REFERENCES 
[1]  M. Alaavi and D. Leidner, “Review: Knowledge management and 
knowledge management systems: Conceptual foundations and 
research issues,” MIS Quarterly, vol. 25, no. 1, 2005, pp. 107-136. 
[2] J. Stark, Product Lifecycle Management: 21st Century Paradigm for 
Product Realisation, Springer, London, 2005. 
[3] D. Hawking, “Challenges in enterprise search,” Proc of the 15th 
Australasian Database Conference, vol. 27, 2004, pp. 15-24. 
[4] D. V. Vranic, 3D Model Retrieval, Dissertation, University of 
Leipzig, 2004. 
[5] J. M. Martinez, R. Koenen, and F. Pereira, “MPEG-7: the generic 
multimedia content description standard, part 1,” IEEE Multimedia, 
vol. 9, no. 2, 2002, pp. 78-87. 
[6] U. Crenze, S. Köhler, K. Hermsdorf, G. Brand, and S. Kluge, 
“Semantic descriptions in an enterprise search solution,” in G. 
Antoniou et al. Eds., Reasoning Web 2007, LNCS 4636, Springer, pp. 
334-337, 2007. 
[7] M. Buttler, The Bussiness Value of Enterprise Search, Martin Butler 
Research, July 2009. 
[8] Y. Fu, R. Xiang, M. Zhang, Y. Liu, and S. Ma, “A PDD-based 
searching approach for expert finding in intranet information 
management,” in H.T. Ng et al. (eds.), AIRS 2006, LNCS 4182, 
Springer, 2006, pp. 43-53. 
[9] P. Dmitriev, P. Serdyukov, and S. Chernov, “Enterprise and desktop 
search,” Proc. of the 19th International Conference on World Wide 
Web, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA, 2010. 
[10] L. Owens, The Forrester Wave: Enterprise Search, Q2 2008. Report, 
Forrester, 2008. 
[11] E. K. Lee and W. Noah, "An enterprise intelligence system 
integrating WWW and intranet resource," Proc. of the Ninth 
International Workshop on Research Issues on Data Engineering: 
Information Technology for Virtual Enterprises (RIDE '99), March 
1999, pp. 28-35. 
[12] D. R. Throop, “Enterprise Search Tasks in IVHM Practice,” Proc. of 
IEEE Conference on Aerospace, 2006.  
[13] R. Winnemöller, “Semantic Enterprise Search (but no Web 2.0)," 
Proc. of 10th International Conference on Intelligent Text Processing 
and Computational Linguistics (CICLing), Mexico City, Mexico, 
May 2009. 
[14] Y. Yao, L. Lin, and J. Dong, "Research on ontology-based multi-
source engineering information retrieval in integrated environment of 
enterprise," Proc. of International Conference on Interoperability for 
Enterprise Software and Applications China (IESA '09), April 2009, 
pp. 277-282. 
[15] S. R. Kruk, S. Grzonkowski, A. Gzella, and M. Cygan, “DigiMe - 
Ubiquitous Search and Browsing for Digital Libraries,” Proc. of 7th 
International Conference on Mobile Data Management (MDM'06), 
2006. 
[16] J. Bahrs, B. Meuthrath, and K. Peters, “Information Retrieval 
Services for heterogeneous Information Spaces,” Proc. of I-KNOW 
’08 and I-MEDIA '08 Graz, Austria, 2008. 
[17] Y. Alemu, J. Koh, M. Ikram, and D. Kim, “Image retrieval in 
multimedia databases: A survey,” Proc. of 5th International 
53
eKNOW 2011 : The Third International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-121-2

Conference on Intelligent Information Hiding and Multimedia Signal 
Processing, 2009. 
[18] J. W. H. Tangelder, and R. C. Veltkamp, “A survey of content based 
3D shape retrieval methods,” Multimedia Tools and Applications, 
vol. 39, 2008, pp. 441-471. 
[19] J. Pu, Y. Kalyanaraman, S. Jayanti, K. Ramani, and Z. Pizlo, 
“Navigation and discovery of 3D models in a CAD Repository,” 
Computer Graphics and Applications, IEEE , vol. 27, no. 4, July-Aug. 
2007, pp. 38-47. 
[20] A. Ruifrok, A. Scheenstra, and R. C. Veltkamp, “A survey of 3D face 
recognition methods,” Audio- and Video-based Biometric Person 
Authentication (AVBPA 2005), LNCS 3546, 2005, pp. 891-899. 
[21] P. Geetha and V. Narayanan, “A survey of content-based video 
retrieval,” J. of Computer Science, vol. 4, no. 6, 2008, pp. 474-486. 
[22] M. A. Casey, R. Veltkamp, M. Goto, M. Leman, C. Rhodes, and M. 
Slaney, ”Content-Based Music Information Retrieval: Current 
Directions and Future Challenges,” Proc. of the IEEE Advances in 
Multimedia Information Retrieval, vol. 96, no. 4, 2008, pp. 668-696. 
[23] N. Gronau, “Modelling knowledge intensive engineering processes 
with the knowledge modeler description language KMDL,” In: F. 
Weber, S. Kulwant, K. D. Thoben, (eds.) Enterprise Engineering in 
the Networked Economy, University of Nottingham, 2003, pp. 195-
202. 
[24] N. Beckmann, H. Kriegel, R. Schneider, and B. Seeger, “The R*-tree: 
An efficient and robust access method for points and rectangles,” 
SIGMOD Conference, 1990, pp. 322-331. 
[25] P. Ciaccia, M. Patella, and P. Zezula, “M-tree: An Efficient access 
method for similarity search in metric spaces,” Proc. of 23rd 
International Conference on Very Large Data Bases, 1997, pp. 426-
435. 
[26] C. Böhm, S. Berchtold, and D. A. Keim, “Searching in high-
dimensional spaces - index structures for improving the performance 
of multimedia databases,” ACM Computing Surveys, vol. 33, no. 3, 
2001, pp. 322-373. 
[27] U. Müller, T. Barth, and B. Seeger, “Accelerating the Retrieval of 3D 
Shapes in Geometrical Similarity Search using M-tree-based 
Indexing,” Proc. of Workshop of Uncertainty, Knowledge Discovery 
and Similarity in Case-base Reasoning (UKDS’09), 2009. 
[28] D. Gusfield, Algorithms on Strings, Trees, and Sequences: Computer 
Science and Computational Biology. Cambridge University Press, 
New York, 1997. 
[29] C. J. Romanowski and R. Nagi, “On comparing bills of materials: A 
similarity/distance measure for unordered trees,” IEEE Transactions 
on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, Part A: Systems and Humans vol 
35, no. 2, pp. 249-260, 2005. 
[30] B.S. Manjunath, P. Salembier, and T. Sikora, Introduction to MPEG-
7: Multimedia Content Description Interface, Wiley & Sons, March 
2003. 
[31] C. Lütke Entrup, T. Barth, and W. Schäfer, “Towards a process 
model for identifying knowledge-related structures in product data,” 
Proc. of the 6th Int. Conf. on Practical Aspects of Knowledge 
Management, LNCAI, vol. 4333, 2006, pp. 189-200. 
[32] S. Karadgi, U. Müller, D. Metz, W. Schäfer, and M. Grauer, “Cost 
estimation of automotive sheet metal components using knowledge-
based engineering and case-based reasoning,” IEEE Int. Conf. on Ind. 
Eng. and Eng. Management, Hong Kong, 2009, pp. 1518-1522. 
54
eKNOW 2011 : The Third International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-121-2

