Towards an Integrated Knowledge Management System for Small and Medium-
sized Enterprises in the Field of Assembly System Engineering
Rainer Müller, Matthias Vette-Steinkamp, Leenhard Hörauf, Christoph Speicher, Johannes Obele
Group of Assembly Systems and Automation Technology
Centre for Mechatronics and Automation gGmbH (ZeMA)
Saarbrücken, Germany
email: {rainer.mueller, matthias.vette, leenhard.hoerauf, christoph.speicher, j.obele}@zema.de
Abstract—The development of assembly systems requires deep
knowledge about assembly processes and process technologies
as  well  as  profound  knowledge  about  the  product  to  be
assembled.  A  method  supporting  communication  and
knowledge management during assembly system development
and manufacturing will be described in this paper. The method
is  designed  to  meet  the  needs  of  small  and  medium-sized
enterprises (SME) and consists of several modules. One of the
modules visualizes the product and the assembly line in order
to gain a common understanding of the system. By adding
metadata to files, the assembly line manufacturer's staff can
quickly access data from completed projects using semantic
searches. The communication module ensures an information
exchange without changes between different media formats
amongst  all  parties  during  assembly  line  development.  All
modules  will  be  put  together  in  a  web-based  software
application to enable multiuser access and collaborative work.
The  interaction  of  the  modules  allows
 transparent
communication, as well as the linking of data and elements of
knowledge throughout the entire assembly system development
process.
Keywords-assembly  system;  collaborative  engineering;
knowledge management; information sharing.
I.
 INTRODUCTION
The demand of consumers for individual and innovative
products  has  been  continuously  increasing.  New,  more
complex products and new model generations are demanded
by market in ever-shorter intervals [1]. This leads to an
increased number of variants and higher complexity along
the  entire  value  chain  and  its  components,  like  special
machinery  and  assembly  systems  (see  Figure  1),  as  a
subcategory of special machinery. 
The  development  of  special  machinery  requires  high
planning efforts, as each machine is designed individually
for the product and the task to be performed. Therefore,
assembly systems are often built only once. These small lot
sizes  are  complicating  a  standardization  of  design  and
construction [2]. 
Assembly  system  development  poses  a  challenge  to
knowledge management. Persons involved in the process of
assembly system development require a deep knowledge on
the product to be produced as well as on the assembly system
and its production processes and production resources. Given
restrictions like structural conditions, the legal framework
and others have also to be taken into account. Changing one
element in the system is potentially affecting other system
elements.  For  that  reason,  assembly  system  design  is  a
recursive process, integrating the product, the production
processes, the production resources and given restrictions
(see Figure 2).
Almost each assembly system is a new project for the
manufacturer.  Correspondingly,  project  folders  for  each
project are created on the servers. If many assembly systems
already have been built in a company, then the number of
folders  and  data  is difficult  to  survey  for  an  individual
person.  Particularly  new  employees  spend  a  lot  of  time
searching for design data of already created concepts. If a
previously created concept or a drawn part could be used in
another project, the employee has to know in which project
folder  the  required  file  is  stored  or  he/she  searches
extensively for it. New  employees  do not  have  detailed
knowledge about past projects, the challenges, built in parts,
and so on. Therefore,  these  employees  do not  have  the
opportunity to search for specific concepts. Especially since
file names are not always meaningful. However, due to their
lack of experience, new employees need more and structured
information  about  completed  projects,  to  prevent  a  re-
development of already existing concepts.
Although the number of features of an assembly system
increased over the last years, customers of special machinery
are demanding ever shorter delivery times [3] because the
Figure 1. Assembly system with manual and human robot collaboration
workstations.
Figure 2. Process elements of assembly system design.
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

time-to-market for products with short product life cycles is
decisive for the market success of the product. In order to
keep  the  time-to-market  as  short  as  possible,  special
machinery  is  ordered  at  an  early  stage  of  product
development. With completion of the product development,
the machine shall be available for production [4]. 
On  the  one  hand,  simultaneous  development  of  the
product  and  the  special  machinery  offers  potential  for
improving quality, reducing costs and reducing the time to
market [5][6]; on the other hand, there are also disadvantages
associated with simultaneous development. In the course of
product development, there is a large number of changes in
product design. Some of these design changes necessitate a
design  change  of  the  special  machinery.  Another
disadvantage  is  the  increased  coordination  effort  for  the
communication of product design changes and the resulting
impact on the system, on costs and on the schedule [4]. 
To guarantee a uniform level of knowledge amongst all
team members, all relevant changes to the product have be
communicated quickly and comprehensibly. This requires a
frequent  exchange  of  data  and  knowledge  between  the
project partners. As schematically shown in Figure 3, there is
a  multitude  of  information  flows  amongst  the  project
partners. The provision of the latest product data from the
customer  to  the  system  manufacturer  is  often  not
immediately carried out after a change was made.
After receiving information about product changes, the
product  manager  coordinates  the  incoming  requests  and
assigns tasks to persons concerned. This procedure leads to
long information transfer times and binds personnel capacity.
For  a  successful  simultaneous  product  and  assembly
system development process, a common understanding of
the product as well as of the assembly system, concerted
actions and sharing of information between the right people
at the right time is crucial [7]. In direct communication at
meetings  or  telephone  conferences,  communication  is
hampered  by  a  lack  of  common  understanding  of  the
product,  the  processes  and  resources  and  their
interdependencies.  Especially  people  without  profound
technical  knowledge  have  difficulties  understanding  the
structure  and  relationships  of  the  interconnected  system
elements. Even for experts, communication is susceptible to
errors  since  terms  for  the  same  component  differ  from
company to company.
Inefficient communication between the project partners
and suboptimal knowledge management within the company
leads  to  unnecessary  work.  For  companies,  efficient
communication and processing of information is vital, as the
available personnel capacity is scarce and expensive due to a
shortage of skilled workers [8][9]. Another reason for the
need  of  an  efficient  knowledge  management  is  the
competition between the companies. Thus, efficient order
processing  and a  shorter  delivery  time  compared  to the
competitors can generate a competitive advantage. Because
of this, a concept that allows simple, transparent and media-
break-free communication amongst all parties as well as an
efficient  knowledge  management  for small  and medium-
sized companies is presented. 
The key contributions of this work are the following: (i)
schematic visualization of the assembly system to support
better understanding; (ii) semantic description of assembly
system elements and associated files beneficial to ease the
reuse of available knowledge; (iii)  improved collaboration
through communication and annotation tools.
The paper is structured as follows: In Section II the state
of the art of the key subjects is shown. Section III introduces
the methodology and its elements. Section IV concludes the
paper and gives a prospect on future works.
II.
STATE OF THE ART
Design and construction of assembly systems involve a
holistic consideration of several research areas. The analysis
of the literature focuses on the three main topics: assembly
system design, simultaneous/collaborative engineering and
knowledge management. Due to the wide scope of each
subject area, the state of the art is presented separately for
each subject area.
A. Assembly System Design
There  are  different  models,  procedures  and
methodologies of the assembly system design process. The
product  is  the  starting  point  for  the  planning  method
proposed by Müller [10]. A process chain is derived from
structure of the product, the geometric characteristics of its
parts and their type of connection. With knowledge about the
product and the necessary processes for product assembly,
suitable  production  resources  will  be  determined.  The
dependencies  between  product,  process  and  production
resources  are  also  taken  into  account  in  the  process  of
assembly system design [10]. This concept is taken up by
Eilers [11] and extended by a methodology for designing
multi-variant production lines. Kluge [12] focuses on the
capabilities  of production resources,  the  consideration  of
different  quantity  scenarios  and  their  influence  on  the
assembly system. Konold and Reger [13] divide the process
of assembly system design into the five phases: problem
Figure 3. Information flows between the involved parties.
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

definition,  rough  design,  detailed  design,  realization  and
production start-up. A review of the outcomes at the end of
each  phase  should  protect  against  misplanning  and
malinvestments. In literature, further methods for assembly
system design can be found, differing in procedure and focus
[14]-[17].  The  examined  methods  focusing  on  assembly
system  design,  the  topics  cooperation  and  knowledge
management are only considered  marginally.
B. Simultaneous, concurrent and collaborative 
Engineering
Product  development  as  well  as  assembly  system
development takes place in teams with people from different
disciplines. This collaboration has been explored for several
decades, over time this research has been dubbed differently.
Therefore,  the  terms  simultaneous  engineering  and
concurrent  engineering  are  synonyms.  The  term
collaborative  engineering  is  intended  to  clarify  the
integration  of  different  subject  areas  and  engineering
disciplines [18]. A clear demarcation of the terms is not
possible because each author has another focus. Thus, there
are many overlaps, since the basic elements of concurrent
engineering, parallel workflows, development teams, early
integration of all parties [19], for collaborative engineering
also applies [20][21]. In the following, for simplification and
due  to  its  broader  scope,  only  the  term  collaborative
engineering is used.
In literature, a multitude of methods and concepts for
collaborative engineering is presented [5][21]-[24]. Kamrani
[21]  introduces  seven  principles  for  a  collaborative
development  of  a  product  and  names  the  faculties  of  a
collaborative team. He also emphasizes the importance of
knowledge  management  and  communication  in  a
collaborative  engineering  team.  The  presented
communication  tool  allows  the  exchange  of  files,  direct
communication between the involved parties is not intended.
Mas  et  al.  [25][26]  addresses  the  importance  of
communication, he notes that even in big companies, over
the wall communication is practiced. In order to solve this
problem, he proposes to expand the digital mockup of a
product  by  production  equipment  so  that  a  common
visualization of the product and production equipment is
possible.  Several  tools  are  available  on  the  market,
supporting  collaborative  engineering  and  teamwork  [27].
Wognum [18] notes that despite the variety of tools and
methods that promise to support collaborative engineering,
these systems are not sufficiently developed to cover all the
needs. In particular, classical product lifecycle management
systems  (PLM)  do  not  meet  the  requirements  of
collaborative engineering [25].
C. Knowledge Management
The term knowledge management summarizes the ability
to identify, store and retrieve knowledge. For a successful
knowledge management system in companies there has to be
understood which information and knowledge is important
for  the  company,  which  goals  are  pursued  and  which
challenges have to be solved [28]. Amongst others, the most
important challenges for SME is the rapid integration of new
employees, the use of existing knowledge, the transfer of
knowledge  across  projects,  as  well  as  a  consistent
documentation over the whole product lifecycle [29]. Anderl
[30] identifies documents that are relevant to each phase of
the  product  lifecycle  and  highlights  the  need  for  cross-
disciplinary knowledge sharing. Another important success
factor for companies is to empower the employees to access
the  existing  knowledge  of  the  company  [31].  Different
knowledge  management  systems  are  established  in
companies.  Products  like  Wikis,  document  management
tools, blogs, groupware systems, forums, etc. are used for
knowledge management [32]-[34]. Depending on the used
system, the access to certain information is difficult because
of missing possibilities to cross-link information stored in
different  systems  [3].  In  particular,  systems,  tools  and
methodologies for knowledge  management, fitting to the
needs of SME are poorly understood [35].
III.
METHOD
The  deep  process  analysis  showed  the  major  issues
during  assembly  system  development.  Based  on  these
results, a method was developed, which meets the special
requirements for a simultaneous development process of a
product and an assembly system. The focus of the developed
method is to support the design of assembly systems, to
improve information exchange and communication as well
as  knowledge  management.  The  functions  and  modules
resulting from the defined focus are shown in Figure 4. 
The developed method has to be transferred in a software
application  that  supports  all  parties  in  the  structured
development of assembly systems. The software application
has a modular structure,  so the functional  scope can be
expanded with new modules. Due to the special demands of
assembly  system  manufactures,  the  software  will  be
customized to their needs. 
In-house  developments  and  Open  Source  software
modules  offer  comprehensive  possibilities  for  adapting
Figure 4. Modules and functions of the methodology for assisted assembly
system development.
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

functions to the given requirements. The use of software
without license costs helps to make the software attractive
for SME also from a financial point of view. In the following
the  most  important  functions  and  modules  of  the
Collaborative Assembly System Development (CASD) tool
are described. 
A. Knowledge Management and Semantic Search
The  knowledge  management  module  offers  different
tools. The most basic tool is the possibility to search file
contents and to have the search results displayed. However,
this method cannot be applied to files with content that is not
textually searchable (e.g., images, CAD data, sketches, etc.).
Therefore, metadata can be attached to describe the content.
This metadata can be interpreted and searched by a computer
as well as a human. Further information about the file can be
written to this metadata. For example, there could be a link
to the operating instructions or to the supplier’s homepage in
case of purchased parts.
A tag is a special variant of metadata, which describes
the file content with keywords [36]. Semantic searches can
be performed since metadata is attached to the files. The
result of a semantic search shows not only results, containing
the  search  term  but  also  a  context  sensitive  results  are
displayed [37]. For example, one wants to grab round rods
with a diameter of 40 mm, one can search for files which are
marked with the tags gripper jaw, round, rod, 40 mm. This
allows easy access to files and knowledge that has been
developed in previous projects. 
Furthermore, existing knowledge can be enhanced by
deploying queries analyzing the data, metadata, semantics
and links. With this method, also new employees are able to
get access to knowledge, which is already available on the
servers. The description of the file contents with metadata
enables the computer to find files with similar content. If the
user searches for a concept or a drawing in order to adopt it
to the current project, this function can be used to show files
with similar metadata to the user. This helps to accelerate the
process of familiarization as well as to increase the reuse rate
of already available concepts and design data.
B. Visualization
In  order  to  create  a  common  understanding  of  the
product,  the  processes,  the  resources  and  their
interdependencies and dependencies, the assembly system is
represented  schematically  by  means  of  symbols
(see Figure 5). Each part and subassembly of the product is
represented by a symbol. In the first step, symbols of the
product  are  positioned  and  connected  with  edges  in
accordance to the assembly sequence. In the next step, the
assembly processes are defined and drawn into the schema.
Processes are connected to the visualization of the assembly
sequence, in order to show the match between the parts and
the respective assembly processes. Finally, the production
resources  are  defined,  drawn  in  the  visualization  and
connected with the processes. At the end, the whole system
is visualized. The graph is showing all connections between
the parts of the product, the assembly processes and the
Figure 5. User interface of the visualization tool.
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

production resources. This graph can be used for further
analysis and automatic optimization of the system. 
Another  result  of  the  visualization  is  the  uniform
understanding of the product, processes and resources as
well  as  the  constraints  for  all  parties  involved.  This
contributes to an improvement in communication because a
scheme of the assembly system is present to all parties and
the  named  symbols  allowing  a  precise  communication.
Influences on the assembly system design and the parts of
the system, resulting from product changes, can be shown
quickly and vividly to the customer. 
Depending  on  the  real  world  element,  which  is
represented by a symbol, different input forms are available.
For example, the parameters for a bolted connection can be
entered in the input form that belongs to the process symbol
bolting  process.  Furthermore,  documents  (e.g.,  operating
instructions, CAD data, CE declarations of built-in products,
etc.), annotations, process characteristics, etc. can be stored
and  assigned  to  the  symbol  using  the  input  forms.  The
metadata collected in this way can also be used for semantic
search.
By collecting all the information belonging to the object
in one place, the user has the opportunity to get all important
information about a specific object quickly and without any
search effort. In addition, data entered in the input forms as
well as the graph with its connections between the symbols
is a further input to the knowledge management system. The
knowledge about the connections of the symbols combined
with the knowledge from the input forms can be used to
check the validity of the system automatically. 
C. Communication and Annotation
Assembly  system  development  requires  numerous
documents. Among these documents, the specification sheet
takes on a prominent role, since the system requirements and
specifications are described from the customer’s point of
view with this individual document. The specification sheet
is the basis for the creation of an assembly system, the
assembly system manufacturer has to work on it intense.
Different departments are working on the specification sheet
simultaneously. Thus, at the assembly system manufacturer’s
site  several  copies  of  the  specifications  are  edited.  This
means that ideas, solution concepts and knowledge are not
transferred to other departments. 
The  annotation  module  provides  the  framework  for
working together on one single specification. Comments and
information  can  be  added  to  the  digital  version  of  the
specification and are therefore visible to all authorized users.
Annotations are individual-related, depending on the group a
person belongs to, reading and writing of annotations is
possible or not. Internal annotations are for example only
visible for employees of the system manufacturer. 
These  annotations  are  connected  to  the  correlating
symbols  in  the  visualization  of  the  assembly  system.
Therefore, a quick switch between the specification and the
visualization is possible. This helps during process definition
as well as in the case of changes in the specifications. 
The method allows the integration of several  persons
with different tasks in the project as well as non-project
experts to solve problems even if they work with a time shift.
In addition, forums offer the opportunity for transparent and
open communication. Persons in charge  kept  up to date
about the current development and discussions by a RSS
feed. The communication module enables an easier more
transparent  and quick exchange of data and information,
leading to a better collaboration of the parties and better
project results. 
D. Data Management and Revision Management
During assembly system development, many files are
created and changed over time. This is especially common
with CAD design data. In order to work on the right files, for
project  participants it  is essential  to recognize  the latest
version  of  a  file.  In  particular,  this  is  important  when
multiple  people  are  working  on  one  file.  The  file
management  is  supported  by  a  document  management
system, which is adapted for the specific requirements of the
collaborative assembly system development process. This
tool offers the opportunity for revision management and the
attachment  of  metadata  to  the  files.  Documents  can  be
identified via a unique identification number. This helps to
connect the documents to a symbol in the visualization and
supports therefore a speedier access on the document. Data
access  management  is  integrated  in  the  document
management system. Every user is assigned to one or more
user groups. For each folder with all its documents or if
necessary for each document the rights (read, write, delete)
are defined for each user group. This avoids unauthorized
access to sensitive information like cost calculations.
E. Project Management
The  visualization  offers  also  a  feature  for  project
management tasks. Data that is recorded with the input forms
can also be used for project management. For instance start
and end dates for the execution of tasks can be defined. After
the user confirms the start or completion of a task, the color
of the task changes. An automatically generated gant chart
can  be  used  to  create  an  overview  of  the  tasks  to  be
performed and used for scheduling. Work orders with a
detailed description of the task can be assigned to a person
and followed up. The project manager gets an outline of
pending,  started  and  completed  work  orders.  With  this
information he/she can track the time course of the project.
The knowledge of how the system elements are connected
with each other, enables the project  manager to identify
persons to be informed about a specific product change. If
the company has already installed a project management
software, all the recorded information can be exported to
JSON file. This file can converted into the data format of the
available project management software and imported then.
F. Web Services and Web Server
The  backbone  of  the  platform  is  a  web  server  that
manages the users' requests and assembles the individual
software  modules  into  one  application.  A  web  based
software design allows the use of Open Source web tools,
which are made for social media and web communication.
In  order  to  keep  the  organizational  efforts,  for  the
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

management of the personalized access to the system, little
there  will  be  a  user  management  with  predefined  user
groups. The web-based concept allows to run the system on
premise as well as in a cloud, depending on the strategy and
the IT infrastructure of the company. 
IV.
CONCLUSION
In  this  article,  the  need  for  a  holistic  treatment  of
knowledge management and communication during product
and  assembly  system  development  is  shown.  From  the
findings of the deep analysis of processes, communication
and  knowledge  management  during  assembly  system
development, the requirements and modules for the method
could be derived. Through the visualization of the assembly
system  by  a  schematic  representation  a  common
understanding of the system is created. The graph which is
created in the visualization tool shows the connections of
product parts, processes and production resources and allows
a direct  identification of affected  persons, processes  and
resources in case of product changes. 
Easy access to already existing data can be achieved with
the  knowledge  management  module  and  its  ability  to
perform semantic searches. Thereby, the training period for
new employees can be reduced. By linking information and
files using metadata, contents of files like CAD-drawings or
images are getting accessible to the user and the computer.
 Transparent communication helps to keep every team
member on the same level of knowledge and thus better
teamwork  is  supported.  The  project  manager  is  able  to
follow up the progress of the project by using the project
management module. 
Modules  as  the  visualization  tool,  the  project
management  tool  and the web server  have already  been
implemented. As the project progresses, the graph analyzing
software as well as the document management software will
be connected  to the visualization tool  by a bidirectional
interface.  Since  graph  analysis  as  well  as  document
management software is available on the market, we will
revert to an already implemented and tested product. Finally,
the method and the software will be tested with different user
groups.
Overall, a method for communication and knowledge
management, which meets the needs of assembly system
manufacturers and their clients, was developed and briefly
presented. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This paper was written in the framework of the research
project NeWiP, which is funded by the Federal Ministry of
Education and Research (BMBF) and supervised by the lead
partner PTKA-Karlsruhe Institute of Technology under the
funding code 02P14B203.
REFERENCES
[1]
R. Müller, J. Eilers, L. Hermanns, and R. Gerdes, „Model-
supported  buildability  check  during  assembly  planing,
increasing planing accurancy for the integration of variants,“
in „wt Werkstattstechnik online,“ vol. 9, pp. 253-260, May
2017.
[2]
S. Poeschl, F. Wirth, and T. Bauernhansl, „Situation-based
Methodology  for  Planning  the  Commissioning  of  Special
Machinery using Bayesian Networks,” in “Factories of the
Future in the digital environment - Proceedings of the 49th
CIRP Conference on Manufacturing Systems,” vol. 57, pp.
247-252, ISSN: 2212-8271, 2016.
[3]
U.  Sendler,  „Boundless  industry  4.0,“  Springer  Vieweg,
Berlin Heidelberg, vol. 1, pp. 213, ISBN: 9783662482780,
2016.
[4]
R. Müller et al., „Communication during assembly system
development, platform to support the communication between
costumer  and  assembly  system  manufacturer,“  in  „wt
Werkstattstechnik online,“ vol. 9, pp. 647-651, Okt. 2017.
[5]
W.  Eversheim,  W.  Bochtler,  and  L.  Laufenberg,
„Simultaneous  Engineering  –  Industry  experience  for  the
industry,“  Springer,  Berlin,  vol.  1,  pp.  15,  ISBN:
9783642789182, 1995.
[6]
M.  Weck,  W.  Eversheim,  and  W.  König,  „  Production
Engineering:  The  Competitve  Edge,“  Butterworth
Heinemann, vol. 1, pp. 65, ISBN: 9781483102122, 1991.
[7]
D. Dixius, „Simultaneous project organization: A guideline
for  project  work  in  simultaneous  engineering,“  Springer,
Berlin Heidelberg, vol. 1, pp. 177, ISBN: 9783642589768,
1998.
[8]
PricewaterhouseCoopers  GmbH,  „Utilization  on  the  limit:
skilled  workers  in  mechanical  engineering  are  becoming
scarce,“
 
Available
 
rom:
https://www.pwc.de/de/pressemitteilungen/2017/auslastung-
am-limit-fachkraefte-im-maschinenbau-werden-knapp.html,
Retrieved: February, 2018.
[9]
K. Suder et al., „Competitive factor professionals, Strategies
for Germany's companies,“ McKinsey Deutschland, pp. 39,
2011.
[10] J. Feldhusen et al., „Pahl/Beitz Design theory methods and
application  of  successful  product  development,“  Springer
Vieweg, vol. 8, pp. 702-725, ISBN: 9783642295690, 2013.
[11] J.  Eilers,  „Methodology  for  planning  scalable  and
reconfigurable  assembly  systems,“  Apprimus,  ISBN:
9783863592950, 2014.
[12] S. Kluge, “ Methodology for the ability-based planning of
modular  assembly  systems,“  Jost-Jetter,  ISBN:
9783939890812, 2011.
[13] P. Konold and H. Reger, „Practice of assembly technology
Product design, planning, system design,“ Springer-Vieweg,
pp. 32-75, ISBN: 9783663016090, 2003.
[14] B.  Lotter  and  H.  Wiendahl,  „Assembly  in  industrial
production: A manual for the  practice,“ Springer-Vieweg,
ISBN: 9783642290619, 2012.
[15] H. Bullinger, D. Ammer, K. Dungs, U. Seidel, and B.  Weller,
„Systematic  assembly  planning,“  Carl  Hanser,  ISBN:
3446146067, 1986.
[16] B. Rekiek and A. Delchambre, „Assembly Line Design: The
Balancing  of  Mixed-Model  Hybrid  Assembly  Lines  with
Genetic Algorithms,” Springer, ISBN: 9781846281143, 2006.
[17] N. Thomopoulos, “Assembly Line Planning and Control,”
Springer, ISBN 9783319013992, 2014.
[18] N. Wognum and J. Trienekens, “The System of Concurrent
Engineering,” in “Concurrent Engineering in the 21st Century
Foundations, Developments and Challenges,” Springer, vol.
1, pp. 21-50, ISBN: 9783319137766, 2015.
[19] X. Koufteros, M. Vonderembse, and W. Doll, „Concurrent
engineering and its consequences,” in “Journal of Operations
Management,” vol. 19, pp. 97–115, ISSN: 0272-6963, 2001.
[20] S.  Willaerta,  R.  de  Graafb,  and  S.  Minderhoudc,
„Collaborative  engineering:  A  case  study  of  Concurrent
Engineering in a wider context,” in “Journal of Engineering
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

and Technology Management,” Elsevier, vol. 15, pp. 87-109,
ISSN: 0923-4748, 1998.
[21] K.  Kamrani,  “Collaborative  Design  Approach  in  Product
Design  and  Development,”  in  “Collaborative  Engineering
Theory  and  Practice,”  Springer,  vol.  1,  pp.  1-18,  ISBN:
9780387473215, 2008.
[22] J.  Leimeister,  “Collaboration  Engineering:  Systematically
develop and execute IT-supported collaboration processes,”
Springer Gabler, vol. 1, ISBN: 9783642208911, 2014.
[23] J.  Krottmaier,  “  Simultaneous  Engineering  Guide:  Short
Development times Low Costs High Quality,“ Springer, vol.
1, ISBN: 9783642793813, 1995.
[24] H.  Bullinger  and  J.  Warschat,  „Concurrent  Simultaneous
Engineering  Systems:  The  Way  to  Successful  Product
Development,” Springer Science & Business Media, vol. 1,
ISBN: 9781447114772, 1995.
[25] F.  Mas,  J.  Menéndez  et  al.,  “Design  Within  Complex
Environments: Collaborative Engineering in the Aerospace
Industry,” in “Information System Development, Improving
Enterprise Communication,” Springer, vol. 1, pp. 197 - 205,
ISBN: 9783319072159, 2014.
[26] F. Mas, J. Menéndez, and M. Oliva, J. Rios, “Collaborative
Engineering: an Airbus case study,” at “Procedia Engineering,
The  Manufacturing  Engineering  Society  International
Conference, MESIC 2013” vol. 63, pp. 336 – 345,  ISSN:
1877-7058, 2013.
[27] R.  Damgrave  and  D.  Lutters,  “Multi-user  Collaborative
Design Tools for Use in Product Development,” in “Global
Product Development Proceedings of the 20th CIRP Design
Conference,”  Springer  vol.  20,   pp.227-236,  ISBN:
9783642159732, 2011.
[28] D. Olson, “Descriptive Data Mining,” Springer, vol.1,  pp.1-7,
ISBN: 9789811033407, 2017.
[29] R. Orth, S. Voigt, and I. Kohl, “ Practice Guide Knowledge
Management,  Implement  Process-Based  Knowledge
Management Using the ProWis Approach,“ Fraunhofer, vol.
1, pp. 7, ISBN: 9783839603062, 2011.
[30] R.  Anderl  and  R.  Deger,  „The  role  of  consistent
documentation of mechatronic products as a success factor for
quality and customer satisfaction,“ research study, Technische
Universität Darmstadt, pp. 27, 2008.
[31] H. Kohl, K. Mertins, and H. Seidel „Knowledge Management
in SMEs: Basics - Solutions - Practical Examples,“ Springer,
vol. 1, pp. 9-18, ISBN: 9783662492208, 2016.
[32] F.  Kramer  et  al.,  “  Computer-Supported  Knowledge
Management in SME -A Combined Qualitative Analysis-,” in
“Proceedings of the 50th Hawaii International Conference on
System Sciences,” pp. 4567-4576, ISBN: 9780998133102,
2017.
[33] P. Hentsch, “ Development of assembly systems for varied
precision engineering products,” pp. 119-122, 2014.
[34] R.  Cerchione  and  E.  Esposito,  “Using  knowledge
management systems: A taxonomy of SME strategies,” in
“International Journal of Information Management,” vol. 37,
pp. 1551-1562, 2017. 
[35] I. Ul Haq et al., “Product to process lifecycle management in
assembly automation systems,” in “Proceedings of the 7th
CIRP  International  Conference  on  Digital  Enterprise
Technology,” pp. 1-11, 2011.
[36] H. Tipton, M. Krause, “Information Security Management
Handbook,” Auerbach Publications, vol. 5, pp. 1094, ISBN:
9780203325438, 2003.
[37] G.  Bruno,  “Product  Knowledge  Management  in  Small
Manufacturing  Enterprises,”  in  “Knowledge  Management
Initiatives and Strategies in Small and Medium Enterprises,”
IGI  Global,  vol.  1,  pp.  157-180,  ISBN:  9781522516439,
2016.
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-620-0
eKNOW 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

