 
 
Toward a Continuous Measurement Model 
Qing Huang, Miklos A. Vasarhelyi  
Accounting & Information System Department 
Rutgers University 
 Newark, USA 
qing.huang@rutgers.edu 
miklosv@business.rutgers.edu  
Eric J.H.J. Mantelaers  
Research Group: Future-proof Auditor 
Zuyd University of Applied Sciences 
Sittard, Netherlands 
Eric.Mantelaers@zuyd.nl 
 
 
Abstract— The business and Enterprise Resource Planning 
(ERP) system data for accounting and auditing is close to 
continuous, but the accounting and auditing work is interval-
based and loses the close to continuous characteristic of the 
business measurement process. A series of proxies for more 
frequent measures have emerged in the increasingly desperate 
attempt to have very short time market trading superiority. 
Our objective in this paper is to propose a continuous 
measurement framework in critical areas of business.  
Keywords- continuous measurement; continuum paradigm; 
business reporting; cybersecurity; sustainability; ESG. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The current accounting and reporting model derives from 
first mainly legal oriented records of the 12th and 13th 
centuries from traders from Florence and then more analytic 
double entry records formalized by Pacioli in late 1400s [4]. 
At that time, trading was manual, and the determinants for 
the success of a business were reporting assets and capital 
structure. Consequently, the traditional accounting and 
reporting mechanisms worked well for the purposes of 
record 
keeping, 
asset 
management, 
supply 
chain 
management, loan recording, and profit distribution. 
However, trading nowadays is real-time, volumes are 
enormous, and the business environment changes fast. Only 
relying on annual or quarterly financial reporting is not 
enough for the algorithms / decision-makers to make good 
decision [22]. As [11] states:  
“Over the last few decades, the relationship between 
market values and traditional financial information has 
become substantially weaker. [32] had found that 
income reflected 50% of information in the market while 
current market studies show relationships in the 5-7% 
range… [6] has shown that over the years this 
relationship is less and less relevant and that the 
inclusion of more firm-specific measures outside of the 
core four accounting statements, such as intangibles [7] 
and R&D [8] may provide better matching between 
market and accounting metrics.” 
 
The progressive adoption of automatic trading by 
investors, which could entail even close to 70% of daily 
trading in the markets, as well as index fund trading by 
algorithms aiming at maintaining these funds representative 
of their indexes [1] adding probably another 15% of the 
volume. Financial information is provided today by 
anachronistic reports published at best once every quarter, 
trading algorithms [17]. Consequently, trading algorithms 
must resort to other forms of information as triggers of 
market actions. Although the rules of trading actions are held 
very private, it appears that trades tend to focus on very short 
time frame price changes, volume levels, peer stock 
behavior, and a series of other factors. These other factors 
may include market changes relative to the particular 
equities, and more recently exogenous variables such as 
social media, weather, internet of things, etc. (see Figure 1). 
A series of proxies for more frequent measures such as 
parking lot usage [14], electricity consumption [36] have 
emerged in the increasingly desperate attempt to have very 
short time market trading superiority. Many other 
unorthodox proxy measurements will emerge over time. 
These factors largely account for 80 or 90 percent of 
stock trading leaving traditional stock trading a minor effect 
and consequently, much of prior research on stock trading 
and financial reporting by and large obsolete. Furthermore, 
the very important function of business measurement and 
reporting principles, which trace back to the Securities Acts 
of 1933 and 1934 as agent accountability, is being measured 
by increasingly obsolete and anachronistic rules and 
measurements.  
The Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) system data for 
accounting and auditing is close to continuous, but the 
accounting and auditing work is interval-based and loses the 
close 
to 
continuous 
characteristic 
of 
the 
business 
measurement process. If the measurement interval is 
changed, close to continuous reporting is also possible. 
 
Figure 1. Data and Reporting (Adopted from [11]) 
 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
 
However, companies, for obvious reasons, are very 
hesitant if not mandated, to disclose day-to-day or second-
to-second details of their operation even if automatic traders 
and the modern real-time-economy needs so [26]. 
Automatic trading algorithms and other modern business 
issues need real time information, the accounting world is 
not providing so, consequently new mechanisms are needed 
[7]. 
It is not only trading that can benefit of a more continuous 
schema of measurement, just-in-time production has long 
been the objective of supply chains where inventory carrying 
costs tradeoff with periodical ordering and delivering costs.  
Although automatic trading is a natural driver for 
frequent measurement and query-based reporting many 
processes in the business ecosystem can benefit or demand 
different methods of measurement, alternative forms of 
reporting, improved approaches for verification (audit), and 
automatic actioning algorithms. However, the acceleration 
and “ad-hoctization” of these processes is not always 
necessarily desirable. [5] has shown that daily data 
measurements create instability in models and therefore for 
certain types of prediction and modeling they are not the 
most desirable. The objective in this study is to propose a 
continuous measurement framework that can provide 
appropriate timely information for both internal and external 
stakeholders in some business areas that we think are 
critical.  
This paper is structured as follows. Section II summarizes 
some related literature. Section III elaborate the idea of 
continuous measurement metrics for critical business areas, 
and Section IV, classifies and discusses the advantage and 
disadvantages of both the traditional and proposed 
measurements. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
 The double entry method for business recording or 
measurement originated from 12th and 13th centuries [1]. 
On of the first attempts for a continuous paradigm in 
accounting and auditing was proposed by Vasarhelyi and 
Halper at Bell Labs [25].  Later, the Canadian Institute of 
Chartered Accountants defined continuous auditing as “a 
methodology for issuing audit reports simultaneously with, 
or a short period of time after, the occurrence of the 
relevant events [9]”. The continuum paradigm covers a 
wide range of interrelated activities, such as continuous 
reporting, continuous monitoring, continuous auditing, 
continuous assurance and so on.   
The traditional approach to information technology 
applications in auditing are characterized by a predominant 
focus on a singular tool for a singular problem. While a 
small number of papers focus on a more holistic approach. 
However, auditing is an evolving process. [13] argue that 
Continuous Auditing can be represented as a maturity model 
that consists of five maturity levels and four factors. The 
progressive maturity levels that can be used in auditing are: 
1) initial approach, 2) ad hoc approach, 3) defined approach, 
4) managed approach, and 5) optimized approach. The four 
capabilities are: A) systems, B) data, C) organization, and 
D) people [13]. That study fills a gap in the literature 
concerning a more holistic approach on auditing, and it 
answers the call for more practical oriented research on 
Continuous Auditing (CA).   
Substantial changes in technology, regulation, and 
business environment led to increased demand for 
continuous auditing and facilitated the development of a 
continuous auditing framework [27]. For example, [34] 
argues for the necessity to provide a reliable real-time 
monitoring of financial activities resulting in the need for 
continuous auditing. Emerging technological capabilities 
also facilitates the usage of other proxy measurements. For 
example, search volume can be used in firm valuation 
[31][37], the number of cars in the retailer’s parking lots can 
be a proxy for a timely measure of store performance 
[19],electricity consumption could detect firm financial 
misreporting [20], etc.  
III. 
POTENTIAL APPLICATIONS OF CONTINUOUS 
MEASUREMENT 
In the following sections, we discuss how continuous 
measurement can be used in three critical areas of the 
enterprise: business reporting, financial and non-financial 
information related to ESG, and cybersecurity.  
A. Continuous Measurement for Business Reporting 
Traditional annual business reporting can only provide 
limited information and is outdated in the real-time 
economy [24]. Continuous measurements of real-time 
processes are needed. The emergence of various forms of 
exogenous 
data 
as 
proxies 
for 
business 
process 
measurement provides potential sources for state-to-art 
business reporting. Existing successful applications indicate 
that business processes and Key Performance Indicators 
(KPIs) can be used not only to measure but also to improve 
business performance [35]. Instead of measuring the 
periodic financial data, we propose a process-based 
continuous performance measurement framework (PCPM) 
to measure the business performance. This framework 
consists of three stages. First, the company needs to 
construct a business process model; then KPIs will be 
designed for each process; finally, a continuous monitoring 
dashboard will be built to monitor all KPIs in real-time.  
1) Construct a process model  
Each company is a collection of activities that are applied 
to produce, design, market, deliver, and support its 
production [30]. But the activities and process models vary 
from company to company, thus the construction of the 
process model should follow the company’s operational 
characteristics. [30] provides a value chain model that 
classifies the company’s activities into primary activities 
and supporting activities. Consequently, the measurements  
 
 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
 
 
Figure 2: PCF levels explained (adopted from [2]) 
 
based on these value activities can provide valuable  
information to stakeholders. However, these valued 
activities might be too general for company valuation, thus, 
a more detailed process model might be needed. The 
American Productivity & Quality Center (APQC) regularly 
issues the Process Classification Framework (PCF) [2] for 
different industries. These frameworks usually have five 
levels (Figure 2), and for each level, it has detailed activities 
and evaluation metrics. Companies can construct their 
specific process model based on this framework. 
2) Construc KPI for each process 
After all level processes are defined, key performance 
indicators for each process can be constructed. The KPIs 
can include not only financial measurements but also 
customer, internal process, as well as learning & growth 
perspectives [21].  
3) Integration 
The last step for the business reporting is to build a 
continuous monitoring dashboard to monitor all processes 
and KPIs. The KPIs need to be aggregated at a task, activity, 
process (group), and category levels to obtain a larger 
picture of performance at each level (Figure 3). These can 
also be aggregated in monetary or percentage score formats. 
The KPI monitoring system can also be combined with 
process mining, which analyses the compliance and 
variance of processes[28].  
 
Figure 3: KPI Monitoring Example (Adopted from [23]) 
B. Continuous Measurement for sustainability reporting  
Besides business reporting, sustainability reporting is 
nowadays also a major concern of information users. Some 
changes in environmental circumstances can be catastrophic 
to companies, consequently, the timely monitoring and 
measurement of the sustainability-related information is 
very important. There are multiple sources for sustainability 
or 
Environment, 
Social, 
and 
Governance 
(ESG) 
information, including company annual reports, company 
websites, regulatory filling, news, etc (Briscoe [15]). These 
different and highly unstructured data satisfy many 
requirements but are of very difficult obtention. Thus, a 
comprehensive measurement system can be very useful for 
both the usage by the company and its external stakeholders.  
The European Union has been working on corporate 
sustainability for many years. In recent years, the European 
Financial Reporting Advisory Group (EFRAG) is moving 
full speed ahead in the development of sustainability 
reporting disclosure standards and has published many 
sustainability-related working papers. Companies can 
follow the proposed topic and subtopics proposed by 
EFRAG [12] (see Figure 4) to construct their own reporting 
range and measure related metrics dynamically.  
 
 
Figure 4: Proposal for a detailed structure for sustainability reporting topics 
and sub-topics (Adopted from [12]) 
C. Continuous Measurement for Cybersecurity 
Cybersecurity needs had taken very central roles in 
modern 
business 
concerns. 
Firms 
that 
experience 
cyberattacks or incidents may suffer substantial costs and 
other negative impacts, such as remediation costs, increased 
defensive costs, lost business, litigation risks, increased 
insurance premiums, reputation damage, and so on [33].  
According to the 2019 data breach report (IBM [16]), the 
average cost of a data breach is globally 3.92 million dollars 
and 8.19 million of dollars for the United States. A 
cyberattack on May 7, 2021, over a fuel pipeline company 
caused an emergency declaration in Washington D.C. and 
17 states [29]. 
To respond to the increasing cyberattacks and potential 
side effects, the AICPA [3] issued cybersecurity risk 
management description criteria which can provide some 
guidance on how to measure the cybersecurity-related risks. 
This guidance consists of nine topic areas, including 
business operation, cybersecurity objective, governance 
structure, control process, and so on (see Table I). 
Companies 
can 
continuously 
measure 
the 
listing 
cybersecurity-related 
information, 
and 
thoroughly 
understand the organization’s cybersecurity status.  
 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
 
TABLE I.  
CRITERIA FOR CYBERSECUTIRY RISK MANAGEMEN 
Source: Adopted from [3] 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
The traditional periodic interval measurement is usually 
yearly or quarterly, and it is standardized, stable, and well 
regulated, since it has been used for several centuries. 
However, this measurement is not adequate for the real time 
economy[10]. Companies may lose great opportunities due 
to outdated information, and investors may incur in many 
extra costs to obtain more timely information. Thus, more 
frequent measurements can benefit both parties. Moreover, 
the continuous business activities and ERP data, the just-in-
time production, and the available exogenous data provide 
the 
foundations 
for 
short 
interval 
or 
continuous 
measurement. TABLE II summarizes the advantages and 
disadvantages of long and short interval measurements. 
Initial measurement costs might be high but they will 
decrease over time while the company is getting more 
familiar with the measurement process. The same will occur 
for measurement accuracy, which can be low at the 
beginning, and then improve over time.  
TABLE II. LONG INTERVAL AND SHORT INTERVAL MEASUREMENT 
COMPARSION 
 
To summarize, continuous measurement can benefit both 
the company and investors in the long run, but there’s still a 
long way to achieve its desired utility. These will have a 
profound effect on standards. Consequently, future research 
is needed to further explore questions like what proxies are 
appropriate 
for 
the 
continuous 
measurement, 
what 
techniques can be used, how the regulations, standards, and 
assurance professions will be affected, etc.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] A. Frino and D. R. Gallagher, “Tracking S&P 500 index 
funds”, The Journal of Portfolio Management, 28(1), pp. 44-
55, 2001. 
[2] APQC, American Productivity & Quality Center  Process 
Classification 
Framework 
, 
2020. 
Aviable 
at: 
https://www.apqc.org/process-frameworks. Accessed on June 
3, 2022.  
[3] American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA), 
Description Criteria for Management’s Description of the 
Entity’s Cybersecurity Risk Management Program, 2017, 
Available 
at: 
https://us.aicpa.org/content/dam/aicpa/interestareas/frc/assura
nceadvisoryservices/downloadabledocuments/cybersecurity/d
escription-criteria.pdf. Accessed on June 3, 2022.  
[4] A. Sangster, "Pacioli's lens: God, humanism, Euclid, and the 
rhetoric of double entry", The Accounting Review 93, no. 2,  
pp. 299-314, 2018. 
[5] A. Kogan, M. G. Alles, M. A. Vasarhelyi, and J. Wu, “Design 
and evaluation of a continuous data level auditing 
system”, Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory, 33(4), pp. 
221-245, 2014. 
Nature of Business and Operation  
• 
The principal products or services and the methods 
by which they are distributed  
Nature of Information at Risk 
• 
The principal types of sensitive information 
created, collected, transmitted, used, or stored 
Cybersecurity Objective  
• 
Objectives related to availability, confidentiality, 
integrity of data, and integrity of processing 
Inherent Cybersecurity Risks 
• 
characteristics of technologies, connection types, 
use of service providers, and delivery channels 
used by the entity 
• 
organizational and user characteristics 
• 
environmental, technological, organizational and 
other changes during the period covered by the 
description at the entity and in its environment. 
Cybersecurity risk governance structure  
• 
The process for establishing, maintaining, and 
communicating integrity and ethical values to 
support the functioning of the cybersecurity risk 
management program 
Cybersecurity Risk Assessment Process  
• 
Process for identify and access related risk 
Cybersecurity Communications and Quality of 
Cybersecurity Information 
• 
The process for internally and externally 
communicating cybersecurity information 
Monitoring of the Cybersecurity Risk Management 
Program 
• 
Conduct evaluation of the operating effectiveness 
of key control activities 
• 
Evaluate and communicate, in a timely manner, 
identified security threats, vulnerabilities, and 
control deficiencies to parties responsible for 
taking corrective actions, including management 
and the board of directors, as appropriate 
Cybersecurity Control Processes 
• 
The process for developing a response to assessed 
risks, including the design and implementation of 
control processes 
 
      Advantages  
Disadvantages 
Long 
interval 
Measure
ment  
 
• 
Standardized 
• 
Well regulated 
• 
More stable 
• 
More familiar to 
users  
• 
Outdated  
• 
Relies on a series of 
assumptions and 
rules (e.g., 
depreciation) 
 
Short 
interval 
measure
ment  
• 
Timely 
• 
High 
Transparency  
• 
Comprehensive 
 
• 
Less regulated  
• 
Measurement cost 
might be high at the 
beginning  
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

 
 
[6] B. Lev, “On the usefulness of earnings and earnings research: 
Lessons and directions from two decades of empirical 
research”,  Journal of accounting research, 27, pp. 153-192, 
1989.  
[7] B. Lev and P. Zarowin, “The boundaries of financial reporting 
and 
how 
to 
extend 
them”, Journal 
of 
Accounting 
research, 37(2), pp. 353-385, 1999. 
[8] B. Lev, B and T.  Sougiannis,  “The capitalization, 
amortization, and value-relevance of R&D”,  Journal of 
accounting and economics, 21(1), pp. 107-138, 1996.  
[9] CICA/AICPA. Continuous auditing. Research report, Toronto, 
Canada. The Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants, 
1999. 
[10] D. Y. Chan and M. A. Vasarhelyi, “Innovation and practice of 
continuous auditing”,  International Journal of Accounting 
Information Systems, 12(2), pp. 152-160, 2011.  Doi: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.accinf.2011.01.001.  
[11] D. Pei  and M. A. Vasarhelyi,  “Big data and algorithmic 
trading against periodic and tangible asset reporting: The need 
for 
U-XBRL”. International 
Journal 
of 
Accounting 
Information Systems, 37, p.100453, 2020.  
[12] European Financial Reporting Advisory Group, EFRAG, 
“Proposal for a Relevent and Dynamic EU Sustainability 
Reporting Standard-Setting”, February, 2021. Avaliable at: 
https://www.efrag.org/Assets/Download?assetUrl=%2Fsites%
2Fwebpublishing%2FSiteAssets%2FEFRAG%2520PTF-
NFRS_MAIN_REPORT.pdf. Accessed on June 3, 2022.  
[13] E. Mantelaers and M. Zoet, “Continuous Auditing: A 
Practical Maturity Model”, In MCIS (p. 40), 2018.  
[14] H. Bradley, “Startups mine market-moving data from fields, 
parking lots-even shadows”, The Wall Street Journal. 
https://www.wsj.com/articles/startups-mine-market-moving-
data-from-fields-parking-lotseven-shadows-1416502993. 
Accessed on June 3, 2022.   
[15] I. Briscoe, “What Constitutes ESG Data ?”, Demyst, 2021, 
https://demyst.com/blog/what-constitutes-esg-
data?gclid=EAIaIQobChMIzaaEttLV9QIVrXxvBB0McgCvE
AAYAyAAEgLnQvD_BwE. Accessed on June 3, 2022.  
[16] IBM, Cost of a Data Breach Report [Press release], 2019. 
Retrieved 
from 
https://www.ibm.com/downloads/cas/ZBZLY7KL. Accessed 
on June 3, 2022.  
[17] J. Brogaard, T. Hendershott, and R. Riordan,  “High-
frequency trading and price discovery”,  The Review of 
Financial Studies, 27(8), pp. 2267-2306, 2014. 
[18] J. Dai, A. Medinetz, and M. A  Vasarhelyi, “ Audit Analytics 
in the Financial Industry” (Part of the Rutgers Accounting 
Series). Emerald Publishing,  2019.  
[19] J. K. Kang, L. Stice‐Lawrence and Y.T.F. Wong, “ The firm 
next door: Using satellite images to study local information 
advantage”, Journal of Accounting Research, 59(2), pp. 713-
750, 2021.  
[20] K. D. Allee, B. Baik, and Y. Roh, “Detecting Financial 
Misreporting with Real Production Activity: Evidence from 
an 
Electricity 
Consumption 
Analysis”, 
 Contemporary 
Accounting Research, 38(3), pp. 1581-1615, 2021.  
[21] K. H. Han and J. G. Kang, “A process-based performance 
measurement 
framework 
for 
continuous 
process 
improvement”, 
International 
Journal 
of 
Industrial 
Engineering, 14(3), pp. 220-228, 2007.  
[22] K. Smit, M. Zoet and E. Mantelaers, “An Evaluation of the 
Added Value of Business Rules Management Principles to 
Transparency”, Journal of Advanced Management Science 
Vol, 8(1), 2020.  
[23] Kyubit Business Intelligence. https://www.kyubit.com/kpi-
dashboard. Accessd on June 3, 2022.  
[24] L. Zhang,  D. Pei, and M. A.  Vasarhelyi, “Toward a new 
business 
reporting 
model”, 
 Journal 
of 
Emerging 
Technologies in Accounting, 14(2), pp. 1-15, 2017. 
[25] M. A. Vasarhelyi and F. B. Halper, “ The continuous audit of 
online systems”, Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory, 
10(1), pp. 110-125, 1991.  
[26] M. A. Vasarhelyi and M. Greenstein, “Underlying principles 
of the electronization of business: A research agenda”, 
International Journal of Accounting Information9Systems, 
4(1), pp. 1-25, 2003.  
[27] M. Eulerich and A. Kalinichenko, “The Current State and 
Future Directions of Continuous Auditing Research: An 
Analysis of the Existing Literature”, Journal of Information 
Systems, Vol. 32, No. 3, pp. 31-51, Fall 2018.  
[28] M. Jans, M. A. Vasarhelyi, and M. Alles, “A field study on 
the use of process mining of event logs as an analytical 
procedure in auditing”, The Accounting Review, 89(5), pp. 
1751-1773, 2014.  
[29] M. Stuti, “Biden adminstration declares emergency over fuel 
pipeline hack and warns more attacks will come”, 
Independent. 
https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/americas/us-
politics/cyber-attack-us-pipeline-biden-b1844775.html. 
Accessed on June 3, 2022.  
[30] M. 
E. 
Porter, 
“The 
value 
chain 
and 
competitive 
advantage”, Understanding business processes, 2, pp. 50-66, 
2001.  
[31] P. C. Chiu, S. H. Teoh, Y. Zhang and X. Huang, “Using 
google searches of firm products to assess revenue quality and 
detect revenue management”, 2020. Available at SSRN 
3252314.  
[32] R. Ball and P. Brown,  “An empirical evaluation of 
accounting income numbers”, Journal of accounting research, 
pp. 159-178, 1968.  
[33] Security Exchange Commision (SEC), Commission Statement 
and Guidance on Public Company Cybersecurity Disclosures, 
2018.  
[34] S. Flowerday and R. von Solms, “Real-time information 
integrity = System integrity + data integrity + continuous 
assurances”, Computers & Security 24 (8), pp. 604–613, 
2005, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cose.2005.08.004  
[35] U. S. Bititci, “Modelling of performance measurement 
systems in manufacturing enterprises”,  International journal 
of production economics, 42(2), pp. 137-147, 1995. 
[36] Z. Da, D. Huang, and H. Yun, “Industrial electricity usage 
and stock returns”, Journal of Financial and Quantitative 
Analysis52 (1), pp. 37–69, 2017.  
[37] Z. Da, J. Engelberg and P. Gao, “In search of attention”, The 
journal of finance, 66(5), pp. 1461-1499, 2011.  
 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-986-7
eKNOW 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

