Innovative Approach for Agile BPM 
 
Marco Mevius 
HTWG Konstanz 
Constance, Germany 
 mmevius@htwg-konstanz.de 
 
Rolf Stephan 
Axon Active AG Schweiz 
Munich, Germany 
rolf.stephan@axonactive.com 
 
 
Peter Wiedmann 
HTWG Konstanz 
Constance, Germany 
pewiedma@htwg-konstanz.de 
Abstract—Current challenges for companies require a high 
flexibility of business processes. The systematic combination of 
Cloud Computing and Business Process Management presents 
advantages, which are particularly useful for the modeling and 
automation of business processes. A targeted enhancement of 
Business Process Management with the help of these 
advantages generates significant new potentials for the 
optimization of business processes. Besides introducing topic-
relevant fundamentals, this paper establishes an agile method 
with a corresponding support toolset, which allow the 
immediate 
capturing, 
fast 
implementation 
and 
high 
adaptability of business processes. This method can be used for 
handling the complexity of missing or insufficiently modeled 
business processes. In addition the paper presents a specific 
reference architecture. Based on this reference each phase – 
modeling, automation, monitoring - passes through the cycle 
efficiently and independently.  
Keywords – Agile Business Process Management, Cloud 
Computing, Service-oriented architecture 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
For companies, fast and efficient business processes 
adaptability is increasingly becoming a critical competitive 
factor [1]. Furthermore, the belief that suitable tools for 
Business Process Management (BPM) are required is 
becoming more accepted [2]. In this context, Cloud 
Computing offers process participants properties which 
improve the conditions beyond conventional BPM. These 
advantages apply to both the development and the utilization 
of BPM tools. High scalability and possible cost reduction 
are two examples of these advantages [4]. BPM tools can be 
divided in tools for IT-BPM and Business-BPM. In IT-BPM, 
the tools can be categorized in the following classes: 
modeling, simulation, automation and monitoring. This 
categorization correlates with the BPM-cycle in general [5] 
and provides the foundation of this paper. Besides the 
constant enhancement of BPM and Cloud Computing, the 
topics of Service-oriented architectures and agile software 
development are also gaining importance. Together, these 
elements point to the need for a flexible and customer-
specific composition of BPM tools. Therefore, the 
opportunity for an improved process orientation through the 
increased agility of supporting services is a topic of high 
relevance [6]. In section 2 the connection of BPM and Cloud 
Computing will be presented. 
In section 3, it will be shown how the possibilities of a 
service-oriented combination of BPM and Cloud Computing 
can be used by applying BPM(N)Easy. The acronym BPM(N) 
Easy paraphrases the combination of Business Process 
Management (BPM) and Business Process and Notation 
(BPMN) with the ambition of making BPM easier. The 
BPM(N)Easy method is supported by an agile toolset for 
efficient and effective BPM. 
II. 
BPM AND CLOUD COMPUTING 
With the rapid development of IT in the context of 
launching and running cloud-based architectures, companies 
are faced with new problems. In particular, collaborative 
business processes in use across company borders offer 
essential optimization potential through the combination of 
BPM and Cloud Computing. An essential commonality of 
BPM and Cloud Computing is the flexible and agile 
approach [cf. 15]. The Cloud Computing paradigm can be 
called an “enabler” of an improved combination of service-
oriented architectures and an agile proceeding regarding the 
management of business processes. But this potential 
depends on different framework conditions. These are 
outlined from an economic and technical perspective below 
and build a further major motivation for BPM(N)Easy. 
A. Technical view 
From a technical view, three dimensions can be 
identified for a successful design, implementation and 
operation of 
(BPM) tools 
in cloud environments: 
programming, integration and security (according to [7, 8]). 
 
 
Programming - Complex and distributed systems 
are ubiquitous in business IT landscapes nowadays. 
In connection with the goal of reaching a higher 
usability and flexibility, this complexity translates 
into 
new 
requirements 
for 
the 
Software 
Engineering unit.  To solve this issue, the adoption 
of new or alternative program languages is 
necessary. Relying on new innovative concepts and 
techniques, the effort invested in development has 
to be reduced to render the complexity of these 
new IT landscapes manageable.   
 
Integration - Integration can be split in data 
integration, function integration and process 
integration. In light of challenges involved, the 
160
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

topic of integration plays a key role in different 
scenarios. For instance, a cloud-based workflow 
engine could control variable activities distributed 
across company borders. For a smooth running of 
several business process instances, there is a need 
of defined integration interfaces and structured 
methods. 
 
Security – (IT) security can be divided into three 
categories: functional security, information security 
and data security. All of these categories have a 
significant relevance for BPM, especially regarding 
complex 
business 
process 
grids. 
Functional 
security specifies how the current state corresponds 
with the target state of functionality. Information 
security is focused on the unauthorized changing or 
extracting of information. Data security takes care 
of the process-related data.  
 
Furthermore, from a technical point of view, the 
question of which business processes are most appropriate 
for running on a cloud-based architecture has to be 
answered. 
Possible 
risks, 
for 
example 
insufficient 
integration options or application programming interfaces 
have to be taken into consideration. 
B. Economic view 
Two dimensions can be listed from the economic point of 
view. 
 
 
Availability - Services which are provided by a 
cloud infrastructure can be accessed any time. 
Based 
on 
a 
higher 
abstraction 
level, 
the 
customizing and the application setup become 
significant easier. In addition to the simplified 
procurement, the end user is able to work with the 
service immediately. 
 
Investment risk – In the context of variable billing 
models such as pay-per-transaction (pay in case of 
an actual use) the usage of cloud-based service 
results in certain charges. These charges contain all 
relevant costs (e.g. server costs, support costs, etc.). 
On this account, investment costs are significantly 
reduced, 
e.g. 
risk 
is 
minimalized 
in 
the 
procurement of a business process supporting 
application. 
 
According to the user-oriented study by Northbridge [9], 
in which 417 companies of different sizes were surveyed, 
75% of respondents estimate that two-thirds of the 
processing power will be obtained from the Cloud. The 
described promising tension between BPM and Cloud 
Computing generated the motivation for developing and 
testing the BPM(N)Easy method in the context of the research 
project 
“BPM@Cloud” 
at 
KIPS 
(http://kips.htwg-
konstanz.de) as presented in the following.  
 
III. 
METHOD AND IMPLEMENTATION 
For performing cloud- and service-oriented BPM, it is 
important to have a method which makes it possible to 
handle the complexity of technical and economic 
conditions. 
A. BPM(N)Easy method 
The major intention of the method is to support the 
potential of BPM by a consistent use of cloud- and service-
oriented infrastructures. Therefore, the method is based on 
the outlined (technical and economic) dimensions and 
connects aspects of agile software engineering with the 
conventional BPM cycle. Furthermore, the method is 
divided in two phases and three steps. The phases provide 
the time frame for performing the steps. 
Figure 1 shows an overview of the BPM(N)Easy method 
phases and steps: 
 
 
 
Figure 1. BPM(N)Easy method 
 
An additional intent of the method is to allow for a 
location independent modeling of business processes, 
supported by a continuous and integrated tool landscape. 
The number of unstructured business process repositories 
can be greatly reduced by using such a homogeneous system 
of resources to manage and store the business processes and 
information [cf. 10]. Furthermore, after running through a 
number of “Sprints” [cf. 11], the created (executable) 
business processes are provided in a cloud environment [cf. 
12]. This release of business processes (or parts thereof) 
offers the chance to utilize these as service-oriented 
components in existing business process architectures. 
Within the steps of BPM(N)Easy the “what must be done” is 
declared and the phases are used to specify “when and how 
it must be done”. 
 
1) Steps 
The method steps are based on the conventional BPM 
cycle and describe the procedure into three categories: 
 
 
Modeling - The initial capture of a process, if 
there are no suitable business process models 
161
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

available, is modeled by using standardized 
interviews which are based on observations 
carried out on site with help of a mobile 
application. The BPM(N)Easy notation thereby 
reduces 
the 
BPMN 
2.0 
standard 
(http://www.omg.org/spec/BPMN/2.0/) on 
important control elements while allowing the 
collection of valuable information through 
various mediums e.g. by adding a video to a 
process activity. All business processes are 
saved in a Cloud repository with which they 
can be retrieved, analyzed, and changed at any 
time. 
 
 
Enrichment - New business process models are 
proposed automatically for enrichment. This 
enrichment includes the design of human-
machine interaction by creating user interfaces, 
and the integration of needed services. For 
these actions, the latest concepts of software 
engineering such as library mechanisms and 
loose coupling or overwriting, are used. The 
result is a semi-automated or automated 
business process. 
 
Monitoring – The monitoring is separated into 
two categories. On the one hand, technical data 
are monitored, for instance to monitor the time 
required to access third party systems or 
application programming interfaces. On the 
other hand, the monitoring is based on specific 
indicators 
for 
measuring 
efficiency 
or 
effectiveness. A drill-down to the lowest-level 
information of an activity of the processes 
should be deliverable. Both categories are 
aligned with the previously discussed technical 
and economic considerations. 
 
2) Phases 
The typical flow through the various stages of the BPM 
often leads to the fact that important requirements at the 
beginning of a BPM project have not been considered or 
adequately described. Also, technical problems are often 
only identified during the implementation of the business 
process. Therefore the entire project costs can be 
significantly increased. In contrast, BPM(N)Easy is based on 
the assumption that complex BPM projects can’t be planned 
at the beginning. The approach of BPM(N)Easy follows an 
empirical, incremental and iterative concept to increase the 
predictability of the process quality and to reduce project 
risks. Within a predefined cycle, there is always the aim to 
generate an executable version of the business processes in 
order to get feedback as early as possible. Fundamental 
principles of the agile method are transparency, controlling 
and flexible adjustment.  
The phases of the BPM(N)Easy method define in which 
intervals and with what accompanying activities the steps 
have to be carried out.  
Figure 2 shows the different stages with the two phases 
schematically: 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Method phases - pilot and main phase 
 
 The high parallelism of the tasks is meant to favor a 
consistent and systematic implementation of the BPM cycle 
from the very start. The tasks are derived with the execution 
of the steps, i.e. the phase sections (1-6) within the pilot and 
main phase are related to following methods steps: 
 
(1) The conception task describes the modeling of the 
processes 
and 
the 
implementation 
of 
the 
system 
architecture. 
 
(2) Shortly after the beginning and before the first sprint 
of the main phase, users should be able to find a runnable 
application, i.e. the cycle (steps) was already completed 
once. This increases the bilateral understanding of business 
and IT departments. 
 
(3) The "Cooperative Management" is executed as a 
support activity over both phases. Examples for this task are 
the coordination of the project members or the writing of the 
product backlog – a list which contains all implementation 
requirements. 
 
(4) Typically, new applications have to be provided to 
the users for reaching the goal of operating independently. 
This "training" supports the critical coordination process 
between processes developers and process users. 
 
(5) During the main phase, each sprint is connected to a 
run through the cycle. If a task is completed already, for 
instance the modeling of a business process, the task has to 
be omitted. 
 
162
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

(6) The end is defined by an end date and a final closing 
test. Conditions to closure include a completed cloud 
repository and an application without access restrictions.  
 
 
 
Pilot phase – In the pilot phase, the creation of 
a detailed specification is the focal point. 
Furthermore, the architecture for the underlying 
system has to be set up. Very soon afterwards, 
the recording of business processes begins and 
the implementation of the first pilot process 
application in a prototypical way is initiated. 
Accompanying this, various training sessions 
are conducted for the core team and the users to 
introduce them step by step to the new system. 
From this early first prototype, which can be 
used in the productive environment already, 
other design criteria and components are 
derived. In addition, all components are re-
usable, 
and 
therefore 
an 
accelerated 
development is possible. The continuous 
contact through cooperative management also 
ensures the high acceptance of the users. 
 
Main phase - The main phase consists of 
sprints. A Sprint describes a timed interval in 
which the Sprint task list has to be worked 
through by the responsible team members. This 
task list has to be set up at the beginning of 
each Sprint. The task list is not bound to 
sequential development sections, but includes 
tasks for setting up the product – the business 
process – in general. Based on this iterative 
process, the possibility of parallel application 
testing is increased. Parallel to the goal of 
rapid, iterative development, the sprints of the 
main 
phase 
improve 
the 
communication 
between business and IT significantly and 
minimize typical barriers. Moreover, the final 
approval gets simplified by involving the end 
user in all steps of the method intensively. 
Through the direct coupling of the development 
team and users, the risk of implementation 
errors due to lack of consultation processes or 
misunderstandings 
can 
be 
reduced 
considerably. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Illustration of the Sprint cycle 
Figure 3 illustrates how the automated or semi-
automated business processes in the context of the 
BPM(N)Easy method are produced and how a system can be 
enriched through different levels. As previously introduced, 
an essential aim in each Sprint is the focus on the ultimate 
goal of the BPM project. As early as after the first sprint, it 
has to be possible to run through the business process from 
the "spring in the valley". Providing the full functionality of 
each process activity is neglected initially. At the end of 
Sprint n a system is available, which covers the defined 
requirements completely.  
 
B. Reference architecture and implementation 
As part of an operational application of the BPM(N)Easy 
method a supporting reference architecture was developed 
and combined with various technical components. 
 
1) Reference architecture 
As an adequate basis for the method BPM(N)Easy a generic 
reference architecture for a cloud-based BPM infrastructure 
was developed as shown in Figure 4 (in allusions to [13]). 
 
 
Figure 4.  Reference  architecture 
 
The generic reference architecture is based on system-
oriented services. The cloud typical layers, Software-as-a-
Service 
(SaaS), 
Platform-as-a-Service 
(PaaS) 
and 
Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS) can be distinguished [14]. 
IaaS describes resources, such as the network connection or 
processing power which are provided as a service. In this 
case the infrastructure is flexible and can be dynamically 
controlled depending on the load. PaaS describes a 
standardized platform for running basic applications (e.g. an 
operating system). PaaS is needed to load the various SaaS 
products from the toolset (suitable to the current step of the 
method). The SaaS layer contains the software which is 
necessary to offer services and user interfaces for the 
administration, execution and monitoring. In general, all 
three levels of the discussed technical aspects - 
programming, integration and security - are considered. 
Examples are the security layer within the PaaS, which 
protects the core architecture, or the separate developer 
interface, which allows for an easy development access. 
163
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

As a result of the reference architecture’s modular design, a 
high degree of integration can be ensured. Therefore, the 
selection of the process application and the corresponding 
toolset are vendor-independent. 
 
2) Implementation 
Based on the generic reference architecture in the 
context of a specific application project within the 
BPM@Cloud Labs, various components were used to apply 
the method and to test and validate the usage on a selected 
business process. 
 
 
Xpert.ivy BPM Suite 
The Xpert.ivy suite of Axon Active AG 
(http://axonactive.com) was used for the development of an 
executable process model. Connected to a cloud repository, 
it is possible to create a high degree of structuring reusable 
modules and execute the created process on the web, 
managing it by versions. The Xpert.ivy module "Monitor" 
provides functionality for real-time measurement of process 
parameters and status. On basis of this module service level 
monitoring and reporting are supported. 
 
 
Fujitsu Cloud 
Fujitsu services were used both as Infrastructure and 
Platform-as-a-Service to create an own cloud repository for 
storing all relevant data. In addition, the services were the 
base for the Software-as-a-Service level which gives the 
option to bring release-ready processes immediately up to 
the Fujitsu Cloud Store. For instance, the SaaS layer 
contains components which enable the users to monitor or 
perform the business processes. 
 
 
Mobile Easy Tool 
This 
mobile 
application 
is 
based 
on 
Android 
(http://developer.android.com) and has been developed at 
the KIPS. It can be used for modeling the selected business 
processes interactively. The application provides a few 
BPMN 2.0 elements which can be dragged & dropped easily 
for modeling the business processes intuitively. Moreover, 
all steps/activities can be enriched by adding metadata 
directly on site (videos of interviews, images, etc.). Tablets 
with camera function are used for this purpose. An 
impression of the very user-friendly ("Easy")- OnClick 
technology is shown in Figure 5. The Android native 
features facilitate the operation of the application. For 
example, all share options, such as e-mail, MMS or 
Google+ are available. 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  BPM(N)Easy mobile application 
An example of a typical approval process is shown in  
Figure 6.  
 
 
 
Figure 6.  BPM(N)Easy test process 
 
 The business process describes the steps involved in 
publishing company news on social media platforms. On the 
one hand, the exemplary process enables an overview of the 
complete phases and steps to go through. On the other hand, 
requirements emerge which have to be dealt with, such as 
the collaborative, mobile news writing and the integration of 
external systems. In sum, all presented technical challenges 
must be considered and dealt with. 
The test scenario was started by modeling the business 
process with help of the simple and efficient BPM(N)Easy 
notation. Using cloud repositories, the communication 
between business and IT was ensured at any time so that 
early user tests could be performed agilely. Within the 
Sprint cycles, the Ultimo, a defined project end, has always 
had the highest priority. From a technical point of view, it 
was also required to develop a specific, security-related 
client management which initiates a trigger automatically 
when the business process has been subscribed to over the 
cloud marketplace. This trigger receives various activities at 
the application level of the Ivy server, such as creating new 
users or the activation of other functions (in terms of Basic / 
Premium versions). The service-oriented usage of third-
party 
systems 
(social 
media 
platforms) 
has 
been 
implemented by calling web services - therefore the system 
can easily be extended. 
 
IV. 
SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK 
The integration of BPM tools or entire business 
processes (BPaaS) in a cloud environment can be assigned a 
high potential. Cut costs and reduced complexity represent 
fundamental goals for BPM projects. Furthermore, the 
improved distribution of services or business processes 
increases the ubiquitous availability of business applications 
and provides a significant target value.  
The transfer research project BPM@Cloud is currently 
run by the Constance Institute for Process Control (KIPS) in 
collaboration with the Axon Active AG. This paper 
introduced an agile method called BPM(N) Easy. Furthermore 
it has been presented a reference architecture which 
supports the agile method for efficient and effective BPM. 
 
164
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

The phases and steps of the agile method do not require 
rigorous planning at the beginning of the BPM project. 
Therefore, a highly flexible and close cooperation with all 
participants is possible. As a result of this, the 
implementation 
of 
the 
business 
processes 
can be achieved significantly. 
The test of the method was performed at the BPM 
laboratory of KIPS and reached a successful result regarding 
the implementation of new business processes. Related and 
further work is currently investigating to what extent  
BPM(N)Easy can be used not only for the 
first 
implementation but for continuous business process 
improvement. From the authors’ point of view, there is 
significant potential for optimization of business processes 
in this context. In addition, cloud-based services will be 
created to complement the methods-supporting toolset. 
V. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Bekele, T.M.; Weihua Zhu; Towards collaborative business 
process management development current and future approaches, 
Communication Software and Networks (ICCSN), 2011 IEEE 3rd 
International Conference on vol., no., pp.458-462, 2011. 
 
[2] Chaudhry, S.; Moller, C.; Advances in Enterprise Information 
Systems II, The role of BPM in the IT value-chain: Exploring how 
manging business processes can decouple business and IT, pp. 56-
58, CRC Press/Balkema, AK Leiden, 2012. 
 
[3] Chee, B. J. S.; Franklin Jr., C.: Cloud Computing: 
Technologies and Strategies of the Ubiquitous Data Center. CRC 
Press Taylor & Francis Group, 2010. 
 
[4] Voorsluys, W.; Broberg, J.; Buyya, R.: Introduction to Cloud 
Computing. 
In 
(Buyya, 
R.; 
Broberg, 
J.; 
Goscinski, 
A. 
Hrsg.): Cloud Computing Priniples and Paradigms. John Wiley 
& Sons, Inc., Hoboken New Jersey, 2011. 
 
[5] Weske, M.: Business Process Management: Concepts, 
Languages, Architectures, Springer Verlag, Berlin New York, 
2010. 
 
[6] Abelein, U.; Becker, A.; Habryn, F.: Towards a Holistic 
Framework for Describing and Evaluating Business Benefits of a 
Service Oriented Architecture.13th IEEE Enterprise Distributed 
Object Computing Conference Workshops, Auckland, 2009. 
 
[7] Briscoe, G.; Marinos, A.: Digital Ecosystems in the Clouds: 
Towards Community Cloud Computing. 3rd IEEE International 
Conference on Digital Ecosystems and Technologies, Istanbul, 
2009. 
 
[8] Fehling, C.; Konrad, R.; Leymann, F.; Mietzner, R.; Pauly, M.; 
Schumm, D.: Flexible Process-based Applications in Hybrid 
Clouds. 2011 IEEE 4th International Conference on Cloud 
Computing, Washington, 2011. 
 
[9] Skok, M.: Future of Cloud leadership panel. Version 2011-Jun-
20.2 Future of Cloud Computing. 
http://www.futurecloudcomputing.net/media-gallery/detail/91/286, 
accessed 19th October 2012. 
 
[10] Kurniawan, T.; Ghose, A.; Le, L.; Dam, H.: On Formalizing 
Inter-process Relationships, BPM 2011 Workshops, Part II, 
Springer Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2012. 
 
[11] Schwaber, K.; Sutherland, J.; The Scrum Guide, The 
Definitive Guide to Scrum: The Rules of the Game, 2011, 
http://www.scrum.org/Portals/0/Documents/Scrum%20Guides/Scr
um_Guide.pdf, 19th October 2012. 
 
[12] W. van der Aalst, Business Process Configuration in The 
Cloud:How to Support and Analyze Multi-Tenant Processes?, 
Ninth IEEE European Conference on Web Services, 2011. 
 
[13] Jiang, J.; Le, J.; Wang, Y.; Sun, J.; He, F.: The BPM 
Architecture Based on Cloud Computing, Knowledge Acquistion 
and Modeling, 4th International Symposium, Sanya, 2011. 
 
[14] Mell, P.; Grance, T.:The NIST Definition of Cloud 
Computing, Recommendations of the National Institute of 
Standards and Technology 
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-145/SP800-145.pdf, 
2011, accessed 19th October 2012. 
 
[15] Trifu, M.: SOA, BPM and Cloud Computing: Connected for 
Innovation in Higher Education. In (Jusoff, K.; Zhu, Z. Hrsg.): 
ICEMT  2010 International Conference on Education and 
Management Technology. IEEE Verlag, Cairo, 2010. 
 
 
 
 
165
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-254-7
eKNOW 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

