Investigating Factors for E-Knowledge Sharing amongst Academic Staff 
 
 
 
Hanan Alotaibi 
Electrical and Computer Science 
University of Southampton 
Southampton, UK 
hmqa1g09@ecs.soton.ac.uk 
 
 
 
Richard Crowder 
Electrical and Computer Science 
University of Southampton, 
Southampton, UK 
rmc@ecs.soton.ac.uk 
Gary Wills 
Electrical and Computer Science 
University of Southampton, 
Southampton, UK 
gbw@ecs.soton.ac.uk  
 
 
Abstract-Knowledge sharing has been considered a 
significant component of success in Knowledge Management 
(KM). In the most organizations KM is often inadequate when 
it comes to knowledge sharing, especially between staff who 
work in universities. In order to encourage knowledge sharing, 
it is important to know why/where/when employees choose to 
contribute or to receive shared knowledge. The purpose of this 
research is to investigate the factors that affect academics’ 
behavior towards knowledge sharing by using Web technology. 
A synthesis of factors which already exist in current theory, 
i.e., the Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology, 
as well as other factors which are always explored 
independently in research studies, are combined to a 
Knowledge Sharing Technology Model has constructed. The 
model identifies the key factors that affect the uptake of 
knowledge technologies in universities.  
   
Keywords-Knowledge management; Knowledge sharing 
Technology, Web technology; the Unified Theory of Acceptance 
and Use of Technology (UTAUT).  
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Over the last few years, the majority of the largest 
global corporations have Knowledge Management projects 
to support their development and growth [1]. It is widely 
recognized that organizations benefit by establishing 
appropriate knowledge management system to increase 
their efficiency. The main activities in Knowledge 
Management [2] are acquiring, sharing, and storing the 
knowledge. It is recognized that the most crucial activity of 
all is knowledge sharing since most knowledge is held as 
tacit knowledge by people [3]. However, Knowledge 
Management is often inadequate when it comes to 
knowledge sharing, especially between staffs [4]. Thus, 
novice staffs are unable to capture valuable information 
while there is no knowledge sharing mechanism between 
staff, this can affect staff performance, when tacit 
knowledge  from experts  is often lost as the knowledge has 
not been made explicit codified. So this may result in a 
poorer employees experience and lower staff achievement.  
In the last few decades, the use of technology in 
supporting Knowledge Management process has been 
widely recognized, which are sharing and reusing of 
knowledge and technology represents a highly visible 
solution while information technology provides direct 
assistance in the processes of Knowledge Management [5]. 
Web technology is the most effective technology used in 
Knowledge Management [6]. Web technology is based on a 
particular set of technologies enabling users to interact and 
collaborate with each other in social media: it can be termed 
the ‘Social Web’, as it incorporates a strong social 
component [7]. Sharing knowledge via web technology can 
be very effective among staffs, who work in universities, 
such as Wiki or Blogs.  
This work considers that application of Knowledge 
Management to Universities in the Saudi Arabia. The 
Universities are lacking in management technology system 
for the academic process. Consequently, tacit knowledge of 
expert academics is lost, as the knowledge has not been 
documented. Thus, the novice academics are unable to use 
useful information, as no knowledge has been shared among 
academic staff. There are insufficient studies regarding the 
academics perspective on knowledge sharing technology [8] 
and their use in Saudi Arabia universities. The majority 
existing studies are conducted in international commercial 
organizations. The aim of this research is to investigate 
factors 
that 
influence 
academics’ 
behavior 
toward 
knowledge sharing via web technology.  
This paper is structured as follows. Section II provides 
additional background to the work. Section III describes a 
conceptual mode that is being used to understand 
knowledge sharing in Universities in Saudi Arabia. Section 
IV discusses how this model is to be validated, the paper 
concludes with a discussion in Section V. 
II. 
BACKGROUND  
A. Knowledge Sharing 
Knowledge sharing is a mutual relationship between 
sender, who provides knowledge, and receivers, who are 
seeking knowledge, exchange of information gained from 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

experiences, is used to support an individual who is working 
towards a common goal [9]. Sharing and distributing 
knowledge is positively linked to Knowledge Management 
[10] found that knowledge sharing is based on individual 
behavior, as people do not accept the value of sharing 
knowledge unless they think it is important. Thus, changing 
people’s 
behavior is the challenge in 
Knowledge 
Management [11] and knowledge sharing behavior is the 
central process of knowledge management.  
Knowledge sharing behavioral is typically affected by 
certain factors either positively or negatively, hence this 
research focuses on knowledge sharing technology 
behavioral factors. 
Knowledge sharing behavior is viewed as the degree to 
which academics actually share their knowledge with their 
colleagues via Web technology. In practice, knowledge 
sharing can be considered from two aspects: behavioral and 
technological. 
B. The Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of 
Technology (UTAUT) 
The Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology 
(UTAUT) model was defined by Venkatesh et al. [9] and 
extended the Technology Acceptance Model (TAM), which 
is the most widely applied model of user acceptance and 
usage [12]. UTAUT provides a useful tool for managers 
needing to assess the likelihood of success for new 
technology [9].  
The UTAUT model examined the determinants of user 
acceptance and usage behavior and found that all contribute 
to the usage behavior [13]. This research takes advantages 
of UTAUT to examine staff behavior toward knowledge 
sharing technology by considering in some factors that will 
present next section.    
III. 
CONCEPTUAL MODEL 
We have synthesized factors affecting knowledge 
sharing; some of these factors already exist for example 
UTAUT [14], while other factors, such trust, time, 
leadership and IT support, that are always explored [15, 16, 
17 ,18] Overall, based on researchers reviews and the 
Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology 
(UTAUT), Knowledge Sharing Technology (KST) Model 
was developed, Figure 1. 
A. Motivation 
The biggest issue facing staff is the difficulties in 
sharing knowledge because of lack of time for preparing the 
subject to be presented and the fact that knowledge sharing 
activities require a high level of effort [19]. In this case, the 
staff should be encouraged to engage in knowledge sharing 
activities, and it is also unrealistic to assume that all staff 
contributes their knowledge. In fact, human beings will 
offer their knowledge when they expect reward, such as 
extra payment [20]. Also, in the case of the benefit expected 
from knowledge sharing, the benefit is not only more 
payment but also reciprocal benefit.   
 
Attitude toward  
knowledge 
sharing via Web 
technology
Behavioral 
intention to  
knowledge 
sharing via Web
Trust
Time
Leadership
IT supporter 
Organisational Culture
Perceived ease of 
use
IT Acceptance 
Perceived 
usfulness
Expect reward 
Reciprocal benefit
Self-efficacy 
Work experience 
Enjoyment of 
helping 
Extrinsic Motivation
Intrinsic Motivation
Motivations Factors 
Subjective 
norm
  Use knowledge 
sharing 
technology 
 
Figure 1  The Knowledge Sharing Technology Model (KST) of the factors that lead to successful adoption. 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

There are some members of academic staff who contribute 
their knowledge because of their belief in their self-abilities 
and competences, and also the belief that their knowledge 
can help to work improvements; this is a self-efficacy 
factor. 
Furthermore, work experience drives staff towards 
knowledge sharing in order to obtain satisfaction and 
pleasure [20]. Some individuals enjoy helping others, 
especially if they are working in group [21].   
According to the UTAUT model, it can be assumed that 
the employees’ attitudes towards knowledge sharing are 
dependent on intrinsic and extrinsic motivation. Intrinsic 
motivation is defined as perception that staff will share 
knowledge because he expect to obtain valuable outcomes, 
it includes expected reward and reciprocal benefit, whereas,  
extrinsic motivation defined as staff will share knowledge 
because the member of staff believes that they have valuable 
information that should be shared  includes self-efficiency, 
work experience and enjoying helping others.  
B. Technology acceptance 
In this work we examine two factors that influence 
individual attitude, perceived usefulness and perceived ease 
of use, which are the root constructs of UTAUT. Perceived 
usefulness is defined as the degree to which staff believes 
that using particular system would be enhanced to share 
knowledge. Perceived ease is defined as the degree to which 
staff believes that using particular system would be free of 
effort to share knowledge of use. They have shown evidence 
that these factors are strongly correlated with attitude 
towards the acceptance of information technology. When 
staff feel the technologies can be used in an easy way, it is 
more probable that they will present their knowledge. So 
their attitude to ease of use will affect an individual’s 
knowledge sharing behavior. Also, staffs are more likely to 
share their knowledge when they feel that they have 
worthwhile information that is very useful for other staff.  
C. Organizational culture  
Organizational culture has a relationship with staff’s 
communication and knowledge sharing behavior, as 
previous research has pointed out [22]. Most of studies [22] 
have 
suggested 
that 
organizations 
should 
create 
opportunities for employees’ interaction and facilitates of 
knowledge sharing.  
Trust has an indirect influence on knowledge sharing, 
which leads to increased sharing through technology. Trust 
is defined in this model as the degree of staff ‘s believe that  
other members are honest and have valuable and useful 
knowledge to share. Furthermore, other researchers have 
examined affect-based trust and cognition-based trust [23], 
and found that trust has an effect on sharing knowledge 
when staffs believe other team members are honest.  
A further factor is time, Ford and Chan [10] and Ford 
and Staples [11] examined the influences of time on 
knowledge share, and found that the most staff unwilling to 
share their knowledge because of lack of time. Moreover, in 
[24] claims that time is one of the barriers to knowledge 
sharing in organizations, as adding information to the 
system is time consuming. However, the authors’ opinion is 
that knowledge sharing is definitely non-consuming time, 
once the information is available in the system. Thus, staff 
can reach the valuable information that has been previously 
placed in the system more quickly, rather than searching in 
the other huge sources. Time is defined as the staff believes 
that sharing knowledge is non- consuming time while 
information is available on the system.     
Furthermore, leadership in a team setting has 
relationship with knowledge sharing. According to Bain et 
al. [14], a team’s expertise is more highly developed when 
there is a leader controlling the team in regard to knowledge 
sharing and moreover, providing a good quality of new 
ideas and encouraging staff to share their knowledge. So, 
leadership has an influence on employee’s attitude toward 
knowledge sharing by using technology. We believe that the 
leadership, which is defined as to encourage employees to 
share knowledge, has a significant influence in the Saudi 
organizations’ situation. 
Knowledge Engineers provide direct assistance in the 
processes and circumstances to create knowledge [15]. The 
success of knowledge management is commonly based on 
implementation of new IT-based systems. Staff codifying 
and sharing knowledge by a system are required to be 
familiar with using the system or there is assistance for 
users who are unfamiliar with IT. In addition, among the 
fast growing technologies, the changing tools of the system 
there is continual improvement, so users should be kept up-
to-date with new changes.  
D. Subjective norm 
According to the UTAUT model, the subjective norm is 
identified as the degree to which a staff member perceives 
whether social pressure will affect the performance of 
knowledge sharing technology. 
IV. 
RESEARCH METHODS 
This initial study will use both qualitative and 
quantitative research methods in two phases. In the initial 
phase we will use in-depth interviews, while the second 
phase will be conducted by using an online survey.  
The interview includes mixed-methods of questions are 
divided into three categories; knowledge sharing; important 
of using Web technology and Knowledge sharing via Web.  
Interviews will be conducted with ten to fifteen expert and 
novice staffs who work in Saudi Arabian Universities. The 
interviews will be conducted across a number of disciplines. 
The purpose of the interviews was to investigate staff’ 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

opinion about knowledge sharing via Web technology and 
explore other unidentified factors and investigate that 
requirement toward knowledge sharing among staff and 
discover the abilities and acceptance of staffs in using Web 
technology in knowledge sharing purpose.  
The 
survey 
will 
conduct 
after 
analysing 
the 
interviewees’ answers. The target subjects will be staff who 
are practicing at universities in Saudi Arabia. In the survey, 
we will measure the items that are include the KST model 
Each item will be measured on a five-point Likert scale 
[25], ranging from strongly disagree (1) to strongly agree 
(5). The result of the survey will help to refine the KST 
model and then confirm it.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The research objective is to improve knowledge 
management in Saudi Arabia universities and to facilitate 
exchanging knowledge between staffs. Therefore, this study 
explored the effective factors of knowledge sharing using 
web technology by examining staff’s behavior toward 
knowledge sharing. Using theoretical frameworks UTAUT 
to underpin the model and using existing research into 
knowledge management, the model has been constructed by 
combining, synthesizing and refactoring the factors, which 
have the most important effects in knowledge sharing using 
web technologies.  
From the authors point of view, the knowledge 
management systems should be established in the Saudi 
universities based on all factors that will explore from 
empirical study, in such a way that they function in a more 
efficient manner. Exploring the factors will asset knowledge 
worker to build website for knowledge sharing purpose in 
Saudi Arabia universities. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors thank the Saudi Higher Education for funding 
Hanan Alotaibi to undertake this research at the University 
of Southampton.  
REFERENCES  
[1] J. Brown and  P. Duguid,  “Knowledge and Organisation: A      
Social-practice Perspective.” Organisation Science, 2001, 
198-213. 
[2] N. Milton, N. Shadbolt,  and H. Cottam ,  “Hammersley 
Towards 
 
Knowledge 
Technology 
for 
Knowledge 
Management” Human-Computer Studies, 1999. 
[3] I. Nonaka and H. Takeuchi. The knowledge-creating 
company: How Japanese companies create the dynamics of 
innovation. USA, Oxford University Press, 1995, pp.  96-104.  
[4] H. Lin. “Effect of extrinsic and intrinsic motivation on 
employee 
knowledge 
sharing 
intentions” 
Journal 
of 
Information Science, 2007, vol. 33 (2), 135-149. 
[5] A. Silver, “Where technology and knowledge meet” Journal 
of business strategy, 2000, pp. 21(6), 28-133. 
[6] C. Wagner, “Breaking the knowledge acquisition bottleneck 
through conversational knowledge management” Information 
Resources Management Journal, 2006, pp.  23 (3) 70-83.  
[7] U. Bojars, G. Breslin, A. Finn, and S. Decker “Using the 
Semantic Web for linking and reusing data across Web 2.0 
communities Web Semantics” Science, Services and Agents 
on the World Wide Web. 2008.  
[8] R.Fullwood, J. Rowley, and R. Delbridge. “Knowledge 
sharing amongst academics in UK universities” Journal of 
Knowledge Management, 2013, vol. 17, pp. 123 – 136.  
[9] M. Eisenhardt and M.  Santos.  Knowledge-based view: A 
new theory2  
 of strategy? In A. Pettigrew et al. 
(Eds.). Handbook of Strategy and Management , 2002. 
[10] S. Allameh, A.  Abedini, J.  Pool, and A.  Kazemi, “ An 
analysis of factors affecting staffs knowledge sharing in the 
central library of the University of Isfahan using the extension 
of Theory of Reasoned Action”  International Journal of 
Human Resource Studies, 2012, vol. 2, p. 1. 
[11] R. Ruggles, “The state of notion: knowledge management in 
practice”. California Management Review, 1998,  pp.  80-89. 
[12] F. Davis, R. Bagozzi, and P. Warshaw,. “User Acceptance of 
Computer Technology: A Comparison of Two Theoretical 
Models.” Management Science, 1989, vol. (35:8), pp. 982-
1003. 
[13] K. Bandyopadhyay  and K. Fraccastoro “The Effect of Culture 
on User Acceptance ofInformation Technology” Communications of 
the Association for Information Systems, 2007, vol 19, Article 23. 
[14] V. Venkatesh, M. Morris, G. Davis, and F. Davis F. “User 
Acceptance of Information Technology toward a Unified 
View” MIS Quarterly, 2003, vol. 27 (3), pp.  425-478. 
[15] D. Ford and Y. Chan. “Knowledge sharing in a multi-cultural 
setting: A case study.” Knowledge Management Research & 
Practice, 2003, vol.4, pp.  3-16. 
[16] D. Ford and D. Staples. “Perceived Value of Knowledge: The 
potential informer's perception”  Knowledge Management 
Research & Practice, 2006, vol. 4, pp.  3-16. 
[17] G. Bain, L. Mann, L. Atkins, and J. Dunning. “R&D Project 
Leaders: 
Roles 
and 
Responsibilities” 
Leadership, 
Management, and Innovation in R&D Project Teams, 2005,  
pp.  49–70. 
[18] B. Bergeron. Essentials of Knowledge Management New 
Jersey USA, 2003. 
[19] K. Husted, S. Michailova, and D. Minbaeva. Knowledge 
sharing and organizational performances: the role of extrinsic 
and intrinsic motives. Cairns, Australia. 2005. 
[20] H. Lin, “Effect of extrinsic and intrinsic motivation on 
employee 
knowledge 
sharing 
intentions” 
Journal 
of 
Information Science, 2007, vol. 33 (2), pp. 135-149. 
[21] I. Emmerik and  I. Jawahar,  “Lending a helping hand, 
provision of helping behavior beyond professional career 
responsibilities” Career Development International, 2005, vol. 
5, p. 10. 
[22] I. Nonaka and H. Takeuchi. The knowledge-creating 
company: How Japanese companies create the dynamics of 
innovation. USA, Oxford University Press. 1995.  
[23] S. Chowdhury, “The role of affect  and cognition-based trust 
in complex knowledge sharing” Journal of Managerial Issues, 
2005, vol. 17(3), p. 310−326. 
[24] T. Haldin-Herrgard, “Difficulties in diffusion of tacit 
knowledge in organizations” Journal of Intellectual Capital, 
2000, vol. 1, pp.  357-365.         
[25] L.Rensis, "A Technique for the Measurement of Attitudes" 
Archives of Psychology, 1932, 140: 1–55. 
 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-329-2
eKNOW 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

