Comparison of Machine Learning Algorithms on Smartphone Energy Consumption
Modeling Issue Based on Real User Context Data
Weizhu Qian
CIAD, Univ. Bourgogne Franche-Comt,
UTBM, F-90010
Belfort, France
Email: weizhu.qian@utbm.fr
Franck Gechter
CIAD, Univ. Bourgogne Franche-Comt,
UTBM, F-90010
Belfort, France
Email: franck.gechter@utbm.fr
Fabrice Lauri
CIAD, Univ. Bourgogne Franche-Comt,
UTBM, F-90010
Belfort, France
Email: fabrice.lauri@utbm.fr
Abstract—Nowadays, billions of smartphones are used world-
wide. The energy consumption is a critical issue when us-
ing such devices. In this context, smartphone power modeling
is a mandatory step to better understand energy drain. On
that way, the most widespread methods are based on speciﬁc
hardware/software level analysis. As opposed to these classical
approaches, we propose, in this paper, an alternative method
aimed at constructing smartphones power models based on
user context data provided by Device Analyzer, an Android
application developed by the University of Cambridge. From a
very large-scale smartphone usage data, we extract the energy-
related events. Then, the energy-related context is formulated
as the input features of the energy models. So as to predict
the energy consumption of a smartphone, we compare four
different machine learning models: a Linear Regression model, an
AdaBoosted Decision Trees model, a Gradient Boosted Regression
Tree model and a Random Forest model. The proposed energy
models are then validated on a real user dataset in different
usage scenarios.
Index Terms—smartphone data; user behavior; energy mod-
eling; regression model.
I. INTRODUCTION
Since the embedded system related technology is progress-
ing rapidly in recent years, mainly thanks to the support of
numbers of applications and advanced hardware, smartphone
devices have now become platforms integrated with various
functions. Obviously, users not only can use their handsets
to make phone calls and send SMS as before, but also can
browse webs, play video games, listen to music and take
photos, etc. Meanwhile, these various functions are tied to
a huge growth in energy costs. Despite the progresses made
in battery technology with an increase of energy storage,
the smartphone usage is still limited by the energy drain
of the components and of software needs. Hence, proﬁling,
modeling and characterizing energy drain in the smartphone
have become an important research topic in recent years.
In literature, many research work studied smartphone en-
ergy consumption focusing on either hardware or operating
systems points of view [1]–[4]. Some other work studied how
applications are consuming energy [5] or how the network
environment changes affect smartphone energy drain [6].
Although this works proposed various accurate smartphone
energy models, it should be aware of that the discharging
process of a smartphone is a complex process, i.e., due to
their unique hardware properties and usage context, different
smartphone devices may have different discharging character-
istics even when they are of the same type. Thus, one other
reasonable alternative for modeling smartphone energy drain
is to develop a personalized energy model for one speciﬁc
smartphone device/user couple.
The purpose of our study is to ﬁnd the relationship between
user behavior and the energy drain in smartphone devices.
This method can be a universal way to build energy models
for smartphones because it does not need to measure the
hardware components energy consuming properties or develop
a specialized kernel tools as in precedent research [1], [3]. Our
approach treats the energy consumption as the consequence
of all the users’ operation on their smartphone devices. Based
on that, we develop a methodology to model the smartphone
energy drain based on user context data. First, the energy-
related events are chosen and extracted from the raw usage
data. Then according to the selected events, the input fea-
tures for energy models are generated. Afterwards, a series
of machine learning models, the Linear Regression model,
the AdaBoosted Decision Tree model, the Gradient Boosted
Regression Tree model and the Random Forest model, are
tested and compared in different usage scenarios.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II discusses some
earlier related research work in this ﬁeld and introduces the
dataset and machine learning algorithms adopted. Section III
presents the machine learning pipeline of our energy modeling
process. Section IV describes how the features are generated
and selected from the raw collected user data. Then, in Section
V, the experiments for different scenarios and their associated
results are presented. Finally, the conclusions and perspectives
are given in Section VI.
II. RELATED WORK AND BACKGROUND
A. Power modeling issue
Smartphone power modeling is to use some energy-related
factors, e.g., hardware properties (battery voltage, battery cur-
rent, CPU utilization, etc.), system calls, user context(screen-
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-690-3
eKNOW 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

on time, phone-call time, WiFi status, etc.), as input variables
of models to predict smartphone energy consumption [7]. A
general smartphone energy model can be described as follows,
where E is the energy consumption of the handset:
E = Pbase·D +
X
i
βi·xi·di
(1)
The ﬁrst term of the sum represents the ﬁxed amount of
energy consumption for the total experiment time D, and Pbase
is the basic energy consumption per time unit. The second
term of the sum represents the variable amount of energy
consumption. xi is a value which represents the property of
energy-related factors, for instance, for hardware elements it
can be the CPU utilization and for user context it can be the
WiFi status. βi is a scalar indicates the energy-drain effect of
xi and di is inﬂuencing duration of xi.
According to (1), from the point of view of hardware,
smartphones devices are made of a series of sub-hardware
components, CPU, display, cell module, WiFi module, audio,
camera, etc. If the energy consumption of each component
can be known, then naturally if we adopt a reductionist point
of view, the total energy consumption of whole smartphone
handset can be regarded as the sum of energy drain of all
hardware components. According to the results in [1], this
method can estimate smartphone energy drain accurately, but
it needs external equipment to measure the power of each
hardware, which is not always practical to implement. Besides,
this method did not consider the interaction between the
components which can represents 10% of the total energy
drain [1]. Another frequently used method of modeling smart-
phone energy consumption is to trace the system calls of the
smartphone [3]. As the different system calls are related to
different power states in the smartphone, once the benchmarks
of different power states are determined, the relationships
between power states and system calls can be represented by
a Finite State Machine (FSM) energy model.
From the aspect of smartphone usage context, a several
research works analyzed how the user behavior and the net-
work environment affect the handset energy drain [4] [6] [8].
Moreover, with the fast-growing crowdsourcing technology,
researchers can have the access to a very large amount of user
context data from a large number of users, which provides
the researchers a new approach to study the interaction be-
tween users and smartphone [9] [10]. For instance, [11] [12]
presented user-data based methods to predict the smartphone
energy consumption and [13] proposed a big data combined
with machine learning method to predict handset’s battery life.
In a similar way, we planned to exploit user context data to
develop the smartphone energy model and to proﬁle how the
energy consumption cause by user behavior in our research
work.
B. Device Analyzer
So as to study how user behavior affects energy drain
in the handset, naturally, the ﬁrst step of the process is to
collect user context data in a large-scale. The dataset presented
TABLE I PART OF COLLECTED EVENTS
Event category
Event name
Setting
Airplane mode
Ring mode
Audio volume, etc.
CPU
Number of cores
Maximum frequency
Minimum frequency, etc.
Battery
Battery level
Battery voltage
Charging status
Battery temperature, etc.
Screen
Brightness level
Screen state
Screen size
Application
APP installed
APP updated
APP service
APP foreground
APP background, etc.
Phone call
Roaming state
Network location
Signal type
Calling state, etc.
SMS
SMS received
SMS sent, etc
Data transfer
Received bytes
Received packets
Send bytes
Send packets
WiFi
WiFi scan
WiFi connected
WiFi state, etc.
Sensor
Type
Max range
Values
Delay, etc.
in this paper is the Device Analyzer dataset [14], which
contains comprehensive and detailed information about the
Android smartphone usage, e.g., events types, event values
and relevant time stamps. Considering the trade-off between
overhead and performance, the Device Analyzer application
records the sampled events, such as battery levels, network
trafﬁc and screen brightness levels, at a time interval of 5
minutes, while records the immediate events, such as phone-
calls, screen-on/off and WiFi on/off when they occur. Table I
presents a list of the collected events. The exhaustive usage
information are selected and formulated as the input features
of our proposed energy models and the change of battery level
of smartphones over 5 minutes of sampling interval is treated
as the modeling targets. By using the context data as inputs
and energy consumption as outputs, our task is to ﬁnd proper
energy models to imply how user behavior leads to energy
drain in smartphone devices.
C. Machine Learning Algorithms
As explained before, our research purpose is to predict
energy consumption based on user behavior. Mathematically,
it can be regarded as a regression problem, which is to ﬁnd
a function that matches real outputs from inputs accurately.
Due to the powerful modeling ability of machine learning
techniques, we resort to different advanced machine learning
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-690-3
eKNOW 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

regression models. The basics of the models is described as
below.
1) Linear Regression: Though the Linear Regression (LR)
model is considered as the simplest regression model, it can
obtain satisfying results in many research cases [13]. For this
reason, the LR model is used in our research as the benchmark
models to make comparisons to other tree-based models.
2) Decision Trees: The smartphone energy consumption is
a continuous process, but we also assume that it consists of a
series of power state change caused by different usage context.
In this case, the regression decision tree models can be the
appropriate models. Classiﬁcation And Regression Decision
Trees (CART) models [15] are tree-shaped models, it can be
applied to either classiﬁcation tasks or regression tasks. In
our regression tasks, to approximate continuous target values,
the CART algorithm uses the Least Square Difference (LSD)
or the Least Absolute Difference (LAD) as criterion to split
nodes. To improve the performance of tree models, the CART
models are used as the basic estimators, combined with two
different classes of ensemble methods: the boosting method
and the bagging method.
• AdaBoosted Decision Tree (ADT): The boosting ensem-
ble method aims to reduce the bias of each tree. Ad-
aBoosted Decision Tree model [16] combines a series of
weak learners with different weights which are calculated
by their predicting accuracies to build a stronger learner.
• Gradient Boosting Decision Tree: The other Boosted
Decision Tree model we utilize is Gradient Boosting
Decision Tree (GBDT) [17]. GBDT uses the residuals
between predictions and targets of former decision trees
as new training targets to adapt its parameters.
• Random Forest (RF): The other class of ensemble method
is the bagging method and a frequently-used model of
bagging method is Random Forests. To overcome the
over-ﬁtting of each tree, Random Forests utilize the boot-
strap aggregating technique [18] to decrease the variance
of each tree.
In Section V, the performance of the four different models
will be compared on the smartphone energy modeling issue.
III. METHODOLOGY
In order to construct the smartphone battery level predicting
model from raw usage data, we propose a machine learn-
ing based modeling methodology. Though, the original data
from the Device Analyzer dataset records extremely detailed
information about users’ usage, most of the information is
not useful for our research purpose. Thus, the ﬁrst step we
take in the modeling process is to preprocess the raw data
to extract the energy-related events. After the energy-related
usage events are selected, according to their properties, the
chosen contextual data are formulated as multidimensional
matrix space consisting of a series of vectors. Each vector
represents the occurrences and values of each energy-related
events over a certain time range. We set the time range as
5 minutes because the battery level value is sampled every 5
minutes by the Device Analyzer application. Afterwards, the
generated vectors are feed to the machine learning models as
input variables. Finally, after the training process, the machine
learning energy models are examined on the testing data and
their results are analyzed. The pipeline of our methodology is
shown in Figure 1. Four types of machine learning model are
adopted in our research: Linear Regression, AdaBoosted De-
cision Trees, Gradient Boosted Regression Trees and Random
Forests.
Figure. 1 Pipeline of smartphone energy prediction
IV. USER CONTEXT
A. Event Selection
The dataset for the experiments is collected from one
Android smartphone user. It records the user’s information for
80 days, and contains 13716 instances. Although the dataset
that we use is from one individual user, our methodology is
not limited to one speciﬁc user or one speciﬁc smartphone
device. Hence, it can be a re-usable paradigm for smartphone
energy consumption modeling. To exploit the useful context
for the energy models, it needs to extract energy-related events
from the raw dataset at the ﬁrst step. Although the raw data
collected corresponds to very detailed usage information, not
all the recorded events directly make contribution to energy
consumption of the handset, for instance, the location infor-
mation and mobility sensors information are not necessary
useful at ﬁrst steps. Meanwhile, it should be reminded that
our energy modeling approach is based on user behavior data.
Hence, some hardware information will not be used neither,
even they can reﬂect the energy drain condition, e.g., battery
voltage and CPU utilization.
The principle of selecting the features is that the chosen
features not only imply the signiﬁcant information of user
context but also are essential to proﬁle energy consumption in
smartphone handsets. For instance, when the screen is turned
on, and several minutes later, it is turned off. During this time
period, the user might watch a video using the smartphone and
as a result, the battery level decreased. Apparently, this screen-
on event caused signiﬁcant energy consumption, meanwhile,
it also represents essential information of the user-smartphone
interaction. Similarly, according to previous works on in-
vestigating the energy-consuming effects caused by energy-
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-690-3
eKNOW 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

TABLE II SELECTED ENERGY-RELATED EVENTS
Category
Event Type
Battery
Battery Level
Screen
Screen On/Off
Brightness
User Context
APP Foreground
APP Background
Phone Call
Plugged In/Out
Data Transfer
Received Bytes
Received Packets
Send Bytes
Send Packets
WIFI
WIFI On/Off
related events [4] [6] [13], other energy-related events, such
as network data trafﬁc, phone-call, application usage and WiFi
status are also important to describe smartphone usage and
reﬂect the energy drain rate change. And they function in the
similar way as the screen-on events in our proposed energy
models. Moreover, the charging state of the smartphone battery
apparently affects the battery level, therefore it is utilized in
our models as well. Eventually, the events that we choose
to build our energy model are screen-on time, the level of
screen brightness, received data bytes, received data packets,
sent data bytes, sent data packets, phone-call time, application
foreground, application background, WiFi state and charging
state.
In our approach, the energy consumption is measured by
the smartphone battery level change. As mentioned in Section
II-B, the battery level is sampled every 5 minutes by Device
Analyzer, thus our task is to predict the energy consumption
over time period of 5 minutes. Since the battery level is
obtained by the smartphone battery indicator, the unit of daily
energy drain is percentage of whole battery capacity. For
example, if the value is 7, it means that the energy consumed
by the smartphone device over this time period is 7% of
the battery capacity. All the collected events utilized in our
approach are listed in Table II.
B. Feature Generation
The measurement of energy drain is the level of the smart-
phone battery which is sampled every 5 minutes by Device
Analyzer. Therefore, the values of each event is quantized
within the time window between two battery level sampled
time points. Furthermore, to make the events’ values feed the
model appropriately, i.e., according to their usage properties,
we classify the possible values of the energy-related events
into different categories: the variation, the duration, the av-
erage, the aggregation and the state as it is demonstrated in
Section III. The 5 categories are described as follow:
• Variation: It should be noticed that all the events’ con-
tribution to the smartphone energy consumption over a
time period is in fact the variation of the battery capacity
over this time period. Thus, instead of using the battery
percentage at the sampling time point as modeling target
directly, it is more reasonable to use the variation of
battery level during the sampling interval.
TABLE III VARIABLES DESCRIPTION
Event
Value Type
Unit
Battery Level
Variation
Percentage
Screen-on Time
Duration
Second
Brightness Level
Average
Scale(0˜255)
APP Foreground
Aggregation
-
APP Background
Aggregation
-
Phone-call Time
Duration
Second
Plugged State
State
1/0
Received Bytes
Aggregation
Byte
Received Packets
Aggregation
-
Send Bytes
Aggregation
Byte
Send Packets
Aggregation
-
WiFi-on Time
Duration
Second
• Duration: If an event is the human-smartphone inter-
action that lasts for a certain time period, then we use
the range of this time period to measure its inﬂuence on
smartphone energy drain. For instance, the screen of a
smartphone at time point T1 is turned on and the screen
is turned off at time point T2, naturally, the total screen-
on time will be T2-T1. This category includes screen-on
time, phone-call time and WiFi-on time.
• Average: For the brightness level of screen, we use the
average value over the sample interval.
• Aggregation: Some of the event may occur more than
once, such as application foreground and application
background, so we use sum of the occurrences to repre-
sent its energy contribution. As for the network transfers,
received Bytes, received packets, send Bytes and send
packets are aggregated values as well.
• State: The charging state of the battery can be whether
plugged-in or plugged-out, so it is a boolean value.
Based on the categories we introduced, the energy-related
events is quantized to a series of input vectors with 11 items
at different sampling time points. Each item of a vector repre-
sents its related event’s quantity. The target value is the energy
consumption at the same sampling time point. Moreover, due
to the malfunction of the data-collecting process, some values
are missing. In this case, the average values are used to ﬁll in
the blanks. Before the input vectors are fed to the model, they
are normalized to eliminate the effect of the different events’
scales.
Once the input variables and the output target are well
deﬁned, the following step is to ﬁnd an appropriate model
to describe the mathematical relationship between the inputs
and the outputs.
V. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
A. Experiments
To investigate the smartphone energy consumption under
different usage scenarios, we select different variables com-
binations as inputs of the energy models. The 6 different
experimental scenarios is demonstrated in Table IV. In the ﬁrst
scenario, we put all the energy-related events together. Then,
in scenario 2, scenario 3, scenario 4, scenario 5 and scenario 6,
we emphasize each energy-related events individually to study
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-690-3
eKNOW 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

TABLE IV EXPERIMENTAL SCENARIOS
Scenario
Context
Scenario 1
All contexts
Scenario 2
Screen-on
Scenario 3
Phone-call
Scenario 4
WiFi-on
Scenario 5
Plugged-in
Scenario 6
Plugged-out
each event’s contribution to energy consumption. It means
that the data collected only in the scenario where screen-on
events, phone-call events, WiFi-on events, plugged-in events
or plugged-out events occur is utilized, respectively.
In order to evaluate the energy models, we resort to cross-
validation method, the total dataset is split into two sub
datasets, the training dataset and the testing data, with the
Bootstrap method. The training subset data is to generate the
energy models and the testing subset data is to examine gener-
alization of the model to measure over-ﬁtting. The criterion of
a good energy mode is that it should not only ﬁt the training
dataset well but also have good performance on testing data.
70% of the whole dataset is used to train the energy models
and the 30% rest is used to test the energy models. The
proposed energy models are trained and tested on the dataset
for 20 times for each scenario. The metrics to evaluate the
energy models is the Root Mean Square Error (RMSE), and
the mean value and Standard Deviation (STD) of RMSE are
calculated.
B. Results
In Figure 2, the battery level curves are reconstructed by
predicted results of our devised models, and it shows that
each energy model is capable of predicting battery level in
the smartphone devices, either when the battery is discharging
or charging. From the more detailed results shown in Table
V and Table VI, in Scenario 1, when putting all contextual
information together, the Random Forest regression model has
the smallest training error and testing error. In Scenario 2,
where the display is turned on, once again the RF energy
model has the best performance both on training dataset and
testing dataset among all the models. In Scenario 3, where
calling events occur, the ADT model has the least training
error and surprisingly, the Linear Regression model has the
most accurate results on testing data. And in Scenario 4, where
the WiFi module is turned on, the ADT model perform best on
training dataset and the Random Forest model performs best
on testing data. In Scenario 5, where the battery is plugged
in, the GBDT model and the RF model has the smallest
training error and has the smallest testing error, respectively.
In Scenario 6, where the smartphone is not charging, the ADT
model outperforms other models on training dataset and the
RF model outperforms other models on testing dataset.
It also can be seen that, among all the scenarios, all
the models’ accuracy decreases in Scenario 5. As opposed
to this, in Scenario 6, all the models have their own best
performance on testing dataset. The reason could be that the
(a) LR Predicted Results
(b) ADT Predicted Results
(c) GBDT Predicted Results
(d) RF Predicted Results
Figure. 2 Predicting smartphone battery level over a time period
smartphone energy consumption is used to measured change
of the battery level. However, it will not be accurate when the
smartphone reaches its maximum energy volume (the battery
level is 100%) and remains at the same battery level even
energy-consuming events occur. Overall, in all scenario, except
Scenario 3, all the tree-based models perform better than the
Linear Regression model on the training dataset and testing
dataset and the Random Forest energy model has the best
performance on testing sub dataset. Thus, we can say that
the RF is the most appropriate energy model in our research.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented a novel smartphone energy
consumption modeling methodology based on user contextual
data and machine learning algorithms. First, we extract the 11
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-690-3
eKNOW 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

TABLE V RMSE OF TRAINING RESULTS
Scenario
LR
ADT
GBDT
RF
Mean
STD
Mean
STD
Mean
STD
Mean
STD
Scenario 1
0.8550
0.0063
0.4703
0.0107
0.5250
0.0072
0.4181
0.0058
Scenario 2
0.9251
0.0101
0.4197
0.0526
0.5115
0.0112
0.3966
0.0096
Scenario 3
0.6457
0.0372
0.2227
0.0248
0.3517
0.0450
0.3068
0.0142
Scenario 4
0.6999
0.0688
0.2153
0.0204
0.3453
0.0381
0.2963
0.0272
Scenario 5
1.5406
0.0110
0.8763
0.0242
0.6525
0.0173
0.8630
0.0181
Scenario 6
0.6179
0.0053
0.3147
0.0082
0.3605
0.0074
0.4600
0.0052
TABLE VI RMSE OF TESTING RESULTS
Scenario
LR
ADT
GBDT
RF
Mean
STD
Mean
STD
Mean
STD
Mean
STD
Scenario 1
0.8612
0.0147
0.7230
0.0131
0.7052
0.0126
0.6975
0.0145
Scenario 2
0.9327
0.0235
0.8628
0.0326
0.8538
0.0306
0.8411
0.0325
Scenario 3
0.8206
0.0743
0.8554
0.1132
0.8944
0.1409
0.8421
0.1182
Scenario 4
0.9213
0.1772
0.8217
0.1732
0.8375
0.1205
0.7814
0.1430
Scenario 5
1.5584
0.0269
1.2881
0.0276
1.2352
0.0346
1.2327
0.0326
Scenario 6
0.6170
0.0123
0.5825
0.0154
0.5638
0.0146
0.5624
0.0137
most important energy-related contexts from the comprehen-
sive and detailed raw user data. Then, so as to feed the machine
learning model properly, a series of features are generated from
the properties of the extracted events. Afterwards, the energy
consumption is used as the output target and the generated
features are used as input variable for the energy model.
Four different machine learning regression models are trained,
tested and compared on the dataset. The ﬁnal results indicate
the feasibility of our proposed methodology.
For future work, we plan to take into account more energy-
related events, for instance, the GSM signal strength and its
types. Besides, we also plan to improve the accuracy of the
existing models and to make a comparison with an agent based
method developed in our previous work [7].
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Authors would like to thank Alastair Beresford and Andrew
Rice from the University of Cambridge for providing the
Device Analyzer dataset.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Zhang et al., “Accurate online power estimation and automatic
battery behavior based power model generation for smartphones,” in
Proceedings of the eighth IEEE/ACM/IFIP international conference on
Hardware/software codesign and system synthesis.
ACM, 2010, pp.
105–114.
[2] A. Pathania, A. E. Irimiea, A. Prakash, and T. Mitra, “Power-
performance modelling of mobile gaming workloads on heterogeneous
mpsocs,” in Proceedings of the 52nd Annual Design Automation Con-
ference.
ACM, 2015, p. 201.
[3] A. Pathak, Y. C. Hu, M. Zhang, P. Bahl, and Y.-M. Wang, “Fine-
grained power modeling for smartphones using system call tracing,”
in Proceedings of the sixth conference on Computer systems.
ACM,
2011, pp. 153–168.
[4] W. Jung, K. Kim, and H. Cha, “Userscope: A ﬁne-grained framework
for collecting energy-related smartphone user contexts,” in Parallel
and Distributed Systems (ICPADS), 2013 International Conference on.
IEEE, 2013, pp. 158–165.
[5] A. Banerjee, L. K. Chong, S. Chattopadhyay, and A. Roychoudhury,
“Detecting energy bugs and hotspots in mobile apps,” in Proceedings of
the 22nd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Foundations of
Software Engineering.
ACM, 2014, pp. 588–598.
[6] L. Sun, H. Deng, R. K. Sheshadri, W. Zheng, and D. Koutsonikolas, “Ex-
perimental evaluation of wiﬁ active power/energy consumption models
for smartphones,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, vol. 16,
no. 1, pp. 115–129, 2017.
[7] F. Gechter, A. R. Beresford, and A. Rice, “Reconstruction of battery
level curves based on user data collected from a smartphone,” in Inter-
national Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence: Methodology, Systems,
and Applications.
Springer, 2016, pp. 289–298.
[8] N. Vallina-Rodriguez, P. Hui, J. Crowcroft, and A. Rice, “Exhausting
battery statistics: understanding the energy demands on mobile hand-
sets,” in Proceedings of the second ACM SIGCOMM workshop on
Networking, systems, and applications on mobile handhelds.
ACM,
2010, pp. 9–14.
[9] D. Ferreira, A. K. Dey, and V. Kostakos, “Understanding human-
smartphone concerns: a study of battery life,” in International Confer-
ence on Pervasive Computing.
Springer, 2011, pp. 19–33.
[10] A. Rahmati, A. Qian, and L. Zhong, “Understanding human-battery
interaction on mobile phones,” in Proceedings of the 9th international
conference on Human computer interaction with mobile devices and
services.
ACM, 2007, pp. 265–272.
[11] E. A. Oliver and S. Keshav, “An empirical approach to smartphone
energy level prediction,” in Proceedings of the 13th international con-
ference on Ubiquitous computing.
ACM, 2011, pp. 345–354.
[12] E. Oliver and S. Keshav, “Data driven smartphone energy level predic-
tion,” University of Waterloo Technical Report, 2010.
[13] H. Li, X. Liu, and Q. Mei, “Predicting smartphone battery life
based on comprehensive and real-time usage data,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1801.04069, 2018.
[14] D. T. Wagner, A. Rice, and A. R. Beresford, “Device analyzer: Under-
standing smartphone usage,” in International Conference on Mobile and
Ubiquitous Systems: Computing, Networking, and Services.
Springer,
2013, pp. 195–208.
[15] L. Breiman, “Bagging predictors,” Machine learning, vol. 24, no. 2, pp.
123–140, 1996.
[16] Y. Freund et al., “Experiments with a new boosting algorithm,” in Icml,
vol. 96.
Citeseer, 1996, pp. 148–156.
[17] J. H. Friedman, “Stochastic gradient boosting,” Computational Statistics
& Data Analysis, vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 367–378, 2002.
[18] L. Breiman, “Random forests,” Machine learning, vol. 45, no. 1, pp.
5–32, 2001.
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-690-3
eKNOW 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management

